Medulla Historiae ANGLICANAE.

Being a Comprehensive HISTORY Of the LIVES and REIGNS OF THE MONARCHS OF
ENGLAND, From the Time of the Invasion thereof by JVLIVS CAESAR, to this
present Year 1679.

With an Abstract of the LIVES of the Roman Emperors commanding in BRITAIN, and
Habits of the Ancient BRITAINS.

To which is added A LIST of the NAMES of the Honorable the House of COMMONS,
now sitting, and His MAJESTY'S Most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Swalle, and are to be sold by him at the Unicorn, at
the West End of S. Paul's. 1679.

frontispiece Medulla Historiae Anglicanae
Printed for Abell swalle at the unicorn at ye West End of St Paul's.

F H. Van Houe. sclp:


THE Preface.
IT is as natural to Man to desire Knowledge, as Bodily Sustenance; the one
being the Food of the Mind, as the other is of the Body: And the Appetites of
both being homogenenous to the Principles from which they proceed; their
tendency to their several Objects, is as eager as the Faculty which produces
It, is active; so that though both flow from the Fountains of one and the same
Nature; yet the one resting in a Material Repletion, must be acknowledged more
limited than the other, which admits of no bounds of Satiety.

But though Knowledge be Man's Natural Desire, and the Similary Nourishment of
his better part, the Reasonaable Soul; yet it is not alike sought after by all;
nor in the same Degrees and Kind.

Some, whose Constitution has disposed them to a Habit of lasie Sensuality, and
others, whom continual Disappointments have baffled into a Neutrality and
Indifference, as to Action, think it sufficient for Man to know, either how to
live with Pleasure and Epicurean Ease, or to die with Affected Haughtiness and
Stoical Apothy, neither of the Two regarding those Knowledges which delight
Curiosity, or are useful to the Society of Mankind.

Others again, who are altogether refined into Spirit and Contemplation, think
their time ill spent, unless they can be able so to anatomize Nature, as to
give the Causes of Things, which either never did exist but in Appearance; or
if they do, are far more profitably understood by their Effects than
Principles: And these two extremes are the Preternatural Vices of Appetite; the
one being the Stupidity and Defect, and the other the Green Sickness or
Boulivia of the Desire.

They therefore whom Age, Learning, and Experience, have licentiated to be
Physicians of the Mind, have taken some Latitude in prescribing Diets according
to the various Constitutions of reasonable Men; allowing those whom a Natural
Disposition inclines to the light Food of Contemplation, such Studies as may
nourish their Curiosity with the Airy Idea's of Philosophy and Speculative
Mathematics, and the nicer Learning of the Schools; judging that the most
proper Nourishment for Sedentary Humors and Volatile Fancies, who covet no
more, but to know for themselves, and to be guided by others: But to Men of a
more Robust and Sociable Habit of Mind; who are desirous both to know and to do
good to themselves, and by their quality and condition fitted for a station in
the World, when Providence pleases to call them to it, they have always
diverted more Active and Useful Learning; such as Practical Mathematics and
History, the one for improving the Works and Inventions, and the other, the
Conduct and Actions of Men in Society: judging Idleness the Lethargy of the
Mind, no ways to be fed, but to be cured by Discipline and Animadversion.

Now, Though Mathematics, which tend to Operation, be of very great use in an
Industrious and Flourishing State or Age; both for the glory and profit of a
People; yet seeing they require a peculiar Talent of Mind to succeed in that
Study, they cannot, nor ought not, be recommended to Universal Practice beyond
that Mediocrity which renders Gentlemen fit, as in that, so in other parts of
Arts and Sciences, to converse with Rational Company (it being impossible for
one Man to be Master of all Humane Knowledges) leaving the more laborious
prosecution thereof to those whose Genius or Vocation invites them to that
Assiduity.

But of History it may be said, that Omne tulit punctum, nam miscuit utile
dulci.

It is so genuine and familiar to Men of all Estates, Age, Quality, Sex, and
Condition, so agreeable to the Inclination, and suitable to the Humor of All:
so delightful in the perusing, and profitable in the retention; affording
Content to the Aged, Pleasure to the Young, and Experience to both: Comfort to
the Disconsolate, Refreshment to the Weary, and Ease to discomposed Minds;
solacing the tedious hours of Pensive Watchings; or otherwise charming anxious
thoughts, into a sweet and gentle repose; being never out of season whilst Men
have life, and the World a being; that amongst the many Elogies it has
received from the Learned Pieces of Ancient and Modern Writers; it may be
justly accounted rather the Recreation than the Application of a Studious Man.

It is indeed that Telescope by which we see into distant Ages, and take up the
actions of our Forefathers with as much evidence as the News of the last
Gazette; it is the Mirror that represents the various Transactions of Times
past, and shows us the Dress of Antiquity; according to which we may rectify
or adjust our present Fashions; it is the Products of gentle and easy
Institutions and Laws, which ought to oblige us as much if not more strictly to
a conformity, than the Preceptive Sanctions of Princes; seeing the Authority of
the one does but inculcate our Duty, and the other gives us innumerable
Instances of the seveveral rewards of Virtue, and Punishments of Vice: It is,
in a word, the last Will and Testament of our deceased Progenitors; which
though it does not expressly leave every one of us a particular Legacy, yet it
shows us how we may he possessed of their Inheritance; and according as we
follow their example, live in Reputation or Ignominy.

In so much that the ruder Ages of the World, who were unacquainted with
Letters, and consequently ignorant of refined Sciences, thought History, next
to their Religion, the only useful and proper Study of Mankind; And judging the
forming of the Manners and regulating the Actions of Man to be the chief Duty
and Care of Societies, they thought Documents, Precepts, and Laws too weak a
Means to work so great effect, without they were confirmed and and strengthened
by the Examples of their Predecessor, to which prone Nature, even amongst the
most Barbarous, does willingly render an implicit Veneration: And therefore
seeing their Libraries were their Memories, and Words their Charactures, so
Songs and rude Rimes were the only Books, whereby their Bards and Druids
instructed their Children in the Histories of former Ages, making the Famous
Actions of their Ancestors, so much the more the Pattern of their Conduct and
Manners, as it was the Subject of their innocent Melody and Mirth: And this
Custom is at this day in practice amongst the incultivate Heathens of Africa
and America.

But when the kind Heavens was pleased to gratify the Industry of Man with the
Invention of Letters; no Subject seemed to the Ancients, so worthy of the
Prerogative of being transmitted to Posterity, as that of History; And indeed,
the most Ancient that can be found of their Writings is of that kind: Whether
it was that they knew no immortality, but that of Fame, or found no better way
to provide with security for their offspring, in whom they were to live to
Posterity, than by handing down to them the Methods and honest Courses by which
some attained to Honor, Wealth, and Command, whilst others by the contrary
ways, lived and died in Obscurity, Poverty and Contempt.

And the desire of perpetuating the Memory, is such a glimmering glance of the
Primitive, but offuscated Light of Nature, that some think it a convincing
Argument to prove the immortality of the Soul; it being a vain thing for any,
but especially a reasonable Being, to desire that, to which it has no natural
capacity: And the rather that the greater and more elevated Souls of all Ages
have aspired as much to the perpetuating of their Fame, as they have to the
purchasing of the same; Witness in Ancient times the great Alexander, who
envied no man but Achilles, for the happiness he had in having Homer for his
Historiographer: And since him Julius Caesar, who notwithstanding he was tired
out with the Fatigues of a continued and difficult War, yet as he thought no
man able to do what he had done, so he judged none worthy to perpetuate his
Memory, and to Write as he Fought, but himself.

But what Satisfaction soever dying men may have in the Prospect of a lasting
Name, it is certain the living reap great benefit from the Register of their
Actions; for would a Prince have Measures to govern, a Subject how to obey, a
Statesman how to give Counsel, a Judge and Magistrate, how to execute Justice,
a Husband and Father how to command and cherish, a Wife and Child, how to Love
Honor and Obey, and all Conditions of Men, how to perform mutual good Offices
in every kind of Society, History, and especially the truest and most Ancient
of All, the Holy Scripture, is that Repository from whence they may draw the
truest Maxims for all Duties, exemplified with the good or bad Successes of
those who have ^^^^ed or transgressed the same (...) thus much in short of
History in general.

But as all Histories are not of the same Nature, so neither are they of the
same usefulness and Advantage: Not to mention the Ancient Poets, which are good
in their way; some are fictitious Romances, which besides the Satisfaction they
give the Authors Inventing Head, are of very little, if of any Use, unless it
be to teach young Gallants to strut it in the phrase of Hero's, and Ladies to
repartie like a Play Book: And the Moralities, which we are told, are couched
therein, are too frequently applied in Serenades, Love Letters, and
Assignations.

Others are Real Histories, or at least intended to be such; and are either
Ancient or Modern, Universal, or Particular; of Kingdoms, or of Private
Families, Foreign or Domestic: and are all very profitable, according to the
several Qualities and Capacities of the Readers; which is a point that needs no
particular Discussion in this place.

In the writing of Histories, some Authors affect an exactness of recounting
Matters with the minutest Circumstances that attend them, and of omitting
nothing that can have any place in the Book; which unless it be some
conspicuous and famous Transactions, looks liker the Depositions of a Witness
in a Trial, or the Breviate of a Lawyer at the Bar, than the Annals or
Chronicles of a Nation; for it is enough for Posterity to know the memorable
Actions of a great King, or the Achievements in a famous Battle; with such
circumstances as render them most considerable in themselves, and significant
to the Reader; though they be not told what kind of Beard the King wore on his
Wedding Day, or to whom the Ground belonged, where the Battle was fought.

Many likewise puzzle both themselves and their Readers, with a too nice
inquiry into the first Original of Nations, and especially by what new flight
of Colonies or transmigration of People, Islands and Countries, discontinued
from the Continent, became first inhabited; and in this Search, so soon as they
transgress the bounds of Authentic Records and Monuments of Antiquity, the
rest is no more History, but the conjectures and probabilities of the Authors.
It is true, that since we are taught by our Religion, That all Mankind
descended from Adam, and consequently as they increased in number, by new
Generations, so they successively enlarged their Habitations into remoter
Regions, until the Habitable World was possessed; it would be very curious for
Men to know from what branch of the Stock they are descended, and not with the
Ancients, who understood nothing of the Creation, believe those People, whose
Original was unknown, to be Indigenae, that is, started out of the Country
they inhabited; but that being impossible to be attained to, since the Memory
of Man cannot, and Letters were not invented, to preserve the Knowledge of the
various Changes and Mutations of Elder Times; we should satisfy our selves
(knowing that we are Men) with what we find in received Record concerning the
Beginnings, Progress, and Changes of Kingdoms and States, without troubling our
selves with our Ancient Relations, who were not one drop of Blood in kin to
William the Conqueror.

The Design therefore of this little Manual of History, is not to amuse the
Readers with the strange Romances of the First Peopling of this Island, nor to
give a List of the Kings who reigned here, probably enough, even before Aeneas,
or his Son Ascanius; nor yet to burden their Memory with all the lesser
Occurrences, that are fully and at large related in many ample Volumes of this
kind; but only to serve as a Remembrancer to those who have already studied the
History of England; that in a short View they may refresh and rub up their
Memories, as to smaller Circumstances, by the general Heads and more remarkable
Passages, which they shall here find faithfully digested in a succinct Method,
both as to time and place; and for others, whose humor or leisure will not
permit them to turn over larger Volumes, this small Pocket Book, if carefully
and often perused, may acquaint them with as much as is necessary perhaps, for
them to know of the State of this Kingdom, in relation to times past, for
satisfying their own curiosity, and rendering them able to entertain others,
who want the same advantages of Knowledge.

This Compend then presents the Reader with what has been most remarkable in
the several Changes of Government that have happened in this Kingdom since the
first Invading of the Island by Julius Caesar; tracing down the Succession and
Lives of the several Emperors, from that time till it was forsaken (because it
could not be kept) by the Romans: With the several Races of the British, Saxon,
Danish, and Norman Kings, till the present year of his Majesty Charles the
Second, whom God long preserve. It gives likewise an Account of all the
Archbishops of Canterbury, since it was erected into a Metropolitant See: Of
all the Mayors and Sheriffs of London since their First Creation, till this
present year: It contains likewise a List of the Members of this present
Parliament assembled in March last 1678/9, with the Names of the Lords and
others of His Majesty's present Privy Council, the Commissioners of the
Treasury and Navy: And in a word, enough to let us see, how by the blessing of
God, the prudence of Governors, and the unanimity and loyalty of the People,
this Kingdom, though sometimes overclouded by homebred Dissentions, yet has
continued for many Ages to be the Envy and Terror of its Neighbors; abounding
in all the Worldly Enjoyments that were fit to be expected from a bountiful
God, or to be desired by a virtuous People. To conclude, We may expect still
the continuance of the same Blessings, unless our sins and wantonness, bring
upon us the same or worse Judgments than our Forefathers ever felt; and
instead of a delightful and fruitful Soil, turn our Land into a Barren
Wilderness; and give us cause to say with the Poet,

Infelix colium and steriles dominantur avenae. T. N.

MEDVLLA Historiae Anglicanae.
BRITAIN.
THIS most flourishing Island Britain, is bounded on the South with Normandy
and France; on the East, with Germany and Denmark; upon the West, with Ireland,
and the Atlantic Ocean; and on the North, with the Deucalidon Seas. The length
thereof, from the Lyzard-point Southward in Cornwall, to the Straithy-head in
Scotland, contains 624 miles; the breadth, from the Lands-end in Cornwall in
the West, unto the Island Tenet in the East, contains 340 miles. It is sited
under the 9th, and 13th Climates of the Northern temperate Zone; insomuch, that
at the Summer Solstice, in the Northern parts of Scotland, there is no Night at
all, but only an obscure twilight. A Country it is for Air mild, for Soil
fruitful, and for length of Days pleasant and delightful. In Winter the absence
of the Sun is relieved, with the warmth of its invironing Seas; and in Summer
the heat is moderated by frequent showers and S^a-winds.

O happy Britain (said the old Panegyrist) and more blisful than all other
Regions! Nature has enriched thee with all commodities of Heaven and Earth,
wherein there is neither extreme cold in Winter, nor scorching heat in Summer;
wherein there is such abundant plenty of Corn, as may suffice both for Bread
and Wine; wherein are Woods without wild-beasts, and the Fields without noisome
Serpents: But infinite numbers of Milch-Cattel, and Sheep weighed down with
Fleeces; and that which is most comfortable, long Days and lightsom Nights. And
as our English Lucan sings, The fairest Land that from her thrusts the rest,
As if she cared not for the World beside;
A World within her self with wonders blessed.


This Queen of Islands was at the first called Albion, either from Albion
Marcoticus who seated himself herein, or ab albis rupibus, from the white Rocks
appearing toward the Coasts of France, or from Olbion, signifying rich or
happy, in regard of its fertility, temperature, and riches. Next, It was called
Britain, either from the two British words Pride and Cain, which signify Beauty
and White, or from the Greek word (...) signifying Metals, with which it
abounds, or from the British word Beyth, that is, painted, stained, colored
(the Inhabitants of old using to dye their bodies with Woad) to which the
Greeks added Tania, (that is, a Region) thence called Britons-Land or Britanie.
At last, The Southern and best part of it (from the Angle-Saxons then
inhabiting it) was called Angle-Land, now

England, which said part of Britain, is bounded on the East with the Germane,
on the West with the Irish, on the South with the British Ocean, on the North
with the River Tweed, and a Line drawn from it, to the Solway Westward. The
longest day in the Northern part of England is Seventeen hours and near Thirty
minutes; and the shortest day in the most Southern part thereof, almost Eight
hours long. Englands dimension in length, from Berwick to the Lands-End is 386
miles, in breadth from Sandwich to the Lands-End 279; in compass (by reason of
the many Bays and Promontories) about 1300 miles.

England, in the Romans time, was divided into Britania prima, containing the
South part of England, Britania secunda containing the Western part, now called
Wales; and Maxima Caesariensis containing the Northern parts beyond Trent. The
first of these in the Britains time belonged to the Archbishopric of London,
the 2d. to the Archbishopric of Glamorgan.
Caerleon, and the 3d. to the Archbishopric of York.

The Britains, or first Inhabitants of this Island, were derived from the
Gauls, as both their Speech, Laws, Customs, and Buildings manifest. The Story
of Brute with his Trojans Conquering this Island in A.M. 2887, or whenever
else, seems to be only a Fable of Geofry of Monmouths framing. Amongst the
Ancient Britains, none save the better and more civil sort did wear any
clothing. They painted their bare bodies with sundry Pictures, representing
all manner of living creatures, flowers, and the heavenly bodies, conceiting,
that this made them appear the more terrible to their enemies. About their
Wastes and Necks they wore Chains of Iron, supposing them to be a goodly
Ornament. The hair of their heads they wore long, which was naturally curled;
all other parts they shaved, save the upper-lip. Of all the Provinces, the
Kentish were the most civilized persons, by reason of their converse with other
Nations in Trafficking and Merchandising. Their buildings were many, and like
to those of the old Gauls (French) poor rude Cottages, yet did they give the
name of Towns to certain cumbersom Woods, which they fortified with Rampires
and Ditches, whither they made their retreat and resort, to eschew the
invasions of their enemies. The Romans first taught them to build their Houses
of Stone.

Their Wives were many, Ten or Twelve apiece, which they held common among
Parents and Brethren; yet was the Issue reputed his only, who first Married the
Mother when she was a Maid. The Children they brought up in common amongst
them. Their diet was spare and mean, being Barks and Roots of Trees, and Milk,
also a kind of food they had no bigger than a Bean, after the eating of which,
for a considerable time they did neither hunger nor thirst. They eat likewise
Venison and Fruits. Their usual drink was made of Barley.

depiction of ancient Britains The Habits of the Ancient Britains
Printed for Abell swalle at the Unicorn at ye West End of St Paul's.

Page. 4.

F. H. Van. Houe sculp:


Their Religion was Paganish superstition. They had many Idol-gods, and used
man's flesh in their Sacrifices. They had Priests and Instructers, the chief of
which were called Druides, who were the sacrificers, discussers and
interpreters of Religious matters; they decided also as temporal Judges almost
all controversies in the civil State, and such as refused to stand to their
judgment, they put under their Interdiction, which was accounted the most
grievous punishment. These Druides were privileged from the Wars, and all
other burdens, taxes and payments. Over all the rest of them there was one
Primate. The main thing they labored to persuade men was, That the Soul is
immortal. They taught only by word of mouth.

The Merchandising of the ancient Britains, consisted chiefly in Ivory Boxes,
Sheers, Onches, Bits and Bridles, Wreaths and Chains, with other conceits made
of Glass and Amber. And as their Merchandise was mean, so was their Shipping
also, the Keels and Ribs whereof were of light wood covered over with Leather.

Their Coin was either of Brass, or else Iron-Rings sized at a certain weight,
which they used for their Money; but as times grew more civil, and Traffic
more frequent, they stamped both Gold and Silver.

Their Armor were Shields and short Spears, in the lower of which Spears was
fastened a round Bell of Brass, which at the beginning of a fight they shoke
with a great courage, conceiting that such a rattling noise did dismay the
enemy. In the beginning of a Battle they fought in Chariots, but when they had
wound themselves in amongst their enemies, they fought on foot, upon occasion
retiring to their Chariots, which in the mean space that they fought on foot,
were drawn all together. They were so expert in managing their Chariot-Horses,
that running them forceably down a steep Hill, they could stop and turn them in
the midway.

Julius Caesar found the Island of Britain, not in a Monarchical estate under
one King; but divided into several Provinces or petty Kingdoms.

The Names of which Provinces were, 1. Cantii, the Inhabitants of Kent. 2.
Regni, Sussex and Surrey. 3. Durothriges, Dorcetshire. 4. Damnonii, Devon and
Cornwall. 5. Belgae, Sommerset, Wilts. and Hampshire. 6. Attrebatii, Berkshire.
7. Dobuni, Oxford and Glocestershire. 8. Catieuchlani, Warwick, Bucks, and
Bedford. 9. Trinobantes, Hartford, Essex, Middlesex. 10. Iceni, Suffolk,
Norfolk, Cambridge. 11. Coritani, Northampton, Lincoln, Leicester, Rutland,
Derby, Nottingham. 12. Cornabii, Stafford, Worcester, Cheshire, and Shropshire
13. Brigantes, Parisi, Lancashire, York, Richmond, Durham, Westmorland and
Cumberland. 14. Ordovices, Flint, Denbigh, Merioneth, Caernarvan and
Montgomery. 15. Silures, Hereford, Radnor, Brecknock, Monmouth and Glamorgan.
16. Pembroke, Cardigan, and Caermarden called Dimetae. 17. Ottadini,
Northumberland, Teifidale, Twedale, Merch and Louthien. 18. Selgovai,
Lidesdale, Eusdale, Eskdale, Annandale, and Niddisdale. 19. Novantes, Kile,
Carick, Galloway, and Cunningham. 20. Fife, Renfraw, Cluydsdale, Leanox,
Striveling, Menteth called Damnii. 21. Ciledonii, Gadini, Perth, Stratherne,
Albin, A^gile, and Lorne. 22. Epidii, Cantire. 23. Vicemagi, Murray. 24.
Venricones, Mernia, Anguis, Mar. 25. Taezali, Buquhane. 26. Cantae, Creones,
Cerontes, Rosse, Southerland. 27. Carnonacae, Carini, Cornabii, Stratnavern,
28. Simertae, Logi, Caithnes.


The most memorable Kings of the Britains, in the times of the Romans.
COmius King of the Attrebatii.

Cassibelan King of the Trinobaates, who as the most worthy of the British
Kings, was chosen by general consent to withstand the Roman invasion, which he
did with very great prowess, twice repulsing their Legions from the
British-Shore. His chief City was Verolam, near where St. Albans now stands.

Cingetorix, Caruil, Taximagul, and Segonax, Kings reigning together in Kent.

Mandubrace a Prince of the Trinobantes, who after that he was beaten out of
his Country by Cassibelan, fled unto Caesar into Gallia, and was a great
Incendiary against his native Land; persuading Caesar to make a second
expedition into Britain.

Cunobeline, the chief City for whose residence was Camalodunum, now called
Malden in Essex.

Adminius, Catacratus and Togodumus Sons of Cunobeline, the last whereof made
gallant resistance against the Romans.

Cogidunus, who received in pure gift at the hands of the Romans certain
Cities, over which he peaceably reigned King.

Caractacus, a most renowned Prince of the Silures, who in Nine years
resistance waded through many adventures against the Romans, but at last was
betrayed and carried to Rome, where being led in Triumph, was for the braveness
of his Spirit, released of his bonds, and accepted into Claudius Caesar's favor.

Venutius a famous King of the Brigantes.

Voadicea, or Boadicea, Queen to Prasutagus, after her Husbands death,
receiving incivilitie^ from the Romans, opposed her self against them, and in
one Battle slew Eighty thousand of them Those two strong Cities, Verolamium,
and Camalodunum, she took and sacked. Petilius Lieutenant of the Ninth Legion
she discomfited, Catus the Procurator she forced to fly beyond the Seas. All
feared the Heroic prowess of this Princess; but at length she was vanquished
in Battle, when rather than live subject to her foes, she poisoned her self.

Arviragus stoutly withstood Claudius.

Galgacus a right valiant Prince of the Caledonians in the time of Domitian.

These were the oppugners of the Roman Power for above an hundred years, nor
were the Britains then subdued without themselves; for their own divisions made
way for the Romans to become their Masters, and to possess their Country.

About the year of the Worlds Creation 3913, and before the birth of Christ
Fifty four years, the fortunate Romans under the conduct of Julius Caesar first
took footing in Britain about Deal; and so welcome was the news of Caesar's
landing in Britain to the Roman Senate, that they decreed unto his honor a
general Thanksgiving for Twenty days, which was the first so great honor ever
granted; the former greatest Victories having had but five, or at most but ten
days assigned them.

Emperors of Rome commanding in Britain.
Caius Julius Caesar was General of the Roman forces in Gallia when he invaded
this Island of Britain; in short time after which, JVLIVS CAESAR.
he assumed the Title and Authority of perpetual Dictator, about A.M. 3925 He
was very succesful in War, and of a most undaunted spirit upon all occasions.
In Fifty several Battles by him fought, he always prevailed, one only excepted.
Four times was he created Consul, and five times entered Rome in Triumph. Once
entering into a Boat in tempestuous weather, and the Waterman afraid to put
forth from shore, he thus animated him, Proceed courageously against the
storms, for thou carriest Caesar, and Caesar's fortunes. And when he was
forewarned of the conspiracy made against him in the Senate House, and
dissuaded from going thither at that time, he answered, That he had rather dye,
than admit fear into his breast: So resolutely going to the place, was by
Brutus, Cassius, and other conspirators murdered in the Senatehouse, receiving
in his Body Twenty three Wounds. He was bald-headed, therefore to cover it, he
always wore the Triumphant Laurel Garland. Some report that the Bathes by the
City of Bath were first found out by him; others say by an ancient British King
called Bladus. For Twenty years after Caesar's coming into Britain, the Britains
retained their own Kings and Laws, having no Roman praefects over them.

AUGUSTUS, A.M 3930
OCtavian Augustus Caesar was Julius Caesar's Sisters Son, and his adopted and
declared Heir In the Forty second year of his reign the Prince of peace, Jesus
Christ, was born, when was universal peace. This wise Emperors Motto was,
Festina ^ente. And used to say, That is speedily or soon enough done, that is
well enough done; and that to get some small profit with great danger, is like
those, that fishing with a golden Hook, hazard more than the Fish is worth. He
dyed in the embraces of his Wife Livia, of whom he took this Farewell, Livia,
Nostri conjugii memor, vive, and vale.

Claudius Tiberius Nero was ordained by Augustus for his Successor. TIBERIUS,
A. D. 17.
Such an impudent Letcher he was, that he caused naked Women and Maidens to
bring in, and attend on him at Supper. Such a notorious Drunkard, that caused
the people, instead of Claudius Tiberius Nero, to call him Caldus Biberius
Mero, a Winebibber. In his time the worlds Savior was crucified, about Five
years after which time, the Gospel was planted in Britain, as says old Gildas.
This Emperor as is conjectured, was smothered to death by Caligula.

Caius Caligula. Nephew to Tiberius, CALIGULA, A D. 39.
was at some times exceeding prodigal, at other times sordidly covetous, always
cruel, proud, and libidinous: He would force Rich men to make their Wills, and
therein to declare him their Heir, which when they had done, he would presently
cause them to be poisoned, scoffing at them, and saying, That when men had once
made their Wills, it was fit they should dye. His own Mother he defamed to be
incestuously begot; his Grandmother he poisoned, his Brother Tiberius he
murdered, his Three natural Sisters incestuously polluted. He made himself a
god, commanding that men should worship him as such, and ordained his great
Horse for his Priest: but as Decius says, Truly a fit priest for such a god,
and a fit god for such a priest. Howbeit, though he would be a god, yet when
the true God sent his Thunder, he would cover his eyes with his Hat, and hide
himself under the Table. He was so exceeding hairy of body, that during his
regality, it was next to High Treason, but to name a Goat. He often lamented
that some rare and unusual disaster happened not in his time, whereby his Reign
might be made memorable to posterity. He wished that all the people had but one
Neck, that so he might have the glory of giving the bravest blow that ever was
struck; but himself was murdered receiving Thirty wounds of the Conspirators.

CLAUDIUS, A. D. 43.
Claudius Drusus, the Grandson of Livia, Augustus's Wife, was by the Praetorian
Band chosen Emperor contrary to the mind of the Senate, who had determined to
reduce the City into her ancient liberty, without admission of any Caesar. He
came into Britain, where for his clemency, the Britains erected a Temple and
Altar in his name, giving him Divine honor. His first Wife Messalina, besides
all her private Lecheries, went often to the common Stews to satiate her Lust;
but she for her impudency being put to death, Claudius Married Julia Agrippina,
who to make way for her Son Nero to the Empire, procured the disinheriting of
Brittanicus the Emperors Son, and by Poison tempered in a Mushrom, she ended
Claudius's days.

DOmitius Nero was elected Emperor by the Soldiers. His own Father he poisoned,
NERO, A. D. 56.
upon his Mother he first committed incest, then murder; he deflowred the
Vestals, slew his Brother Germanicus, and Sister Antonia, his Wives Poppea and
Octavia, his Ant Domitia, his Son-in-Law Rufinus, and his famous Tutour Seneca,
with many of the Roman Nobility, and raised the first persecution against the
Christians. He set the City of Rome on fire, 1st. Persetion.
charging the innocent Christians with the fact, and tormenting them for it. He
caused St. Peter and St. Paul to be put to death, the first by crucifying, the
other by beheading. But this Tyrant was grown so hated, that the Senate
adjudged him to be shamefully whipped to death; which he hearing of, run himself
upon his own Sword. In the first five years of his Reign he was very
compassionate, in so much, as being requested to sign a Writ for the execution
of a Malefactor, he said, Would God I had never learnt to Write. In the year of
our Redemption, 67, Joseph of A^imathea was sent by Philip the Apostle to plant
the Gospel in Britain, who laid the foundation of the Christian Faith at a
place then called Avalon, afterward Iniswitren, now Glastenbury, where he dyed
and was buried. In Nero the progeny of the Caesar's ended.

SErgius Sulpitius Galba was elected Emperor by the Soldiers and Senate, GALBA,
A. D. 70.
who when he had Reigned only Seven Months, was by the procurement of Otho,
slain by a Troop of Horsemen.

OTHO, A. D. 71.
SAlvius Otho being chosen Emperor, Vitellius a Roman General marches against
him, and at Brixillium won the day; and to save the shedding of Roman Blood,
Otho refused to engage any further with him, though much importuned by his
Soldiers to reinforce the Battle; but he thus answered them, To hazard your
virtues and valors for one man's estate, I hold it dangerous; and needless it
is that my life should be prized at so dear a rate. These Civil Wars Vitellius
begun, which for my part I purpose not to continue. And hereby let posterity
esteem of Otho, that others have kept the Empire longer; but never any that
left it more Valiantly. You for your parts would have dyed for my sake, but I
to save your lives do dye voluntarily and unvanquished: I blame not the gods,
nor envy I Vitellius his rising glory; sufficient to me it is, that my House
has touched the highest strain of honor, and my self to be left upon Record,
The Sovereign Monarch of the World. And thereupon, with a solemn farewell to the
whole Army, he went into his Tent, and with his Dagger gave himself his
deaths-wound.

VITELLIVS, A. D. 71.
AVlus Vitellius was so gluttonous and prodigal, that Two thousand Dishes of
Fish, and Seven thousand of Fowl, were served to his Table at one Supper. In
those few Months he reigned he wasted Seven millions, thirty one thousand two
hundred and fifty pound Sterling; but was ignominiously slain after the manner
of a common Malefactor, when he had reigned only Eight Months and five days.

FLavius Vespasian was chosen Emperor by the Mesian Legions: VESPASIAN, A D. 71.
He was a great enemy and scourge to the Jews, but a great favourer of
Learning, valiant, just, and wise, yet it may be too covetous; for he imposed a
Tax upon every Family, according to the quantity of Urine that was made in it;
which his Son Titus blaming him for, as dishonorable to so great an Emperor,
he bade Titus smell to the Gold brought for Tribute-Money, asking him what ill
favor he found in it? Adding, that the smell of gain is sweet out of any thing.
He dyed of a Flux.

TItus Vespasian won the City of Jerusalem. TITUS, A. D. 81.
For his humanity and native goodness he was styled, The Darling and delight of
Mankind. So tender he was of satisfying his People, that his usual saying was,
No man ought to go sad from his presence. So inclined to gratify the poor,
that one day being passed from him, without any notable good done for them, in
sorrow he said, Perdidimus diem, we have quite lost a day. He was a great enemy
to promoters, and extorters of penal Laws, whom he caused to be whipped and
banished Rome. He would not receive any accusation against those that spoke
evil of him, saying, So long as I do nothing that deserves reproach. I value
not lies. But his Brother Domitian aspiring after to the Empire, procured this
good Emperor to be poisoned.

DOMITIAN, A.D. 83.
FLavius Domitian instead of applying himself to manly exercises, he busied
himself commonly in a private Gallery with catching of Flies, and pricking them
through with a Bodkin. He caused his Statue to be made of Gold, and commanded,
that himself should be called God. Upon small surmises he murdered the Senators
and Nobles. Many new tortures he invented. Confiscations and Banishments were
favors from him. 2d. Persecution.
He raised the second Persecution against the Christians, Banished St. John
into the Isle of Pathmus; but himself was murdered, and his dead carcass
disgracefully abused, his Scutcheons and Images defaced by order of the Senate.

NERVA, A. D. 98.
COcceius Nerva recalled the banished Christians, permitting them to enjoy the
free profession of their most holy Faith. Now St. John returned from Pathmos to
Ephesus. This Emperor dyed in a Choleric passion, conceived against a Senator.

TROJAN, A.D. 100.
ULpius Trojan, when he invested any Praetor, in giving him the Sword, he would
command him to use it against his own person, if he violated the Law. 3d.
Persecution.
He raised the third persecution. The Jews rebelling he put to death in such
infinite numbers, that it was accounted the greatest slaughter that ever was
made. He dyed of a Flux.

AELius Hadrianus is said to have been of so excellent memory, HADRIANUS. A.D.
119.
that he never forgot any thing which he either heard or read. The Britains
rebelling, he came over and reduced them into obedience, whereupon there was
this addition upon his Coin, The Restorer of Britanie. And to defend the Romans
from the incursions of the wild Northern Britains, he caused a wall of Stakes,
turf and earth, to be made from the river Eden near Carlisle unto the river Tine
near Newcastle, 80 miles in length. Some write, that he only repaired this
Wall, and that Agricola Nero's General first made it. He razed Jerusalem even
to the ground, built another City near where that stood, calling it Aelia,
banished the Jews from thence, and upon the gate of the new City looking
toward Jerusalem, he caused the picture of a Swine to be set, because that
beast is an abomination to the Jews. He prohibited the persecuting of
Christians, and was minded to have built a Temple to Christ, but was dissuaded
from it. He died of a Dropsy.

ANtoninus Pius published an Edict in favor of the Christians, A. PIUS, A.D.
140.
ordaining that if any after that time should be found guilty of molesting them
without just occasion, that then the Christian accused should be acquit, and
his accuser should suffer that punishment he endeavored to procure upon the
Christian. He often said, That he had rather save one subjects life, than kill a
thousand enemies. So bountiful he was, that thereby he consumed his own private
Estate, which his Empress repining at, he said, That when he undertook to be
Emperor, he then laid aside the interest and proprieties of a private person.
In further praise of him, it is said, That in his youth he did nothing rashly,
nor in his age negligently. He died of a Fever, aged Seventy.

MARCUS AURELILUS. A.D. 162. Fourth Persecut.
MArcus Aurelius Antoninus Philosophus, chose to himself for his Associate in
the Empire Lucius Verus, who raised the fourth Persecution, when those two
famous Christians Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, and Justin Martyr, suffered
Martyrdom, the like to which did many other good Christians. But after nine
years bloody Persecution, the Tyrant Lucius was cut off by an Apoplexy. Marcus
Aurelius in his Wars against the Quadi, Germans, what with the pestilence
raging in his Army, and what by want of water, was sorely distressed, but by
the prayers of his Christian Soldiers, such a plenteous shower of rain fell,
that therewith, after five days extremest drought and thirst, the whole Army
was refreshed, and his enemies on the contrary by Thunder and Lightning were
utterly dispersed and overthrown; whereupon this Emperor both mitigated the
Persecution, and named that Legion of the Christians, (...), the Lightning
Legion. His Son Commodus procured the Physicians to destroy him.

AVrelius Commodus would sometimes show himself like Hercules in a Lions skin,
COMMODUS. A.D. 181.
sometimes wantonly clad in the habit of an Amazon. He kept three hundred
Concubines, and amongst the rest his beloved Martia, whose painted picture he
wore on the outside of his garment; but through some displeasure having
designed to put her and some other persons to death, they conspired against
him, and with poison, stabs and strangling, murdered him. The news of whose
death was most grateful both to the Senate and People, who styled him, Hostis
humani generis, the enemy of mankind. About the beginning of this Emperors
reign was the Christian Faith in Britain first professed by public Authority
under King Lucius the first Christian King in the world. At which time
Eleutherius then Bishop of Rome, sent Faganus and Damianus to him, K. Lucius.
upon whose preaching the Heathenish Flamins and Arch Flamins (twenty eight in
number) were converted to so many Bishops Sees, whereof London, York, and
Caerleyn upon Vs^e in Wales were made the Metropolitans of the Province. The
first Archbishop of London was Theanus.

PVblius Helvius Pertinax a petty Tradesmans Son, PERTINAX, A.D. 194.
was in his old age called to the government of the Empire by the Senate, but
the Praetorian Cohorts (whose licentious lives he restrained) shed his innocent
blood when he had reigned little more than a Month.

DIDIUS, A.D. 194.
DIdius Julianus a Lawyer by profession, when the Empire was now exposed to
sale by the Praetorian Soldiers, obtained the Diadem with larger promises than
ever he performed. But Severus warring against him, and the Soldiers remaining
unsatisfied of the covenanted promises, and withal hoping to purchase favor
with Severus, they slew their Chapman Didius in his Palace, within a few days
after that he had assumed the Government.

SEPT. SEVERUS. A D. 195.
SEptimus Severus was by the Syrian Army elected Emperor; and he as soon as he
came near to Rome, gave strict command that the Praetorian Cohorts should
attend him disarmed, which being done, he vehemently checked them for their
treason against Pertinax, depriving them both of the name, honor, and arms of
Soldiers, and banished them an hundred miles from Rome; which act of his was
highly grateful to the Roman Citizens. This Emperor came over into Britain,
where he fought many Battles, but ever with more difficulties to the Romans
than Britains. Clodius Albinus the Roman. Lieutenant in Britain made opposition
against him, but he subdued him. Hadrians wall he repaired. The Caledonian
rebelling he commanded to be destroyed without exception. But Severus remaining
in York (which place afterward grew to be one of the chiefest for account among
the Brigantes (as commonly the stations of the Roman Colonies, were the
seed-plots of all our Cities and chief Towns) growing aged and sick, he died
Apr. 4. A. D. 212. This Emperor having layn long sick of the Gout, and one of
his Nobles telling him, That he wondered how he could rule so vast an Empire,
being so lame and unwieldy? he answered, That he ruled the Empire with his
Brain, Fifth Persecution.
and not with his Feet. He raised the fifth Persecution against the Christians.

BAssianus Caracalla, CARAC. and GETA. A.D. 212.
and his brother Septimus Geta, were declared Emperors by old Severus their
father, and both by him Surnamed Antoninus (a name then very gracious in the
esteem of the Romans.) These Emperors together with the Empress-Mother Julia
transported the Funeral ashes of the old Emperor in a Golden Urn to Rome, where
they solemnly consecrated him a god; the Ceremony being after this sort
performed: His Image being lively pourtraied in manner of a sick man was laid
upon an Ivory Bedsted richly furnished in the porch of his Palace. The Princes
and Senators sat all on the left side thereof in black array, the Ladies on
the right, clothed in white, the Physicians diligently visiting him. When seven
days were ended as if then just dead, the prime Nobles carried him in his
Ivory-bed to the Forum, where all the Patrician Youth, and noble Virgins
encompassed him with most doleful Hymns and Ditties. From thence his Image was
removed to Mars's field, where a apiece frame of Timber was erected of a
very great height and compass, the stories still mounting to the top with
sundry ascents, richly beautified with gold, purple ornaments, and Images of
great art and price. On the second of which ascents was placed the Emperors bed
and statue, with infinite store of most sweet odors; the young Nobles riding
round about in a kind of dance, others who represented great Princes in their
Coaches, and then his Successor first set fire on the Frame, and after him all
the people did the like on all sides, till the whole began to be in a flame,
which done, an Eagle (secretly enclosed within) was let fly out of the top, the
people following its flight with shouts and prayers, supposing that therewith
Severus was mounted into Heaven. But in short time after this, Caracalla to
gain the sole Sovereignty slew his brother Geta in his Mother Julia's arms,
pretending that the innocent youth had sought his death. And because Papinianus
the famous Civilian would not excuse the Murder in his Pleas at the Bar, he
caused him to be slain, with many of the Nobility who favored Geta. Julia his
brother Geta's own Mother, and his Mother-in-Law, he took to Wife, reported on
this occasion: Julia in his presence either casually or purposely let fall her
Vail, thereby discovering her naked breasts and beauty, which he beholding,
instantly said, Were it not unlawful, I should not be unwilling: to which she
replied. That all things were lawful to him who made Laws for others, but was
himself subject to none. Whereupon he married her; but a violent death
prevented him from enjoying her long, and she hearing of his being murdered
poisoned her self.

OPilius Macrinus from obscure Parentage, MACRINUS. A.D. 219.
by election of the Soldiers obtained the Imperial Crown, but enjoyed it but a
short time, for young Heliogabalus warring against him, overcame him, and put
him to death, with Diadumanus his son.

BAssianus Ant. Heliogabalus the natural son of Caracalla was incredibly
luxurious. HELIOGABALUS. A.D. 220.
His garments though exceeding costly he would not put on twice. His shoes
were set with pearls, seats strewed with musk and amber, his bed covered with
gold and purple, and adorned with most costly jewels, his vessels (even of
basest use) all gold, his lamps burnt with the balms of Arabia and India, his
way strewed with the powder of gold and silver, his diet so profuse that at
every supper in his Court was usually spent 1000 pounds sterling. At a Feast of
the chief Roman Citizens in his Court, he caused all the rooms to be strewed
with saffron, saying, That such cattle deserved such litter. Near the Sea he
would eat no fish, and in the inland no flesh. He had whole meals made of the
tongues of singing birds and peacocks, or of the brains of most costly
creatures. At one supper he was served with 600 Ostriches. He built a stew in
his Court, wherein himself in the attire of an harlot would make orations to
his whores, terming them his fellow soldiers, and giving them instructions how
they should practice with the greatest variety their filthy lust. In Rome he
built a Chatter-house for women to meet in, where they might determine of their
attires. He brought his Mother Semiamira into the Senate, giving her a voice
with the Senators. But conscience accusing him, and he fearing the rage of the
people for his crimes, therefore he prepared silken halters, golden knives, and
built a stately tower, exceeding high, adorned with gold and gems, thinking
when occasion should be, by some of these means to destroy himself, having
these words often in his mouth, That howsoever he died, yet his death should be
precious in the sight of all men. But he was mistaken, for the Praetorian band
draged him and his mother, with acclamations through Rome, saying, That the
Bitch and her Whelp must go together: then slew them and threw them into Tyber.
And the Senate approving of what was done, decreed that his Name should be
blotted out of all Monuments in Rome, and never any Antoninus should again rule
the Empire.

ALEX. SEVERUS A.D. 224.
AVrelius Alexander Severus was a great lover of the Liberal Arts, and a great
favourer of the Christians, from whom he took to himself examples of life, and
commended their precepts to others. This his kindness to the Christians is
thought to have been procured by his mother Mammea, whom Origin instructed, and
whom St. Hierom styles a most holy woman. He was a great observer of justice,
and therefore caused Turinus a Courtier (who had taken money of diverse persons,
with promise to procure the Emperors favor in their suits) to be put to death
by smoke, one in the mean while proclaiming, That he had sold smoke, therefore
with smoke should die. His Roman Soldiers grown far out of order by the ill
government of his predecessors, he sought by severe courses to reduce; but they
being backed by Maximinus (whom he had raised) murdered him.

Caius, Julius, Verus Maximinus, MAXIMINVS. A.D. 237.
a Thracian by birth, spent his youth in keeping of cattle, and was of a
gigantick stature, being eight foot and an half high by geometrical measure. On
his thumb he wore as a Ring, the bracelet which his Wife used to wear on her
arm. And according to his limbs, so was his diet; for he daily devoured forty
pound weight of flesh, and thereunto did drink six gallons of Wine. For his
admirable height he was admitted by Severus into the rank of a common Soldier,
and shortly after to be one of his guard, and at last the soldiers elected him
Emperor. But a Tyrant he proved, as well to the Roman State in general, as the
Christians in special, 6th. Pers.
against whom he raised the sixth Persecution. His conditions were so hateful,
that the Senate advanced one Gordianus to sway the Empire; but he proving
unfortunate in his attempts against him, strangled himself. And Maximinus as he
was drawing his forces toward Rome to revenge himself on the Senate, at the
siege against Aquileia was slain in his pavilion by his discontented soldiers.
The Citizens Wives in the time of this siege cut off the hair of their heads to
make bow-strings thereof.

PVPIENVS and BALBINVS, A.D. 239.
PVpienus Maximus, and Clodius Balbinus, were by the Peers and Princes
constituted Empeperors; the people extolling the Senate for their prudent
choice of so wise men, contrary to the rash practice of such, who chose their
Governors to fit their own fancies. But the Praetorian soldiers taking this as
a reflect upon them, and chiefly because German strangers were brought in to be
of the Guard, as if themselves were not to be trusted; therefore turning their
spleens against these Emperors, they assaulted them in their chambers,
dispoiled them of their Imperial Robes, haled them through the City like two
Thieves, and lastly slew them, leaving their bodies to despightful ignominy, in
A. D. 241. in which year was so great an eclipse of the Sun, that the noonday
thereby became as dark as the midnight.

GORDIANVS, A D. 241.
ANtonius Gordianus was by the Senate and Praetorian Band elected Emperor, when
he was not yet full sixteen years of age. He caused the Temple of Janus at
Rome, which had long stood shut, to be opened; a sure token that Wars were at
hand: which with good success he prosecuted against the Persians, Goths,
Sarmates, and Germans. He was most noble and lovely conditioned, exceeding
studious, and addicted unto learning, having in his Library no less than 62000
books. But by his Prefect Philip he was deposed, Philip also usurping the
Imperial Government under whom for a time this deposed youth held an ordinary
Captains place; but the Usurper judging himself not secure while Gordianus
lived, commanded him to be slain.

JVlius Philippus Arabs has the honor, PHILIPPUS, A.D. 246.
according to some, of being the first Emperor baptized into the Christian
faith, together with his Wife Severa, and Son Philip. Himself and Son were
slain by the soldiers. Of his son it is reported, that he was of so admirable
composedness, that in all his life he was never seen to laugh.

TRajanus Decius swayed the Empire like a worthy Prince, TRAJANVS, A.D. 253.
7th. Pers.
saving his persecuting the Saints of God: for he it was that raised the
Seventh Persecution against the Christians. Under him suffered Fabianus and
Cornelius, Bishops of Rome; St. Lawrence and many other good Christians he put
to great tortures; amongst the rest, Origin he caused to be scourged at an
Iron-stake, and then locked his feet in the stocks four paces asunder. But after
that he had seen his two sons Decius and Hostilianus slain before his face,
himself was swallowed up in a whirlpool, never having other honor of burial.

TRebonianus Gallus, TREBONIANVS, A.D. 254.
whom Decius had appointed Governor of Mysia, and to keep the passages from
the invading Goths, through the desire of rule he plotted with the Goths
against the Roman Army, to the ruin of his Sovereign Lord; but thereby he
attained the Empire he had lusted after, The Christians he banished. At which
time so violent a Pestilence commenced, that no Province in the world was
exempt from it. He made a dishonorable peace with the Goths, who
notwithstanding continued their furies against the Romans, which his General
Aemilianus Maurus revenged with a wonderful slaughter; whereby Aemilian grew so
famous, and Gallus so contemptible, that the soldiers proclaimed Aemilian
Emperor, who slew Gallus and his son both in fight.

AEMILIANUS, A. D. 255.
JVlius Aemilianus, an African by birth, of base parentage, was elected Emperor
only by the Mysian Army, which election the Italian Bands opposed, in favor of
their own Leader Valerianus, whom they sought to promote to the Empire, the
Senate also inclining thereto. Therefore the Mysian Soldiers when they
understood this, tumultuously murdered Aemilainus, when he had reigned about
four months.

VALERIANUS, A. D. 255. 8th. Perse.
LIcinius Valerianus in the beginning of his reign was very gracious and mild
toward the Christians; but afterward (stirred up by an Egyptian Sorcerer) he
began the Eighth persecution with great cruelty. Many were the Martyrs which
with horrible tortures he caused to be put to death; but the just revenging
hand of God cut him off, by Sapor the savage King of Persia, who in battle took
him prisoner, and made his aged back his footstool whilst he mounted his horse,
for the space of seven years, and then caused him to be fley'd alive, and
salted.

LIcinius Gallienus, GALLIENUS, A.D. 268.
in whose time the sun was clouded as under sackcloth, not being seen for many
days together; also great and fearful earthquakes happened, which overthrew
Cities and other Edifices, shaking the ground so terribly, that vast caves, and
hideous gaping bowels of the earth were thereby laid open, and great streams of
salt water flowed out from them; the earth roared, and seemed to thunder, when
there was no voice heard in the air above. The sea overswelled her banks, and
brake into many Continents, drowning countries, cities, and people. And so
violent a Pestilence raged, that in Rome no less than Five thousand persons
dyed thereof in a day. Which said calamities somewhat moving this Emperor to
remorse, he stayed the persecutions of the Christians, sending out his edicts
in favor of them. The Roman soldiers now in diverse places of the Empire, set
up no fewer than Thirty titular Emperors at once. But Gallienus, after that he
had suffered the Empire to be rent in pieces, and usurped by many barbarous
nations, was murdered at Millain by three of his principal Captains.

AVrelius, Flavius Claudius, CLAUDIUS II. A.D. 271.
was elected by the soldiers before the Walls of Millain, and with much joy was
confirmed Emperor by the Senate in Rome. He slew and took prisoners of the
Goths (who had invaded Italy) in one battle three hundred thousand fighting
men; two thousand of their ships also, laden with warlike munition, he took;
but dyed of a Fever before he had reigned full two years. His Statue of Gold
the Senate caused to be set up in the Capitol, and his Target of the same metal
to be hung up in the Senate House.

QUINTILIUS, A.D. 272.
AVrelius Quintilius, brother to Claudius, was proclaimed Emperor by the
soldiers of his Army, and was confirmed by the Senate: but the soldiers that
had followed Claudius, thinking themselves worthy of the first voice in the
election, proclaimed Aurelianus for Emperor; and Quintilius knowing that he
could not stand against him, chose rather by cutting his veins to bleed himself
to death, after he had reigned only seventeen days, than to hazard the chance
of war, or to return to his private estate.

AURELIANUS, A.D. 272.
VAlerius Aurelianus subdued the Swevians and Sarmates, and with great valor
forced the Germans out of Italy. The Warlike Queen Zenobia he vanquished, and
brought her in Triumph to Rome. But that which blemishes the luster of this
Prince is, That he raised the Ninth Persecution against the Christians. 9th.
Pers.
He was slain by his own Servants.

TACITUS, A.D. 279.
Claudius Tacitus, after Eight Months Interregnum, with much importunity took
upon him the Government of the Empire; for all seemed now to decline this
greatness, they saw it so hazardous. But this Prince reigning about Six Months,
yielded to Deaths impartial stroke: Whether that was natural or violent is left
uncertain.

ANnius Florianus, Brother to Tacitus, FLORIANUS, A D. 279.
took upon himself the name and authority Imperial; but hearing the news of
Probus his Election, he bled himself to death, after he had for a very few days
pleased himself with only the shadow of Sovereignty.

VAlerius Probus was elected by the Eastern Army, PROBUS, A.D. 280.
and had his election confirmed by the Senate, with these additions to his
Title of Augustus, namely* The Father of his Country and highest Bishop. His
first service after he was Emperor, was in Gallia, against the Germans who had
made themselves Lords thereof, where in one Battle continuing Two days, he slew
400000 of them, and recovered out of their hands Seven Cities. He quieted the
Provinces of Muscovia, Russia, and Polonia, and likewise Greece, Syria, Arabia,
Palestina, and Judea. Whence passing into Persia, he had honorable conditions
of Narseus their mighty King: Whereupon issued so universal a peace, that no
wars were heard of in all the Provinces of the Empire. But this calm lasted but
a short time; for the Egyptians, likewise Bonosus and Proclus, rebel against
him; all whom he subdued. Other defections and rebellions there were in the
Eastern parts, which he prepared vigorously to correct, resolving, as he said,
to bring matters to that pass, that the State should want no more soldiers*
which saying of his, with also his curbing the dissolute manners of the
soldiers, did so disgust them, that some of his Army conspired against him, and
treacherously murdered him. After which yet, they erected for him an honorable
sepulcher, wherein was engraven this epitaph: Here lies the Emperor Probus,
justly for his goodness called Probus: Of all the Barbarous Nations and Tyrants
a Conqueror.

CARUS, A.D. 286.
AVrelius Carus was chosen by the soldiers, and confirmed by the Senate. The
murderers of his predecessor Probus he severely punished Carinus his eldest son
he made Governor of Britain, and the Western parts, and himself with his
younger son Numerianus, prepared for the East against the Persians; but in his
journey thitherward, as he lay sick in his bed, a Thunderbolt slew him, with
many others then with him in his Tent. The terror whereof so disanimated his
whole Army, that they desisted the intended design against Persia, and
Numerianus took his Fathers death so heavily, that with continual weeping his
eyes were so weakened, that he could not endure any light. From which disasters,
Arrius Aper, in hopes of procuring the Empire to himself, took occasion to work
the death of Numerianus.

DIOCLESIANUS, and MAXIMIANUS. A.D. 288.
DIoclesianus, who at the first was a common soldier, slew Arrius Aper; which
done, he was elected Emperor, and confirmed by the Senate. Valerius Maximianus,
for his good service in vanquishing the Gauls, who troubled the peace of the
Empire, he made his Consort in the Government. These Emperors raised the Tenth
Persecution, 10th. Pers.
which continued for the term of ten years, so fierce, that within the space of
one month Seventeen thousand Christians were put to death, besides infinite
numbers of others cruelly handled, though suffered to escape with their lives.
And as in other parts of the Empire, so in Britain, the Churches of the
Christians were demolished, and their Bibles burned, and their bodies
afflicted. St. Alban of the City Verolanium, was beheaded at Holmhurst, now
called St. Albans. His Instructor Amphibolus was brought to the same place, and
whipped at a stake whereat his entrails were tied; so winding his entrails out
of his body, was at last stoned to death. Sundry others were put to death in
other places; and in Lichfield so many, that the place became another Golgotha;
for which cause that City does bear for their Seal of Arms, a Field charged
with many Martyrs. But the chief cause of these miseries befalling the
Christians, was from the Christians themselves: For (says Eusebius) after that
our conversation through too much liberty and licentiousness, was degenerated,
and holy discipline corrupted; whiles every one of us did envy, bite, and
back-bite each other, waging intestine wars, and piercing one another with
opprobrious words; whilst nothing but hypocrisy was in the face, deceit in the
heart, and guile on the tongue, whereby mischief was at the full height, then
began the heavy hand of God to visit us, etc. Howbeit, when God had done using
these his Rods of Correction he cast them into the fire. These two Tyrants
having renounced the Empire, and being again become private men, Dioclesian
poisoned himself, and Maximian hanged himself.

CONSTANTIUS CHLORUS.
COnstantius Chlorus, and Galerius Maximinus (to whom the two former Emperors
had voluntarily resigned up their soveraignties) divided the Empire into two
parts, East, and West; Galerius had the Government of the Eastern division, and
Constantius of the Western. Constantius was wise, valiant, noble, and of a
public spirit, wholly reigning to enrich his Subjects. He would commonly say,
That it was more profitable for the state, that the whole wealth of the Land
should be dispersed into the Commons hands, than to lie locked up in the
Princes Coffers. He was so averse to superfluity, that upon extraordinary
occasions, he was forced to borrow Plate of his Friends, to furnish his Tables
and Cup-boards. But the most excelling virtue was, his countenancing and
protecting the late persecuted Christians, making his Court their Sanctuary.
And to winnow the chaff from the Wheat, he used Jehu's policy, commanding all
his Officers to offer sacrifice to the Idol-gods, pretending to discard all
such as refused; but on the contrary, those that complied, he rejected with
this reflect, That he who is disloyal to his God, will never be faithful to his
Prince. Whilst he served here in Britain under Aurelian, he married Helena (the
Daughter of Calus or Calius a British Prince) who was the worker of his
conversion, and on whom he begat Constantine the great in Britain. Whilst he
swayed the Empire, being here in Britain and lately returned from his
expedition against the Picts (which were Northern Britains, who continued to
paint themselves after the Southern parts were brought to more civility) he
fell sick at York, his Imperial seat. At which time his Son Constantine came
thither no him, the sight of whom so rejoiced him, that setting himself upright
in his Bed, he spoke as follows; It now suffices, and death is not fearful,
seeing I shall leave my unaccomplished actions to be performed by thee, my Son,
in whose person I doubt not but that my memorial shall be retained, as in a
monument of succeeding fame. What I had intended, but by this my fatal period
leave undone, see thou do it, that is, govern thy Empire with Justice, protect
the Innocent, and wipe away all tears from the eyes of the Christians, for
therein, above all other things, I have accounted my self happy: To thee
therefore I leave my Diadem, and their defense, taking my faults with me to the
grave, there to be buried in everlasting oblivion; but leaving my virtues (if
ever I had any) to live and revive in thee. So ending his speech, his life also
ended.

Helena his Empress first Walled the City of London, so called from Lhun, or
Longh and Dinas, a City of Trees or Ships.

CONSTANTIUS MAGNUS, A.D. 310.
COnstantine the Great, at his first entrance upon the Empire pursued the
relics of the War, which his Father Constantius had begun against the
Caledonians and other Picts. Then he undertook to tame the Tyrant Maxentius;
but being doubtful what God he should call upon for aid in this his enterprise,
(for as yet he was not fully settled in the Christian Faith, nor Baptized) in
his meditation, happening to cast up his eyes Eastward, he beheld in the
Heavens the sign of a Cross, or the form of the first Greek Character of the
Name of Christ presented to his sight, wherein were Stars (as Letters) so
placed, that this sentence in Greek might be read, In hoc vince. This
miraculous Sign, promising victory, was so comfortable to Constantine, that
with great courage he advanced toward his enemy, bearing before him and his
Army, in place of the Imperial Standard, the form of this Vision embroidered
with Gold and precious Stones. Maxentius had framed a deceitful Bridge over
Tyber, near unto Pons Milvius, with intent thereby to entrap Constantine; but
the Armies joining Battle, Maxentius was put to flight, when, through forgetful
have, he took over the same Bridge, which suddenly falling under him, he with
many more were drowned, and Constantine remained victour. And to the end that
he might with the more facility restrain the turbulent Persians, he removed the
Imperial Seat from Rome into the East, building at Bizantium a most magnificent
City, naming it New Rome, and in imitation of the old one, he circulated Seven
Hills. Herein was built the Palace of that public Library, wherein were
contained Twenty thousand of the choicest written Books, and in the midst
thereof were the Guts of a Dragon, in length 120 foot, on which was admirably
written in Letters of Gold, the Iliads of Homer. But this new City quickly lost
its name of New Rome; for love to the Founder made it take name from him, that
is, Constantinople. To this City Constantine drew his Legions out of Germany,
Gallia, and Britanie, which much weakened this part of the Empire, and made way
for the Picts to infest the more civil parts of this Island. He called the
Council of Nice, where himself sat President.

He dyed, May 22, 337. whose Body was interred at Constantinople, in the Church
of the Apostles, which himself had founded.

This Christian Emperor would often kiss the hollow of old Paphnutius eye,
which he had lost in the former times of Persecution, for the sake of Christ.
He used such reverence and attention to the Word of God Preached, that many
times he would stand up all Sermon time, and when some told him that it tended
to his disparagement, he answered, That it was in the service of the great God,
who is no respecter of persons. He was not Baptized till A. D. 318.

COnstantinus, Constans and Constantius, CONSTANTINUS, A.D. 337.
were the Three Sons of Constantine the Great, amongst whom he divided the
Empire. But Constantine the eldest, whose part was Britain, France, Spain, and
part of Germany, thinking himself wronged in the division, sought to enlarge
his own Dominions upon the frontiers of his Brother Constans; but was
encountered and slain, when he had held his Territories the term of Three
years. Then Constans seized his Dominions, adding them to his own; but he
living luxuriously, was slain by one of his Captains, and then Constantius
became sole Emperor. In whose time Gratianus the Father of Valentinian the
Emperor was general of the Army in Britain, a man so strong of Limb, that no
five men could pluck a Rope out of his hand by all their force, whence he was
surnamed Funarius, the Roper. Constantius dyed of a Fever declaring Julian his
Heir.

JULIAN APOSTATE. A. D. 361.
JVlian the Apostate, was the Brothers Son of Constantine the Great. He was
excellently Learned; and in his younger years so in love with the Christian
Religion (at least in show) that he took upon him the Office of a Deacon,
Reading in public to the People the Sacred Scriptures; but by the Rhetoric of
Libanius, was seduced to Heathenism, and by degrees became a deadly enemy to
the Church of Christ. His temperance was to admiration, both as to his Apparel,
Lodging and Diet. He would often say, that it was the safety of his life, that
he never had any War with his Belly And doubtless he was a grand worldly
Politician; for sometimes he would side with the Catholics against the
Arrians, which were very numerous; yet still encouraging a distance betwixt
them, that so they might not hurt him, being united. To the Jews he would make
large promises, when he foresaw they might stand him in any stead. Whilst
Constantius lived, he dissembled his Religion; but he dead, then he set open
the Temples of the Pagan gods, repaired their Altars, and defaced the Monuments
of the Christians. That Brazen figure of Christ erected at Coesarea Philippi,
he caused to be broken down, instead thereof, placing his own Figure that it
might be worshipped; but it was suddenly destroyed with Lightning.

The Christians he forbad the public Schools and study of the Arts and
Tongues, jesting away the reason of this injustice with scoffs, as he did the
rest, saying, That since Plato, Aristotle and Isocrates adored Mercury and the
other gods, he held it absurd, that the Christians should learn from their
Books, whose Religion they condemned and loathed. When he at any time seized
upon the Goods of the Christians, (which he oft-times did upon slight
pretenses) he would say, he did it that they might enter Heaven with the less
difficulty. When he had disabled the Christians of all command, Civil or
Martial, he said he did it, because their Gospel takes from them, potestatem
Glad^, the power of the Sword. If any poor Christian desired the redress of any
grievance, he would answer That it was the duty of their profession to bear
injuries. But Julian entering Persia with an Army Ten Miles in length, put the
Persians to flight, whom pursuing, as he lift up his hand in sign of victory,
was in the very instant struck with a Javelin into the lovver lappet of his
Liver. From whose hand this Javelin came is uncertain, some say it was from
the hand of a flying Persian, others say, from the hand of one of his own
Soldiers. Calistus one of his own Guard, that vvrote this Battle in Heroical
Verse, affirms, that some wicked Fiend or Devil run him through with that
Javelin. But be it by vvhomsoever, when the Apostate had plucked the Javelin
out, he cast it into the Air, uttering this blasphemous speech, At length thou
have overcome me, O Galilean. For so in contempt he used to call Christ.

JOVINIANUS. A.D. 363.
FLavius Jovinianus a Christian, was chosen Emperor by the Army, and because
of the distress that his Host was in for want of provision, he made Peace
with the Persians for Thirty years, and so left their Country. In his time
Blazing-Stars were seen at noonday. And the Statue of Maximianus Caesar let
fall the Globe out of its hand, no force moving it. Also horrible sounds and
noises were heard in the Consistory. These were taken for ominous signs of
those troublous accidents which befell the Army in their way homevvard from
Persia. Jovinian dyed suddenly of the obstructions and stoppings of the Lungs.

FLavius Valentinianus a Christian being elected Emperor, he made Valens, his
Brother, VALENTINIANUS. A.D. 364.
his partner with him in the Empire. Into Britain Valentinian sent Theodosius
his Lieutenant, who recovered this Province out of the hands of their enemies
the Picts, Saxons and Scots that had miserably infested it, re-edified the
Cities, repairing the Garrison Castles, and fortifying the frontiers, naming
Britain Valentia in honor of Valentinian the Emperor. Strange and dreadful
were the signs, that in the third year of this Emperor happened, as
Earthquakes, Inundations and the like, amongst which St. Hierom reports, That
there rained Wool from Heaven so perfect good, that no better grevv upon the
Sheep. This Christian Emperor was so displeased with his Brother Valens an
Arian, for persecuting the Orthodox Christians, that he denied to afford him
help against the Goths, when they invaded his Dominions in the East, saying,
That it was an impious thing to strengthen the hands of a man, who had spent
his days in warring against God and his Church. He dyed of an Apoplexy, or as
some write, of the Plague. And Valens flying from the Goths, was in a house
near Adrianople burnt to Ashes.

FLavius Gratianus the Son of Valentinian succeeded his Father, GRATIANUS and
VALENTINIAN.
to whom was joined for Consort in the Empire his Brother Valentinian, a
Child about four years of Age. Whose advancement (though done without his
allowance) he envied not, but regarded his Brother exceedingly, and brought
him up with all tenderness, forgetting the wrong offered to himself, and one
Mother Severa, for Valentinians Mothers sake, whose name was Justina; a Damsel
surpassing all other Women so far, that the Empress her self became in love
with her, and could not forbear extolling her beauty beyond compare, in the
hearing of the Emperor her Husband, who provoked hereby, took her also to Wife,
by whom he had this young Valentinian and three Daughters, albeit that his Wife
Severa was yet living. In Britain, Clemens Maximus descended from Constantine
the Great, had so won the affections of the Britains, through his good service
done against the Picts and Scots, (which last were those people inhabiting the
High-lands of Scotland, and came first out of Ireland, planting themselves on
the North-side of Cluid) that they accepted him for their Sovereign; and his
Soldiers by constraint forced him to assume the Imperial Style, and Purple
Robe. And now Maximus hasts into Gallia with the chiefest flower and strength
of the British Forces, against whom Gratian advanced; but after five days
skirmishing, being forsaken of his Soldiers, he was forced to fly. After which,
he sent Ambrose Bishop of Milain to sue for peace with Maximus, unto which
Maximus seemed to incline; withal causing Letters to be sent, and reports
given out to soft spirited Gratian, that his Empress was upon her journey to
visit him, which the innocent Emperor credited. And accordingly set forward
with joy to meet her, but when he opened the Letter therein hoping to embrace
her, was by Captain Andragathius and his Ruffians (sent in it on purpose)
treacherously murdered near unto Lions. But Theodosius undertaking the Usurper
Maximus, vanquished his forces, and slew him and his Son Victor. Howbeit young
Valentinian was not in safety; for by the Treason of Captain Arbogastes, and
Eugenius a Grammarian he was strangled to death in his bed.

FLavius Theodosius Magnus, THEODOSIUS MAGNUS.
to revenge the the death of the Emperor Valentinian, and also to oppose the
proceedings of the Traitor Eugenius, who had usurped a part of the Empire,
marched with his forces toward the confines of Italy, where, at the foot of
the Alps; he found the passages stopped, and his enemies powers far surmounting
his, and likewise having so beset him about, that no victuals could be brought
into his Camp, this good Emperor therefore, in this his distress, applied
himself with fasting and tears unto the Lord of Hosts, who, to vindicate
Theodosius righteous Cause, sent such a violent tempest and raging wind upon
the faces of his enemies, that when both Armies were engaged in fight, his
adversaries own Darts were driven back upon themselves; whereby he obtained a
most glorious Victory. In this Battle the Usurper Eugenius was taken, who
whilst he was craving pardon at the Emperors feet, had his head struck of by
the Soldiers. And Arbogastes escaping by flight, two days after ran himself
upon his own Sword.

Theodosius thus delivered, repaired to Milain, where he shortly after sickned
unto death, constituting his Son Honorius Emperor of the West, and Arcadius of
the East. His Humility and Piety was such, that St. Ambrose Bishop of Millain
having forbid his entrance into the Church to communicate with other Christians
in their devotions, (because he had rashly punished the Inhabitants of
Thessalonica for an offense committed by them) he accordingly submitted to this
censure, acknowledging his offense, and for a future prevention of the like
rashness, by the advice of St. Ambrose, he Enacted, That Thirty days should
pass between the sentence of death, and execution of the Malefactor. He was
wont to say, That he accounted it a greater honor to be a member of the Church
of Christ, than to be head of the Roman Empire.

HONORIUS, A. D. 395.
HOnorius, because of his Nonage, was by his Father committed to the
Government of Stilicho. But this wretch aspiring after absolute Sovereignty,
first sowed sedition among the Lieutenants of the Provinces, then with disgrace
cashiered those Goths, that had served with good proof of their fidelity above
Twenty years, since their entertainment by Theodosius. These Goths therefore to
revenge their wrongs, chose for their Leader a valiant Goth named Alaricus, who
shortly proved the scourge of Rome. With him joined the Vandales, Alanes, and
Swevians, all which, with great fury began to War in Austria, and Hungary,
increasing their powers with such multitudes, that the World was amazed and
stood in fear. For unto these resorted Two hundred thousand Goths more, under
the conduct of Radagasius their King, who with united Forces overran Thracia,
Hungary, Austria, Slavonia, and Dalmatia, spoiling all in such manner, that
Devils and not men seemed to have passed that way. The Roman Empire thus
declining, and the Armies in Britain fearing the fury of the Goths, to secure
themselves the best way they could, elected an Emperor at home, one Marcus
their Lieutenant; but he not fitting their humors, they in a short time
murdered him. In whose stead they enthroned one Gratian a Britain, whom within
four Months they also murdered. At the death of him, they elected, for the
names sake, one Constantine a common Soldier, and he passing beyond the Seas,
was very prosperous for a while. His Imperial seat he placed at Arles, sent
Letters excusatory unto Honorius, pretending that the Soldiers compelled him to
do what he did, which so pleased the Emperor, that he sent him a Purple Robe.
But one Maximinus rising against him, he was taken Prisoner, sent to Rome, and
there beheaded. From that time Britain renewed her obedience to Honorius, and
Victorinus Lieutenant here, oft-times repressed the incursions of the Scots and
Picts. Howbeit Rome was sore afflicted, and sacked by the Goths and Vandals.
The Emperor Arcadius dyed in peace at Constantinople, and his Brother Honorius
at Rome.

THEODOSIUS, and VALENTINIAN. 2d. A. D. 423.
THeodosius the Son of Arcadius was now Emperor when the Roman greatness was
almost quite fallen. His Kinsman Valentinian he chose for his associate, making
him Emperor of the West. At this time the Britains were sorely distressed by
the continual disturbers of their Peace, the Scots and Picts; therefore they
sent their Ambassadors to Rome, with their Garments rent, and dust upon their
heads, bewailing their most miserable estate, and craving the Emperors aid, who
sent a Regiment of Soldiers into Britain under Gallio. Which Captain did some
present kindness for them; but in short time was called over with his Legion
into Gallia, to secure the Country about Paris. At his departure he advised
the Britains to stand upon their own guard, and for the future to provide for
their own safety, and not to depend upon any succors from the Romans, who had
their hands full of troubles near home.

Thus after about 500 years that the Romans had swayed in Britain, they took
their final farewell of it, burying part of their treasures here in the earth.
But during their stay in this Island, they had much dispeopled it of its
Natives, having levied as many Companies, Cohorts and Ensigns of Stout Britains
from hence for the service of Armenia, Egypt, Illyricum their frontier
Countries, as from any other of their Provinces whatsoever. Some of these
British Soldiers, after they were wearied out in the Wars, had Armorica in
France assigned them (by Constantine the Great) for their good service in the
Wars, from whom, that Country of Armorica was called Little-Britain. Hither,
in the time of Gratian the Emperor, was Vrsula the Daughter of Dinoth, Regent
of Cornwall sent, with Eleven thousand Virgins in order to have been Married
with their Contrymen; but all of them perished ere they arrived, some being
drowned in the Sea by tempest, the remainder put to the Sword by the barbarous
Huns and Picts, because they refused to yield their chastities to their filthy
Lusts.

The Romans made four famous Highways in England, namely, Ikenild-street, or
way, the Fosse, Ermin-street, and Watling-street.

About A. D. 400, Pelagius a Britain brought up in the Monastery of Bangor, did
much disturb the peace of the Church by his heretical Opinions.

SAXONS.
THe Southern or more civilized Britains being now grown very low, and
exceedingly weakened (what with the Romans exporting their valiant Contrymen
to serve in foreign Countries, what with their own civil dissentions, the
Romans forsaking them, and the Calamity of scarcity and Famine) their veteran
foes the Scots, Picts and Irish, hereupon take their opportunity so miserably
to infest and trouble them, that not longer able to defend and secure
themselves, they supplicate aid out of Germany, from the Angles, Jutes, and
Saxons, then inhabiting Jutland, Holsten, and the Seacoasts along to the River
Rhene. Of these to the number of Nine thousand, under the command of the two
Brethren Hengist and Horsa, entered Britain at Ebs-fleet in the Isle of Tenet,
about 450 years after the birth of Christ. There they were received with great
joy, and saluted with Songs after the accustomed manner of the Britains, who
appointed them that Island for their habitation. And not long after, Hengist
obtained of Vortigern King of the Britains, the property of so much ground, as
he could enclose with a Bulls-hide, which cutting into Thongs, he there built
the Castle, called from thence Thong-Castle. To which place he invited
Vortigern. who there fell in love with Rowena the Daughter, or Niece of
Hengist, upon which match Hengist began to grow bold, and to think of making
this Island his inheritance. In order to which, he sent for fresh forces to
come over to him, which being arrived, they sought and made occasions of
quarrels with the Natives, driving the Inhabitants before them from their
wonted possessions, every several Captain, accounting that part of the Country
his own, where he could over-match the Britains, commanding in it as an
absolute King: By which means the Land became burdened with Seven of them at
the first, at one and the same time: But although the Land was divided into
Seven several Kingdoms, and each of them bearing a Sovereign command within his
own Limits; yet one of them ever seemed to be supreme over the rest.

The Saxon Heptarchy.
THe Kingdom of Kent consisting of that County only, 1. Kent.
(which Vortigern had given to Hengist in favor of Rowena) was the first
Dominion of the Saxons Seven-headed Kingdom, and began in, or near the year of
our Lord 455, continuing 372 years. In it there Ruled Seventeen Kings
successively; the first of which was Hengist; and the first Christian King
thereof was Ethelbert surnamed Pren.

The South Saxons Kingdom containing the Counties of Sussex and Surrey, 2 South
Saxons.
commenced in A. D. 488, continuing 113 years, Ella being the first King, and
Ethelwolph the first Christian King thereof.

3. West Saxons.
The West Saxons Kingdom containing the Counties of Cornwall, Devon, Dorset,
Somerset, Wilts, Berks and Hantshire, began in A. D. 519, continuing 300 years;
Cherdick being the first King, and Hingils the first Christian King thereof.

4. East Saxons.
East Saxons Kingdom containing the Counties of Essex, Middlesex, and part of
Hartfordshire, began in A. D. 527, continuing 281 years, Erchenwin being the
first King thereof, and Sebert the first Christian King.

5. North.
The Kingdom of Northumberland containing the Counties of York, Durham,
Lancaster, Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Northumberland, began in A. D, 527,
continuing 379 years; Ella and Ida the first Kings thereof, and Edwin the first
Christian King.

6. Mercia.
The Kingdom of Mercia containing the Counties of Huntingdon, part of
Hartfordshire, Northampton, Rutland, Lincoln, Leicester, Derby and Nottingham,
began in A. D. 582, continuing 202 years, Creda being the first King, and Peada
first Christian King thereof.

7. East Angles.
The Kingdom of the East- Angles containing the Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk and
Cambridge, began in A. D. 575, continuing 353 years, Vffa being the first King,
and Redwald the first Christian King thereof. Its last King was Edmond, whom
the Danes for his constant profession of the Christian Faith most barbarously
slew, at a Village then called Heglisdune, where when the Danes were departed,
his head and body were buried, and the Town upon occasion thereof called St.
Edmunds-bury. After the death of this Edmond, the Kingdom of the East- Angles
was possessed by the Danes till such time that Edward surnamed the Elder
expulsed them, and joined it a Province to the West- Saxons: But the Britains,
during the time of the Heptarchy, stood still in defense of their own rightful
inheritance, with great disdain, and valorous resistance, as much as in them
lay, opposing the Saxon yoke.

The British Princes who contended with the Saxons to maintain their Countries
rights, were these chiefly. First,
VOrtigern, at that time King, VORTIGERN.
by the election of the Britains, when the Saxons were first invited into the
Land. This Vortigern reigned first Sixteen years, and then deposed for his
favors to the Saxons, was retained indurance all the Reign of Vortimer his
Son, after whose death he was re-established; but oppressed by the Saxons, and
pursued by Aurelius, he fled into Wales, where in a Castle which he built by
Merlins directions in the Mountains, he, with his Daughter whom he had taken to
Wife, were burnt to Ashes.

VOrtimer for his Fathers abuse of Government, VORTIMER.
was constituted King of the Britains. He gave unto the Saxons Four famous
overthrows, almost to their utter expulsion. After his last Victory over them,
British Princes.
he caused his Monument to be erected at the entrance into Thanet, whither he
had driven the Saxons, even in that same place of the overthrow. Which Monument
was sometime called Lapis Tituli, now the Stoner, wherein he commanded his Body
to be buried, to the further terror of the Saxons; that in beholding this his
Trophey, their hearts might be daunted at the remembrance of their great
overthrow. But Rowena procured his death by Poison. He restored the Christian
Religion, then sorely decayed, and rebuilt the Churches destroyed by the Pagan
Saxons.

AMBROSIUS.
AVrelius Ambrosius descended of that Constantine, who was elected here, only
in hope of his lucky name. He was very successful against the Saxons; but, as
some say, was poisoned by the procurement of Pascentius the youngest Son of
Vortigern. Others report that he was slain in the Field by the Saxons, and that
the Britains erected that famous Monument called Stone-henge, anciently Chorea
Gigantum, over the place where he was slain and buried; though according to the
saying of some, Aurelius Ambrosius caused that Monument of Stone-henge to be
erected in memorial of the Massacre of 300 of the Nobility of the Britains by
the Saxons, who were there buried. He built Ambresbury in Wilts.

VTer Pendragon, the Brother of Ambrosius, was in all his Wars against the
Saxons most victorious and fortunate. UTER PENDRAGON. A.D. 497.
He was surnamed Pendragon, either because at his birth there appeared a fiery
Comet something resembling a Dragons-head, or because of his Serpentine-wisdom,
or from his Royal Banner, wherein was pourtrayed a Dragon with a Golden head.
When he had reigned Eighteen years, he dyed of poison put into a Well, whereof
he usually drank.

ARthur, the Son of Pendragon, ARTHUR, A.D. 516.
begotten upon the Lady Igren Duchess of Cornwall, was Crowned King of
Britains at Fifteen years of Age, about A. C. 516. Twelve Battles he fought
against the Saxons with great manhood and victory, the last of which was fought
at Bath, or Bathen-Hill, where the Britains gave the Saxons a very great
overthrow. But Mordred a Prince of the Picts, whose Mother was Pendragons
Sister, affecting the Crown, upon the pretense of Arthurs reputed Bastardy,
gave many attempts against him, and lastly at Cambalu, now Camelford in
Cornwall, encountering King Arthur gave him his deaths-wound, and was himself
slain by Arthur in the place. From which place this renowned King was carried
to Glastenbury where he dyed of his wounds in A. D. 542, whose body was there
buried, and after 600 years was dug up by the command of Henry the 2d. His
bones of great bigness, and Skull, wherein was perceived Ten wounds, were found
in the Trunk of a Tree; over him was a huge broad Stone, in which a leaden
Cross was fastened, and therein this Inscription, Hic jacet, etc. Here lies King
Arthur buried in the Isle of Avalonia. By him lay his Queen Guenaver, whose
tresses of hair finely platted, of a golden color, seemed perfect and entire,
till but being touched they mouldred to dust. These relics were reburied in
the great Church.

CONSTANTINE, A.D. 542.
COnstantine the Son of Cador Duke of Cornwall, and Cousin to King Arthur by
Marriage, and his adopted Heir, was slain by Conanus, when he had been King
Three years, and was buried at Stonehenge.

CONANUS, A.D. 545.
AVrelius Conanus, King Arthur's Nephew, detained his Uncle in perpetual
Imprisonment, and slew his two Cousins, because they had more right to the
Crown than himself.

VORTIPORUS, A.D. 578.
VOrtiporus in many Battles vanquished the Saxons, and valiantly defended his
Subjects; but otherwise very wicked.

MALGO, A.D. 581.
MAlgo Canonus, in Arms and Dominions, was stronger and greater than any other
British Potentate, says Gildas.

CARETICUS, A.D. 586.
Careticus sowed civil Wars amongst his Subjects the Britains, which occasioned
them to forsake him, and leave him to the mercy of the Saxons; who pursuing
after him, he fled into Cyrencester for safety; but by the device of his
pursuers, certain Sparrows being taken, and fire fastened to their feet, were
let fly into the City, who lighting among Straw, set it on fire, whence the
City was burnt to the ground; but Careticus escaped, and fled for safety unto
the Mountains of Wales, where he dyed. From that time forth the Britains lost
their whole Kingdom in the East part of the Island, and were confined in the
West, by the Rivers Severn and Dee.

CAdwan maintained himself and Subjects in great honor and peace. CADWAN, A D.
635.
His first affairs against the Saxons was to revenge the deaths of his
Britains, and harmless Monks of Bangor, slain by wild Ethelfrid the mighty King
of Northumberland.

The Monastery of Bangor in North- Wales, was situated in the fruitful valley
now called the English Mailor, containing within it the quantity of a Mile and
an half of ground. This Monastery, as says Bernard Clarivalentius, was the
Mother of all others in the World. Whose Monks distributed themselves into
Seven portions, every one numbering 300 Souls, and all of them living by the
labor of their own hands. Many of these Monks assembled at Chester.
Caer-Legion, to assist their Brethren the Britains with their Prayers, against
Ethelfrid surnamed the Wild, King of Northumberland, who with his Pagan
Soldiers set upon the Britains, discomfited their host, and put to the Sword
Twelve hundred of these Christian Monks.

CAdwallo, or Cadwallin the Son of Cadwin, warred most valiantly against the
Saxons, slew the Christian King Edwin of Northumberland, CADWALLO, A. D. 635.
with his Son Osfride, in a great and bloody Battle at Heathfield. He dyed in
peace, as the British Writers say, and was buried in St. Martins Church in
London; his Image great and terrible, triumphantly riding on Horseback, being
artificially cast in Brass, the Britains placed upon Ludgate, to the further
fear and terror of the Saxons.

CADWALLADOR, A.D. 685.
CAdwallador the Son of Cadwallo, with great valor fought against the Saxons;
but his Nobles dissenting and warring among themselves, did much endamage his
very hopeful undertakings. And by the All disposing hand of Providence, so
great a dearth befell, that Herbs and Roots were the Commons chiefest
sustenance. Mortality and Pestilence likewise raging so sore, and so suddenly,
that people in their eating, drinking, walking, and speaking, were surprised by
death, and in such numbers, that the living were scarce sufficient to bury the
dead. Which calamities lasted no less than Eleven years whereby the Land became
desolate, insomuch, that the King and many of his British Peers were forced to
seek and eat their bread in forain parts. But the destroying Angel by Gods
appointment, having sheathed his devouring Sword, Cadwallador was minded to
have returned into his native Country, with some aids which he had procured of
his Cousin Alan King of Little-Britain; but was forbid by an Angel (as he
thought) and commanded to go to Rome, and there take upon him the habit of
Religion; which accordingly he did, and dyed at Rome, where in St. Peter's
Church he was buried, being the last King of the Britains blood, about A. D.
689.

The most powerful Kings of the Saxon Heptarchy were
HEngist, HENGIST, A.D. 455.
who about the 5th year after his arrival in Britain began his Kingdom in Kent,
He (as all the Saxon Kings beside) does derive his original from Prince Woden,
and his Wife Fria, by Wechta the eldest of their Seven Sons, being the fifth in
Issue from them. His Brother Horsa was slain in Battle by the Britains.
According to some himself dyed in peace; others say, that he was slain when he
had reigned Thirty four years.

ELla the first King of the South- Saxons, ELLA, A.D. 479.
in the Twenty third year of Hengist's Reign, brought a fresh supply of Germans
to he relief of his Countrymen; who landing at Shoreham in Sussex, vanquished
the Britains in those parts, after which he assumed the name of King of that
Province.

CHerdick the first King of the West- Saxons, CHERDICK, A. D. 485.
arrived in the Western parts of this Island, in the Seventh year of Ella's
reign; where in his first Battle with the Britains, he slew a mighty King of
theirs named Natanleod, or Nazaleod. This Battle was fought in Hampshire, near
unto a Brook of Water, which from Cherdick, began to be called Cherdick-ford,
where now a Town of the same name stands; but by contraction called Charford.

KENRICK.
KEnrick the 2d King of the West- Saxons, enlarged his confines upon the
territories of the Britains, giving them two great overthrows, the one at
Searbury in Wiltshire, the other at Banbury in Oxfordshire.

CHELWIN A.D. 560.
CHelwin, or Cheuline, the Son of Kenrick, and 3d King of the West- Saxons,
overcame the Britains in many fights; also set himself to enlarge his own
Territories upon his Countrey-mens: For entering Kent, in a set Battle he
defeated that Kings forces. He surprised the Cities of Gloucester, Bath, and
Cyrencester; slew Three of the British Kings, named Coinmagil, Candidan, and
Farimnagil: But grown proud through his many victories he tyrannized over his
own Subjects, which moved them to take part with the Britains against him; and
at Wodnesbeath, now Wansditch in Wiltshire, they vanquished and put him to
flight, forcing him into Banishment, in which he dyed.

EThelbert the 5th King of Kent, ETHELBERT, A.D. 561.
was Married to Berta the Daughter of Chilperick King of France on these
conditions, That the Lady should enjoy the profession of her Christian Faith,
and the conversation of Luidhard her learned Bishop. About this time it chanced
that Gregory the Great, then Archdeacon of Rome, saw certain youths of this
Island of Britain, brought to Rome to be sold, concerning whom he enquired,
first of what Nation they were, and being answered that they were Angles,
Gregory replied, and not without cause are they so named indeed, their
resemblance is so Angelical; and fit it is that they be made inheriters with
the Angels in Heaven. But of what Province are they in Britain, said he? and
being answered of Deira, now great pity it is said he, but that these people
should be taken from Dei^ira, the wrath of God. And being told that their Kings
Name was Ella, he by way of allusion said, That Alelujah to the praise of God,
should shortly be sung in that Princes Dominions; to which end, when he had
attained to be Bishop of Rome, he sent Augustine a Monk, with Forty others his
assistants, which landed in Thanet, about A. D. 596; finding at their coming
Seven Bishops in the British Churches. These Roman Christians sent by Gregory,
were by King Ethelbert freely permitted to Preach the Gospel, and in his chief
City of Canterbury, he allowed them fit places of residence, and to Augustine
resigned his own Palace. In this City Austin laid the foundation of that great
Church dedicated to the name and service of Christ. Augustine the Monk, and
Laurentius, A. Bps. of Canterbury.
And also at his cost built a most fair Monastery, wherein Eight Kings of Kent,
and Ten Archbishops were afterward interred. But between the Britain
Christians and Austin, there was a great difference about the due time for
celebrating the Feast of Easter. Easter was kept in Britain after the manner of
the Eastern Church, on the Fourteenth day after the full Moon, whatsoever day
of the week it happened on, and not on Sunday, as we at this day observe it;
which made Austin in great displeasure against them, and they to dislike him
for his pride. The British Bishops were consecrated by their own Archbishops,
and they by their own Suffragans, making no profession of subjection to any
other Church. And when Augustine the Monk required of the British Bishops to
profess subjection to the Sea of Rome, Dinothus Abbot of Bangor, made it
apparent by diverse Arguments that they owed him none; nor did they follow the
Rites of Rome. But King Ethelbert being by Augustine converted to the Christian
Faith, was the instrument of converting of Sebert King of the East- Saxons,
whom he assisted in the building of St. Paul's, where had stood the Temple of
Diana, as also the Church of St. Peter's at Westminster, then called Thorney,
where the Temple of Apollo stood; and himself built the Cathedral Church at
Rochester, dedicating it to St. Andrew He brought the Laws of his Country into
their own Mother Tongue, and was very forward in advancing the Christian
Religion. He dyed in, or near A.D. 616, and was buried at Canterbury. Augustine
the first Archbishop of Canterbury dyed, during the reign of Ethelbert, and
was buried in the Northern Porch of the New Church in Canterbury dedicated to
St. Peter and Paul; and Laurentius succeeded him in that Bishopric.

REdwald 3d King of the East- Angles, REDWALD, A.D. 616.
was Baptized in Kent; but returning into his own Country (through the
persuasions of his Queen) he returned to his superstitions, and in one and the
same Temple, erected an Altar for the service of Christ, and another for his
Idols.

EDwin the Great, EDWIN, A D. 624.
and 2d King of Northumberland, subdued all the coasts of Britany, wheresoever
any Provinces were inhabited, either by Britains or Saxons; which thing, no
King of the English before him had done: And added the Mevian Isles or Hebrides
unto his own Dominions. He was converted to the Christian Faith by Paulinus,
and Baptized at York in St. Peter's Church then built of Wood, which he rebuilt
of Stone, making it the Cathedral Church; and Paulinus Archbishop of that See.
Church of Lincoln founded by Bp. Paulinus.
He suppressed Idolatry, established the Gospel in the Northern parts which
daily spread into other Provinces and with such fruit of Peace, that throughout
his Dominions, a weak Woman with her newborn babe might have passed without
danger or ^am^ge over all the island from State ^ea^ (...) And for the
convenience of wayfaring me^ (...) closed clear Springs by the ways sides,
Melitus and Justu, A. Bps. of Canterbury.
where he placed great Basins of Brass, both to wash and bathe in. But Penda
the Mercian King, and Cadwallo the Britain confederated against him, and in
fight slew him and his Son Osfryd. His Body was buried at Streanshall, now
called Whitby.

OSWALD, A.D. 633.
OSwald the 5th King of Deira, the 9th of Bernicia, and 3d of Northumberland,
having received the Christian Faith in Scotland, during his banishment there;
at his return took such care for the salvation of his Subjects, that he sent
into Scotland for Aidan a Christian Bishop, to instruct his Northumbrians in
the Gospel of Truth. And because the Bishop could not speak their Language, the
King himself would interpret his Sermons to the people. Which godly undertaking
of the good King and Bishop was so successful, that as is reported, in Seven
days space, Fifteen thousand received Baptism. At this time the whole Island
flourished with Peace and plenty, and acknowledged their subjection to Oswald,
But Penda King of Mercia envying his flourishing estate, slew him in Battle, at
a place called Maserfield in Shropshire; and then tore his body peace-meal:
Whereupon, the said place of his death, is called to this day Oswalds-tree. His
dismembered Limbs were first buried in the Monastery of Bradney in Lincolnshire,
afterward removed to Gloucester, and buried in the North-side of the upper end
of the Quire in the Cathedral Church.

King Oswald being at Dinner on Easter Day, Melitus and Justus, A.B. Cant.
one brought him word, that there was a great company of poor people in the
Streets which asked Alms of him; whereupon he commanded the Meat prepared for
his own Table to be carried to them, and brake a Silver Platter to pieces and
sent it amongst them.

In the year of Christ 636, Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury first divided
England into Parishes. Northumberland was sometime parted into two Kingdoms,
namely Deira, and Bernicia.

Osway the 4th King of Northumberland, OSWAY, A.D. 643.
slew Penda in fight, with the discomfiture of all his Mercian power; and in
the same Battle slew Ethelbert King of the East- Angles, who sided with Penda,
after which victory he subdued the Mercians, and made the Northern part also
wholly subject unto him. He founded the Cathedral Church in Lichfield for a
Bishops See, dyed in A. D. 670, and was buried in St. Peter's Church in
Streanshalch.

VVlfhere the 6th King of the Mercians, VULFHERE, A D. 668.
slew his two Sons Vulfald and Rufin, because they usually resorted to reverend
Chad for the profit of their Souls, and had received at his hands the
Sacraments of Baptism. Their martyred bodies, Queen Erminhild their Mother
caused to be buried in a Sepulcher of Stone, and thereupon a fair Church to be
erected; which by reason of the many Stones brought thither for the foundation,
was ever after called Stones; Honorius and Duesdedit, A.B. Cant.
and is now a fair Market Town in Staffordshire. But Vulfhere repenting his
most inhumane murder, and becoming a Christian, converted his Heathen Temples
unto Churches and Monasteries, and finished Medisham, now Peterborough (his
brother Pada's foundation) enriching it largely with Lands and possessions. He
dyed A. D. 674, and was buried at Peterborough.

ETHELRED.
EThelred, because of his Nephew Kenreds minority, and disposition to a private
life, was accepted of the Mercians for their King. His entrance was with War
against the Kentish King Lothair, whose Country he miserably destroyed,
sparing neither Religious, nor secular place. But at length disquieted in mind,
because of his cruelties, to expiate his crimes, he first built a godly
Monastry at Beadney in Lincolnshire, then resigning the Crown to Kenred, became
there a Monk himself, living a regular life the term of Twelve years, and dyed
Abbot of the place, in A. D. 716. In the 4th year of his Reign a fearful
Blazing-Star discovered it self, and for three Months together continued rising
in the morning, and giving forth a blazing pile, very high, and of a glittering
flame.

KEnred the 8th King of Mercia, Theodorus and Bertualdus, A. B of Cant.
reigned in peace the term of four years; but affecting a private retired life,
he appointed Chelred his Cousin to rule in his stead, and accompanied with Offa
King of East Saxons, KENRED.
and Edwin Bishop of Winchester, he went unto Rome, where himself and Offa
became Monks, and there dyed.

CHeldred the 9th King of the Mercians, CHELRED A.D. 709.
was all along during his seven years reign engaged in Wars against Inas King
of the West Saxons. Which Inas being in pilgrimage at Rome in A.D. 720, gave a
tribute to Rome called Peter Pence, being a penny for every house. At first it
was called the Kings Alms; it was also called Romescot. Inas built a College at
Wells, and a stately Abbey at Glastenbury, where formerly the old Cell of Joseph
of Arimathea had been. He also built a Castle at Taunton.

King Chelred dyed in A. D. 716, and was buried in the Cathedral Church at
Lichfield.

EThelbald the 10th King of the Mercians, ETHELBALD.
spent the most part of his reign in peace, and too much thereof in Luxury; for
the which he was reproved by Boniface (an English man) Bishop of Mentz: Whose
Epistle Redargutory had this influence upon the King, that in sign of
repentance, he privileged the Church from all Tributes to himself, and founded
the Abbey of Crowland. About which time it was appointed by Archbishop Cuthbert
and his Clergy, in a convocation held in his Province, that the Sacred
Scriptures should be read in their Monasteries, the Lords Prayer and Creed
taught in the English tongue, A. D. 733. In January the Sun suffered so great
an Eclipse, that the Earth seemed to be overshadowed, as with Sackcloth. And
A. D. 756, and in December, the Moon being in her full, appeared both dark and
bloody; for a Star (though there be none lower than the Moon) seemed to follow
her, and to deprive her of light, till it had got before her. But great
Ethelbald fighting against Cuthred the West Saxon, was traitorously slain by
the procurement of one of his own Captains, near Tanworth, and was buried at
Repton in Derbyshire.

OFFA, A.D. 758.
OFFA the 11th. King of the Mercians, as is said, was born both lame, deaf, and
blind, continuing so unto his man's estate. He was of such stout and daring
spirit, that he thought nothing impossible for him to attain unto. The first
that felt his fury were the Kentish men, whose King Alrike he slew in fight
with his own hands. From south to north he then marched, and beyond Humber made
havoc of all that opposed him. Whence returning in triumph, he vanquished
Kenwolph and his West Saxons, with whom Marmadius King of the Britains, sided.
He caused a great ditch to be made between his and the Britains borders, that
is, from Basingwark in Flintshire, and North Wales, not far from the mouth of
Dee, running along the Mountains into the South, ending near Bristol at the
fall of Wye. The tract whereof in many places is yet seen, being called Clawdh
Offa, Tarninus and Nothelmus, A.B. Cant.
or Offa's Ditch. The Danes that had invaded England, he forced back to their
ships, with the loss of all their booty, and many of their lives. Then making
his son Egfryd Partner with him in the Kingdom, he went to Rome, where he made
his Kingdom subject to a tribute called Peter Pence, and gave rich gifts to
Pope Hadrian for canonizing Alban a Saint; in honor of whom at his return he
built a Magnifick Monastry over against Verolanium. Also in testimony of his
repentance for the blood he had shed in his Wars, he gave the tenth part of his
goods unto the Churchmen and poor. At Bath he built a Monastry, and in
Warwickshire a Church, where the adjoining town from it and him bears the
name Off-Church. He dyed at Offley in A D. 794, and was buried without the town
of Bedford, in a Chapel standing upon the bank of Owse, which long since was
swallowed up by the same River.

In A D. 755, was Sigebert King of West Saxons slain by a Swineherd; and in
A.D. 760, Kenwolph King of West Saxons made Wells an Episcopal See.

EGfryd the son of Offa restored to the Church her ancient privileges which
his Father had deprived her of. EGFKID, A.D. 794.
He dyed in the first year of his reign, and was buried in the Abby-Church of
St. Albans.

KEnwolph the 13th King of the Mercians, KENWOLPH, A.D. 795.
was at home a president of peace, religion, and justice, and abroad of
temperance, humility, and courtesy. In War stout and victorious, in Peace
studious of enriching his subjects. He vanquished the Kentish men, and carried
away their King prisoner, detaining him captive, and giving his Kingdom to
Cuthred. He built a fair Church at Winchcomb in Glocestershire, where upon the
dedication thereof, he led Pren his captive King of Kent, up to the high altar,
and there without either his entreaty or any ransom, set him at full liberty.
He dyed A. D. 819, and was buried at Winchcomb, where was buried also Kenelm
his son, murdered by his sister Quendred.

SAXON MONARCHS.
EGBERT, A.D. 819.
EGbert the 18th King of West Saxons, first warred against the Cornish and
Welsh, a remnant of the old Britains, which for fourteen years held side
against this King; which so enraged him, that he made it present death for any
Britain to pass over Offa's pitch into England. Their great Caer-legion, now
Westchester, he took from them; and at London cast down the Image of their
Prince Cadwalle. He subdued Kent, East Saxons, and East Angles, also the
Mercians, and indeed all upon the North and South of Humber yielded him
obedience. He was crowned at Winchester absolute Monarch of the whole Island in
A. D. 819, and caused the South of this Island to be called England. Three
several times the Danes landed in England in his reign, whom he expelled. He
dyed in A. D. 836, and was buried at Winchester. Cuthbert and Brogmius, A.B.
Cant.
But his bones were since taken up, and with others bestowed in Chests, set
upon the Wall on each side the Quire of the Cathedral, with these verses
inscribed:

Hic Rex Egbertus pausat cum Rege Kenulpho, nobis egregia munera uterque tulit.
His issue were Ethelwolph and Ethelstan, and one Daughter named Egdith,
commonly called St. Edith, who was Governess of a Monastry of Ladies at
Pollesworth in Warwickshire.

EThelwolph was in his youth committed unto the care of Helmestan Bishop of
Winchester, ETHELWOLPH, 836.
and by him unto learned Swithun the Monk. He took such a liking unto the quiet
and solitary life (enjoyed only by religious men, all other estates being
molested to withstand the intruding Danes) that he took upon him the Monkish
Vow and profession, and was made Deacon; and shortly after upon the death of
Helmestan, he was elected, if not consecrated also Bishop of Winchester. But
the death of his Father immediately following, by the entreaty of the Nobles,
and constraint of the Clergy, he was made King, and absolved of his vows by
Gregory 4th. His Bishopric he bestowed on Swithun. This King in great devotion
passed to Rome, where he rebuilt the School built by King Offa (late fired)
bearing the name of Thomas the holy, confirmed the grant of Peter Pence; and
for his kind entertainment in the Popes Court, he covenanted to pay a hundred
Marks to St. Peter's Church, another to St. Paul's Light, and a third to his
Holiness. Lambert and Ethelard, A.B. Cant.
In his return through France, he married fair Judith the daughter of Charles
the Bald, then Emperor, in honor of whom he ever placed her in his English
Court in a Chair of State, with all other Majestical complements of a Queen,
contrary to the Law of the West Saxons formerly made for Ethelburga's offense,
who by accident had poisoned her own Husband with the poison she had prepared
for one of his Minions. Which respect of his to his Queen so displeased his
Nobles, that they rose in arms against him; but by mediation of Friends the
difference was composed on these terms, viz. That the Land should be divided
betwixt himself and Son Ethelbald, to whom the better part was allotted. He
dyed at Stanbridg in A.D. 857, and was first buried where he deceased, but
afterward his body was removed to the Cathedral of Winchester. He had issue
Ethelbald, Ethelbert, Ethelred, Elfred, and one Daughter named Ethelswith. It
is said of this King, That by the advice of his Nobles he gave for ever to God
and the Church, both the tithe of all goods, and the tenth part of all the
Lands of England, free from all secular service, taxations, or impositions
whatsoever.

ETHELBALD, A.D. 857.
EThelbald, or Ethelwald, married Judith his Mother-in-law. Some say, that he
married his own Mother, who was King Ethelwolph's Concubine. But when he had
reigned about two years and an half, he dyed in A D. 860. His Body was first
buried at Sherbourn in Dorcetshire, (where at that time was the Cathedral
Church and Episcopal See) but afterward was removed to Salisbury.

EThelbert was disquieted by the Danes all the time of his reign. First,
ETHELBERT, A.D. 860.
they spoiled all before them to Winchester, also sacking and spoiling that
City; howbeit in their return, the Berkshire men, under the conduct of Osryck
Earl of Hampton, met with them, recovered the prey, and slew many of them. The
same year also the Danes with the Normans entered Thanet; but these the Kentish
men repulsed, and made a great slaughter of them. Ethelbert dyed in A. D. 866,
and was buried at Sherbourn.

EThelred was now King of England, ETHELRED, A.D. 866.
when there arrived on the English Coasts an huge Army of Danes, under the
command of those strong and cruel Captains, Inguar and Habba who burnt down the
City of York, and therein consumed with fire all those that had fled thither
for security: Who entered Mercia, won the City of Nottingham, and therein
wintred. Who with fire and sword laid all waste where they came, and spared
neither sex nor age, religious or secular. Therefore to avoid their
Barbarities, the Nuns of Coldingham deformed themselves by cutting off their
upper-lips and noses. King Ethelred in one years time fought no less than nine
set-battels with these Danes; and at that battle fought at Essendon, not far
from Reading, he obtained a great victory over them. But in a fight at Basing,
the King received his mortal wound, whereof he dyed at Wittington in A. D. 872.
Alfredus and Trelolegeldus, A. B. Cant.
He was buried at Winbourn in Dorcetshire with this Inscription:

In hoc loco quiescit corpus Sancti Ethelredi Regis West-Saxonum, Martyris, qui
A.D. 872, 23 die April: per manus Ducorum paganorum occubuit.

His Issue were Elfred and Oswald, and one Daughter named Thyre.

ALFRED, A.D. 872.
ELfred, or Alfred, the fourth Son of King Ethelwolph, was in his young years
and Fathers lifetime anointed King at Rome by Pope Leo; but after his brother
Ethelred's death was crowned at Winchester, and is by some styled the first
absolute Monarch over the English. Within a Months time after his Coronation,
he was forced into the field against the Danes, whom he fought at Wilton, where
he was worsted. Then the Danes constrained the West Saxons to enter into league
with them, then advanced to London, where they wintred; compelled the Mercians
to compound with them, banishing Burthred their King, placing another in his
stead of their own choosing. Their King Halden gained Northumberland, which he
bestowed amongst his followers. In A.D. 876, Rollo a nobleman of Denmark came
over with a great Army of fresh Forces, making a miserable spoil where he came;
but Alfred forced him out of the Land. Howbeit the Danes who had already seated
themselves in England, bring the King many times to such extremities, that he
was forced to hide himself out of sight, and with such small companies as he
had, to live by fishing, fowling, and hunting, having no more of his great
Monarchy left him but Wilt, Somerset, and Hantshire, nor them neither free from
the incursions of the Danes. The solitary place of his most residency was an
Island in Somersetshire, commonly called Edelingsey, where in poor disguise he
was entertained into a Cowherds Cottage. This Cowherd who succored King
Alfred, named Dunwolfus, whom the King after set to learning, and made Bishop
of Winchester. Yet in these his distresses he would sometimes disguise himself
in the habit of a common Minstrel, repairing to the Danes Camp, and by his
excellent skill in Music and Song, would gain the opportunity of observing as
well what their designments were, as their security, which he wisely improved.
For seeing his time, he gathered what small Forces he could, and on the sudden
surprised his careless enemies in their Camp, making a great slaughter of them,
to the great terror of others of them in other parts of the Nation, who
accounted the King dead long before. Shortly after this, the Devonshire men
joined Battle with King Hubba, whom they slew with a great number of his Danes,
near unto a Castle then called Kinwith. The body of Hubba was there buried in
the field, and thereof called Hublestone. In that fight the English took the
Danes much esteemed Banner, called Reafan, wherein a Raven pourtrayed was
wrought in Needle Work by the three Sisters of Hubba. And now the English
fortunes seemed so advanced, that the Danes sent to the King for Peace which
was condescended unto, and Gormon, or Gurthrun their King was Baptized. Alfred
being his Godfather, Celnoth and Ethelrad, A. B. Cant.
and giving him the name of Athelstone, and withal bestowing on him in free
gift Gormoncester, or Godmonchester near Huntingdon, with the adjoining
territories. Thirty of the chief Danish Nobility were likewise baptized, upon
whom King Alfred bestowed many rich gifts. And that the limits of the English
might be free from Danish incursions, thus the confines of King Alfreds Kingdom
were laid out. His Dominions were to stretch from the River Thamisis, and from
thence to the Water of Lea, even unto the head of the same water, and so forth
straight unto Bedford, and lastly, going along by the River Ouse, to end at
Watling-street. But notwithstanding the agreement, the Danes were still
unquiet, with whom one Hastings a Nobleman of Norway joined, bringing a
considerable force to their assistance. And in the year of Grace 901, this
excellent King dyed much bewayl'd of his Subjects, whose body was first buried
at Winchester, next removed into the Church of the new Monastry; and lastly,
his Body, Monument, Church and Monastry, were all removed without the
North-gate of the City, since called Hide. He was born at Wanading, now Wantage
in Berks, where anciently was a Mannor-House of the Kings of England.

London that had been destroyed and burnt by the Danes about A. D. 839, King
Alfred repaired and made habitable again in A. D. 886. At Edelingsey he built a
Monastry, at Winchester another, at Shaftsbury a Nunnery, where he made his
Daughter Ethelgeda Abbess. The day and night consisting of 24 hours, did this
virtuous Prince design equally (when State-business would permit such an order)
to Three special uses, and them he observed by the burning of a Taper set in
his Oratory. Eight hours he spent in contemplation, reading and prayers, other
eight hours for his repose and health, and the other eight in the affairs of
State. His Kingdom he likewise divided into Shires, Hundreds, and Tithings, for
the better administration of Justice, and suppressing of Thieves; whereby he
effected so great security to his Subjects, that honest men might travel
without injury; and that bracelets of Gold being hanged in the Highways, none
durst be so bold as to take them away. He ordered all his Subjects possessing
two Hides of Land, to bring up their Sons in learning, till Fifteen years of
Age at least; saying, That he reputed a man freeborn, and yet illiterate, no
better than a Beast, a Brainless-body, and very Sot. Nor would he admit any
into Office in his Court, unless Learned. His Census or Tribute he divided into
Six parts; the first part of which he gave to the poor, the 2d to the
foundation of Churches, 3d to Scholars at Oxford, 4th, to the Lights of the
Church, 5th, to his Military men, 6th, to Laborers and Artificers. The best
Laws for his Subjects good he rendered into English. The holy Gospel he
translated into the Saxon Tongue; and therein the Lords Prayer after this
manner,

Faeder ure thu the Earth on Heafenum, si thin nama Gehalgod, to be came thin
Rice, Gewurthe thin willa on eorthan swa swa on heafnum, urne ge daeghwanlican
hlaf syle us to daeg. And forgyf us ure gyltas swa swa we forgivath urum
gyltendum, And ne gelaedde thu us on cosenung, ac Alyse u^ of yfle. [Si it
swa.]

He was a great protector of the Clergy, Widows and Orphans, devout in the
service of God. It Is also said of him, that he laid the foundation of the
Unversity of Oxford, and of that College called

Oxford University College.
University College. Others say that Oxford was built by one Mempritius a
British King, and from him was at first named Caer Mempric; Et crevit ibi
posteris dielus nobile studium generale, ab inclyta universitate de Greeklade
derivatum.

Baliol College was founded by John Baliol King of Scots, in A. D 1263.

Merton Coll. founded by Walter de Merton, Lord Chancellor, and Bishop of
Rochester, 1274.

Excester Coll. by Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Excester, and Lord Treasurer,
1316.

Oriel Coll. founded by King Edward the 2d. or by his Almoner Adam Brown, 1327.

Queens Coll. by Robert Eglesfield, Chaplain to Queen Philip Wife of Edward the
3d, 1340.

New Coll. by William of Wickham, Bishop of Winchester, 1379.

Lincoln Coll. first founded by Richard Fleming, Bishop of Lincoln, 1420; but
finished by Thomas Rotheram, Bishop of the same See.

All Souls founded by Henry Chichely Archbishop of Canterbury, 1437.

Magdalen Coll. by William Waniflet Bishop of Winchester, 1459.

Brazen-Nose Coll. by William Smyth Bishop of Lincoln, 1513; but finished by
Richard Sutton.

Corpus Christi Coll. by Richard Fox, Lord Privy Seal, and Bishop of
Winchester, 1516.

Christ-Church begun by Cardinal Wolsey, 1546; and by King Henry the 8th,
ordained the Cathedral Church of the Sea of Oxford.

Trinity Coll. first founded by Thomas Hatfield Bishop of Durham, by the name
of Durham Coll. 1518; but after its suppression, Sir Thomas Pope restored it,
and dedicated it to the holy Trinity, 1556.

St. John's Coll. founded by Henry Chichely A. Bp. of Cant. by the name of
Bernards College, 1437; but after its suppression by Henry the 8th, Sir Thomas
White Merchant-Taylor of London, rebuilt it to the honor of St. John Baptist,
1557.

Jesus Coll. by Dr. Hugh Price, 1562.

Wadham Coll. founded by Nicholas Wadham of Somersetshire, and Dorothy his
Wife, 1613.

Some report that Cambridge was built by Cantabar a Spaniard, Cambridge
University.
375 years before the birth of Christ, and that he founded the University
there, and brought thither from Athens certain Philosophers, amongst whom
An^ximander and Anaxagoras. Another Author thus writes, Oxonii gymnasium
instituit Aluredus (Alfred) hortante Neoto viro sanctissimo, unde, a tempore
quo Cantabrigia sub Sigeberto, rege orientialium, and Oxonium sub Aluredo
condita sunt, semper fuere viri in Anglia doctissimi, a quibus Lutetia
Farisiorum, Papia in Italia originem duxerunt. Cantabrigiae gymnasium
praecessit Oxonio annis 265, nam Sigebert, A. D. 630 Cantabrigiam erexit, and
Alured Oxonium, A. D. 895. But as some contend, Cambridge began not to be an
University. till such time that Hugh Balsham Bishop of Ely founded the

College of Peter-house, in A D. 1256.

Clare-Hall, founded by Elizabeth de Burgo Countess of Clare, Widow of John de
Burgo Earl of Vlster, in A. D. 1347.

Pembroke Hall founded by Mary de St. Paul, Widow of Adomarius de Valentia Earl
of Pembroke, 1347. First named Aula de Valence Maria.

Corpus Christi, commonly called Benet College, was founded by the Alderman,
and Brethren of Corpus Christi Guild, and the Brethren of our Lady Guild in
Cambridge, 1351.

Trinity Hall was of old time an Hostel or House of study, wherein Students
lived at their own charge; but Dr. William Bateman founded it a College, 1353.

Gonvil and Caius Coll. first founded by Edmond de Gonvil, Rector of Terrington
and Bushworth in Norfolk, 1353; and was repaired by John Caius Dr. of Physic,
1557.

Kings Coll. by King Henry the 6th. 1441.

Queens Coll. by Margret Andegavensis, Wife to King Henry the 6th, 1441; but
finished by Elizabeth Wife to King Edward the 4th 1465

Katherine Hall founded by Robert Woodlark Provost of Kings College, 1475.
Plemundus, A.B. Cant.


Jesus College from a desol^te Nunnery was converted into a College, by John
^lcock Bishop of Ely 1497.

Christ's College founded by Margret Countess of Derby (the Mother of King
Henry the 7th.) in the place where the College of Gods-house stood, 1505.

St. John's Coll. was erected upon the ruins of an ancient Hospital of regular
Canons by the said Margret Countess of Derby, 1508.

Magdalen Coll. first an Hall, wherein Monks of diverse Monastries studied; but
in the year 1542, Thomas Audley Lord Chancellor of England, founded there a new
College in honor of St. Mary Magdalen.

Trinity Coll. founded by King Henry the 8th, in A. D. 1546.

Emmanuel Coll. founded by Sir Walter Mildmay, 1584.

Sidney Sussex Coll. was founded by Frances Countess of Sussex, the Daughter of
Sir William Sydney, A. D. 1598.

EDward surnamed the Elder, EDWARD, A.D. 901.
the eldest Son of Alfred, was Crowned at Kingstone upon Thames. At Wodnesfield
near Wolfrune Hampton, he obtained a great victory over the Da^es; for two of
their Kings were slain, many of their Nobles, and an innumerable company of
their commons, which caused him both to be feared and loved. His Sister Elfleda
had very hard travel of her first Child, therefore ever after she forbear the
nuptial embraces, Atheme, A.B. Cant.
alleging it to be an over-foolish pleasure, which brought with it so great
pains. And listing her self under Mars, she in person assisted her Brother
against the Danes, performing many manly feats. King Edward dyed at Farringdon,
and was buried in the new Monastry of Winchester, in A. D. 924. His Issue were
Ethelstan, Elfred, Elsward, Edwin, Edmund, Edred, and Nine Daughters. He built
a Castle at Stafford, in A.D. 914, He likewise built a Castle at Huntingdon, in
A. D. 917, which Henry the 2d afterward demolished, as some say. He also built
Hereford, out of the ruins of old Aviconium. Manchester in Lancashire,
anciently Mancunium, having been destroyed in the Danish Wars, this King caused
to be built again; because the Inhabitants had behaved themselves manfully
against the Danes.

King Edward the elder, built a new Town over against Nottingham, and made a
Bridge over the River betwixt the two Towns.

Ethelstan, A. D. 924.
EThelstan was Crowned at Kingstone by Athelme Archbishop of Canterbury. This
Prince by the evil suggestions of his Cup Bearer, became suspicious of some
Treason to be wrought against him by his Brother Edwin, therefore caused him to
be put in a small vessel without Tackle, and Oars, and so to be exposed to the
mercy of the Waters; whence the young Prince overcome with grief, cast himself
headlong into the Sea: whose Ghost the King sought to pacify by a Seven years
voluntary penance, and building the two Monastries of Middleton and Michelness.
He also took revenge on his Cup Bearer by this occasion. On a festival-day as
his Cup Bearer was serving, one of his feet happened to slip; but he recovered
himself with the other, and thereupon pleasantly said, You see how one Brother
helps another. Then the King with grief called to mind the death of his
innocent Brother, and forthwith commanded execution to be done upon his
Cup Bearer, the procurer thereof. King Ethelstan or Adelstane overcame in fight
Godfrey the Danish King of Northumberland, Constantine King of Scots, and
Howell, or Ludwall King of Wales, constraining them to submit unto his
pleasure, which done, he presently restored to their former estates, saying,
That it was more honor to make a King than to be a King. He enlarged his
dominions beyond any of his predecessors and was in the greatest reputation
with all foreign Princes, who sought his friendship both by alliance, and rare
presents. Hugh King of France, (besides some inestimable Jewels) sent him the
Sword of Constantine the Great, in the Hilt whereof; all covered with Gold, was
one of the Nails, as 'twas said, which fastened Christ to the Cross. He sent
likewise the Spear of Charles the Great, reputed to be the same which pierced
the side of our Savior; also a part of the Cross whereon he suffered and a
piece of the Crown of Thorns, with also the Banner of St. Maurice. And from
Otho the Emperor who had married his Sister, was sent a vessel of precious
Stones, artificially made, wherein were Lantskips with Vines, Ulfelinus or
Wolstane A.B. Cant.
Corn, Men, all seeming so naturally to move, as if they had been really the
things themselves. And the King of Norway sent him a famous and rich Ship. Some
of these Relics he gave unto Swithuns Abbey in Winchester, and the rest to the
Monastry in Malmsbury. He beautified the City of Excester, founded St. Germans
in Cornwall, St. Petrocus at Bodman, the Priory of Pilton, and enriched every
famous Abbey in the Land, either with new-buildings, Jewels, Books, or Revenues,
as also he did certain Cities with the Mintage of his Money. Whereof in London
were Eight Houses, at Winchester Six, Lewis Two, Hastings Two, Hampton Two,
Warham Two, Chichester One, Rochester Three, two for the King and one for the
Bishop; Canterbury Seven, four for the King, two for the A. Bishop, and one for
the Abbot. He caused the Holy Bible to be translated into the Saxon Tongue. He
dyed at Gloucester, called by the Britains Caer-Gloue, i. e. Fair City, in A. D.
940, and was buried at Malmsbury in Wilts, first built by Malmutius a King of
the Britains. About this King Ethelstans time (if ever) lived that famous Guy
Earl of Warwick.

EDMOND, A.D. 940.
EDmond the 5th Son of King Edward, was Crowned at Kingston. He obtained many
signal victories over the Danes in diverse parts of the Land, recovering out of
their hands several Counties and Cities; but at his Manor of Puckle-kerks in
the County of Gloucester, whilst he was interposing himself between his Sewer
and another to part a fray, he was with a thrust through the body wounded to
death in A. D. 946, and was buried at Glastenbury. His Issue was Edwy and Edgar.

EDred was the sixth Son of King Edward, EDRED, A. D. 946.
and succeeded his Brother in the Nonage of his Sons. Wolstane Archbishop of
Canterbury, for some misdemeanors he committed to custody; but afterward in
reverence to his office discharged him. So devout he was in the Religion of
those times, that he suffered his royal body to be chastised at the will and
direction of Dunstan Abbot of Glastenbury, unto whose keeping he also committed
the greatest part of his treasures and richest Jewels. The stately Abbey of Mich
at Abingdon, built by King Inas, but destroyed by the Danes, he repaired, and
most richly endowed it, confirming the Charters with Seals of Gold. St. Germans
he ordained a Bishops See, which there continued, till by Canutus it was
annexed to the Bishopric of Kyrton in Devon, both which Sees were by Edward
the Confessor translated to Excester, He dyed in the year of Grace, 955, and
was interred in the old Minster or Monastry of Winchester. His Issue Elfrid and
Bertfrid.

EDwy the eldest Son of King Edmond was Crowned at Kingstone, EDWIE, A.D. 955.
and on the day of his Coronation, as some Monks say, he in sight of his Nobles
as they sat in Council, abused the body of a great Lady his near Kinswoman,
and not long after slew her Husband, that he might the more freely enjoy his
incestuous pleasure. Otho, A B Cant.
A great enemy he was to the Monks Order, expelling them from some of their
Monastries, and placing married Priests in their vacancies. Dunstan the St. he
expelled the Realm, either for his bold reprehensions of him, or for detaining
the Treasure his Uncle had committed to his keeping, or both; but the people
having the Monks single life in high veneration, and conceiting Dunstan to be a
very holy man, they turned their affections from him, and swear their fealty to
Edgar; for very grief whereof he pined away and dyed, A. D. 959, and was buried
in the Church of the New-Abby at Winchester.

EDGAR, A.D. 959.
EDgar surnamed the Peaceable, was Crowned at Kingston by Otho Archbishop of
Canterbury. To rid the Land of Wolves, which then were very plenty, instead of
the Tribute imposed on the Prince of Wales by King Athelstan, he appointed
Luduall Prince of Wales to pay yearly 300 Wolves. His Navy-Royal he employed in
securing the Coasts from Pirates and foreign enemies, wherein himself would
sail every Summer. And in the Winter he would circuit the Country, taking an
account of the administration of his Laws, and demeanor of his great men,
especially his Judges, whom he would punish severely if he found them to have
been guilty of bribery, or partiality, insomuch that there was never less
robbery, deceit or oppression than in the reign of this King. His State was so
flourishing in peace and prosperity, that caused diverse Kings to bind
themselves in League with him. Wars he had none in all his reign, OTHO A.B.
Cant.
save a little toward the latter end thereof by the Welsh whom he quickly
curbed. But that which darkened his glory, was his lasciviousness. For he
defloured a certain Nun called Wolfchild, on whom he begat St. Edyth; after her
another named Ethelflede, on whom he begat his son Edward. And after this,
happening to hear a Western Dukes Daughter extolled for her beauty, he came to
her Fathers house, commanding her to his bed. But her Mother, tender of her
honor, instead of her Virgin-daughter, brought her servant-maid in the dark to
the King; who well enough pleased him that night; though in the morning when he
understood the deceit, he checked the Lady, yet entertained this Servant for
his Concubine, keeping to her bed alone till he married his lawful Wife
Elfrida, Duke Ordgarus daughter: The fame of whose excelling-beauty coming to
his ear, he employed Earl Ethelwold his Favorite to go to visit her, and if he
found her beauty suiting, then to court and secure her for the King. But
Etholwold liked her so well when he saw her, that he courted her for himself,
and at his return to Court pretended to the King that her beauty was far short
of what it was famed to be; therefore besought the King, in respect she was a
great Heiress, that he would solicit her Father to bestow her upon him to
Wife; Which the credulous King did: But the Duke had not been long married with
fair Elfrida, ere a fresh commendation of her beauty sounded in the Kings ears:
Elsius and Dunstane, A.B. Cant.
Whereupon he resolved to make his own eyes the Witnesses, which accordingly he
did: And upon sight of her beauty became so inamored of her, that taking
Etholwold at the advantage as they were hunting together, he ran him through
with his Javelin, then took Elfreda to be his Wife, who was very willing to
embrace the honor.

Edgar at the instigation of Dunstane now Archbishop of Canterbury, displaced
the married priests, and possessed their vacancies with Monks of single life.
To repress drunkenness which the Danes had brought in, he ordained a size by
certain Pins in the Pot, with penalty to any that presumed to drink deeper than
the Mark. He dyed A.D. 975, and was buried in the Abbey of Glastenbury.

His Issue were, Edward, Edmond, and Ethelred.

Ordolph the son of Ordgare Earl of Devonshire, in A. D. 961, built a famous
Abbey at Tavistoke in Devon. Ethelwald Bishop of Winchester, about A. D. 963,
and in the reign of King Edgar, in a great Famine sold away all the sacred
Vessels of his Church for to relieve the poor, saying, That there was no reason
that the senseless Temples of God should abound in riches, and lively Temples of
the Holy Ghost to want them.

EDWARD II. 975.
EDward, surnamed the Martyr, was much opposed by his Mother-in-law Queen
Elfrida, and many of the Nobles, as being illegitimate; but by the procurement
of Dunstane and the Clergy, he was admitted to be King, and was crowned at
Kingstone in A.D. 975. The beginning of whose Reign was attended with a
miserable barrenness of the ground, and Murrain amongst Cattle. A dreadful
Comet also appeared. These many men thought to be signs and judgments sent from
heaven, for the sins committed against the Married Clergy, who were expulsed
from their ancient possessions. In favor of whom, the Duke of Mercia destroyed
the Monastries in his Province, cast out the Monks, restoring to the Priests
and their Wives their ancient revenues. On the contrary, Duke Edelwin in
East-Saxia grievously oppressed the married Priests. To put an end therefore to
these troubles, and to prevent the dangers that might ensue, the case was
referred to be heard in Council at Winchester; where the business was debated
so long, till the Monks were in hazard of losing the day. Whereupon it was
persuaded to be referred to the Rood, placed where the Council sat; which
Oracle (after devout prayers made unto it) thus spoke, God forbid it should be
so, God forbid it should be so: you judged well once; and to change that again,
is not good. Upon which words the married Priests went down the wind. But they
disclosing to the people that this was but a trick of the Monks, in placing a
man behind the wall, who through a trunk uttered these words in the mouth of
the Rood: it was therefore instantly desired, that the case might be once more
scanned. Which was granted; and at Cloves in Wiltshire the Prelates, Peers, and
Commons assembled, where being set in consultation, Ethelgar and Elfrick A.B.
Cant.
the Chamber-floor being over-pressed with the weight of people, broke, and
fell down, hurting many, and killing others; only St. Dunstane by a miracle
remained without any hurt, the post whereon his Chair stood, standing still
firm. This is the story. And now the secular married Priests were left to take
Care without any Cure. But King Edward as he hunted near Corf-Castle, where
Elfrida and her son Ethelred resided, either on purpose or by chance parted
from his company, and came to the Castle to visit his Brother-in-law; where, as
he sat on horseback at the gate, discoursing with Elfrida and Ethelred, and
whilst he was drinking a cup of Wine, a knife was struck into his back by a
servant whom Elfrida had appointed thereunto. Whereupon the King, setting spurs
to his horse, rode away; but fainting through the loss of much blood, he fell
from his horse, and with one foot in the stirrup was dragged up and down the
woods and grounds, till in the end his body was left dead at Corfe's Gate; and
was first buried at Warham, afterward removed to the Minster of Shaftsbury.
Alfrida his Mother-in-law, sore repenting the fact, to expiate her guilt, and
pacify his crying blood (as she thought) founded the Monastries of Almsbury and
Worwell, in the last whereof she dyed and was buried.

ETHELRED, A.D. 978.
EThelred, for his slowness surnamed The unready, was crowned at Kingstone.
Upon his Coronation a Cloud was seen through England, one half like blood, the
other half like fire: Ethelgar and Alfrick A.B. Cant
And in the third year of his reign the Danes arrived in sundry places of the
Land, and did much spoil. And about the same time a great part of London was
consumed by fire. He paid tribute 40000 l. yearly (called Dane-gilt) to the
Danes. His reign was much molested with Danish Invasions in diverse parts of the
Land. And so low were the English at that time by the intruding Danes, that
they were forced to till and sow the ground, while the Danes sat idle in their
houses, and eat that which they toiled for. Also abusing their Daughters and
Wives, and having all at their command, the English for very fear calling them
Lord Danes. Hence we call a lazy Lubber a Lurdane. In this the English
distressed estate, the King at last sent forth a secret Commission into every
City within his Dominions, That upon the Thirteenth day of November they should
massacre all the Danes which were amongst them. This Command of the Kings the
people put in execution with extreme rigor in A.D. 1002. But to revenge this
great destruction of the Danes, Swein King of Denmark prepared a very great
Navy, and arrived in the West of England, and shortly after Canutus brought 200
sail of ships well furnished to his assistance. And in A. D. 1016, King
Ethelred dyed, and was buried at St. Paul's.

His Issue were Ethelston, Egbert, Edmond, Edred, Edwy, Edgar, Edward, Elfred,
and four Daughters.

In the year of our Lord 991, was Ipswich in Suffolk sacked by the Danes. And
in A. D. 1004, Thetford in Norfolk, anciently called Sitomagus, was sacked by
the Danes; Siricus, Elphegus, Livingus, A.B. Cant.
for the recovery whereof, Bishop Arfast removed his Episcopal See from Elmham
thither. Norwich was fired by the Danes; its Castle was afterward re-edified by
Hugh Bigod Earl of Norfolk.

EDMOND IRONSID. A.D. 1016
EDmond, surnamed Ironside, the eldest son that Ethelred had living at his
death, was crowned at Kingstone by Livingus Archbishop of Canterbury, A. D.
1016. At which time the Danes were so powerful in England, that Canute was
accepted King at South-hampton by many of the Clergy and Laity, who swear
fealty to him. But the City of London stood most firm for Edmond, and bravely
withstood Canute besieging it, till such time that King Edmond came and
relieved them. At Penham near Gillingham King Edmond engaged with the Danes,
where he put many of them to the sword, and the rest to flight. And not long
after, his and the Danish Host met nigh to Shereston in Worcestershire, where
the battle was for the first day fought with equal success; but on the next
day, when the English were in forwardness and probability of the victory, the
Traitor Edrick on purpose disanimated them, by cutting off the head of a dead
soldier, putting it on his sword point, then crying to the English Host, Fly ye
wretches, fly, and get you away, for your King is slain; behold, here is his
head; seek therefore now to save your own lives. By which means the fight ended
on even hands. And the next night following Canute stole away toward London,
whom Ironside followed, first raising the siege that Canutus had laid against
London, and then marching after him to Brentwood, where he gave the Danes a
great overthrow. Then near unto Oteford in Kent, the two Armies met again, and
fought in furious manner, till at last the day fell to the English, who slew
Four thousand five hundred men, with the loss but of Six hundred, and put the
rest to flight, whom the King had pursued to their utter confusion, had not his
brother-in-law Edrick played the Traitor again, dissuading him from the chase
of them, under the pretense of danger of ambushments, and the English soldiers
over-weariedness. Whereupon Canute had the opportunity of passing over into
Essex, where his scattered Forces rallied, and fresh supplies came in to them.
After whom Edmond advanced, and at Ashdon by Saffron-Waldon the Armies joined
battle, when a bloody slaughter ensued with the hopes of victory on the English
side; which the ever-traytorous Edrick perceiving, he withdrew his strength to
the Danes, the enemy thereby regaining the day. Of King Edmond's Nobles were
slain, Duke Alfred, Duke Goodwin, Duke Athelward, Duke Ethelwin, Earl Vrchel,
with Cadnoth Bishop of Lincoln, and Wolsey Abbot of Ramsey, and other of the
Clergy that were come thither to pray for good success to the English. The
Memorial of this Battle is still retained by certain small hills there
remaining where the dead were buried. From hence King Edmond marched to
Gloucester with a very small Army, which he there increased. After him Canute
followed, and at Dearhurst near Severn both Hosts met, and were ready to join
battle; When by the motion of a certain Captain, Edmond and Canute undertook by
single Combat to end the difference. So entering into a small Island called
Alney, adjoining to Gloucester, there they valiantly fought, till Canute having
received a dangerous wound, and finding Edmond to over-match him in strength,
he thus spoke to the English King: What necessity should move us, most valiant
Prince, that for the obtaining of a Title, we should thus endanger our lives?
Better it were to lay Malice and Weapons aside, and to condescend to a loving
Agreement. Let us now therefore become svvorn Brothers, and divide the Kingdom
betwixt us, and in such league of amity, that each of us may use the others as
his own: So shall this Land be peaceably governed, and We jointly assist each
others necessity.

Which words ended, they both cast down their Svvords, embrace as friends,
with the great joy and shouting of both Armies. And according to Canute's
proposal, the Kingdom was divided betwixt them; Edmond having that part that
lay coasting upon France, Canute the rest. But the Traitor Duke Edrick, with
design to work himself further into Canute's favor, procured Edmond to be
thrust into the body as he was easing nature. Then cutting off his head, he
presented Canute therewith, saying, All hail, thou now sole Monarch of England;
for behold here the head of thy Co-partner, which for thy sake I have
adventured to cut off. To whom Canute, like a worthy King, replied, That in
regard of that service, the bringers own head should be advanced above all the
Peers of his Kingdom. A while after performing this his promise, by causing
Edrick's head to be cut off, and placed on the highest Gate of London. But some
say that King Edmond dyed a natural death at London, when he had reigned seven
Months, whose body was buried at Glastenbury.

His Issue were, Edward surnamed the Outlaw (because he lived out of England
during the reign of the Danes) and Edmond.

DANES.
CANUTE, A.D. 1017
CANVTE the Dane, after the death of Edmond, seized upon the other half part of
the Kingdom, the English Nobles owning him for their rightful King, and
swearing allegiance to him. He was crowned at London by Living us Elstane,
Archbishop of Canterbury, A. D. 1017.

And to establish the Crown more sure to himself, he banished Edwin (the son of
King Ethelred), who for his melancholy and regardless behavior, was called,
The King of Churles. He also sent away Edward and Edmond, the sons of Edmond
Ironside. Next he espoused Emma the Widow of King Ethelred, and sister to the
Duke of Normandy, on this condition, That the issue of her body by him should
inherit the English Crown.

Then calling a Parliament of his Peers to Oxford, he there established these
Laws following, viz. That all decent ceremonies tending to the increase of
reverence and devotion in the service of God, should be used as need required.
That the Lords Day should be kept holy. That a Clergy killing a Layman, or for
any other notorious crime, should be deprived both of his Order and Dignity.
That a married woman convict of adultery, should have her nose and ears cut
off: And a Widow marrying within the space of twelve months after her Husbands
dectase, should lose her Jointure. With many others. He went on pilgrimage to
Rome, where he complained against the excessive exactions, and vast sums of
money extorted by the Pope from the English Archbishops, at such times as they
received their Palls from thence. Which the Pope engaged to redress for the
future. The greatness and glory of this King was such, that some
Court-Parasites sought to persuade him, that he possessed a more than humane
power; but he to demonstrate the contrary (being then at Southampton) caused a
Chair to be set on the shore, when the Sea began to flow, then sat himself in
it, and in the presence of his many attendants thus spoke to the
swelling-waves: Thou Sea art part of my dominion, don't therefore on pain of
punishment presume so much as to wet the robes of thy Lord. But the unruly Sea
swelling on further and further, first wet his skirts, then thighs; so that the
King suddenly started up, and retiring, said, Let the inhabitants of the world
know, that the power of Kings is but weak and vain; and that none is worthy the
name of King, save He that keeps Heaven, Earth, and Sea in obedience to his
own will. After which time he would never wear his Crown, but therewith crowned
the picture of Christ on the Cross at Winchester, which became a prize to the
Churchmen He dyed in A.D. 1035, and was buried at Winchester. His Issue were,
Swein, Harold, Hardicanute, and two D^ughters.

In Essex he built the Church of Ashdon, where he had the victory of King
Edmond. In Norfolk he founded the Abbey of St. Benets and in Suffolk the
Monastry of St. Edmond, Egelnoth, A.B. Cant.
which Saint he much dreaded. To the Church of Winchester, besides other rich
Jewels, he gave a Cross, worth as much as the Revenue of England amounted to in
one year. And unto Coventry they say he gave the Arm of St. Augustine, which at
Papia cost him an hundred Talents of silver, and one of gold.

HARALD, A.D. 1035
HARALD, for his exceeding swiftness surnamed Harefoot, the base son of King
Canute, in the absence of Hardicanute his Fathers son by Queen Emma, was
admitted King by the Nobility, and crowned at Oxford by Elnothus Archbishop of
Canterbury. Which done, for the better securing of the Crown to himself, he
sought means to gain Edward and Alfred (the two surviving sons of King
Ethelred) into his hands. In order whereunto, he sent to them into Normandy a
Letter feigned in their Mother Emma's name, inviting them over into England for
the recovery of their right. But when Prince Alfred was accordingly arrived,
Earl Goodwin, who pretended great kindness unto him, betrayed him and his small
party brought over with him, into Haralds hands, who at Guilford committed them
to the slaughter, only reserving every tenth man either for service or sale.
Alfred he sent prisoner into the Isle of Ely, where his eyes being put out, he
in short time after dyed through grief and pain. Queen Emma's Goods Harald
confiscated, banished her out of the Realm, and oppressed the English people
with great payments. He dyed at Oxford, Elnothus, A B. Cant.
A.D. 1040, and was buried at Westminster.

HArdicanute upon the death of Harold was by the States of the Land,
HARDICANUTE, A.D. 1030
as well English as Danes, invited over from Denmark to take upon him the
government of the Kingdom, which he accordingly did, and was crowned at London
by Elnothus Archbishop of Canterbury. The dead body of his half brother King
Harold, he caused to be taken up, and to be thrown into the River Thames, which
being found by a Fisherman, he buried it in the Churchyard of St. Clements
Danes; so called, because the great burial-place of the Danes.

Hardicanute for the maintaining of his Fleet, imposed heavy tributes on the
English, insomuch that two of the Collectors thereof, named Thurstane and
Feader, were slain by the Citizens of Worcester, for which fact their City was
burnt, and their Bishop Alfred expulsed the Sea, till that with money he had
purchased his peace. Earl Goodwin presented to this King a Ship whose Stern was
of Gold, with Eighty soldiers in her, all uniformly and richly suited: On their
heads they all wore gilt Bargenets; and on their bodies a triple gilt
Habergion, swords with gilt hilts girded to their wastes, a battel-ax (after the
manner of the Danes) on their left shoulders, a target with gilt bosses born in
their left hands, a dart in the right hand, and their arms bound about with two
bracelets of gold of six ounces weight, But as Hardicanute was revelling and
carousing at Lambeth, in a solemn Assembly and Banquet, He suddenly fell down
dead. The day of whose death, instead of laments, was annually celebrated
amongst the common people with open pastimes in the streets. Which time (being
the eighth of June) is called Hoctide, or Hucxtide, signifying a time of scorn
and contempt, which fell upon the Danes by his death. He was buried at
Winchester A. D. 1042.

About four years before the Danes first coming into England (which was near
the year of our Lord 789) showers of blood fell from Heaven, and bloody Crosses
were therewith marked upon men's garments. It Is said also, that after the Danes
had seated themselves in England, whilst the English were drinking, they would
stab them, or cut their throats; to prevent which, when the English man drank,
he requested the next sitters by to be his surety or pledge: Hence our custom of
pledging one another, it is said.

SAXONS. Edsine, A.B. Cant.

EDward the Confessor, EDWARD CONF. A.D. 1041
the Son of King Ethelred and Queen Emma, was born at Islip, and after his
Fathers death was for his safety sent unto the Duke of Normandy, his Mothers
Brother; but upon the death of Hardicanute, the English Nobility (disdaining
all Danish subjection) invited Edward to return into England, and to execute
the Kingly Office. He was crowned at Winchester by Edsine Archbishop of
Canterbury, A.D. 1042.

He remitted that heavy Tribute of Forty thousand pound yearly, gathered by the
name of Dane-gilt, which had been paid for forty years continuance, out of the
Lands of all, the Clergy excepted; Because (say our ancient Laws) the King
reposed more confidence in the prayers of the holy Church, than in the power of
Armies. Then from the diverse Laws of the Mercians, West Saxons, Danes, and
Northambrians, he selected the best, and made them one body certain, and
written in Latin. His Reign was more spent in peace, and works of piety, than
in wars and blood: Only some slight troubles happened from the Danes, Irish, and
Welsh, and also from Earl Goodwin and his sons, who being very powerful and
proud, caused some molestations in the State. But the sins of the people which
were then great, procured other Judgments instead of War: For in the month of
January there fell a great snow, Robert, A.B. Cant.
which covered the ground to the midst of March, whereby Cattle and Fowls in
abundance perished. And on the next year following, a strange and terrible
Earthquake happened, and withal such Lightnings as burnt up the Corn growing in
the fields, whereby an excessive Dearth ensued.

This King by the instigation of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Goodwin Earl
of Kent, dealt too rigorously with his own Mother, depriving her of all her
Jewels, and other substance, and committing her to safe custody in the Abbey of
Werwell. And moreover, put her to undergo that over-hard Law, Ordalium, which
was to pass over nine Plowshare-irons red glowing hot bare foot and blindfold.
By which trial she is said to have acquit her self, insomuch that having passed
them over before she knew it, cried and said, O good Lord, when shall I come to
the place of my purgation? The King her Son hereupon received her into his
favor again. And she in memory of her deliverance from this fiery trial, gave
nine Manors (according to the number of the Plow-shares) to the Minster of
Winchester (wherein she had that trial), and adorned the same with many rich
ornaments. And the King repenting the wrong he had done her, bestowed on the
same place the Isle of Portland. The eauses objected against Queen Emma, and
for which she suffered the loss of her goods, were her marriage with Canute,
the Capital enemy of England, and her neglecting to succor Edward and his
Brother in their exile. The matter objected against her, for which she
underwent the Ordalium, was incontinency of body with Alwin Bishop of
Winchester.

Of this King it is storied, that as he lay in his bed in an afternoon with the
curtains drawn about him, a certain pilfering Courtier came into his Chamber,
where finding the Kings Casket open (which Hugoline his Chamberlain had forgot
to shut) he took out as much Coin as he could conveniently carry, and went
away. Did the like a second time. Came again the third time; when the King
spoke to him, and bad him speedily be packing whilst he was well, adding, that
if Hugoline should come and take him there, he should not only lose all he had
gotten, but also stretch an halter. And when Hugoline came, and missing the
money, was greatly troubled, the King vvish'd him not to be grieved: for
(says he) the man that had it, has more need of it than we have. When this
devout King, lying on his deathbed, perceived, those about him to weep and
lament, he said unto them, If ye loved me, ye would not weep, but rejoice,
because I go to my Father, with whom I shall receive the joys promised to the
faithful, not through my Merits, but by the free Mercy of my Savior, which
shows mercy on whom he pleases. He dyed A. D. 1066, and with great laments
was buried at Westminster. He is said to be the first King that cured that
Disease commonly called the Kings Evil. This King of a little Monastry
dedicated to St. Peter at Westminster, made a most beautiful Church and large,
and founded St. Margrets Church standing by; and this he did for the discharge
of his vowed Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. He founded also the College of St. Mary
Otery in Devon, and removed the Bishops See from Cridington to Excester.

He married Godith the Daughter of Earl Godwin, which Earl took bread and eat
it in witness that he was not guilty of the death of Prince Alfred; but as soon
as he had received the bread, he was choked at the Table before the King at
Windsor.

HAROLD, A. D. 1066
HArold the Son of Earl Goodwin, notwithstanding that Edgar Atheling, the
Grandson of Ironside, was the next rightful Heir, yet gained the English
Crown to himself; Which he set upon his own head, without all ceremony and
solemn celebration, none either greatly approving or disapproving his
presumption, save only for the omission of the manner and form of Coronation.
But now Harold to gain and retain the love of all, lightened the burdens of
Custom and Tribute, that his Predecessors had laid upon the people; was liberal
to the Churchmen, repaired their Monasteries, nevv-built that at Waltham in
Essex: He created young Edgar Earl of Oxford, and held him in special favor.
And to all men was affable and kind, whence he much fastened the hearts of his
subjects unto himself. But this tranquil estate was quickly disturbed by the
Norman Duke, who first sent his Embassage, claiming right to the Kingdom of
England by the promise of King Edward, and his ratifying the same with the
consent of the State, and by Harolds own oath given to the Duke, for keeping
the Kingdom on his behalf; and then (upon Harold's slighting the Ambassie) he
made prepapation for gaining of England by force. But ere Duke William with
his Normans are arrived on the English shore, Harfager King of Denmark invaded
the Land (with whom Tosto the cruel Earl of Northumberland, Harold's Brother
joined) against whom Harold marched, and at a Bridge called Stamford (where he
was to pass over) one Dane made good, for a time, the Bridge against his whole
Host, and with his Ax slew forty of his men, himself at last being slain with
a dart. When the English had gained the Bridge, and were reduced into their
ranks, Harold most boldly set upon the Danes in their Camp, vanquished them,
and slew Harfager and Tosto, with many other persons of note, and gained an
exceeding rich booty both of gold and silver, then seized on their great Navy.

And now William the Norman being well furnished with a vast Fleet of Ships
well manned, store of money drawn from his people, the Pope's Benediction, who
had sent him a consecrated Banner, an Agnus Dei, and one of the hairs of St.
Peter, with a curse to all that should oppose him. Thus prepared, the Duke
arrived at Pevensey in Sussex, Sep. 28, where when he came to Land, his foot
chanced to slip and he fell into the mud, and all mired his hands; which
accident was presently construed for a lucky prefage; For now, said a Captain,
O Duke, thou have taken possession, and hold of that Land in thine hand,
whereof shortly thou shall become King. But the Duke thus landed, he set fire
on his Fleet, thereby to cut off all occasion or hope from his men of
returning. And from Pevensey he marched to Hastings, divulging as he went, the
causes of his coming, which was for the obtaining of his Kingdom; it being, as
he said, his by donation from Edward; giving withal a severe charge to his
soldiers, not to wrong any of their persons who in a short time after were to
become his subjects. To Harold he sent his Messenger, demanding the Kingdom and
Harold's subjection. But Harold returned him this answer by the same Messenger,
That unless he forthwith departed the land, he would make him sensible of the
strokes of his just displeasure. And with a brave and undaunted mind the
valiant Harold advanced his Forces into Sussex, pitching his Camp within seven
miles of his Enemy. When the Armies were come near together, and ready to
engage, the Norman Duke, to save the effusion of Christian blood, as he said,
sent a Monk as a Mediator for peace, with offers to Harold of these conditions,
Either wholly to resign the Kingdom to him, or in sight of the Armies to try
the quarrel with him in single combat, or to stand to the arbitrament of the
Pope. To whom Harold answered, That it should the next day be tried with more
swords than one. The next day was the Fourteenth of October, which Harold ever
accounted fortunate, because his birthday, and with hopeful affurance desired
greatly the approach of the same. His Soldiers likewise, too confident of
victory, Stigand, A.B. Cant.
spent the night in revellings, The morning being come, they both marshalled
their battles. The Kentish-men Harold placed with their heavy Axes or Halberts,
in the van (for by ancient custom they had the Front belonging to them): Then
the battles joined, both parts bravely fighting; but the Norman perceiving that
by true valor he could not vanquish the English, betook himself to a
stratagem, commanding his men to retreat, yet withal to keep in good order;
which the English seeing, supposed that they had fled, and thereupon pursued
their enemy so rashly, that they put themselves into disorder. Which
opportunity William took hold of, so that facing about, and charging them
fiercely when disranked, he made a great slaughter of the English. Yet would
not any of the remaining English fly the field, but manfully fought it out,
till such time that Harold wounded into the brains with an arrow through the
left eye, fell down dead. With Harold dyed his brethren Gyrth, and Leoswinc,
with most of the English Nobility. And of the Soldiers were slain Sixty seven
thousand nine hundred seventy and four; some say an Hundred thousand. The
Conqueror had three Horses slain under him, yet lost not a drop of blood by the
enemy. He won this battle with the loss only of 6013 men. It was fought in
Sussex seven miles from Hastings, upon Saturday the 14th of October, A. D.
1066. The English after this loss had designed to have made Edgar Atheling
King, and to have took the field again against the Conqueror, but the Earls of
Yorkshire and Cheshire, Edwin and Morcar the Queens Brothers, plotting
secretly to get the Crown to themselves, hindered the design.

The Body of King Harold (dispoiled of his Ornaments, and by a base Soldier
mangled and hacked in the leg (for which the Conqueror cashiered him for ever),
after much search was found among the dead bodies, and by the English Nobles
conveyed to Waltham in Essex, where it was solemnly and royally interred.

A little before the fight a dreadful Comet appeared.

Tosto Earl of Northumberland, in spite to his brother Harold; slew all
Harolds servants, and cutting them piecemeal, salted some of their limbs, and
cast the rest into Vessels of Mead and Wine, sending his brother word, that he
had furnished him with powdered meat against his return home.

This he did at Horolds house when he was absent.

NORMANS.
William the Conqueror.
WIlliam the Conqueror, A. D. 1066.
was the base Son of Robert Duke of Normandy. His Mother Arlotte (a Skinners
Daughter) when she was great with him, dreamed that her bowels were extended
and dilated all over Normandy and Britain. And as soon as he was born, being
laid on the Chamber-floor, with both his hands he took up Rushes, and held them
fast therein; which things were taken for presages of his future greatness. He
began his Reign October 14, A. D. 1066, and was Crowned December 25 on the same
year, by Aldred Archbishop of York, the English Bishops and Barons swearing
Allegiance to him; and himself taking a solemn Oath to defend the rights of the
Church, to establish good Laws, and to see justice uprightly administered. After
which, he applied himself to secure his new-obtained Kingdom; and the better to
assure the South of the Land, he took his way toward Dover, that so he might
command the Seas from Enemies arrivage, and overawe the Kentish a most strong
and populous Province. But Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, and Eglesire
Abbot of St. Augustines hearing of his coming, they assembled the commons of
Kent to oppose him, who about Swancomb kept themselves secret in the Woods,
waiting the coming of the Conqueror. All jointly agreeing (because no way lay
open save only a Front) to carry in their hands great branches of Trees,
wherewith they might keep themselves both from discovery, and if need were
impede the passage of the Normans. Which said device took so strange effect,
that it daunted King William, even with the sight; who being, as he thought,
free from the enemy, was now on the sudden beset on all sides with Woods, some
of which he saw to move, and the rest for ought he knew were of the like
nature. At length to put him out of all doubt, the Kentish men enclosing his
Army about, displayed their Banners, cast down their Boughs, and with Bows bent
were prepared for Battle. At which sight the Conqueror stood amazed. To whom
Stigand and Eglesine presented themselves, and in behalf of the Kentish men
thus spoke, Most noble Duke, behold here the Commons of Kent are come forth to
meet, and receive you as their Sovereign, requiring your Peace, their own free
condition of Estate, and ancient Laws. If these things be denied, they are here
presently to abide the verdict of Battle, being fully resolved rather to dye,
than to part with their Laws, or to live servile in bondage. The Conqueror in
this straight, more wisely than willingly, granted their demands. Some of the
English this Norman King banished, and most part of every man's estate he seized
into his own hands, bestowing the Lands of the Natives amongst his followers.
He deprived Monastries, Bishoprics, Lanfrank, A B. Cant.
Cities and Corporations of their ancient liberties and privileges, putting
them to redeem them at his own rate. And for default of lacking the weight of a
Groat in the payment of 700 Marks by the Monks of Ely, for the restoring to
their Abbey the ancient possessions, they were constrained to pay a 1000 Marks
more. The Clergy he charged with maintenance for his Wars, bereaved the
Religious Houses of their Treasures, Chalices, and rich Shrines; abrogated for
the most part the ancient Laws of the Land, ordaining new in their stead, not
so equal or easy to be kept; also causing them to be writ in the Norman
Tongue. He ordained the four Law-Terms, whereas before the causes of the
Kingdom were determined in every Shire, or by the late Law of King Edward in
their Gemote, or Conventicle held monthly in every Hundred. He commanded every
English Householder to put out both Fire and Candle at eight of the Clock at
Night. At which hour, in all Cities, Towns and Villages, he caused a Bell to be
rung by the Normans, then called Covre-feu, that is, Coverfire, to prevent
nightly meetings. He laid great Subsidies upon the Land. And that the same
might amount to his greater benefit, he caused an exact survey to be taken of
the whole Kingdom, and of every particular part and Commodity thereof, causing
all the people of England to be numbered, their names taken, and what every one
might dispend by the year; their substance, Money and Bondmen recorded. How
many yokes of Oxen and Plow-lands were in the Realm, and what services they
owed him. Which done, he exacted Six Shillings to be paid him for every Hide of
Land. The Book thus made of every several survey, by the English was called
Doomes-day Book. He permitted no English man to bear any office of trust and
credit. He dispeopled 36 Parish Towns, laying the Churches and Towns flat with
the earth, making thereof a Forest for pleasure, now called New-Forest. To
strengthen himself against revolts and rebellions, he fortified such places as
he thought most convenient for his purpose, and built the Tower of London, the
Castles of York, Lincoln, Nottingham, and Hasting. He was the first that
brought the Jews to inhabit England. His Son Robert rebelled against him in
Normandy, and in sight dismounted him; but then knowing his voice, desired his
pardon, and remounted him. Odo Bishop of Bayeux and Earl of Kent, his Brother
by the Mother, for secretly siding with the King of France, he committed to
Prison, not as Bishop, but as he was Earl, and seized his Estate. Some of whose
Gold ground into powder, was found hidden in the bottom of Rivers. The
Conqueror going to War against the King of France, in Normandy fell sick, when
keeping his Bed beyond his wont, and the French King hearing that the Disease
was in his Belly, scoffingly said of him, Our Cousin William is laid now in
Childbed, Oh what a number of Candles must I offer at his going to Church!
surely I think an Hundred thousand will not suffice. Which King William hearing
of, said, Well, I trust our Cousin of France shall be at no such cost, but
after this my Childbirth, at my going to Church (swearing by the resurrection
and brightness of God) I will find him a Thousand Candles, and light them my
self. And accordingly, not long after, he entered France with a great Army,
spoiling all where he came, and setting the City Mauntz on fire: But he came so
near the flames, that with the heat of his Harness he gat a sickness (which
increased, with a leap of his Horse, that burst the inward rim of his belly)
cost him his life. He dyed at Roan in Normandy, A. D. 1087. And forsaken of all
his Courtiers, his body was left unburied, till that one Harluims a poor
Country Knight at his own charge, conveyed it to Caen. Where, when it should
have been buried, a certain man in Gods name forbad the interment in that
place, which said he, was his and his Ancestors right, taken from them
violently by the said Duke. Whereupon they were forced to compound with him ere
they interred the Corpse. His Issue were Robert, Richard, William, Henry, and
six Daughters. His base Son, named William Peverel, was Earl of Nottingham.

By his last Will and Testament, he commanded all his Treasure to be
distributed to Churches, Gods Ministers, and the poor, limiting to each their
several portion. To the Church and Monks of St. Stephens at Caen in Normandy,
he gave diverse Manors in England, and great store of Land; yea, and his Crown
and Regal Ornaments, which his Son Henry redeemed. To his Son Robert he had
before given the Dukedom of Normandy. England he left undisposed, only wished
his Son William might succeed him in it. And to Henry he gave Five thousand
pound, presaging that all his Dominions should become Henry's in the end.

He did oft-times exhort his Children to the study of Learning, with this
saying, That an unlearned Prince, is but a Crowned Ass. He built a Religious
House, called Battel-Abby, in the same place where King Harold was slain,
dedicating it to the holy Trinity and St. Martin, That there the Monks might
pray for the Souls of Harold and the rest that were slain in that place,
endowing it with many great privileges, and amongst the rest these Two; That
if any Murderer, or other Felon, for fear of death fled thither, he should be
freed from all punishment: And that it should be lawful for the Abbot of that
place to deliver any Thief or Robber from the Gallows, if he should chance to
pass, where any such execution was in hand. At Selby in Yorkshire he founded
the Abbey of St. Germans, at Excester the Priory of St. Nicholas, and at Caen in
Normandy the Monastry of St. Stephens. In his time it was decreed at Rome, That
the Sea of York should be styled primas Angliae; and the Sea of Canterbury,
Primas totius Angliae. The setting Seals to Bonds and Writings was now first
used in England, there being before only Witnesses to them. Stigand Archbishop
of Canterbury was deposed by the Conqueror, and dyed in Prison. The Abbot of
St. Albans told this King, that the reason why he gained England in one Battle,
which the Danes could not do in many, was because the maintenance of Martial
men, with a part of the Lands Revenues, was converted to maintain religious
men, and to religious uses. In the time of this Kings Reign befell a most
fearful Earthquake, strange burning Fevers very mortal, Murrains causing a
great dearth among Cattle, extraordinary Rains, Water floods incredible, which
so softened the hills to the foundations, that some of them fell, and
overwhelmed the Villages near them. Most of the principal Cities were
indamaged by fire. So great a fire happened in London, that it consumed Houses
and Churches all the way, from the West-gate, to the Eastgate. And it is said,
that tame and domestic Fowls became wild, flying to the Woods.

WILLIAM RUFUS.
WIlliam surnamed Rufus, A. D. 1087.
notwithstanding that Robert Curtoise his eldest Brother was living; yet by the
mediation and assistance of Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury and Wolstane, he
gained the voices of the Council, and was Crowned, A. D. 1087. But Odo Bishop
of Bayeux (to take revenge for his sufferings under the Conqueror) instigated
Duke Robert to repair into England, and recover his right, which he promised
should soon be effected. Now Robert, that Money, the sinews of War, might not
be wanting for the carrying on of this design, mortgaged the Province of
Constantine to his Brother Henry; and with him many of the English sided.
William on the other hand by fairly promising to abolish the over-hard Laws
made by his Father, and to take off the Taxes and Imposts, drew the people
generally to stand in his defense; by whose aids he regained diverse strong
holds that the Nobles had seized for Duke Robert. He also besieged Rochester
wherein Odo was, from which siege he sent forth his Proclamation throughout the
Land, commanding all men to repair thereto, and that whosoever would not,
should be reputed a Niding. A word so disgraceful and hateful to the English
(signifying a Coward or base-hearted fellow) that made multitudes have with all
speed to that service. Whereupon the Castle was yielded, and Odo banished, and
his goods confiscated. But whilst these things were acting, Robert Duke of
Normandy Landed at Southampton, and very shortly returned again into his own
Territories, upon his Brother Williams promise to pay him Three thousand Marks
yearly, and to resign the Kingdom to him, or his Heirs at his death. About this
time Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury dyed, and the King kept that See vacant
above Four years. So did he by many other Ecclesiastical promotions, and set to
sale the rights of the Church, preferring those therein that would give the
most; and yet his exchequer became never the richer. He was wont to say, That
Christ's bread is sweet, dainty, and most delicate for Kings. His Brother
Roberts Territories in Normandy he invaded, taking diverse strong holds and
Castles, enforcing Robert to make a Peace with him. After which, these two
Brothers unite their forces against their Brother Henry. But he fearing
after-claps, had strongly fortified the Castle of Mount St. Michael in
Normandy, wherein they besieged him. In which time of Siege, King Williams life
was in great hazard; for some of the besieged sallying forth, William more
boldly than wisely rode against them, and a Knight encountering him, slew his
Horse under him, and had slain him too, had he not made himself known by his
voice. Whereupon the armed men with great reverence took him up, and brought
him another Horse, when the King not staying for the stirrup, sprang into the
Saddle, and with angry countenance, demanded who it was that overthrew him, and
the Knight as boldly answered and showed himself who he was. By Lukes face,
quoth the King, thou shall be my Knight, and be enrolled in my Check. with a
fee answerable to thy worth.

Prince Henry in the time of this siege being sorely distressed for Water, sent
to his Brother Robert (knowing him to be of the better temper) desiring him,
that he might have that permitted him which God had made common. Duke Robert
commanded him to be supplied; whereat King William was wroth. Anselme, A.B.
Cant.
To whom Robert said, And do thou esteem more of water which is every where
to be got, than of a Brother, having no more but him and me? In short time
after these. Three brethren were reconciled, and in short time after that, the
two elder again disagreed. The Peace of England was also disturbed by Malcolme
King of Scots; but by the Ambushment of Mowbray Earl of Northumberland, he was
slain, with his Son Edward. Then Mowbray grown proud turns Rebel; but was taken
and committed to Windsor.

Duke Robert preparing for the Holy Wars, mortgaged his Dukedom to his Brother
William, for the sum of Six thousand six hundred sixty six pounds of Silver;
for the making up of which sum, King William made the Religious Houses to
ransack their Coffers. Normandy therefore was now the Kings concern to keep as
his own, wherefore (a while after) hearing as he sat at meat, that Main a City
in Normandy was straightly besieged, and his Subjects sorely distressed, he swore
his wonted Oath, By St. Lukes face, that he would not turn his back till he was
with them. And thereupon commanded the wall of the House to be broke down, that
he might go forth the next way to Sea, leaving order for his Nobles
straightway to follow him. But the Winds being contrary, and Seas raging, his
Pilate humbly desired him to stay a while, till the winds and Seas were
appeased. To whom the King said, Have thou ever heard that a King has been
drowned? Therefore hoise up the sails I charge thee, and be gone. Which
accordigly being done, the King making such have, relieved the City before it
was expected. Then settling his affairs in that Country, he returned into
England, where, as he was Hunting in New-Forest, Sir Walter Tyrrel a French
Knight, shooting at a Stag, the Arrow glanced against a Tree, and struck the
King into the breast, with which he immediately dyed, Aug. 1. A. D. 1100. His
body laid in a Colliers Cart, was drawn with one poor Jade through a very dirty
way till the Cart broke, where for a while the Corpse was left in the dirt; but
afterward was conveyed to Winchester, and there buried in the Cathedral
Church. The bones since have been taken up, and laid into a Coffer with the
bones of Canutus. At Westminster he laid new foundations of a most stately
Palace, and finished that stately building, called the great Hall, which he
found fault with because no bigger, accounting it scarce worthy the name of a
Bedchamber, in respect of that which he intended to build. He new built the
City Carlisle which 200 years before had been spoiled by the Danes, built the
Church of St. Saviors in Southwark, and founded an Hospital in York to the
Honor of St. Peter.

In this Kings reign the Bishops See was translated from Selsey to Chichester,
anciently called Cissancester.

In his Reign happened a most dreadful Earthquake, vehement Lightning leaving
an intolerable stink behind it. An exceeding tempest of Wind, that in London
drove down Sixty Houses, blew off the Roof of Bow-Church, with the Beams, Six
of which in their fall were driven Twenty three foot deep into the ground (the
Streets of the City lying then unpaved.) A Blazing-Star appeared, and other
Stars seemed to shoot Darts one against another. The Sea broke over its Banks,
drowning an abundance of people; and in Kent overwhelmed the Lands that
sometime were Earl Goodwins, which now are called Goodwins Sands, very
dangerous for Navigators. A Well of Blood for Fifteen days rose out of the
ground at Finchampstead near Abingdon. Pestilence, and Scarcity.

Robert of Gloucester has a pretty passage of King William in these Lines.

As his Chamberlain him brought, as he rose on a day,
A morrow for to wear, a pair of Hose of Say,
He asked what they costned, three Shillings be seid,
Fie a dibles, quoth the King, who sey so vile a deed,
King to wear so vile a Cloth, but it costned more,
Buy a pair for a Mark, or thou shall ha cory fore.
A worse pair enough, the other swith him brought,
And said they costned a Mark, and unneath he them bought.
Aye bel-amy, quoth the King, these were well bought.
In this manner serve me, or ne serve me not.
A. D. 1096, and in the Reign of William Rufus, by reason of the Pestilence
then raging, and the oppressions under which the English groaned, the tillage
of the earth was neglected, whereby ensued great scarcity the year following
throughout all England.

HENRY BEAVCLERK.
HENRY, for his Learning styled Beauclerk, A.D. 1100
(whilst his brother Robert was busied in the Holy War) promising many good
things, was with the general liking of the people crowned at Westminster in A.
D. 1100; Whose first business was the reforming of his own Court and Household,
for a pattern to his subjects. Next, he restored to the English the use of fire
and lights at their own liberty, freed the Church from reservation of its
possessions upon vacancies; made the heirs of the Nobility free to possess
their Fathers Lands without redemption from him, engaging the Nobles to do the
like by their Tenants. Allowed the Gentry to marry their daughters and
kinswomen without his license, so it were not to his enemy. Ordained that the
Widow should enjoy her Jointure, and be at liberty to marry according to her
own liking. That the Mother and next kindred should be Guardians to fatherless
children. That Coiners of false money should be punished with the loss of hand
and genitals. He also appointed a Measure to the length of his arm, to be a
standard of commerce amongst his people. He forgave all debts to the Crown
before his time. And that which did the most content his subjects was, Anselme,
A.B. Cant.
that he revived the Laws of Edward the Confessor. After which, he recalled
Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, who had been forced out of the Realm by Rufus,
because he opposed him for keeping Church Livings in his hands. And Henry to
settle himself the more deeply in the affections of the English, he married
Maud daughter to the King of Scots by Margret Sister to Edgar Atheling. But
Duke Robert being returned with greatest honor from the Holy Land, claimed the
Kingdom of England as his rightful inheritance; landed an Army at Portsmouth,
many of the English flocking to him. At length the difference between these two
brethren was reconciled on these terms; That Henry should enjoy the Crown
during his life, paying to Robert in way of fealty three thousand Marks by the
year. But this sunshine of Peace was shortly after withdrawn by the Rebellion
of Robert Beliasme Earl of Shrewsbury, who in short time being vanquished, fled
into Normandy for shelter. Archbishop Anselme is also said to have disturbed
the peace by standing too stiffly for the pretended Rights of the Church of
Rome, against the Kings real Rights and Prerogative, peremptorily depriving
what Prelates he pleased of their promotions, and refusing to consecrate
certain Bishops that the King had advanced. Moreover the King and his Brother
Robert continued not long in amity, ere Henry invading Normandy, takes his
brother in fight, whom he sent prisoner to Cardiff Castle in Wales, where he
had the liberty to walk in the Kings Meadows, Forests, and Parks; but
endeavoring to make his escape, Radulphus, A.B. Cant.
he was committed to a stricter durance, and also deprived the sight of both
his eyes, and in few years after dyed, and was buried at Gloucester, his Brother
Henry not long surviving him.

Some troubles arose from the Welsh; but that people the King restrained,
chiefly, by placing those Flemings among them, whose Lands the Seas had
devoured some years before, and to whom King Rufus had granted that they should
seat themselves in Cumberland. The poor Married Priests, Anselme sadly
perplexed. And the King imposed heavy Taxes on the people, and reserved vacant
Church-promotions to his own use, under pretense of keeping them for the most
deserving. But how unworthily he disposed some of them, may be guessed by that
pretty reproof which Guymund his Chaplain gave him. Who on Rogation-Sunday
celebrating Service in the Kings Chapel, being to read that Lesson out of St.
James, 5.17, it rained not on the earth, by the space of three years and six
months, he purposely read, It rained not one, one, one years, and five one
months. Which causing laughter or admiration in all that heard him, the King
rebuked him for it, demanding the reason why he read so. Marry, quoth he, I see
you bestow your preferments only on such as can read so. Wherewith the King
touched, preferred him* and in the future was more cautious whom he raised to
preferments in the Church. The estates both spiritual and temporal he caused to
assemble at Salisbury, then reforming many abuses, and laying here the first
foundation of our High Court of Parliament. About this time Lewis King of
France invaded Normandy, whither King Henry passed and vanquished him. But as
his Son Prince William was returning after him out of Normandy, he was cast
away, and with him an 160 persons of prime note and esteem, none of their
bodies being found. The Mariners had had too much Wine bestowed on them at
their putting forth to Sea.

Maud or Matilda the Empress, after the death of the Emperor her Husband, King
Henry her Father sent for over into England, where calling a Parliament, he
caused Stephen his Sisters Son, with his Nobles, to swear Fealty to her, as to
his lawful, and now only Heir. But the King sailing again into Normandy, he
there after his pleasure of Hunting, made a great repast of Lampreys, upon the
eating of which, he fell exceeding sick, and after Seven days sickness dyed, A.
D. 1135. at the Town of St. Denis. His Bowels, and Brains, and Eyes were buried
at Roan. The Physician that took out the Brains was poisoned with the stench.
His body sliced, powdered with Salt, and wrapped in a Bulls Hide, was conveyed
to Reading, and there buried in the Abbey which himself had founded. Besides his
lawful Issue William and Maud, he is said to have had Fourteen illegitimate,
some say more. He built a magnificent Palace at Woodstock in Oxfordshire. In a
great dearth in his Countries of Anjou and Main, he fed every day with
sufficient sustenance Ten thousand persons, from the beginning of April, till
such time that new Corn was inned. He erected and endowed the Sees of Carlisle
and Ely, and the Abbeys of Hide, Reading, Cyrencester, and the Priory of
Dunstable. His Queen Maud was so devout, that she would go to Church barefoot,
and constantly exercise her self in works of Charity, insomuch, that when her
Brother Prince David came out of Scotland to visit her, he found her in her
Privy-Chamber, washing, wiping, and kissing poor peoples feet; which he
disliking, said, Verily, if the King your Husband knew this, you should never
kiss his lips. To which she replied, That the feet of the King of Heaven, are
to be preferred before the lips of an earthly King. It Is reported that when the
King was preparing for his last passage into Normandy, there happened a fearful
Earthquake, and that out of chinks in the earth arose burning flames which
could not be quenched.

In the year 1111, at Dunmow in Essex, the Lady Inga founded a Priory for Black
Nuns, which afterward became an House of Monks. Which Monks, it is said, did
allow a Gammon of Bacon to such married couples, as repented not of their
bargain within a year and a day after their Marriage, nor made any Nuptial
transgression in word or deed. This they were to make a solemn Oath of.

William Curboill, A.B. Cant.
STEPHEN.
A.D. 1135
STEPHEN Earl of Bloys Son to Adelicia Daughter of the Conqueror, was admitted
King by the workings of his Brother Henry Bishop of Winchester, and Roger
Bishop of Sarum; but chiefly through the means of Hugh Bigot, who took his Oath
that King Henry had on his deathbed (upon some distaste taken against his
Daughter) disinherited her, and appointed Stephen to succeed him. He was
Crowned at Westminster on St. Stephens day, in A. D. 1135, by William Corbell
A. B. of Canterbury, the Prelates swearing to obey him as their King, so long
as he should preserve the Churches rights; and the Lay-Barons in like manner
swore allegiance to him, so long as he should keep his Covenants to them, and
preserve their rights. His right he owned to be by election. The Charter
containing his peoples Franchises, Liberties and Immunities, which he bound
himself to maintain, he Sealed at Oxford. Which was, that all Liberties,
Customs and Possessions granted to the Church should be firm, and in force;
That persons and causes Ecclesiastical, should appertain only to Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. That the vacancies of Churches and Church-mens goods, should be
at the sole dispose of the Clergy. That all bad usages in the Land touching
Forests, exactions, etc. should be extirpate, and that the ancient Laws should
be restored. Many Castles he either caused, or suffered to be erected in the
Land, which he intended for his own security against Maud; but they proved
greatly to his own detriment. His entrance was very peaceable; but by little
and little civil discords increased to the miserable spoil of the Realm,
besides the troubles arising from out-parts. Baldwin de Redners first began to
break the peace, but him the King soon quieted. Then the Welshmen, who gave a
great defeat to the English. Then David King of Scots (set on by some
disaffected to Stephen) but in a short time peace was concluded with him. Then
the Welsh again make inrodes into the Land, carrying away great spoils. Next
David King of Scots enters Northumberland, in the quarrel of the Empress, where
his rude Soldiers dealt most barbarously with many of the Inhabitants, ripping
up the wombs of Women with Child, and tossing their Infants upon the points of
their Spears, slaying the Priests at the Altar, and after an inhumane manner
dismembring the slain bodies After this the Peers of the Land conspire against
the King, taking themselves to strongholds: a great cause whereof was, because
the King showed extraordinary favor to William de Ypre and his Flemings,
following their counsels, and chiefly relying upon them. When David King of
Scots taking opportunities from these inbred troubles, again entered
Northumberland with a great Army, against whom the Northern Lords marched at
the command of Thurstan Archbishop of York the Kings Lieutenant, who himself
being then sick appointed Ralph Bishop of Durham for his General. Which Bishop
of Durham in the close of his invective Oration to his Army against the Scots,
before the Battle, absolved from punishment of sin, all such of his side, that
should dye in the fight, whereby the English were made to fight the more
desperately; so that in a short time they vanquished the Scots, driving the
King of Scots and his Son out of the Field. King Stephen went on also very
prosperously against his Barons, winning many Castles from them. Which done he
proceeded against the Scots, with whom in short time a Peace was concluded. But
that Stephen might be kept employed, the Empress Maud landed near to Arundel,
with but an 140 men. Whom Stephen hasted to meet, but she coloring her designs
with the pretenses of amity and peace, he over-credulous, caused her to be
honorably conveyed to Bristol, where she remained two Months, and then went to
Wallingford; her base Brother, Earl Robert, in the mean time gathering aids for
her. Wallingford King Stephen besieged, and his Brother the Bishop of
Winchester, invited certain of the Nobles to his palace, where he kept them as
Prisoners, till he had gained them to resign their Castles to the King.
Worcester Earl Robert subdued and spoiled. Nottingham, Ralph Painell burned in
favor of the Empress. And she for her better security took into Lincoln,
whither Stephen following her gained the City, the Empress making an escape.
Shortly after which, Robert Earl of Gloucester, with Ranulph Earl of Chester,
encountered the King near to Lincoln, where with equal success the fight was
maintained a long time, till at length the Kings Horsemen (not without
suspicion of Treason) gave back and fled, and shortly after his Foot began also
to faint and fly, leaving this valiant King almost alone, who with his
Battel-Axe drove back whole Troops assailing him, maintaining the quarrel
against his Foes with an undaunted courage till his Battel-Axe broke; and after
that till his Sword flew in pieces. When now weapenless he was struck down,
taken, and carried to the Empress at Gloucester, from whence he was sent to
Bristol. The Empress for a while ruling all, London, after much persuasion,
received her with a royal procession; but in short time grew discontent,
because she refused to remit some over-hard Laws made by her Father, and to
restore those of King Edward. Many Nobles also repined, as conceiving
themselves too much slighted by her. The Bishop of Winchester who a while
before had accursed all that withstood her, now absolves them, under pretense
that the Barons had kept Faith with her, she not with them. The discontented
Londoners he solicited in his Brother Stephens behalf. Diverse Castles he stored
with munition and men. In the mean time Matilda came to Winchester, where
sending for the Bishop, (being then the Popes Legate) though he doubted some
danger, yet not daring to send a flat denial, returned this equivocal answer,
Ego parabo me, I will make ready, as though he had meant to follow the
Messenger; whereas he addressed himself to work her downfall. For sending for
his Brothers Queen, Prince Eustace, the Londoners, and William Ypre, he made
strong his party for the King. Himself and friends abiding in the City, and the
Empress keeping in the Castle, not daring to adventure forth for about the
space of Seven weeks. When, the Bishop to deceive Matilda commanded peace to be
proclaimed, and the City Gates to be set open. But the Empress and her Friends,
now leaving the Castle to go to some other place, were pursued by the Bishops
forces, in which pursuit many of her party were wounded and slain, Earl Robert
taken, and others flying into the Nunnery of Warwell, were burned, together
with the place. And Winchester City the Bishop caused to be fired, for the
Citizens affections to the Empress. The Empress who had escaped to the Castle
of the Devizes, and there in hazard to be surprised, caused her self to be put
into a Coffin, as though dead, bound fast with Cords, and so as if it had been
her dead Corpse, she was carried in a Horse-litter to Gloucester. King Stephen
and Earl Robert being exchanged one for another, the King now pursues Matilda,
and in Oxford besieged her, wan the Suburbs thereof, and brought her to that
straight, that for her escape in a great Frost and Snow, she was forced (in
order to the deceiving of the Sentinels eyes) to cloth her self in white Linen
Garments, and so on foot to run through Ice and Snow, Ditches and Valleys, till
she came to Abingdon, where taking Horse, she got the same night to Wallingford
Castle. After which many bickerings happened betwixt the two parties, with
variable successes to and fro. Sometimes in one part of the Nation Matilda's
side prevailed, in another part Stephens, to the great ruin of the whole
Realm. However, Stephen to assure the succession to his Son Eustace, called a
Council at London, commanding Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury to consecrate
his Son King. Which he refusing to do, (and that by the Popes special Mandate)
was forced to fly into Normandy, the King seizing upon all his possessions. But
Eustace shortly after dying, King Stephen inclined to peace, and was content to
adopt Henry Fitz-Empress for his Son and Successor. To whom the Nobles at
Oxford did homage as to the undoubted Heir, and the Prince yielded Stephen the
honor of a Father. But King Stephen being afflicted with the Iliack passion,
together with his old Disease the Hemerhoids, gave up the Ghost at Dover, A. D.
1154, and was buried at Feversham in Kent: Though his body afterward for the
Lead-sake, wherein it was wrapped, was cast into the River. He had Issue
Balwine, Eustace, William, Maud, Mary, and two natural Sons. His Son Eustace in
a rage set fire on the Cornfieldsd belonging to the Abbey of Bury, Theobald,
A.B. Cant.
because the Monks denied to help him to a sum of Money; but afterward sitting
down to Dinner, at the first morsel of Bread he put into his mouth, he fell
into a fit of madness, and in that fit dyed. King Stephen erected the Abbeys of
Cogshall in Essex, of Farness in Lancashire, the Nunneries at Carew and Higham,
an Hospital at York, and Monastry at Feversham. About the beginning of his
Reign, a Fire beginning at London-stone, consumed Eastward to Aldgate and
Westward to St. Paul's.

HENRY II.
A.D. 1154.
HENRY PLANTAGINET the Son of Maud the Empress, and Earl Geofry of Anjou was
Crowned at Westminster, by Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury. And Henry to
settle the Realm in quiet, demolished certain Castles, and fortified others.
Some Earls unduly created, he reduced into a private condition, purged the
Realm of Foreign Soldiers; chiefly of the Flemings. Chose himself a Council out
of the most eminent persons spiritual and temporal, and restrained the
insolences of some great personages, which made some of them discontented,
especially that arrogant Lord Hugh de Mortimer, who raised a Rebellion. Against
whom the King went in person, where in the Siege of Bridge-North he had been
shot with an arrow, had not Hubert de St. Clare interposed and took the arrow
into his own bosom. The King having quieted the Rebels, he hasted into France,
and there did homage to King Lewis for his French Provinces, settled an accord
between himself and Brother Geofry, and at his return into England entered into
amity with Malcolm King of Scots, restoring to him the Earldom of Huntingdon.
Then he advanced against the Welsh, with whom fighting, his person was in great
danger, his Standard-royal cowardly abandoned; for the which Henry de Essex
Standard Bearer, was afterward accused by Robert de Montford, who in single
combat within lists vanquished him at Reading, where the said Essex was shorn a
Monk: But the King at length overcame the Welsh, and returned with triumph into
England; after which, himself and his Queen Eleanor were crowned at Worcester,
where they both at the Offertory laid their Crowns upon the high Altar, vowing
never to wear them after. This now was the third time in which at three several
places Westminster, Lincoln, and Worcester, he had been crowned.

Then the King crossed the seas into his Dukedom of Normandy, where he made
seizure of some Cities into his hands after his Brother Geofry's death, and
settled some affairs, then returned. After which, and about the year 1163, began
the famous Controversy betwixt the King and his Favorite Be^ket, whom in the
beginning of his reign he had advanced to be Lord Chancellor, and upon the
death of Theobald to be Archbishop of Canterbury. Tho. Becket A.B. Cant.
Which Archbishopric Becket at the Council of Tours secretly delivered up to
the Pope, and received it again from his hands. But the cause of the dissension
betwixt the King and this Bishop, was the remisness and neglect of Becket's
curbing the disorders of the Churchmen, which then were grown to a dangerous
height; complaint having been made to the King of above a hundred Murders
committed by the Clergy in his reign. Which enormities, besides many others of
other kinds, not being punished by Church-censure, the King exceedingly
displeased, brought them under the Civil Power, ordering that Justice should be
administered to all alike without partiality, as well Clergy as Laity;
appointing Ministers of Justice through all parts of the Land to that purpose:
against which Becket opposed himself, peremptorily defending the pretended
Rights of the Clergy, and his See of Canterbury; yea so far, as that he
challenged from the Crown the custody of Rochester Castle, and other Forts,
which the King for securing his state had resumed into his own hands. Hereupon
the King assembling his Bishops at Westminster, it was there agreed, That none
should appeal to the Sea of Rome in any case without the King's leave. That no
Archbishop or Bishop upon the Popes summons should go out of the Realm without
the Kings license. That no Bishop should excommunicate any holding of the King
in chief, or put any of his Officers under interdict, without the Kings
license. That Clerks criminous should be tried before Secular Judges. Unto
which Articles the King peremptorily urged Becket to yield, without any
reservation of saving in all things his order and right of the Church. But
Becket utterly refused, sending complaints thereupon to the Pope, who very
desirous to keep the Kings favor, required the Bishop to yield unto the King
without any salvo's or exceptions. So Becket, though with much reluctance, at
length did swear in verbo Sacerdotali and de plano, that he would observe the
Laws which the King entitled Avitae, of his Grandfather, the like to which did
all the other Bishops and Nobility. But notwithstanding Becket refused to set
his seal to the Instrument wherein these Customs were comprehended, alleging
that he did promise it only to do the King some honor in word only, but not
with intent to confirm the said Articles. Whereupon the King sent to Pope
Alexander the third, thinking by his means to have subjected the Prelate. But
he passing it by, the King undertook the case himself, and by his Peers and
Bishops, had all Beckets movable Goods condemned to his mercy; they also
adjudging him guilty of perjury. The Bishops did by the mouth of the Bishop of
Chichester, disclaim thenceforward all obedience to him as their Archbishop.
And the next day, whilst they were consulting further concerning him, the
Bishop caused to be sung before him at the Altar, The Princes sit and speak
against me, and the ungodly persecute me, etc. and forthwith taking his silver
Crosier in his hands, he entered therewith into the Kings presence. But the King
enraged at his boldness, commanded his Peers to sit in judgment on him, and
they adjudged him as a Traitor and perjured person to be apprehended and cast
into prison. To prevent which, Becket fled into Flanders, the Pope now openly
siding with him, and also Lewis the French King. But Henry to let the Servant
of servants know that he was supreme in his own Kingdom, and that he liked not
his taking part with a subject against his Sovereign Lord, commanded the
Sheriffs to attack such as did appeal to the Court of Rome, with the Relations
of all such of the English Clergy as were with Becket, and to put them under
Sureties; Also to seize their Revenues, Goods and Chattels. The King likewise
seized all the Archbishops Goods and Profits, banished his Kindred, prohibited
his being publicly prayed for as Archbishop: Commanded his Justices to
apprehend and secure all such as should bring any Interdict into England till
the Kings pleasure was further known. On the other hand, Becket in France, by
special authority from the Pope, excommunicated the Bishop of London, and
proceeded so far with others, that there was scarce found in the Kings Chapel
such as might perform the wonted Service. Hereupon the King sends again to the
Pope, to send him Legates which might absolve his excommunicate subjects, and
settle a Peace. But the Popes Legates whom he sent, did not effect a
reconciliation, by reason of Becket's perverseness. Some conjecture, that in
contempt of Becket (whose Office it was as Archbishop of Canterbury, to Crown
the King) King Henry caused his eldest son Henry to be crowned King of England
by Roger Archbishop of York. At whose Coronation-feast the Father-King himself
carrying up the first dish of Meat, the Archbishop pleasantly said to the young
King, Rejoice, my fair Son, for there is no Prince in the world that has such
a Servitor attending at his Table, as you have. To whom the proud young King
thus answered, Why wonder you at that? My Father knows that he does nothing
unbeseeming him, forasmuch as he is royal born but on-one side, but Our self
are royal born both by Father and Mother. Not long after this, by mediation of
some friends, a reconciliation between the King and Becket was effected; and
Becket was permitted to have the full use of his Metropolitan See, and all the
profits thereof, with the Arrearages. Which he had not long re-possessed, ere
he published the Popes Letters, by which Roger Archbishop of York, and Hugh
Bishop of Durham were suspended from their Episcopal Function for crowning the
young King in prejudice of the Sea of Canterbury. And the Bishops of London,
Sarum, and Excester, cut off from the Church by Censure; for assisting therein;
whom Becket would not absolve at the young Kings request, but under conditions:
Which the old King then in Normandy hearing of, let fall some words, intimating
his high displeasure against the Archbishop, and desire to be rid of him.
Whereupon Hugh Morvill, William Tracie, Hugh Brito, and Richard Fits-Vrse,
Knights and Courtiers, hasted into England, and murdered the Archbishop in the
Cathedral Church of Canterbury, Richard a Monk, A.B. Cant.
as he stood in the Evening-service-time before the Altar. Which done, the
Parricides fled, and Thomas was reputed for a most Glorious Saint and Martyr,
and strange Miracles (beyond my Creed) are reported to have been done by this
dead Roman-Saint, and his blood. Amongst other Epitaphs made on his death, this
was one: Quis moritur? praesul. Cur? pro grege. Qualiter? ense.
Quando? Natali. Quis locus? Ara Dei.


But the news of this vile act coming to the ears of the old King, he was
exceedingly troubled; and to take off the imputation of Guilt from himself, he
protested that he would submit himself to the judgment of such Cardinal Legates
as the Pope should send to enquire of the fact. And to calm his own
perturbations, and avert men's thoughts from the consideration of that Tragedy,
he undertook the conquest of Ireland, which he effected (being helped forward
therein by the Civil dissentions then amongst the Irish petty Kings). Where
having caused a reformation of the Irish Church, and settled affairs therein to
his convenience, he returned into England, and from thence posted into
Normandy; where attended for his arrival two Cardinal-Legats (sent at his own
request for his purgation concerning Thomas a Becket's death) by whom he was
absolved: Having first given oath, that he was no way consenting to the fact,
and declared his sorrow for having in his anger, given occasion by rash words
for others to do the deed, and engaged to perform enjoined penances. The
conditions of his absolution were, That at his own charge he should maintain
200 Soldiers a whole year, for the defense of the Holy Land, and that he should
revoke the Laws which he had made against the privileges of the Sea of Rome,
and Beckets friends. And now this Cloud thus blown over, another succeeds in
its place, For his unnatural Son young King Henry, (by the instigation of his
Mother Queen Eleanor) conspired against him, having for his confederates the
Kings of France and Scotland, his two Brothers Richard and Geofry, with many of
the English Nobles. Against whom the Father with a bleeding heart, for his Sons
ungraciousness, prepared himself, and was very successful in Little Britain,
where himself was in person; also in England by his faithful Subjects. For
Humphrey de Bohun High Constable of the Realm, with other Nobles, vanquished
Robert Earl of of Leicester and took him Prisoner, which moved Lewis of France
to seek a Truce of him for six Months; whereunto King Henry yielded* then
Shipped for England* landing at the Port of Hampton. From whence he took his
journey toward Canterbury, and being come within about three miles thereof, he
went barefooted, the hard stones so cutting his tender feet, that the ground
was stained with his blood. And after he came to Canterbury, and was entered
into the Chapter House of the Monks, Baldwin, A.B. Cant.
he most humbly prostrated himself on the ground, begged pardon, and by the
instancy of his own Petition, was by all the brethren corrected with Rods. The
number of lashes which he received on his bare flesh amounted to Fourscore.
About this time William King of Scots, that had lately entered England, was
taken Prisoner, and young King Henry was with storms driven back into France,
and his Fleet scattered, shortly after which, Peace was concluded betwixt his
Father and him. But yet again he sought his Fathers ruin, though before he
could effect it, he was prevented by the King of Terrors, Death, A. D. 1183.
The following year Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem arrived in England,
soliciting the King to undertake the holy War in his own person, which by the
advice of his Lords, he refused, yet yielded to aid the Cause with Money, and
gave them leave to go that were disposed thereto. His Son John, (whom he
exceedingly loved, and commonly in jest called Sans terre, without Land) he
made Lord of Ireland, assuring unto him also Lands and Rents in England and
Normandy. Richard and Geoffery his Sons rebelled again against him: The younger
of which in a Turnament at Paris was trod to death under the Horse feet, but
the elder lived to the further grief of his Father. For joining himself with
Philip of France, forced his Father out of the City of Mentz (the City where he
was born, and loved above all others) which made King Henry to utter these
words against him, That since his Son Richard had taken from him that day, the
thing which he most loved in the world, he would requite him; for after that
day, he would deprive him of that thing, which in him should best please a
Child, namely, his heart. And afterward finding his Son John first in the
Catalogue of the Conspirators against him in that action, he bitterly cursed
the hour of his birth, laying Gods curse and his upon his Sons, which he would
never recall by any persuasions. But coming to Chinon, he there fell
desperately sick, and feeling death approach, caused himself to be born into
the Church before the Altar, where after humble confession and sorrow for his
sins, he yielded up his Soul, A. D. 1189, and was buried at Font-Everard. His
Issue were William, Henry, Richard, Jeffry, Philip, John, Maud, and Eleanor.
His base Issue William surnamed Longsper, and Jeffry Archbishop of York. These
two by fair Rosamund, and Morgan by another Woman. Rosamund his beloved
Concubine, was the Daughter of the Lord Clifford, whom to keep safe from the
envy of Queen Eleanor, he placed in a Labyrinth, which he built for her at
Woodstock, with such windings and turnings, that none could come at her
retiring Room, save the King, or whom he instructed. Howbeit the jealous eye of
Queen Eleanor found her out by a clew of silk, which Rosamund let fall as she
sat to take the Air. For she suddenly fleeing to escape being seen, the end of
the silk fastened to her foot, and the clew still unwinding, which the Queen
followed till she had found the lovely Rosamund, whom she so dealt with (giving
her Poison) that she ended her days, whose body was buried at Godstow with this
Epitaph upon her Tomb, Hic jacet in Tumba Rosa mundi, non Rosa munda,
Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet.


King Henry divided England into Circuits, appointing that two of his judges
should twice in the year, in each Circuit administer Justice.

In the year 1164 he called an assembly of the States at Clarendon in Wilts,
where (amongst other matters) it was decreed, That all the Clergy should, bona
fide, swear allegiance to the King, and should appeal but unto the Archbishop,
or from him finally to the King, without particular license.

In the beginning of his reign, one Nicholas Breakspear an English man was
elected Pope, by the name of Adrian the 4th, who in the 5th year of his Popedom
was choked with a Fly. He sent the Lords Prayer (in this manner) from Rome, to
be taught the English people.

Ure Fadyr in Heaven rich, Thy name be halyed everlich, Thou bring us thy
michel bliss, Als hit in Heaven y-doe, Evar in earth been it also. That holy
bread that lasts ay, Thou send it ous this ilke day, Forgive ous all that we
have don. As we forgive uch other mon. Ne let ous fall into no founding, Ac
shield ous fro the foul thing. Amen.

In the Isle of Wight it rained blood, the shower continuing for the space of
two hours together. A great Earthquake in Ely, Norfolk, and Suffolk, which made
the Bells to ring in the Steeples. At St. Osyths in Essex, was seen a Dragon of
marvelous bigness, which by moving burned Houses. Another great Earthquake
which overthrew many buildings, and amongst the rest, rent in pieces Lincoln
Cathedral. At Oreford in Suffolk a certain hairy creature perfectly resembling
man in all parts and proportions, was taken out of the Sea by Fishers in a Net,
who after he had been kept a while, secretly slipped away into the Sea again.

RICHARD I.
A.D. 1189
RICHARD from his exceeding valor surnamed Ceur de Lion, was Crowned at
Westminster by Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury. At which time a great number
of the Jews, were in a tumultuous sort, slaughtered by the common people, for
which many of them suffered death. The Coronation rights performed, Richard
with all speed prepares for his voyage into the Holy Land, appointing William
Longchamp Bishop of Ely his chief Justiciar, and Lord Chancellor, joining with
him Hugh Bishop of Durham for the parts beyond Humber, associating to those
Bishops, diverse temporal Lords for the defense and preservation of Justice. And
with the King of Scots he concluded firm friendship. Which done, with a royal
Navy he put out to Sea, and by the way to the Holy Land, he seized on the
Island Cyprus, where he solemnly took to Wife his beloved Lady Berengaria. The
Island he committed to the keeping of his own Deputies, permitting the
Islanders to enjoy all such Laws and Liberties, as they held in the time of
Immanuel the Emperor. Further in his way he conquered a mighty Argosey, called a
Dromond, wherein were a-Board a Thousand five hundred Saracens (disguised under
French-Flags) furnished, besides all other provisions, with Fireworks, Barrels
or Cages of venomous Serpents, for the use of the Sarazens at Ptolemais, since
called Acon. Of the Sarazens he killed and drowned 1300, and then sailed safely
to Acon. Before which lay these Christian Nations, the Genoways and
Florentines, Flemings, Almains, Danes, Dutch, Pisans, Friezlanders, Lombards,
and the English under Hubert Bishop of Sarum. Besides the Knights Templers
collected out of all Nations, and also the aids of the Asians. The King of
France also came to the Siege. Where whilst the Christians lay, Sultan Saladin
cut off the heads of 1500 Christian Captives; in revenge whereof, King Richard
in sight of Saladines Host, cut off above 2500 of the heads of Turkish Slaves.
The Siege before Acon was so well plied, (notwithstanding sundry dissensions
betwixt King Richard and Philip King of France, the two competitors of glory in
this Siege) that the City of Acon was surrendered upon Articles. Which done, the
French King, envying the English Kings noble exploits, (though contrary to the
French men's will) returned into France, having first given Oath to the King of
England, that he would well and faithfully keep the Lands and Subjects of King
Richard, and neither do damage to them himself, nor suffer others to do it till
Richards return. Howbeit whilst Richard was busied in the Holy War, the King of
France after his return home, devised how to trouble and endamage his
Dominions, but was hindered by his own Nobles* In England the Peers and people
were much discontented at the incredible insolences and intolerable tyrannies
of the Chancellor, which though K. Richard heard of, yet kept he himself
employed in the War, wherein he performed many Heroic acts. Within sight of
Jerusalem he encountered Saladine, slew a great number of his Soldiers, took
3000 Camels, 4000 Horses and Mules, took his Carriage richly laden from
Babylon, rescued Joppa, repulsing Saladine from thence. He also assayed to
regain Jerusalem; but being in that Enterprise abandoned by the Duke of
Burgundy, he was persuaded to accept Saladines offers for a three years Truce.
Which having concluded, and settled his affairs in the East, he set sail
homeward; where in his passage his ships were scattered by tempest, and driven
hither and thither; but he happily gaining the shore, hoped in disguise as a
Merchant to have free journeying through Germany. But he being by the way
over-free in his expenses, became suspected for another kind of man than a
Merchant; and near to Vienna was discovered, and imprisoned by the Archduke of
Austria, under pretense that he was guilty of the death of the Marquess Conrade
at Tire. Then the person of this famous King being thought too great a booty
for the Duke, was gained into the Emperors hands, whose usage toward him was
very cruel, and the ransom required for him most unreasonable, being an
Hundred thousand Marks sterling to himself, and Fifty thousand more to himself
and the Duke, besides other conditions. All which being yielded unto, and
engagement given for the performance, Hubert, A.B. Cant.
after fifteen Months imprisonment, he was set at liberty, to the great joy of
many Princes in those parts, and to the unspeakable joy of his own Subjects in
general, though not of his brother John, who, with the King of France ('it is
said) were some instruments for the procuring of his unhandsome usage. But Ceur
de Lion (escaping the way-layings of the Emperor, who sent to re-take him after
his release) safely Landed at Sandwich, whither Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury, that had been with him in the Holy Land, came with a joyful heart
to meet him, whom when the K. saw, he dismounted, bowed his knee, then fell
upon the earth. In like sort the Bishop lay upon the ground over against him,
till at last both of them rising up, ran into each others arms, comforting
themselves with mutual embraces and weeping for joy. His Brother John, who had
been false to him, upon his submission he freely forgave, calmly saying unto
him, Would that thy fault may so be forgotten of me, as that thy self may keep
in memory what thou have done. And after this the King restored his forfeited
possessions to his brother John, who from that time became faithful to him, and
did him very noble services, especially against the French, with whom Richard
then warred. In which wars, this John Earl of Morton, and Markadey Captain of
the Routs, had made an incursion up to Beauvois, where the Bishop (being also a
Peer of the Royal Blood) valiantly fighting, was taken in the skirmish, armed
at all points, on whose behalf the Pope wrote somewhat earnestly to K. Richard,
to set his very dear Son (for so he called the Bishop) at liberty. The K. in a
kind of pleasant earnestness, caused the Habergeon and Curaces of the Bishop to
be presented the Pope, with this question, See, whether this be thy Sons Coat
or not? Whereupon the Pope replied, That he was neither his Son, nor the Son of
the Church, and therefore should be ransomed at the Kings pleasure, because he
was rather to be judged a Servitor of Mars, than a Soldier of Christ. In this
War with the French, the King amongst other victories obtained one of fame;
Taking an hundred Knights and Servitors on Horseback, and Footmen without
number, Thirty men of Arms, also 200 great Horse, whereof an 140 had Barbs and
Caparisons armed with Iron. The King in his own person did most nobly, for with
one Spear, he threw to the earth Matthew de Mummerancy, Alan de Rusci, and Fulk
de Giservall, and took them. So have we vanquished the King of France at
Gysors, howbeit we have not done it, but God and our right by us, said the King
in his Letter to the Bishop of Durham. But the fatal accident is at hand, which
put an end to this renowned Warrior; for the Viscount of Limoges having found a
great hoard of Silver and Gold, sent a great part thereof to King Richard, as
chief Lord, with which the King being not contented, came with some forces to
the Castle of Ch^luz belonging to the Viscount, where he supposed the riches
were: The Garrison of which place offered to yield the same to him, and all
therein, if only their lives and limbs might be saved; but the King would
accept of no conditions, bidding them to defend themselves as they could, for
he would enter by the Sword and hang them all. Whereupon an Arbalaster standing
upon the Wall, and seeing his time, charged his Steel-bow with a Square-Arrow,
making first his Prayer to God, that he would direct that shot, and deliver the
innocence of the besieged from oppression; then discharging it, as the King was
taking a view of the Castle, mortally wounded him in the left shoulder, the
anguish and peril whereof, was extremely increased by the unskilfulness of the
Chyrurgeon. The Castle by continual assaults was taken, and by the Kings
command none left alive, save this too skilful Archer, who neither denied, nor
excused the fact; but alleged the necessity of his case, and the justice of
God in it, for that the King, he said, had slain his Father, and two Brothers
with his own hands. Yet did the magnanimous King forgive this Bertram de Guidon
the fact, gave him an Hundred Shillings, and set him at liberty: but Captain
Markadey after the King was dead, took him, flayed him alive, and then hanged
him. When Ceur de Lion perceived the certain approach of death, with
contrition, confession and participation of the Sacrament, he prepared himself
for another life, and dyed of his wound, April 6, A D. 1199. And according to
his command, his Bowels were buried at Charron amongst the rebellious
Poictovins, as those, who had only deserved his worst parts; his heart at Roan,
as the City, which for her constant loyalty had merited the same; and his Corpse
were inhumed at Font-Everard, at the feet of his Father, to whom he had
sometime been disobedient. In the first year of his Reign he appointed Henry
Fitz Alwin to be Major of London, that honorable City having been formerly
governed by Portgraves, or Portreves. He caused Money to be coined, (held in
great request for its purity) by the Easterlings a people of Germany,
afterward current Money, and called Sterling, from the Easterlings. When this
King was in France, one Fulk a Priest told him, that he kept three Daughters,
which if he did not dismiss, they would procure him Gods wrath. Why, Hypocrite,
said the King, all the World knows that I never had Child. Yea, said Fulk, you
have Three, and their names are Pride, Covetousness, and Lechery. Is it so,
said the King? You shall see me presently dispose them. The Knights Templers
shall have Pride, the White Monks Covetousness, and the Clergy Lechery; and
there have you my three Daughters bestowed amongst you. Now lived Robin Hood an
outlawed Noble, and Little John, who with an Hundred stout fellows more,
molested all passengers by the way, yet only robbed and made prey of the rich,
selling good pennyworths when they had done.

JOHN.
JOHN (though that Arthur his Brother Jeffries Son was living, A. D. 1119.
yet) by the assistance of his Mother Eleanor and other Noble Friends, was by
the great Council of the Realm admitted King: To whom they then swear only a
conditional Fealty, viz. To keep faith and peace to him, if he would render to
every of them their rights. He was crowned at Westminster by Hubert Archbishop
of Canterbury. His Reign throughout was attended with great troubles: For
first, the King of France took upon him to establish young Arthur in the
Kingdom; though after a while for his own advantage he delivered the Prince
into his Uncles hands. Then the King of Scots procured some disturbances; but
an accord was shortly made, the two Kings of England and Scotland swearing
faithful love to each other upon the Crosier of Archbishop Hubert. Presently
after which, these two Kings, with the King of South Wales, expressed their
great humility, by helping to carry the Corpse of Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, on
their shoulders to the place of interment. Then the Clergy disturbed the peace,
oppugning the Kings Royal Title to a Benefice, locking the Church-doors against
his Praesentee, scorning his Princely Letters, fencing the Church with armed
men against his Officers, assailing his Sheriff, moving the Pope to
excommunicate all their opposers; yea, caused the King himself to be accused to
the Pope for a Tyrant. The whole Cistercian Order denied the payment of a
subsidy granted the King. The Canons of Lincoln refused to accept of him for
their Bishop, whom the King had appointed in the place of him deceased. Hubert
Archbishop called a General Council in his Province without the Kings
permission, and then disdained the Kings prohibition thereof. The Lay-Peers
they came in also to act a part, and at a time when the King stood in need of
their help against the Poictovins and French, refused to attend the King in his
Wars against them. Howbeit King John put forth to Sea, arrived in Normandy, and
in battle overthrew his Nephew Arthur, and by valor recovered all the
Provinces which had revolted; Prince Arthur, and all the Peers of Poictou,
above 200 French Knights and others of command, he took prisoners. Not long
after which, young Arthur dyed, not without suspicion of violence. Which gave
fresh occasion to some of the disaffected Peers to b^^dy against the King, whom
the King of France now cited as his Homager for the Dukedom of Normandy, to
appear at a set-day to be tried by his Peers upon point of Murder and Treason.
And King John not appearing at the appointed time, was by the King and Peers of
France Disinherited and condemned, and according to the sentence they proceeded
against him; and what by the Kings remisness, the treachery of his people, and
power of his enemies, he lost a great part of his strongest Towns and Castles
in the French Territories. But the Delinquent Peers and Barons King John put to
their Fines; and for the carrying on of the Wars against France, had a Subsidy
granted him, which moved the people to think hardly of him. The King of France,
who had been too succesful of late against the English, sent a braving Champion
over into England to justify by Duel his proceeds in K. John's French
Dominions; with whom John Curcy Earl of V^ster undertook to combat. This Curcy
was a man of gyant-like limbs and strength, and of some conditions ^o^
despicable, had they not been savaged with too much rudeness: Which appeared
not only in his wild speeches touching the Kings (...) of his Nephew Arthur;
but even th^n, (...) the King demanded of him whether he would combat in his
quarrel: answered, No, not in thy quarrel, nor for thy sake; yet for the
Kingdoms right I will fight to the death. But this the French Champion never
put him to; for hearing of the Earls excessive feeding, and strength answerable
thereto, the Monsieur sneak't away into Spain, as ashamed to show his face
again in France. Of Earl Curcy it is further said, That when the two Kings of
France and England met together upon a Truce in France, K. Philip having heard
of Curcy, and that he was in the English Camp, requested of K. John that he
might see some experiment of his so much feared and famed strength. Whereupon
an Helmet of excellent proof, full-farced with Mayl, was set upon a Wooden
block; when the Earl first lowering round about him with a dreadful aspect, lift
up his trusty skeyn, and cleft so deep quite through the steely resistance,
into the knotty wood, that none there present save himself could draw it out
again, which he did with ease. Then being by the Kings asked, Why he frowned so
angrily before he struck? answered, That he purposed if he had failed of his
blow, to have killed them all, both Kings, and the other spectators. But for
all this famous Champion, K. Philip by degrees gained all in Normandy, even
Roan it self. Main, Turain and Poictou, revolted from King John; and Angiers
was betrayed: All these losses happening through the default of some of the
English Peers and Prelates. For when the King was in readiness to take shipping
for Normandy, Hubert the Archbishop forbad him proceeding in the voyage; the
Peers also again refused to attend him: Wherefore the King put many of his
Earls, Barons and Knights, yea, and Clergymen also, to a grievous pecuniary
redemption; and Huberts Wealth and Possessions (who dyed the same year) the
King seized on. This Hubert was suspected of too familiar practicing with the
King of France. Upon the death of this Archbishop Hubert, the Monks of
Canterbury made choice of Reginald, their Sub-Prior, in his stead; and the
King, after them, of John Gray Bishop of Norwich, a man of great wisdom. But
the Pope neglecting both these, recommended Stephen de Langton to the Monks of
Canterbury, and Bishops of that Province, to be presently chosen for their
Primate. Which the Monks unwilling, and deferring to do, Stephen Langton, A.B.
Cant.
alleging that no Canonical Election could be made at Rome, where was no
consent neither of King nor Covent: The Pope with choler replied, That he had
plenitude of Power over the Church of Canterbury; and moreover, that no consent
of Princes used to be expected in Elections where the Pope was. He therefore
commanded them under pain of his high curse, to accept him for their Primate;
Which all accordingly did (though not without murmurations), save one Elias de
Brantford. And to work the King into a compliance hereto, the Pope sent him
four Gold Rings with four precious stones, an Emerald, Sapphire, Ruby, and
Topaz; signifying in his Letter sent with them, that the Rings roundness must
remember him of Eternity; the quadrate number must mind him of Constancy, and
the four Cardinal Virtues, Prudence, Justice, Temperance and Fortitude. The
Golds price, of Wisdom; the Emeralds greeness, of Faith; the Saphires
brightness, of Hope; the Rubies redness, of Charity; and the Topaz's clearness,
of sanctity of life, But King John for all these fond toys and fine words, when
he observed the Popes arbitrariness, the dishonor arising to himself in being
frustrated of his choice; the prejudice to his Crown in having a Bishop thrust
upon him without Sovereign consent; the hazard to the State in having a French
Favorite over the English, with also the Monks disloyalty in yiedling to the
Pope's Election: He first of all proscribed the Monks as Traitors; and after
that writ Letters to the Pope, wherein he alleged the wrongs done to himself,
and made his exceptions against Langton, vowing immutably* to stand for his own
elect and to dye in defense of the liberties of his Crown, likewise minding the
Pope of his great profits he received from England, menacing withal, that if
he were crossed in this, he would then stop all from crossing the Seas to Rome.
To which Letters of the King, the Pope answered very comminatory, and shortly
after, viz. in A. D. 1208. because the King would be King in his own Dominions,
this Servus Servorum interdicted the whole Kingdom, under which it lay for the
term of six years, and fourteen weeks, without Gods service, or Sacraments, or
Christian burial. The Lay People were tumbled like Dogs into every Ditch.
Howbeit the King to be even with the Pope, proscribed the disloyal Clergy,
their revenues he confiscated, their Bishoprics, Abbeys and Priories he put
into Laymens hands, and everywhere they suffered wrong, without ordinary
protection of justice. But some of the eminent Clergy detested the Popes savage
proceedings, as Philip Bishop of Durham and his Successor. The Bishops of
Winchester and Norwich they animated the King to contemn the Papal Curse, and
the Cistercian Abbots (neglecting the Interdict) continued their Divine
Service, till the Pope suspended them for their contempt. Moreover, the Pope to
revenge himself on the King, Anathematized him by name, which caused many to
desert his service; for which he punished them by Fine. Yet at length, the
better to secure himself, and State, the King was very desirous to come to an
atonement, and assured under his Seal, that Archbishop Langton, with the
Bishops and Monks, and others, should be restored both to his favor and their
possessions; that Holy Church should have all its Franchises, as in Edward the
Confessors time: But because he would not make full satisfaction to the Clergy,
for all confiscations, and other emoluments received of them, the Popes
Nuncio's refused a peace with him. And the Pope was so mad, that he absolved
all Kings and people, poor and rich, having dependence on him from all fealty
and subjection to him; whereupon, Malcontents set themselves to work
mischief. The Welsh fall off from the King, wherefore at Nottingham he hangs up
their hostages, 28 in number. His Nobles many of them held themselves
discharged of their Allegiance* so rebel, inviting the French King to their
assistance, and promising to settle the English Crown on his head. Stephen
Langton and other Bishops, implore the Popes help to support the Church of
England, being at the point of ruin. His officious Holiness thereupon decrees,
That K. John must be deposed, and that he would ^ppoint one more worthy in his
stead. To effectuate which, the Pope sent his Letters to Philip King of France,
requiring him to undertake the affair of dethroning the King of England, and
for his reward, he should have pardon of all his sins, besides the enjoying of
the English Crown to him and his heirs for ever. Also transmitting his Letters
general, to all Potentates, Soldiers, Men of War of all Nations, to sign
themselves with the sign of the Cross, and to follow Philip in this design,
assuring all that their assistance herein, whether in person or purse, should
be no less meritorious, than if they visited our Saviors Sepulcher. The King
of France accepts the offer, and makes great preparation for the invading of
England, and King John raises a Land-Army, and prepares a Royal Navy to
withstand him. But ere the French make their attempts, Pandulph the Popes
Messenger arrives in England, and so wrought upon the King, what by
representing the danger he was in, and what by flattering promises, that King
John (not insensible of his desperate estate) swear in all things to submit to
the judgment of the Church. And shortly after at the Knight-Templers House in
Dover, he surrendered his Crown into the hands of Pandulph, for the use of the
Pope, laying at his feet his Scepter, Robe, Sword and Ring, and subscribed to a
Charter, whereby he resigned his Kingdom to the Pope: Professing he did it
neither through fear or force, but of his own free will, as having no other way
to make satisfaction to God and the Church for his offense. And that from that
time forward he would hold his Crown of the Pope, paying a pension annual of a
Thousand Marks, for the Kingdoms of England and Ireland. Pandulph now having
got what he came for, hastens into France, there to dissuade Philip from
proceeding against King John, as being become an obedient and reconciled Son to
the Church. But Philip, who was of his holy Fathers mind, not caring for K.
John's repentance, but his Crown, in great choler professed, That since the
Pope himself had so far thrust him on, his Legates suggestions, no nor his
threats of excommunication, should not withdraw him from his intentions. In
which resolution, calling his Peers into a consultation, they all approved his
design, save Ferdinand Earl of Flanders, who alleged, that it was an
unreasonable thing to think of invading another man's right; enforcing this his
judgment with so good arguments, that thereby many of the Peers were induced to
change their opinion. Which so incensed K. Philip, that he drew his Forces
against Flanders, commanding his mighty prepared Fleet to set forward
thitherward. Of the which K. John having speedy intelligence, set forth his
Navy, and happily surprised the French Fleet at the Port of Damme (whilst most
of the Soldiers were on Land, spoiling the Earls Country) taking 300 Vessels
laden with Provisions, Arms, and other costly fraught, and burning and sinking
above an 100. And now the King thinking to take the advantage of this Victory,
made ready a great Army for the recovery of his hereditary Provinces lost to
the French; but when all else was ready, then the Barons denied him their
attendance, till he was assoyled of his Excommunication, and that their
pristine liberties granted them by Henry the first were restored. Stephen
Langton animating them herein; and promising his faithful assistance to them.
Hereupon the King makes his appeal to Rome, presenting the Pope with rich
presents; in answer to which, the Pope sent his Legate the Bishop of Tusculum,
who wrought with the King to corroborate the conveyance of his Kingdoms to the
Pope; unto which the King yielded. But the Archbishop of Canterbury opposed
himself against it, with whom the Peers of the Land joined, avowing it to be an
execrable thing to the whole World. And in a full Parliament it was Enacted,
That since the King could not without consent of Parliament bring his Realm and
people to such thraldom; therefore if the Pope should in the future attempt any
such thing again, with life and livelihood he should be withstood. The Pope
hearing of this, not only conceived exceeding hatred against the Archbishop;
but sent also his authentic Letters for repealing the Interdict, upon
restitution of 1300 Marks more to the Prelates, and that but by equal portions
of five years payment. And now the King passed into Poictou which he reduced,
thence into Britain, where his Poictovins, according to their old custom,
proved false to him to his great detriment. The while his Barons they play Rex
at home, renewing their confederation, and binding themselves with an Oath at
the High Altar at St. Edmonds; bury, That they would pursue the King with Arms,
till he should consent to the Charter of Liberties, granted by Henry 1st. So
that the King was enforced to return into England, where, when come, they
challenged this Charter as a part of his Oath made at his Absolution, and
shortly after they met together at Stamford with a very numerous Army. Their
General was Robert Fitz-Walter, whom they styled, The Marshal of Gods Army and
Holy Church. London invited them to enter the City by night, where, when
entered, by their threatful Letters, they not only drew most of the Nobles from
the King, but had also almost locked him out of his Royal Seat, insomuch, that
he was necessitated by gentle messages, to procure of his factious Barons a
place and day of meeting, which was Running-Mead, betwixt Windsor and Stains,
(since called Councel-Mead) whither they came with Armed multitudes, out of all
the Kingdom, numberless. Where the King perceiving their so great strength, and
his own small party, he granted them the utmost of their desires, not only for
liberties specified in Magna Charta, and Charta Forestae, but also for a kind
of rule in the government, by 25 selected Peers, to whose command all the other
Barons, were also bound by Oath to be obedient. But the King could not long
relish this, therefore privately sends to his trustiest friends to fortify and
victual their Castles, and himself secretly retires into the Isle of Wight.
From whence he dispatched Messengers both to the Pope and his foreign friends,
to crave the censure of the one, and succors of the other, against such
outrageous Rebels. In both which his Agents were so sedulous, and friends
compassionate, that at Rome by definitive sentence, the Barons Charters were
made void, the King and Barons accursed, if either of them observed the
composition made at Councel-Mead. And from Flanders, Goscoin, Brabrant, and
other parts, such competent aids came in, as encouraged the King, after Three
Months secrecy, to show himself in the face of his Enemies. His Host he divided
into two parts; with the one, conducted by himself Northward, he everywhere
subdued his Rebels, as likewise did the Earl of Salisbury Southward. Stephen
Langton the Pope suspended for abetting the Barons; and his Brother Simon
Langton Archbishop elect of York, had his election made void, the Pope
constituting in his place Walter Gray, whose Pall cost him no less than 1000
pounds. [The Archiepiscopal Pall is a Pontifical Vestment made of Lambs wool,
as it comes from the Sheeps back, without any other artificial color, and spun
by a peculiar order of Nuns, cast into St. Peter's Tomb, and adorned with little
black Crosses* having two Labells hanging down before and behind; which the
Archbishops, when going to the Altar, put about their Necks, above their other
pontifical Ornaments.] The disloyal Barons were all excommunicated by name, and
all their Lands, together with the City of London Interdicted. But the lofty
Barons held those censures in so high contempt, that they decreed neither
themselves nor Citizens of London should observe them, nor the Prelates
denounce them. And to revive their dying Cause, they resolve on a project for
betraying the Crown of England unto Lewis the Dauphin of France, sending their
Letters of Allegiance, confirmed with all the Barons Seals, to implore K.
Philips favor for sending his Son, and his Son for the acceptance of the
English Crown. To prevent a correspondency herein, the Pope sends his
Apostolical Commands to Philip of France, that he should stay his Son from
entering upon St. Peter's patrimony, with a Curse also on all such, as should
assist the excommunicate Barons. To which Philip replied, That England was no
patrimony of St. Peter's, no King, says he, having power of himself to alienate
his Kingdom, K. John especially, who being never lawful King, had no power to
dispose thereof; and that it was an error and pernicious example in the Pope,
and an itching lust after a new kind of Domination. His Peers swore, That they
would spend their blood, rather than suffer that a King should of himself, or
with a few flatterers, pass over his Crown, and enthrall his Nobles, especially
to the Pope, who should follow St. Peter's steps, to win souls, and not to
meddle with Wars, and murders of men's bodies. And Prince Lewis declared, That
he would choose rather to be excommunicated by the Pope, than to falsify his
promise to the English Barons. So without more ado, he speedily set forth for
England, with his Fleet of 600 Ships, and 80 Boats, which coming to shore in
Kent, the Barons joined forces with him. King John whose Army consisted most of
stipendiary Foreigners, thought it best for a time to forbear Battle with
Lewis, and not to commit his whole fortunes to the hazard of their sudden
defection; therefore drew toward Winchester, Lewis marching forward toward
London, taking all the strongholds in his way (excepting Dover Castle, kept by
the valiant and faithful Hubert de Burgo.) London received Lewis, the Citizens
swearing truth to him, so did the Barons at Westminster, Lewis swearing to
them, That he would restore all men their right, and recover to the Crown what
ever had been lost by K. John. All or most places where the French Prince came
submitted to him. At Odiam Castle indeed (wherein were but 13 English men)
Lewis and his whole Army, was not only braved 15 days; but also sallying forth
upon them, every one took an enemy, surrendering the Castle at last upon
honorable terms. K. John in other parts of the Realm, with a very considerable
Host ruined the Barons Castles and possessions. But setting forth from Lyn in
Norfolk (where for their faithful services he bestowed large Franchises, and
his own Sword, and a gilt Bowl) with a full resolution to give Lewis Battle; as
he was passing the Washes, with his Army and Carriages toward Lincolnshire,
all his Carriages, Treasures, and Provision were irrecoverably lost, himself
and Army hardly escaping. And now by this time, the Barons were struck with
some remorse to see their Native Country by their procurement to be so
miserably wasted, and afflicted; and which grieved them the most was, that
their faithful services to Lewis, were but slightly regarded by him at present,
and were like to be ill repayed in the future; for Viscount De Melun a Noble
Frenchman, had on his death bed privately discovered to them, how that Lewis
had sworn, That if ever Englands Crown was settled on his head, he would condemn
unto perpetual exile all the disloyal Barons, as Traitors to their Sovereign,
and extirpate all their kindred. Forty of the Barons therefore presently
addressed their Letters of submissive suit to the King, but he was dead before
the Messengers came. Some say he dyed of a Flix, some of a Surfeit; but the
most report, that he dyed of Poison; for K. John coming, say they, from the
Washes to Swinshed Abbey, and there taking notice as he sat at meat, of their
too prodigal provision, he swore, That if he lived but half a year longer, he
would make one halfpenny Loaf as dear as twelve. To prevent which, a Monk
presented him with an invenomed Cup, tasting first thereof himself, so becoming
the wicked instrument of his own and Sovereigns death, October. 19, 1216. He was
buried at Worcester. His Issue were Henry, Richard, Joan, Eleanor and Isabel.
Base issue, Jeffry Fitz-Roy, Richard, and Jane. He appointed those excellent
forms of Civil government in the Cities and incorporate Towns of England,
endowing them also with their greatest Franchises. He settled the rates and
measures for Wine, Bread, Cloth, and such like necessaries of Commerce. He
planted English Laws and Officers in Ireland. Now lived one Simon Thurvey, who
for his pride in Learning, especially for his blasphemies against Moses and
Christ, became so utterly ignorant, that he could hardly read a Letter in the
Book.

In or the near the year 1176, London Bridge was begun to be built of Stone by
Peter of Cole-Church Priest, and was finished in A. D. 1209.

Mayors in this Kings time, were these following,

In the 10th year, Henry Fitz Alwin was first Mayor. Peter Duke, Thomas Neal,
Sheriffs.


In the 11th year, Idem, Mayor. Peter le Josue, William Blounde, Sheriffs.


In the 12th year, Idem, Mayor. Adam Witley, Stephen le Grass, Sheriffs.


In the 13th year, Idem, Mayor. John Fitz Peter, John Garland, Sheriffs.


In the 14th year, Idem Mayor. Randolph Egland, Constantine Josue, Sheriffs.


In the 15th year, Idem Mayor. Martin Fitz Alice, Peter Bate, Sheriffs.


In the 16th year, Idem Mayor. Solomon Basing, and Hugh Basing, Sheriffs.


In the 17th year, William Hardel Mayot. John Trevers, Andrew Newland, Sheriffs.


HENRY III.
HENRY 3d. at about 10 years of Age was Crowned King, A.D. 1216
the Ninth day after his Father K. John's decease, the Earl of Pembroke being
by common consent of Peers and Prelates constituted Guardian of him during his
Nonage. This Noble Earl set out against Lewis, and at Lincoln utterly
defeated his Army; which discomfiture was called Lewis Fair, from the great
spoil that the Earls Soldiers took from the Lewysians and City of Lincoln.
Here the chiefest of the malignant Barons were taken, with about 400 Knights,
besides Esquires, and of other sorts innumerable. A great number also of such
as escaped out of the Fight, were knocked on the head by the Country people.
Likewise about the same time a fresh supply of men and Money coming from
France, were scattered, sunk and taken by the English Fleet, the English in the
engagement using unslaked Lime, which they threw into the faces of the
Monsieurs, blinding their sight therewith. Then to give no rest to Lewis his
declining fortunes, the Earl of Pembroke clseloy besieged London with Lewis in
it, where he brought the matter to capitulation. The heads whereof were, That
Lewis and the Barons should submit to the judgment of the Church, whose censure
they had long contemned. That Lewis should depart the Land, Richard Magnus,
A.B. Cant.
and never return with design to do harm. That he should endeavor with his
Father, that all such things that belonged to the English Crown might be
restored; and that when Lewis himself should be King, he should peaceably part
with them. That Lewis should immediately render to K. Henry all holds and
places taken in the War; for the performance of all which, Lewis took his Oath.
On the other part, the King, Legate, Wallo and the Earl swore, That the King
should restore to the Barons and others, all their rights and inheritances,
with all their liberties formerly demanded of K. John. That none of the Laity
should suffer damage and reproach, for taking part on either side. That
Prisoners should be released. This done, Wallo absolved Lewis and his
adherents, and Lewis took his leave of England. Yet was not England quiet long,
for William Earl of Aumarl, Foulk de Brent, and Robert de Veipont, with others,
committed diverse furious Riots, the Church and State being grown into such
disorder, that every man dared to attempt in either, what his own audaciousness
should suggest. The Welsh they made some stirs. And one Fitz-Arnulph a Citizen
of London, attempted to set up Lewis again; for the which, himself and two
others were hanged, and many more had their hands or feet cut off. The Barons
they were high, for a confirmation of their Liberties. And Lewis of France,
upon the death of his Father, seized Rochel, and the whole Country of Poictou
(which belonged to the King of England) into his hands, under pretense, that K.
Henry an Homager for Aquitain, was not present at his Coronation, nor yet
excused his absence by Ambassadors. Whereupon Henry summons a Parliament for
Aids to recover his losses, which being granted, he sent over his forces, which
discomfited the French. But the King necessitated for more Moneys for the
carrying on of his design in Gascoign, wrung from the Londoners Five thousand
Marks above their Fifteenths, alleging that they had to his prejudice given
Lewis the like sum. The Clergy also were compelled under pain of Papal censure,
to pay the Fifteenth, not only for their temporal, but also Ecclesiastical
Goods: And by advice of Hubert de Burgo Chief Justice, the King revoked the
Charters of Liberties, which for about two years had been practiced through the
Realm, pretending his Nonage when granted. Which caused in all a great
heart-burning against Hubert. Howbeit, the King was well furnished with money
and men, which he caused to be transported into Britain, and on the same day in
which he set sail from England, himself in person did visit the poor and
feeble, dealing large Alms to them, and not refusing to kiss the sick and
leprous. But before that the King had opportunity to effect any thing in those
parts considerable, the Irish rebelled, constraining him to return, to reduce
then in^o order. Which when he had done, he advanced against the Welsh, whom he
also repressed, though not without considerable loss. About this time Hubert de
Burgo Earl of Kent, was accused by the Bishop of Winchester and others for the
committing of many great crimes, and he doubting that he should not have a fair
Trial, retired himself into Essex, whither he was prosecuted by Armed men, and
in a Chapel at Burntwood was apprehended; out of which the rude Soldiers
hailed him, and sent for a Smith to make Shackles for him; which when the Smith
understood that they were for him, fetching a deep sigh, he said, Do with me
what you please, and God have mercy on my soul; but as sure as the Lord lives,
I will never make Iron-Shackles for him, but will rather dye the worst death
that is. For is not this the most Loyal, and Courageous Hubert, who so often
has preserved England from being destroyed by strangers, and restored England
to England? Let God be judge between him and you, for using him so unjustly and
inhumanely, requiting his most excellent deserts, with the worst recompense
that can be. Notwithstanding all this, Sir Godfrey de Crancomb who commanded
the party, bound the Earl, and conveyed him to the Tower of London, where he
had not long been, ere the Bishop of London procured his liberty, though
shortly after he was again imprisoned. In his place the King elected for his
Councellor and Confident, Peter de Rupibus Bishop of Winchester, who displaced
the English Officers, and in their Rooms placed Poictovins and Britons,
stuffing the Kings Castles with them, intrusting as it were the treasures,
strength and Realm it self in their hands, to the great discontent of the
English Peers. Who now confederated against the strangers, and refused upon the
Kings summons to appear in Parliament; sending this impudent Message to their
Sovereign, That if out of hand he removed not the Bishop of Winchester, and
strangers out of his Court, they all of them, by the common consent of the
Kingdom, would drive him and his wicked Counselors out of it, and would
consult about creating of a new King. Whereupon the King (animated by
Winchester) commanded the Earl-Marshal, with all others whom he suspected, to
appear at Gloucester, where the King was with an Army: Which they refusing to
do, the King burnt their Manors, and gave away their Inheritances to the
Poictovins. The Earl-Marshal he contracts strict amity with Leweylyn Prince of
Wales, and made great spoil on the possessions of the Kings reputed Seducers.
Shrewsbury he sacked and burnt. Gilbert Lord Basset, the Earls great
Confederate, set fire on Alkmundbury, not far from Huntingdon. But the
Earl-Marshal having crossed the seas into Ireland, there to recover his Lands
taken from him by the fraud of the Bishop of Winchester, was there wounded to
death; for whose loss the King, to the wonder of all that saw it, broke forth
into tears, affirming, That he had left no Peer about him in the Kingdom. And
now the Bishop of Winchester, hated of the people, was commanded by the King
not to meddle any farther in State-matters. And against Peter Rivallis Lord
Treasurer, the King was so in raged, that he swear he would pluck out his eyes,
were it not for reverence of holy Orders. And by the workings of the Bishops,
an accord was effected betwixt the King and his Peers, and the Poictovins were
commanded to depart the Realm. Howbeit the Land was not yet eased of its
Oppressors and Oppressions; for the Pope sent over into England three hundred
Romans, requiring to have the first Benefice that should become vacant, to be
bestowed on them; requiring also great sums of money of the Clergy for
maintenance of the Pope's Wars against the Emperor: Which though the Clergy at
first opposed, yet were forced to yield unto it at the last. The Pope himself
had a mind to have come hither in his own person, but the King's Council liked
not thereof; alleging, that the Romans Rapines and Simonies had enough stained
England's purity, though the Pope himself came not personally to spoil and prey
upon the Wealth of the Church.

About the year 1240, Richard Earl of Cornwall, the King's Brother, with the
Earls of Pembroke, Chester, Lincoln, Salisbury, and many other honorable
persons, departed for the Holy Land; and in A. D. 1242, the King passed the
Seas to recover Poictou, but effected not any thing remarkable, though he
expended great store of Treasure. Upon his return into England he was therefore
compelled to be burdensome to his subjects for recruiting of his exhausted
Treasure, as well by the levy of Escuage, as of Loan and otherwise. The Jews in
especial manner were made sensible of his wants. Too much of their money, thus
raised, it is said he expended in Entertainments and Shows; though afterward the
King reflecting on his former profuseness in gifts and entertainments, he
shortened the allowances of his household and entertainments, without any regard
to Majesty. And to spare his own charge the more, he invited himself now to
this man's house, now to that; but nowhere contenting himself with his welcome,
unless himself and his Queen, Son Edward, yea, and chief Favorites, were
presented with costly Gifts. It Is said that he was sometime reduced to that
penury, that he was forced to live upon the Alms of the Church. This King
designed, at least pretended, to go for the Holy Land; when the Parliament
granted him large Aids upon this condition, That at this time once for all, he
should submit himself to govern by Law, to confirm the Charters of Liberties,
or Magna Charta: Against the breakers whereof, a most solemn curse was
pronounced. The King swearing to keep all Liberties, upon pain of that
execratory sentence, As he was a man, a Christian, a Knight, and a King
anointed and crowned. Yet, notwithstanding the Oath and the Curse, the King two
or three years after caused the Tenth of all England and Ireland to be
collected for his own use and the Popes, the Pope having given the Kingdom of
Sicily to his Son Edmond; but the English subjects were first to win it for
him. Which the Nobles peremptorily denied the attempting, there being occasion
enough for money and men at home, the Welsh having risen in rebellion. Against
whom Prince Edward was sent; who, though he wanted not for Courage, St. Edmund
of Abing^^n, A. B. Ca^t.
yet in one field lost 2000 English men, and was beaten out of the field.

In A.D. 1257, was Richard Earl of Cornwall, the King's Brother, elected King
of Romans, and was crowned at Aquisgrane, having paid a large sum of money for
the honor. At this time the Earl was reputed to possess so much ready Coin, as
would every day for ten years afford him an hundred Marks upon the main stock,
besides his Rents and Revenues in Germany, and the English Dominions.

And now the King relapsed into his profuseness, and favoring of the
Poictovins, and other foreigners: The Nobles hereupon came exquisitely armed
to the Parliament holden at Oxford, with a resolution to enforce the King and
his Aliens to their proposals; Which were, That the King should unfeignedly
keep the Charter of Liberties: That such an one should be in place of
Justitiar, who would judge all impartially. That the Foreigners should be
expelled the Realm: And that twenty-four persons should there be chosen to have
the sole administration of King and State; and yearly appointing of all great
Officers. Reserving to the King the Ceremonies of Honor. Binding themselves by
Oath to see these things performed; and the King and Prince swearing to observe
the ordination of these disloyal Barons, who had by an Edict given out high
menacings against all that should resist. The Poictovins were so terrified by
these violent proceedings, that they fled into France. The giddy people they
joined with the Barons as the Assertors of their Liberties: Boniface, A. B. Cant
the Londoners bound themselves under their public Seal to assist them in the
common Cause: Richard King of Romans the Barons would not suffer to come into
England, but in a private manner, with a very small train; and being landed,
they exacted an Oath of him; and upon pain of forfeiting all his Lands in
England, bound him to join with them in reforming the State, which they
factiously had assumed to do, having appointed Four Knights Commissioners in
every shire, to enquire of all Oppressions, and to certify the same to them.
And the better to strengthen their Cause, Simon Montford Earl of Leicester,
Head of the Factionists, with others, passed into France, there to transact
with the King thereof, as to an indissoluble League. About which time King
Henry, for want of Money, or good Counsel, or both, was induced upon no very
good terms, for ever to renounce to the King of France all his right to
Normandy, Anjou, Tourain, Main, and Poictou. But the fire which had been long
in blowing, did now break out into a flame; the King and his Barons taking arms
against each other. Simon de Montford executes his greatest revenge on the
Queens friends, who were aliens; not sparing the King's, who were freeborn
Englishmen: Yet at length mutual weariness inclines Henry and his Barons to a
peace; and the King is willing that the Statutes of Oxford should be in force;
but the Queen was unwilling: Which being known to the Londoners, it put the
baser sort into so lewd a rage, that she being to shoot the Bridge from the
Tower toward Windsor, where Prince Edward was ingarison'd, they with dirt and
stones, and villainous words, forced her back to the Tower. Howbeit at London in
a Parliament there held, matters were pieced up, though shortly after all was
rent again, both sides making fresh preparations for War. King Henry drew
toward Oxford, where the rendezvous of his friends and forces was appointed;
from which University he dismissed all the Students, being above fifteen
thousand, of those only whose names were entered into the Matriculation-book.
Whereupon many of them went to the Barons to Northamptor, whither Henry came,
and breaking in at the Town-Walls, encountered his Enemies, amongst whom these
Students of Oxford had a Banner by themselves, advanced right against the King,
and did more annoy him in the fight, than the rest of the Barons Forces: Which
the King (who at length prevailed) vowed sharply to revenge; but was dissuaded
by his Counselors, who told him that those Students were the sons and kindred
of the great men of the Land, whom if he punished, even the Nobles that now
stood for him, would take arms against him.

The King, encouraged by this success, advances his Royal Standard toward
Nottingham, burning and wasting the Barons Lands wheresoever he came. The
Barons they sent Letters to him, protesting their loyal observance to his
person, but all hostility to their enemies who were about him. Rob. Kilwarby. A
B. Cant,
To which the King returned them a full defiance, as to Traitors, professing
that he took the wrong of his friends as his own, and their enemies as his. At
length the two Armies met, and engaged in fight, wherein Prince Edward bravely
behaved himself, putting the Londoners to flight, pursuing them for four miles;
but in the mean while, his Father having his horse slain under him, yielded
himself prisoner: the King of Romans, and other great Peers were taken, and the
whole hope of the day lost on the Kings side. On the next day peace was
concluded for the present on condition, That Prince Edward and Henry the King
of Romans Son, should also render themselves into the Barons hands. And now by
this advantage the factious Lords, gained all the chief Castles of the Kingdom
into their power, Montford carrying his Sovereign as his prisoner about the
Country (yet with all outward respect and honor) the rather to procure a more
quiet surrender of Garrisons. So fortunate may Treason and Rebellion for a time
be, though in the end it commonly speeds as it deserves. To tame these Rebels
the Pope sends his Cardinal Legate to Excommunicate them, but they trusting to
the temporal sword, made light of the spiritual. Howbeit, to the Kings great
advantage there happened so irreconcilable a difference betwixt the two great
Earls of Leicester, and Gloucester, that the latter forsook the Barons cause,
and joined himself with Roger de Mortimer, and his associates, to whom not long
after Earl Warren, and William de Valence Earl of Pembroke, with other Peers
united themselves, and Prince Edward escaping came in safety to them; the
Counties of Hereford, Worcester, Salop and Chester coming in to their
assistance. When the Prince having a considerable strength marched against
Montford, who hearing of the Princes advance, encamped at Evesham, where Prince
Edward enclosed him, compelling him either to fight or yield. The first of
which he elected, both Armies joining battle before the Town of Evesham, where
the Earls host was with much slaughter, especially of the Welsh, utterly in the
end distressed and discomfited. Simon de Montford being slain in fight, had his
head, hands and feet chopped off. The King who had been brought a prisoner into
the field, by his friends valor and good hap, was restored to his Liberty. And
he presently after this cruel battle called a Parliament at Winchester, by
whose approbation he seized into his hands the Charters of London, and other
disloyal Towns, disinherited such as were on the Earls side, distributing their
estates amongst his well-deserving Subjects. The Legate Cardinal Ottabon
excommunicated the Bishops of London, Winchester, Worcester, and Chichester,
for their adhering unto the Earl. And now all things being calm in England,
Prince Edward, with many of the Nobles, took the Cross upon them for the
Holy Land. And the King to secure the Nations peace, held a Parliament at
Marleborough, where the statutes of Marleborough were enacted. But King Henry
having been at Norwich, to punish the Citizens outrage in burning the Priory
Church, he, in his return, fell grievously sick at the Abbey of St. Edmond in
Suffolk, and there died, in A. D. 1272. Whose issue was Edward, Edmond Surnamed
Crouchback, Richard, John, William, Henry, Margaret, Beatrice and Katherine.
This King laid the first stone, of the new work of the Abby-Church at
Westminster. He founded the house of Converts, where such as forsook the Jewish
Religion had provisions for maintenance. He also erected and endowed a famous
Hospital at Oxford, both for the entertainment of Foreigners and Pilgrims, and
for relief of such as were diseased. He was so disposed to performing acts of
charity, made Leoline Prince of Wales (Montfords confederate) when he was
threatened hardly if he would not live at peace, to answer thus, I more fear the
Alms deeds of the King, than all the men of war which he has and his Clergy to
boot. King Henry, because Thomas de la Linde killed a white Heart in Blackmore
Forest which he much fancied, set a perpetual fine upon the land, which at this
day is called White-H^^^-Silver.

In the 17. year of his reign four mock Suns were seen from morning till
evening, after which followed so great a Dearth, that people were forced to eat
horseflesh, and barks of Trees, and in London twenty thousand were famished.
A, D. 1241. Certain Jews of Norwich were hanged for circumcising a Christian
Child, and their house called the Thor was destroyed* A Scholar of Oxford who
attempted to kill the King in his chamber at Woodstock, was pulled in pieces by
wild Horses. Now arose in England a most monstrous impostor, who pretended
himself to be Christ, procuring himself to be wounded in the hands, feet, and
side, thinking thereby the more easily to delude the people; his punishment was
immuring between two walls, together with an old hag, pretending her self to be
the Virgin Mary, there to pine to death.

In this Kings reign flourished in England, the Irrefragable Doctor Alexander
de Hales, who was Schoolmaster to the Angelic Dr. Thomas Aquinas. Now also
lived Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln called Romanorum Malleus, who writ
boldly against the Pope, reproving his arrogant (to call them no worse)
practices.

At Sorbiodunum, or Salisbury, Richard Poor then Bishop of Sarum, built that
stately Church, which has in it as many windows as are days in the year, as
many marble-pillars as hours, as many doors as months.

Magna Charta containing the Sum of all the written Laws of England, was
ordained in the ninth year of Henry the third.

The Mayors and Sheriffs of London in this Kings Reign.
In his first Year, William Hardel was Mayor. John Travers, Andrew Newland,
Sheriffs.


In his second Year, Robert Serl was Mayor. Thomas Bokerell, Ralph Holyland,
Sheriffs.


In his third Year, Robert Serl continued Mayor. Benet Senturer, William
Blundivers, Sheriffs.


In his fourth Year, Robert Serl continued Mayor. John Wail, or Veil, Josue le
Spicer, Sheriffs.


In his fifth Year, Robert Serl continued Mayor. Richard Wimbledon, John Wail
or Veil, Sheriffs.


In his sixth Year, Robert Serl continued Mayor. Richard Renger, John Veil,
Sheriffs.


In his seventh Year, Robert Serl continued Mayor. Richard Joyner, Thomas
Lambert, Sheriffs.


In his eight Year, Richard Renger was Mayor. William Joyner, Thomas Lambert,
Sheriffs.


In his ninth Year, Richard Renger continued Mayor. John Trevers, Andrew
Bokerill, Sheriffs.


In his Tenth Year, Richard Renger continued Mayor. John Trevers, Andrew
Bokerill, Sheriffs.


In his Eleventh Year, Richard Renger continued Mayor. Roger Duke, Martin
Fitz-Williams, Sheriffs.


In his Twelfth Year, Roger Duke was Mayor. Stephen Bokerell, Henry Cocham,
Sheriffs.


In his Thirteenth year, Roger Duke continued Mayor. Stephen Bokerell, Henry
Cocham, Sheriffs.


In his Fourteenth Year, Roger Duke continued Mayor. William Winchester, Robert
Fitz-John, Sheriffs.


In his Fifteenth Year, Roger Duke continued Mayor. Richard Walter, John de
Woborn, Sheriffs.


In his Sixteenth Year, Andrew Bokerel was Mayor. Michael of St. Helen, Walter
de Enfield, Sheriffs.


In his Seventeenth Year, Andrew Bokerel continued Mayor. Henry de Edmonton,
Gerard Bat, Sheriffs.


In his Eighteenth Year, Andrew Bokerel continued Mayor. Simon Fitz-Mary, Roger
Blunt, Sheriffs.


In his Ninteenth Year, Andrew Bokerel continued Mayor. Ralph Ashwy, John
Norman, Sheriffs.


In his Twentieth Year, Andrew Bokerel continued Mayor. Gerard Bat, Richard or
Robert Hardel, Sheriffs.


In his Twenty first Year, Andrew Bokerel continued Mayor. Henry Cobham, Jordan
Coventry, Sheriffs.


In his Twenty second Year, Andrew Bokerel continued Mayor. John Tolason,
Gervais the Cordwainer, Sheriffs.


In his Twenty third Year, Richard Renger was Mayor. John Codras, John
Whilhall, Sheriffs.


In his Twenty fourth Year, William Joyner was Mayor. Raymond Bongy, Ralph
Ashwy, Sheriffs.


In his Twenty fifth Year, Gerard Bat was Mayor. John Gisors, Michael Tony,
Sheriffs.


In his Twenty sixth Year, Reymond Bongy was Mayor. Thomas Duresm, John Voyl,
Sheriffs.


In his Twenty seventh Year, Reymond Bongy continued Mayor. John Fitz-John,
Ralph Ashwy, Sheriffs.


In his Twenty eighth Year, Ralph Ashwy was Mayor. Hugh Blunt, Adam Basing,
Sheriffs.


In his Twenty ninth Year, Michael Tony was Mayor. Ralph Foster, Nicholas Bat,
Sheriffs.


In his Thirtieth Year, John Gisors was Mayor. Robert Cornhill, Adam of Bewley,
Sheriffs.


In his Thirty first Year, John Gisors continued Mayor. Simon Fitz-Mary,
Lawrence Frowick, Sheriffs.


In his thirty second Year, Peter Fitz-Alwin was Mayor. John Voil, Nicholas
Bat, Sheriffs.


In his thirty third Year, Michael Tony was Mayor. Nicholas Fitz-Josue, Geoffry
Winchester, Sheriffs.


In his thirty fourth Year, Roger Fitz-Roger was Mayor. Richard Hardel, John
Tolason, Sheriffs.


In his thirty fifth Year, John Gisors was Mayor. Humfrey Bat, William
Fitz-Richard, Sheriffs.


In his thirty sixth Year, Adam Basing was Mayor. Lawrence Frowick, Nicholas
Bat, Sheriffs,


In his thirty seventh Year, John Tolason was Mayor. William Durham, Thomas
VVimbourn, Sheriffs.


In his thirty eighth Year, Richard Hardel was Mayor. John Northampton, Richard
Pichard, Sheriffs,


In his thirty ninth Year, Richard Hardel continued Mayor. Ralph Ashwy, Robert
of Limon, Sheriffs.


In his fortieth Year, Richard Hardel continued Mayor. Stephen Do, Henry
VValmond, Sheriffs.


In his forty first Year, Richard Hardel continued Mayor. Michael Bokerel, John
the Minor, Sheriffs.


In his forty second Year, Richard Hardel continued Mayor. Richard Otwel,
William Ashwy, Sheriffs.


In his forty third Year, Richard Hardel continued Mayor. Robert Cornhil, John
Adrian, Sheriffs.


In his forty fourth Year, John Gisors was Mayor* John Adrian, Robert Cornhil,
Sheriffs.


In his forty fifth Year, William Fitz-Richard was Mayor. Adam Browning, Henry
Coventry, Sheriffs.


In his forty sixth Year, William Fitz-Richard continued Mayor. John
Northampton, Richard Pichard, Sheriffs.


In his forty seventh Year, Thomas Fitz-Richard was Mayor. John Tailor, Richard
VValbroke, Sheriffs.


In his forty eighth Year.

Thomas Fitz-Richard continued Mayor. Robert de Mountpeter, Osbert de Suffolk,
Sheriffs.
Yet Fabian says, that from this 48. Year to the end of his Reign, there were
no Mayors of London, but only Guardians of the City.

In his forty ninth Year, Thomas Fitz-Thomas Fitz-Richard was Mayor. George
Rokesley, Thomas de Detford, Sheriffs.


In his fiftieth Year, Thomas Fitz-Thomas Fitz-Richard, continued Mayor. Edward
Blunt, Peter Anger, Sheriffs.


In his fifty first Year, William Richards was Mayor. John Hind, John
VValraven, Sheriffs.


In his fifty second Year, Alen de la Souch was Mayor. John Adrian, Lucas de
Batencourt, Sheriffs.


In his fifty third Year, T, VVimbourn, Custos, Sir Stephen Edward. Walter
Harvey, William Duresme, Sheriffs.


In his fifty fourth Year, Hugh Fitz-Ottonis, Custos of London, and Constable
of the Tower. Thomas Basing, Robert Cornhil, Sheriffs.


To this time the Mayor and Sheriffs had been chosen, but now the King grants
the choice of them to the City it self.

In the fifty fifth Year.

John Adrian was Mayor. Walter Potter, Philip Tailor, Sheriffs.
In his fifty sixth Year, John Adrian continued Mayor. Gregory Rochesly, Henry
VValleis, Sheriffs.


In his fifty seventh Year, Sir Walter Harvey was Mayor. Richard Harris, John
de VVodeley, Sheriffs.


EDWARD I.
EDWARD surnamed Long-shanks at his Father Henrys death, A.D. 1272
was employed in the holy Wars, wherein he so excellently behaved himself, that
he gained the repute of a most valiant Soldier. At Acon an assasinate wounded
him with a poisoned knife, which wounds his Queen Eleanor daily licked with her
Tongue, till therewith the poison was extracted and the wounds healed; her self
receiving no harm thereby. When the news of his Fathers death came to his ears,
he grieved much more, than for the death of his Son, who died a little before,
saying to the King of Sicily who wondered thereat, that the loss of Sons is but
light, because they are multiplied every day, but the death of Parents is
irremediable, because they can never be had again. At his arrival in England he
was most joyfully welcomed, and with his dearest Eleanor was Crowned at
Westminster, by Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury. When for the more
royal celebration of the Coronation-feast of so Martial a Prince, there were
five hundred great horses let loose, every one to take them for his own, who
could. The first matter of remark done by King Edward, after his Coronation,
was the subduing of Wales, whose Prince Lewelin, the last Prince of Britains
blood, had refused to do him homage; but being slain his head crowned with
Ivy, was set upon the Tower of London. In his stead the King created his own
son Edward, born at Caernarvon, Prince of Wales. And now Wales being settled in
quiet, the King repaired into France, where he sat in person with the French
King in his Parliament at Paris, as a Peer of that Realm, in respect of such
lands as he held in those parts, and being returned into England he addressed
himself to purge his state from the Oppressions under which it groaned. Fifteen
thousand of the extorting Jews he banished out of the Land, confiscating their
goods. His corrupt Justiciars he displaced and fined, and constrained all his
Justices to swear that from that time, they would take no Fee, Pension, or
Gift, of any man, except only a breakfast or like present. He also appointed
that Justices, Itinerants, should go their several circuits at such certain
times of the year. And now the Crown of Scotland by the death of Alexander the
third, being destitute of any apparent Heir, by the umpirage of King Edward it
was settled on the head of John Baliol, who did homage to Edward (against the
minds of the Scots) for the whole Kingdom of Scotland. But shortly after Baliol
to regain the affections of his people, combined with the French against the
English, wherefore the King advanced against the Scots with a puissant Army,
drove the Scots out of the North-parts of England, where they had done much
mischief, took Berwick Town and Castle, had Dunbar yielded to him, and after a
cruel fight, obtained a victory of great importance, took the Castle of
Roxbrow, John Peckham. A.B. Cant.
had Edenbrough rendered to him, so brought Baliol to sue for mercy, which was
granted on condition, that the Scots should submit to him as their Sovereign.
And accordingly the Nobles of Scotland, at a Parliament holden at Berwick, did
swear to be true Subjects to Edward for ever after, and hereof a solemn
Instrument was there sealed by them. John the late King was sent to the Tower
of London, and the custody of Scotland was committed to John de Warren Earl of
Surrey and Sussex. Out of Edenbrough Edward took the Crown, Scepter and Cloth
of State. Burnt their Records, abrogated their Laws, altered the forms of their
Divine service, transplanted their learned men unto Oxford. The Marble-chair
in the Abbey of Schone, wherein the Kings of Scotland were wont to be Crowned,
he sent unto Westminster. This is the Chair upon which was engraven the Famous
prophetical Distich.

Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Invenient lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
That the Scots should reign, wheresoever that chair should be, verified in
King James. But King Edward drawn beyond the Seas, by occasion of wars in
Gascoign, and for aid of friends in Flanders, one William Walleys Captain of
the discontented Scots, put Earl Warren to flight in Scotland, and all the
English forces that were with him, taking them at an advantage as they were
passing over a narrow-bridge near Striveling, where the slaughter of the
English was not small. Hugh de Cressingham Treasurer of Scotland, for King
Edward was there slain, whose dead body the Scots did fley, dividing his skin
amongst them. But King Edward being returned into England, he summoned a
Parliament to York, giving the Scots a day to appear at it, which they not
doing, nor acknowledging that they ought so to do, he entered Scotland with a
mighty Army, where when he was near the enemy, as he was putting his foot into
the stirrup, his horse being affrighted with the sudden shout of the Scotch
Army, threw him down, and striking with his heels broke two of the Kings ribs,
who nevertheless proceeded to battle. Captain Wallis encouraged his men with
this short speech, I have brought you to the King, hop gif ye kun. In this
battle, fought at a place called Fawkirk, and English slew of the Scots 70.
thousand. After which victory King Edward took sundry places in Scotland, then
returned into England, where in Parliament holden at London, and Stamford, he
confirmed Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, and yielded that there should be
no Subsidy, or Taxation levied upon the people; without consent of the
Prelates, Peers and people. And for the more ample satisfaction of some then
discontented, he left out this Clause in the end of his Grants, Salvo jure
Coronae nostrae, Saving the right of our Crown; upon the Popes request he set
John late King of Scotland at liberty, who departed into France. And then the
King made it his whole affair to finish the annexation of Scotland to the Crown
of England, to which end, Rob. Winchelsey. A. B. Cant.
he passed with a dreadful Army into Scotland, where the Scots not being able
to withstand him by force of Arms, they procured inhibitory Letters from the
Pope; but these the King set light by, swearing per sanguinem Dei, that he
would not desist. And when the Scots threatened that if he would not desist his
hostility, the Pope would take the matter upon him, the King with a disdainful
smile answered; Have ye done homage to me as to the chief Lord of the Kingdom
of Scotland, and do ye now suppose that I can be terrified with threatening
lies, as if (like one that had no power to compel) I would let the right which
I have to go out of my hand? Let me hear no more of this, for if I do, I swear
by the Lord, I will consume all Scotland from Sea to Sea. To which the Scots
replied, that in defense of Justice, and their Countries rights, they would shed
their blood. Howbeit that the King might not seem altogether to neglect the
Court of Rome, he sent the Earl of Lincoln thither in justification of his
proceedings, and at the instance of the Pope, he granted Truce to the Scots
from All Saints to Whitsuntide. But the Pope not long satisfied with this,
directly opposed the King in his martial proceeds against that Nation,
wherefore the King in a Parliament holden at Lincoln, by the consent of the
whole Representative body of the Realm, returned a copious defense of his whole
proceedings, with protestations first, That he did not exhibit any thing as in
form of judgment or trial of his Cause, Gualter Renold. A. B. Cant.
but for satisfaction of his holy Fatherhoods conscience, and not otherwise.
And because the Pope required that the King should stand to his decision for
matter of Claim, the Earls and Peers (to whom the King wholly referred it) with
one mind directly signified, That their King was not to answer in judgment for
any rights of the Crown of England, before any Tribunal under Heaven, and that
(by sending Deputies, and Atturneys, to such an end) he should not make the
said truth doubtful, because it manifestly tended to the disinherison of the
said Crown, which with the help of God, they would resolutely and with all
their power maintain against all men. To the which they all (being an 100.
Peers) subscribed their Names, Dated at Lincoln, 1301.

The Names of those Worthy Patriots, who withstood Papal Usurpation.
JOhn Earl Warren, Thomas Earl of Lancaster, Ralph de Monthermer Earl of
Gloucester and Hereford, Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hartford and Essex, Roger
Bigod Earl of Norfolk, Guy Earl of Warwick, Richard Earl of Arundel, Adomer de
Valence Lord of Monterney, Henry de Lancaster Lord of Monmouth, John de
Hastings Lord of Bergevenny, Henry de Percy Lord of Topclife, Edmond de
Mortymer Lord of Wigmore, Robert Fitz-Walter Lord of Wodham, John de St. John
Lord of Hannake, Hugh de Vere Lord of Swanestampe, William de Breuse Lord of
Gower, Robert de Monthault Lord of Hawarden, Robert de Tateshall Lord of
Wokeham, Reinold de Gray Lord of Ruthin, Henry de Gray Lord of Codnore, Hugh
Bardolph Lord of Wormgay, Robert de Clifford Chatellaine of Appleby, Peter de
Malowe Lord of Mulgreen, Philip Lord of Kime, Robert Fitz-Roger Lord of
Claverings, John de Moham Lord of Dunestar, Almerick de St. Amound Lord of
Widehay, William de Ferrers Lord of Groby, Alane de Zouch Lord of Ashby,
Theobald de Verdon Lord of Webberley, Thomas de Furnivall Lord of Schefield,
Thomas de Multon Lord of Egremont, William Latimer Lord of Torby, Thomas Lord
Berkly, Fowlk Fitz-Warren Lord of Mitingham, John Lord Segrave, Edmund de
Eincourt Lord of Thurgerton, Peter Corbet Lord Cause, William de Cantelow Lord
of Ravensthorpe, John de Beauchamp Lord of Hacke, Roger de Mortimer Lord of
Pentethlin, John Fitz-Reinold Lord of Blenleveny, Ralph de Nevil Lord of Raby,
Brian Fitz-Allane Lord of Bedale, William Marshal Lord of Hengham, Walter Lord
Huntercombe, William Martin Lord of Cameis, Henry de Thies Lord of Chilton,
Roger le Ware Lord of Isefield, John de Rivers Lord of Anger, John de Lancaster
Lord of Grisedale, Robert Fitz-Pain Lord of Lainnier, Henry Tregoze Lord of
Garinges, Robert Hipard Lord of Lumford, Walter Lord Faucombridge, John Strange
Lord of Cnokin, Robert Strange Lord of Ellesmere, Thomas de Chances Lord of
Norton, Walter de Beauchamp Lord of Alecester, Richard Talbot Lord of
Eccleswell, John Butetourt Lord of Mendesham, John Engain Lord of Colum, Hugh
de Poinz Lord of Comualet, Adam Lord of Wells, Simon Lord Montacute, John Lord
Sulle, John de Melles Lord of Candebury, Edmund Baron Stafford, John Lovell
Lord of Hackings, Edmond de Hastings Lord of Elchunhonokes, Ralph Fitz-William
Lord of Grinthorpe, Robert de Scales Lord of Neusells, William Tuchet Lord of
Lewenhales, John Abadan Lord of Deverstone, John de Haverings Lord of Grafton,
Robert la Ward Lord of White Hall, Nicholas de Segrave Lord of Stowe, Walter de
Tey Lord of Stonegrave, John de Lisle Lord of Wodton, Eustace Lord Hacche,
Gilbert Peche Lord of Corby, William Painell Lord of Trachington, Roger de Albo
Monasberio, Foulk le Strange Lord of Corsham, Henry de Pinkeny Lord of Wedon,
John de Hodeleston Lord of Aners, John de Huntingfield Lord of Bradenham, Hugh
Fitz-Henry Lord of Ravenswath, John Daleton Lord of Sporle, Nicholas de Carr.
Lord of Mulesford, Thomas Lord de la Roche, Walter de Muncie Lord of Thornton,
John Lord of Kingstone, Robert Hasting the Father Lord of Chelessey, Ralph Lord
Grendon, William Lord Leibourne, John de Greystock Lord of Morpath, Matthew
Fitz-John Lord of Stockenham, Nicholas de Nevill Lord of Wherlton, and John de
Painell Lord of Ateli.
POPE Boniface the eighth, perceiving these high resolutions, and having enough
to do with the King of France, left the Scots to look to themselves as well as
they could. Over whom King Edward had appointed the valiant Lord Segrave
Custos; but notwithstanding his valor the Scots discomfited him, and took him
Prisoner, whom Sr. Robert de Neville rescued, as also the rest of the prisoners
without the loss of one man of his own. When the report of this success of the
Scots came to Edwards ears, he went in person with a great Army, piercing
therewith through all Scotland from Roxbrough to Cathness, being about three
hundred miles, not an enemy appearing with power to obstruct him, but all
either submitting to him, or betaking themselves with their Captain Walleys to
the Woods and Mountains. King Edward after he had settled affairs in that
Nation to his best convenience, returned to London, whither not long after,
Captain Walleyes a Knights son having been betrayed, was brought prisoner, and
at Westminster for Treason, and other crimes, was tried, found guilty and
adjudged to death, which sentence was executed on him, and his quarters set up
in diverse parts of Scotland. After this man's death generous Bruce (who attained
the Crown of Scotland) headed his Countrymen the Scots, but was put to flight
by Aymery de Valence, and forced into the utmost Isles of Scotland, where for a
while he lived in great distress, till seeing his time he appeared again in an
hostile manner in Scotland, John Stratford. A.B. Cant.
doing many things above the opinion of his means. This induced martial King
Edward to advance toward Scotland, but in his march he fell sick at Carlisle,
where (amongst other things given in charge) he commanded his son Edward, that
he should be industrious in carrying on his design against the Scots, and that
he should carry his skeleton along with him through the Scottish Nation: For,
said the King, whilst thou have my bones with thee, none shall be able to
overcome thee. He likewise commanded the Prince on pain of his Curse, not
without common consent, to repeal Pierce Gaveston, who for abusing the Princes
tender years with wicked vanities, by common decree was banished. He charged
the Prince too, That he should send his heart into the Holy Land, accompanied
with an 140. Knights, and their retinues, for whose support he had provided
thirty two thousand pounds of Silver. Lastly He charged him, That upon pain of
eternal damnation the said moneys should not be expended upon any other uses.
This Heroic King dyed of a Dysentery at Burgh upon Sands, A. D. 1307. and was
buried at Westminster. His Issue were John, Henry, Alphonse, (who dyed before
him) Edward, Thomas, Edmond, and ten Daughters. In remembrance of his first
wife Queen Eleanor, who dyed at Herdeby in Lincolnshire, he erected Crosses
between that and Westminster, in all places where her Hearse rested. It Is said,
that he built Hull in Yorkshire, which was afterward beautified with fair
buildings by Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk. In the eighth year of his
Reign, he sent out his Writ Quo Warranto, to examine by what Title men held
their Lands, which brought him in much money; till John Earl Warren being
called to show his Title, drew out an old rustie Sword, and said, he held his
land by that, and by that would hold it till his death. In a Synod holden at
Reading, it was Ordained, That no Ecclesiastical person should have more than
one Benefice, to which belonged the Cure of Souls. There was executed at London
297 Jews at one time, for defacing the Kings Coin.

Now flourished Roger Bacon a Franciscan Friar, an excellent Philosopher and
Mathematician.

Mayors and Sheriffs of London in this Kings Reign.
In his first Year, Sir Walter Harvey was Mayor. John Horn, Walter Potter,
Sheriffs.


In his second Year, Henry VValleys was Mayor. Nicholas Winchester, Henry
Coventry, Sheriffs.


In his third Year, Gregory Rokesley was Mayor. Lucus Battencourt, Henry
Frowicke, Sheriffs.


In his fourth Year, Gregory Rokesley continued Mayor. John Horn, Ralph Blunt,
Sheriffs.


In his fifth Year, Gregory Rokesley continued Mayor. Robert de Arar, Ralph L.
Fewre, Sheriffs.


In his sixth Year, Gregory Rokesley continued Mayor. John Adrian, Walter
Langley, Sheriffs.


In his seventh Year, Gregory Rokesley continued Mayor. Robert Basing, William
le Meyre, Sheriffs.


In his eighth Year, Gregory Rokesley continued Mayor. Thomas Box, Ralph Moore,
Sheriffs.


In his ninth Year, Gregory Rokesley continued Mayor. William Farendon,
Nicholas Winchester, Sheriffs.


In his tenth Year, Henry VValeys was Mayor. William le Meyre, Richard
Chigwel, Sheriffs.


In his eleventh Year, Henry VValeys continued Mayor. Ralph Blunt, Hawkin
Betuel, Sheriffs.


In his Twelfth Year, Henry VValleys continued Mayor. Jordan Goodcheap, Martin
Box, Sheriffs.


In his thirteenth Year, Gregory Rokesley was Mayor. Stephen Cornehil, Robert
Rokesley, Sheriffs.


In his fourteenth Year.

Ralph Sandwich was Mayor. Walter Blunt, John VVade, Sheriffs.
In his fifteenth Year, Ralph Sandwich continued Mayor. Thomas Cross, Walter
Hawteyne, Sheriffs.


In his sixteenth Year, Ralph Sandwich continued Mayor. William Hereford,
Thomas Stanes, Sheriffs.


In his seventeenth Year, Ralph Sandwich continued Mayor. William Betaine, John
of Canterbury, Sheriffs.


In his eighteenth Year, Ralph Sandwich continued Mayor. Fulk of St. Edmund,
Solomon Langford, Sheriffs.


In his nineteenth Year, Ralph Sandwich continued Mayor. Thomas Romain,
William de Lyre, Sheriffs.


In his twentieth Year, Ralph Sandwich continued Mayor. Ralph Blunt, Hamond
Box, Sheriffs.


In his twenty first Year, Ralph Sandwich continued Mayor. Elias Russel, Henry
Bole, Sheriffs.


In his twenty second Year, Ralph Sandwich continued Mayor. Robert Rokesley,
Martin Awbery, Sheriffs.


In his twenty third Year, Sir Ralph Sandwich continued Mayor. Henry Box,
Richard Gloucester, Sheriffs.


In his twenty fourth Year, Sir John Briton was Mayor, John Dunstable, Adam de
Halingbery, Sheriffs.


In his twenty fifth Year, Sir John Briton continued Mayor. Thomas of Suffolk,
Adam of Fulham, Sheriffs.


In his twenty sixth Year, Henry Walleys was Mayor. Richard Refham, Thomas
Sely, Sheriffs.


In his twenty seventh Year, Elias Russel was Mayor. John Armentor, Henry
Fingene, Sheriffs.


In his twenty eight Year, Elias Russel continued Mayor. Lucas de Havering,
Richard Champnes, Sheriffs.


In his twenty ninth Year, Sir John Blunt was Mayor. Robert Collor, Peter de
Besenho, Sheriffs.


In his thirtieth Year, Sir John Blunt continued Mayor. Hugh Pourte, Simon
Paris, Sheriffs.


In his thirty first Year, Sir John Blunt continued Mayor. William Combmartin,
John de Burford, Sheriffs.


In his thirty second Year, Sir John Blunt continued Mayor. Roger Paris, John
de Lincoln, Sheriffs.


In the thirty third Year, Sir John Blunt continued Mayor. William Cawson,
Reginald Thunderley, Sheriffs.


In his thirty fourth Year, Sir John Blunt, continued Mayor. Geoffry at the
Conduit, Simon Billet, Sheriffs.


EDWARD II.
A.D. 1807.
EDWARD called Caernarvon after that he had provided for the affairs of
Scotland, and had homage done him by many of the Scottish Lords at Dumfres, he
next took (unjust) revenge on Walter Langton Bishop of Chester by Imprisoning
him, and seizing all his temporal goods and credits; because that in his Father
K. Edward's lifetime, the Bishop had gravely reproved him for his
misdemeanors, and had complained on Pierce Gavestone, whereon ensued young
Edward's Imprisonment, and Gaveston's banishment. Then he sailed into France,
where at Bolein, with wonderful magnificence he was married to young Isabel
Daughter of Philip the Fair, and at his return for England, brought back with
him his beloved Minion Pierce Gaveston, who was a Gentleman stranger brought up
with him* Which Gaveston the King suffered now to Lord it over the chief
Nobles, to fill the Court with Buffoons and Parasites, and the like pernicious
instruments, to wast the wealth of the Kingdom in revellings and riotous
courses, to transport riches into foreign parts, bestowing upon him his own
Jewels, and Ancestors treasures, and even the Crown it self of his victorious
Father. Not sticking to profess, That if it lay in his power, he should succeed
him in the Kingdom, being wholly ruled by him. Therefore to repress Gaveston's
exorbitances, the Lords in Parliament procured, (though with no good will of
the Kings) that Gaveston Earl of Cornwall should be perpetually banished, they
gratifying the King with a subsidy of the 20th part of the Subjects goods.
Howbeit shortly after, the King contrary to his Oath made unto the Parliament,
called Earl Gaveston home out the Ireland, himself meeting him at Flint-Castle,
and then bestowing on him to Wife Joan of Acres Countess of Gloucester,
resolving for this lewd man's sake, to put Crown, Life and all in hazard. And
now the insolent Earl strives to outgo himself in his former courses, consuming
the Kings treasures and means, so that there was not sufficient left for the
necessities of the Court; and drawing the King into such debaucheries, that the
Queen conceived her self injured thereby, as well as the Nobles. Whereupon
Gaveston is a third time forced out of the Realm, into which he again returned
the following Christmas, when the King welcomed him as an Angel from Heaven,
and forthwith advanced him to be principal Secretary. But the Lords, as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal, resolved by force of Arms utterly to extirpate him,
choosing for their Leader in this design Thomas Earl of Lancaster. And at
Datkington this infamous Earl Gaveston was surprised by Guy Earl of Warwick,
who conveyed him to Warwick-Castle and in a place called Blacklow (afterward
Gaveshead) caused his head to be cut off, as a subverter of the Laws, and an
open Traitor to the Kingdom. Which act caused a lasting hatred in the King to
his Nobles, John Offord A.B. Cant.
though for the present the Kings displeasure was allayed by the mediation of
the Prelates, and especially of Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, who stood neutral.
But whilst the English King minded only his pleasure, undaunted Bruce (now the
received King of Scotland) industriously prosecuted his design, for setting his
Country at liberty from the English, driving them out of most places of his
Realm, and making great spoil in Northumberland. Which awakning K. Edward, he
marched with a very great Army against him, though many of the Nobles refused
to attend him in this service, because he delayed to ratify their desired
Liberties, and provisions for better Government; so often consented unto by
himself. At Bannocksbourn the English and Scotch Armies came in sight each of
other, when the enemy left nothing undone that might be for their advantage,
digging before their Battalions certain trenches, wherein they stu^k sharp
Stakes, covering them with Hurdles, which miserably afflicted the English
Cavalry falling into them at unawares, thereby procuring to the Scots the
greatest victory that ever they had over the English. In this fight K. Edward
did gallantly behave himself; nor would he fly, till by the importunity of
friends he was thereunto forced, for his preservation. Now was slain the Earl
of Gloucester, the Lord Clifford, with other Lords, and about 700 Knights,
Esquires, and m^n of Armories; Humphry de Bohun was taken Prisoner, and a great
booty the Scots gained; for the English in this expedition had adorned
themselves as for a triumph, with all sorts of riches, gold, silver, and the
like, in a kind of wanton manner, corresponding to the Prince they followed. In
those times, the Scots made suchlike scoffing Rhimes as this on the English,
Long Beards heartless, painted Hoods witless,
Gay Coats graceless. makes England thriftless.


This Conquest encouraged the Scots to make inroads into the English Northern
Counties where they made great spoil, some of the disloyal Englishmen joining
with them. The King nevertheless could not forget his Gaveston, whose body with
great pomp he caused to be transferred from Oxford to Kings-Langley in
Hartfordshire, himself in person honoring the Exequies* Then in Pierce
Gavestons place the King advanced into his favor the two Spencers* Father and
Son, whose intolerable insolences and oppressions seemed to exceed those of
Gavestons; against whom the Barons did swell with such impatience, that not
content with the wast of their Lands, by threats of civil War they procured
their Banishment. The Queen who hitherto had been a Mediatrix betwixt the King
and his Lords, having received the denial of one nights lodging at the Castle
of ^eeds in Kent, which belonged to one of the Barons, whom she perceived to
take too much upon them, now turned her Spleen against them, incensing the King
her Husband against them so highly, that King Edward resolved to dye in the
quarrel, or to bring the factious Lords into a more becoming carriage toward
him. The judgment given against the Spencers, he procured to be reversed. Some
of the Delinquent Lords rendered themselves to the King; others of them were
apprehended; amongst whom were the two Roger Mortimers, Father and Son, who
were committed to the Tower. Howbeit the Earl of Lancaster in the North,
resolved with what forces he could procure, to fight for his security; against
whom the King marched, and at Burrowbridg encountered him; where Humphrey de
Bohun was slain with a spear from under the bridge; and the Earl of Lancaster,
with other principal men, Barons and Knights, to the number of above ninety,
were taken by Andrew de Herckly Captain of Carlisle, afterward created Earl of
that place. The Earl of Lancaster a few days after was beheaded at Pontfract,
the Barons and Knights were drawn, hanged and quartered. The Lord Badlesmere,
who refused to let the Queen lodge at Leeds, was executed at Canterbury. Never
did English earth at one time drink so much blood of her Nobles, as at this
time in so vile a manner shed. One Earl and Fourteen Lords suffering death,
most of them by the halter. But that this Tragedy of the Lords was exploited by
others, and not by the Kings free inclinations, appears; for that when some of
the Courtiers and Favorites pleaded for the life of one of a mean Family
condemned for being engaged in the Rebellion, the King fiercely answered, A
plague upon you for cursed whisperers, malicious backbiters, wicked
Counselors; entreat you so for the life of a most notorious Knave, who would
not speak one word for the life of my most near Kinsman, that most noble Knight
Earl Thomas? By the soul of God, this fellow shall dye the death he has
deserved. In A. D. 1322. King Edward marched with a mighty Host into Scotland,
from whence for want of Victuals he was forced in a short time after to return,
without the honor of any achievement, the Scots also following him at the
heels, and so suddenly assailing him, that he was forced to leave his Treasure
and Furniture for pillage to them. But by reason of the Interdict which the
Pope had put the Scots under in favor of the English, a truce was made betwixt
the two Nations for thirteen years. Which being confirmed, Edward took his
progress through the Counties of York and Lancaster, and Marches of Wales,
from whence the late seditions had their nourishments; there punishing many
severely. Amongst the rest, he caused Andrew de Herkly to be degraded, hanged,
drawn and quartered, for traitorously taking part with the Scots. Whilst these
things were acting, young Roger Mortimer having corrupted his Keepers, or
potion'd them with a sleepy drink, escaped out of the Tower, getting over into
France. The Spencers, Father and Son, one created Earl of Winchester, the
other of Gloucester, behaved themselves exceeding lordly, even to the Queen her
self, whose maintenance they abridg'd to advance their own wealth. Many Nobles
that had been engaged in the Barons quarrel, they put to such excessive rates
for purchasing the Kings favor again, that utterly impoverished them. Adam
Bishop of Hereford, and Henry Bishop of Lincoln, for the same cause they
deprived of all their temporalties. But the Queen and discontented Nobles
resolve to clear themselves of the Spencers; to which end the Queen procured
aids out of Henalt and Germany, and uniting them with the Barons forces,
marched against the King, who found but few friends, because of the mortal
hatred that the people generally did bear to the Spencers. The Queen lying with
her Army at Oxford, caused the whole University to be called together: When in
the presence of the Queen, Prince, Roger Mortimer, and other Nobles, the Bishop
of Hereford preached to them from that Text, 2 King. 4.19, My head, my head
aketh: Delivering to them the reasons of the Queens coming with her Army;
concluding that an aching and sick Head of a Kingdom was to be taken off, and
not to be tampered with by any other Physic. The Londoners stood high for the
Queen and Barons, cutting off the Bishop of Excesters head, whom the Queen had
left Guardian of London. The Tower they gained into their possession,
proclaimed John of Eltham Custos of the City and whole Land, set at liberty all
prisoners. The Queen did the like throughout all the Realm; by her order also
all banished men were revoked, whereby no small increase was brought to the
Barons Forces. From Oxford the Queen marched to Bristol, which she besieged and
took, and therein Hugh Spencer the elder, whom she caused without any form of
trial to be cut up alive, and quartered, having been first at the clamours of
the common people drawn and hanged in his proper Armories. The unfortunate King
being now forsaken of almost all his English subjects, after much wandering,
entrusted himself with the Welsh (who still loved him) lying hid in the Abbey
of Neath, till at length after much search he was found out, and with him young
le Spencer, Robert Baldock Chancellor, and Simon de Reading, were taken. King
Edward was conveyed to Kenelworth Castle, the Lords to Hereford, where the
Queen lay with her Host. Spencer and Simon de Reading were condemned to death
by William Trussel, and were both ignominiously hanged. The distressed King
being now shut up in prison, and without hopes of any redemption, after he had
been much solicited, at last yielded to resign the Crown to his Son Edward;
which being granted by the King, the Lords forthwith proceed to the short
Ceremonies of his Resignation, chiefly consisting in the surrender of his Crown
and Ensigns of Majesty to the use of his Son Prince Edward. Sir William
Trussel thereupon in the behalf of the whole Realm, renounced all homage and
allegiance to the Lord Edward of Caernarvon late King, in these words; I
William Trussel, in the name of all men of the Land of England, and of all the
Parliament Procurator, resign to thee Edward the Homage that was made to thee
sometime; and from this time forward I defy thee, and deprive thee of all
Power-Royal; and I shall never be tendant on thee after this time, A.D. 1327.

His Issue were, Edward, John of Eltham, Joan and Eleanor.

In the fourth year of this Kings Reign, a Baker named John of Stratford, for
making bread lesser than the assize, was with a fools-hood, and loaves of bread
about his neck, drawn on a Hurdle through the streets of London.

So terrible a famine was in England, that upon St. Lawrence Eve, there was
scarce bread to be got for sustentation of the Kings household, so great a
mortality likewise accompanying this dearth, that the living were scarce
sufficient to bury the dead. In the time of scarcity the King set forth an
Order, That Wheat should be sold in the Market at eleven shillings the Quarter,
a fat Ox stalled or Corn-fed at 24. Shillings, a fat Hog of two years old at
three Shillings four pence, a fat Hen for a penny, and 24 Eggs for a penny; but
victuals thereby became so scarce in the Markets, that this Order was revoked,
and the people left to sell as they could.

Mertons College in Oxford brought forth in this Kings, and his son Edwards
reign those four Lights of Learning, namely, Jahn Duns called Scotus the
Subtle, who in a fit of the Apoplexy, it is said, was buried alive; Bradwardina
the profound; Ocham the Invincible, and Burly the Perspicuous. And as some
say, Baconthorp the Resolute was of the same College.

Now was the Knights-Templars Order universally extinguished.

Mayors and Sheriffs of London in this Kings Reign.
In his first Year, Sir John Blunt continued Mayor. Nicholas Pigot, Nigellus
Drury, Sheriffs.


In his second Year, Nicholas Faringdon was Mayor. William Basing, James
Butler, Sheriffs.


In his third Year, Thomas Roman was Mayor. Roger le Palmer, James of St.
Edmund, Sheriffs.


In his fourth Year, Richard Reffam was Mayor. Simon Cooper, Peter Blackney,
Sheriffs.


In his fifth Year, Sir John Gisors was Mayor. Simon Metwod, Richard Wilford,
Sheriffs.


In his sixth Year, Sir John Gisors was Mayor. John Lambin, Adam Lutkin,
Sheriffs*


In his seventh Year, Nicholas Farendon was Mayor. Robert Gurden, Hugh Garton,
Sheriffs.


In his eighth Year, Sir John Gisors was Mayor. Stephen Abingdon, Hammond
Chickwel, Sheriffs.


In his ninth Year, Stephen de Abingdon was Mayor. Hammond Goodcheap, William
Bodeleigh, Sheriffs.


In his tenth Year, John Wingrave was Mayor. William Caston, Ralph Balancer,
Sheriffs.


In his eleventh Year, John Wingrave continued Mayor. John Prior, William
Furneaux, Sheriffs.


In his Twelfth Year, John Wingrave continued Mayor. John Pointel, John
Dalling, Sheriffs.


In his Thirteenth year, Hammond Chickwel was Mayor. Simon de Abingdon, John
Preston, Sheriffs.


In his Fourteenth Year, Nicholas Farendon was Mayor. Renauld at the Conduit,
Will. Prodham, Sheriffs.


In his Fifteenth Year, Hammond Chickwel was Mayor. Richard Constantine,
Richard de Hackney, Sheriffs.


In his Sixteenth Year, Hammond Chickwel continued Mayor. John Grantham,
Richard de Ely, Sheriffs.


In his Seventeenth Year, Nicholas Farendon was Mayor. Adam of Salisbury, John
of Oxford, Sheriffs.


In his Eighteenth Year, Hammond Chickwel was Mayor. Benet of Fulham, John
Cawston, Sheriffs.


In his Ninteenth Year, Hammond Chickwel continued Mayor. Gilbert Mordon, John
Cawston, Sheriffs.


In his Twentieth Year, Richard Britain was Mayor. Richard Rothing, Roger
Chauntelere, Sheriffs.


EDWARD III.
EDWARD the third was Crowned King upon Candlemas-day, A. D. 1327.
being the eighth day after that his Father had made a resignation of the Crown
to him. And now because sundry great persons, with the whole order of Friars
Preachers took pity on the old Kings captivity, Mortimer therefore hastened to
dispatch him out of the way, in order to which he procured an Express from the
young King (then about 16. Years of age) to remove him from Kenelworth Castle,
delivering him into the hands of those ignominious Knights Thomas de Gourney
Seniour, and John Mattrevers, who conveying him from Kenelworth to
Barkly-Castle, there murdered him, by running a burning spit up into his body,
as he was about to disburden nature, September 22. 1327. His body was buried at
Gloucester. To animate the bloody Regicides to the commitment of the horrid
fact, it is said, this ambiguous phrase was invented by Adam de Torleton Bishop
of Hereford, and sent to them by Mortimer, Edwardum occidere nolite timere
bonum est. Gourney or Corney and his villainous companions, when they would
needs shave the King on his way to Barkley, lest he should be known and
rescued, enforced him to sit down on a molehil; and the rascal Barber
insulting, told him, That cold water out of the next ditch should serve for his
trimming at that time; To whom the sorrowful King answered, Whether you will or
no, there shall be warm water, and therewith shed tears plentifully. But young
King Edward at his Fathers death was upon the borders of Scotland, where having
environed the Scots in the woods of Wividale and Stanhope, by the Treason of
Mortimer they escaped, and he returned inglorious, after an huge wast of
Treasure, and great peril of his own person. For had not his loyal Chaplain
stepped in and received the mortal weapon in his own body, the Kings life had
been lost. Shortly after this, peace was concluded with the Scots upon
dishonorable terms to the English by the procurement of the Mother-Queen, and
her Minion Mortimer. Joan the Kings Sister was married to David Bruce, the
Scots in derision calling her Joan Make-peace. King Edward at the Treaty of
Peace sealed Charters to the Scottish Nation, the contents whereof were
contrived by his Mother, Roger Mortimer, and Sir James Douglas without the
privity of the English Peers. He also delivered to them that famous evidence
called the Ragman-Roll, and likewise quitted them of all his claim to the
government of Scotland, withal rendering back certain Jewels taken by the
English from the Scots, amongst which was one of special Note, called the
Black-Cross of Scotland. In the same year, being the year of our Lord, 1327.
dyed Charles the fair King of France, by whose death the Crown of that Kingdom
devolved to Edward King of England in right of his Mother Queen Isabel, Tho.
Bradwardin. A. B. Cant.
who was daughter to Philip the Fair, and Sister to Lewis Hutin, Philip the
Long, and Charles the Fair all Kings of France successively, and all three
dying without Issue, the whole right now seeming to be Isabel the only Child of
the said Philip that had any Issue. But the French pretending a fundamental
Law, or Entail, called the Salique Law, by which no woman was inheritable to
France, sought to debar King Edward his right, receiving to the Crown Philip of
Valois, whose Father was younger Brother to Philip the Fair, advancing the
Brothers son, before the Daughters son, not following the propinquity or
descent of blood, but meliority of the Sex. Against the stream of the Queen,
and her Lord Mortimers absolute sway, some great persons now stood, amongst
whom was the Kings Uncle Edmund Earl of Kent, whose death the Queen and
Mortimer shortly procured. Nor was Mortimers fall now far off, for the King
beginning to perceive his own peril in the others potency, upon good advice
therefore surprised Mortimer with the Queen Mother in Nottingham-Castle, and by
a Parliament held at Nottingham, Queen Isabel's Dowry was taken from her, and
only a pension of a thousand Pound, per Annum. allowed her. Mortimer was
condemned in open Parliament at Westminster, for causing the young King to
make a dishonorable peace with the Scots, from whom he received bribes; For
procuring the death of Sr. Edward of Caernarvon the late King; For
over-familiarity with Isabel the Queen Mother; For polling and robbing the King
and Commons of their Treasure. He was ignominiously drawn to Tyburn, then
called the Elmes, where he was executed on the common Gallows, there hanging
two days and nights, 1330. With him there dyed for expiation of the late Kings
death, Sr. Simon de Bedford, and John Deverell Esquire. About this time befell
great disturbances and divisions in Scotland, occasioned by young Bruce and
Baliol, who both pretended right to that Crown, which opportunity King Edward
took hold on, conceiving himself not obliged to stand to that contract made in
his minority by the predominancy of his mother and Mortimer, the Scots also
detaining his Town and Castle of Berwick from him. Wherefore he raises an Army,
and with Edward Baliol marches to Berwick, which having besieged David Bruce
sent a puissant host to the relief thereof, and at Halydon-Hill the English and
Scoth Armies joined battle, where the Scots were vanquished with a lamentable
slaughter of them. There dyed Archibald Dougles Earl of Angus and Governor of
Scotland; the Earls of Southerland, Carrick and Fosse, the three Sons of the
Lord Walter Steward and at least fourteen thousand others, with the loss only
of one Knight, and ten other Englishmen. Hereupon Berwick was surrendered to
King Edward, and Baliol was accepted to be King of Scotland, and had faith and
allegiance sworn unto him by the Scotch Nobles. Simon Islip. A.B. Cant.
Which done Baliol repaired to King Edward then at Newcastle upon Tine, where
he submitted to Edward the third, as his Father John Baliol had done to Edward
the first. After which the King of England assisted this Edward Baliol as his
homager, going himself in person diverse times for suppressing the Brucean
party, which he kept under, till such time that he was engaged against the
French for the obtaining of that Kingdom, and the recovery of sundry Towns and
places in Goscoigne, injuriously withheld from him by the French King. To
remedy which wrongs the King of England had addressed his Ambassadors, but in
vain; therefore that the World might take notice of his just proceedings, he,
in a large Letter directed to the College of Cardinals justifies his design
upon France to be equal and honest. First, because himself of any Male living
was the nearest in blood to the late King Charles his Uncle. Secondly, because
the French had refused to put the Cause to civil trial. Thirdly, for that the
process of the twelve Peers in giving the Crown from him when he was under age,
was by all Laws void, and frustrate. Fourthly, for that Philip of Valois had
invaded Aquitain which belonged to the Crown of England, and detained such
places as he had wrongfully gained therein. Fifthly, for that the said Philip
had aided the Scots in their rising against him. Edward having done this, he
next makes a confederation with the High and Low Dutch and other Foreigners,
then prepared a brave Army, his English Subjects contributing liberally for the
carrying on of the War. And to make his Coffers the fuller, he made bold with
the Lombards, and the moveable goods of such Priories in England, as were Cells
to Monasteries in France. Thus provided of men and moneys King Edward sailed
with his Forces to Antwerp, and by the importunity of the Flemings he first
assumed the Title, and Armories of the Realm of France, quartering the Flower
de Lis with the Lions. And entering France he burnt and spoiled the North-parts
thereof up as far as Turwin, then returning to Antwerp he there kept his
Christmas with his Queen Philip, from whence about Candlemas he set sail for
England, where in a Parliament holden at Westminster he obtained liberal aids
for supportation of his designed Conquest. In lieu of which, he granted a
general large pardon of trespasses and other to him, and confirmed Magna
Charta, and Charta de Foresta with some others. Then upon June 23. He shipped
from Harwich to Sluice in Flanders, near which place the French lay in wait with
a Navy of 400 Ships with intent to intercept him; but Edward having the
advantage of Wind and Sun, furiously set upon the French Ships, putting the
Monsieurs so hard to it, that a great number of them chose to cast themselves
into the Sea, rather than to become Prisoners. Thirty thousand of them are
confessed to have been slain and drowned, and more than half of their Ships
were either sunk or taken The loss was so very great on the French side, that
least the news thereof might too much afflict the King of France, his Jester
disclosed it to him, by oftentimes repeating this saying in his hearing,
Cowardly Englishmen, Dastardly Englishmen, Faint-hearted Englishmen. Why?
said the King at length; Because, said the Jester, They durst not leap out of
their Ships into the Seas, as our brave French men did. From which saying the
King took a hint of the overthrow. After which Famous Sea-victory obtained by
the English, puissant King Edward with his Host consisting of near an hundred
thousand men, sat down before Tourney, from whence he sent to the French King,
whom he saluted only by the name of Philip of Valoys, challenging him to fight
with him hand to hand in single Combat; or if that pleased not, then each to
bring an hundred men into the Field, and try the event with so small an hazard;
or otherwise within ten days to join full battle with all their forces near
Tourney. To which Philip made no direct answer, alleging that the Letters were
not sent to him the King of France, but barely to Philip of Valoys.
Nevertheless he brought his Army within sight of the English Host, but by the
mediation of Queen Philips Mother, and two Cardinals, a Truce was concluded
between the two Kings till the Midsumer next following. The main reason
inducing King Edward to yield hereunto, was the want of supplies of money,
through the fault of his Officers in England, whom he severely punished at his
return. And now to weaken great Edwards strengths, the Pope put Flanders under.
Interdict, Simon Langham. A B. Cant.
as having disloyally left their own Earl, and chief Lord, Philip King of
France. And Lewis the Emperor breaking league with the King of England, took
part with France; which when King Edward understood, he angrily said, I will
fight with them both. And not long after he was upon the Sea with a very great
Fleet, none knowing whither he would steer his Course; but in Normandy he
landed, where he took the Populous and Rich City of Caen, and with his dreadful
Host, burning and spoiling round about, marched up almost as far as the walls
of Paris. Where with his Army, in an enemies Country between two Rivers Sein
and Some, (the bridges being broke down by the French) Edward designed at a low
water, to have passed over a Ford between Albeville and the Sea, whom to
intercept the French King had sent thither before him Godner du Foy, with a
thousand Horse and six thousand Foot.

Howbeit undaunted Edward entered himself into the Ford, crying, He that loves
me let him follow me, as one resolved to pass over, or there to die, the first
of which he did; for his Soldiers following him won the passage, putting du
Foy to flight. And now King Edward being come near to Cressie in Po^thieu,
lying between the Rivers of Some and Anthy, he there most vigilantly provided
for his defense against King Philip, who was advancing toward him with an
Hundred thousand men and upward. When the two Armies were within sight each of
other, the King of England after he had called upon God, disposed his Host into
three Battles. Simon Langham. A B Cant.
To his Son Edward the Black-Prince he gave the ordering of the Van; the second
Battle the Earls of Northampton and Arundel commanded; the third himself. And
as if he meant to barricado his Army from flying, he caused his Carriages to be
placed in the rear thereof, and Trees to be plashed and felled, to stop up the
way behind his Host; commanding withal, that all should forsake their horses,
and leave them amongst the Carriages. On the Enemies part, the King of Bohemia
and Earl of Alanson had charge of the Vantguard, King Philip was in the main
battle, and the Earl of Savoy commanded the Rear. The sign of battle being
given by King Philip, a bloody fight ensued, wherein the Black Prince was very
hard beset, therefore his Father was sent for to his rescue; who upon the
hillock of a Windmill stood to behold the fight, being in readiness to enter
thereinto, when just occasion should invite him. But at that time he refused to
go, returning the Messengers with this answer, Let them send no more to me for
any adventure that may befall, while my Son is alive; but let him either
vanquish or dye; because the honor of this brave day shall be his, if God
suffer him to survive. Which he did, and beat the French out of the field.
Thereupon King Edward with his untouched Battle advanced toward his victorious
Son, and most affectionately embracing and kissing him, said, Fair son, God
send you perseverance to such prosperous beginnings; you have nobly acquit your
self, and are well worthy to have the governance of a Kingdom entrusted unto
you for your valor. In the field was found the dead bodies of eleven great
Princes; and of Barons, Knights, and men of Arms, above fifteen hundred. There
was slain the King of Bohemia, King of Majorca, Earl of Alanson, Duke of
Lorrain, Duke of Bourbon, Earl of Flanders, Earl of Savoy, the Dolphin of
Viennois, Earl of Sancerre and Harecourt, Earls of Aumarl, Nevers, etc. six
Earls of Almain, besides others of great account, with the Grand Prior of
France, and Archbishop of Roan. Of the Commons there fell about thirty
thousand. Of the English side not one man of note or honor was slain. A. D.
1346. From the Forest of Crescie, King Edward marched to Callis, and besieged
it. In the time of which siege, the Governor thereof, for the sparing of food,
thrust forth of the Town above fifteen hundred of the poor and impotent people,
whom this Christian King Edward turned not back, but suffered them freely to
pass through his Camp, relieving them gratis with fresh victuals, and giving
two pence a piece sterling to each of them. But whilst the King was busied
abroad in France, the Scots (in favor of the French) invaded England,
advancing as far as Durham, where the English encountering them, overcame them,
took David their King prisoner at Nevils Cross by Durham. There lay dead in the
field the Earls of Murray and Strathern, the Constable, Marshal, Chamberlain,
and Chancellor of Scotland, with many other Nobles. Prisoners taken besides the
King, were the Earls of Douglas, Fife, Southerland, Wigton, and Mentieth. In
this battle on the English side were many spiritual persons, who for the
defense of their Country, made use of carnal Weapons. And as King Edwards
friends were successful in England, so were they also in foreign parts: for in
Britain Sir Thomas Dagworth overthrew the Lord Charles of Blois, though he had
much the odds of him as to number of men. In Gascoign and those parts, Henry
Earl of Derby and Lancaster worsted the Duke of Normandy, took sundry places of
great importance; amongst the rest, that considerable Town of Brigerac, where
he permitted every soldier to seize any House, and convert all therein to his
own profit. Whereupon it happened, that a certain Soldier called Reth, having
broke into a House where the Monyers had for safety stowed the Money of that
Country in great long sacks, he acquainted the Earl therewith, supposing that
the Earl intended not so great a treasure for a private share; but the Earl
told him, That accordingly as he had at first proclaimed, let the treasure be
worth what it would, yet was it all his own. And now after almost a years
siege, Callis was delivered to King Edwards mercy. In Little-Britain the Kings
Warden thereof Sir Walter de Bendly vanquished the Marshal of France in fight,
slew 13 Lords, 140 Knights, 100 Esquires, and took prisoners 9 Lords, besides
many Knights, and Esquires. At length after much spoil made upon the French, a
peace was concluded on betwixt the two Kings, though it continued not long ere
the French broke the agreement. In revenge whereof Edward presently entered
France with an Army, Will. Witlesy. A. B. Cant.
and spoiled it where he came; and after his return into England again, when he
heard that John the new King of France, had given to Charles the Daulphin the
Duchy of Aquitain, King Edward bestowed the same upon the Black-Prince,
commanding him to defend that right with the sword. The Prince thereupon
furnished with a gallant Army, set sail toward France, where he took many
Towns and prisoners, advanced into the bosom of France up to the very gates of
Burges in Berry; from whence wheeling about to return to his chief City
Bordeaux, John King of France encountered him with a great Army, having the
odds of six to one; notwithstanding which the victorious Prince of Wales
discomfited the French, took prisoners King John and Philip his youngest son,
the Archbishop of Sens, and many great Lords, and about two thousand Knights,
Esquires and Gentlemen bearing Armories. And slew in fight about fifty two
Lords, and seventeen hundred Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen, with Sir Reginald
Camian, who that day bore the Or flamb, or French Ensign; and of the common
Soldiers about six thousand. To James Lord Audley, who in this fight received
many wounds, the Prince gave 500 Marks Land in fee-simple, which said Land the
Lord Audley bestowed on his four Esquires that had continued with him in all
the brunt and fury of danger. King Edward the Father, whilst his Son was thus
prosperously busied in France, proceeded in hostile sort against the Scots, and
brought King Baliol at Roxbrough to make a surrender of his Crown to him.
Prince Edward after his late victory, marched with joy and triumph to Bordeaux,
where having refreshed his wearied soldiers, he took his leave of France,
though not of the King thereof; for him he brought with him a Captive to
London, whither the Prince was welcomed with exquisite honor by Henry Picard
then Lord Mayor. Which said Picard afterward at one time feasted at his own
charge the King of England, France, Scotland, and Cyprus. King Edward ordered,
that eight days should be spent in giving God the glory for the victory; and
not long after with a Fleet of One thousand one hundred sail, he passed over
from ^andwich to a fresh invasion; and being come before the walls of Paris, he
honored Four hundred Esquires and Gentlemen with Knighthood. Ample conditions
were offered by the French unto the King of England, to which he would not at
present listen; yet at length was persuaded to an accord on these conditions:
That Himself and Son Edward should for ever release unto King John and his
Heirs the right and claim which they had unto the Crown of France, Duchy of
Normandy, etc. That King John and his Son should for them and their Heirs
release unto King Edward and his Heirs the whole Country of Aquitain, Santoin,
etc. so the County of Ponthicu, etc. the proper Inheritance of Queen Isabel K
Edward's Mother. That King John should pay for his ransom the sum of Thirty
hundred thousand Schutes of Gold, every two of which should be six shillings
eight pence sterling; with some other conditions. All which were ratified with
hands, Seals and Oaths at Callis, though by the falsehood of the French King
this amity continued not many years; for King John by underhand-dealing sought
to alienate the hearts of King Edwards foreign subjects from him, and the
County of Ponthieu he surprised before King Edward heard thereof. Wherefore the
King sent over John Duke of Lancaster, and Humphry de Bohun Earl of Hartford to
invade France, who pierced up as far as Roan, and after them the King sent that
renowned Captain Sir Robert Knolls, who went on very prosperously, till by the
instigation of Sir John Mensterworth and some others (who thought themselves
better than Sir Robert) a division was made in the Army, whereby the English
fortunes were hindered; for the which Mensterworth paid the loss of his head.
About the same time also some great Officers of the Kings, as John Duke of
Lancaster, the Lord Latimer, and Sir John Sterrie were complained of for
fraudulency to the State, and at the request of the Parliament, called The
good, were displaced. But that which caused the greatest grief to Englishmen
was the loss of their Martial Prince Edward, who left this life upon Trinity
Sunday 1376, about his age 46, and was buried at Canterbury. Nor did his
Martial Father long survive him, for in A. D. 1377. he dyed at Shene in Surrey,
and was buried as Westminster. His Issue were Edward the black Prince, so
called from his dreadful valorout Acts, William of Hatfield, Lionel Duke of
Clarence, John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, Simon Sudbury. A. B, Cant.
Edmond Earl of Cambridge, and Duke of York, William of Windsor, Thomas of
Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, Isabel, Joan, Blanch and Margaret. He built
Queenborough in Kent in honor of Queen Philip his Wife. He erected a building
at Windsor-Castle, whose circumference was six hundred foot, where Knights and
men of War were to have their entertainment of Diet at his charge; and begun a
magnificent Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary, which King Henry the eight,
and Sir Reginald Bray finished. He is also said to be the Founder of the most
Noble Order of the Garter; so entitled, perhaps from the Garter he took up of
the Countess of Salisburies, which slipped off in a dance: perhaps for that in
a battle wherein he was victorious, Garter was the Word or Signal. But some
will have this King to be only the Reviver of this Order, and Richard the first
to be the Institutor of it. King Edward confirmed Magna Charta about twelve
times. He restrained the Pope from conferring English Benefices on strangers.
He invited Cloth-workers to repair hither out of Foreign parts, to whom he
granted sundry privileges. The staple of wools which had been in Flanders he
revoked, establishing the same in Westminster, Canterbury, Chichester, Bristol,
Lincoln and Hull.

The famous custom of the Kings of England Washing, Feeding and Clothing of as
many poor people upon Maundy Thursday as they are years old* is referred to the
celebration which this King made of his fifth year. His Concub^e Alice Pierce
was so insolent, Simon Sudbury. A. B. Cant.
that she would go into the Courts of Justice, where sitting by the Judges and
Doctors, she would proudly persuade or dissuade for her most advantage,
therefore was complained of in Parliament, and removed from the person of the
King. At a Parliament held the thirty seventh of his Reign, the wearing of Gold
and Silver, Silks and rich Furs were forbidden to be worn by any but eminent
Persons; also the Labourer and Husbandman was limited to the eating of such
certain meats. An Act was likewise made, that no common whore should wear any
Hood except striped with diverse colors, nor Furs, but garments with the wrong
side outward. At Stamford in Lincolnshire an University was instituted, but of
short continuance.

A blazing-Star appeared, which continued thirty days. Southhampton was burnt
by the French. A. D. 1348, It rained from Midsummer till Christmas. A plague
all over Christendom, some say, the World; and so raging in England that scarce
the Tenth person of all sorts was left alive* In London it was such, that in
one years space there was buried in the Cistercian, or Charter House
Churchyard above fifty thousand. It began in the year 1348, and continued till
the year 1357, and was seconded with murrain of Cattle, and dearth of all
things. Now flourished in the University of Oxford that Famous Doctor John
Wickliffe, whose followers in those Popish-times, were called Lolards, from
Lolium, signifying tares, or hurtful weeds amongst Corn.

The Mayors and Sheriffs of London in this Kings Reign.
In his first Year, Hammond Chickwel was Mayor. Henry Darcy, John Hawton,
Sheriffs.


In his second Year, John Grantham was Mayor. Simon Francis, Henry Cobmartin,
Sheriffs.


In his third Year, Richard Swanland was Mayor. Richard Lazer, William Gisors,
Sheriffs.


In his fourth Year, Sir John Pountney was Mayor. Robert of Ely, Thomas
Worwode, Sheriffs.


In his fifth Year, Sir John Pountney continued Mayor. John Mocking, Andrew
Aubery, Sheriffs.


In his sixth Year, John Preston was Mayor. Nicholas Pike, John Husband,
Sheriffs.


In his seventh Year, Sir John Pountney was Mayor. John Hammond, William
Hanford, Sheriffs.


In his eighth Year, Reginald at the Conduit was Mayor. John Kingstone, Walter
Turk, Sheriffs.


In his ninth Year, Reginald at the Conduit continued Mayor. Walter Mordon,
Richard Vpton, Sheriffs.


In his tenth Year, Sir John Pountney was Mayor. John Clark, W. Curtes,
Sheriffs.


In his eleventh Year, Henry Darcy was Mayor. Walter Neale, Nicholas Crane,
Sheriffs.


In his Twelfth Year, Henry Darcy continued Mayor. William de Pomfret, Hugh
Marbler, Sheriffs.


In his Thirteenth year, Andrew Aubery was Mayor. William Thorney, Roger
Frosham, Sheriffs.


In his Fourteenth Year, Andrew Aubery continued Mayor. Adam Lucas, Bartholomew
Morris, Sheriffs.


In his Fifteenth Year, John of Oxenford was Mayor. Richard de Barking, John de
Rokesley, Sheriffs.


In his Sixteenth Year, Simon Francis was Mayor. John Loufkin, Richard
Killingbury, Sheriffs.


In his Seventeenth Year, John Hammond was Mayor. John Steward, John Aylesham,
Sheriffs.


In his Eighteenth Year, John Hammond continued Mayor. Geoffry Witchingham,
Thomas ^eg, Sheriffs.


In his Ninteenth Year, Richard Lazer was Mayor. Edmund Hemenhall, John of
Gloucester, Sheriffs.


In his Twentieth Year, Geoffry Witchingham was Mayor. John Croydon, William
Clopton, Sheriffs.


In his twenty first Year, Thomas Leggy was Mayor. Adam Brampson, Richard Fas
or Bas, Sheriffs.


In his twenty second Year, John Loufkin was Mayor. Henry Bicard, Simon Doleby,
Sheriffs.


In his twenty third Year, Walter Turk was Mayor. Adam of Bury, Ralph of Lynne,
Sheriffs.


In his twenty fourth Year, Richard Killingbury was Mayor. John Notte, William
of Worcester, Sheriffs.


In his Twenty fifth Year, Andrew Aubery was Mayor. John Wroth, Gilbert of
Stenineshorpe, Sheriffs.


In his twenty sixth Year, Adam Francis was Mayor. John Peace, John Stotley,
Sheriffs.


In his twenty seventh Year, Adam Francis continued Mayor. William Would, John
Little, Sheriffs.


In his twenty eight Year, Thomas Leggy was Mayor. William Nottingham, Roger
Smelt, Sheriffs.


In his twenty ninth Year, Simon Francis was Mayor. Thomas Foster, Thomas
Brandon, Sheriffs.


In his thirtieth Year, Henry Picard was Mayor. Richard Nottingham, Thomas
Dolsel, Sheriffs.


In his thirty first Year, Sir John Stody was Mayor. Stephen Candish,
Bartholomew Frostling, Sheriffs.


In his thirty second Year, John Loufkin was Mayor. John Barnes, John Buris,
Sheriffs.


In his thirty third Year, Simon Doulseby was Mayor, Simon of Benington, John
of Chichester, Sheriffs.


In his thirty fourth Year, John Wroth was Mayor. John Dennis, Walter Berney,
Sheriffs.


In his thirty fifth Year, John Peche was Mayor. William Holbech, James Tame,
Sheriffs.


In his thirty sixth Year, Stephen Candish was Mayor. John of St. Albans, James
Andrew, Sheriffs.


In his thirty seventh Year, John Not was Mayor. Richard of Croydon, John
Hiltoft, Sheriffs.


In his thirty eighth Year. Adam of Bury was Mayor. John de Metford, Simon de
Mordan, Sheriffs.


In his thirty ninth Year, John Loufkin was Mayor. John Bukilsworth, John
Ireland, Sheriffs.


In his fortieth Year, John Loufkin continued Mayor. John Ward, Thomas of Lee,
Sheriffs.


In his forty first Year, James Andrew was Mayor* John Tarngold, William
Dickman, Sheriffs.


In his forty second Year, Simon Mordan was Mayor. Robert Girdeler, Adam
Wimondham, Sheriffs.


In his forty third Year, John Chichester, was Mayor. John Piel, Hugh Holdich,
Sheriffs.


In his forty fourth Year, John Barnes was Mayor. William Walworth, Robert
Gayton, Sheriffs.


In his forty fifth Year, John Barnes continued Mayor. Adam Staple, Robert
Hatfield, Sheriffs.


In his forty sixth Year, John Piel was Mayor. John Philpot, Nicholas Brembar,
Sheriffs.


In his forty seventh Year, Adam of Bury was Mayor. John Abery, John Fished,
Sheriffs.


In his forty eighth Year, William VValworth was Mayor. Richard Lions, William
Woodhouse, Sheriffs.


In his forty ninth Year, John Ward was Mayor. John Hadley, William Newport,
Sheriffs.


In his fiftieth Year, Adam Staple was Mayor. John Northampton, Robert Laund,
Sheriffs.


RICHARD II.
RICHARD, the Son of Edward the Black Prince, was crowned King in the eleventh
year of his age; but ere the Crown was settled on his head, the French braved it
on the English coasts, and the Scots set fire on the Tower of Roxbrough; and
through want of care in such who had the charge of State-matters in the young
Kings behalf, things were declined to a shameful change; and the glorious
achievements of the two late Edwards fell under an eclipse. The North parts of
England were grievously afflicted with the stroke of Pestilence, and their
misery augmented by the inroads and outrages of the Scots, who had now by
surprise gained Berwick, which upon the ninth day after, the Earl of
Northumberland regained by force. A. D. 1379, a Parliament was held at London,
wherein for supply of the Kings wants, it was agreed, That the Commons or
poorer sort should be spared, and the burden be wholly laid upon the abler
sort. And in the next year following a Parliament was held at Northampton,
wherein every one of each sex, above such an age, was charged to pay 12 d. per
poll; which, with the hatred born to John Duke of Lancaster, was the cause of a
great insurrection of the Commons and Bondmen, chiefly of Kent, Essex, Surrey,
Suffolk, Norfolk, and Cambridg-shire. The principal heads of the said giddy
multitude, were VVat Tyler and Jack Straw. The Rebels of Kent embattel'd
themselves upon Black Heath by Greenwich, from whence they marched to London;
where, the common sort generally siding with them, they became Masters of
Mis^ule. The Priory of St. John's without Smithfield, they kept burning for
about seven days. Savoy-Palace belonging to the Duke, with all the riches
therein, they consumed by fire, in a kind of holy outrage; for they threw one
of their fellows into the flames, because he had thrust a piece of stolen Plate
into his bosom. They burnt all the Archbishops Goods at Lambeth, and defaced
all the Writings, Rolls, Records, and Monuments of the Chancery, as having a
special hatred to the Lawyers. Simon Tibald Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Chancellor of England, a worthy Prelate, Sir Robert Hales Lord Prior of St.
John's. and Treasurer of England, they haled out of the Tower, where the King
was in person, and beheaded them on Tower Hill with great shoutings and
rejoycings. The number of these rebellious Reformers under the leading of Jack
Straw, and the Idol of Clowns VVat Tyler, were about an Hundred thousand; and
at a Sermon made to them by John Ball, there was near twice as many. Their
proud Petitions the King granted them (necessity compelling him thereto); after
which, a great multitude of them repaired to their several homes. The remaining
Rout the King by his Proclamation invited to meet him in Smithfield, where he
would satisfy their desires in all respects to the full. William Courtney, A.
B. Cant*
But when they were met in the place appointed, Wat Tyler there in the presence
of the King offering to kill Sir John Newton (for not giving him some undue
respect) William Walworth Lord Mayor thereupon set upon the arch-Traytor with a
drawn Weapon, and slew him: Which when the Rebels perceived, they prepared to
take extreme revenge; but the King instantly spurring forth his Horse, bade
them follow him, and he would be their Captain. And whilst they thronged after
him into the fields, brave VValworth (the while) hasted into the City, raised a
thousand Citizens in armor, and brought them, with VVat Tylers head born
before him upon a spear, to the King: Which the rude multitude seeing, some of
them fled, and others on their knees begged mercy of the King. Worthy Walworth
the King knighted, and bestowed on him an hundred pound lands by the year in
fee-simple; and, as some write, the Dagger was now added to the City-arms, in
remembrance of the great good service done by the Lord Mayor. Jack Straw at the
time of his execution confessed, that these Rebels had designed to murder the
King and chief of the Realm, and to have set up petty kings of their own
choosing in every shire. The number of rebels executed in all places, was about
Fifteen hundred. These were called the Hurling-times. And now the Nation being
settled in quiet, King Richard married the Lady Ann Daughter unto the Emperor
Charles the Fourth. John Duke of Lancaster was sent into France, where he
concluded a Truce with that Nation for six months. But these sunshine days
lasted not long: For besides the annoyances done to England by the Scots at
several times, and the French threatening an Invasion, the worst mischief befell
at home through the means of discontented and ambitious spirits, who kindled a
Civil War. The Laity took offense against the Clergy, because the Archbishop
had in Parliament refused to yield to an unjust proportion of the Tax granted
the King, to be laid upon the Clergy. And so far were the Commons and some
Lay-Peers offended therewith, that they petitioned the King to take away the
Temporalties from Ecclesiastical persons; which he denied, saying, That he
would maintain the English Church in the quality of the same state, or better,
in which himself had known it to be when he came to the Crown The displacing of
Sir Richard Scrope Chancellor, was displeasing to most men. The reason of his
displacing was, because he refused to pass such large gifts under the Great
Seal, as the King in his youthful humor had granted to some Courtiers. Also
the Kings over-freeness to the Queens Contrymen the Bohemians, discontented
many. The ancient Nobles they envied that Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford, was
created Marquess of Dublin, and Duke of Ireland; and Michael de la Pool a
Merchants Son, Earl of Suffolk; and that the King had them in too great favor.
These were held for great grievances; nor would the Parliament grant the King
any aids against his foreign foes, unless these Lords were removed and
degraded. This the King could not well digest, but consulted the Learned in the
Law concerning certain Articles of Treason, within the compass of which he
might take the popular Lords. And at Nottingham Robert Trisilian Chief
Justitiar, Robert Belknap Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, John Holt, Roger
Fulthorp, and William Burgh, Justitiars; John Lockton the Kings Sergeant at
Law: All subscribed to certain Articles of Treason made against the Lords,
which afterward cost them dear. Judge Belknap foresaw the danger; therefore
unwillingly consented, saying, There wants but an Hurdle, Horse, and Halter, to
carry me where I might suffer the death deserved. For if I had not done this
(quoth he) I should have dyed for it; and because I have done it, I deserve
death for betraying the Lords.

And now the King and Lords prepare themselves for the field; the Lords march
up to London with an Army of about Forty thousand men; against whose coming the
King, not being able to match their power, shuts himself up in the Tower,
whither the factious Lords, Gloucester, Derby, Arundel, Warwick and Marshall,
send him word, That if he come not quickly to Westminster according to
appointment, they would choose them another King, who both would and should obey
the Counsel of the Peers. Hereupon the King, though with no good will, attends
their Lordships pleasure at Westminster, where he yielded to remove from about
his person Alexander Neville Archbishop of York, the Bishops of Durham and
Chichester, the Lords Zouch and Beaumont, with diverse others; and amongst them
certain Ladies. Other of his friends were made prisoners. And at the Parliament
which was shortly after, the Judges were arrested as they sat in Judgment, and
most of them sent to the Tower. Trisilian that had fled, being apprehended, and
brought to the Parliament in the forenoon, had sentence to be drawn to Tyburn
in the afternoon, and there to have his throat cut, which was done accordingly.
Diverse other Knights also were sacrificed to their revenge. The Duke of Ireland
and others had their estates confiscated to the Kings use by Act of Parliament.
This while the Scots invaded the North of England under the conduct of Sir
William Douglas, whom Henry Hot-spur fighting with hand to hand, slew; but the
Earl of Dunbar coming with an excessive number of Scots, took Hot-spur and his
brother prisoners.

A. D. 1396, Peace was concluded with the French, the Scots and Spaniards being
included therein. And in September, 1397, a Parliament called The Great, (for
the extraordinary number of Peers and their retinues which came thereunto) was
held at London, wherein the sanctuary of former Laws, and all particular
Charters of pardon were taken away from Thomas Duke of Gloucester, the Earl of
Arundel, and others for their treasonable practices; and all the Justitiars who
stood for the King were cleared from dishonor, and such Articles as they had
subscribed were publicly ratifyed, and the offenders against them pronounced
Traitors. Richard Earl of Arundel was beheaded on Tower Hill, where at his
death he utterly denied that he was a Traitor in word or deed. The Earl of
Warwick confessing himself a Traitor in open Court, was only banished to the
Isle of Man.

The Duke of Gloucester (whom, as the peoples darling, it seemed not safe to
bring to a public Trial) was secretly smothered with pillows and feather-beds
at Callis. The King at this Parliament created himself Prince of Chester, and
to his Escutcheon-Royal added the Armories of Edward the Confessor; his Cousin
Henry Earl of Derby he made Duke of Hereford, and advanced the Titles of many
other Nobles. Not long after which, Henry Duke of Hereford accused Thomas
Mowbray Duke of Norfolk for speaking certain words to the Kings dishonor,
which Mowbray constantly denying, it should have come to a combat within Lists,
but the King ended the controversy otherwise, by banishing Norfolk for ever,
and Hereford first for ten years, then for six only. In the year following the
Duke of Lancaster dyed, when the King unjustly seized upon the goods of that
mighty Prince his Uncle, and determined to banish for ever his son the Duke of
Hereford, now Duke of Lancaster by his Fathers death. But whilst King Richard
was in Ireland to qualify a disturbance there, Henry Duke of Lancaster and
Hereford lands in England with what forces he had, pretending nothing but the
recovery of his inheritance. To him there repaired the Earl of Northumberland,
his son Hot-Spur and Earl of Westmoreland, with many others: Multitudes
offering their service to him, as pitying his calamity, and exasperated against
the King, because to furnish his Irish voyage he had extorted moneys on all
hands, and had taken up carriages, victuals, and other necessaries without any
recompense. The Duke of Lancaster with an Army of about sixty thousand marched
to Bristol, besieged the Castle and took it, and therein two Knights of the
Kings Council, Bushy and Green, whose heads were cut off at the request of the
rabble.

The Duke of York whom King Richard had left behind him to govern England,
could gain but small assistance against Lancaster, nor could the King at his
return into England find many friends, therefore he betook himself to a parley
with his enemies; the sum of his demands being, That if himself and eight more
whom he should name, might have Honorable allowance, with the assurance of a
private quiet life, he would resign the Crown. This was promised him: whereupon
he put himself into the Duke of Lancasters hands, who conducted him out of the
West to London, where he was lodged in the Tower. And now a Parliament is
summoned in the Kings name to be held at Westminster, in which Parliament King
Richard was charged with the breach of his Coronation Oath in thirty two
Articles: His abuse of the public Treasure, waste of the Crown-Land, loss of
Honor abroad; and that at home he was guilty of Falsehood, Injustice, Treason
against the rights of the Crown, and what not, that ambition and envy could
invent against him. Tho. Arundell. A. B. Cant.
The result whereof was, he resigned his Crown to the Duke of Lancaster, which
resignation the whole body of the Parliament did particularly accept, saving
the most loyal Bishop of Carlisle, A. D. 1399, September. 29.

In the very beginning of this Kings reign, one John Philpot a private Citizen
of London, at his own charge manned out a Fleet to the Sea, for the guarding of
both Land and Sea from the enemy; and was so successful, that within a short
space he took fifteen Ships of the Spaniards fraught with Rich Merchandise.

By a Tempest were cast away at Sea four Knights, and above a thousand
Englishmen in their passage to Little-Britain. In the year 1392, the Londoners
were so unkind to the King, that they refused to supply him with the loan but
of a thousand pound, and because a certain Lombard offered to lend the same,
they abused and almost killed him, for which the King took away their Charter.
The year of Christ, 1394, was famous or notable for the deaths of many great
Ladies, and amongst the rest of Queen Anne the Kings first wife, whom, it is
said, he loved to a kind of madness. In the same year that the King was deposed
the Bay or Laurel Trees withered all over England, and afterward reflourished;
and on the first of January, near Bedford-Town the River where it was deepest,
did on the sudden stand still, and so divided it self, that the bottom remained
dry for about three miles. Now flourished Sir John Hawkwood, whose Chivalry had
made him renowned through the Christian World. Sir Geoffry Chaucer, Poet-
Lawreat, now also lived.

Queen Anne wife to King Richard the second, first taught English women to ride
on side-saddles, when as before that time they rid astride. She also brought in
high head attire piked with Horns, and long trained Gowns for Women.

The Mayors and Sheriffs of London in this Kings Reign.
In his first Year, Sir Nicholas Brember was Mayor. Nicholas Twiford, Andrew
Pikeman, Sheriffs.


In his second Year, John Philpot was Mayor. John Boseham, Thomas Cornwallis,
Sheriffs.


In his third Year. John Hadly was Mayor. John Helisdon, William Barra,
Sheriffs.


In his fourth Year, William VValworth was Mayor. Walter Doget, William
Knighthode, Sheriffs.


In his fifth Year. John Northampton was Mayor. John Rotu, John Hind, Sheriffs.


In his sixth Year, John Northampton continued Mayor. Adam Bramme, John Sely,
Sheriffs.


In his seventh Year, Sir Nicholas Brember was Mayor. Simon Winchcome, John
Moor, Sheriffs.


In his eighth Year, Sir Nicholas Brember continued Mayor. Nicholas Exton, John
French, Sheriffs.


In his ninth Year, Sir Nicholas Brember continued Mayor. John Organ, John
Churchman, Sheriffs.


In his tenth Year, Nicholas Exton was Mayor. William Stondon, William More,
Sheriffs.


In his eleventh Year, Nicholas Exton continued Mayor. William Venor, Hugh
Falstalf^, Sheriffs.


In his twelfth Year, Nicholas Twiford was Mayor. Thomas Austen, Adam Carlehul,
Sheriffs.


In his thirteenth Year. William Venor was Mayor. John Walcot, John Love,
Sheriffs.


In his fourteenth Year, Adam Bamme was Mayor. John Francis, Thomas Vibent,
Sheriffs.


In his fifteenth Year, John Hind was Mayor. John Shadworth, Henry Vamere,
Sheriffs.


In his sixteenth Year, William Stondon was Mayor. Gilbert Mafield, Thomas
Newington, Sheriffs.


In his seventeenth Year, John Hardley was Mayor. Drew Barintin, Richard
Whitington, Sheriffs.


In his eighteenth Year, Sir John Froyshe was Mayor. William Bramston, Thomas
Knolls, Sheriffs.


In his nineteenth Year, Sir William More was Mayor. Roger Ellis, William
Sevenoke, Sheriffs.


In his twentieth Year, Adam Brown was Mayor. Thomas VVilford, William Parker,
Sheriffs.


In his twenty first Year, Sir Richard VVhitington was Mayor. John VVodcock,
William Ascham, Sheriffs.


In his twenty second Year, Sir Drew Barintin was Mayor. John VVade, John
Warner, Sheriffs.


HENRY IV.
A D. 1389
HENRY of Bullingbroke, the son of John Duke of Lancaster, the fourth son of
King Edward the third, was Crowned at Westminster by Thomas Arundel Archbishop
of Canterbury. His Cousin the late King Richard seemed so little concerned for
the loss of his Crown, that when it was told him of Bullingbrokes being
accepted by Parliament for King in his stead, he only used these words, I look
not after such things, but my hope is, that after all this, my Cousin will be
my good Lord and friend. But now Henry seated in Richards Throne, used all the
best means to retain the hearts of the people that sided with him, and to
weaken the opposite party, and withal sent Ambassadors to foreign Princes to
justify his unjust proceedings. But the King of France and people of Aquitain,
would not allow of his pretenses, and the Citizens of Bordeaux openly said,
That since the world began there was never a more cruel, unreasonable, nor
wicked fact done. That the good Prince was betrayed by faithless men, and that
all Law was violated. In England were many that inclined and contrived to set
King Richard again upon his rightful Throne, (though to seek a captive Kings
deliverance does commonly hasten his death.) The principal Conspirators were
John Holland Earl of Huntingdon, Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, the Dukes of
Surrey, Excester, and Aumarl, John Monticute Earl of Salisbury, Thomas Spencer
Earl of Gloucester, and the Bishop of Carlisle. Their plot was to kill Henry
Bullingbroke, and his son Henry; but before the time of intended execution was
come, the whole conjuration was discovered. Many attempts the conspirators made
to effect the re-establing of Richard, and amongst the rest, they procured one
Maudlen King Richards Chaplain to personate his Lord, but this with all the
rest of their projects failed. The Townsmen of Cyrencester assailed and took
some of the discontented Lords, and then cut off their heads, because some of
their followers set fire on Cyrencester, thinking that whilst the Townsmen
were busied in quenching the fire, they might set their Lords at liberty. The
Commons in Essex took the Earl of Huntingdon and cut off his head, in revenge
of the Duke of Glocesters death, which he had had a hand in. The Lord Spencer
the Commons beheaded at Bristol. Some others of them were put to death at
Oxford, some at London, where also John Maudlen, the counterfeit Richard (a
goodly personage) and one VVillian Ferby were hanged and quartred. The Bishop
of Carlisle was by the Kings Clemency saved, after his condemnation. King
Richard did not long survive his friends, but at Pontfract Castle was put out
of the way by hunger, cold, and great torments, though the Scots have untruly
writ, that he escaped out of prison, and led a solitary and virtuous life in
Scotland, and there dyed and was buried at the black-Fryars in Sterling. After
Richards murder at Pontfract, King Henry caused his dead body to be brought up
to London, where in St. Paul's with his face uncovered, he lay for a time
exposed to the view of all men; then was his body transported to Langley in
Hartfordshire where it lay buried, till Henry the fifth in the first year of
his Reign caused the Royal remains of his body to be Translated to
Westminster. That beautiful Picture of a King sitting Crowned in a chair of
State at the upper end of the Quire in VVestminster-Abby, is said to be, of
him. And now King Henry to divert the thoughts of the people from his
Predecessors Tragedy, prepared a puissant Army and marched with it into
Scotland, where he only did some hurt by wasting the Country, and then
returned. Shortly after which he advanced against Owen Glendour that had raised
a Rebellion in Wales; but Glendour against the Kings coming had withdrawn
himself, with his surest friends, into the Fastnesses of Snowden; wherefore the
King only made some spoil in the Country and returned. Many were the plots
that were still made against the King, but the contrivers were discovered and
put to death, among whom were many Monks. And now Glendour having taken the
Lord Mortimer prisoner, with no small slaughter of his Herefordshire-men, the
King marched again into Wales, where while he stayed he was in great danger to
have perished by sudden storms and rains, the like whereof his people had never
seen or felt. The common fame went that Glendour was a Conjurer, and had raised
those hideous Th^^^p^^^ by ^lish Arts. In the No^ (...) forces were more
fortunate against the Scotts; for at Halidon-hill Henry Hot-spur obtained a
great victory, taking prisoners the Earls of Douglas, Fife, Angus, Murray and
Orkney, the Lords Montgomery, Erskin, and Grave, with about eighty Knights,
besides Esquires and Gentlemen. And besides what Scots were slain in battle,
there were about five hundred of those which fled from the fight drowned in the
River Tweed* But that Henry might have little joy of his ill-gotten greatness,
the Piercies they raised a dangerous Rebellion, wherein indeed they pretended a
care for the Commonwealths reformation, though they really intended the
advancement of their own private interests; for it was agreed amongst the
conspirators, that the Kingdom should be shared betwixt Mortimer Earl of March,
Piercy and Owen Glendour, South England to Mortimer, North England to Piercy,
and Wales beyond Severn to Glendour, and Archenbald Earl of Douglas was
allowed as a sharer to be freed from ransom, and to have Berwick for his own.
Thus agreed, they fortify Shrewsbury, vvhither the King advances with his
Army, where a terrible battle was fought, and therein Hot-spur slain, and his
Host vanquished. The Earls of Dunglas, Worcester, Sir Richard Vernon, and Baron
Kindleton, with diverse others were taken, though not without great danger of
the Kings life, and the death of many persons of quality on his side. Henry
Hot-spurs body was drawn out of the Grave, Beheaded, and Quartred, and the
parts sent to be set up in diverse places of the Kingdom. The Earl of Worcester,
Vernon and Kindleton were Beheaded. The Earl of Northumberland who was taken by
the way as he was bringing Forces out of the North to join with those at
Shrewsbury, had his life pardoned.

The year following a Parliament was holden at Coventry, called the
Lack-learning-Parliament, either for the unlearnedness of the persons, or for
their malice to learned men: For in order to supply the Kings wants, a Bill was
exhibited against the temporalties of the Clergy, but by the courage of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Kings care of the Church, their motion was
fruitless.

A. D. 1405, another conspiracy was made against King Henry, the chief in which
conspiracy were Thomas Mowbray Earl Marshal, and Richard le Scrope Archbishop
of York, who being taken were both Beheaded. But the Pope excommunicated all
such that had a hand in putting the Archbishop to death. Another fresh report
of King Richards being alive was again spread abroad, when the Earl of
Northumberland and Lord Bardolph sought to raise an Army in the North, but were
encountered by the Sheriff of Yorkshire, who after a sharp conflict slew the
Earl in the field, and mortally vvounded the Lord Bardolph. The Earls head was
cut off, and after it had been ignominiously carried through London, was fixed
on the Bridge.

A. D. 1413, the King fell sick, and as some report, in this his last sickness
he caused his Crown to be set on a pillow at his beds-head, when suddenly the
pangs of his Apoplexy seized on him so violently, that all supposed him to be
dead. At which instant Prince Henry coming in, took away the Crown; but his
Father recovering out of his fit, quickly missed it, and understanding who had
taken it away, caused his son to be called unto him, of whom he demanded, what
he meant to bereave him of that whereunto he had yet no right? The Prince
boldly replied, Long may you live, Sovereign Father, to wear it your self; but
all men deeming that you was gone to Inherit another Crown, this being my right
I took it as my own, but now do acknowledge it for none of mine. And therewith
set the Crown where he found it. O Son, quoth the Father, with what right I got
it, God only knovveth, who forgive me the sin. But howsoever it was got,
said the Son, I mean to keep it, and defend it (when it shall be mine) with
my Svvord, as you by the Svvord have obtained it. The King dyed at London, and
was buried at Canterbury. His Issue were Henry, Thomas Duke of Clarence, John
Duke of Bedford, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, Blanch and Philippa.

A great Plague befell throughout England, chiefly in London, where within a
short space it destroyed thirty thousand. In the ninth year of his reign a
Snow continued December, January, February, and March. The Winter was so very
sharp and long, that almost all small Birds perished through hunger. A little
before the Rebellion of the Piercies was a strange Apparition betvveen Bedford
and Bickleswade, where sundry Monsters of diverse colors in the shapes of
armed men, were often seen to issue out of the Woods in the morning, which to
such as stood far off, seemed to encounter one another in most terrible manner,
but when they drevv near nothing was to be found.

Because the number of Lolards, so called, increased, an Act was made for the
punishing of them by burning.

The Mayors and Sheriffs of London in this Kings Reign.
In his first Year, Sir Thomas Knolls was Mayor. William Waldren, William
Hende, Sheriffs.


In his second Year, Sir John Francis was Mayor. John Wakel, William Ebot,
Sheriffs,


In his third Year, Sir John Shadworth was Mayor. William Venor, John
Fremingham, Sheriffs.


In his fourth Year, John Walcot was Mayor. Richard Marlow, Robert C^ic^y,
Sheriffs.


In his fifth Year, Sir William Ascham was Mayor. Thomas Falconer, Thomas Pool,
Sheriffs.


In his sixth Year, John Hind was Mayor. William Louth, Stephen Spilman,
Sheriffs.


In his seventh Year, Sir John Woodcock was Mayor. Henry Barton, William
Cromer, Sheriffs.


In his eighth Year, Sir Richard Whittingham was Mayor. Nicholas Watton,
Geoffry Brook, Sheriffs*


In his ninth Year, Sir William Stondon was Mayor. Henry Ponfract, Henry
Halton, Sheriffs.


In his tenth Year, Sir Drew Barentine was Mayor. Thomas Buck, William Norton,
Sheriffs.


In his eleventh Year. Richard Marlow was Mayor. John Law, William Chichely,
Sheriffs.


In his twelfth Year, Sir Thomas Knolls was Mayor. John Pen, Thomas Pike,
Sheriffs.


In his thirteenth Year, Sir Robert Chichely was Mayor. John Rainwel, William
Cotton, Sheriffs.


In his fourteenth Year, William Walden was Mayor. Ralph Lovenham, William
Sevenoke, Sheriffs.


HENRY V.
A. D. 1413
HENRY of Monmouth whilst he was Prince, did many things very incongruous to
the greatness of his birth, For he and his wild companions would way-lay and
rob his Fathers and his own Receivers. And when one of his servants was
arraigned at the Kings Bench bar for felony, this Prince hearing thereof,
posted thither, commanding his Fetters to be struck off, and he set at liberty;
and when the Judge opposed him therein, commanding him upon his Allegiance to
cease from such riot, and keep the Kings peace, he in a rage ascended the
Bench, and gave the Judge a blow on the face, who sat still undaunted, and
boldly thus spoke unto the Prince; Sir, I pray remember your self. This seat
which I here possess is not mine but your Fathers, to whom and to his Laws you
owe double obedience. If his Highness and his Laws be thus violated by you, who
should show your self obedient to both, who will obey you, when you are a
Sovereign, or minister execution to the Laws that you shall make? Wherefore for
this default, in your Fathers name, I commit you prisoner to the Kings Bench,
until his Majesty's pleasure be further known. With which words, the Prince
abashed stood mute, laid by his weapons, and with obeisance done, went to the
Prison.

Whilst the King his Father was crazie, and kept his Chamber, he through the
Princes wild extravagances, and set on by some Court-whisperers, began both to
withdraw his affections, and to fear some violence against his own person from
the Prince, which when young Henry understood, in a strange disguise he
repaired to his Fathers Court, accompanied with many persons of Honor. His
garment was a Gown of blew Satin wrought full of eye-let-holes, and at every
eye-let the needle left hanging with the silk it was worked with. About his Arm
he wore a Dogs Collar set full of S's of Gold, the Tirets thereof being most
fine Gold. Being come to the Court, he charged his followers to advance no
further than the fire in the Hall, whilst himself passed on to his Fathers
presence, before whose feet he fell, confessing his youthful faults, and
justifying his loyalty to his person; declaring himself to be so far from any
disloyal attempt, that if he knew any person of whom his Father stood in any
danger, or fear, his hand according to duty, should be the first to free the
King of suspicion; yea, says he, I will most gladly suffer death to ease your
perplexed heart; and to that end I have this day prepared my self both by
confession, and receiving the blessed Sacrament: Wherefore I humbly beseech
your Grace to free your suspicion from all fears conceived against me with this
dagger, the stab whereof I will willingly receive at your hands, and will
clearly forgive my death. At which, the King melting into tears, cast down the
naked dagger (which the Prince had put into his hand) and raising his prostrate
Son, Henry Chicheley. A. B. Cant.
embraced and kissed him, confessing that his ears had been over-credulous
against him, which he promised they should never be in the future.

But notwithstanding this Prince's youthful exploits, yet when he had attained
the Crown, to begin a good Government, he began at home, banishing from his
Court those unruly youths that had been his consorts, commanding them either to
change their manners, or never to approach within ten miles of his person. And
chose worthy men for his Council of Estate, advancing his Clergy with Power and
dignity. So highly careful was he for the execution of Justice, that himself
would every day after dinner for the space of an hour, receive Petitions of the
oppressed, and with great equity would redress their wrongs. And so nearly did
the death of King Richard touch his heart, that he sent to Rome to be Absolved
from that guilt of his Fathers Act. In the first year of his Reign at a
Parliament holden at Leicester was a Bill exhibited, wherein complaint was
made, That the temporal lands given to the Religious houses and spiritual
persons for devotion sake, were either superfluous, or disorderly spent; Whose
revenues (if better employed) would serve for the defense of the Land and
Honor of the King; For the maintenance of fifteen Earls, 1500 Knights, 6200
Esquires, and 100 Almes-houses for the relief of diseased and impotent people,
and unto the Kings Coffers Twenty thousand pounds per Annum. By the Authority
of this Parliament, an 110 Priories alien were suppressed, and their
possessions given to the King and his successors for ever. But to divert those
in Authority from such like proceedings, projects were put into the Kings head
for recovery of France his rightful possession. Henry Chicheley Archbishop of
Canterbury suggested that King Henry as the true Heir unto his
Great-grand-Father Edward the third, was the true Heir to the Crown of France.

As for the Salique-Law alleged against the English claim, he affirmed, that
that Text touched only those parts of Germany which lay betwixt the Rivers Elbe
and Sala, conquered by Charles the Great, who placing the French there to
inhabit, because of the dishonest lives of those German-women, made this Law,
In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant, which the gloss did falsely expound
for the whole Kingdom of France, whose practice notwithstanding he showed to be
contrary, by many experiences both in King Pepin descended of Blithud daughter
to Clothair the first, and by Hugh Capet as Heir to the Lady Lingard daughter
to Charlemain; so King Lewis called the Saint; and besides, that this exclusion
is contrary to the word of God, which allows women to succeed in their
Fathers inheritance, Numb^. 27.

King Henry now sends a summons and demand in the first place of his Dutchies
of Normandy, Aquitain, Guyon and Anjou; to which the Daulphin of France in
derision sent him for a present a Tun of Paris Tennis-Balls; but the King
returned for answer, That he would shortly send him London-Balls, which should
shake Paris-walls. Whilst the English were making provision against the French,
Sir Robert Humfreville gave the Scots a considerable defeat, which the French
understanding, with also the great preparations that Henry of England was
making against them, they sent over Ambassadors, who at Winchester made offer
of money and some Territories; also the Princess Katharine to be given in
marriage to King Henry, so that he would conclude a peace; but it was answered,
That without the delivery of the other Dominions belonging to the Kings
Progenitors, no pacification was to be made. And when the Ambassadors had had
their answer given them, the King sent Antilop his Pursevant at Arms unto
Charles King of France with Letters of defiance; next made Queen Joan his
Mother-in-Law Regent of the Realm, then drew his Forces to Southampton,
commanding his followers there to attend him on such a day.

The King of France on the other part makes all the preparation he could to
defend himself, and to offend the King of England. To Gray a Privy-Councellor,
Scroop Lord Treasurer, and the Earl of Cambridge Son of Edmond Duke of York, he
sent, it is said, a Million of Gold to betray King Henry into his hands, or else
to murder him; but their Treason being discovered, they received the just
reward of Traitors.

On the seventh of August, 1414, the King of England with 1500 sail took to the
seas, attended with Thirty thousand Soldiers, besides Gunners, Enginiers,
Artificers, and Laborers, a great number. And the 15 day of the same Month he
cast anchor in the mouth of Seyn, about three miles from Harflew; where landing
his men, he fell devoutly on his knees, desiring Gods assistance to the gaining
of his Right. Then made Proclamation, That on pain of death, Churches,
Churchmen, Women and Children, should be spared from all violence. And after
due encouragement to his followers, he made Harflew the first essay of his
Fortunes in France, it being a Port conveniently seated upon the mouth of the
River Seyn, and a safe entrance into his intended Conquest, as well for the
landing of men, as to hinder the passage unto Roan and Paris, both which
received Traffic by the same River.

This town of Harflew was surrendered to King Henry, September, 22. Into which
when he first entered, he passed along the streets barefooted until he came to
the Church of St. Martin, where with great devotion he gave most humble thanks
unto Almighty God for that his first achieved Enterprise. When the King had
continued at Harflew about fourteen days he marched with 2000 Horse, and 13000
Foot, through Caux and Eu, toward Callis; in which march the French used all
their endeavors to endamage him: for besides many skirmishes* they broke down
the Bridges where he was to pass, plashed the woods, entrenched the ways, stuck
stakes in the Fords, and in places of advantage laid store of soldiers to
impeach his passage; conveyed all victuals out of the Countries through which
he should go, and at Blanchetague where he purposed to have passed over the
River Some, there the French had fortified against him; for which cause he
marched by Worms, with intent to have passed the River at Port le Remy; but
finding that also guarded, he kept along the River to Hargest, the French Army
marching on the other side. Therefore he still marched on by the River side,
till he came to Bathen-Court, where he got over his feeble* and wearied Army,
proceeding on his march till he came to Azin, or Agin-Court, which was upon
October. 24, where the French in a field of advantage purposely chosen, had
pitched their Banner-Royal, with an infinite Host, exceeding the English six
times in number, some say ten times. King Henry now seeing himself so far
engaged and many of his men sick of the flux, it is said he offered the
surrender of Harflew, and what else he had won, and to make satisfaction for
the harms done in France, so as he might have liberty safely to depart for
Callis: to which the Constable and Marshal of France were willing; but the
young Princes and Nobles refused all conditions of Peace. And assuring
themselves of victory, they beforehand disposed of the English Prisoners,
prepared a Chariot for the captive King, divided the prey, commanded the Bells
to be rung in the adjacent Cities and Towns, and thanks to be given to God that
had delivered the Enemy into such a place of advantage: sent to King Henry to
know what ransom he would give: sent for King Charles and the Daulphin to come
in their persons to the battle, that so they might have the honor of the
Victory. And so bold were the French upon their numbers and great strength,
that they spent the night before the battle in Feasts, triumphs, and sports;
but the English more wisely in preparing themselves for the fight. When morning
was come, the French took the field, pressing who should be foremost to this
easy (as they thought) Conquest. Against whom (their greatest strength
consisting in Horse) King Henry commanded Two hundred strong Bow-men to lodge in
a low Meadow, where a deep ditch full of water, might help to secure them from
the Horse, and the bushes cover them from sight; having stakes also prepared,
and shod with iron at both ends, which they were appointed to stick slopewise
in the ground* and to remove them upon occasion to guard them from the Horse.
This done, King Henry ranged his Host, disposing it into three Battles, placing
his Bow-men on both sides the Main, where the King rode himself richly
accoutred, before whom the Royal Standard was born, and many other Banners in
Warlike order. Both sides being in readiness, they a while stood facing one
another. But the King of England resolving to break his way through his Enemies
to Callis, or else to dye, with a cheerful countenance, and words full of
courage, he animated his followers to put forth their utmost powers, that
after-ages might know what the Lance, the Axe, the Sword, and the Bow, could do
in the hands of the Valiant; and that whosoever desired Riches, Honors, and
Rewards, here they were to be had. Which words ended, his Army fell prostrate
on the ground, and committed themselves to God, every man taking into his mouth
a piece of earth in remembrance of his own mortality, or in lieu of the
Sacrament: And then rising up, the King with cheerful countenance commanded his
Standard to advance forward, saying, Because our injurious enemies do attempt
to shut up our way, let us upon them in the name of the most Glorious Trinity,
and in the best hour of the whole year. Sir Thomas Erpingham, an old
experienced Soldier, with a Warder in his hand, led the way; who when he saw
time, threw his Warder up into the air, whereat the whole Army gave a great
shout, The French kept still their own ground; which the undaunted English
perceiving, they advanced toward them, giving another shout; when immediately
the Archers laid in the Meadows, darkened the Air with a shower of Arrows, and
the English Army fell on with admirable courage, the most of them also for
nimbleness being but half clothed, without hat, and bare-leg'd; so behaving
themselves, that the French Vantguard was instantly distressed, and disordered
into such a confused press, that they were not able to use their Weapons at any
advantage. Their Wings which assayed to charge upon the English, were broken,
and forced back for safety to their Main Battle, where they bred both fear and
confusion. And those French Troops which pursued the Archers (who gave back as
if forced to fly) came on with their Horses on the spur upon the jaws of
destruction: for falling by multitudes on those goring-stakes (left by the
Archers on purpose) they were miserably overthrown and panched to death, the
English still on all hands hotly pursuing their advantages. Against whom the
Duke of Brabant advanced (hoping by his example to encourage others) furiously
breaking into the English Army, wherein manfully fighting he was slain. With
the like resolution Duke Alanzon pressed into the English Battalion where King
Henry fought, and there had slain Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, had not the King
come in to his rescue, between whom and Alanzon was a hard contest, Alanzon
giving the King a slighty wound, and the King at length striking him down to
the ground, whom the Soldiers in the heat of fight then slew, contrary to the
Kings command. The French Reer-Guard seeing the disaster of their Van and Main
Battle, to save themselves, ran away, leaving the English no more work to do.
The number of prisoners taken by the English here was very great. But King
Henry perceiving fresh troops of the King of Sicils to appear fresh in the
field, and the same strong enough without any new rallied forces to encounter
with his wearyed Soldiers, to the end therefore that he might not have at once
prisoners to guard, and an enemy to fight, contrary to his generous nature, he
commanded that every man should kill his prisoner, which was immediately done,
certain principal men excepted. Then by his Heralds he commanded those Troops
either forthwith to come and fight with him, else to depart the field, either
of which if they delayed he would revenge upon them without mercy. Whereupon
they quit the field. When the fight was over and the field won, King Henry fell
down upon his knees, and commanded his whole Army to do the same, saying that
verse in the Psalm, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give
the glory. And demanding what was the name of the place, when it was answered
him Agincourt, then to all posterities following, says he, shall this battle
be called, the battle of Agincourt.

The spoil here taken in Armor, Jewels, and Apparel, was very great. Of the
English were slain the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk, two Knights, David
Gam Esquire, and twenty eight private Soldiers. Of the French were slain four
thousand Princes, Nobles, Knights, and Esquires, and ten thousand common
Soldiers. Prisoners of Account taken in the field were Charles Duke of
Orleans, John Duke of Bourbon, the Earl of Richmond, Louis de Bourbon, Count de
Vendosme, the Earl of Eu, Edward de Rouen, with diverse others. Just before this
battle of Agincourt, when it was reported that the French forces were very
numerous, Captain Gam resolutely said, That if there were so many, there were
enough to be killed, enough to be taken prisoners, and enough to run away. The
next day after this battle Great Henry marched toward Callis, and in the next
month following spread sails for England, and on November 23, in Triumph-wise
he entered London, where he received the gratulations of his people. The City
presented him a thousand pound in Gold, and two golden Basins. After some time
of refreshing the King called a Parliament to London, which granted him a
Subsidy, and a Tenth for the carrying on of his Wars in France, which he
graciously accepted, though it was too short for the defraying so vast a charge.

Therefore to make it up, the King pawned his Crown to his Uncle Cardinal
Beauford for a great Sum of Money, and certain Jewels to the Lord Mayor of
London for ten thousand Marks. Then with an Army of 25527, Soldiers, every
fourth being an Horseman, besides a thousand Carpenters and Laborers. Upon
July 28, 1417, he took to the Seas; and August the first, arrived in Normandy
to their great terror, many of the Inhabitants for fear flying into Britain.
And as soon as on shore to encourage his followers, he dubbed 48* Knights, then
laid siege against Conquest the strongest Castle in Normandy, which he took
August the sixteenth. He took likewise the Castles of Aumbelliers and Lovers,
the first of which he gave to his brother Clarence, the second to the Earl of
Salisbury, and third to the Earl Marshal. Caen in Normandy the King took by
force, giving the pillage thereof amongst his Soldiers. Now whilst King Henry
was busied in France, the Scots wrought what mischief they could against him at
home, entered England in an Hostile manner, bringing with them one whom they
pretended to be King Richard the second, laid strait siege against Roxbrough,
and Berwick, but upon the report of an Army of English coming against them,
they broke up their sieges, and well was he that could first set foot in his
own Country. In January the strong Town and Castle of Fallors was delivered to
the King, after which he divided his Army into several parts under the Conducts
of the Dukes of Clarence and Gloucester, and Earl of Warwick, who took sundry
garrisons. The King the while besieged Roan, which after about a Twelve-months
siege was delivered to him upon Terms, i. e. That the Burgesses should pay unto
him three hundred fifty six thousand Crowns of Gold; Should swear faith and
loyalty to him and his successors, etc.

A. D. 1418. Immediately after the surrender of this, sundry other places of
Note yielded themselves, wherein King Henry placed Garrisons. And now France
trembling at the English successes and their own losses, sought a peace from
King Henry, who yielded to a personal conference to be held at Melun, vvhither
Charles the French King, his Queen Isabel, the Princess Katharine, Duke of
Burgundy, Count of St. Paul, with a thousand Horse, came first; then King
Henry, his brothers of Clarence and Gloucester attended likewise with a thousand
Horse, met them. When much conference passed, but nothing was concluded, which
did not well please the King of England: wherefore ready to depart, he thus
spoke to Burgundy. Cousin, I may not well digest this refusal; but be ye
assured, that either I will have your Kings daughter, and all my demands, or
else I will banish both you and them out of France. You may speak your
pleasure, answered the Duke; but before you shall thrust us out of France, you
shall be weary of the enterprise. The Treaty thus broke, Burgundy reconciled
himself with the Daulphin, and Henry displeased herewith, prosecuted the War
more sharply, set upon Ponthois the last of July, and in few hours gained the
Town, wherein great spoils fell to the Soldiers shares. The news of this made
King Charles to remove his Court from Paris to Troys in Champagne, whilst Henry
went forward with his intended enterprises, he and his Generals winning many
strongholds. And to make the more way for the English successes, the Daulphin
and his Mother the Queen fell at great variance, when the Queen by the
procurement of Burgundy (the King being very infirm) was made Regent of France,
whose female authority, and the hatred to her own Son the Daulphin, did not a
little prejudice the Crown of France. And to the greater advantage of the
English the Daulphin killed the Duke of Burgundy, whereupon the Queen and young
Duke of Burgundy persuaded King Charles to disinherit the Daulphin his Son, and
to give the Lady Katharine in marriage unto the King of England, which
accordingly was done, and a peace was concluded betwixt the two Kings of
England and France. The prime Articles of the peace were these, That Charles
and Isabel should retain the name of King and Queen, and should hold all their
dignities, rents and possessions during their natural lives. That after the
death of Charles the present King of France, the Crown and Realm of France,
should with all rights and appurtenances remain unto the King of England, and
his Heirs for ever. That because of King Charles his infirmness and incapacity
to dispose the affairs of the Realm of France, therefore during his life the
government thereof should be and abide to King Henry; so that thenceforth he
should govern the Realm, and admit to his Council and Assistance with the
Council of France, such of the English Nobility as he should think fit, etc.

The Number of Articles were thirty three, which were sworn unto at Troyes, May
30, 1420, the same being proclaimed in London, the 20 of June following. These
Articles were concluded betwixt the two Kings in the presence of diverse of the
chief Nobility both of England and France, homage being sworn unto King Henry,
and he proclaimed Regent of France. And on the third of June the marriage of
Henry and Katharine was with all pompous solemnity celebrated at Troyes, the
Bishop of that See performing the ceremonies. From Troyes the King of England
and his Queen rode to Paris, where great entertainment was g^ven; and the more
to weaken the Daulphins interest, a Parliament of the three Estates was
assembled in Paris, where the disinherison of the Daulphin was confirmed. In
this Parliament was also the final accord betwixt the two Kings acknowledged by
the French King, as made by his free consent and liking, and with advice of the
Council of France; whereupon it was likewise there ratified by the General
States of that Realm, and sworn unto particularly upon the Holy Evangelists by
the French Nobles and Rulers spiritual and secular, who also set their Seals to
the Instruments thereof. Which Instruments were sent into England to be kept in
the Kings Exchequer at Westminster. Things now settled in France as well as that
unsettled time would permit, King Henry leaves the Duke of Clarence to be his
Lieutenant there, and hasts for England with his Queen, whom he caused to be
Crowned at Westminster in little time after their arrival in England. Then
called a Parliament in order to the raising of moneys for the continuing of the
Conquest in France; but some men minding more their private interest than the
public, instead of being free thereto to contribute, they petitioned the King
to commiserate the poverty of the Commons, which, as they pleaded, were
beggered by the Wars: wherefore without further pressing for any aid the King
again pawned his Crown to his rich Uncle Cardinal Beauford for twenty thousand
pounds, and then returned into France with four thousand Horse and 24 thousand
Foot. And time it was, for the Daulphins party was grown considerably strong by
Aids sent from Scotland, under the conduct of the Earl of Bucquhanan and
Archibald Douglas, who had given a defeat to a party of the English, therein
killing the valiant Duke of Clarence, and taking prisoners the Earls of
Huntingdon and Somerset, and Thomas Beaufort. After which the Daulphinois had
laid siege to Alenzon, and straightened the City of Paris, by withholding
provisions from it; but when victorious Henry appeared, the enemy betook them
to their strongholds, many of which he gained in short time.

A. D. 1421, and December. the sixth, whilst King Henry lay before Meaux, news
was brought him that his Queen at the Castle of Windsor was delivered of a Son,
at which he exceedingly rejoiced, yet said, he liked not the place of her
delivery, having before commanded that she should not be delivered there, and
withal predicted that what Henry of Monmouth should gain, Henry of Windsor
should lose.

A. D. 1422, Queen Katharine passed beyond the Seas to the King into France,
and there in the Loure King Henry and his Queen Katharine at the Festival of
Pentecost sat in their Royal Robes, with their Imperial Crowns on their heads,
and kept there Court with great confluence of people. But shortly after, this
renowned Prince fell sick of a burning Fever and Flux, whereof he dyed, August
31. 1422. His bowels were buried at St. Mauro de Fosses, his body at
Westminster, next beneath the Tomb of Edward the Confessor. Upon his Tomb Queen
Katharine caused a Royal Picture to be laid, covered all over with Silver-Plate
gilt, the head whereof was wholly of massy Silver. All which at the Abbeys
suppression was sacrilegiously broken off and taken away. His Issue was only
Henry of Windsor. It Is said of him* That he was a Prince godly in heart, sober
in speech, sparing of words, resolute in deeds, provident in Council, prudent
in judgment, modest in countenance, magnanimous in action, constant in
undertaking, a great Alms-giver, devout to Godward, a renowned Soldier,
fortunate in field, from whence he never returned without Victory. He erected
the Monasteries of Bethlem and Briget near unto Richmond, gave Princely gifts
to the Church of Westminster and Brotherhood of St. Giles without
Cripple-gate-London. He first instituted Garter principal King at Arms, besides
other augmentations to the Order of St George.

A. D. 1414, Sigismond the Emperor came into England, desiring to make peace
betwixt the two Nations of France and England, but when that could not be
effected he entered into a League with the English himself. Sir Roger Acton,
Beverly, Murley and some others were strangled and burned for an unlawful
meeting in St. Giles-fields. A. D. 1417. Sir John Oldcastle, Lord Cob^am, was
adjudged as a Traitor to the King and Realm, to be drawn through the streets to
St. Giles-fields by London, and there to be hanged and burnt.

Three Popes were now at once mounted into St. Peter's Chair, namely Benedict,
Gregory and John, therefore for preventions of mischief to the Church by this
Schism, a Council was held at Constance in Germany, whither King Henry sent
nine English Prelates, one of which, to wit, Richard Clifford Bishop of London,
was the first nominated by the Council to be Pope, and he first nominated him
that succeeded, which was Otho Collonna, by the name of Martin the fifth. In
the third year of this Kings reign, and on Candlemas day, seven Dolphins came
up the River Thames, four of which were taken.

An Act made in Parliament holden at Leicester, That such who maintained
Wickliffes doctrine were Heretics and Traitors, and to be hanged and burned.
By which Law Sir Roger Acton, with diverse others, as also the Lord Cobham, were
put to death.

The Mayors and Sheriffs of London in this Kings Reign.
In his first Year, Sir William Cromar was Mayor. John Sutton, John Michael,
Sheriffs*


In his second Year, Sir Thomas Falconer was Mayor. John Michael, Thomas Allen,
Sheriffs.


In his third Year. Sir Nicholas Wotton was Mayor. William Cambridge, Alan
Everard, Sheriffs.


In his fourth Year, Sir Henry Barton was Mayor. Richard Whittington, John
Coventry, Sheriffs.


In his fifth Year, Richard Marlow was Mayor. Henry Read, John Gedney, Sheriffs*


In his sixth Year, William Sevenoke was Mayor. John Brian, John Barton, John
Parvess, Sheriffs*


In his seventh Year, Sir Richard Whittington was Mayor. Robert Whittington,
John Butler, Sheriffs.


In his eighth Year, William Cambridge was Mayor. John Butler, John Wells,
Sheriffs.


In his ninth Year, Sir Robert Chichely was Mayor. Richard Gosseline, William
Weston, Sheriffs.


HENRY VI.
A. D. 1422.
HENRY of Windsor, was crowned about the Eighth Month of his age. The guard and
custody of this Royal Infant, was committed to Thomas Duke of Excester; the
Nurture and Education to his Mother the Queen-Dowager, the Government of
England to Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, and the Regency of France to John Duke
of Bedford. The first disadvantage that befell the English Cause after the late
King's decease, was the death of Charles the French King, who survived Henry
but 53 days; for the imbecilities of this Prince were a strength to the
English; on the other side, the Infancy of young Henry was an advantage to
young Charles, by them of his party now called King of France, though by the
English he was called only King of Berry, because little else was left unto
him. Howbeit now he seeks to enlarge his Dominions, having received Aids from
Italy and Scotland. And not far from the Town of Vernoil, his and the Regents
Forces joined battle, when the English inured to the French Wars, having born
the first heat of their enemies encounter, by perseverance utterly broke them,
and put them to flight. The Regent himself fought most fiercely, winning unto
himself a lasting Honor. On the enemies part was slain the Constable and
Lieutenant of France, the Earls of Wigton and Vantadour, with about five
thousand others. Prisoners taken, was the Duke of Alanzon himself, with about
two hundred others of special account. After this Victory, the Regent besieged
Mants in Main, and with Ordnance beat down part of the Walls, whereupon it was
yielded; this being one of the Articles at the surrender (which perhaps might
be upon every like occasion) That if any person was found within the City which
had been consenting to the murder of John Duke of Burgundy, Father to Philip
Duke of Burgoigne, that they should simply be at the Regents mercy.

Some time after this, and not much, Thomas Montacute Earl of Salisbury, with a
dreadful puissance, besieged the City of Orleans, and so enforced it, that the
inhabitants were willing to articulate, and to yield themselves to the Duke of
Burgundy, then being in his company: but the Earl highly disdaining thereat,
said in the English Proverb, I will not beat the bush, and another shall have
the bird. Which Proverbial speech, it is said, so offended the Duke, that it
wholly alienated his mind from the English, to their great loss in all the
French Wars following. And now appeared that famous French Shepherdess Joan of
Lorrain, about 18 years of age, daughter to James of Arcke. This Maid to
comfort Charles of France, presented her self to him at Chinon, bidding him to
be of good courage, and constantly affirming, that God had sent her to deliver
the Realm of France from the English yoke, and to restore him to the fullness of
his Fortunes. Then she armed her self like a man, and required to have that
Sword which at that time did hang in Saint Katharines Church of Fierebois in
Tourain; and being warlikely arrayed, she gets into Orleans, which did greatly
animate the fainting French. From Orleans this Maid of God (for so the French
called her) sent a Letter to de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, in words to this
effect: King of England, do reason to the King of heaven for his blood royal;
yield up to the Virgin the keys of all the good Cities which you have forced,
etc. I am the chief of this War; wheresoever I encounter your men in France, I
will chase them, will they nill they, etc. The Virgin comes from heaven to
drive you out of France; be not obstinate, for you shall not hold France of the
King of heaven, the Son of St. Mary, but Charles shall enjoy it, the King and
lawful heir, to whom God has given it. He shall enter Paris with a goodly
train, etc. Understand these news of God and the Virgin; spare innocent blood,
leave Orleans at liberty. This Letter was entertained of the English with
laughter, and Joan reputed of them no better than a Bedlam, or Inchantress. But
be she what she would, yet by her encouragements and conduct the English had
Orleans plucked out of their hopes, and with much loss were driven to raise the
siege. In all Adventures Joan was one, and the foremost. At one Sally, she
being shot through the arm, said to her followers, Come this is a favor, let
us go on, they cannot escape the hand of God. The English lost at this siege,
the Earl of Salisbury, the Lord Moline, the Lord Poynings, Sir Thomas Gargrave;
and of all sorts (if you believe the enemy) were slain in such Sallies as the
Martial Maid made, 8000, our own Writers say but 600. After the raising of this
siege, some Towns were took by the English; but at a Village called Potay, the
French coming upon them before the Archers could fortify their battles with an
empalement of stakes, the English after three hours bloody resistance were put
to the worst: The Lords Talbot, Scales, Hungerford, and Sir Thommas Rampstone,
were taken prisoners. Which loss was followed with the sudden revolt of sundry
Towns. Nor was it long ere Charles recovered Aunerre and Rhiemes; in the last
of which, according to the Maids direction, he was solemnly crowned King of
France. Hitherto the Virgin had been very lucky; but coming to the rescue of
Champagne, distressed by the English and B^rgundians, she was taken by a
Burgundian Knight, who sold her to the English, and they sent her to Roan,
where she was burnt for Sorcery, Bloodshed, and unnatural use of man-like
Apparel and Habiliments, contrary to her Sex. The rumor of whose death, and
ignominious cause thereof* was something incommodious to Charles's affairs for
a time; and it was thought that the coming of young King Henry into France
would be much more, who December. 7.1431, was crowned King of France in
Paris, by the Cardinal of Winchester. At which time such of the French
Nobility as were present, did their homage to him. The Kings Patents and
Grants touching French matters, passed under the seal and style of Henry King
of the Frenchmen and of England. And about this time the English Affairs
succeeded pretty fortunately in France. The Earl of Arundel and Lord Talbot
carry about victorious arms, and terrify Main, Anjou, and other places, with
their successes.

A D. 1435, that famous Patriot and General John Duke of Bedford, dyed at
Paris. Upon which many Towns voluntarily yielded, and multitudes of the
French forsook the English to join with Charles. And though the English Forces
then in France were not altogether slothful* yet through a fatal security or
negligence, or both, at home, there was not speedy sufficiencies of resistance
ministered. Richard Duke of York was created Regent of France; but before he
arrived there, Paris was lost by the treachery of the Citizens, Feb. 27. 1436.
And Philip Duke of Burgundy now in person gives proof of his disaffections to
the English, bringing his Forces before the Town of Callis; for the relief of
which place the Protector Humphrey Duke of Gloucester passed with a great
Army; but Burgundy had vvithdravvn his Forces before the Duke arrived. Howbeit
the Duke took some revenge on him, by vvasting part of his Dominions; Which
done, he with honor returned to his Charge in England.

In France the Earl of Warwick was very active driving the Duke of Burgundy's
Forces from Crotoy, freeing Albeville from the danger of a Bastile, for twenty
days spoiling the Country of Picardy about Amiens and Artois. The Duke of
Somreset, Lords Talbot and Willoughby were also busied in other places for the
security of what the English had gained. John Stratford. A. B. Cant.
But the common enemy the Turk increasing in strengths, Ambassadors were sent
from all parts to determine these bloody differences betwixt the Nations of
France and England, whereupon a Truce was taken by the two Kings for eighteen
months.

A. D. 1444, was King Henry married with Margaret the daughter of Renate Duke
of Anjou and Lorrain. In which marriage, say some, begun the mournful Tragedies
of our Country: For after this day, the fortune of the World began to decline
the King; so that he lost his friends in England, and revenues in France, for
shortly all was ruled by the Queen and her Council, to the great disprofit of
the King and his Realm, and to the mauger and obloquie of the Queen her self,
who had many a wrong and false report made of her.

A. D. 1447, Good Duke Humphreys death was effected. He was much hated by the
Queen and her party, as the only man who by his prudence, as also by the Honor
and Authority of his birth and place, seemed to impeach that Sovereign Command,
which they pretended to settle in the King, but meant indeed (as the manner is
under soft Princes) to reign themselves in another name. Many great Lords were
drawn on (at the time of a Parliament then holden at St. Edmondsbury) to concur
for his destruction, not perceiving that thereby they plucked up the flood-gate,
at which the Duke of York should enter. This great Duke being come to attend in
this Parliament, was Arrested of High Treason by John Lord Beaumont High
Constable of England, the Dukes of Buckingham, Sommerset and others; and to
guard him certain of the Kings household were appointed: but it was not long
before he was found dead, whose body was showed to the Lords and Commons, as if
he had died of a Palsy or Imposthume. His servants Sir Roger Chamberlain,
Richard Middleton, Thomas Herbert, Arthur Tursey Esquires, and Richard Nedham,
Gent. were condemned of High Treason, and had this unexampled punishment. They
were drawn from the Tower to Tyburn, there hanged, let down quick, stripped
naked, marked with a knife to be quartred, and then a Charter of Pardon for
their lives was showed by the Marquess of Suffolk. Thomas Wild the Dukes
servant also being condemned and pardoned, had for a preamble in his Letters
Patents words importing, That he had been one among many other Traitors against
the King with Duke Humphrey, who went about, and practiced to deliver Eleanor
late wife to the Duke out of Prison, for which purpose he had gathered a great
power and number of men to come to the Parliament at Bury, there to have
contrived the Kings destruction. Such was the end of this great Prince, who by
the people of England was thought to be doubly murdered, by detraction and
deadly practice. He was not only a true Lover of learned men* but himself was
also learned and a Father of his Country. And now the whole frame of government
seemed to repose it self on the Queen, and such Favorites as the King by her
commendations liked.

The affairs of France were neglected. And the Duke of York perceiving the King
to be ruled, and not to Rule, began secretly to allure his friends of the
Nobility, and privily declared to them his Title to the Crown, as likewise he
did to certain Governors of Cities and Towns. Which attempt was so politickly
and closely carried, that his provision was ready, before his purpose was
public. The very state of things invited this fatal conspiracy, there being
now a milder King than England was worthy of, a Council out of favor with the
people, manifold losses and dishonours abroad, a turbulent and jealous
condition of things at home. Of all which the Duke of York made his best use,
cherishing the popular discontents, and instead of seeking to redress any evils
in the State, he represented them to be worse than they were, thereby to ripen
that breach of Loyalty in the hearts of men, which his ambition wrought upon.
In France matters went on very unhappily on the English side; For the Duke of
Sommerset during the Truce, suffered a Town of Britain to be surprised, denying
restitution thereof, cherished his Soldiers in their riot and disorders. The
French therefore making this their example, surprised Town after Town till they
had gained all Normandy, and within few years extorted the Duchy of Gascoign
out of the English possession.

In the mean time the Duke of York raised his esteem in England, by his
appeasing of a tumult which had happened in Ireland. And at a Parliament holden
at Westminster, many Articles were exhibited by the Lower House against the
Duke of Suffolk, wherein he was charged with evil demeanor, Misprision and
Treason, and committed Prisoner to the Tower, from whence he was discharged
within a few weeks after.

About this time Adam Molins Bishop of Chichester and keeper of the Privy Seal
(a wise and stout man) stood in the Duke of Yorks way to the Crown; therefore
he procured him to be slain at Portsmouth by certain Ship-men. And in a
Parliament holden at Leicester the Duke of Suffolk, a principal pillar of King
Henry's safety, was set at again by the Yorkists. They charge that for a crime
on him (namely the delivery of Anjou and Main) which themselves had universally
in a former Parliament assented unto and ratified. This they prosecuted so
effectually, (though unjustly) against him, that he was condemned to be
banished for five years; but in his way to banishment he was by some employed
on purpose, taken at Dover-road, where they struck off his head at the side of
a Cock-boat: nor was his death much lamented of the people, because he was
thought to have been a private actor in the death of the Noble Duke of
Gloucester. Now the Yorkists having thus rid Suffolk out of the way, think it no
unfit time to begin to put their designs in practice; so induce the Commons of
Kent to make an Insurrection. John Kemp. A. B. Cant.
The Captain of the Rebels was a Villain named Jack Cade, whom some by
contraries called John Amend-all. Their demands were, That the Duke of York now
in Ireland might be called home; and that he, with some others whom Cade named,
might be principally used in Council: That those guilty of good Duke Humphrey's
death, might receive due punishment. That the Grievances of the people might be
redressed. These Kentish Rebels (with whom others from Essex joined) after they
had committed some outrages in and about London, as in beheading the Lord Say
Treasurer of England, Mr. Cromer High Sheriff, plundering many of the Citizens,
etc. upon the King's Proclamation and assurance of Pardon, returned to their
own homes. But Cade afterward attempting to raise new troubles, was slain by
Mr. Edan a Kentish Gentleman. The Duke of York finding the humors of the
popular body fitted for his purpose, came suddenly out of Ireland, and
confederated with diverse Noblemen to take the Crown from Henry's head, and to
set it on his own. Howbeit their pretense in taking arms, was only for the
reformation of the State, professing that they meant all honor and obedience
to the King; Which King Henry and his Friends, chiefly the Duke of Somerset,
could not believe: Therefore an Army was prepared, and also advanced against
the Yorkists. But before the Armies came to engage in fight, by such that
secretly favored the Duke of York, the King was persuaded to a reconciliation,
and that Somerset should be commanded prisoner to his own house. Tho.
Bourchier, A. B. Cant.
Which done, and York having dissolved his Army, he came to the King, making
great complaints against Somerset; who hearing thereof, presented himself to
the King against his accuser, answering York face to face, and in plain terms
accused him of highest Treason, as having conspired to depose the King, and to
take the Sovereignty upon himself. Whereupon York was for a time put under
restraint, till in St. Paul's Church in London, before the chief of the
Nobility, he took a solemn oath to be a true, faithful, and obedient subject
unto King Henry.

A. D. 1452, John Lord Talbot, first Earl of Shrewsbury of that Family, with an
Army was sent to regain Gasgoin. Bordeaux her self yielded to this great
Soldier: Whence he went to relieve Chastilion; but charging the Enemy upon much
unequal terms, was there slain in the field, together with his Son the Viscount
Lisle.

After which battle, when the flames of intestine War began to flash out in
England betwixt the two Families of York and Lancaster, the Martial men of
England were called home out of France, to maintain the Factions here: At which
time a French Captain scoffingly asked an English man, When they would return
again into France? To whom the English man feelingly and upon a true ground
answered, When your sins shall be greater and more grievous in the sight of God
than ours are now. A. D. 1453, the Queen was delivered of a Son, who was named
Edward.

A. D. 1454, the Duke of York in despite of his sacred Oath so publicly
taken, raised arms against the King, marching with his forces toward London.
Against whose coming, King Henry prepared an Army, with which he advanced to
St. Albans, where a sharp battle was fought, and the Royal party worsted. On
the Kings side were slain the Duke of Somerset, Earls of Northumberland and
Stafford, Lord Clifford, with sundry worthy Knights and Esquires. The King
himself was shot into the neck with an arrow, taken prisoner, and conveyed back
to London; where, in July immediately following, a Parliament was holden, the
precursor whereof was a Blazing-star, which appeared in June, extending its
beams to the South. The first popular Act of this Assembly, was to restore the
memory of Duke Humphrey to honor, declaring him to have been a true subject to
the King and Realm. The next was to free the Yorkists from treason as to their
taking up of arms. In this Parliament the Duke of York created himself
Protector of England, the Earl of Salisbury his great Confident, was made Lord
Chancellor, and the Earl of Warwick (Salisbury's Son) Captain of Callis. They
spared as yet to touch King Henry's life, because the people did wonderfully
esteem and reverence him for his holiness. But that they (the Yorkists) might
with the more facility uncrown, and at last kill him, they by degrees workt out
his ancient Counselors, and placed of their own creatures in their rooms.

And now the French encouraged by our inward divisions, landed at Sandwich
Fifteen thousand men, where they did some spoil, then departed. Another part of
them burned Foway, and some other towns in Devonshire.

A. D. 1458, the Lords met at London to compose all quarrels, bringing with
them great troops of armed attendants, which through the great vigilance and
providence of the then Mayor of London, Godfrey Bullein (Queen Ann Bulleins
Ancestor) dutifully kept the King's peace. This Meeting of the Lords ended in a
Composure, though it continued but a very short time before both sides made
preparations for War; and at Blore-Heath they came to battle, which was long
and bloody; but at length the worst of the day fell to the Kings side. Howbeit
not long after, the King put the Yorkists to flight at Ludlow, which town was
spoiled to the bare Walls.

In a Parliament holden at Coventry, the Duke of York, Earls of March,
Salisbury, Warwick, Rutland, and others, were attainted of High treason, and
had their whole Estates confiscated. But on July 9 1460, at Northampton was the
fatal battle, where Henry's Forces were utterly broken and vanquished, through
the treachery of the Lord Gray of Ruthen, who quit his place, and fled to the
Yorkists. The Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Shrewsbury, Viscount Beaumont, Lord
Egrimond, Valiant Sir William Lucy, with many others of the Kings Friends,
were slain; and the King himself fell a prey into his enemies hands, who
carried him to London, where a Parliament begun October. 8. At which Parliament
Richard (...) his claim to the Crown, publ^ (...) ^gree to them on this sort,
nam^ (...) third son of King ^dward the third* had Issue Philip his daughter,
who was married to Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, who had Issue Roger Earl of
March, who had Issue Edmond Earl of March, Roger, Anne, and Eleanor, which said
Edmond, Roger, and Eleanor, died without Issue, and Anne the Heir of that House
was married to Richard Earl of Cambridge (the son of Edmond Duke of York, fifth
son to King Edward the third,) which said Earl of Cambridge had Richard now
Duke of York. He also alleged, that the descendents of John of Gaunt fourth
son and younger brother to Lionel, had hitherto holden the Crown of England
unjustly, for that himself the said Richard Plantagenet Duke of York was the
lawful Heir, being the son of Richard Earl of Cambridge and Anne aforesaid.
Whilss this weighty controversy to whom the Crown of right belonged was under
debate, a Crown which hung for an Ornament in the middle of the roof of the
Room, where the Knights and Burgesses met to consult, and also the Crown which
for like cause stood upon the highest Tower of Dover-Castle, both fell suddenly
down, which were vulgarly construed to be of ill-portent to King Henry. The
conclusion of the Parliament concerning the Crown was, That Henry should enjoy
it during life, and then it should remain to Richard Duke of York, and his
Heirs, and King Henry's Heirs to be for ever excluded. Whereupon the Duke was
proclaimed Heir Apparent. But this while the Queen was gathering forces in the
North, resolving if possible to maintain the possession of a Crown, and to
secure it for her son. The Duke of York therefore with an Army marches against
her, and near unto Wakefield both Hosts join battle, where the Queen at length
gained the Victory. The Duke himself with diverse men of account were slain in
the fight, and the Earl of Salisbury was taken prisoner and beheaded. And now
Edward Earl of March the son of Richard Duke of York, takes upon him to
maintain the quarrel, and at Mortimers Cross near Ludlow, he set upon the
Queens Army. At which time there appeared three Suns, which suddenly joined
into one. The Battles maintained themselves with great fury, but in the end
March obtained the Victory. There were taken Sir Owen Teder or Tudor (Father to
Jasper Earl of Pembroke) whom Earl Edward caused to be beheaded, Taken also
were, Sir John Scudamor with his two sons, and other persons of Rank.

A. D. 1461. Both Armies met and engaged in fight at St. Albans, where the
Queens side won the day, and recovered the King, whom the Yorkists had brought
along with them from London. Howbeit the Londoners stood wholly for the Earl of
March (whose presence and carriage made him amiable amongst the people,
especially women) and at his return to London from the fight, proclaimed him
King of England.

King Henry's Issue was only Edward. He was a Prince free from pride, given
much to Prayer; well-read in the Scriptures, Charitable, so chaste and modest,
that when certain young women presented themselves before him in a Mask, with
their hair loose, and bare breasts laid out, he immediately rose up and
departed with these words, Fie, fie for shame, forsooth ye are to blame. He
took all injuries, whereof he received plenty, so patiently, that he not only
did not seek to revenge them, but gave God thanks that he did send them to
punish his sins in this life, that he might escape punishment in the life to
come. To a Russian that struck him on the face whilst he was prisoner, he only
said, Forsooth, you are to blame to strike me your anointed King. Not long
before his death, being demanded why he had so long held the Crown of England
unjustly, he replied, my Father was King of England, quietly enjoying the Crown
all his Reign; and his Father, my Grandsire was also King of England, and I
even a Child in the Cradle, was proclaimed and Crowned King without any
interruption, and so held it forty years well-neer, all the States doing homage
unto me, as to my Ancestors. Therefore I say with King David, My lot is fallen
in a fair ground, I have a goodly Heritage: my help is from the Lord which
saves the upright in heart. He founded those Famous Colleges of Eato^, and
Kings College in Cambridge.

In or near the year of our Lord 1442. was Eleanor Cobham the good Duke
Humphries wife, arraigned of Sorcery and Treason, for setting on Bu^lingbrooke
and Southwell to take away the Kings life by Necromancy. Something of the fact
she either confessed, or was proved against her, for the which she was put to
solemn and public penance in London three several days, then was committed to
perpetual imprisonment.

The Art of Printing was first found out in Germany by a Knight called John
Guttenberghen, and brought into England by William Caxton a Mercer of London,
who first practiced the same in the Abbey at Westminster, Anno Dom. 1471.

The Mayors and Sheriffs of London in this Kings Reign.
In his first Year, Sir William Waldren was Mayor. William Eastfield, Robert
Tatarfel, Sheriffs.


In his second Year, William Cromar was Mayor. Nicholas James, Thomas Watford,
Sheriffs.


In his third Year, John Michal was Mayor. Simon Seamen, John Bywater, Sheriffs.


In his fourth Year, John Coventry was Mayor. William Mildred, John Brokle,
Sheriffs.


In his fifth Year, Sir John Rainwel was Mayor. John Arnal, John Higham,
Sheriffs.


In his sixth Year, Sir John Gedney was Mayor. Henry Frowick, Robert Otely,
Sheriffs.


In his seventh Year, Sir Henry Barton was Mayor. Thomas Duffhouse, John
Abbot, Sheriffs.


In his eighth Year, Sir William Eastfield was Mayor. William Russe, Ralph
Holland, Sheriffs.


In his ninth Year, Nicholas Wotton was Mayor. Walter Chertsey, Robert Large,
Sheriffs.


In his tenth Year, Sir John de Wells was Mayor. John Aderly, Stephen Brown,
Sheriffs.


In his eleventh Year, Sir John Parveis was Mayor. John Olney, John Paddesley,
Sheriffs.


In his Twelfth Year, Sir John Brokle was Mayor. Thomas Chalton, John King,
Sheriffs.


In his Thirteenth year, Sir Roger Oteley was Mayor. Thomas Barnewel, Simon
Air, Sheriffs.


In his Fourteenth Year, Sir Henry Frowick was Mayor. Thomas Catworth, Robert
Clopton, Sheriffs.


In his Fifteenth Year, Sir John Michael was Mayor. Thomas Morsted, William
Gregory, Sheriffs.


In his Sixteenth Year, Sir William Eastfield was Mayor. William Hales,
William Chapman, Sheriffs.


In his Seventeenth, Year, Sir Stephen Brown was Mayor. Hugh Dyker, Nicholas
You, Sheriffs.


In his Eighteenth Year, Robert Large was Mayor. Philip Malpas, Robert Marshal,
Sheriffs.


In his Ninteenth Year, Sir John Paddesley was Mayor. John Sutton, William
Welinhale, Sheriffs.


In his Twentieth Year, Robert Clopton was Mayor. William Combis, Richard Rich,
Sheriffs.


In his twenty first Year, John Aderley was Mayor. Thomas Beaumont, Richard
Nordon, Sheriffs.


In his twenty second Year, Thomas Catworth was Mayor. Nicholas Wyford, John
Norman, Sheriffs.


In his twenty third Year, Sir Henry Frowick was Mayor. Stephen Foster, Hugh
W^tch, Sheriffs.


In his twenty fourth Year, Sir Simon Air was Mayor. John Darby, Godfrey
Fielding, Sheriffs.


In his Twenty fifth Year, John Olney was Mayor. Robert Horn, Godfrey Bullen,
Sheriffs.


In his twenty sixth Year, Sir John Gedney was Mayor. William Abraham, Thomas
Scot, Sheriffs.


In his twenty seventh Year, Sir Stephen Brown was Mayor. William Cotlow,
William Marrow, Sheriffs.


In his twenty eight Year, Sir Thomas Chalton was Mayor. William Hulin, Thomas
Canning, Sheriffs.


In his twenty ninth Year, Nicholas Wilford was Mayor. John Middleton, William
Dear, Sheriffs.


In his thirtieth Year, Sir William Gregory was Mayor. Matthew Philip,
Christopher Wharton, Sheriffs.


In his thirty first Year, Sir Geoffry Fielding was Mayor. Richard Lee,
Richard Alley, Sheriffs.


In his thirty second Year, Sir John Norman was Mayor. John Walden, Thomas
Cook, Sheriffs.


In his thirty third Year, Sir Stephen Foster was Mayor. John Field, William
Tailor, Sheriffs.


In his thirty fourth Year, Sir William Marrow was Mayor, John Young, Thomas
Oldgrave, Sheriffs.


In his thirty fifth Year, Sir Thomas Canning was Mayor. John Styward, Ralph
Verney, Sheriffs.


In his thirty sixth Year, Sir Godfrey Bullen was Mayor. William Edward,
Thomas Reyner, Sheriffs.


In his thirty seventh Year, Sir Thomas Scot was Mayor. Ralph Joceline, Richard
Nedham, Sheriffs.


In his thirty eighth Year, Sir William Hulin was Mayor. John Plummer, John
Stocker, Sheriffs.


In his thirty ninth Year, Sir Richard Lee was Mayor. Richard Flemming, John
Lambert, Sheriffs.


EDWARD IV.
EDWARD the fourth, A. D. 1^61
was the eldest son of Richard Duke of York, and began to Reign in the
twentieth year of his Age. At which time Henry of Windsor had many friends
remaining, who by open Hostility sought to re settle him on the English Throne.
The battle at Towton fought on Palm Sunday 1461, is very memorable, wherein
died the Lords Beaumont, Nevill, Willoughby, Wells, Scales, Gray, Dacres,
Fitzhugh, Beckingham, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen a great number, and in
all on both parts 35091, but Henry lost the day.

A. D. 1461, and June 28, was Edward Duke of York and Earl of March Crowned
King at Westminster with great solemnity. And in November following was Henry
of Windsor and his son Edward by Parliament disinherited of their right or
claim to the Crown. The Dukes of Excester and Sommerset, and Earl of Devonshire
with an 140 more were Attainted and Disinherited.

Queen Margre^ the mean while was gaining Aids from France, but they were
discomfited by bastard Ogle. Then with the Scots she entered Northumberland,
took the Castle of Bamburgh, and passed forward to the Bishopric of Durham,
her forces daily increasing: but these also were defeated by King Edward at
Hegely Moor, where Sir Ralph Piercie dying said, I have saved the Bird in my
breast, meaning his Oath made to King Henry, in whose cause he lost his life.

At Hexam also were Henry's forces defeated, but himself with much difficulty
escaped into Scotland. Shortly after which, this unfortunate Prince came into
England in disguise, but being betrayed, was apprehended in Waddington-Hall as
he sat at dinner, from whence he was conveyed to London, with his Legs bound
to the stirrups, and at London was Arrested by the Earl of Warwick, and
committed to the Tower.

And now King Edward thinks himself at leisure to marry, yet refuses all
Foreign matches, whereof he had many offered, and takes for his consort an
inferior subject, the Relict of his mortal enemy, Sir John Gray slain at the
battle of St. Albans on King Henry's side. This Lady Elizabeth Gray becoming a
suitor unto the King for her Jointure; kind King Edward became a suitor unto
her for a nights-Lodging; but she wisely answered him, when he became
importunate, That as she did account her self too base to be his Wife, so she
did think her self too good to be his Whore. When the King would needs marry
this Lady, to the great discontent of his Council, but especially of his
Mother; His Mother alleged many reasons to the contrary, and amongst the rest
this, That only her Widow-hood might be sufficient to restrain him, for that it
was an high disparagement to a King, to be dishonored with bigamy in his first
marriage. To which the King pleasantly answered, In that she is a Widow, and
has already Children, By Gods blessed Lady I am a Bachelor and have some too,
and so each of us has a proof, that neither of us are like to be barren. And
therefore Madam I pray you be content, I trust in God she shall bring you forth
a young Prince, that shall please you. And as for the Bigamy, let the Bishop
hardly lay it in my way when I come to take Orders, for I understand that it is
forbidden to a Priest, but I never wist yet that it was forbidden to a Prince.
On May 26. 1465, was this Lady, whom Edward had accepted to be his Queen,
Crowned at Westminster with all due Celebrations. Her Father Sir Richard
Woodvil was created Lord Rivers, and made High Constable of England. Her son
Thomas Gray was created Marquess Dorcet, and her other relations preferred. But
this marriage of the Kings did so sorely disgust the Earl of Warwick, who had
courted the Duke of Savoys daughter for King Edward, that he turned his
affection from him to Henry, contriving all he could King Edwards deposition.
He wrought upon George Duke of Clarence the Kings brother to favor his
designments, the Duke being the easier wrought upon, by reason he had before
took offense against his brother about his Marriage, and preferring his Wifes
kindred. Then did Warwick by his Agents stir up a commotion in the North, one
Robert Huldern first heading a rabble of about fifteen thousand, and he put to
death, Sir John Coniers undertook the leading of them, marching with them
toward London; Proclaiming, That King Edward was neither a just Prince to God,
nor a profitable Prince to the Commonwealth. Against these rebels the King
sent an Army that engaged with them not far from Banbury, where the Northern
men had gone off with the worst, had not John Clapham Esquire, a servant of
Warwicks, displayed his colors with the white Bear, and from an eminent place
cried a Warwick, a sVVarwick, whereat the Welshman, fearing indeed that
Warwick had been come, betook themselves to flight, leaving their General the
Earl of ^embroke, and his brother in the field, who valiantly fighting were
encompassed and taken. The Earl with his brother Sir Richard Herbert were
brought to Banbury, where with ten other Gentlemen they lost their heads,
Coniers and Clapham being their Judges, 1469.

From hence the Northern men under the conduct of Robin of Riddisdale, hasted
to the Kings Manor of Graffon, where the Queens Father then lay, whom with his
son John they suddenly surprised, and at Northampton struck off their heads.
The King this while having prepared a mighty Army, marched toward Warwicks
company, and at Wolney pitched his Tents, the enemy lying at a little distance,
in readiness for battle; but by mediation of friends a peace was entreated.
When the King resting secure was by politic Warwick surprised in the dead of
the night, and carried Prisoner to Warwick-Castle, from whence he was by night
conveyed to Middleham Castle in Yorkshire, where under the custody of the Earls
Brother George Neville Archbishop of York he was retained; but the Bishop
granting him liberty to ride a Hunting in the Forests and Parks, he fairly made
his escape. Warwick hereupon rages, but seeing no remedy, he made use of
necessity, and gave forth, that himself so caused it, having power to make
Kings and to unmake them. Nor did he and Clarence leave off here, but procured
a Rebellion in Lincolnshire, where Sir Robert Wells, an expert Soldier, with
Thirty thousand Commons disturbed the Country, and in every place proclaimed
King Henry. At Stamford-Wells set upon the Kings forces (not staying for
VVarwicks coming) where was performed a most bloody fight, till at length Sir
Robert being taken, the Lincolnshire men, casting away their Coats, all ran
away. In regard whereof, this Battle was called, the Battle of Lost-Coat-Field.
Wells with many others were put to death, 1470. Upon this defeat Clarence and
Warwick fled into France, thinking to take sanctuary at Callis; but there the
Lord Vawclear whom Warwick had substituted his Deputy, denied them admittance,
bidding them defiance with his great Guns; for which good service King Edward
mad Vaw^lea^, himself, Governor of Callis, But though these Lords were
rejected here, yet were they with great respect received at the ^rench Court,
K. Lewis furnishing them with aids, which effected, they set sail and landed at
Dartmouth: from whence Warwick marched toward London, proclaiming Henry King,
and commanding all from sixteen to sixty upon a great penalty to take arms
against the Usurper Edward Duke of York.

And incredible it was to see the confluence of them which came armed to him,
who a little before applauded and approved none but King Edward. The Bastard
Fawconbridg in the West, and the Earl of Pembroke in Wales, everywhere
proclaimed King Henry also. And the Lord Montacute, who having mustered 6000
men in the name of King Edward, and brought them forward almost to Nottingham,
drew them back again, alleging King Edward's ungratefulness to his friends.
Every one cried now, A King Henry, a King Henry; a Warwick, a Warwick; and
indeed all so applauded the passage now on foot, that King Edward was forced to
fly beyond the seas. His Queen Elizabeth stole out of the Tower, and took
sanctuary in Westminster, where on the 4th of November she was delivered of a
son, which without all pomp was there also baptized by the name of Edward.
Other Sanctuaries were also full of Edwards Friends. And now the Kentish men
took the opportunity to rob, spoil, and do much harm about London, and some in
London it self; and more would have done, had not the Earl of Warwick come in
to the rescue; which increased his name, that was great enough before. On
October 6, the said Earl entered the Tower, wherein King Henry had been detained
prisoner almost the space of 9 years, whom he released, and restored to him the
title of King, and forthwith conveyed him through London to the Bishops palace,
where a pompous Court was kept till the 13 of the same month, on which day
Henry went Crowned to St. Paul's, the Earl of Warwick bearing his Train, and
Earl of Oxford the Sword, the people crying, God save King Henry. November 26
following, a certain Parliament was begun at Westminster, wherein K. Edward was
declared a Traitor to his Country, an Usurper of the Crown, and had all his
goods confiscate; the like judgment passed against his adherents. John Tiptoft
Earl of Worcester was beheaded. All the Statutes made by K. Edward were
revoked. The Crowns of England and France entailed to K. Henry, and his Heirs
Male, and for want of such, unto George Duke of Clarence; and the Earl of
Warwick was made Governor of the Land in those turbulent times. But K. Edward
having received some aids from the Duke of Burgundy, and the promises of more
in England, landed at Ravenspur in Yorkshire. At his first arrival, he seemed
to lay aside his claim to the Crown, pretending only to his rights as a private
person, howbeit, when he had possessed himself of York, and got his friends about
him, he then marched in an hostile manner till he came near to the City of
Warwick, where his Brother Clarence brought in to his assistance 4000 men. And
Clarence reconciled to K. Edward, sought to draw in Warwick, to which end, he
sent messengers to him to the Town of Warwick where he then lay; but Warwick
bade the Messengers go tell the Duke from him, That he had rather be an Earl,
and always like himself, than a perjured Duke; and that ere his Oath should be
falsified, as the Dukes apparently was, he would lay down his life at his
enemies foot, which he doubted not should be bought very dear. This stout
resolution made Edward more wary, therefore he hastens forward to obtain
London, whither when he was come, the Citizens set open their Gates to him. And
now peaceable Henry becomes Prisoner again to K. Edward, who hearing of
Warwicks advance toward London, draws forth his forces to meet him, taking
Henry along with him, and upon Gladmore near Barnet, on Easterday in the
morning the Kings and Earls hosts joined Battle, the best of the day for a
while being Warwicks; but at length through the fogginess and darkness of the
Air, the Stars embroidered on the Earl of Oxfords men's Coats, who were in the
left wing of the Battle, were mistaken for the Sun which K. Edwards men wore;
in which error VVarwicks Battalion lets fly at their own fellows, that were in
great forwardness of gaining the victory, and they not knowing the cause of the
error, judged themselves betrayed; whereupon the Earl of Oxford with 800 men,
quit the Field: Which great Warwick perceiving, he courageously animated his
men, and furiously rushed into the midst of his enemies battle, so far, that he
could not be rescued, where valiantly fighting he was slain. Marquis Montacute
making forward to relieve him was also slain, whereby ended that bloody days
task. On King Edward's part died the Lord Cromwell, Lord Bourchier, Lord Barnes
and Sir John Lisle. On the other part, the Earl of Warwick, and his brother
John Nevil Marquis Montacute. On both sides ten thousand, most of which were
buried upon the same plain, where afterward a Chapel was built. In this same
year 1471, and within few weeks after this was a battle fought at Tewksbury
betwixt King Edward and the Martial Queen Margaret, the defeat happening to the
Queen; On whose side were slain John Lord Sommerset, John Courtney Earl of
Devonshire, Sir John Delves, Sir Edward Hampden, Sir Robert Whittingham, and
Sir John Lewkner, with three hundred others. Amongst them that fled Prince
Edward King Henry's son was one; him Sir Richard Crofts apprehended, and
presented him to the King, whom the King a while beheld with austere
countenance, at last demanded of him, How he durst with Banner displayed, so
presumptuously disturb his Realm; To which the Prince answered, That what he
did was to recover his Fathers Kingdoms and his most rightful inheritance. How
dare thou then, added the Prince, which art his subject display thy Colors
against him thy Liege-Lord? Which answer so moved King Edward, that he dashed
the Prince on the mouth with his Gantlet, and Richard Duke of Gloucester with
some of the Kings servants, most shamefully murdered him at the Kings feet. His
body was buried in the Monastery of the black- Friars at Tewksbury.

Edmond Duke of Sommerset, the Pryor of St. John's, with many Knights and
Esquires were taken forth of Sanctuary and executed at Tewksbury. Queen
Margaret in this fatal day of battle took into a religious house, from whence
she was taken and committed to sure and strait keeping, in which condition she
remained till such time that she was ransomed by her Father Duke Renate. May
20, King Edward entered London, and in few days after the Crookback'd Duke of
Gloucester stabbed harmless King Henry to the heart. Whose murdered body was on
the Ascension-Eve laid in an open Coffin and conveyed to St. Paul's in London,
where it rested uncovered one day, and began to bleed afresh, thence it was
carried to the black Friars Church, where it did bleed as before, then was
buried at Chertsey in Surrey, but King Henry the seventh translated it to his
Chapel of Windsor.

A. D. 1474, Was an Interview at Piquigny in France, of the two Kings of
England and France, where falling into complemental conference, Lewis told King
Edward that he would one day invite him to Paris, there to court his fair
French Ladies, with whom if he committed any sin, Lewis merrily told him that
Cardinal Bourbon should be his Confessor, and to be sure his penance should be
the easier, for that Bourbon used to kiss fair Ladies himself. This was no
sooner spoken howsoever meant, but Edward was as forward of thanks and
acceptance; which King Lewis observing, rounded Philip Co^^nes his
bosome-servant in the ear, telling him flatly, That he liked not Edwards
forwardness to Paris, there had been too many English Princes at that City
already. After King Edwards return into England as he was hunting in Arrow-Park
belonging to Thomas Burdet Esquire, with the death of much game he slew a white
Buck, which the Esquire much fancied, whereupon he wished the Horns in that
persons belly that moved the King to kill that Buck. For which words he was
accused and condemned of Treason, his words being wrested, that he wished the
Horns in the Kings belly, and was beheaded at Tyburne.

A. D. 1478. George Duke of Clarence, by the procurement of his brother Richard
Duke of Gloucester, was accused of Treason and committed to the Tower. His
accusation was, That he had caused diverse of his servants to inform the people
that Mr. Burdet was wrongfully put to death, That upon purpose to exalt himself
and Heirs to the regal dignity, he had most falsely published that the King his
brother was a bastard, and therefore not capable to wear the Crown, for which,
and the like crimes charged upon him, he was in Parliament Attainted of
Treason, and found guilty, and on the eleventh of March 1478, after he had
offered his Mass-peny in the Tower, was drowned in a But of Malmsey, whose body
was buried at Tukesbury. But the King was afterward much grieved, that he had
consented to his death, and would say when any made suit for the life of a
condemned person, O unfortunate brother, for whose life no man would make suit.

A. D. 1483, King Edward fell into a dangerous and deadly sickness, when
calling for his Lords into his sick presence, and raising his faint body on the
pillowes, he exhorted and required them all, For the love that they had ever
born unto him, for the love that he had ever born unto them, for the love that
our Lord bears unto us all, that from that time forward all griefs forgotten,
each of them would love other. Which, says he, I verily trust you will, If you
any thing regard either God or your King, affinity, or kindred, your own
Country, or your own safety. Shortly after which words he departed this life,
April the ninth, and was buried at Windsor in the New Chapel, whose
foundation himself had laid. It Is said of him, that he was just and merciful in
peace, sharp and fierce in War, and that never any King was more familiar with
his Subjects than he. In the beginning of his reign he used to sit in person
certain days together in his Court of King's Bench to see justice and equity
done. His Issue were Edward, Richard, George who died an infant, Elizabeth,
Cicely, Anne, Briget, Mary, Margret and Catharine. His Concubines were
Elizabeth Lucy and three others, which were of three several humors as himself
would say, One the merryest, which was Shores Wife, another the wiliest, and
the third the holiest, for she had wholly devoted her self to his Bed and her
Beads. His base Issue were Arthur surnamed Plantaginet and Elizabeth.

He ordained penal Statutes against excessive pride in apparel, especially
against long-piked shoes then worn, which had grown to such an extreme, that
the Pikes in the toes were turned upwards, and with Silver-chains or Silk-laces
tied to the knee. He gave some Cotswold-sheep to Henry of Castile, and John of
Arragon, 1465, which has been accounted one of the greatest prejudices that
ever happened to England. One Walker a substantial Citizen of London was
beheaded in Smithfield, for only saying to his Child, That he would make him
Heir of the Crown, meaning his house which had that sign.

In the fallen estate of King Henry many of the Nobles that had took part with
Henry were put to fly for their lives into Foreign Countries; and amongst the
rest Henry Holland Duke of Excester and Earl of Huntingdon, son to the Lady
Elizabeth second daughter of John of Gaunt, and Husband to the sister of King
Edward the fourth, was constrained to live in exile in miserable want and
penury. For, says Philip Comines, I once saw the Duke of Excester run on foot,
bare-leg'd, after the Duke of Burgundies Coach and Train begging an Alms for
Gods-sake; But being known what he was, Burgundy gave him a small pension for
his maintenance.

The Mayors and Sheriffs of London in this Kings time.
In his first Year, Sit Hugh Witch was Mayor. George Ireland, John Lock,
Sheriffs.


In his second Year, Sir Thomas Cook was Mayor. William Hampton, Bartholomew
James, Sheriffs.


In his third Year. Sir Matthew Philip was Mayor. Robert Basset, Thomas
Muschampt, Sheriffs.


In his fourth Year, Sir Ralph Joceline was Mayor. John Tate, John Stones,
Sheriffs.


In his fifth Year, Sir Ralph Varney was Mayor. Henry Weaver, William
Constantine, Sheriffs.


In his sixth Year, Sir John Young was Mayor. John Brown, Henry Brice, John
Darby, Sheriffs.


In his seventh Year, Sir Thomas Oldgrave was Mayor. Thomas Stalbrook, Humphrey
Heyford, Sheriffs.


In his eighth Year, Sir William Tailor was Mayor. Simon Smith, William
Herriot, Sheriffs.


In his ninth Year, Sir Richard a Lee was Mayor. Richard Gardner, Robert Drope,
Sheriffs.


In his tenth Year, Sir John Stackton was Mayor. John Crosby, John Ward,
Sheriffs.


In his eleventh Year. Sir William Edwards was Mayor. John Allen, John Shelley,
Sheriffs.


In his twelfth Year, Sir William Hampton was Mayor. John Brown, Thomas
Bledlow, Sheriffs.


In his thirteenth Year. Sir John Tate was Mayor. Sir William Stocker, Robert
Belisdon, Sheriffs.


In his fourteenth Year, Sir Robert Drope was Mayor. Edmond Shaa, Thomas Hill,
Sheriffs.


In his fifteenth Year, Sir Robert Basset was Mayor. Hugh Brice, Robert
Colwich, Sheriffs.


In his sixteenth Year, Sir Ralph Joceline was Mayor. Richard Rawson, William
Horn, Sheriffs.


In his seventeenth Year, Sir Humfrey Heyford was Mayor. Henry Collet, John
Stocker, Sheriffs.


In his eighteenth Year, Sir Richard Gardner was Mayor. Robert Harding, Robert
Bifield, Sheriffs.


In his nineteenth Year, Sir Bartholomew James was Mayor. Thomas Ilam, John
Ward, Sheriffs.


In his twentieth Year, Sir John Brown was Mayor. Thomas Daniel, William Bacon,
Sheriffs.


In his twenty first Year, Sir William Herriot was Mayor. Robert Tate, Rich.
Charey, Will. Wiking, Sheriffs.


In his twenty second Year, Sir Edmund Shaa was Mayor. William White, John
Matthew, Sheriffs.


EDWARD V.
EDWARD the eldest son of King Edward the 4th, A. D. 1483.
being a child but of about twelve years of age when his Father dyed, was
committed to the government of his Uncle Sir Anthony Woodville, a right
honorable person, with whom were joined other of the Queens friends. But
Richard Duke of Gloucester was much discontented that these should have the
keeping of him secure, whom he designed to destroy, that thereby the Crown
might become his. This bloody man therefore, the better to effect his wicked
purposes, did everywhere represent the Queens Kindred to be enemies to the
ancient Nobility, and that they would abuse the Kings Name to their undoing.
With which, and like suggestions, he wrought upon the Duke of Buckingham and
the Lord Hastings (that had formerly born no great good will to the Queens
friends) to join with him, utterly to remove from the Kings company all his
Mothers friends, under the name of the ancient Nobles enemies. Then the
Hypocrite Gloucester understanding that the Lords attending the King, purposed
to bring the King to London to his Coronation, strongly guarded, he therefore
procured the Queen to be brought in mind, That it was not needful, but would be
jeopardous for the King to be brought up strong; for that if the Lords of her
Kindred should assemble in the Kings Name much people, they should give the
Lords of the contrary Faction cause to suspect, that this was not done for the
Kings safety, whom no man impugned, but for the destruction of the ancient
Nobility, by which means the Nation should be brought into an uproar. The Queen
thus overreached, sent such word unto the King and his friends about him; so
that they mistrusting no guile, brought the King forwards with a small company,
in great haste, but with no good speed: For the Dukes of York and Buckingham at
Stony-Stratford, as the King was on his way to London, took him by violence
from his Friends, arrested the Lord Richard Gray, Sir Thomas Vaughan, and Sir
Richard Hawt, in the Kings presence, and imprisoned Sir Anthony Woodvile, Lord
Rivers, in Northampton; whom in short time after, with the Lord Richard and Sir
Thomas Vaughan, they sent prisoners into the North. Which done, with much
honor and humble reverence they convey the King toward London. But the Queen
hearing of these proceedings, in great fright and heaviness she bewailed her
Child's Reign, her friends and her own mishap, cursing the time that ever she
dissuaded the gathering of power about the King; got her self in all haste
possible with her young Son Richard, and Daughters, into the Sanctuary, lodging
her self and company, in the Abbots place at Westminster; whither the
Archbishop of York went to comfort her, telling her, he hoped that the matter
was nothing so bad as she doubted it; and that he was put in good hope, and out
of doubt, by a Message sent him from the Lord Hastings (whose faithfulness to
the King, he said, none did or had cause to suspect): Ah woe worth him, quoth
the Queen, he is one that labors to destroy me and my blood. When the
Archbishop was returned home, in the dawning of the day, he might out of his
Chamber-window, see all the Thames full of boats, with the Duke of Glocester's
servants in them, watching that none should go to sanctuary, nor none pass
unsearched. Great then was the commotion and murmur, as well in other places
about, as especially in the City, the people diversely divining upon this
dealing; and some Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, either for favor of the
Queen, or fear of themselves, assembled in sundry companies harnessed. But
these commotions and fears were moderated by the Lord Hastings then Lord
Chamberlain, who persuaded that the Duke of Gloucester was a sure friend to the
King, and that the Lord Rivers with the others were for matters attempted
against the Dukes of Gloucester and Buckingham, put under arrest; and that the
King was bringing up to his Coronation.

May 4th, the King entered the City, and was lodged in the Bishops Palace, where
was held a great Council, and the Dukes of Gloucester, Buckingham, and all the
Lords, were svvorn to the King; and the Duke of Gloucester was chosen to be
Protector of the King and his Realm. And now the Protector, to the end he
might finish his designs at once, projecteth to get the young Duke of York out
of sanctuary, in order to which he pretends that the said Duke only was a fit
associate for his brother the King, and that it was dishonorable both for the
King and those about his Grace, that the Kings brother should be fain to keep
Sanctuary. But because the Duke might not be taken out of Sanctuary by
violence, the A. B. of York was therefore employed to persuade with the Queen
to yield him up. This the A.B. undertook (though perhaps not very willingly)
alleging to the Queen the comfort that his society would be to the King his
brother, and that it would take off the obloquy of one brothers being afraid of
the other, which would seem to be by the Dukes being kept in Sanctuary. The
Queen desirous to keep him where he was, pleaded his infancy, his being vexed
with sickness, insomuch that she durst put no earthly person in trust with his
keeping but her self only: For though others (said she) happily might do their
best to him, yet there was none that knew better than her self how to order
him, she having so long kept him; nor was there any more like to cherish him
than his own Mother that bare him. And to this her reply she added many biting
words against the Protector. Howbeit, in the conclusion finding by the A.B's
words that the Protector would fetch her Son out by force, if otherwise he
might not be had, she deemed it best to deliver him, which she did to the
Bishop and other Lords with him: saying to them, I deliver him, and his brother
into your hands to keep, of whom I shall ask them both before God and the world.
And to the she said, Farewell, mine own sweet Son, God send you good keeping,
let me kiss you once ere you go, for God knows when we shall kiss together
again; and therewithal she kissed him, blessed him, turned her back and wept,
and so went away, leaving the Child weeping as fast. Then the Lords brought him
to the Protector, who took him in his arms, and gave him a Judas kiss.

June the 13, many Lords assembled in the Tower and there sat in Council,
communing concerning the Kings Coronation, for the which Pageants were
provided, and whilst they were in consultation in came the Protector about nine
of the Clock, saluting them courteously and excusing himself that he came so
late, saying merrily, I have been a sleeper to day; then after a while
departed, and about eleven of the Clock returned thither, but with a wonderful
sour and angry countenance, knitting his brows, frowning and fretting and
biting his lips, and after some short time said, What are they worthy to have,
who imagine and compass my destruction, that am so near of blood to the King,
and that am Protector of his Royal Person and Realm? The Lord Hastings answered
that they deserved to be punished as heinous Traitors, whatsoever they were,
and so said the other Lords. This is, quoth the Protector, yonder Sorceress my
brothers Wife, meaning the Queen, and that other Witch of her Council Shores
Wife, with their affinity, who by their Sorcery and Witchcraft have wasted my
body, and therewith with he plucked up his doublet sleeve to the elbow, on his
left arm, showing a wearish, withered arm, and small as it never was otherwise.
Whereupon the Lords minds much gave them, that this was but a quarrel.

Howbeit the Lord Chamberlain (who from the death of King Edward had kept Jane
Shore) said, certainly my Lord if they have so done they are worthy of great
punishment. What, quoth the Protector, Thou servest me with Ifs and with Ands I
ween, I tell thee they have so done, and that I will make good on thy body,
Traitor. And therewith he rapt on the board with his fist, at which sign given,
one without the Chamber cried out, Treason; Whereupon many men in harness came
rushing into the Councel-Chamber, where they seized on the Lord Hastings, whom
the Lord Protector bad speed, and shrieve him apace, for by St. Paul, said he,
I will not to dinner till I see thy head off, which accordingly was done,
for he was presently brought forth to the Tovver-green, vvhereupon a long log
of Timber his head was struck off. Thus ended this honorable man easy to
beguiled. Now the Protector to set some color upon the matter, after he had
dined sent in all haste for many substantial men out of the City into the
Tovver, against whose coming thither himself and Buckingham his creature had
harnessed themselves in old rusty Briganders, as though some sudden necessity
had constrained them to put on such Armor. And being come the Protector told
them, that the Lord Chamberlain Hastings, and others of his conspiracy had
contrived suddenly to have destroyed him, and the Duke of Buckingham, there the
same day in Council, of the which Treason he never had knowledge before ten
of the Clock the same Forenoon. And for the further appeasing of the peoples
minds concerning this Lords death, he caused also the same day an Herald of
Arms to proclaim it through the City of London, That the Lord Hastings, with
diverse others had conspired to murder the Lord Protector and Duke of Buckingham
sitting in Council, and after to have taken upon them to rule the King and
Realm at their own pleasures. By and by after this he caused the Sheriff of
London to repair to Jane Shores house, and to spoil her of all that she had;
then procured the Bishop of London to put her to open penance for her former
dalliance with his brother King Edward, and as it is said, he prohibited any
from relieving her extreme wants. The Protector had also so contrived it with
his Cabal, that the same day and about the same hour in which the Lord
Chamberlain was beheaded at the Tovver, those Lords taken from the King at
Stony-stratford and Northampton should be beheaded at Pontfract. Which
accordingly was done, in the presence and by the order of Sir Richard
Radcliffe, who at their execution would not permit them to speak or declare
their innocence. And now the way thus prepared Gloucester hastens for his own
Coronation, instead of setting the Crown on his Nephevvs head, Edmund Sha the
Mayor of London he vvins to his side. And the Mayors brother Dr. Sha (by the
direction of the Protector and his Council) upon Sunday June 19th, at
Pauls-Cross, declared to the people that King Edward the fourth was never
lavvfully married to the Queen, and therefore his Children were Bastards.
Moreover that neither King Edward himself, nor the Duke of Clarence were
reckoned (by those that were of secrecy in the household) for the Duke of
Yorks Children; but, says he, as for the very Noble Prince the Lord Protector,
he is the Fathers own Picture, his own countenance. At the time of the
uttering of these words (according to the plot laid beforehand) the Protector
should have come in, to the end that those words just meeting with his
presence, the people might have been the more affected with them; but whether
by the slovvness of the Protector in coming, or the Doctors too much speed, the
Protector came not till these words were over: Nevertheless when the Dr. spyed
his Lordship coming at last, he abruptly broke off from the matter he was upon,
to repeat the former words, This is the very Noble Prince, etc. But the people
were so far from crying, King Richard (as it was hoped they would) that they
stood as if they had been without sense, they were so amuzed at his shameful
Harangue. And the poor Parson when he had done got him home, and there
consumed and pined to death in fevv days after. The Theme of his preachment
was, Bastard-slips shall never take deep root. On the Tuesday follovving Henry
Duke of Buckingham made an oration to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in
the Guildhall of London, wherein he aspersed King Edward the fourth as a
Tyrant, his Children as Bastards; endeavored to prove the Protector to be the
only true Heir to the Crown, persuading the Citizens that they should therefore
join with the Nobility in Petitioning the Protector to take the Government of
the Realm upon him, according to his very right and just Title. The next day
the Mayor, Aldermen and chief Commoners of the City resorted unto the Protector
to Baynards-Castle; whither also repaired Buckingham and other Nobles with many
Knights and Gentlemen. When they were met together Buckingham desired the
Protectors pardon and license to acquaint his Grace with the intent of their
coming, (as though he had not known it before) which in short was to beseech
him to take the Crown and Government of the Realm upon him. At which words the
Protector began to look angerly, withal denying to yield thereto. Whereupon his
Privado Buckingham threatened, saying, That if he would not, they would find out
some other man that should, for they were resolved that King Edwards Lineage
should no longer Reign over them, and then Richard was pleased to accept the
Crown as his just right, the people thereat shouting and crying, King Richard,
King Richard.

RICHARD III.
RICHARD the Third, Son of Richard Duke of York, was born with all his teeth,
and hair to his shoulders. This his monstrous birth foreshewing his monstrous
conditions and proceedings. June 22. he was by the Nobility and Citizens of
London elected King of England, and afterward by Act of Parliament was
confirmed. On June 25 he took his seat in the King's Bench Court, and there
pronounced pardon of all offenses committed against him. On July 4 he came to
the Tower, where he Created Estates, ordained the Knights of the Bath, set at
liberty the A.B. of York, and Lord Stanley; and July 6 was anointed and Crowned
at Westminster. But this Usurper well knowing that whilst his young Nephews
were living the Crown would not stand firm on his head, he therefore imploys
Sir James Tirrel, a man of an aspiring spirit, to procure these Childrens
destruction; which accordingly he did. For about midnight Miles Forest, and
John Dighton, Tirrell's bloody instruments, came into the Chamber where the
young King and his Brother lay, and suddenly wrapped them up in the Bed-clothes,
keeping by force the Feather-bed and Pillows hard upon their mouths, that they
were therein smothered to death. This villainy done, Sir James caused the
Murderers to bury their Bodies at the stairs-foot, somewhat deep in the ground
under a great heap of stones; though afterward K. Richard caused them to be
taken up, enclosed in Lead, and to be cast into a place called the Black-deeps
at the Thames mouth. But the justice of God pursued the Murderers, for Forest
rotted away piecemeal, Tirrell died for Treason under Henry 7, and Dighton
lived and died a vagabond beyond the Seas. And the Usurper after this
detestable fact, never had quiet in his mind, never thought himself secure; but
when he went abroad his eyes still whirled about, his body privily fenced, his
hand ever on his Dagger, his sleep interrupted with fearful dreams, sometimes
suddenly starting up, leaping out of his bed and running about the Chamber.
Immediately also after this Murder began the Conspiracy betwixt the Duke of
Buckingham and diverse other Gentlemen against the Murderer. The occasion of
Buckinghams falling off from Richard is diversely reported: some say, it was
because the King would not grant him the Duke of Hereford's lands, to the which
he pretended himself the rightful heir; others impute it to the Dukes
high-mindedness, that he could not bear the glory of another. Himself said the
occasion was the murder of the two Children. But be the occasion what it would,
yet this is most sure that this enmity of the Dukes to the King proved of good
consequence to the rightful heirs to the Crown. For hereupon the Duke left the
Court, retiring to his own house of Brecknock, where he had in his custody that
true friend to K. Edward's Posterity, John Morton Bishop of Ely, who by his
wisdom abused the Dukes pride to his own deliverance, the Dukes destruction,
and benefit of such to whom the Crown of right appertained. When the Duke was
at first become alienated from the King, and come to his own house, he
solicited the Bishop his Prisoner to speak his mind freely to him in matters of
state; but the Bishop refused, thus answering him, In good faith my Lord, I
love not much to talk with Princes, as a thing not all out of peril, although
the words be without fault; forasmuch as it shall not be taken as the party
meant it, but as it pleases the Prince to construe it. And ever I think on
Aesops tale, that when the Lion had proclaimed that on pain of death there
should no horned beast abide in the Wood; one that had in his forehead a bunch
of flesh, fled away a great pace. The Fox that saw him run so fast asked him,
Whither he made all that haste, he answered, In faith I neither wot nor care,
so I were once hence, because of this Proclamation of horned beasts. What fool
(quoth the Fox) thou may well enough abide, the Lion meant not thee, for it
is no horn on thy head. No marry, quoth he, that wot I well enough; but what
and if he call it an horn, where am I then? But though the Bishop at the first
declined talking of State-matters with the Duke, yet afterward when by often
discoursing with the Duke, and other circumstances, he found him to be of a
proud stomach, and emulated the Kings greatness, he would speak his mind
frankly enough to him, rendering the Usurper as odious as was possible, by
alleging his unnaturalness to his own Mother, in charging her with defiling
the Marriage Bed, his unnaturalness to his own Brothers and Nephews, in saying
they were bastards, his murdering his Nephews, and other enormities. Then to
tickle the Dukes own ambition, the Bishop would commend him to be a person of
such rare virtues that he merited to wear the Crown himself, inviting him for
Gods sake and his Countries sake to take the Government upon himself, or
otherwise to devise some means how the Realm might be rid of the Tyrant, and
brought under some good Governor. When the Duke had pondered a while upon this
and the like discourse of the Bishops, he acquainted the Bishop, That his
resolutions were to advance Henry Earl of Richmond to the Crown, and that the
said Earl of Richmond heir of the House of Lancaster, should marry the Lady
Elizabeth eldest Daughter of Edward the fourth, by which Marriage the Hous^s of
York and Lancaster should be united into one. All which to effect, the Duke and
Bishop first made the Mothers of Elizabeth and Henry privy hereunto, and
employed diverse trusty instruments to interest the Nobles and Gentry in the
design. Then the Bishop left Brecknock in disguise, and sailed into Flanders,
where he did Earl Henry eminent services. Many great persons combined to
dethrone the Usurper, which he having knowledge of, sent his loving Letters to
the Duke of Buckingham, whom he understood to be head of the Complotters,
requesting him most earnestly to come to the Court, for he was in great want of
his wise counsel. But the Duke mistrusting his smooth words, excused himself
that he was sickly and not well able to travel. The King therefore sent his
commands to him, and threats withal, if he refused to give attendance; unto
which the Duke sent his resolute answer, That he would not come to his mortal
enemy; and immediately prepared War against him. Then Thomas Marquess Dorset
came out of Sanctuary, and also gathered a band of men in the North, Sir Edward
Courtney and his Brother the Bishop of Excester raised another Army in
Devonshire and Cornwall, and in Kent Sir Richard Guilford and other Gentlemen
raised a party, all which was done in a moment. But the Usurper marching with
his Host against the Dukes forces, which were most Welsh, they for want of pay
and other provision brake up their Camp, and left the Duke to shift for
himself; which when the Confederates understood they also dispersed themselves.
The Duke of Buckingham in disguise repaired for security unto a servants of his
near Shrewsbury, named Humphry Banister, but the King by Proclamation promising
great rewards to him that should detect the Duke, that wretch Banister for the
hope of gain betrayed his Master the Duke. Who with a guard of men was conveyed
to Salisbury, where without arraignment or judgment the Duke lost his head.
Howbeit the Traitor Banister did not only lose his promised reward, but also
received just punishments from Heaven; for his eldest son fell mad, and so died
in a Hogstie, his second son became deformed and lame in his limbs, his third
son was drowned in a small puddle of water, his eldest daughter was struck with
a foul Leprosy, and himself being of extreme age was found guilty of murder,
but saved by his Clergy. Diverse of the Earl of Richmond's party were put to
death, and so jealous was the King now of his ill-gotten greatness, that he
stored the Seacoasts with armies of men, furnished the Ports with store of
munition, and made all things ready to prevent Earl Henry's arrival; caused a
Parliament to be assembled at Westminster, wherein the said Earl, and all such
as had fled the Land in his behalf were attainted, and were made enemies to
their native Country, their Goods confiscate, their Lands and possessions
condemned to the Kings use. Moreover the Usurper sent his Agents laden with
Gold and many gay promises to the Duke of Britain, offering what not if he
would either send Earl Henry into England, or commit him there into Prison; but
the Duke himself lying extreme sick, his Treasurer Peter Landose corrupted with
Gold, had betrayed the Earl into Richard's hands, had not the Earl had timely
notice of it, and prevented it by a speedy escape unto the French-Court, where
he received great favors Dr. Richard Fox then a Student in Paris was eminently
serviceable to the Earl in that Nation. And the Duke of Britain, when he
understood the treachery of Landose, was highly displeased, and continued a
favourer of the Earl and his Cause. But all these things with many more were
against K. Richard, which he very well foresaw, though he knew not well how to
remedy: yet that he might make his Title and interest as good as he could, he
devised to marry with his Niece the Princess Elizabeth; but his Queen Anne
stood in his way to this for the present, though not long, for she fell into
the remorseless hands of death, but whether a natural or violent is not well
known. After which Richard courts the Lady Elizabeth, his own Brothers
daughter, though in vain, for she detested him. Howbeit when Henry heard of
Richards attempts herein, and not knowing what time through flattery and
persuasions from some persons might do upon the young Princess her good nature,
he hastened for England, setting sail from Harfleet with about 200 men, August
15, and arrived at Milford-Haven the seventh day following, from whence he
advanced toward Shrewsbury. On his way to which place there met him Sir Rice
ap Thomas, a man of great command in Wales, with a great body of men to side
in his quarrel, which Earl Henry afterward requited by making this his first
Alder Governor of Wales: From Shrewsbury the Earl marched to Newport, where
Sir Gilbert Talbot met him with two thousand men from the Earl of Shrewsbury.
Thence he passed to Litchfield where he was honorably received. But when the
Usurper understood that the Earl daily increased in strengths, and that he was
advanced so far, without any opposition, from his Court at Nottingham, he set
forth his Host to meet the Earl, which he did near unto Market-Bosworth in
Leicestershire. His Vant-guard he disposed of a mavelous length, to strike
the more terror into the hearts of his foes, the leading whereof was committed
to John Duke of Norfolk. His own Battalion was furnished with the best approved
men of War. When he had ordered his army for fight, he animated his followers
to behave themselves valiantly; alleging to them, that it was against a
company of Runnagates, Thieves, Outlaws, Traitors, beggarly Britains, and
faint-hearted Frenchmen, that they were to fight, who would oppress and spoil
them of their Lands, Wives and Children; that these their enemies were such
Cowards, that they would fly faster from them than the silly Heart before the
Hound; that the Earl of Richmond Captain of the rebellion was but a Welsh
Milk-sop. For their love to him their Prince, their zeal to their native
Country, he wished them that day to show their English valor, assuring them
that for his part he would either triumph in a glorious victory, or die in the
quarrel with immortal fame. Now S. George for us, and us for victory, says he;
Haste therefore forward, and remember this, that I am he that with high
advancement will prefer the valiant and hardy, and with severe torture will
punish the dastard and cowardly runaway. The Earl of Richmond's forefront was
commanded by the Earl of Oxford, the right wing by Sir Gilbert Talbot, the left
by Sir John Savage, the main Battle by the Earl himself, and his Uncle Jasper.
When the Earl had ordered his small Host, consisting of about 5000 men, he rode
from rank to rank, and wing to wing, encouraging his followers to fight:
alleging the justness of their quarrel, which God would bless; assuring them
that for so good a cause as to free the Land of a Monster, a Tyrant, a
Murderer, he would that day rather become a dead carrion upon the ground, than
a Carpet-prisoner kept alive for reproach. Advance therefore forward, says he,
like true-hearted Englishmen, display your Banner in defense of your Country;
get the day and be Conquerors, lose the day and be villains. God and St. George
give us a happy success. Then immediately a fierce Battle commenced, and was
manfully continued on either part. At length the King having intelligence that
Earl Henry was but slenderly accompanied with men of Arms, he therefore with
his Spear in the Rest ran violently toward the Earl, in which rage at the
first brunt he bare down and overthrew the Earls Standard, slew Sir William
Brandon the bearer thereof, next encountered Sir John Cheiny whom he threw to
the ground, thereby making an open passage to the Earl himself. In which very
instant when the Earl was like to be distressed, the Lord Stanley sent in aids
of fresh Soldiers (under the leading of Sir William Stanley) which were raised
as he pretended for Richard, but intended them when he should see his time for
Richmond's service. These entered the fight with such courage that they put the
Usurpers forces to flight; when the Usurper closing his Helmet said to such
that brought him a swift horse for his escape, This day shall finish all
Battles, or else I will finish my life. So thrusting into the throng of his
enemies, he manfully fighting died in the place, A. D. 1485, Aug. 22. There
died with him that day the Duke of Norfolk, the Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Sir
Richard Ratcliff, Sir Robert Brakenbury. The number of both parts slain in the
field were 4000, Sir William Catesby with two other persons of quality were
taken, and two days after were beheaded at Leicester. Thomas Howard Earl of
Surrey, the Duke of Norfolks son and heir being then also taken prisoner, the
Earl of Richmond demanded of him how he durst bear Arms in behalf of that
Tyrant Richard? to which he answered, He was my Crowned King, and if the
Parliamentary authority of England set the Crown upon a stock, I will fight
for that stock. And as I fought then for him, I will fight for you when you are
established by the said Authority. King Richard's Crown which was taken amongst
the spoils of the field, the Lord Stanley Earl of Derby set upon Earl Henry's
head. The slain body of the Usurper all tugged and torn, stark naked was
trussed behind Blanch St. Lieger a Pursevant at Arms, like a Hog or Calf, the
head and arms hanging on one side of the Horse, and his legs on the other,
after which manner it was brought to Leicester, where it was buried in the
Grey-Friers Church. The stone-Chest wherein his Corpse lay, was at length made a
drinking trough for horses at a common Inn. His body, if you will credit
tradition herein, was born out of the City and contemptuously bestowed under
Bowbridge.

His Issue was Edward dead before himself. He founded a College at Middleham
beyond York, and a Collegiate Chantry in London, called our Lady of Barking. He
endowed Queens-Colledg in Cambridg with 500 Marks of yearly revenue. He
disforested the great field of Whichwood that King Edward his brother had
enclosed for his Game, and made some good Laws; and when diverse Shires of
England offered him benevolence, he refused, saying, I had rather have your
hearts than your money. This scoffing Rhyme was divulged in contempt of the
Usurper Richard, and his three principal Creatures: The Cat, the Rat, and
Lovell the Dog,
Rule all England under the Hog.
The Cat and Rat meant of Catesby and Ratcliff, the Dog of Lovell, that
creature belonging to the Lord Lovell's Arms, and the Hog of K. Rich. whose
cognizance it was. But William Collingbourn Esquire who had been Sheriff of
Wiltshire and Devonshire, was upon Tower Hill executed with all extremity as
Author thereof.

Mayors and Sheriffs of London in this Kings Time.
In his first year, William Billesdon was Mayor. Thomas Newland, Wiliima
Martin, Sheriffs.


In his second year, Thomas Hill was Mayor: Richard Chester; and he dying,
Ralph Astry, Thomas Britain, Sheriffs.


HENRY VII.
A D. 1485 Aug. 22.
HENRY Earl of Richmond was Son to Margaret Countess of Richmond and Derby,
daughter to John Duke of Sommerset, son to John Earl of Sommerset, son to John
of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster fourth son of Edward the third.

October 30th, A. D. 1485, was Henry Crowned at Westminster. Then the better to
secure his estate he shut up the Earl of Warwick, the only son and Heir of
George Duke of Clarence, in the Tower of London. Then instituted a guard for
his person, consisting of a number of choice Archers, with allotment of Fees
and Maintenance under a peculiar Captain, by the name of Yeomen of the Guard
for him and his Successors. November the seventh was a Parliament assembled at
Westminster, at the sitting whereof Richard the late Usurper was attainted,
and with him many of the Nobility and Gentry. Free pardon was also given to all
such (saving the persons excepted by name) as should presently submit
themselves to the Kings mercy. Reversed also were all former Acts hurtful
either to the King or his Friends, and the Crown was established upon the King
and his Heirs for ever. Next the King assumed into his Council those two
renowned Agents in advancing his fortunes, John Morton and Richard Fox.

A. D. 1486, John Morton. A.B. Cant.
and January the eighteenth he married the Lady Elizabeth, eldest daughter of
King Edward the fourth, to the utter abolisment of all Hostilities between the
two Houses or York and Lancaster. But there wanted not some malcontents who
assayed to disturb these serene days; for the Lord Lovell one of the late
Usurpers Creatures, with Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother assembled forces
against the King, which upon but the news of an Army coming against them
dispersed themselves. Sir Humphrey was taken out of Sanctuary and executed at
Tyburn.

When this storm was over, the White Rose or York faction raised another,
procuring one Lambert Symnel to personate one of King Edwards sons. Which
puppet Lambert was conveyed into Ireland where the Irish adhered to him, and in
Christ-Church in Dublin Crowned him King of England. And into Ireland the
Duchess Dowager of Burgundy, sister to Edward the fourth sent this Impostor
two thousand Soldiers under the conduct of Colonel Swart. These with Irish
and some English joined to them, landed in Lancashire at the Pile of Fowdray;
thence they took their march through Yorkshire, so toward Newark, everywhere
as they came proclaiming their new King. Not far from Newark and near to a
little village called Stoke, the King with his Army encountered them, where the
fight continued doubtful for about three hours, but at last the victory fell to
King Henry. On Lamberts part were slain the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Lovel,
Sir Thomas Broughton, Colonel Swart and Maurice Fitz-Thomas with four thousand
Soldiers. On the Kings side fell not any man of Honor, but almost half his
vant-guard was slain, so that the Garland was dipped in blood. Amongst the
prisoners that were taken was the counterfeit King, who had been a Scholar in
Oxford, and his Tutor Richard Simon a Priest. Lambert confessed his parents to
be mean persons, and of a mean Calling. Him the King condemned to his kitchen
or scullery, at length promoted him to be one of his Falconers, in which estate
he continued till his death. Sim. Subtle, or Richard Simon was condemned to a
dungeon and perpetual shackles.

Stoken-field battle was fought, A D. 1487, June 16, being Saturday, A day of
the week observed to have been lucky to this Prince Henry; who sent his Royal
standard to our Ladies Church of Walsingham in Norfolk, there to remain as a
Monument of this his Victory, and gratitude for it. And now the King
dispatcheth his Agents into Scotland, there to settle amity with James the
third, and to prevent the retreat and protection that his enemies had found
therein. Shortly after which some discontented persons in Yorkshire rose in
Arms, under pretense that they were oppressed in their Tax or Subsidy; but some
of these Rebels were routed by the Earl of Surrey, who took their Leader John
a- Chamber prisoner, and upon the hearing of the Kings approach, the rest of
them under the leading of Sir John Egremond dispersed themselves, John a
Chamber with some others of the chief of the Rebels were executed at York. The
Kings affairs being settled in a present peaceable estate at home, he was next
engaged in a War with France; For the carrying on of which, his Subjects did
largely contribute, chiefly the City of London, out of which he received for
his furniture in that voyage almost ten thousand pounds from the Commoners, and
two hundred pounds besides from every Alderman. And this wise King knowing how
great a strength that rich City was to him, humoured the Citizens exceedingly.
Himself did not only become one amongst them, causing himself to be entered a
Brother of the Merchant-Taylors Company, but also wore the habit at a public
Feast, and sat as Master of the Company.

A. D. 1492, October. the sixth, King Henry with his Host landed at Callis, from
whence with his whole forces he marched toward Boloigne, which when he had
besieged, Articles of peace were concluded betwixt him and the King of France.
For King Henry before his going out of England had been dealt with on the
French Kings behalf to accept of conditions, but would not enter into any
Treaty with him, till he was in the field, and that with such a puissance, as
was likely enough to force his own conditions. When Henry had to his
advantage settled his transmarine affairs he returned for England, where he
was not to remain long in quiet, For the Duchess of Burgundy had provided
another counterfeit King, a youth of a Princely personage, called Peter
VVarbeck the son of a converted Jew. This her creature Peter, or as some called
him Perkin and Peterkin, under the name and Title of Richard Plantaginet,
second son of King Edward the fourth, had great honor given him by the King of
France. And diverse persons of eminency in England were so deluded, that they
believed him to be the true Richard, and thereupon sought to advance him to the
Crown, which cost some of them the price of their heads, as the Lord
Fitz-VValter, Sir Simon Montford, Sir William Stanley Lord Chamberlain that
gained the Victory for King Henry at Bosworth-field. These with more were put
to death for favoring of Perkin. The King also for the further prevention of
dangers, caused the coasts of England to be strongly guarded, sent a new Lord
Chancellor into Ireland, Henry Denny a Monk of Langton-Abby, and Sir Edward
Poynings with some forces, whose greatest care and diligence was to punish such
as before time had given any assistance to the Mock-king, and to restrain such
as were likely to do so in time to come. The Earl of Kildare falling under
suspicion, Poynings sent prisoner into England, where the King did graciously
hear and admit his defenses, and returned him with Honor, and continuation of
authority. The Irish had formerly exhibited many Articles against this Earl,
the last of which was; Finally, all Ireland cannot rule this Earl, Then, quoth
the King, shall this Earl rule all Ireland, constituting him Lord-Deputy
thereof. But Perkin having gained private assistance from the French King, and
Maximilian, to strengthen yet his enterprise, he repairs into Scotland unto
James the fourth, (having special recommendations from the King of France, and
Duchess of Burgundy) who gave him most courteous entertainment. The rare
impudency of the youth, and that connection which his darings had with other
Princes, drew this King into an error concerning him. When he was first
brought to the presence of the King of Scots, with a right Princely
gracefulness he declared to the said King, That Edward the fourth leaving two
sons Edward and Richard both very young, their unnatural Uncle Richard to
obtain the Crown purposed the murder of them both; but the instruments of his
cruelty having murdered his elder brother the young King, were moved with pity
to spare his life, and that thus saved by the mercy of God, he was privately
conveyed beyond the Seas (the world supposing that himself also had been
murdered.) And that Henry Teuder Earl of Richmond, after he had by subtle and
foul means obtained the Crown, he then wrought all means and ways to procure
the final destruction of him the rightful Heir to the English Diadem. That his
said mortal enemy Henry has not only falsely surmised him to be a feigned
person, giving him Nicknames, so abusing the World; but that also to deprive
him of his right, he had offered large Sums of Money to corrupt the Princes with
whom he had been retained, and had employed his servants to murder him. That
every man of reason might well understand that the said Henry needed not to
have taken these courses against him had he been a feigned person. That the
truth of his manifest cause had moved the King of France, and Duchess of
Burgundy his most Dear Ant, to yield him their assistence. That now, because
the Kings of Scotland were wont to support them, who were spoiled and bereft of
the said Kingdom of England, and for that he, the said King James had given
clear signs that he was of the like Noble quality and temper with his
Ancestors, he so distressed a Prince came to put himself into his hands,
desiring his aid to recover his Realms, promising faithfully, that when his
Kingdoms were regained, he would gratefully do him all the pleasure that should
lie in his utmost power.

The King of Scots was so influenced with this Impostors words, amiable person,
Princely deportment, recommendations of Princes; his aids from the Irish, and
assured hope of aid, in England, that he honorably received him, as if he had
been the very Richard Duke of York, and gave his consent that this pretended
Duke should marry the Lady Katharine Gourdon daughter to the Earl of Huntly,
which accordingly he did, and also prepared to invade England in his quarrel,
although there wanted not them, who with many arguments advised this King to
repute him for no other than a Cheat.

King Henry that he might be prepared for the Scots, called a Parliament which
granted a Tax to be gathered of six score thousand pounds, the Levy of which
money kindled a dangerous fire in England; For when the Kings Collectors came
amongst the Cornish-men to receive their proportion of the Tax, they
tumultuously assembled under the leading of one Thomas Flammock a Lawyer, and
Michael Joseph a Blacksmith of Bodnam. Which Captains led their rout toward
Kent, and at Wells James Tuchet Lord Audley joined with them. From Wells they
proceeded to Black Heath, where the Kings forces defeated them without much
labor; fifteen hundred of the Rebels were taken, and the takers had their
prisoners goods granted them.

James Lord Audley was led from Newgate to Tower Hill, in a Coat of his own
Armories painted on a Paper reverst and torn, where he was executed. Flammock
and the Smith were quartred. Memorably strange was the comfort that the Smith
cheered himself withal, as he was drawing to his execution, to wit, That yet
he hoped that by this means, his Name and Memory should be everlasting.

The Kings care was now to order the War against Scotland, whither he sent the
Earl of Surrey with an Army to invade the Scotch borders, as they had lately
done the English. The Earl pursued the revenge with great vehemence, but in
short time, by the King of Spains mediation, a Truce was concluded betwixt the
two Nations: One Article of which Truce was, That Perkin should be no longer
fostered in Scotland. Whereupon he withdraws into ^reland, whither the
Cornish-men sent to him, inviting him amongst them, promising that at his
arrival they would venture their lives and fortunes for him, as hoping that
under his government they should be eased of their Taxes. Perkin accepting
their invitation landed at Whitsand-Bay in Cornwall, after whose arrival some
thousands of people resorted to him.

When King Henry heard of his landing, and making head against him, he smiled,
saying, Lo we are again provoked by this Prince of Rake-hells; but lest my
people should through ignorance be drawn into destruction, let us seek to take
this Perkin by the easiest way we can. He therefore assembled his forces, and
sent out his Spies to observe the track and hopes of Prince Peterkin, who had
now besieged the loyal City of Excester, which would neither yield to his fine
promises, nor his threats and violence, but valiantly withstood him, till they
were relieved by Edward Courtney Earl of Devonshire and other good subjects,
that forced the Rebels away from before the City. Which Rebels now
understanding what great preparations were made against them, began many of
them to drop away from their new King, and Perkin himself secretly fled, and
took Sanctuary at Beaulieu in New-forest, out of which Sanctuary, upon the
Kings offer of life to him, and oblivion of his crimes, he gladly came forth,
and put himself into the Kings hands, by whose order he was conveyed to London,
where the King by curious and often examination of him, came to the full
knowledge of that his heart desired. The ch^ef matter of which confession, the
King caused to be published in Print.

But the imaginary King Perkin endeavoring to make an escape, from such that
had the charge of him (after the undergoing of some public shame for that
attempt) was committed to the Tower, where he by his insinuations and promises
had corrupted his keepers to set himself and the Earl of Warwick at large, (to
which design of escaping, the poor Earl is said to have consented.) Perkin for
this conspiracy had his Trial at Westminster, and was condemned, and being
drawn to Tyburn had the sentence of death executed upon him. At the Gallows
Perkin did read his own confession, therein owning himself to have been born in
the Town of Tourney in Flanders, of such parents, whom he named, and that being
come into Ireland to see the Country, he was there wrought upon to personate
Richard Duke of York, etc. Thus died (If I be not deceived) a deceiver, A. D.
1499.

The Earl of Warwick was publicly arraigned for minding to have escaped out
of the Tower, and consequently to deprive King Henry of his Crown and Dignity,
and to usurp the Title and Sovereign Office, all which streined charge the Earl
by false friends ('it is said) was persuaded to confess. So lost his head upon
Tower Hill, and was buried at Bisham by his Ancestors. Thus died the last Heir
Male of the blood and Surname of Plantaginet. It is said, That in the eyes of
the Castil^a^s (who had secretly agreed with King Henry to match their Princess
Katharine with Prince Arthur) there could be no sure ground of succession
whilst the Earl of Warwick lived. Tho. Langton. A. B. Cant.
And the said Lady Katharine, when the Divorce was afterward prosecute against
her, by her Husband King Henry the eight, is reported to have said, That it was
the hand of God, for that to clear the way to the Marriage, that innocent Earl
of Warwick was put to unworthy death.

A. D. 1506, Edmund de la Pole Earl of Suffolk wilfully slew a common person in
his fury, for the which King Henry caused him to be arraigned; the fact he was
persuaded to confess, and had pardon. But the Earl as a Prince of the blood
(his mother being sister to Edward the fourth) held himself disgraced, by
having been seen at the Kings-Bench-Bar a Prisoner, therefore in discontent
fled to his Aunt the Duchess of Burgundy; but within a while after he returned
into England, and the year following (his spirit not yet being laid) fled
again, after he had first complotted to disturb the Kings peace. Whereupon King
Henry applied himself to his wonted Art, for learning the secrets of his
enemies, employed Sir Robert Curson to feign himself a friend to Pole, thereby
to get himself into his bosom for the finding out of his secret designs and
correspondents Many great persons for Poles c^use were committed to prison;
some were put to death as Sir James Terrel, and Sir John VV^d^am, who lost
their heads on Tower Hill, and three other persons who were executed in other
places. And the more to disanimate de la Poles accomplices and favorers, King
Henry had procured from Pope Alexander the sixth, an Excommunication, and curse
against Pole, Sir Robert Curson and five other persons by special name, and
generally all others that should aid the Earl against the King. Sir Robert
Curson was named on purpose to make de la Pole secure of him. Neither did the
King leave here, for he so prevailed with the Pope, as he decreed by Bull, That
no person should afterward have privilege of Sanctuary, who had once taken the
same, and came forth again, and that if any Sanctuary-man, should afterward
commit any murder, robbery, sacrilege, treason, etc. He should by lay force be
drawn thence to suffer due punishment And now Suffolk perceiving himself stripped
of all future hope of endamaging the King, he put himself into the grace and
protection of Philip King of Spain, with whom he remained in banishment, till
King Philip was driven by tempest into England, at which time King Henry
prevailed with him to deliver Pole into his hards upon promise that he would
spare his life. And accordingly at Philips return home Pole was sent in
England, and then committed to the Tower. King Henry thus secured of this
hazard, bestowed his ages care on gathering of money, though by some such ways
as seemed none of the justest.

Empson and Dudley two Lawyers, were his instruments for the bringing in of
money to fill his Exchequer. These called the richer sort of Subjects into
question for the breach of old penal Laws, Henry Dean and William Warham. A.
Bps. Cant.
long before discontinued and forgotten. The courses they took in the execution
of their employment, was for one of them to outlaw persons privately, and then
to seize their estates, forcing them to chargeable compositions with the King,
and heavy bribes to themselves.

Another detestable practice of theirs, was to have false Jurors and
Ringleaders of false Jurors, who would never give in any verdict against their
Patrons Empson and Dudley, insomuch that if any stood out in Law these sons of
Belial squared the destiny of their causes. By these means many honest and
worthy Subjects were rigorously fined, imprisoned or otherwise afflicted. But
the King falling sick of a consuming disease, by the means of good Counsel, he
inclined to grant to all men general Pardons, certain only excepted, and
ordained that all such monys should be restored as had been unjustly levied by
his Officers. He died A. D. 1509, April 22.

His Issue, Arthur, dead before himself, Henry, Edmond, Margaret, Elizabeth,
Mary. His daughter Margaret was married to James the fourth King of Scotland,
and after his death unto Archibald Dougles Earl of Angues, to whom she bare
Margaret, who married Matthew Steward Earl of Lenox, and had by him Henry Lord
Dernly who married Mary Queen of Scots by whom he had King James the sixth.

King Henry left at his death, 1800000 l. in ready money. He founded the
Hospital of the Savoy, founded six religious houses for Franciscan-Friers,
built the Palace of Richmond where he died, and that Chapel at Westminster
called by his name, where he was buried. He exceedingly Honored that devout
King Henry the sixth, whom he labored to have had canonized for a Saint, but
Pope Julio held that Honor at too dear a Rate. His Mother-in-Law, Queen to
Edward the fourth, he deprived of her Estate, and confined to the Monastery of
Bermondsey in Southwark: one cause pretended for it, was, for that she had
yielded up her daughter into the hand of the Usurper Richard, contrary to her
faith given to them who were in the plot for bringing in of Henry. A. D. 1498,
A Cordwainers son was hanged at St. Thomas Waterings, for assuming the name and
Title of the Earl of Warwick thereby to raise disturbances.

The Mayors and Sheriffs of London in this Kings time.
In his first Year, Sir Hugh Brice was Mayor. John Tate, John Swan, Sheriffs.


In his second Year, Sir Henry Collet was Mayor. John Percival, Hugh Clopton,
Sheriffs.


In his third Year, William Horn was Mayor. John Eenkel, William Remington,
Sheriffs.


In his fourth Year, Robert Tate was Mayor. William Isaac, Ralph Tinley,
Sheriffs.


In his fifth Year, William White was Mayor. William Capel, John Brook,
Sheriffs.


In his sixth Year, John Matthew was Mayor. Henry Cote, or Coot, Robert Revel,
and he dying, Hugh Pembarton, Sheriffs.


In his seventh Year, Hugh Clopton was Mayor. Thomas Wood, William Brown,
Sheriffs.


In his eighth Year, Sir William Martin was Mayor. William Purchase, William
Walbeck, Sheriffs.


In his ninth Year, Ralph Austry was Mayor. Robert Fabian, John Winget,
Sheriffs.


In his tenth Year, Richard Chawrie was Mayor. Nicholas Alwin, John Warner,
Sheriffs.


In his eleventh Year, Sir Henry Collet was Mayor. Thomas Kneesworth, Henry
Summer, Sheriffs.


In his Twelfth Year, John Tate was Mayor. John Shaa, Richard Hedon, Sheriffs.


In his Thirteenth year, William Purchase was Mayor. Bartholomew Read, Thomas
Windew, or Windou^, Sheriffs.


In his fourteenth Year, Sir John Percivel was Mayor. Thomas Bradbury, Stephen
Gennings, Sheriffs.


In his fifteenth Year, Nicholas Aldmine was Mayor. James Wilford, Thomas or
Richard Brond, Sheriffs.


In his sixteenth Year, William Rennington was Mayor. John Hawes, William
Steed, Sheriffs.


In his seventeenth Year, Sir John Shaa was Mayor. Lawrence Aylmer, Henry Head,
Sheriffs.


HENRY VIII.
A. D. 1509.
HENRY the Eighth was born at Greenwich, June 22. 1491. His youth was so
trained up in literature that he was accounted the most learned Prince of
Christendom. In A. D. 1509, and June 25, he was Crowned at Westminster,
together with his Queen Katharine, the Relict of his brother Arthur, by William
Warham Archbishop of Canterbury. His Counselors he chose of the gravest
Divines and wisest Nobility, with whom he not only often sat to the great
increase of his politic experience, but would also yield his authority to
their wisdoms.

Empson and Dudley he caused to be imprisoned, then to be brought to their
Trial, and at last to lose their heads. To regain the ancient Rights of England
he first sent his Herald Clarencieux into France, roughly demanding the
Dutchies of Normandy, Guyen, Main, and Anjou, and with them the Crown of
France: Then sent certain Nobles before him thither, and afterward followed
himself pitching down his Tents before Terwin; Where he raised his Royal
Standard of the Red-Dragon, and begirt the City with a strait Siege. To which
place Maxmili^n the Emperor repaired, and to the great Honor of Henry entered
into his pay, wearing the Cross of Saint George, with a Rose (the Kings-Badge)
as his faithful Soldier. The French attempting to relieve the Town with
Victuals and men, were so encountered by King Henry, that many of their chiefest
Captains were taken prisoners, and six of their standards won, and the rest of
the Monsieurs for safeguard of life so posted away, that this conflict was
called the battle of Spurs, shortly after which the Town yielded unto the King.
Then was the siege removed to Tournay, which in short time was also surrendered
to the King, with ten thousand pounds sterling for the Citizens redemption, Who
to the number of 80000, then took their Oaths to become his true Subjects,
1513. The safe keeping of this City the King committed to Sir Edward Poynings
Knight of the Garter, and Ordained Thomas Wolsey Bishop of Tournay.

Whilst King Henry was busy in France, his Lieutenant. Thomas Earl of Surrey
marched against the Scots who were entered into Northumberland, and at Flodden
the Armies engaged in fight, and the English won the day. In this battle King
James of Scotland was slain* one Archbishop, two Bishops, two Abbots, twelve
Earls, seventeen Lords, Knights and Gentlemen a great number, in all about
eight thousand were slain, and almost as many taken Prisoners in A. D. 1513.
Sep. 9.

A. D. 1514, by the procurement of Pope Leo a peace was concluded betwixt the
Kings of France and England, immediately after which, Mary the sister of King
Henry was Honorably conducted into France, where a^^ Albeville, October the
ninth, she was married unto old King Lewis, who died eighty two days after the
Marriage.

A. D. 1517, by reason of the great concourse of strangers at London, to the
hindrance of trade, and their insolency toward the English, the youth and
vulgar sort of Citizens, upon May Day assaulted these strangers, doing much
harm to their houses, substance, and some of their persons, for which riotous
offense John Lincoln the instigator thereof was hanged, and four hundred men
and youths, with eleven women were led in ropes along the City in their Shirts,
with halters about their necks to Westminster, where the King pardoned their
offense to the great rejoicing of the Londoners.

A. D. 1519, was the City of Tourney delivered back to the French on these
conditions, That they should pay to King Henry six hundred thousand Crowns in
twelve years; That the Daulphin should marry the Lady Mary, King Henry's young
daughter, which marriage if it happened not to take effect at the years of
consent, then Tourney should be re-delivered to the English; That Cardinal
Wolsey should have a thousand Marks paid him yearly for the revenues of the
said Bishopric.

A. D. 1521, Edward Bohun or Stafford Duke of Buckingham was beheaded on
Tower Hill, for imagining to destroy the King, and to enjoy the Crown himself.
Wolsey was the Dukes grand adversary, because that the Duke had sometime spoken
certain words to his disgrace. About this time the Pope sent his Legates about
to incite the Christian Princes to attempt the recovery of the Holy Land,
sending Cardinal Campeius on this errand into England. Which Cardinal and his
company being come to London, as they passed through Cheap Side, the sumpture-
Mules cast their Carriages and Coffers on the ground, out of which, the lids
flying open, fell old breeches, boots and broken shoes, torn stockings,
tattered rags, old iron and horse shoes, broken meat, marrow bones, roasted
eggs, and crusts of bread, with suchlike treasure.

About A. D. 1521, the Emperor Charles passing toward Spain landed at Dover,
where the King met him, and conducted him in great state to London, lodging him
in his new Palace in the Black-Friars, then feasted him at Windsor; and in such
bands of amity the Emperor and King Henry seemed to be linked, that in London
this sentence was set up in the Guild Hall, over the door of the
Councel-Chamber, Carolus, Henricus vivant, Defensor uterque, Henricus fidei,
Carolus Ecclesiae. The reason of which Titles Defender of the Faith and Church
was, For that Charles the Emperor had directed forth a solemn Writ of
Out-lawry against Dr. Martin Luther, who had then given a great blow to the
Triple Crown; and King Henry had wrote a Book against the said Luther, for the
which the Pope gave the Title of Defender of the Church to the Emperor, and
Defender of the Faith to the King, and for the same cause he sent King Henry a
consecrated Rose.

A new variance happening again betwixt the Kingdoms of France and England, the
King assembled a Parliament at the Blackfriars in London, which granted him
half of the yearly revenues of all Spiritual livings to be paid for five years
continuance, and the tenth part of all temporal substance to carry on the Wars
against France and Scotland. When the King being furnished with money sent a
great Army into France under the conduct of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk,
who had married Mary, the Kings Sister, Queen Dowager of France. This valiant
Commander first besieged and won Bell-Castle, then took the Castle of Bonguard,
Braie, Roie, Lihome, Mondedier, and Boghan; which done he returned. King Henry
was so enraged against the Scots, that he took from all those inhabiting
England, all their goods, sending them into their Country on foot, with white
Crosses sowed upon their uppermost garments. But Margaret Queen of Scots
soliciting her brother Henry for a peace, the difference betwixt the two
Nations was for a while reconciled.

About A. D. 1525, arose great troubles in Ireland, the wild Irish casting off
all obedience and killing many of the Kings English Subjects. Girald
Fitz-Girald Earl of Kildare was sent prisoner into England, for that the Earl
of Ossery had accused him of many misdemeanors; as, That he connived at the
Earl of Desmonds escape, whom he should have attached by order from the King;
That he grew over-familiar with the Irish, and that he put to death the Kings
best subjects. When the Earl was brought to London he was committed to the
Tower by the Cardinals means, who did not love him. In the Tower he expected
death daily, but with such courageous resolution, that being at slide-groat
with the Lieutenant when the Mandate was brought for his Execution on the
morrow morning, and seeing the Lieutenant struck into a sudden sadness, he said
unto him; By St Bride Lieutenant, there is some mad game in that Scroll, but
fall how it will, this throw is for a huddle. And when the worst was told him,
he said, I pray thee Lieutenant do no more but assuredly learn from the Kings
own mouth, whether his Highness be witting of this or not. Whereupon the
Lieutenant loving the Earl well, went to the King, and showed him the Warrant,
which the King seeing, controlled the sawciness of the Priest (for so he then
called the Cardinal) and gave the Lieutenant his Signet for a nullity of the
Warrant, so the Earl was delivered from the death threatened, and not long after
from his imprisonment.

About or in A. D. 1528, King Henry began to call into Question the lawfulness
of his marriage with his Queen Katharine, who was daughter to Ferdinand King of
Spain, and had been married to Prince Arthur (eldest son of Henry the seventh)
when he was about fifteen years of age, but he dying ere he had been married
twelve months, King Henry his brother by the advice of his Council took this
Princess Katharine to Wife in few days after his Fathers death, and enjoyed her
nuptial society near twenty years, in which time she had born him two sons,
both dying in their infancy, and one daughter named Mary, afterward Queen. But
now, he said, his Conscience was much dissatisfied, doubting it might not be
lawful for him to have his brothers Wife, notwithstanding he had had a
dispensation from the Pope for it; therefore first he refused his Queens bed,
and having moved the doubt to his own Divines, he next sent for the opinion of
most of the Universities of Europe, which concluded against it, and signified
so much under most of their common Seals. He also sent Agents unto Rome, with
an humble request to the Pope, that an indifferent Judge might be sent to
determine this weighty affair.

Whereupon Cardinal Campeius was sent over into England, with whom Cardinal
Wolsey was joined in Commission. These Cardinals had a place ordained them in
the Blackfriars in London, for the keeping of their Court of Judicature. To
which Court the King and Queen were summoned to appear personally, which
accordingly they did, having several seats prepared for them. When the Court
was sat, the Crier called King Henry to appear, who forthwith answered, Here;
Then was the Queen called, who made no answer at all, but presently rose up,
and going to the King fell on her knees at his feet, and in the audience of the
people, said unto him, Sir, I desire you to take some pity upon me, and do me
Justice, and right; I am a poor woman, a stranger born out of your Dominions,
having here no indifferent Council, and less assurance of friendship. Alas!
Wherein have I offended, or what cause of displeasure have I given you, that
you thus intend to put me away? I take God to my Judge I have been to you a
true and humble Wife, ever conformable to your will and pleasure, never
gainsaying any thing wherein you took delight. Without all grudge or
discontented countenance I have loved all them that loved you, howsoever their
affections have been toward me. I have born you Children, and been your Wife
now this twenty years. Of my Virginity and Marriage Bed I make God and your own
Conscience the Judge, and if it otherwise be proved, I am content to be put
from you with shame. The King your Father in his time for wisdom was known to
be a second Solomon, and Ferdinand of Spain my Father accounted the wisest
amongst their Kings, could they in this Match be so far over-seen, or are there
now wiser and more learned men than at that time were? Surely it seems
wonderful to me that my marriage after twenty years should be thus called in
Question with new invention against me, who never intended but honesty. Alas,
Sir I see that I am wronged, having no Counsel to speak for me but such as are
your Subjects, and cannot be indifferent upon my part; therefore I most humbly
beseech you, even in charity to stay this course, until I may have advice and
Council from Spain; if not, your Graces pleasure be done. Then rising and
making low obeisance to the King, she departed the Court; and though the Crier
called her to come into the Court as she was going away, yet she went on,
bidding her Attendant to go forward, and saying to him, This is no indifferent
Court for me. When the King perceived that she was departed, he presently spoke
thus unto the Assembly: I will, quoth he, in her absence declare before you
all, that she has been to me a most true, obedient and comfortable Wife,
endued with all virtuous qualities and conditions according to her birth, and
in lowliness equals any of baser sort. Which said, Cardinal Wolsey humbly
requested the King, that he would be pleased to declare before that honorable
Assembly, whether he had been the cause of this his intended Divorce, wherewith
he was charged in the opinions of the people? Whereupon the King said, My Lord
Cardinal I can well excuse you in this, and rather affirm, that you have been
against me in attempting it thus far. Then by and by the Court was adjourned
till May 28 following, which time being come the Kings learned Council alleged
many reasons and likelihoods to prove that Prince Arthur had nuptial knowledge
of Lady Catherines body, as their being both of years capable to expleat the
Act, he above fifteen, she above seventeen, and both laid in one bed almost
five months together, etc.

From day to day the Pleas proceeded, but nothing was concluded touching the
Divorce, therefore the King sent the two Cardinals to persuade with the Queen
to put the whole matter to himself, which he said would be far better and more
honorable for her, than to stand to the trial of the Law These Legates
accordingly repairing to her, she from among her maids at work came presently
forth of an inner room to them, having a skein of white thread about her neck
to whom she said, Alack my Lords, I am very sorry to make you attend upon me.
What is your will? Madam, quoth Wolsey, We are come in good will to know your
Graces mind in this great matter of your Marriage, and to give you our advice
with the best service we can. The Queen thanking them said, That by order of
holy Church, she was espoused to the King as his true Wife, and in that point
she would abide till the Court of Rome (which was privy to the beginning) had
made thereof a final determination and end. The King then hopeless of his
Queens consent, hasted his Lawyers to forward the Divorce, which daily they
did; but when the day appointed was come for the final determination of the
matter in question, then Cardinal Campeius reserved it for the Pope himself to
conclude. Which so enraged the Duke of Suffolk that with a stern countenance he
said, It was never merry in England since we have had any Cardinals amongst us.
And Cardinal Wolsey, though he sought to excuse himself herein as not having
sufficient authority, yet did he fall under the Kings high displeasure. The
first step of this great Prelates fall was his dislike of the Kings affection
unto Anne Bullen, a Gentlewoman nothing favorable to his Pontifical pomp, nor
no great follower of the Ceremonies of those times of Popery, which moved the
Cardinal to write unto the Pope to defer the judgment of Divorce till he had
wrought the Kings mind in another mould. Which was not done so secretly but it
came to the Kings ear, and proved to his ruin. For first the Broad-seal was
taken from him, and some of his Bishoprics, his house and furniture seized
upon, and shortly after he was suddenly arrested by the Earl of Northumberland
at Cawood-castle, (for arrogant words against the King, importing a desire of
revenge) from whence he was conveyed toward London, in which journey at
Leicester-Abbey he ended his life, by taking an overgreat quantity of a
Confection to break wind from off his stomach. So ended this haughty Cardinal,
who was born at Ipswich, his father a good honest Butcher, himself a good
Philosopher and Orator. His education in his youth was at Magdalen College in
Oxford; his first Preferment was from the Lord Marquess of Dorset, who bestowed
a Benefice upon him. Then Sir John Naphant preferred him to King Henry the
Seventh, which King, having urgent business with Maximilian the Emperor, he
sent this his Chaplain to him post, who posted again back before he was thought
to be there, and withal concluded some points forgot in his directions, to the
high content of his Sovereign, for the which he bestowed on him the Deanery of
Lincoln, after which he was preferred to be the Kings Almoner, then one of his
Council, then Bishop of Tourney, then Bishop of Lincoln, then A.B. of York,
whereby he became as it were three Bishops at once; then was made Priest,
Cardinal, and Legate de Latere, then Lord Chancellor, and Bishop of Winchester,
and in commendam the Abbey of St. Albans was bestowed upon him. And with them
the Cardinal held in farm the Episcopal Sees of Bath and Wells, Worcester and
Hereford enjoyed by strangers incumbents not residing in the Realm. This
Prelate raised to this greatness was attended with so many officers and
servants as is incredible. And being Ambassador to the Emperor at Brussels, he
was there waited upon by many English Nobles, and served at the Table by his
Servitors on their knees. Insatiable he was to get, but Princely in bestowing,
lofty to his enemies, and not easily reconciled, which hastened his fall when he
began. The grudges against this Cardinal were not only for the especial favor
he stood in with the King, and great stroke he bare at the Council Table, but
for his intolerable pillings, who to patch up his pride in the raising of his
new Colleges at Oxford and Ipswich, suppressed forty Monasteries of good fame,
converting all their goods and movables to his own use. As also that he
emptied the land of twelve-score thousand pounds, enforced by him from the
King, which he employed to relieve and ransom the Pope then in Prison, to the
great impoverishing of his Majesty's Coffers. And lastly his so intolerable
pride, as no less than 1200 Horse for his retinue, eighty Wagons for his
Carriage, Tho. Cranmer. A. B. Cant.
and sixty Mules for Sumpture-horses attended him into France, when he went
thither Ambassador; but, Sic transit gloria mundi. A prodigal and merry
conceited Nobleman having lately sold a Manor of an hundred Tenements, came
ruffling into the Court in a new suit: saying, Am not I a mighty man that bear
an hundred Houses on my back? Which Cardinal Wolsey hearing, said, You might
have better employed it in paying your debts. Truth my Lord, said the Nobleman,
you say well, for my Father owed my Master your Father three halfpence for a
Calves-head, hold, here is twopence for it. But now whilst the matter of the
Kings Marriage hung in suspense the space of two years, it happened that Dr.
Cranmer said, That the Kings cause would easily be determined by the Law of
God, which the King hearing of put the Doctor upon the work, who thereupon
penned a Treatise, therein proving by Scriptures, General Councils, ancient and
modern Writers, that the Bishop of Rome had no authority to dispense with the
Word of God, so as contrary thereunto to grant liberty for a man to marry his
brothers Wife. This he presented to the King, which when the King had well
read, he demanded of the Doctor if he would abide by what he had writ? That I
will, said he, by Gods Grace, even before the Pope himself, if your Majesty
shall so appoint. Marry, quoth the King, to him you shall go. And accordingly
the King sent Thomas Bullen Earl of Wiltshire, Dr. Cranmer, and other Divines
to the Pope, who was then at Bonony. But when the day of audience was come, and
Cranmer prepared to defend what he had writ, on the sudden all was interrupted
by an unmannerly Spaniel of the Earls, which seeing the Servus Servorum put
forth his foot to be kissed, caught his great Toe in his mouth, it is said. But
be it so or not, yet this is sure, that there was no conclusion of the matter
made by the Pope; therefore K. Henry resolved to cut the Gordian-knot himself
without more ado; and withal began to call in question what authority the Pope
had in his Dominions, which being afterward debated in Parliament, an Act
passed against his usurped authority or supremacy, and all persons were
prohibited from appealing or making any payments to Rome, and the Kings
Marriage with Queen Catharine dissolved, and that from thenceforth she should
be called only Princess Dowager. The Parliament made it appear that in forty
years last past then, the Court of Rome had received from this Kingdom 160000
pounds for Investitures of Bishops.

Whilst the Divorce was under debate one Elizabeth Barton (commonly called the
holy Maid of Kent) made a Votaress in Canterbury, was taught by Bocking a Monk
to counterfeit many Trances, and in the same to utter many pious expressions to
the rebuke of sin, under which she was heard the more freely against the
Doctrine of Luther, and the Scriptures translation then desired by many. Also
giving forth from God and his Saints, by sundry pretended revelations, That if
the King proceeded in his Divorce and second marriage, he should not reign in
his Realm one month after, nor rest in his favor one hour. But the
imposturisme being detected, she and seven of her accomplices were executed at
Tyburn, for Treason, and others of them fined and imprisoned.

A. D. 1533, and November the fourteenth was King Henry married with Anne
Bullen daughter of Sir Thomas Bullen Earl of Wiltshire, and June the first she
was Crowned at Westminster, and on September the seventh following she bare
into the World that most excellent Princess Elizabeth, A. D. 1534.

And A. D. 1535, January 29, She was again delivered of a Child but that was
dead: Nor had the Queen her self long to live, for she was accused of Incest,
and adultery with her own brother George Lord Rochford, who was beheaded for
this fact on Tower Hill. And May the 19, 1536, this Queen was brought upon a
Scaffold erected on the Green within the Tower, where in the presence of many
Noblemen, the Lord Mayor and others, she said, Good Christian people, I am come
hither to die, for according to the Law and by the Law I am judged to death,
and therefore I will speak nothing against it: I come hither to accuse no man,
nor to speak any thing of that I am accused of, and condemned for. As for mine
own offenses God knows them, and unto God I remit them, beseeching him to
have mercy upon my Soul, and if any person will meddle in my cause, I desire
them to judge the best. And so I take my leave of the World, and of you all,
and do heartily beseech you to pray for me, and I beseech Jesus save my
Sovereign and Master the King long to live and reign over you, the most
Godliest, Noblest and Gentlest Prince that is. These words she uttered with a
smiling countenance, which done she kneeled down, and with a fervent spirit
said, To Jesus Christ I commend my Soul, Lord Jesus receive my Soul. And
repeating those words very often, suddenly with the sword the Executioner severed
her head and body, which were buried in the Quire of the Chapel of the Tower.
It Is said, that the Lord Rochford the Queens brother coming to her beds-side to
solicit a suit, leaned thereupon to whisper her in the ear, which the spials
gave forth that he did so to kiss the Queen. Most probable it is that the
crimes which this Queen was charged withal were matters contrived by Popish
instruments, because she gave great encouragements unto many, more publicly
and with boldness to profess the reformed religion, and procured a toleration
for the Protestant Divines. Moreover that this Queens death was rather sought
for than merited by her, seems also very probable, because that the next day
after her death, the King was married unto the Lady Jane Seymour, daughter of
John Seymour Knight.

About this time began to flourish Thomas Cromwell a Black-Smiths son of
Putney, whom King Henry first raised to be Master of his Jewel-house, then
Baron of Okeham, then Earl of Essex, then Lord great Chamberlain, and lastly
ordained him Vicar General over the Spirituality. This great Cromwell procured
it to be enacted in Parliament, That the Lords Prayer, Creed and ten
Commandments should be read in the English Tongue. Other matters also tending
to reform the English Church from the Roman corruptions, were attempted by
Cromwell, which did not at all please the Monks and their party. The
Lincolnshire men began a commotion under the leading of one Mackarell a Monk,
who named himself Captain Cobbler. A Copy of their grievances they sent to the
King, some of which were, The suppression of many religious houses, whereby the
service of God, they said, was minished. The Kings taking into his Council men
of Low-birth, who sought their own lucre. That there were diverse Bishops lately
preferred that had subverted the faith of Christ. That by reason of their loss
of Sheep and Cattle, they were not able to pay the Quindecim, or Tax granted to
the King, etc. But these Rioters the King soon pacified with good words.

In whose steads others rose up immediately, for forty thousand rusticks
assembled in Yorkshire, furnished with horse, armor and artillery. Their
pretense was Religion, and defense of holy Church. Their Banners were painted
with the five wounds of Christ, the Chalice, Cake and other Romish inventions.
This their Rebellion they termed the holy Pilgrimage. Their General of foot was
one James Diamond, a poor Fisherman, styled the Earl of Poverty, their chief
Leader was Mr. Robert Ask, a man it seems of terror: For when Lancaster Herald
at Arms was sent to him to declare the Kings message, this Ask, did so
terribly bluster forth his answers, that the Herald fell before him on his
knees, excusing himself to be but a Messenger. Many persons of great note were
parties in this insurrection. And to draw the more in to side with them, Ask
and his accomplices set forth in writing these scandalous untruths against the
King.

First, That no infant should be permitted to receive the blessed Sacrament of
Baptism, bot onles an trybet to be paid to the King.

Secondly, That no man under twenty pound lands shall eyte no bread made of
Wheat, ner Capon, Chekyn, Gois, ner Pig, bot onles to pay a trybet to the King.

Thirdly, That for every Ploghe-land the King will have en trybet, with other
extreme urgent causes, and heartily, Fare ye well. Their oath wherein they
bound themselves in this league, was the preservation of the Kings person, and
Issue; the purifying of Nobility and expulsing all villain blood, and evil
Counselors; not for envy to any to enter into their pilgrimage, or any private
commodity, but for the Commonweal, the restitution of the Church, and
suppression of Heresy and Heretics. But a great force being drawn against
them, they dispersed themselves, upon promise of pardon and redress in their
just complaints. Yet notwithstanding this the Kings clemency, some of the chief
of these actors engaged themselves again in a new insurrection in short time
after this, for which offense they suffered death. Of Ecclesiastical persons
were put to death, four Abbots, two Priors, three Monks, seven Priests, also
Captain Mackarel; and of temporal persons were executed Robert Ask, the Lord
Dacres, Sir Robert Constable, Sir Francis Bigod, Palmer, Percie, Hamilton,
Tempest and Lumley.

These stirs being stinted a Commission came forth to purge the Churches of
Idols, and to suppress the Monastries to the Kings use, granted him by
Parliament. When down went the Rood of Boxely in Kent, commonly called the Rood
of Grace, which was made with diverse vices to bow down and lift up it self, to
shake and stir both head, hands and feet, to roll the eyes, move the lips and
to bend the brows, thereby to cheat silly Souls. So likewise the Images of our
Lady of Walsingham and Ipswich, set with Jewels and Gems, also diverse other
both of England and Wales were brought to London, and many of them burnt before
the Lord Cromwell at Clelsey, A. D. 1538.

Then down went the Monasteries to the number of about 645, besides 90
Colleges, and of Chantries and free Chapels 2374. Almost all these were born
down in those boistrous times to the worlds amazement. Amongst the Shrines that
of Thomas a Becket was defaced, whose meanest part was pure Gold, garnished
with many precious Stones; the chiefest of which, was a rich Gem of France
offered by King Lewis, who asked and obtained of this prime Saint, (believe it
who list) That no passenger betwixt Dover and White-sand should perish by
Shipwreck. But instead of these impertinencies, the holy Bible was commanded
to be read in English in the Churches, and Register-Books of Weddings,
Christnings and Burials to be kept in every of them. If we will credit
tradition, shameful villainies were too frequently prepetrated by the
Monasticks, as Whoredoms, Incests, Sodomy, and Murders. Many infants bones, the
products of their wantonness, were found in many of their religious houses. The
Monasteries thus dissolved and the revenues thereof converted to secular uses,
King Henry hereby ran in great obloquy of many foreign Princes and Potentates,
but especially of the Pope. Yea, and homeborn subjects disliking hereof by
secret working sought to deprive King Henry, and to elevate Reg^nald Pole to
the regal dignity, for the which treason Henry Courtney Marquess of Excester,
the Lord Montacute and Sir Edward Neville, were beheaded on Tower Hill.

A. D. 1540, and January the sixth was King Henry married unto the Lady Anne,
Sister to the Duke of Cleve, but he refrained her bed, for the dislike he had
to her person; and she good Lady, no other cause alleged, was divorced by
Parliament the June following, when it was also enacted, That she should no
longer be called Queen.

In this Parliament was Cromwell Attainted for setting at liberty certain
persons committed for misprision of Treason, and Heresy; for favoring and
maintaining the Translation of heretical Books (so called) into English; for
countenancing and supporting heretical Teachers; for being an heretic himself,
and for having spoken great words for the upholding his said religion, to wit,
That the King himself should not change it if he would. The cause why the King
fell into dislike of him, and consequently of his ruin, was, because he stood
in the defense of the Lady Anne of Cleve, and spoke not all well of the Lady
Katharine Howard, whom the King was minded and did take to Wife. Which distaste
of the Kings against him, his enemy Stephen Gardner Bishop of Winchester did
improve to Cromwells destruction, who was beheaded on Tower Hill, and with him
the Lord Hungerford of Heitesbury for buggery.

Margaret Countess of Salisbury daughter of George Duke of Clarence, and Mother
of Cardinal Reginald Pole, being neither Arraigned nor Tried, but condemned by
Parliament as Cromwell had been, was beheaded. And the Lord Leonard Gray about
the same time lost his head for Treason. And the next day after his death,
Thomas Fines Lord Dacres of the South died at Tyburn for killing a man in a
fray. Nor was the Sword sheathed until the heads of Queen Katharine Howard, and
the Lady Jane Rochford were struck off; the former for Adultery, the other for
concealment, as was alleged. The parties offending with Katharine Howard, were
Francis Dereham and Thomas Culpepper, Dereham before she was Queen and
Culpepper after, who both were executed at Tyburn, December. the tenth; and on
Febru. the twelfth following Mrs Katharine Howard (for so in the Act of her
Attainder she is called) who had been Queen for the space of a year and half,
with the Lady Jane widow of the Lord Rochford, were brought unto the
Tower Hill, where in lamentable passions they suffered death. This Queen
protested after her condemnation to Dr. White her last Confessor, that she was
guiltless, having never so abused her Sovereigns bed.

But as these in case of Treason, so others in matter of Conscience were put to
death, by force of the Statutes made under this King. Whereof one was the
renouncing the Popes supremacy, and owning the King for supreme head of the
Church in his own Dominions; this concerned the Papists. The other was the six
Articles, this concerned the Protestants. Which six bloody Articles were,

First, That after the words of Consecration there is no other substance
consisting in the bread and wine, besides the substance of Christ, God and man.

Secondly, That the Communion in both kinds was not necessary to Salvation, the
flesh only in form of bread being sufficient to the Laity.

Thirdly, That Priests might not marry by the Law of God.

Fourthly, That the vows of chastity ought by Gods law to be observed.

Fifthly, That private Masses were necessary for the people, and agreeable to
the Law of God.

Sixthly, That auricular Confession was expedient to be retained in the Church
of God. For offending against the former Law of abjuring the Popes Supremacy,
etc. was John Fisher Bishop of Rochester put to death, and Sir Thomas More Lord
Chancellor, so merry conceited a person that he could not forbear his jests
though bloody death stared him in the face: For when on the Scaffold the
Executioner desired his forgiveness, he replied, I forgive thee, but I promise
thee thou will get no honor by ^utting off my head, my neck is so short. And
when he was to lay his neck on the block he stro^kt out his white beard, and
said to the Heads-man, I pray let me lay it over the block, lest you should cut
it off; For though you have a Warrant to cut off my head, you have none to cut
off my Beard. Besides these two there were put to death for the same cause many
Abbots, Priors and Friars. For oppugning the six Articles and asserting
Gospel Truths did many Christians of the reformed Religion suffer death in the
flames. Amongst the rest Dr. Robert Barns was one, and Mrs. Anne Askue a person
of rare wit and elegant beauty, who when she had been twice tormented upon the
Rack to the disjoynting of her bones, then gave her body to the flames for
Christ's sake. And the life of Queen Katharine Parre was hard laid for by
Stephen Gardner, but through her wisdom and prudent carriage toward the King,
it was preserved;

About A. D. 1545, was a match concluded to be made betwixt Prince Edward King
Henrie's son, and the young Princess of Scotland, the Scotch Nobility approving
thereof, and in a Parliament of the three estates the match was confirmed in
England, the like also in Scotland: but Cardinal Beton Archbishop of St.
Andrews, fearing lest hereby Scotland should also change the Church-Orders, and
the French likewise not liking the union, means was therefore wrought to break
the said intended marriage of the two young Heirs, whence wars insued, and the
English invaded Scotland, spoiled Leith, burnt Edenbrough, and wasted the
Country for seven miles about, set fire upon Haddington and Dunbar, then
returned. And because the French refused the performance of certain Covenants,
King Henry made war also upon that Nation, and in short time won the strong
Town of Bulloigne. Then the French King with intent to balance the loss of
Bolloign invaded the Isle of Wight, and Seacoasts of Sussex, though it proved
to the loss of many of his Captains, and thousands of his Soldiers.

A. D. 1546, the Reingrave came with a great force to victual a Fort built near
to Bulloigne, which the Earl of Surrey sought to prevent him from, but was
discomfited, with the loss of many brave men's lives. Shortly after which, by
the mediation of the Emp^ror, and other Christian Potentates peace was
concluded betwixt France and England.

A. D. 1547, and January the twenty eighth King Henry yielded to deaths
impartial stroke, whose body with great solemnity was buried at Windsor. In his
Will he ordained (howsoever Titles had been made invalid in Parliaments) That
his three Children should succeed each other, for want of other Issue. One
thousand Marks he commanded should be given to the poor; and to twelve poor
Knights at Windsor each of them twelve-pence a day for ever, every year a long
Gown of white cloth, the Garter to be embroidred upon the breast, and therein
the Cross of St. George, and a Mantle of red cloth to be worn thereupon. His
Wives were Katharine his brothers Relict, Anne Bullen, Jane Seymore, Anne of
Cleve, Katharine Howard Niece to the Duke of Norfolk, and Katharine Parre the
daughter of Sir Thomas Parre of Kendal. His Issue Henry which lived not full
two months, another son not named, and Mary, these by Katharine of Spain,
Elizabeth, and a son still-born by Anne Bullen; Edward by Jane Seymour. His
natural Issue Henry Fitz-Roy.

After the dissolution of the religious Houses, he erected the Bishoprics of
Westminster, Chester, Oxford, Peterborough, Bristol and Gloucester, and also
erected the Cathedral Churches of Canterbury, Winchester, Worcester, Chester,
Peterborough, Ely, Gloucester, Bristol, Carlisle, Durham, Rochester and Norwich.
In all which he founded a Dean, with a certain number of Prebendaries. The
College of Christ-Church in Oxford begun by Cardinal Wolsey, he ordained to be
the Cathedral of this Bishops See.

Many died of the sweating sickness in England, especially about London. In the
twenty third year of his reign Richard Rice a Cook was boiled to death in
Smith-field for poisoning diverse persons. In the thirty seventh of his reign
the Stews on the Bank-side in Southwark were put down by the Kings appointment.

A. D. 1546, William Foxly continued sleeping fourteen days and fifteen nights,
and could not by any means be awakened during that time; yet when he did awake
he was in very good temper, as though he had slept but one night, and lived
forty years after.

King Henry by Act of Parliament assumed the Style and Title of King of
Ireland, former Kings of England bearing only the style of Lords thereof. It Is
said that now, Turkey, Carp, Hops, Pickarel and Beer, came into England all in
a Year.

Mayors and Sheriffs of Londen in this Kings Time.
In his first Year, Thomas Bradbury was Mayor for the part of the year, Sir
William Capel for the rest. George Monox, John Doget, Sheriffs.


In his second Year, Sir Henry Kebble was Mayor. John Milborne, John Rest,
Sheriffs.


In his third Year, Sir Roger Acheley was Mayor. Nicholas Shelton, Thomas
Mersine, Sheriffs.


In his fourth Year, Sir William Copinger was Mayor for part of the year, Sir
Richard Haddon for the rest. Robert Holdernes or Alderns, Robert Fenrother,
Sheriffs.


In his fifth Year, Sir William Brown was Mayor. John Dawes, John Bruges, Roger
Bosford, Sheriffs.


In his sixth Year, Sir George Monox was Mayor. James Yarford, John Monday,
Sheriffs.


In his seventh Year, Sir William Butler was Mayor. Henry Warley, Richard
Gray, William Baily, Sheriffs.


In his eighth Year, Sir John Rest was Mayor. Thomas Seymour, John or Richard
Thurston, Sheriffs.


In his ninth Year, Sir Thomas Exmewe was Mayor. Thomas Baldrie, Ralph, or
Richard Simons, Sheriffs.


In his tenth Year, Sir Thomas Mersine was Mayor. John Allen, James Spencer,
Sheriffs.


In his eleventh Year, Sir James Yarford was Mayor. John Wilkinson, Nicholas
Patrick, Sheriffs.


In his twelfth Year, Sir John Burg was Mayor. John Skevington, John Kyme,
alias Keble, Sheriffs.


In his thirteenth Year, Sir John Milborn was Mayor. John Breton, or Britain,
Thomas Pargitor, Sheriffs.


In his fourteenth Year, Sir John Mundy was Mayor, John Rudston, John
Champneis, Sheriffs.


In his fifteenth Year, Sir Thomas Baldrie was Mayor. Michael English, Nicholas
Jennings, Sheriffs.


In his sixteenth Year, Sir William Bailey was Mayor. Ralph Dodmere, William
Roche, Sheriffs.


In his seventeenth Year, Sir John Allen was Mayor. John Caunton, or Calton,
Christopher Askaw, Sheriffs.


In his eighteenth Year, Sir Thomas Seymour was Mayor. Stephen Peacock,
Nicholas Lambert, Sheriffs.


In his nineteenth Year, Sir James Spencer was Mayor. John Hardy, William
Hollis, Sheriffs.


In his twentieth Year, Sir John Rudston was Mayor. Ralph Warren, John Long,
Sheriffs.


In his twenty first Year, Sir Ralph Dodmer was Mayor. Michael Dormer, Walter
Champion, Sheriffs.


In his twenty second Year, Sir Thomas Pargiter was Mayor. William Dantesey, or
Dancy, Richard Champion, Sheriffs.


In his twenty third Year, Sir Nicholas Lambert was Mayor. Richard Gresham,
Edward Altham, Sheriffs.


In his Twenty fourth Year, Sir Stephen Peacock was Mayor. Richard Reynolds,
John Martin, Nicholas Pinchon, John Priest, Sheriffs.


In his twenty fifth Year, Sir Christopher Askew was Mayor. William Forman,
Thomas Kitson, Sheriffs.


In his twenty sixth Year, Sir John Champneis was Mayor. Nicholas Leveson,
William Denham, Sheriffs.


In his twenty seventh Year, Sir John Allen was Mayor. Humfrey Monmouth, John
Cotes, Sheriffs.


In his Twenty eighth Year, Sir Ralph Warren was Mayor. Robert or Richard
Paget, William Bowyer, Sheriffs.


In his twenty ninth Year, Sir Richard Gresham was Mayor. John Gresham, Thomas
Lewin, Sheriffs.


In his thirtieth Year, Sir William Forman was Mayor. William Wilkinson,
Nicholas Gibson, Sheriffs.


In his thirty first Year, Sir William Hollys was Mayor. Thomas Ferrer, Thomas
Huntlow, Sheriffs.


In his thirty second Year, Sir William Roche was Mayor. William Laxstone,
Martin Bows, Sheriffs.


In his thirty third Year, Sir Michael Dormer was Mayor. Rowland Hill, Henry
Suckley, Sheriffs.


In his thirty fourth Year, Sir John Cotes was Mayor. Henry Hobberthorn, Henry
Amcoats, Sheriffs.


In his thirty fifth Year, Sir William Bowyer was Mayor. John Toulouse, Richard
Dobbes, Sheriffs.


In his thirty sixth Year, Sir William Laxton was Mayor. John Wilford, Andrew
Jud, Sheriffs.


In his thirty seventh Year, Sir Martin Bows was Mayor. George Barn, Ralph
Allen, or Alley, Sheriffs.


In his thirty eighth Year, Sir Henry Hobberthorn was Mayor. Richard Jarveis,
Thomas Curteis, Sheriffs.


EDWARD VI.
A. D. 1547.
EDward the Sixth was born (but not without the death of his Mother) A.D. 1537,
October. 12.

A. D. 1547, and Febr. 20. he was Crowned at Westminster. At which time when
three Swords were delivered to him, as King of England, France and Ireland, he
said, There was yet another Sword to be delivered him, namely, the sacred
Bible, which is, said he, the sword of the Spirit, without which we are
nothing, neither can do any thing. His Mothers brother, Edward Lord Seymour
Earl of Hartford, and Duke of Somerset was by the consent of the Nobles made
Protector over his Minority, and the Realms. In short time after the Kings
Coronation, the Lord Protector and Council sought to effect the Marriage
betwixt the young King and the young Queen of Scotland, as it had been formerly
agreed on by both Nations; but this the Scots refused to yield unto, wherefore
the Protector led an army into Scotland, and at a place called Edmondstone-edg
near to Musclebrough fought the Scots and vanquished them, following the chase
of them almost five miles, wherein the Lord Fleming with sundry men of note
were slain, and 10000 of the Soldiers; and about a 1000 were taken Prisoners,
the chief whereof were the Earl of Huntly, the Lords Yester, Hobby, and
Hamilton, the Lord Weems, and a brother of the Earl of Cassills. Lies the
English sacked and set on fire, took the Island St. Colmes, Broughticrag,
Rocksbrough, Humes Castle, and others, insomuch that many Gentlemen in Tividale
and the Meres came to the Protector, and entered into terms and conditions of
peace with him. After the Protectors return a Parliament was assembled at
London, wherein the six Articles were repealed, those Colleges and Chapels
that King Henry had left were given the King, and the Churches ordered to be
purged of all Images. And accordingly Commissioners were appointed, who first
began at St. Paul's in London, and thence proceeded throughout England and
Wales. But this reformation occasioned great commotions, which began in the
West. A Priest stabbed one Mr. Body a Commissioner to the heart, for plucking
down certain Images; and this fact of his was so favored by the Cornish and
Devonshire Rusticks, that ten thousand of them rose in Arms, heading themselves
under Mr. Humphrey Arundel, six other Gentlemen, and eight Priests. These
rebels besieged the City of Excester and sore distressed it, yet did the
Citizens loyally hold out against them; for which the King did enlarge their
Liberties, and gave unto their City the Manor of Exilond. At last the rebels
agree upon Articles to be sent the King, therein requiring to have Mass
celebrated as in time past it had been. To have holy bread and holy water in
remembrance of Christ's body and blood. To have the six Articles again in force,
etc. To these and the rest of their demands the King sent an answer, Therein
pitying their ignorance, reproving their sawciness, and withal a general pardon
to as many as would desist in time, concluding thus: We for our part seek no
longer to live than to be a Father to our people, and as God has made us your
King, so has he commanded you obedience; by whose great Majesty we swear, you
shall feel the same power in our Sword, which how mighty it is, no subject
knows, how puissant it is no private man can judge, and how mortal no English
heart can think. Therefore embrace our mercy whilst it is offered, lest the
blood spilt by your means cry vengeance from the earth, and be heard in the
ears of the Lord of Heaven. Notwithstanding all this, the rebels still
persisted in their Traitorous attempts; the King therefore sent an army against
them, which put them to flight at Honiton, then worsted them at Excester, where
the rebels lay siege, and lastly upon Clift-heath destroyed the greatest part
of them; their consecrated Host, Crucifix, Crosses, consecrated Banners, holy
bread and holy water (which the rebels had brought into the field, thinking by
virtue of them to have made all sure on their side) were all trampled into the
dirt. Arundel, Winsland, Holmes and Bury, four rebell-Captains were taken and
executed at London. Others also of their partakers were executed by Martial
Law, amongst whom was Boyer the Mayor of Bodmin in Cornwall. Nigh to which Town
dwelt a Miller that had been a busie-fellow in the rebellion, but he knowing
his own danger, willed his man to take the name of Master if any enquired after
him. To this Millers house Sir Anthony Kingstone, Marshall of the Field came,
where calling for the Master the officious man in his name very bodily
presented himself, whom Sir Anthony straight commanded to the Gallows; and when
the poor fellow seeing the danger he was in changed his note, confessing
himself to be but the man, Sir Anthony said, Well, thou can never do thy
Master better service than to hang for him, causing him to be trussed up on the
next tree. Other commotions arose in other parts of the Realm; but the most
dangerous was that in Norfolk headed by Robert Ket a Tanner of Wimonham, who
took upon him to be the Kings Deputy, giving out Warrants in the Kings name for
what he pleased. His Tribunal-seat was in an old Tree, where sat the jolly
Tanner accompanied with his Counselors and Assistants being two chosen men out
of every hundred of the rout. Hither came the complaints of the Camp, and from
hence Commissions were issued out to plunder Ships and Gentlemen's houses of
Armor and Artillery; so that this Tree was termed the Oak of Reformation.
Whence likewise sometimes Sermons were delivered, and once by the Reverend Dr.
Parker, for which his life was endangered, his Sermon was so displeasing to the
Rabble. To pacify these rebels the King caused his general pardon to be
proclaimed by an Herald at Arms. Notwithstanding which they still proceeded in
their rebellion, and made themselves Masters of the City of Norwich. The King
therefore sent William Parre Marquess of Northampton against them, but him they
overpowered. Then the Lord Dudley Earl of Warwick was employed against them,
who with small resistance gained the Marketplace of Norwich, where he caused
sixty rebels, whom he had taken, immediately to be executed by Martial Law.
The main body of the rebels entrenched themselves at the foot of the Hill
called Dussin-dale, partly upon vain Prophesies given forth amongst them by
Wisards, That Hob, Dic and Hie, (meaning the Clowns) should with their clubs
fill up the valley of Dussin-dale with dead bodies. On August 27, the Earl
prepared for fight, the rebels likewise set themselves in order, placing in
their fore-rank all the Gentlemen whom they had taken prisoners coupled in
Irons. Upon the rebels Captain Drury with his own Band and the Almains charged
courageously, and opened their Battle, to the setting at liberty of the captive
Gentlemen, and the Earls light Horsemen came so valiantly on that the rebels
gave back and fled, and with the foremost their Captain Ket. The chase held
three miles and more with the slaughter of 3500 rebels. The rest of the
rebels that kept about the Ordnance, by the Generals persuasions and promise
of pardon, cast away their Weapons, and with one voice cried, God save King
Edward. The next day following Ket was apprehended in a Barn where he had hid
himself, and shortly after was hanged in Chains upon the Castle of Norwich;
William Ket his brother was hanged upon the high Steeple of Wimonham, and nine
other of them were hanged upon the Oak of Reformation. This Rebellion was at
the first broacht under the pretense of throwing open the Enclosures, which the
King by Proclamation had commanded to be done, though it was neglected. These
disturbances being settled, others were made in the North by Thomas Dale a
Parish Clark, William Ombler a Yeoman, and one Stevenson the Post of Seymour.
Their pretenses were to restore the Church her rights, and to disburthen the
Land of Grievances; giving out that the Pope was the man, that K. Edward was an
intruder, if not a mere Heretic, that the Church had power of both the Swords.
When these fellows were increased to the number of about 3000, the Kings pardon
being sent to them, they most of them departed to their own homes; but Ombler
and Dale with four others were executed at York, September. 21, 1549. And as the
Commons disquieted the Country, so did some Lords and Ladies disquiet the
Court. The Protector's brother Thomas Seymour Baron of Sudley, High Admiral of
England, had married Queen Katharine Parre, which Lady contending for place
with the Protector's Duchess, occasioned the haughty Duchess ('it is said) to
procure the Lord Sudley's ruin. Which Lord was accused to have designed the
getting of the Kings person into his custody, and Government of the Realm; for
the which (with some smaller matters charged upon him) he was condemned by Act
of Parliament and by his brother the Protector's Warrant was beheaded on
Tower Hill, March 20. But the Brothers being now disjoined, who might have
supported each other had they lived together in brotherly love, the Protector
himself is marked out for destruction. Diverse Lords article against the Duke,
accusing him, That he had animated the rebels in their rebellion: That he was
a sower of sedition amongst the Nobles: That he had against Law erected a Court
of Requests in his own house, enforcing diverse of the Kings Subjects thither to
answer for their free-holds, etc. And so close and cunningly they prosecuted
the matter against him, that they got him into the Tower, October. 12, 1549, but
the King procured his liberty immediately, though not his former Authority. In
the mean space that the Protector was under these troubles, the Scots recovered
the places that the English had gained from them. The French also attempted to
gain the Fort of Bulloinberg by surprise, unto which enterprise 7000 men were
chosen, who secretly marched in the night with Ladders and furniture meet for
the design, and approached within a quarter of a Mile of the Fort; but one
Carter an English man, a soldier amongst them, understanding what was intended,
hastily and privately made from his Company, and gave the Alarm to his
Countrymen in the Fort; whereupon Sir Nicholas Arnalt the Governor made such
preparations against the French men's coming, that at their approach he repulsed
them with so great a slaughter, that fifteen Wagons went away laden with dead
bodies of the French. After this the French assaulted the Isles of Garnsey and
Jersey, but were beaten off with the lost of a thousand men. Howbeit the French
King gave not over till he had recovered by surrender Bulloinberg, and the Town
of Bulloin, which last he purchased at a high price.

A. D. 1550, that mortal disease called the sweating-sickness raged extremely
through England, whereof died the two Sons of Charles Brandon, both of them
Dukes of Suffolk successively, besides an infinite number in their best
strength. And, which is wonderful, this disease followed only English men in
foreign Countries, no other people being infected thereby. And to fill up the
dolours of these doleful times, the good Duke of Sommerset was again by the
over-reachings of the Earl of Warwick, (lately created Duke of Northumberland)
and other his emulators, committed prisoner, and not long after put to death.
For the Duke of Sommerset giving ear to such false friends as sought his ruin,
privily armed himself, and so went to the Council Table, his flatterers having
put him in fear of some sudden attempt intended against him. But at the
Council Table his bosom being opened, and the Armor found, he was forthwith
apprehended as intending the death of some Counselor, and sent to the Tower,
October. 16, 1551, and in December following he was condemned of Felony, as
seeking the death of some of the Kings Counselors, and on Febr. 22 of the same
year, he was brought to the Scaffold on Tower Hill, where he thus spoke to the
people: Dearly beloved Friends, I am brought hither to suffer death, albeit I
never offended against the King, either in word or deed, and have always been
as true and faithful to this Realm as any man has been. But forasmuch as I am
by Law condemned to die, I do acknowledge my self as well as others to be
subject thereunto. Wherefore to testify my obedience which I owe unto the
Laws, I am come hither to suffer death; whereunto I willingly offer my self,
with most hearty thanks unto God, that has given me this time of repentance,
who might through sudden death have taken away my life, that I neither should
have acknowledged him nor my self. When having uttered these words with others
exhortatory, That the people would continue constant in the Gospel, suddenly
there was heard a great noise, whereby the assembly was struck into great fear,
which noise was made by some of the Trainband-Hamlets coming hurrying on the
Tower Hill. This stir being ceased, another presently insued, for the people
seeing Sir Anthony Brown ride toward the Scaffold, they violently ran and
crowded together thitherward, supposing he had brought a pardon from the King,
and with a sudden shout, cried a pardon, a pardon, God save the King. But these
interruptions over, the Duke proceeded in his speech; requesting the people to
join in prayer with him for the King, exhorting them unto obedience to him and
his Council. Which done, asking every man forgiveness, and declaring that he
freely forgave every man; he meekly submitted his head to the Axe. Whose death
the people were much grieved for, speaking very bitterly against the Duke of
Northumberland, and the good King sorely mourned because of it, which likely
did much increase his Consumptive distemper that brought him to his end. Whilst
he lay in his weakness he was over-wrought to disinherit his two sisters Mary
and Elizabeth, and to ordain by Will for his Successor to Englands Diadem
Guilford Dudley's Wife, Jane the elder Daughter of the Duke of Suffolk, whose
Mother the Lady Frances, was the Daughter of Mary Queen of France, and Charles
Branden Duke of Suffolk. Unto this Will of King Edward all his Council, the
Bishops and all the Judges, saving Sir John Hallis, subscribed. When the King
drew toward his last breath, he prayed as follows: Lord God deliver me out
of this miserable life, and take me among thy chosen, howbeit not my will, but
thy will be done. Lord, I commit my spirit to thee. O Lord, thou know how
happy it were for me to be with thee, yet for thy Chosen sake if it be thy
will, send me life and health that I may truly serve thee. O my Lord, bless thy
people and save thine inheritance. O Lord God, save thy chosen people of
England. O my Lord God, defend this Realm from Papistry, and maintain thy true
Religion, that I and my people may praise thy holy Name, for thy Son Jesus
Christ's sake. So turning his face and seeing some by him, he said, I thought
you had not been so nigh. Yes, said Dr. Owen, we heard you speak to your self.
Then said the King, I was praying to God. O I am faint, Lord have mercy upon
me, and receive my Spirit. And in so saying he yielded up the Ghost, July 6,
1553. And was interred in the Chapel of St. Peter's at Westminster. He was a
Prince very well learned in the Latin and Greek Tongues, also in the French,
Spanish and Italian, adorned with the skill of Logic, Natural Philosophy,
Music and Astronomy. Of such observation and memory that he could tell and
recite all the Ports, Havens and Creeks belonging to England, Scotland and
France, what coming in there was, how the Tide served in every of them, what
burden of Ship, and what wind best served the coming into them. Of all his
Nobles, chief Gentry and Magistrates he took special notice of their
hospitality, and religious conventions. He was very sparing of his Subjects
blood though rebels, or heretics. When Joan Butcher was to be burnt for
heresy, all his Council could not move him to sign the Warrant for her
execution, till Dr. Cranmer A. B. labored with him therein; to whom the King
said, What my Lord, will you have me send her quick to hell? And taking the Pen
he used this speeeh, I will lay all the charge hereof upon Cranmer before God.
So zealous he was for the reformed Religion, and against Popery, that he thrust
out all the Roman fopperies out of the Churches; and superstitions out of the
English Church; nor would he permit his sister Mary to have Mass said in her
house, though the Emperor Charles made suit for it in her behalf. So
charitable that he conferred on the City of London Christs-Hospital, and St.
Thomas-Hospital for the relief of the Impotent, fatherless Children, and
wounded Soldiers, and Bridewell for vagabond and idle persons; and so
circumspect as to himself and public, that he kept a Journal Book written with
his own hand, how all things proceeded with him and the state, even from the
first day of his reign unto his death.

The Mayors and Sheriffs of London in this Kings Reign.
In his first Year, Sir John Gresham was Mayor. Thomas White, Robert Chertsey,
Sheriffs.


In his second Year, Henry Amcoats was Mayor. William Lock, Sir John Ayleph,
Sheriffs.


In his third Year, Sir Rowland Hill was Mayor. John York, Richard Turk,
Sheriffs.


In his fourth Year, Sir Andrew Jud was Mayor. Augustine Hind, John Lion,
Sheriffs.


In his fifth Year, Sir Richard Dobbes was Mayor. John Lambert, John Cowper,
Sheriffs.


In his sixth Year, Sir George Barn was Mayor. William Garret, or Gerard, John
Mainard, Sheriffs.


Queen MARY.
A.D. 1553
PIOUS King Edward having exchanged this wretched life for an happy, the
Council in the first place persuaded the Lord Mayor, and certain of the
Aldermen of London to take their Oaths to be faithful to the Lady Jane Gray;
then caused the said Lady Jane to be proclaimed in London Queen of England. But
when Queen Mary heard the news of her brothers death, and the Councels
proceeds, by her Letters she required the Council as they tendered her
displeasure, and their own safeties, to proclaim her Queen and Governor of the
Land. Unto which Letters the Lords forthwith answered, That by good Warrant of
Ancient Laws of the Realm, besides the last Will of King Edward the right was
in the Lady Jane to govern England, unto whom therefore and none other they
must yield subjection. They also remembered the Queen of the unlawful marriage
and divorce of her Mother, of her own illegitimation, desiring her to forbear
any further claim, and to submit her self to the Queen Jane now her Sovereign.
Which Letters sent to Queen Mary were subscribed by Thomas Canterbury
Archbishop, Thomas Ely Chancellor, Henry Suffolk Duke, The Duke of
Northumberland, Marquess of Winchester, etc. Upon the receipt of the Letters
the Queen removed from Keningal to Fremingham-Castle, unto whom the Suffolk-men
first resorted, offering their service with condition that they might still
embrace the Gospel, in the same manner that King Edward had established it. To
which she then condescended, though afterward being petitioned to perform her
promise herein, she both punished the Writer, and answered, that they should
one day well know, that they being but members should not direct her their head.

July the twelfth the Earl of Oxford and other Lords came in to the Queens
assistance, and proclaimed her at Norwich, and July the fourteenth the Duke of
Northumberland with an Army set forth off London toward Norwich; but few or
none of the people bade this ambitious Duke God-speed, which himself took
notice of as he marched out of London with his Army.

But whilst Northumberland was on his way, the Lord Windsor and other Gentlemen
raised the Commons of Buckingham-shire for Queen Mary; so Sir John Williams,
and Sir Leonard Chamberlain of Oxfordshire, and Sir Thomas Tresham in
Northamptonshire. And at London the Tide turned and Queen Mary was there
proclaimed, and many of the Lords deserted the Duke, insomuch that the Duke
himself, thinking it the easiest to swim with the stream, even fairly in the
Marketplace at Cambridge proclaimed Mary Queen of England, throwing up his Cap
in token of joy. The way thus made free, Queen Mary repaired to London and
there set at liberty Edmond Bonner imprisoned in her brothers time, restoring
him to the Sea of London, which Dr. Ridley had possessed, and made him a
prisoner. Other Protestant Bishops she removed, placing Papists in their
steads. Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury she committed to the Tower, and
Stephen Gardner she made Lord Chancellor. And to assure her estate the better
the Duke of Northumberland was Arraigned and condemned, and brought upon the
Scaffold on Tower Hill to suffer death. Where this Duke having promise of life
if he would recant the reformed Religion, did so, and withal exhorted the
people to follow the Romish way, though when he had so done the executioner
made him shorter by the head; with him suffered Sir John Gates, and Sir Thomas
Palmer August 22.

A few days after which the Queen was Crowned at Westminster, by Stephen
Gardner Bishop of Winchester. And October 18th began a Parliament, wherein that
Act was repealed which was made in Edward the 6th's time, entitled, An Act for
the uniformity of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments.

Then came all the Popish trinkets into fashion again, the Mass Book,
Crucifixes, Agnus Dei's, Relics, with all the Idols and Abominations. And the
temporising Priests were forced to forgo their Wives, though not to live
honestly: For, as Mr. Heywood merrily said to the Queen concerning these men,
when she told him that the Priests must no longer have their Wives; Your grace
then must allow them Lemmons, for the Clergy cannot live without sauce.

A. D. 1553, was the Lady Jane Gray and her Husband Arraigned and condemned at
the Guild Hall in London, and February 12th, her Husband Gilford Dudley 4th son
to the Duke of Northumberland, was had to the Tower Hill, where with prayers
and great signs of repentance he ended his life. Whose body all bloody laid in
a Cart, together with the head wrapped in a cloth, was brought into the Ch^ppel
of the Tower, even in the sight of this sorrowful Lady his Wife, who was now to
mount the Scaffold raised upon the Green within the ^ower, whither being
ascended, she with a cheerful countenance spoke unto the spectators, declaring
that her offense was only in consenting unto others, That she never sought that
greatness; Then desired the people to bear her witness, that she died a true
Christian woman, and looked to be saved by no other means, but only by the
mercy of God in the blood of Christ Jesus his only son; confessed that when she
did know the word of God, she neglected it, and loved the world and her self,
and that therefore this plague and punishment justly happened to her for her
sins. Lastly, desired the people to pray for her whilst she lived. Then
kneeling down said in English the 51, Psalm, which done, she stood up and gave
her Book to Mr. Bridges Lieutenant of the Tower; then by the help of her two
Gentlewomen made her self ready for the Block, and commending her spirit into
the hands of the Lord Jesus, her head was severed from the body. Thus ended the
life of this most ingenious and virtuous Lady, ruined by the Ambition of her
own, especially Husbands Father.

On the 23 of the same month, her Father Henry Duke of Suffolk, for a second
offense, the promoting an insurrection to hinder the Queens marriage with
Philip of Spain, was beheaded on the Tower Hill. And A. D. 1554, April 23, was
his Brother the Lord Thomas Gray beheaded in the same place. Against this
foresaid match with Spain many combinations were made, and many persons in
diverse places of the Realm were up in Arms. And amongst the rest Sir Thomas
Wiat with the Kentishmen, against whom the Duke of Nurfolk was sent, but many
of his followers forsook him and joined with Wiat. Then Wiat advanced to
Dartford, and from thence to Deepford by Greenwich, at whose approach so nigh
the City, the fears were there so great, that the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and most
of the Citizens were in armor, and the Sergeants and Lawyers in Westminster in
the Hillary-Term pleading their Causes in harness. The Queen to make the City
sure on her side, came unto the Guild Hall, where she made an Oration to the
Citizens, therein acquainting them, That though the Rebels pretense was to
resist the marriage with Spain, yet that their intention was against her
Religion. That they arrogantly demanded the possession of her person, the
keeping of the Tower, the placing and displacing of her Counselors. She also
therein alleged her right to the Crown, professed her entire love and
affection to her subjects, promised them in the word of a Queen, that if it
should not probably appear before the Nobility and Commons in Parliament, that
her designed marriage with Prince Philip would be for the profit of the Nation,
she would abstain from it. Wherefore, says she, good Subjects pluck up your
hearts and like true men, stand fast with your lawful Prince against these
Rebels, both Ours and Yours, and fear them not, for I assure you I do not.
Against these Rebels the Earl of Pembroke was made General, and a hundred pound
lands by the year was promised to be given to him and his Heirs for ever; that
should bring Wiat either alive or dead.

Howbeit Wiat with fourteen Ensigns, and about five thousand men advanced to
Southwark, where he made Proclamation, That no Soldier should take any thing
without due payment Southwark he fortified, planting diverse great Guns therein.
And London was fortified against him, and the drawbridge cut down. Wherefore
when Wiat perceived that he could have no access into the City that way, he in
the night marched round about by Kingstone, thinking that way to have surprised
the City on the sudden; but staying to remount a great Gun, that was dismounted
by the way, by that means he could not reach the City so soon as he had
expected, nor till his coming was discovered and preparations on that side the
City made against him.

Cardinal Reginald Pole. A.B. Cant.
The Earl of Pembroke possessed himself of St. James's, which Wiat at his coming
perceiving marched a little aside toward Charing Cross. At Charing Cross the
Lord Chamberlain and Sir John Gage stood to resist Wiat, but the Kentish-men
rushing violently into the Streets, forced their opposites into the gates of
White Hall, where was a great distraction within, and no other voice heard than
Treason, Treason. Mean while Wiat with such small company as he had with him
hasted to Ludgate, where he knocked to have entrance, but was debarred. In the
interim those his followers that had turned to White Hall were dispersed, about
twenty of which dirty, bemired Rebels were slain in the conflict, and no other
cry heard on the contrary part, but, Down with the daggle-Tails.

Wiat returning from Ludgate sat down upon a stall against Bell-Savage-Inne,
where he mused a while, then retired toward the Court, and was not opposed
till he came to Temple Bar; where began some Bickering, but Clarencieux King at
Arms coming to him persuaded him to submit to the Queens mercy. To whom Sir
Thomas Wiat said, If I must yield I will yield to a Gentleman, and yielded
himself to Clarencieux. Then was he mounted behind Sir Maurice Berkley, and so
carried to the Court, and in the afternoon to the Tower. About fifty of his
fellow Rebels were hanged in London, and four hundred more were led through the
City with Halters about their necks to Westminster, where they were all
pardoned by the Queen.

A. D. 1554, and April 11th, Sir Thomas Wiat was beheaded on Tower Hill, where
at his death he warned the people to beware how they took any thing in hand
against the higher Powers, and excused the Lady Elizabeth, and the Lord
Courtney of having any hand in his Rebellion. Alexander Bret and twenty two
Kentish persons more were executed, in diverse parts of that County. These
Commotions were the occasions of great troubles to the Lady Elizabeth, for the
great difference in judgment that was betwixt her sister the Queen and her,
caused the Queen to suspect that she was a principal mover in them. Wherefore
the good Princess was in all haste sent for from her Manor of Ashbridge, where
she then lay sick, and was committed prisoner to the Tower of London, at her
first coming being kept a close prisoner under locks and bolts; but at length
the Lord Shandois obtained liberty, for her to walk in the Queens Chamber and
in the garden. About May 19th, she was removed to Woodstock where her liberty
was not much enlarged. In this her confinement, as she sat looking out of the
window, she hap'd to see a maid milking in the Park, and merrily singing over
her pail, which struck this pensive prisoner into a deep muse, preferring the
Maids fortunes above her own, and heartily wishing that her self was a
Milk-maid. Perhaps this might be the place, where Stephen Gardner (with intent
to ensnare her life) caused her to be examined, what she thought of those words
of Christ, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body. To which after some pause the
Princess thus warily, and as wittily answered, Christ was the word that spoke
it,
He took the bread and brake it;
And what the word did make it,
That I believe and take it.


A. D. 1554, and April 16th, a disputation began concerning Transubstantiation
betwixt certain learned men of the Popish persuasion, and Thomas Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury, Nicholas Ridley late Bishop of London, and old Father
Latimer sometime Bishop of Worcester of the Reformed Religion; which dispute
ended on the 20th, of the same month, and a year and six months after the
aforenamed Bishops gave Testimony to the truth in the flames, in the Town-ditch
of Oxford.

A. D. 1554, and July 25th, was the marriage betwixt Philip of Spain, and Mary
Queen of England with great State solemnized, and their Titles by Garter King
at Arms, solemnly proclaimed with these following styles, Philip and Mary by
the grace of God King and Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem and
Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Princes of Spain and Sicily, Archdukes of
Austrich, Dukes of Milain, Burgundy and Brabrant, Counts of Haspurg, Flanders
and Tyrol. In the November next following this marriage, the Queen was reported
to be with Child, for joy whereof Te Deum was commanded solemnly to be sung,
and processions and prayers were made for her safe delivery.

The Queen took her Chamber, the Court was full of Midwives, all due provisions
made against the good hour. And so certain it was taken to be, that some were
punished, but for questioning the contrary, and the Parliament Enacted, That if
God should take away Queen Mary, this their young Master coming into the world
should succeed, and that King Philip should be Protector during the Princes
minority. Howbeit though they had this confidence to trust Philip with the
government of England, if such a case should happen; yet had Philip little
confidence in the English, first, because they would have hindered the marriage
betwixt him and the Queen, and then because a Nobleman had given his counsel to
cut off the Lady Elizabeth's head, whence he assured himself, that those so
bad-minded to their natural Princess, could not be well-minded to him a
stranger. A great friend it is said, King Philip was to the said Princess
Elizabeth, nor would he cease soliciting his Queen till he had gained her some
freedom from her close restraint. But now the expected time of Queen Mary's
deliverance being come, a rumor was spread that a Prince was born, for joy
whereof the Bells were rung, Bon-fires flamed, processions were made, and some
in their Sermons fondly described the beauty of this young Prince.
Notwithstanding at last it proved no such matter. Some said, this rumor was
spread in policy, and that the Queen to have put the Lady Elizabeth besides the
Crown, would have mothered another bodies Child; but King Philip scorned to
Father it. Others said, that the Queen miscarried; others, that she had a
Tympany.

A. D. 1557, the Queen to take part with the Spaniard and Pope proclaimed Wars
against France, and King Philip crossed the Seas into Flanders. After whom his
Queen sent a thousand Horsemen, four thousand Foot, and two thousand Pioneers
under the conduct of the Earl of Pembroke, who came with his forces before the
Town of St Quintins, (at that time besieged by the Dukes of Savoy and
Brunswick) and in short time by their manly courage forced the Town to yield,
for joy whereof great Triumphs were made in England, which lasted not long: For
this success made the English too secure, insomuch that through neglect of
seasonable and fitting supplies the Town of Callis was forced to yield to the
French, upon but indifferent Terms on the English part. Thus the Town of Callis
won by the victorious King Edward the third, and that by no less than eleven
months siege, was now in the compass of eight days besieged, and regained, and
that in the depth of Winter, it being surrendered on January 17th, 1557. And in
the same month and year were also the strong Forts of Guises and Hames taken by
the French, whereby all the English footing was lost in France. This loss, with
the absence of King Philip, who did not passionately love his consort the
Queen, is thought to have hastened the death of Queen Mary. She was heard to
say, That the loss of Callis was written in her heart, and might therein be
read when her body should be opened. She died of a burning Fever, November. 17th,
1558, and was buried at Westminster. The Church-possessions which this Queen
had in her hands, she freely resigned with this saying, That she set more by
the Salvation of her own Soul, than she did by ten Kingdoms. Though she was of
no bad natural temper, yet through a blind zeal, she dealt so rigidly and
cruelly against those called Sacramentarians, the Protestants, that in less
than four years space she caused to be put to death of them 277. In Smithfield
and other parts of the Land were consumed of them in the flames for
Christs-sake, 5 Bishops, 21 Ministers, 8 Gentlemen, 48 Artificers, 100
Husbandmen, Servants, and Laborers, 26 Wives, 20 Widows, 9 Virgins, 2 Boys,
and 2 Infants, one of them whipped to death by bloody Bonner; and the other
springing out of its mothers womb, as she burned at the stake, was thrown again
into the fire. Sixty four more were persecuted for their profession of the true
Christian Doctrine, whereof 7 were whipped, 16 perished in prisons, and were
buried in dunghills, and many lay in captivity condemned till the coming in of
Queen Elizabeth, and many fled the Realm in those Scorching times, amongst whom
was Katharine Duchess of Suffolk, the last Wife of Charles Brandon Duke of
Suffolk. Pray God of his great mercy defend England from the Religion and
cruelties of Antichristian Rome.

On the self-same day that Queen Mary died, died also Cardinal Pole Archbishop
of Canterbury and was buried at Canterbury.

In the reign of this Queen extreme dearths raged, also Quartain Agues, of
which many old people died, especially Clergymen. At a little Town about a
mile, and Eastward from Nottingham a Tempest of thunder did great harm, beat
down many Houses, forced the Bells out of the Steeple, carrying them to the
outside of the Churchyard, and some Webs of Lead four hundred foot into the
field. A Child by the violence of it was taken out of a man's arms and carried a
hundred foot. Five or six men besides the Child were slain by it. Some
Hailstones fell that were fifteen Inches about.

Mayors and Sheriffs of London in her Reign.
In her first Year, Sir Thomas White was Mayor. Thomas Offley, William Hewet,
Sheriffs.


In her second Year, Sir John Lion was Mayor. David Woodroffe, William Chester,
Sheriffs.


In her third Year, Sir William Garret or Gerrard was Mayor. Thomas Lee, or
Leigh, John Machel, Sheriffs.


In her fourth Year, Sir Thomas Offley was Mayor. William Harper, John White,
Sheriffs.


In her fifth Year, Sir Thomas Curteis was Mayor. Richard Mallory, James
Altham, Sheriffs.


In her sixth Year, Sir Thomas Lee, or Leigh was Mayor. John Halsey, Richard
Champion, Sheriffs.


ELIZABETH.
A. D. 1558.
QUeen Elizabeth the Restorer and Defender of tne public profession of the
Apostolical Religion in England, begun her Reign A. D. 1558, November. 17. Upon
the death of her sister Queen Mary, she removed to the Charter House of London,
and from thence was royally attended through the City unto the Tower. In which
Triumphal state as she passed through the streets of London, when the Book of
God was presented to her at the little Conduit in Cheapside, she received it
with both her hands, and kissing it, laid it to her breast, saying, That the
same had been her chiefest delight, and should be the Rule by which she meant
to frame her Government. January 15 was the Crown-Imperial set on her head by
Dr. Oglethorp Bishop of Carlisle. Shortly after which a Parliament sat, wherein
the Title of the Supremacy was restored to the Crown, with the Tenths and First
fruits of all Ecclesiastical Livings, and the Book of Common Prayer (set forth
in Edward the sixths time) was ratified, as also those Acts repealed which were
Enacted in Queen Mary's time in favor of the Romish, and against the Reformed
Religion. During this Parliament a Petition was made unto her Majesty to move
her unto Marriage, in hope of royal Issue from her. To which she replied, That
she best liked a Virgins life; but that if it happened that her affection should
change, her choice should be only of such an one as should be as careful as any
of themselves for the public good. As for her Issue, she said, if she should
have any it might grow out of kind, and prove ungracious; and therefore to
leave behind her a more lasting and grateful remembrance, she held it
sufficient, that a Marble-stone should declare to posterities, that she a Queen
had reigned, lived and died a Virgin. This Maiden-Queen the better to secure
her self against the Bishop of Rome, who sought to disable her Title by the
calumny of Illegitimation, entered into a league with some Princes of Germany.
This done, she claimed the restitution of Callis as her right, having been
lawfully granted and assured by the French themselves unto the Crown of
England. But the English Queen was not more desirous to have Callis than the
French was unwilling to part with it; howbeit at length it was thus concluded,
That Callis should remain French the term of eight years, and then to return to
the English, else the French to pay 500000 Crowns, which they never performed
though the agreement was sealed and sworn unto. Next, her Highness proceeds to
purge the Clergy of England, ordering the Oath of Supremacy and other Articles
to be tendered them, which many refusing were forthwith deprived of their
Ecclesiastical Benefices and Promotions. Then went forth Commissioners to
suppress those Monasteries restored by Queen Mary, Matthew Parker, A. B. Cant.
and to cast out all Images set up in Churches; and after the reducing of
Church Matters into order, this happy Queen brought her Coyns into fine and
pure Sterling, debasing of Copper-coins, causing likewise great store of
Munition, Armor and Powder to be brought into the Land, and laid up in
readiness against a time of need.

A. D. 1562, Her Majesty sent Ayds into France to support the Reformed Religion
there. These with great joy were received into the Towns of Newhaven, Roan and
Deep; but within the space of twelve months they were forced back into
England, bringing thence many sick Soldiers, which dangerously infected the
Nation with a long continuing Plague.

About the year 1564, the Irish sought to shroud themselves from their
obedience unto Queen Elizabeth, under the shelter of Shan O-Neal, a man cruel
by nature, and claiming an Hereditary right to the Province of Vlster, as the
O-Neals formerly had done to all Ireland. Against this rebel so great
preparations were made, that he terrified therewith came over into England, and
on his knees begged the Queens pardon, which she granted him. Howbeit not long
after he rebelled, but at length was slain by some of his own Countrymen.

A. D. 1567, so great civil dissensions were in Scotland, that outrages were
not only committed upon the best Subjects, but even upon the King and Queen
themselves; him they barbarously murdered, and forced her to leave Scotland.
Which unhappy Queen having embarked her self for France, Edward Grindal, A. B.
Cant.
hoping there to find many friends, was by cross winds drove upon the English
Coasts, from whence she might not return, but was detained Prisoner in England.

A. D. 1568, by the working Instruments of the old Doctor at Rome, there were
discontents bred and nourished in some great persons of England, as the Earls
of Northumberland and Westmerland, Leonard Dacres, Nevill, etc. who had in
readiness certain English Priests, Morton and others, with Bulls and
Instruments of Absolution, Reconciliation, and Oaths to be taken to the Pope.
These Romish rebels raised forces, and with Banner displayed entered
Burrowbridge, old Morton being their Ensign-bearer, in whose Colors was
painted the Cross and five wounds of Christ. But at the approach of her
Majesty's Forces, the Captains of the rebels fled into Scotland, and their
followers were taken without any resistance. Of these Traitors were put to
death at Durham by Martial Law, an Alderman, a Priest, sixty-six Constables,
besides others of them in other places about.

A. D. 1570, Leonard Dacres of Harlsey renewed the rebellion, and had amongst
his followers many Women-soldiers; but upon a Moor nigh unto Naworth the Lord
Hunsdon dispersed them in fight.

August 22d of this year, was the Earl of Northumberland beheaded at York,
where in his last speech he avowed the Popes Supremacy, denied that subjection
was due to the Queen, affirmed the Realm to be in a Schism, and that obedient
subjects were no better than Heretics. For you must know that Pope Pius the
fifth had by his Bull dated 1569 deprived the Queen of her Kingdoms, absolved
her subjects of all subjection to her, and pronounced all that yielded her
obedience accursed. Which Bull was privately hung upon the Bishop of London's
Palace-gate at the West End of St. Paul's. And such influence it had upon the
spirits of many persons disaffected to the Reformed Religion, that they sought
by diverse means to work the Queens destruction. Many were the projects and
devices to ruin the Church and Queen, but by the good providence of Almighty
God, the projectors were defeated in their purposes, and suffered deserved
punishment. In Norfolk John Throgmorton, Brook, Redman and others sought to
raise a commotion, for the which they suffered death. Dr. Story executed for
his treason 1571. John Sommervil instigated by one Hall a Seminary Priest, to
murder the Queen, was executed. John Pain employed to murder her as she took
her recreation abroad, was executed; so was Edmond Champion a Seminary Priest
also executed. Francis Throgmorton for endeavoring to procure an Invasion, was
executed. William Parry, who purposed to have murdered the Queen, was executed.
Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, being privy to the Plots of Throgmorton
for the bringing in of foreign powers, was committed to the Tower, where to
save the Hangman a labor, he shot himself to the heart. Thomas Howard being
too busy in some Popish designs was also put to death. John Whitgift. A B.
Cant.
Other Popish Traitors were likewise deservedly executed, whose names, facts
and places, and times of execution for brevities sake are omitted.

A. D. 1572, November. 18, appeared a strange Star or Comet Northward, in the
Constellation of Cassiopeia, not much less than the Planet Venus, never
changing place, fixed far above the Moons Orb, the like to which never did
appear since the beginning of the world, that we read of, saving that at the
Birth of Christ.

A. D. 1573, was built at London the Royal Exchange (so named by her Majesty)
whose founder was Sir Thomas Gresham.

A. D. 1576, Sir Martin Frobusher sailed into the Northeast Seas, far further
than any man before him had done, giving to those parts the name of Queen
Elizabeth's Foreland.

A. D. 1577, and November. 15, Capt. Drake set sail from Plymouth, and in three
years wanting twelve days he encompassed the Earth, landing again in England on
November. 3, 1580. In America in the Country which he named Nova Albion the King
thereof presented unto him his Network Crown of many colored feathers, and
therewith resigned his Scepter of Government unto his dispose. The people there
so admired the English men, that they sacrificed to them as to their gods. At
his departure from thence he reared a Monument to witness her Majesty's right
to that Province, as being freely given to her Deputy both by King and people.
The little Ship called the Pelican wherein this admirable Voyage was performed,
was at her Majesty's command laid up in the Dock by Deepford, as a Monument of
Englands fame, and Captain Drake was honored with Knighthood.

A. D. 1581, was the motion renewed for a Marriage betwixt Francis Valois Duke
of Anjou, and Queen Elizabeth; and so effectually was the suit moved, and
acceptably heard of her Highness, that the Monsieur came over in person, though
to the little liking of many of the English Nobles, and to the great discontent
of the Commons, as was made known by a Book written against it, which cost
William Stubs the Inditer thereof the loss of his right hand.

About A. D. 1583, the Pope and King of Spain sent supplies to the Irish
rebels, under the command of Thomas Stukely an English fugitive, whom the Pope
had styled Marquess of Ireland. These landing in Ireland raised their
consecrated Banner, built their Fort Del Ore; but the Lord Gray of Wilton, Lord
Deputy quickly put most of them to the sword.

A. D. 1585, after several suits made unto the Queen by the distressed States
of the Netherlands, and their Grievances recommended to her by the King of
France, with promise of his own assistance; her Majesty was graciously pleased
to undertake their protection, sending to their assistance Sir John Norrice,
with 5000 Foot, and a thousand Horse, all retained at her Highness pay during
those Wars against Spain, which monthly amounted to 12526 l. Sterling. For
which moneys so disbursed the Towns of Flushing and Brill, with two Sconces,
and the Castle of Ramekins in Holland, were delivered to the Queens use in
pledge, until the money was repaid. The considerations moving her Majesty to
assist ^he United Provinces, were; The defense of the Reformed Religion,
because of the bloody Inquisition, that without respect had persecuted her
subjects; Because the King of Spain had sent forces into Ireland; and lastly to
prevent her enemy the Spaniard from being so nigh a neighbor to her.

A. D. 1587, and Febr. 7, was Mary Queen of Scotland, King James's Mother
beheaded at Fotheringhay Castle, to the great discontent, it is said, of Queen
Elizabeth, who committed Secretary Davison to the Tower thereupon, and never
admitted him more to his place, because of his forwardness in promoting the
death of that Roman Catholic Queen. But what is above us is nothing to us. The
matters for which she was condemned in the Star Chamber Court at Westminster,
were her pretending title to the Crown of England, her being privy to certain
Treasons of Anthony Babington, and others tending to the hurt and death of the
Royal person of Queen Elizabeth. This she absolutely denied, affirming, that
she never attempted any thing against the Queens person; though for her own
delivery out of prison, she confessed she did make some attempts. Babington
with thirteen other Traitors were executed.

A. D. 1588, Henry third King of France, who ever honored Queen Elizabeth, and
not the least because of her Religion, sent speedy and secret notice unto her
of the Spaniards intentions to invade her Realm of England. Against whose
coming the Queen caused her Trained-bands to be in readiness, Tilbury in Essex
was the place for her Camp, whereunto were appointed to march 15000 Horse, and
22000 Foot. And for her special Guard out of the several Counties of the West,
East, and South parts of England, were selected 2352 Horsemen, and 34050
Footmen. The Queen her self was Generalissimo, and Robert Dudley Earl of
Leicester Lieutenant General.

A. D. 1588, and May 19, the Armado, or invincible Navy of the Spaniards (as
they termed it) loosed Anchor from Lisbon, and on July 20 it passed by Plymouth
toward Callis, hoping about those coasts to have met with the Prince of Parma,
but in their way the English Fleet changed some bullets with them. July 21 the
two Fleets fought within Musket Shot, when the English Admiral Lord Charles
Howard fell most hotly on the Spaniards Vice Admiral. In this fight they well
perceived how that their great unweildy Ships were unfit for service in those
narrow Seas, the English smaller Ships being too nimble for them, as well in
respect of saving themselves as in annoying the Spanish.

July 22, Sir Francis Drake Vice Admiral took one of their great Gallions,
wherein was Don Pedro de Valdez, with diverse other Noblemen. The Soldiers had
the spoil of this Ship, in which was 55000 Ducats of Gold.

July 23 the Spaniards came right against Portland, when the sorest fight was
performed, and the English gained a great Venetian Ship, with other lesser ones.

July 24, the fight was only betwixt the four great Galleasses, and some of the
English Ships.

July 25, the Spaniards came aaginst the Isle of Wight, where was a terrible
Encounter, till at length the English so battered the Spanish tall Ships, that
they were forced to secure themselves in an Half Moon posture.

July 28, as the Spanish Fleet lay at Anchor within sight of Callis, the
English sent in amongst them eight Fireships filled with Gunpowder, pitch,
brimstone, and other combustible matter, their Ordnance charged with bullets,
stones, chains, and the like. These being drove with wind and tide unto the
Spanish Fleet, and then taking fire, such a sudden roaring clap was given, that
the Spaniards affrighted, in the dead of the night, were struck into an
horrible fear lest all their Ships should be fierd by these, wherefore in great
haste they cut their cables, hoised their sails, and drove at random into the
Seas.

July 29. ranging themselves in order they approached overagainst Greveling,
where the English again getting the wind of them, discharged upon them from
morning till night, to the confusion of diverse of the Spanish Ships. The
Hollanders with thirty-five of their Ships watched the coasts about Dunkirk, to
prevent the Duke of Parma from having any intercourse there.

July 30, the Spanish Dons having gotten more Sea-room for their huge-bodied
bulks, spread their sails, and made away as fast as wind and water would permit
them, fearing the small fleet and forces of the English, whereas had they known
but the want of Powder that was on the English side, they would sure have stood
longer to their tacklings. The English Admiral followed now the Vincible Armado
toward Norway, and the Spaniards for the saving of their fresh water cast all
their Mules and Horses over board. The Duke of Medina their Admiral when he at
last arrived in Spain, was deprived of all his Authority, and other ways
disgraced. Many of the Spanish Ships in their flight perished through tempest
upon the Irish Seas, others were driven into the Chanel of England, where part
of them were taken by the English, others by the Rochellers, and some arrived
at Newhaven. Of 134 Ships which had set sail from Lisbon only 53 returned into
Spain. Of the four Galleasses of Naples but one, and of the ninety-one Gallions
and great Hulks from diverse Provinces only thirty-three returned. Of the four
Galleys of Portugal but one. In brief, there was missing of their whole Fleet
eighty one Vessels, and of the 30000 Soldiers, 13500 and odd. Of Prisoners
taken in England, Ireland, and Low Countries were 2000 and upwards. So that it
appears there was small virtue in the Popes Crusado, wherein he published a
safe Passport for his Spaniards to enter England. The English Fleet was
betwixt fourscore and a hundred sail. Captains therein were the Lords Howard
and Sheffield, Sir Francis Drake, Sir John Hawkins, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir
Martin Frobisher, etc. For this Deliverance the 19 of November was appointed a
day of Thanksgiving: Blessed be the Lord who gave us not a prey into their
teeth, etc. Psalm. 124. Octogesimus octavus, mirabilis annus.
Clade Papistarum, faustus ubique piis. Dr. Fulk.
The Thunderclap of this Armado being thus over, and the Invincible become
Vincible, the Queen determined to assist Don Antonio the expulsed King of
Portugal, for the regaining of his Kingdom, to which end a Fleet was sent out
under the conduct of Sir Francis Drake, and Sir John Norris for the
land-service was General. These landing in a Bay of Galicia near to the Groin,
took the Base-town by surprise, which they found well-victualled and stored
with Wine, to the damage of the English, who taking too immoderately of it, so
inflamed and infected their blood, that it caused great sickness and mortality
in the whole Army. After some conflicts with the High-town, they fired the
Base-town or suburbs, and put again to Sea; and when some struglings with the
Winds were over, they recovered the Burlings. In which passage Robert Earl of
Essex with his Brother Mr. Walter Deureux, accompanied with other gallant men
came Volunteers to the Fleet, which landing in Portugal won the Town and Castle
of Peniche. Then the English Army marched over-land to Lisbon, where a strong
sally was made upon the English, but the Earl of Essex chased them back to
their very gates. And the mean while Admiral Drake with his Fleet were come to
Cascais, and possessed the Town without any resistance, and during the stay
there, the English took threescore Hulks from the Spaniards laden with Corn,
Masts, Cables, Copper and Wax.

About A. D. 1591, Queen Elizabeth sent Ayds into France in the behalf of Henry
IV, whom the Popish party would not admit to the Crown of France, though his
absolute right, because he leaned to the Reformed Religion, nor was he admitted
till he had taken Oath to defend the Roman faith against all oppugners.

A. D. 1596, and June the first, did Charles Lord Howard, and the Earl of
Essex, with a gallant Fleet begin their Voyage for Cadiz, which in a short time
after their coming to it, was surrendered to them. The spoil thereof was given
to the English soldiers, the wearing clothes of the inhabitants only excepted,
and the Citizens upon the payment of an 120000 Ducats for their ransom had
their liberty. The Spanish Fleet which lay in the Harbor valued at twelve
Millions of Ducats was fired by the Admirals command, to the end it might not
become a prize to the English. The Town the English burnt, and spoiled the
Island, then set sail toward Favo a Town in Algarva where the English landed,
forraged the Country for about three leagues, burnt the Town Lotha and then
returned for England. But the wrongs which had been offered by the Spaniards
seeming far greater to the English, than was yet the justice upon them, and the
wise Queen holding it best to keep the Spanish King employed at home, the Earl
of Essex was therefore Commissioned with a well-furnished Fleet to sail for the
Azores Islands. Which Fleet upon September. 15. 1597, fell with the Isles of
Flores, Evernes, Fyall and Pike, all which submitted to the Earl. Then he
sailed for St. Michaels, where Sir Walter Rawleigh kept the Seas with the
Ships, whilst Essex landed and sacked the rich Town Villa Franca; but the
Winters storms approaching the Earl returned home, bringing with him a
Brazil-ship of War, with three other prizes, valued at 400000 Ducats. The Pope
and Spaniard though they had hitherto been frustrated in all their mischievous
designments against the Queen and Church of England; yet still they hoped that
by one treacherous means or other they might at length effect the ruin of both,
though praised be God the ruin proved to their own vile instruments. Patrick
Cullen hired to murder the Queen, was executed at Tyburn. Philip Earl of
Arundel, and Sir John Perat were both condemned for high Treason, but died by
course of nature. Roderick Lopez a Spaniard, one of the Queens Physicians,
undertaking to poison her, was with his two accomplices executed at Tyburn.
Edmund York, and Richard Williams, hired by one Holt an English-Jesuite, were
executed for their Treasons. Edward Squire was executed for impoysoning the
pommel of the Queens saddle, and pommels of the Earl of Essex his Chair, though
by Gods providence the poison effected not what was intended by it.

One VVallpoll a Jesuit animated him to the fact, by alleging that he might
do it without much danger of his life; but though he should lose his life for
it, yet he should be assured that in exchange of this transitory one, he should
enjoy the estate of a glorious Saint in Heaven. So meritorious it seems it is,
to murder Catholic Princes, so they be not Roman Catholic ones. But besides
all these Romish-Agents there was the Irish Tir-Oen, who used his greatest
endeavors to divert subjection from the English Crown, against whom that
Martial Knight Sir John Norris was sent General, who after he had brought
Tir-Oen to a submission (though as it after proved, but a feigned one) ended
his days. The Irish Rebelling again the Earl of Essex was sent thither, where
in the Province of Munster he became terrible to those wild Irish-Rebels,
chasing them before him into the woods, though with more expense of time and
loss of men, than was well liked by some statists in England, Then the Earl
advanced into Leinster-Province against the O- Coners, and O- Moils. Then made
toward Vlster where he entered into Parley with Tyrone. But her Majesty being
informed (likely by some that envyed the Earls being so highly in her favor)
that the Spring, Summer, and Autumn were spent without service upon the
Arch-Traytor Tyr-Oen, that her men were diminished and large sums of money
consumed without the Earls doing that he was sent for; That without her
Highness order he entered into Parley with the Rebels. Hereupon her Majesty sent
sharp Letters, unto the Earl, upon the receipt whereof, in discontent he hasted
into England, well hoping to pacify the Queens displeasure; but after a short
verbal welcome from the Queen he was commanded to his chamber, and soon after
committed to the custody of the Lord Keeper, 1599. In the Earls stead Charles
Blount Lord Montjoy was sent into Ireland, who held Tyr-Oen very hard, and
forced him to withdraw into his old lurking places. But to strengthen the Irish
part, the King of Spain sent into Ireland two thousand old trained Spanish
Soldiers, with certain fugitive, Irish under the command of Don d'Aquila, who
strait after his arrival published a writing, wherein he styled himself
Master-General and Captain of the Catholic King in the Wars of God, for
preserving the faith in Ireland. Unto these two thousand Spaniards more were
shortly sent under the conduct of Alohons O- Campo; but Alphonso had not long
nested in Ireland ere himself and three of his Captains were taken, and twelve
hundred of his Spaniards were slain.

And at the siege of Kingsale the Spaniards made suit to the Lord General for a
peace, which was yielded unto; whereupon the Spaniards departed, and the Irish
submitted themselves to the merciful Queen.

The Earl of Essex who had been committed to the keeping of the Lord Keeper,
was by her Majesty's clemency quit of that durance, and only commanded to his
own house; but the Earl of a daring spirit, and exasperated by his Martial
followers, likewise presuming upon the Queens high respect toward him,
resolved by force and violence to have personal conference with the Queen, and
to remove from about her, such as he deemed his enemies. To effect which many
of his favorers assembled at his house, as well Noblemen and Knights, as
Captains and other Officers; but this being understood by the Statists, they
made it known to her Majesty, who thereupon sent four of her Honorable
Counselors to the Earl to offer him Justice, and to command the Assembly to
depart. These Counselors accordingly went to the Earl to Essex-house, where
they did their message to the Earl, and commanded his followers whom they saw
about him to lay down their weapons and depart, but the Earl leaving these
Counselors under custody in his own house, with his attendants in tumultuous
manner made into London, his followers crying through the streets, that the
said Earl of Essex should have been murdered by Cobham, Cecill, and Rawleigh.

Howbeit instead of finding that friendship in London which they expected, the
Earl was proclaimed Traitor in diverse places thereof. Wherefore the Earl made
haste back, and fortified his own house in the Strand; but after some little
resistance yielded himself to the Lord Admiral, and the same night was sent
prisoner to the Tower. And upon February the nineteenth the Earls of Essex, and
Southhampton were Arraigned and condemned at Westminster, and on February 25,
1600, the Earl of Essex suffered death on the Green within the Tower, whose
dying speech was to this effect, That his punishment was just, his sins
innumerable, his last sin for which he died, a great, crying bloody and
infectious sin, that had drawn others for love to him, to offend God, their
Sovereign, and the World. He prayed God to forgive his sins, and her Majesty
and the state to forgive him. Prayed for them, thanked God that he was never
Atheist in denying the Scriptures, nor Papist in trusting to his own merits for
Salvation, but in the merits of Christ Jesus his Savior. Prayed the people to
join with him in prayer, that his Soul might be lifted up by faith above all
earthly things, desired forgiveness of all the World, as he from his heart
forgave all men.

His head was with three strokes severed from the body, and his death generally
lamented. For Accessories and Abettors in the offense were executed first
Captain Lee, and after him Sir Gilliam Merrick and Henry Cuff, a learned man,
were executed at Tyburn, and on Tower Hill were beheaded Sir Charles Davors,
and Sir Christopher Blunt. But as the death of this Noble person was much
bewailed of the Subjects, so was it likewise of her Majesty, who would often
times show passions of her grief for his death, even until her own death, which
to the great sorrow of her people befell on the 24 of March, 1602. Her body was
buried in Henry the sevenths Chapel at Westminster, where her Successor King
James erected her a Princely Monument, Memoriae Sacrum, etc. She was it is said,
Spains rod, Romes ruin, Netherlands relief,
Earths joy, Englands gem, worlds wonder, Natures chief.


In her Reign were executed in England of Jesuits and Seminary-Priests, for
sowing sedition and plotting Treason the number of sixty seven, and fifty three
more of them were banished.

A. D. 1571, and February the seventeenth at Kingstone near Marlech in
Hereford-shire, the ground opened, and certain Rocks, with a piece of ground
removed and went forward the space of four days. It removed it self betwixt six
of the Clock in the evening, and seven the next morning forty paces, carrying
great Trees and sheep-coats, some with flocks of sheep in them. It overthrew
Rinnastone-Chappel, also two highways were removed nigh an hundred yards with
Trees and Hedges. The ground thus carried being in all twenty six Acres, and
where tillage-ground was, there pasture is left in place, and where pasture
there tillage.

A. D. 1578, Mark Scaliot a Blacksmith of London made a Lock of Iron, Steel
and Brass of a eleven several pieces, and a pipe-Key, all which weighed but one
grain of Gold. He also made a Chain of Gold of forty three links, which Chain
being fastened to the Lock and Key, and put about a flea's neck, the flea drew
them with ease. Chain, Key, Lock and Flea weigh^d but one grain and an half.

A. D. 1580, In the Marshes of Dainsey in Essex was so infinite a number of
Mice, that they almost covered the whole Marsh, and so tainted the grass with
their venomous teeth, that the Cattle grazing thereon were infected with the
Murrain and died. And by no art could men destroy these Mice, but at length
Owls in abundance, to the great admiration of the Country, came and devoured
them.

In or nigh the Year of our Lord, 1591, was William Hacket a hotheaded
Sectarist Arraigned, and found guilty of having spoken many Seditious and
Traiterous words, etc. For the which he was brought from Newgate in London to
a gibbet in Cheapside, and there executed. Diverse persons called Brownists were
executed in several places of England for sowing sedition, namely Henry Barrow
and John Greenwood, one Penrie a VVelch-man, Elias Thacker and John Copping.

A. D. 1600, and August the fifth did James the sixth King of Scotland narrowly
escape a grand Conspiracy, practiced by the Earl of Gowry and his brother.

A. D. 1586, that mirror of men for Letters and Arms Sir Philip Sidney died of
a wound received at Zutphen-fight in Guelderland.

Mayors and Sheriffs of London in her Reign.
In her first Year, Sir William Hewet was Mayor. Thomas Lodge, Roger Martin,
Sheriffs.


In her second Year, Sir William Chester was Mayor. Christopher Draper, Thomas
Roe, Sheriffs.


In her third Year, Sir William Harper was Mayor. Alexander Avenon, Humphrey
Baskervile, Sheriffs.


In her fourth Year, Sir Thomas Lodge was Mayor. William Allen, Richard
Chamberlain, Sheriffs.


In her fifth Year, Sir John White was Mayor. Edward Banks, Rowland Heyward,
Sheriffs.


In her sixth Year, Sir Richard Mallory was Mayor. Edward Jackman, Lionel
Ducket, Sheriffs.


In her seventh Year, Sir Richard Champion was Mayor. John Rivers, James Hawes,
Sheriffs.


In her eighth Year, Sir Christopher Draper was Mayor. Richard Lambert, Amb.
Nicholas, John Langley, Sheriffs.


In her ninth Year, Sir Roger Martin was Mayor. Thomas Ramsey, John Bond,
Sheriffs.


In her tenth Year, Sir Thomas Roe was Mayor. John Oliph, Robert Harding, James
Bacon, Sheriffs.


In her eleventh Year, Sir Alexander Avenon was Mayor. Henry Beecher, William
Dane, Sheriffs.


In her twelfth Year, Sir Rowland Hayward was Mayor. Francis Barneham, William
Box, Sheriffs.


In her thirteenth Year, Sir William Allen was Mayor. Henry Milles, Johr
Branch, Sheriffs.


In her fourteenth Year, Sir Lionel Ducket was Mayor. Richard Pipe, Nicholas
VVoodrosse, Sheriffs.


In her fifteenth Year, Sir John Rivers was Mayor. James Harvey, Thomas
Pulloccel or Pullison, Sheriffs.


In her sixteenth Year, Sir James Hawes was Mayor. Thomas Blancke, Anthony
Gamage, Sheriffs.


In her seventeenth Year, Sir Ambrose Nicholas was Mayor. Edward Osborne,
VVolstane Dixie, Sheriffs.


In her eighteenth Year, Sir John Langley was Mayor. William Kempton, George
Barn, Sheriffs.


In her nineteenth Year; Sir Thomas Ramsey was Mayor. Nicholas Backhouse,
Francis Bowyer, Sheriffs.


In her twentieth Year, Sir Richard Pipe was Mayor. George Bond, Thomas
Starkie, Sheriffs.


In her one and twentieth Year, Sir Nicholas VVoodroffe was Mayor. Martin
Calthorp, John Heart, Sheriffs.


In her two and twentieth Year, Sir John Branch was Mayor. Ralph Woodcock,
John Allot; Sheriffs.


In her three and twentieth Year, Sir James Harvey was Mayor: Richard Martin,
William Web, Sheriffs.


In her four and twentieth Year, Sir Thomas Blancke was Mayor. William Roe,
John Haydon deceased, Cuthbert, Buckle succeeded, Sheriffs.


In her five and twentieth Year, Sir Edward Osbourne was Mayor. William Mashaw,
John Spencer, Sheriffs.


In her six and twentieth Year, Sir Thomas Pulioccell was Mayor. Stephen
Slaney, Henry Billingsley, Sheriffs.


In her seven and twentieth Year, Sir Wolstone Dixie was Mayor. Anthony
Ratcliffe, Henry Pranel, Sheriffs.


In her eight and twentieth Year, Sir George Barn was Mayor. George House,
William Elkin, Sheriffs.


In her nine and twentieth Year, Sir George Bond was Mayor. Thomas Skinner,
John Catcher, Sheriffs.


In her thirtieth Year, Sir Martin Calthorp served one part, Sir Richard Martin
the other. Hugh Offley, Richard Saltonstall, Sheriffs.


In her one and thirtieth Year, Sir John Heart was Mayor. Richard Gurney,
Stephen Some, Sheriffs.


In her two and thirtieth Year, Sir John Allot served one part, Sir Rowland
Heyward the other, Nicholas Mosley, Robert Brook, Sheriffs.


In her three and thirtieth Year, Sir William Web was Mayor. William Rider,
Benet or Benedict Barnham, Sheriffs.


In her four and thirtieth Year, Sir William Roe was Mayor. John Garret or
Gerrard, Robert Tailor, Sheriffs.


In her five and thirtieth Year, Sir Cuthbert Buckle served one part, Sir
Richard Martin the other. Paul Banning, Peter Haughton, Sheriffs.


In her six and thirtieth Year, Sir John Spencer was Mayor. Robert Lee, Thomas
Bennet, Sheriffs.


In her seven and thirteth Year, Sir Stephen Slaney was Mayor. Thomas Low,
Leonard Halliday, Sheriffs.


In her eight and thirtieth Year, Sir Thomas Skinner served one part, Sir Henry
Billingsley the other. John Wats, Richard Godard, Sheriffs.


In her nine and thirtieth Year, Sir Richard Saltonstall was Mayor. Henry Roe,
John More, Sheriffs.


In her fortieth Year, Sir Stephen Some was Mayor. Edward Holmedon, Robert
Hampson, Sheriffs.


In her one and fortieth Year, Sir Nicholas Mosley was Mayor. Humphrey Walde,
Roger Clerk, Sheriffs.


In her two and fortieth Year, Sir William Rider was Mayor. Thomas Smith,
Thomas Cambel, William Craven, Sheriffs.


In her three and fortieth Year, Sir John Garret, or Gerrard, was Mayor. Henry
Anderson, William Glover, Sheriffs.


In her four and fortieth Year, Sir Robert Lee was Mayor. James Pemberton, John
Swinerton, Sheriffs.


JAMES.
A. D. 1602
KING James his Title to the Crown of England sprung from Henry the seventh,
whose Issue (...) the Male, failing in the late deceased Queen Elizabeth, the
offspring of Margaret his eldest daughter was the next Heir, which Lady
Margaret being married unto James the fourth King of Scotland by him had Issue
James the fifth, whose only daughter and Child Queen Mary was the Mother of
King James the sixth of that name that had swayed the Scepter in Scotland.
Which learned Prince when he heard of the death of Queen Elizabeth, set forward
out of Scotland, and was with great joy received of all his English Subjects in
his way to London; and at his approach unto that honorable City, the Lord
Mayor, and Aldermen, with five hundred choice Citizens, all in Chains of Gold
and well-mounted, met his Majesty, and with all solemn observance attended him
unto the Charter House. Then preparations were made for his Coronation, but
before the day appointed thereunto, a Proclamation came forth, that no Citizen
should presume to approach the Court, the City having buried in one week above
one thousand of the plague. And yet a greater plague than this was intended
against England about the Kings coming in, had not God in his mercy prevented
it, For Pope Clement the eighth having sent unto Henry Garnet Superior of the
Jesuits in England two Bulls, therein prohibiting any to be admitted to the
Crown, unless he would first tolerate the Romish Religion, and by all his best
endeavors advance that Catholic cause; Hereupon the Popes creatures, to do
their unholy Father the best service they could, combined with some (whom
private discontents had discomposed) to surprise the Kings person and Prince
Henry, intending to retain them prisoners in the Tower, or if they could not
gain the Tower then to carry them to Dover-Castle, and there to keep them till
they had brought the King to their own terms, and completed their designs. The
persons accused for this Conspiracy were Henry Brook, Lord Cobham, Thomas Lord
Gray of Wilton, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir Griffin Markham, Sir Edward Parham,
George Brook, and Bartholomew Brooksby Esquires, Anthony Copley Gentleman,
Watson and Clark Priests.

A. D. 1603, and July 21, King James and Queen Anne were Crowned at Westminster
by John Whitguift Archbishop of Canterbury, and when the Coronation was over
the Conspirators were conveyed to Winchester, (where the Term was then kept,
because of the plague at London) and there had their Trial, and were all
condemned by their Jury, save Sir Edward Parham: Howbeit only three of them
were executed, namely, Watson, Clark, and George Brook. This business thus
Transacted for the safety of King and Kingdom, his Majesty to gratify the
Puritan or Presbyterian party, (that had petitioned for a reformation in the
English Church) commanded an Assembly of selected Divines to appear in his
Royal presence at Hampton Court, whither the summoned accordingly repaired.
Persons summoned to maintain the cause of the Church of England were the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishops of London, Durham, Winchester, etc.

Persons for the reformation of the Church were Dr. Reynolds, and Dr. Sparks of
Oxford, Mr. Knewstubs and Mr. Chaderton of Cambridge. At this conference his
Majesty notably vindicated the Church of England: see the conference at
Hampton Court Printed, 1604. After an endeavor of settling Church-peace, the
King commanded a new Translation of the holy Scriptures, which was accordingly
done.

A. D. 1604, and August the nineteenth was peace proclaimed betwixt the two
Nations of Spain and England. And the King to join the Nations of England and
Scotland into an happy unity, caused himself by Proclamation to be styled King
of Great Britain. A Proclamation also came forth commanding all Jesuits and
Seminary Priests out of the Land; but these under-miners of Church and State,
mean not to leave England so, but design to stay and triumph in its ruins,
purposing by one fatal-blow to destroy the King, the Prince, the Peers both
temporal and Spiritual, the Knights, and Burgesses of Parliament.

And the Traitors intent, when that damnable villainy should be effected was, to
surprise the Queen, and remainder of the Kings Issue, Richard Bancroft. A. B.
Cant.
to bring in foreign powers and to alter Religion. Sir Edward Baynham an
Attainted person was sent to the Pope to acquaint him with the designed
Gun-powder-Treason, and Thomas Winter brought with him out of Flanders, Guy
Fawks as a fit Executioner of their hellish project. The Conspirators resolved
among themselves, that it was lawful for case of Conscience to destroy the
innocent with the nocent, and this by the Authority and judgment of Garnet
himself.

Then they took Oath of secresy, swearing by the blessed Trinity, and the
Sacrament they then were about to receive, never to disclose directly or
indirectly, by word or circumstance, this their Plot in hand, nor any of them
to desist from the Execution thereof, until the rest of the Conspirators should
give leave. This done, Mr. Thomas Piercy hired an house next adjoining to the
Parliament House, pretending it to be for his Lodgings, and Guy Fawks, who
changed his name into Johnson, was to be his man, and to have the keeping of
the Keys of the House. December. 11th, 1604, the Traitors entered into their work
of darkness, beginning their Mine, and by Christmas-Eve they had brought their
work under an entry unto the wall of the Parliament House, under-propping all
still as they under-mined. The wall which was very hard and nine-foot thick
with great labor they wrought halfway through; but then it happening that a
Cellar was to be let, which was under the Parliament House, they ceased their
under-mining, and Thomas Piercy hired the Cellar for the laying in of his
Winter-fuel wood and coal. But instead of these, they stored it with thirty six
Barrels of Gunpowder, upon which they laid bars of Iron, logs of Timber,
massy stones, Iron-crows, pick-Axes, with the rest of their under-mining
Tools, and, to cover all, store of Billets and Fagots: So that now all was in
readiness against the next meeting of the Parliament. The secular Traitors had
hitherto done their parts, nor were the Jesuitical Priests wanting on their
parts in doing their utmost. Their Masses and Sacrifices they usually concluded
with prayers for their brethrens good success, supplicating their God to
prosper their pains who labored in his cause day and night, and that Heresy
might vanish away like smoke, and their memory perish with a crack, like the
ruin and fall of a broken House: But through the goodness of the God of Heaven
these Romish-Saints were taken, in the snare that they had laid for the just.
They wrought their own destruction; For upon Thursday in the evening ten days
before the Parliament were to convene, a Letter directed to the Lord
Mont-Eagle, was delivered to a Footman of his in the street, by an unknown
person, with a charge to deliver it into his Lords own hand. This Letter,
without date or subscription of name, somewhat unlegible and of strange
contents, perplexed the Lord; he hastes therefore to White Hall there to impart
it to the Lord Cecil Earl of Salisbury principal Secretary, who showed it to
the Lord Chamberlain and other Lords, and then conveyed it to the King. The
Letter was as follows.

My Lord, Out of the love I bear to some of your Friends, I have a care of your
preservation. Therefore I would advise you, as you tender your life to devise
some excuse to shift your attendance at this Parliament. For God and man have
concurred to punish the wickedness of this time, and think not slightly of this
advertisement, but retire your self into the Country, where you may expect the
event in safety. For though there be no appearance of any stir, yet I say, you
shall perceive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet they shall not see who
hurts them. This counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do you good,
and can do you no harm, for the danger is past, so soon as you have burnt the
Letter. And I hope God will give you the grace to make good use of it, to whose
holy protection I commend you.

His Majesty after he had read this Letter, first paused a while; then reading
it again, delivered his judgment upon it; That he apprehended by these words of
receiving a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet should not see who hurt
them; That a sudden danger by blast of Gunpowder should be intended by some
base Villain in a corner, no Insurrection, Rebellion, or desperate attempt
appearing. And therefore he wished that the Rooms under the Parliament House
might be thoroughly searched, which accordingly was done November. 4th. about
midnight, at which time Sir Thomas Knevet went to search those under Rooms;
Where at the entrance into the Cellar he found Guy Fawks at so unseasonable a
time, cloaked and booted, whom he apprehended, then entering the Cellar he found
therein under the Billets thirty six Barrels of Powder; and when he came to
search the Traitor Fawks, he found about him a dark Lantern, three matches
and other instruments for blowing up of the Powder. And the Villain no whit
daunted, instantly confessed himself guilty; but so far from repentance, That
he vowed, if he had been found within the Room, he would have blown up himself
and them all.

And when he was brought before the Lords of the Council, he lamented nothing
so much, as that the deed had not been done, saying, That the Devil and not
God, was the discoverer of the Plot. But the news of the Plots discovery coming
to the ears of Catesby, Piercy, Rookwood, the Wrights, and Thomas Winter, they
posted into Warwickshire to other of their associates, who now began an open
Rebellion, pretending that all the Catholics throats were appointed to be
cut. And after that they had hovered about a while, they fled to Holbeth in
Hereford-shire, whither they were pursued, and where John Wright and
Christopher Wright Gentlemen making opposition were slain, and Thomas Piercy
and Ro^ert Catesby Esquires fighting back to back were both of them slain with
one bullet, others were there taken.

A.D. 1605, and January 27th, Sir Everard Digby Knight, Tho. Winter, Rob.
Winter, Ambrose Rookwood, John Grant, Gentlemen, Robert Keys, Thomas Bates, and
Guydo Fawks were tried, found guilty and condemned, and on Thursday following
Digby, Grant, Bates and Robert Winter were hanged and quartred at the West End
of Saint Paul's, and on Friday the rest were executed in the Parliament-yard at
Westminster. In memory of this great deliverance, the fifth of November (being
the day appointed for the execution of this Hellish Plot) was by Authority of
Parliament Enacted to be observed a day of Thanksgiving.

A. D. 1606, March 28th, was Henry Garnet Provincial of the English Jesuits
arraigned for concealing the foresaid Treason, and on May the third was
executed at the West End of Paul's. At his death confessing his fault, asking
forgiveness, and exhorting all Catholics never to attempt any Treason against
the King or State, as a thing which God would never prosper.

A. D. 1607, was an Insurrection in Northampton, Warwick, and Leicester-shires,
about the throwing down of Enclosures. At first the rout was without any
particular head, but at length one John Reynolds undertook to be their Captain,
affirming to the company, that in his great Pouch hanging by his side, he had
sufficient to defend them against all opposers; though afterward being
apprehended, and his Pouch searched, there was nothing found in it but a piece
of green Cheese.

June 12th, King James was entered a brother of the Cloth-workers, when also
many Lords and Gentleman were made free of the same Company.

A. D. 1608, George Jervis a Seminary Priest, and Thomas Garnet a Jesuit were
executed at Tyburn, the last of which had pardon offered him, if he would take
the Oath of Supremacy; but the Traitor would hang rather.

About this time were many famous English Pirates, some of whom denied their
faith and turned Turks, living in great state at Tunis, as Captain Ward,
Bishop, Sir Francis Verney and Glanvil. Nineteen of the Pirates were taken, and
hanged at Wapping.

A. D. 1609, was the New-Exchange built, the King naming it Britains-Burse. In
the same year the King by Proclamation prohibited all foreign Nations from
fishing on any of the coasts of England, Scotland, Ireland, or the Isles
adjacent, without special License from his Commissioners. In this year also the
King according to an ancient custom had aid of his Subjects through England,
for making his eldest son Prince Henry Knight.

A. D. 1610, June 4th, all Roman Priests, Jesuits and Seminaries, as being the
Incendiaries of disturbances, were commanded to depart the Realm. Then the Oath
of Allegiance was ministered to all sorts of people.

His Majesty caused to be built the goodliest Ship of War that had ever been
built in England, being of the burden of 1400 Tun, and carrying 64 pieces of
Ordinance, Prince Henry named it the Prince.

A. D. 1612, The Corpse of Mary late Queen of Scotland, the Kings Mother, was
translated from Peterborough to the Chappel-Royal at Westminster. On November
the sixth following Prince Henry died of a malignant Fever, which reigned that
year in most parts of the Land. Some said that he died by poisoned grapes which
he eat; others, by Gloves of a poisoned perfume given him for a present: but be
his death by what means it would, certain it is, that he was infinitely beloved
of the people, as one that had given great hopes of proving a wise and Martial
Prince.

February 14th, the marriage of the Prince Palatine of the Rhyne with the
Princess Elizabeth was solemnized in the Chapel at White Hall. She was attired
all in white, having a rich Crown of Gold upon her head; her hair hanging down
at length, curiously beset with Pearls, and precious Stones; her train
supported by 12 young Ladies all in white. In this same year, the City of
London, having before had the Province of Vlster granted them by the King for a
plantation, sent thither about three hundred persons of all sorts of
Handy-crafts-men, chiefly to inhabit the Cities of Londonderry and Coleraign.
And for the advancing of this or the like plantation in Ireland, the King about
this time began a new Order of Knights called Baronets, which Order he stinted
within the number only of two hundred; and as the Issue should fail, the Order
to cease. About this time also an exemplar punishment was imposed upon Sir
Peckshall Brockas, which was to stand at Pauls-Cross in a white sheet, holding
a wand in his hand, he having been formerly convicted before the
High-Commissioners, for many notorious adulteries with diverse Women.

About A. D. 1614, Mr. Hugh Middleton Citizen and Goldsmith of London, with
infinite cost and labor brought the New-river to the City of London, from the
two great springs of Chadwel and Amwel in Hartfordshire. And about the same
time was the Moor-Fields by London converted from deep stinking ditches, and
noisome Common-shores, to pleasant sweet Walks.

A. D. 1615, Smithfield which was before a rude dirty place, was paved all
over, and the middle part thereof railed in.

September 27th, the Lady Arbella the Kings Cousin-German died. She had
sometime before, without the Kings privity, secretly married the Earl of
Hartfords younger Son, for which they were both committed to the Tower.

Sir Edward Cook the famous Lawyer, upon some displeasure was discharged from
being Lord Chief Justice.

In this year was a divorce made betwixt Robert Devereux Earl of Essex, and his
Countess, for his Insufficiency, and she left free to marry any other. After
which divorce Robert Carre Earl of Sommerset took her to Wife. But Sir Thomas
Overbury the Earls special friend having dissuaded the match, and perhaps laid
some imputation on the Ladies fame, according to desert, did by this means so
incense these Lovers against him, that they first made means to have the said
ingenious Gentleman committed to the Tower, and then by their instruments to
have him poisoned; some say, by a Tansey sent him to eat; some, by a Clister
ministered to him. For which fact Sir Gervas Elwes then Lieutenant of the Tower,
and Mrs. Turner, with others, were put to death. The Earl and his Countess were
also arraigned and condemned, but had a lease of their lives granted them for
ninety-nine years, yet so as after never to see the Kings face more. This made
way for the advancement of Mr. George Villers; for this great favorite the
Lord Carre being upon this occasion laid aside, the said Mr. Villers was
accepted in his stead. Whom the King first of all Knighted and made Gentleman
of his Bedchamber, soon after Viscount and Master of his Horse, a while after
Earl of Buckingham, then Marquess of Buckingham and Lord High Admiral, and
lastly Duke of Buckingham. A person, it is said, he was of delicate composure of
body, and of excellent natural parts, and one that was very mindful of his
Relations and Kindred, most of whom he procured to be advanced.

A. D. 1618, Sir Walter Rawleigh, who had lived a condemned man many years in
the Tower of London, now to procure some liberty, propounded to the King a
project for the fetching of Gold from a Mine in Guyana, and that without any
wrong to the King of Spain. This the King condescended unto, and Sir Walter set
forward in his Voyage; but when after a real, or only a show of search no
treasure could be found* he fell upon St. Thome belonging to the King of Spain,
George Abbot. A B. Cant
which he plundered and burnt, then returned, though to his ruin. For though Sir
Walter sought to excuse his spoiling of St. Thome, by alleging that the
Spaniards had first assaulted him; and moreover, that he could not come at the
Mine without first winning of that Town; yet did the Spanish Lieger Gundamo^e
so aggravate this his fact, and prevailed so with the King, who preferred the
public peace, before the life of a man already condemned, that he gave way to
have the sentence of his former condemnation executed upon him. And accordingly
this man famous for Letters and Arms was beheaded in the Parliament-yard at
Westminster.

In this Year 1618, and March the second, Queen Anne died at Hampton Court, and
was buried at Westminster. The November preceding her death a famous Comet or
Blazing-Star appeared.

A. D. 1620, July the seventeenth, Bernard Calvert of Andover, rode from St.
Georges Church in Southwark to Dover, from thence passed by Barge to Callis in
France, and from thenee returned back to St. Georges Church the same day. This
his journey he performed betwixt the hours of three in the morning and eight in
the afternoon.

A.D. 1621, Sir Francis Michel a Justice of the Peace of Middlesex, was
sentenced by Parliament to Ride with his face to the Horse-tail through the
City of London, for practicing sundry abuses in setting up new Alehouses, and
exacting moneys contrary to the Law. This sentence was executed upon him. Sir
Francis Bacon Viscount St. Albans, Lord Chancellor of England, was for bribery
(but it was his servants that were bribed) put out of his place, and committed
to the Tower for some days.

A. D. 1621, the Count Palatine of the Rhine was elected King of Bohemia by the
States of that Kingdom; but immediately after, the Emperor with great forces
assaulted him in Prague, drove him, with his Wife and Children from thence, and
deprived him of his Patrimony the Palatinate. Prince Charles about this time by
great Gundamores persuasion, was sent into Spain in order to the gaining of the
Infanta to Wife, it being suggested that by that match with Spain, a
re-settlement of the Prince Palatine in his Patrimony might have been procured.
But when the Prince was arrived in Spain, though he found Royal entertainment
in the Court, yet was he suffered to have little acquaintance with the Infanta,
insomuch that in all his eight months stay in Spain, he never spoke with her
but twice, and that before company, with certain limitations also what he
should speak to her. Some thought that a difference betwixt the Duke of
Buckingham (then with the Prince) and Count Olivares the King of Spains great
Favorite, was no small obstruction to the match. Others thought that the King
of Spain never intended any such thing, but meant only by this Treaty to spin
out time till he had compassed some designs in the Low Countries and
Palatinate. But howsoever it was, Gundamore made some good improvement of the
Treaty to himself; for he persuaded some English Ladies of the certainty of the
match, and they gave him good Sums of money to be put in such or such an Office
when the Spanish Princess should come to the English Court. King James at last
wearied with delays, if not angered with the delusion, sent for the Prince to
return, which accordingly he did; and not long after, this Treaty of marriage
with Spain was utterly ended, and the King made preparations both of men and
money to recover the Palatinate, and sent to Treat of a marriage with France.

A. D. 1525, and March 27th, this Politic and Peaceable Monarch King James
died of an Ague at Theobalds, and was buried at Westminster with great
solemnity, and greater lamentations of his Subjects. His Issue were Henry,
Charles, Elizabeth; And Mary and Sophia who both died young.

Two obstinate Arian-Hereticks Bartholomew Legate, and Edward Wightman were
burnt, the first in Smithfield, the other at Lichfield. George Abbot Archbishop
of Canterbury being on hunting, as he shot at a Deer, his Arrow by mischance
glanced and killed a man, but he was cleared; yet out of a Religious
tenderness, he kept the day of the year on which the mischance happened, with a
solemn fast all his life after.

The murder of one Waters murdered by his Wife, was discovered by a dream. One
of the said Waters neighbors dreamed that Waters was strangled and buried in
such a certain dunghill, which upon search was found true, and the Wife was
burned for the fact.

A. D. 1606, Virginia was planted with an English Colony. It was first
discovered A. D. 1584, by Sir Walter Rawleigh, who is said to have first
brought that charming weed Tobacco into England. The Bermudas and New England
were also made English Plantations. King James for a sum of money quit the
Cautionary Towns, Brill, etc.

A. D. 1612, A blazing Star was seen streaming toward the West; infinite
slaughters and devastations following both in Germany and other places.

Mayors and Sheriffs of London in his Reign.
In his first Year, Sir Thomas Bennet was Mayor. Sir William Rumney, Sir Thomas
Middleton, Sheriffs.


In his second Year, Sir Thomas Low was Mayor. Sir Thomas Hayes, Sir Roger
Jones, Sheriffs.


In his third Year, Sir Leonard Hollyday was Mayor. Sir Clement Scudamor, Sir
John Jolles, Sheriffs.


In his fourth Year, Sir John Watts was Mayor. William VValthall, John Leman,
Sheriffs.


In his fifth Year, Sir Henry Row was Mayor. Geoffrey Elwes, Nicholas Style,
Sheriffs.


In his sixth Year, Sir Humphrey VVeld was Mayor. George Bolles, Richard
Farrington, Sheriffs.


In his seventh Year, Sir Thomas Cambell was Mayor. Sebastian Harvey, William
Cockaine, Sheriffs.


In his eighth Year, Sir William Craven was Mayor. Richard Pyat, Francis
Jones, Sheriffs.


In his ninth Year, Sir James Pemberton was Mayor. Edward Barkham, John Smiths,
Sheriffs.


In his tenth Year, Sir John Swinnerton was Mayor, Edward Rotheram, Alexander
Prescot, Sheriffs.


In his eleventh Year, Sir Thomas Middleton was Mayor. Thomas Bennet, Henry
Jaye, Sheriffs.


In his twelfth Year, Sir Thomas Hayes was Mayor. Peter Proby, Martin Lumley,
Sheriffs.


In his thirteenth Year, Sir John Jolles was Mayor. William Goare, John Goare,
Sheriffs.


In his fourteenth Year, Sir John Leman was Mayor. Allen Cotton, Cuthbert
Hacket, Sheriffs.


In his fifteenth Year, Sir George Bolles was Mayor. William Holyday, Robert
Johnson, Sheriffs.


In his sixteenth Year, Sir Sebastian Harvey was Mayor. Richard Hearne, Hugh
Hamersley, Sheriffs.


In his seventeenth Year, Sir William Cockaine was Mayor. Richard Deane, James
Cambell, Sheriffs.


In his eighteenth Year, Sir Francis Jones was Mayor. Edward Allen, Robert
Ducie, Sheriffs.


In his nineteenth Year, Sir Edward Barkham was Mayor. George Whitemore,
Nicholas Rainton, Sheriffs.


In his twentieth Year, Sir Peter Proby was Mayor. John Hodges, Sir Humphrey
Hantford, Sheriffs.


In his one and twentieth Year, Sir Martin Lumley was Mayor. Ralph Freeman,
Thomas Mounson, Sheriffs.


In his two and twentieth Year, Sir John Goare was Mayor. Rowland Heilin,
Robert Parkhurst, Sheriffs.


CHARLES I.
CHARLES the First was born at Dunferling in Scotland on November the
nineteenth, A. D. 1600, A. D. 1625.
but in so much weakness that his Baptism was hastened. In the second year of
his age he was created Duke of Albany, Marquess of Ormond, Earl of Ross, and
Baron of Ardmonack.

In the fourth year of his age he was brought to the English Court, and made
Knight of the Bath, and invested with the Title of Duke of York. In his
eleventh year he was made Knight of the Garter, and in his twelfth year Duke of
Cornwall. In his sixteenth year he was created Prince of Wales, Earl of Chester
and Flint, the revenues thereof being assigned to maintain his Court. In his
nineteenth year he performed a Justing at White Hall, wherein he acquitted
himself with a bravery equal to his dignity.

A. D. 1622, he was sent into Spain there to contract a marriage with the
Infanta, whither he was to pass incognito through France, accompanied only with
the Marquess of Buckingham, Mr. Endymion Porter, and Mr. Francis Cottington.
But this attempt of King James in sending him to the Court of Spain, raised the
censures of the World upon him, as being too forgetful of the inhospitality of
Princes to each other, when they have been found in an others Dominions. And
this none other daring to mind the King of, his Jester Archee did it after this
manner: He came to exchange Caps with the King; why so, said King James?
because said Archee, thou have sent the Prince into Spain, from whence he is
never like to return. But said the King, what will thou say when thou see him
come back again? Marry, says the Jester, I will take off the fools Cap which I
now put upon thy head for sending him thither, and put it on the King of Spains
for letting him return.

When the Prince was returned from Spain, a Wife was sought for him from
France, by a marriage with Henrietta Maria the daughter of King Henry the
fourth. The love of whom the Prince had received by the eye, and she of him by
the ear, For having formerly received impressions from the reports of his
gallantry, when she was told of his passing through Paris, she answered, That
if he went to Spain for a Wife, he might have had one nearer home, and saved
himself a great part of that labor. Prince Charles after the celebrating of
his Fathers Funerals, whereat himself was chief Mourner, he next hastened the
coming over of his dearest Consort the Princess Henrietta Maria, whom the Duke
of Chevereux had in his name espoused at the Church of Nostredame in Paris; and
he receiving her at Dover, the next day after Trinity-Sunday at Canterbury
began the Nuptial embraces.

A. D. 1625, and June the eighteenth, a Parliament was assembled, at the
opening of which the King acquainted them with the necessities of supplies for
the War with Spain, which themselves importunately had engaged his Father in,
and made it as hereditary to him as the Crown. But through the practices of
some unquiet persons of that Parliament, two petitions one respecting Religion,
the other redress of grievances, were brought into debate, both formed in King
James his time, which delayed the succors and increased the necessities; Yet
at length the Parliament granted two Subsidies. Which done, and diverse Acts
passed, the Parliament was adjourned till August, and their Convention to be at
Oxford, by reason of the plague then raging in London. When the Parliament was
met again according to the time appointed, there were high and furious debates
of grievances, as, That evil Councels guided the King; That the Treasury was
misimployed, with reflections on the Duke of Buckinghams miscarriages. The
Commons consulting to divest the Duke of his Admiralship, and to demand an
account of those public moneys wherewith he had been entrusted. The King
hereupon dissolved the Parliament. And the infection decreasing at London, his
Majesty was Crowned at Westminster, February the second, And February the
sixth, another Parliament was begun, wherein the Commons voted the King four
Subsidies. But some of the Members highly taxed the Duke of Buckingham, and
Articles were carried up against him to the Lords House, for his ill management
of the Admiralty, his engrossing Offices, preferring his kindred to places
unfit for them, making sale of places of Judicature, and his Mother and
Father-in-Law's fostering of Popish Recusants.

These leading Commoners were Mr. Cook, Dr. Turner, Sir Dudley Digges, Sir John
Elliot, and Sir William Walter. And to make the Faction more sport, the Duke
and Earl of Bristol did mutually impeach each other. But his Majesty to put a
stop to these contrasts, dissolved the Parliament June 18, 1626, before the
Bill for the Subsidies was passed. Therefore the King by the advice of his
Council took care to provide money some other ways hence followed the levying
of Customs and Imposts upon all such Merchandises as were imported and
exported. Then compositions to be made with Recusants for the Leases of their
lands and tenements, for forfeitures due since the tenth year of King James.
Also Privy-Seals were issued out, and Benevolence proposed, etc. The several
Maritime Counties and Port-Towns were ordered by the Council to set out Ships
for the guarding of the Seacoasts, against the attempts of Spain and Flanders,
which they very unwillingly, if at all yielded unto. A Royal Fleet was also
preparing to be set out, designed for Barbary, as was given out. But at last as
the most expeditious way for raising of money, a general Loan was resolved
upon, and Commissioners forthwith appointed for the purpose; which grand
Assesment of the Loan, met with much opposition from people of all sorts and
degrees, upon which diverse Gentlemen were committed prisoners, and George Abbot
Archbishop of Canterbury, refusing to License a Book in behalf of the Loan, was
suspended for a time from his Archiepiscopal jurisdiction; and Dr. Williams
Bishop of Lincoln for speaking some words concerning the Loan in disadvantage
of the King, fell into some disfavour; and Sir Randolph Crew for being backward
to promote it, was displaced from his Office of Lord Chief Justice.

A. D. 1627, His Majesty being now sued by the French Protestants of Rochel for
his protection, and because the King of France had seized on the English
Merchants goods in the river of Bordeaux, therefore sent the Duke of Buckingham
to attach the Isle of Rhee, which had now submitted to the English valor, had
not the Duke managed that War more with the Gayeties of a Courtier, than the
Arts of a Soldier. In this expedition many brave Englishmen lost their lives,
from which when the Duke was returned, those poor remains of his Army, most of
them Irish and Scots, were billeted in diverse villages of England, to the great
discontent of the Country. This Epedition being so unhappy, and the miseries of
Rochel making them importunate for the Kings assistance, he therefore summoned
a Parliament to meet March 17th, 1627, He also passed a Commission under the
great Seal to levy moneys throughout the Nation by impositions in nature of
Excise.

When the Parliament were met at their prefixed time, there was forthwith
presented to the House of Commons a certain Paper, called a Speech
without-dores. Wherein was laid open the miscarriages of many persons in places
of Trust, with several sorts of National grievances. The first matter that the
Parliament took into their consideration, was the grievances of the Country,
and the first grievance they debated was the Case of those Gentlemen, who
having refused the Loan, were notwithstanding their Habeas Corpus committed to
prison. This business took up a long debate and earnest, which was chiefly
managed by Sir Francis Seymour, Sir Thomas Wentworth, Sir Benjamin Rudyard, Sir
Edward Cook, and Sir Robert Philips. Next the House proceeded to the drawing up
of a Petition against Recusants, to which Petition the King gave a satisfactory
answer. Then after the granting of the King five Subsidies, they took into
debate the Petition of Right, wherein they prayed his Most Excellent Majesty,

First, That no man hereafter be compelled to make or yield any Gift, Loan,
Benevolence, Tax, or such like charge, without common consent by Act of
Parliament; and that none be called to make answer, or to take such Oath, or to
give attendance, or be confined, or otherwise molested concerning the same.

Secondly, That no Freeman be taken and imprisoned, or be disseized of his
freedom or liberty, or his free-customes, or be outlawed, or exiled, but by
the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Laws of the Land.

Thirdly, That the Soldiers and Mariners now billeted in diverse Counties,
might be removed, and the people not be burdened so in the future.

Fourthly, That the late Commissions for proceeding by Martial-Law might be
revoked and annulled, and that hereafter no Commission of like nature might be
issued forth. To all which the King at last yielded his consent; sending this
answer to the Parliament, Soit droit fait comme il est desiree. And to the
peoples further satisfaction, his Majesty received into his favor the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Lincoln, the Earls of Essex, Lincoln,
Warwick, Bristol, and the Lord Say.

The Parliament next resume their accusation of the Duke of Buckingham, against
whom they drew up another Remonstrance, the like they did against Bishop Neal,
and Bishop Laud, and at last were about to take away the Kings right to Tonnage
and Poundage; whereupon the King adjourned them till October 20th, and
afterwa^d by Proclamation till the 20th of January following.

About this time Dr. Lamb a favorite of the Dukes, and supposed Necromancer,
was killed in London by the rout of the people, who hated him both for his own
sake and the Dukes, A. D. 1628, During the last Session a Fleet of fifty sail
was sent to the relief of Rochel, but was repelled with much loss. Then another
expedition was agreed on, and a more formidable Fleet was prepared; but as the
Duke of Buckingham was at Portsmouth, hastening his preparations for Sea, he was
suddenly stabbed by Lieutenant Felton, who after his apprehension being demanded
what invited him to the bloody fact, boldly answered, That he killed him for
the Cause of God and his Country. The murderer was hanged at Tyburn, his body
sent to Portsmouth, where without the Town it was hanged up in Chains.

In the Dukes place the Earl of Lindsey an excellent Soldier was sent for the
aid of Rochel, who after some valiant yet fruitless attempts returned into
England, and the Rochellers to the obedience of the French King. And within a
short time after peace was concluded betwixt France and England.

January 20th, the Parliament assembled again, when they prepared a Bill
against Tonnage and Poundage, and the Commons made a Protestation amongst
themselves, That whosoever should seek to introduce Popery or Arminianisme, or
other opinions disagreeing from the true and Orthodox Church, should be reputed
a Capital enemy to the Commonwealth, That whosoever should counsel or advise
the taking or levying the Subsidies of Tonnage or Poundage, not being granted
in Parliament, or should be an Actor or Instrument therein, should likewise be
reputed an enemy to the Commonwealth; or whosoever should voluntarily pay the
same not being granted by Parliament, should be reputed a betrayer of the
Liberties, and an enemy of the Commonwealth. Hereupon his Majesty presently
dissolved the Parliament. After which he called to question certain refractory
Members at the Council Table; Namely, Sir John Elliot, Sir Miles Hobard, Mr.
Denzill Hollis, Sir Peter Hayman, Sir John Barrington, Mr. Seldom, Mr. Stroud,
Mr. Coriton, Mr. Long, Mr. Valentine, and Mr. Kirton, who were all committed to
Prison. But by the dissolving of the Parliament 1629, the Popular odium was in
a high measure stirred up against the great Ministers of State, as was
manifested by certain invective Libels published against Bishop Laud, and the
Lord Treasurer Weston.

This Year a peace was concluded with Spain.

A. D. 1630, and May 29, was Prince Charles born, and about noon of the same
day was a Star seen in the Firmament.

In this Year was the old Prerogative-Statute for Knighthood put in execution,
whereby those who had estates of 40 l. per. Annum, were summoned to appear to
receive Knighthood, and upon default to be fined; by which means one hundred
thousand pounds was brought into the Exchequer. Sir Thomas Wentworth was now
made Viscount Wentworth and Lord President of the North.

A. D. 1632, his Majesty recalled the Lords Justices out of Ireland, who then
had the Government thereof, and in their stead sent thither the Lord Wentworth,
as Lord Deputy.

The King recommended to the Nobility and Gentry, the raising amongst
themselves a large contribution, toward the reparation of St. Paul's Church in
London; which motion was so far entertained, that a considerable sum was
gathered, and the work had a fair progress.

A. D. 1633, and May 13, the King took a Journey into Scotland there to be
Crowned, and it was but time for him so to do; for not long before this, he had
received a Letter from a Scotch Lord, wherein was this expression, That should
he longer defer his coming to be Crowned, the people might perhaps be inclined
to make choice of a new King. As soon as the Coronation-Rites were
accomplished, the King summoned a Parliament, and past an Act for the
ratification of all those Laws that King James had made in that Nation, for the
better regulation of that Church, both as to the Government and Worship of it.
Which Act too many sinister persons opposed, because it savoured of
establishing Episcopacy.

October the 13, was James Duke of York born, the Book for tolerating sports on
the Lords day, first published by King James, was now ratified, which greatly
distasted the Puritanical party, and many Episcoparians also.

A. D. 1634, the English Coasts being infested with Pickeroons, Turks and
Dunkirk-Pirates, and the Fishing usurped by the Hollanders, on the Kings
Dominions, in the narrow Seas, and the Kings Exchequer not being able to
furnish out a Fleet sufficient for the repressing these Incroachers, his
Majesty hereupon consults his Attorney General Noy what might be done herein;
Will. Laud A. B. Cant.
Noy acquaints him with ancient Presidents of raising a Tax upon the Nation,
for setting forth a Fleet in case of danger, and assures him of the Legality of
the way in proceeding by Writs to that effect; which Counsel being embraced,
there were Writs directed to the several Counties, for such a contribution, as
might in the whole build, furnish, and maintain 47. Ships for the safety of the
Kingdom: but this Tax was by many disrellished, and censured as a breach of the
civil liberties, and to be against Law, because not laid by Parliament, and Mr.
John Hambden and others refused to pay this Ship Money, standing it to a Trial
of Law; against whom several of the Judges, to whom the King had referred the
Cause, gave Judgment, Hutton and Crook excepted.

The Pirates were curbed by the Kings Fleet, and the Hollanders reduced to a
precarious use of the English Seas.

A. D. 1637. Mr. Prynne, Dr. Bastwick, and Mr. Burton, a Lawyer, Physician and
Divine, for writing against Episcopacy and Bishops were sentenced to pay 5000
l. to the King, to lose their ears in the Pillory, which they did, and then
were sent into banishment, or remote confinement. Dr. Williams Bishop of
Lincoln was fined, and suspended from his Offices and Benefits, and
imprisoned, for underhandly fomenting Popular disaffections, and venting some
dishonorable speeches concerning the King.

July 13, while the Dean in his Sacerdotal habiliments was reading a new
composed Liturgy, in St. Giles Church at Edinburgh, the common People both Men
and Women flung cudgels, stones, stools, or any thing that came next hand, at
him; and after that was done, reinforced their assaults upon the Bishops then
present. Nor was it the rabble only, that were disaffected to the
Church-Liturgy and Discipline, but persons of all degrees and orders, who
mutually obliged themselves, and the Scottish Nation, in a Hellish Covenant to
extirpate Episcopacy, and to defend each other against all persons. To reduce
this People to a more peaceful practice, the King sent Marquess Hamilton as his
Commissioner; but there were new seeds of discontents and war daily sown: so
that to pacific the discontents of the Scots, his Majesty at length gave order
for revoking the Liturgy, the High Commission, the Book of Canons, and the five
Articles of Perth made by King James, also granted that a general assembly of
the Kirk should be holden at Glascow, Novem. 21. 1638. and a Parliament at
Edinburgh, 15 of May 1639.

When the Assembly were met, they fell to declare against Bishops, to
excomunicate them and their adherents, and to abolish Episcopacy; and the
Covenanters were also so daring, that they seized upon the Kings Revenue,
surprised his Forts and Castles, and at last put themselves in Arms. Cardinal
Richlieu of France heightning them, it is said, in their factious proceeds, by
promising them assistance from the French King.

King Charles now well perceiving that his Clemency to the Scots, was converted
to his own prejudice, raises therefore a gallant Army, with which he marches
within two miles of Berwick, within sight of the Rebel Scots; but they
Petitioning for a pacification, the King yielded thereunto.

A. D. 1639, and June 17, the King disbanded his Army, expecting that the Scots
would have done the like, according to the Articles of accord; but the
Covenanters instead of keeping those Articles, retained their Officers in pay,
changed the old form of holding Parliaments, invaded the Prerogatives of the
Crown, and solicited the French King for an aid of men and money. His Majesty
hereupon calls a Parliament in England to sit, April 13, 1640. and another in
Ireland. The Irish Parliament granted money to raise and pay 8000 men in Arms,
and to furnish them with ammunition; but the English Parliament were not so
free in granting supplies against the Scots, although the King promised them
for ever to quit his claim of Ship Money, and give satisfaction to their just
demands, if now they would supply him. When his Majesty sent old Sir Henry Vane
unto them to demand six subsidies, he either purposely or accidentally (the
first is rather thought) named twelve, which put the Commons into such a heat,
that they were about to remonstrate against the War with Scotland. Whereupon
the King was forced to dissolve the Parliament, May the 5. 1640. Howbeit he
continued the Convocation of the Clergy, which granted him four shillings in
the pound for all their Ecclesiastical promotions. Soon after this, a tumult
was stirred up at the Bishop of Canterbury's; insomuch that a great number of
Apprentices and vulgar persons assaulted his house at Lambeth; some of whom
being apprehended and imprisoned, were by their Companions rescued out of
Prison; for which, one of the Ringleaders was hanged and quartered.

Now whilst these things were acting at home, the turbulent Scots had entered
England, and defeated a part of the Kings Army, before the whole could be
imbodied, and had gained Newcastle and Durham. And no sooner was his Majesty
come to his Army in the North, but there followed him from some English Lords a
Petition conformable to the Scotch Remonstrance, which they called the
intentions of the Army, (viz.) not to lay down Arms till the reformed Religion
(meaning Scotch Presbytery) was settled in both Nations; and the causers and
abetters of their present troubles were brought to public Justice, and that in
Parliament. The King therefore summons the Lords to appear at York, September
the 24, 1640. who accordingly met, where it was determined that a Parliament
should be called to meet November the third following; then a Treaty was agreed
upon betwixt the English and Scotch, for the ceasing of all Acts of Hostility;
and one of the Articles was, That the contribution of 850 l. per diem, should
be raised out of the English Northern Counties, to maintain the Scotch Army
during the Treaty, and till peace was secured.

The fatal long Parliament began November the third; which day, as it is said,
was looked upon by the Archbishop of Canterbury as an unlucky day for meeting
of Parliaments in reference to Church Affairs, having proved so in the time of
King Henry the eighth: whereupon he advised the King to put off their setting
to another day; which his Majesty inclined not unto, but at their meeting
acquainted them, that he was resolved to put himself wholly upon his English
Subjects; that he would satisfy all their just grievances; then commended to
their care, the chasing out of the saucy Scots, making provisions for his own
Army, and relieving the oppressed Northern Counties. But the Parliament,
instead of complying with their Sovereign in his just proposals, they first set
upon purging their house of such whom they thought would not comply with their
designs, finding fault either with their elections, or else making them
criminals in some public grievance; then settled Committees for grievances, and
receiving Petitions; voted down Monopolies, impeached the Lord Wentworth Earl
of Strafford of High Treason, and committed him to the black Rod; committed
Archbishop Laud likewise to the black Rod, and ten weeks after voted him guilty
of High Treason, and sent him to the Tower. In the mean while Prynn, Burton,
and Bastwick, were freed from their confinement, and conducted into London in
great State and Triumph.

Alderman Pennington with some hundreds attending him, presented the Commons
with a Petition from the Citizens of London against the present
Church Government. Diverse Petitions from other places came before them of the
like nature. And now the Parliament well perceiving their own strength and
interest, drew up a bill for Triennial-Parliaments; wherein the power of
calling that great Council of the Nation, was upon refusal of the King and
neglect of others, devolved upon Constables. This the King through their
importunities granted unto them. February the 16 the Parliament voted, That no
Bishop should have any vote in Parliament, nor any Judicial power in the
Star-Chamber-Court, nor have any sway in Temporal affairs; and that no
Clergyman should be in Commission of Peace. And after about five months from
their sitting, the Earl of Strafford Lord Deputy of Ireland was brought to his
Trial, in Westminster Hall, before the Lords as his Judges. The King, Queen,
and Prince, setting behind a curtain in an adjoining Gallery; and round about
the Court stood the Commons his accusers, and the Witnesses against him were
English and Scotch Anti-Episcoparians and Irish Papists, his charge consisted
of 28 Articles; to all which the Earl answered with such firm reasons, that he
could not be found guilty of Treason, either in particulars, or in the whole.
The Parliament therefore resolved (for right or wrong this wise man must fall)
to proceed against him by Bill of Attainder, and upon April the 19 by making a
Law after the fact, vote him guilty of High Treason, yet withal add a caution
for the security of themselves, that it should not be drawn into a president.
Which vote of theirs passed not without a long debate and contention, and 59 of
the Members honestly dissented from the vote, whose names were afterward
posted and marked for the fury of the Rabble. In the bill of Attainder, the
Earl was charged for endeavoring to subvert the ancient Fundamental Laws and
Government of the Realms, and for exercising a tyranous and exorbitant power
over the liberties and estates of his Majesty's Subjects; and for having by his
own authority commanded the laying and assessing of Soldiers upon his Majesty's
Subjects in Ireland. And also for that upon the dissolution of the last
Parliament, he did slander the House of Commons to his Majesty, and did advise
his Majesty that he was loosed and absolved from rules of Government, and that
he had an Army in Ireland which he might employ to reduce the Kingdom. And that
the said Earl had been an Incendiary of the Wars betwixt England and Scotland,
etc.

May the first his Majesty called both Houses together, and told them, that he
had been present at the hearing of the great Cause, and that in his Conscience
positively he could not condemn the Earl of Treason, and yet could not clear
him of misdemeanors, but hoped a way might be found out to satisfy Justice
and their fears, without oppressing his Conscience.

May the second the Prince of Orange was Married to the Princess Mary at
Whitehall.

May the third there came a seditious Rabble of about 5 or 6000 of the dregs of
the People, armed with staves, cudgels, and other instruments of outrage, to
the Parliament-dores, clamouring, Justice, Justice; and posted upon the gate of
Westminster a Catalogue of names of those that would have acquitted the Earl,
whom they styled Straffordians. Then at the doors of the House of Peers, they
affronted some of the Lords, especially the Bishops, at their passing in and
out; after this they forced open the doors of the Abby-Church, where they broke
down the Organs, spoiled the Vestments and Ornaments of Worship. From thence
they hurried to the Court, and there most Impudently and Traitorously cried
out, That they would have Straffords head, or a better; upbraiding the King
himself (who persuaded them as they passed by, to a modest care of their own
private affairs) with an unfitness to Reign; and when some Justices of the
Peace, according to their Office, endeavored to suppress those tumults, by
imprisoning some of the Leaders of them; they themselves were imprisoned by the
command of the Commons upon pretext of an injury offered to the Liberties of
the Subject; one of which was, (as they then dictated) that every one might
safely Petition the Parliament; howbeit afterward they acted quite contrary to
such whose Petitions were too honest to please them. But notwithstanding these
tumultuous inforcements, his Majesty would not sign the Bill of Attainder till
he had consulted both with the Judges, as to matter of Law, and the Bishops as
to matter of Conscience. When the Judges told his Majesty, that in point of Law
(according to the Oath made by Sir Henry Vane of the Earls advice to raise
horse to awe this Nation) the Earl was guilty of Treason; it is said an eminent
Bishop did answer the King, that he had a Conscience as a private man, and as a
public; and though by his private Conscience he could not yield to the Earls
death, yet by his public (considering the present state of things) he might.

May the 10. With much reluctance the King signed a Commission to some Lords to
pass that Bill of Attainder, and another of ill consequence also, which was for
continuation of the Parliament during the pleasure of the two Houses.

May the 12, 1641, was the Earl of Strafford strongly guarded to the
Tower Hill, and there with courage beseeming a Christian, he suffered the
severing of his Head from his body. The death of which great and able Minister
of State, did so terrify the other Ministers of State, that many of them made
a voluntary resignation of their Offices. At the request of the house of
Commons, the King for peace-fake, relinquished his claim to Tonnage and
Poundage, and yielded to sign the Bills for taking away of the High Commission
and Star Chamber Courts.

A. D. 1641, and October the 12, the Natives or wild Irish began a most bloody
Rebellion throughout the whole Kingdom of Ireland, on a suddein invading the
unprovided English that were scattered amongst them, despoiling them of their
goods, and massacring 200000 of them, without any respect of sex, age, kindred,
or friendship, making them as so many sacrifices to their bloody superstition,
the Popish Religion. The chief heads of this Rebellion and Massacre, (besides
the Priests) were Sir Phelim O-Neal, Turbough O-Neal his Brother, Rowry
Mac-Guire, Philip O-Rely, Moelmurry, O-Rely, Sir Conno Mac-Gennis, Mac-Brian
and Mac-Mahon. His Majesty then in Scotland having intelligence of the dismal
fate of the English in Ireland, sent post to the Parliament of England to have
them send reliefs thither; but differences still heightning betwixt the King
and his Parliament, succors were not seasonably sent, by which the Rebels much
strengthened themselves, At the Kings return from Scotland, the Parliament
presented him with a Petition for taking away the votes of Bishops in the House
of Lords, and the Ceremonies of the Church, and for the removing of evil
Counselors from about him. Their grand Remonstrance they also presented him,
wherein were reckoned up the offenses of the Courtiers, the unpleasing resolves
of some Judges, the neglects or rigours of some Ministers of State, the
undigested Sermons of some Preachers, the Positions of some Divines in the
Schools; unpleasing accidents they therein represented as designs of Tyranny;
and those things which had been reformed, were yet mentioned as burdens. To
this Remonstrance his Majesty answered, That he thought he had given
satisfaction to his Peoples fears and jealousies concerning Religion, Liberty
and Civil Interests, by the Bills he had past this Parliament; desiring that
misunderstandings might be removed on either side, and that the bleeding
condition of Ireland might persuade them to unity, for the relief of that
unhappy Kingdom. But this modest answer of his Majesty's did not at all
satisfy the factious. The Apprentices and Rabble in great numbers and much
confusion resorted again to Westminster; some crying out against Bishops and
Liturgy of the Church; others boldly menacing, that the Militia should be taken
out of the Kings hands. Affronting the Bishops at their passing in and out of
the Lords House; and before Whitehall behaving themselves very insolently. His
Majesty hereupon took a Guard of such Gentlemen as offered their service for
his safety; but the factious made use of this to raise the rage and jealousy
of the whole City against the King; for at midnight there were outcries made in
the streets, that all people should rise to their defense, for the King and his
Papists were coming to fire the City, and to cut their throats in their beds.
The King therefore not always to encourage these indignities with his patience,
resolved by a course of Justice to punish the Authors and Countenancers of
these seditious practices, so commanded his Attorney General to accuse five
Members of the Lower House of High Treason, and one of the House of Peers. He
also sent some Officers to Seal up their Trunks and Cabinets in their several
Lodgings, and to secure their persons. To this the Commons voted, That all
those persons were enemies to the Commonwealth that should obey the King in any
of his commands concerning them; and that it was lawful for any person to
assist the said members. And because the King came into the House of Commons,
and there demanded to have the five Members delivered up to him (though he left
his guard of Pensioners, and Lords and Gentlemen without upon the stairs) the
Commons voted this proceeding of the Kings, a breach of the privilege of
Parliament; and withal published a Declaration, That whosoever should arrest
any Member of Parliament by warrant from the King only, was guilty of the
breach of Parliamentary privileges; and likewise that all they who attended
the King, when he came to demand the five Members (then hid in the City) were
guilty of a Traiterous design against King and Parliament. The Londoners they
came thronging to Westminster in a tumultuous sort, to Petition for the
impeached Members, behaving themselves very rudely toward the Bishops. And
such increase and numbers of the heady common people assembled in a tumultuous
manner about White Hall and Westminster, that the King justly mistrusting some
danger from them, withdrew himself, with the Queen and their Children, to
Windsor. The next day after which, the five Members were Triumphantly guarded
from London to Westminster by water. Strange reports were these times given out
concerning dangers from the King; how that Troops of Papists were gathered
about Kingston upon Thames, under the command of Colonel Lunsford, who was
Chararactered to be of so monstrous an Appetite, that he would eat Children,
and other like false and ridiculous stories. Petitions were presented the
Parliament, requiring that neither the Bishops nor Popish Lords should continue
to vote amongst the Peers* Women also presented a Petition to the like purpose.
The House of Commons Petitioned his Majesty that they might have the Tower, and
London-Militia put into their hands; which he denied to grant: yet did they
place Major General Skippon over that Militia.

The King in hopes to stay the fury of the faction, consented to almost all
that they desired. Howbeit, notwithstanding all his gracious condescentions,
endeavors were still used to create an hatred of his Majesty. Mr. John Pym
publicly charged Him with a connivence at least, if not with contrivance of
the Irish Rebellion; and when the King required satisfaction for the calumny,
the Commons justified Pyms speech to be the sense of their House. And now the
breach, through bad men's practices, growing still wider and wider, betwixt his
Majesty and his two Houses of Parliament, His Majesty resolved to withdraw into
the North, there to abide till he saw what issue this storm would have; taking
with him the Prince, and Duke of York. The Queen he had before sent with the
Princess of Orange into Holland.

When the King was departed, the Parliament made preparations both by Land and
Sea, upon pretext of great dangers at home, and more prodigious terrors from
abroad; pretending, that by intelligence from Paris, Rome, and Venice, they
were assured of great designs to overthrow the Parliament, together with the
Protestant Religion, and strange unheard of Plots, they said, were made to
murder the most eminent Patriots.

A. D. 1642, and April the 23, the King attended with his guard, consisting for
the most part of Lords and Gentlemen only, would have entered into his Town of
Hull, but Sir John Hotham insolently shut the gates against him, and kept him
out; whereupon the King proclaimed him Traitor, and complained to the
Parliament of this indignity; but they justified Hothams act, and authorized
him to strengthen the Garrison of Hull. In short time after this, Englands
miseries commenced by an intestine War. A little before which, were strange
sights seen in the Air in many parts of England, as Musketeers, harnessed-men,
and horsemen, moving in Battel-array, and assaulting one the other in diverse
furious postures. The King and the two Houses now began to make all the
speediest warlike preparations to defend themselves; and offend each other, but
the two Houses had a great advantage of his Majesty, both in respect of moneys,
and the speedy raising of Men, and also Arms and Ammunition for war of all
sorts, through their having the City of London on their side, the Citizens
whereof were very free in parting with their Plate upon the public faith; and
their Wives were so zealous for the good Cause (as that of the two Houses was
then miscalled) that they gave their very Bodkins and Thimbles toward the
maintaining of it, and were forward to have Husbands and Children to venture
their lives in this Rebellion.

On August 22. 1642, did his Majesty set up his Standard-Royal at Nottingham.
His General was the Valiant Earl of Lindsey, the Parliaments General was Robert
Devereux Earl of Essex and their Admiral the Earl of Warwick. The first blood
that was spilt in this unhappy war, was near unto Hull, whither some forces of
the Kings forces were drawn, upon whom Sir John Hotham and Sir John Meldram
sallied, taking some, and killing others.

September the ninth. 1642, the Earls of Essex set forth with his Army out of
London, and October the 23 the Caveliers, (so called) which were the Kings
party, and the Roundheads (so called from the custom of the Puritans cutting
their hair short to their ears) which were the Parliaments party, met between
Keinton and Edghill in Warwickshire, and there engaged in fight, which was
acted with such fury, that near 6000 were slain upon the place. The King had so
much the better of the day as to keep the Field. Persons of remark slain on his
Majesty's side, were the Earl of Lindsey, and Sir Edward Varney
Standard Bearer; but Mr. John Smith immediately recovered the Standard, for
which service he was Knighted in the Field. On the Parliaments part were slain
the Lord St. John of Bletso, and Colonel Essex. From this fight at Edg-hill the
King marched to Banbury, which was surrendered to him; then entered Oxford
triumphantly, and having secured that place, he advanced toward London, and at
Brantford fell upon two Regiments of his Enemies, taking about 500 Prisoners.
The Parliament to increase their Numbers, declared that all Apprentices that
would list themselves in their service for the Public Cause, should be secured
from the injury of their Masters, and their time to go on toward their freedom;
by which means multitudes of Youth forsook their Masters to fight for the
Parliament. They also invited their Brethren the Scots (as they called them) to
come into England to their aid. And to animate the people to take up Arms for
the Parliament, some busy Clergymen made great (not good) use of that sacred
Text in their Pulpits, Curse ye Meroz, etc. Judges the 5.23. But, blessed are
the Peace makers, says the Prince of peace. About the beginning of March,
Commissioners were appointed to treat at Oxford in order to a rcconcilation;
but the Parliaments proposals were so out of reason, that the treaty proved
fruitless.

A. D. 1643, in the beginning of the Spring, the Queen returned into England,
bringing with her considerable supplies of Men, Money, and Ammunition out of
France; and that year his Majesty became Master of the North and West, some few
Garrisons excepted. July the 5th Sir Ralph Hopton with his Cavaliers, routed Sir
William Waller at Lansdown near Bath; and July the 15th. he again defeated him
at Roundway-hill by the Devizes, killing many hundreds in the place, and taking
many more Prisoners. Bristol and Exeter were yielded unto those two Martial
Princes, Rupert and Maurice, Sons of Fredrick Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and
Elizabeth his Wife, Sister to King Charles the first. Gloucester the King
besieged with a brave Army; and the besieged under the command of Colonel
Edward Massey defended themselves with great bravery, till the Earl of Essex
came with an Army and raised the Siege. From this Siege the two Armies marched
within few miles each of the other without any engagement, (save a little
skirmish by Alborne-Chace) till they came to Newbury, where a sore Battle was
fought. On the Kings part were slain the Earls of Carnarvon, and Sunderland,
and the Learned Lord Faulkland; Essex lost many of his Officers.

January the 22, those loyal Members of Parliament who dissented from them at
Westminster, met at Oxford by the Kings Summons; of these, besides the Prince
and Duke of York, the Lord Keeper Littleton, Treasurer Cottington, Duke of
Richmond, and Marquess of Hartford, there were nineteen Earls, and as many
Lords, and one hundred and seventeen Knights and Gentlemen. Other Loyal Lords,
Knights and Gentlemen, Members of Parliament, were at this time employed in the
Kings service in diverse places of the Nation.

In this month and year the Scotch Army under the Conduct of the Earl of Leven
entered England for the Parliament, being about 18000 foot and 2000 horse.

About this time was Loyal Newark besieged by Sir John Meldram; but by Prince
Ruperts coming it was relieved, and the Parlimentarians forced to march away
after great losses, on such conditions as the Prince would grant them.

This year upon a cessation of Arms in Ireland, some forces came over to the
Kings assistance.

This year also that Rebellious thing called a Parliament at Westminster, and
their Adherents, and some to save themselves from punishment; took the Scottish
Solemn League and Covenant, with hands lifted up to the most high God, swearing
to endeavor the preservation of the reformed Religion, the extirpation of
Popery and Prelacy, to preserve the Rights and privileges of Parliament, and
liberties of the Kingdom, and to defend and preserve the Kings Majesty's
person, and Authority, etc. All the Parliaments pretense in raising Arms, was
reformation, for the defense of the Kings person, to rescue him from his evil
Council, and to make him a glorious King; which at length they did, when they
deprived him of his natural life.

A. D. 1644, Sir William Waller defeated Sir Ralph Hopton about Brandon Heath.
The Lord Fairfax and his Son, Sir Thomas, took diverse of the Kings Garrisons in
the North. Prince Rupert raised the Siege of Latham-house. June the 29, the
Kings forces gave a great defeat to Wallers Army at Cropredy-bridge. And
presently after this, the King drove the Earl of Essex up into Cornwall; but
the Earl deserted his Army, passing by water to Plymouth; and his horse taking
the advantage of a dark night, escaped, leaving the Foot to shift how they
could, who capitulated for their lives, leaving their Arms, Cannon, Ammunition,
and Baggage, to the Kings disposal. Then Ilferdcomb, Barnstable, and Saltash
yielded to the King, who now victoriously marched toward London.

July the third was a great fight at Maston-Moor, where the Parliament obtained
a very considerable Victory. And October the 27th, Essex, Waller and the Earl
of Manchester met the King as he came out of the West, at Newbury, where a
sharp Battle was fought, and the Kings part forced out of the field.

In November, Mac-Mahon an Irish Rebel was hanged and quartered at Tyburn. And
December 23d. Sir Alexander Carew was beheaded on Tower Hill, for attempting to
give up the Island of Plymouth to the Kings forces.

January the first, Hotham the Son, and January the second, Hotham the Father,
were beheaded on Tower Hill, for designing to betray Hull to the Royalists, and
for other treacheries.

January the 10th, William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury was brought to the
Scaffold on Tower Hill, where he preached his last Sermon, taking for his Text,
Heb. 12. Verse. 2 So yielded his neck to the stroke of the Executioner. The
charge against him was, endeavoring to subvert the Laws, Religion, and
Privileges of Parliament.

January the 30th, by his Majesty's procurement a Treaty was held at Vxbridge,
where the Parliaments demands were, That Episcopacy might be extirpated, that
Presbytery might be established, and that the King should yield up the Militia
solely into the Parliaments dispose; which were such unreasonable demands, that
the King could not yield to them.

February the 20th, the Lord Mac-Guire, another of the grand Irish Rebels, was
executed at Tyburn.

About this time was the Parliaments Army new-moduled. The Earl of Essex and
the other Commanders who were Parliament Men ( Oliver Cromwell was excepted)
were by the self-denying ordinance (lately made) to attend in Parliament, in
whose steads other and more active persons were appointed. Sir Thomas Fairfax
was constituted Captain General, Oliver Cromwell, (then the Sectaries Darling)
was made Lieutenant General, Henry Ireton Commissary-General, etc. After which
model the Kings affairs of the Nation began fatally to decline.

A. D. 1645, His Majesty drew his Army out of Oxford, in order to relieve his
Nothern Counties, and Garrisons; but after he had stormed and taken Leicester,
in his way, he was called back to secure Oxford, which the Parliament Army
threatened with a Siege. This while Sir Thomas Fairfax had intercepted a Letter
of the Lord Gorings to the King, wherein that Loyal Subject had desired of his
Majesty to forbear engaging with the Enemy till he could be joined with him.
Hereupon Fairfax left his Siege before Oxford, and made directly toward the
King with a purpose to fight him, before that addition of strength should come
in. And at a place near Naesby in Northamptonshire, both Armies met on
Saturday, June 14th. 1645. His Majesty commanded the main body, Prince Rupert
and Prince Maurice the right wing, Sir Marmaduke Langdale the left, the Lord
Ashly the right hand reserve, and Sir George Lisle the left. Of the Parliament
Army Fairfax and Skippon had the ordering of the main battle, Cromwell the right
wing, and Ireton the left. Prince Rupert charged that wing commanded by Ireton
so home, that he disordered it, taking Ireton Prisoner; and for a while he
followed the Parlimentarians toward Naesby; but in the interim Cromwell worsted
the Kings right wing, and then came into Fairfax his assistance, who together
charged upon the Kings main body; and they no longer able to stand it out,
retreated out of the Field, leaving a complete Victory to the disloyal party,
who pursued them within two miles of Leicester, killing in their way many Women
that had followed the Cavaliers Camp. On the Parliaments side were wounded and
slain above 1000, On the Kings side were slain 20 Knights, Colonels and
Officers of note: and 600 private Soldiers; and of Prisoners were taken six
Colonels, 8 Lieutenant-Colonels, 18 Majors, 70 Captains, with many other
Officers, 4500 common Soldiers, 13 of the Kings houshold-servants, 12 Pieces of
Ordinance, 8000 Arms, 40 Barrels of Powder, 200 Carriages, store of rich
pillage, 3000 Horses, the Kings Standard, one of his Coaches, His Cabinet of
Letters, which the Parliament caused to be made public.

April the 16th, Leicester was yielded up to Sir Thomas Fairfax, which
accomplished; he marched into the West to relieve Taunton then besieged by the
Royal party. At Langport he discomfitted the Lord Gorings forces, taking 1400
Prisoners. Then Bridgwater and Bath yielded to him. Then he besieged Sherbourn
Castle, and sent Cromwell to suppress the Wilts, and Dorsetshire Club-men,
associated about Shaftsbury, which he did, killing some, taking others, and
dispersing the rest. These Club-men declared themselves Nutrals, pretending
only to secure their own proprieties. August the 15th, Sherbourn Castle was
surrendered upon promise of Quarter.

At Rowton-heath, near Chester, Colonel Poyns worsted his Majesty's forces.

In Yorkshire, Colonel Robert Lilburn routed the Royalists commanded by the
Lord Digby, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale. Colonel Birch and Colonel Morgan by a
stratagem took Hereford for the Parliament. At Boveytracy Oliver Cromwell
surprised the Lord Wentworth, took three Regiments, dispersing two others.
Fairfax took Dartmouth, defeated the Lord Hopton at Torrington, and immediately
after blocks him up at Truro, enforcing him to disband his Army. March 21,
Jacob Lord Ashly was routed at Stow in the Would, by Sir William Brereton, and
Colonel Morgan. The Loyal Lord himself was taken Prisoner, with 1500 others.
Many of the Kings Garrisons fell this year into the hands of the
Parlamentarians; as Bristol, the Devizes, Winchester-Castle, Basing-House,
Laycock-House, Berkly-Castle, Chepstow, Westchester, Belvoir-Castle,
Latham-House, Monmouth and Welbeck House, etc.

A. D. 1646, All Caveliers were commanded to depart the City of London betwixt
the 30, of March, and April the 6th; and now his Majesty was reduced into a
very low Condition. His forces beaten out of the field in all places, and his
Garrisons surrendered and taken daily, as St. Michaels-Mount, Ruthen-Castle,
Woodstock, Excester, and Barnstable; and General Fairfax approaching to besiege
Oxford, the King upon thoughts of providing for himself, went in a disguise to
the Scotch Camp that was then before Newark, May the fourth the Scotch Officers
engaging to secure both him and as many of his party as should seek for shelter
with them, and to stand to him with their lives and fortunes. But upon his
Majesty's departure from Oxford, diverse of the Noblemen as they had been
deserted by the King, yielded themselves to Fairfax. And June the 24th, the
most Loyal University and City of Oxford was surrendered upon Honorable Terms
by Sir Thomas Glenham. After which a number of the Kings Garrisons yielded to
the Parliament, as Banbury, Ludlow, Borstal, Carnarvan, Lichfield, Worcester,
Wallingford, Gothridge, Ragland, Pendennis, and Newark by the Kings order was
delivered up; and the Lord Montross in Scotland, and Lord Ormond in Ireland, by
the Kings command desisted their Hostilities. After the surrender of Newark,
the Scotch Army marched back toward their own Country as far as Newcastle upon
Tine, where when they were come, they tendered their Covenant to the King,
pretending that unless he would take that, they durst not bring him into
Scotland. This the King refused not, if they would first satisfy those scruples
concerning Church Government which lay upon his Conscience, which to effect,
Mr. Alexander Henderson a Minister, the Oracle of the Kirk, was employed to
converse with him. His Majesty's parts were so great, and Cause so good, that
made all Mr. Hendersons attempts succesless. See the Printed papers of their
Disputations.

Whilst these things were acting at Newcastle, the bargain was struck at London
betwixt the Parliament and Scotch Commissiones; and for 200000 l. the Scots
delivered the King up to the English Parliament. Yet to mask their perfidy, the
Scots added this caution, That there should be no attempt made upon the Kings
person, but being entertained at one of his own Palaces, he should be there
treated with upon propositions from both Nations, which should be speedily sent
unto him.

February the 6th, the Scots left Newcastle and marched homeward, and two days
after the King set forward with the Parliaments Commissioners for Holmby,
attended with 900 Horse. And now the Parliament, because they wanted others to
quarrel withal, fell to quarrel amongst themselves, dividing into two parties,
Presbyterians and Independents, with Anabaptists and the other Sectarists. The
Presbiterians were then powerful in the House, but the other in the Army, and
were a subtle and resolute people. The former of these parties seeing
themselves in danger of being supplanted by the other, voted in Parliament, to
have part of the Army disbanded, another part of it sent over into Ireland
toward the reducing that Country, and the remainder to be disposed into
several places of England to keep the Royallists in awe. This put the Army into
a heat, who to make their part sure, sent a party of Horse, commanded by Cornet
Joyce, to seize upon the Kings person, and to bring him from Holmby into their
own quarters, which was done, June the 3d, 1647: From Holmby they conveyed His
Majesty to Childersley, and thence to New Market, the Grandees of the Army
pretending to him, how they were grieved for his imprisonment and sufferings,
professing they would never part with their Arms, till they had made his way to
his Throne, (but it must be a Throne in Heaven). And the more to palliate their
evil meanings, they permitted him the service of his own Chaplains, (which he
had been denied at Holmby) the commerce of Letters with the Queen, the visits
of his own party, and attendance of his Courtiers. The Parliament voted, that
the General should be required to deliver the King to their Commissioners, who
were to bring him to Richmond, to the end that propositions of peace might be
speedily presented him. Hereupon the Army drew up Articles against Eleven of
the Members of the Commons House, namely, Mr. Denzill Hollis, Sir Philip
Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John
Maynard, Colonel Massey, Colonel Long, Colonel Harley, Mr. Glyn, and Mr.
Anthony Nichols. Nor would the Army be satisfied till the House was purged of
these Members. Which being done, the Army-party became something prevalent, who
voted that the London-Militia should be taken out of the hands of the City, and
transferred to others better affected to the Army: and that it should be
Treason to seek for Subscriptions to Petitions. Hereupon great multitudes of
Apprentices and others in a tumultuous sort resorted to the Parliament House,
and there kept the Speaker in his Chair till this vote was past; That the King
should come to London to treat, and that the City should have the ordering of
their own Militia. Fairfax understanding this, hasts with his Army to London,
and at Hounslow was met by the Speaker, and such of the Members as sided with
the Army, who complained of the violence that was offered them. In the mean
while the Citizens and Presbyterian part of the Parliament, made some
preparations to oppose the Army; but upon the Generals approach to the City,
the Gates were thrown open, and the Army marched in Triumph through the City,
seized upon the Tower, dismantled the Fortifications, imprisoned the Mayor, and
diverse of the chief Citizens, and committed some Noblemen to the black Rod.

In September, the Members at Westminster sent propositions to His Majesty then
at Hampton Court, which were the same in substance with those formerly offered,
as for the abolishing Episcopacy, the Parliament to have the disposal of all
great Offices of Trust.

About this time the Parliament voted, That 6000 Foot and 2400 Horse and
Dragoons should be sent into Ireland, and 18000 Foot and 7200 Horse, and 1000
Dragoons should be kept up as a standing Army for England, the rest of the
Soldiers to be disbanded. The Army also for the better carrying on of their
designs, about the same time elected out of every Regiment a certain number of
Soldiers to meet and consult, by the name of Adjutators.

November the 6th, the Scotch Commissioners sent a Letter to the Speaker of the
Lower House, that the King might be admitted to a Personal-Treaty, at least,
that the Army might not remove him him from Hampton Court; but some of the
Army Officers having informed His Majesty (on design to have him the surer at
their dispose) that his person was in some hazard from the Adjutators and
Levellers, he therefore with Three of His most trusty Attendants, Sir John
Berkley, Mr. Ashburnham, and Colonel Leg, in the dark and tempestuous night
of November the 11th escaped from Hampton Court, and after some wandering
committed himself to Colonel Hammond Governor of the Isle of Wight, who
conveyed him to Carisbrook-Castle, the very pit, it is said, that His enemies
had designed for him; for it was rumored above a fortnight before, in the
Army, that the King should be in the Isle of Wight: And the very night he
departed from Hampton Court, the Sentinels were withdrawn from their usual
standings, on purpose to facilitate his escape thence.

From Carisbrook-Castle His Majesty wrote a Letter to the Parliament, wherein
he professed, he could not, either as a King or Christian consent to the
abolishing of Episcopacy, because he esteemed it to be Apostolical, and at his
Coronation was sworn to maintain it; yet he was willing Presbitery should be
settled for three years, and that a free debate should be had by such a number
of Divines, about the settlement of Church Government for the future. And was
willing also that the Parliament should dispose of the Militia, and should have
the choice of his Privy Council by grant of Pattent from him during his reign:
withal earnestly soliciting them to pity the languishing condition of the
Kingdom, and to come to a Personal treaty with him. After three days debate,
the Parliament sent four Bills unto His Majesty to be signed by him, but so
derogating they were from his Royalty, that the Scotch Commissioners declared
against them, and the King refused the signing of them. The Parliament
thereupon voted, That no more Addresses should be made to the King.

In the mean while Colonel Hammond had dismissed the Kings Servants, and used
him more severely than formerly, which occasioned Capt. Burleigh to beat up the
Drum for the Kings service and freedom in the Isle of Wight; but he was soon
apprehended, and afterward executed.

A. D. 1648, The Parliament voted that all they who would not submit to the
Power (meaning their usurped authority) should be expelled the University, and
that all the Colledg-Rents should be paid to the Visitors by them appointed.

April the 9th and 10th, The London-Boys made an Insurrection, seized the
Magazine at Leaden Hall, crying out for God and King Charles, but were quietted
by Fairfax. Poyer, Langhorne, Powel, and Sir John Owen took up Arms for the
King in Wales, but Colonel Langhorne and Powel were defeated by Colonel Horton,
and Sir John Owen by Major General Mirton, and Pembroke-Castle kept by Colonel
Poyer, was yielded to that Arch-Traytor Cromwell, July 13. Powel, Poyer and
Langhorn afterward cast Lots for their lives; and the lot falling upon Poyer
he was shot to death.

April the 20th, The Duke of York disguised in woman's apparel, escaped from
St. James's, and and past into Holland. Many were the Petitions that now were
presented the Parliament for a Personal-treaty, and for disbanding the Army.
But the Surry-Petitioners by the command of the Army Officers, and
Parliament Men, were assaulted at the Parliament-doors, and some of them were
killed, some wounded, and most of them plundered by the Soldiers. And now the
Kentish men to the number of 10000 took up Arms for the King, and embodyed
themselves at Maidstone, where they made a gallant resistance against General
Fairfax for the space of six hours; but his Veteran Soldiers at last prevailed,
taking many of them, and eight pieces of ordnance. June the 2d, The old Lord
Goring, Earl of Norwich, with 500 men, crossed into Essex and got into
Colchester, whither the Country people flockt unto him, also a party from
London, and the Lords Capel and Loughbrough out of Hartfordshire.

The Earl of Holland also headed a Royal party at Kingstone upon Thames; but
after a short, yet smart fight, his party was dispersed, the Lord Francis
Villers was slain, and many Prisoners of Note were taken, July the 7th, and
shortly after the Earl of Holland himself was apprehended.

The Parliament of Scotland sent into England an Army under Duke Hamilton in
order to recover the Kings liberty, and to re-establish him on his Throne; but
August the 17th, at Preston in Lancashire, this Scotch-Army of near a 21000 was
totally routed by Oliver Cromwell. It Is said in this days fight and the
pursuit, the English took more Prisoners than their own Army amounted unto, and
that was about 12000. The Parliament lost here that daring Martialist Colonel
Francis Thornhaigh. Shortly after the Battle Duke Hamilton was taken Prisoner;
and Cromwell to improve this success, followed the scattered parties into
Scotland, where when he was come, there repaired to him the Earls of Arguile,
Lowden, Leven, and other of the Scotch Covenanting-Nobility, who contracted
with him for subduing the common Enemy, meaning the Loyal party.

Colchester, that had endured a tedious siege, and was now brought to such
scarcity of provision, that they had not Horseflesh enough to serve them one
day longer (and on it they had lived almost a Fortnight) August the 27th
yielded upon Articles, The private Soldiers to depart with life, the Commanders
to remain at the Generals dispose, and the City to raise 14000 l. to save it
from Plunder. Prisoners of quality taken here, were the Lords Goring, Capel and
Loughbrough, eleven Knights, twelve Colonels, eight Lieutenant-Colonels, nine
Majors, thirty Captains, and sixty-five Gentlemen. Three of the Knights were
presently condemned by a Council of War, two of whom, namely Sir Charles Lucas,
and Sir George Lisle, were shot to death, dying as they had lived, with great
courage.

But whilst these things were managed by the Army, the Parliament was busied
with Petitions from London, and other places for a Personal Treaty. The
Parliament therefore contrary to the humors of some of their factious Members,
repealed those Votes they had formerly made for no more Addresses to the King,
and both Houses voted a Treaty to be with the King in honor, freedom and
safety. And September the 18th. the Treaty began at Newport in the Isle of
Wight, where his Majesty condescended so far unto the Parliaments demands,
(which were the same in substance with those formerly made) that both Houses
came to this resolve, That the Kings Concessions were a sufficient ground for
peace. But this did exceedingly inrage the factious Members and Commanders of
the Army, who now resolved to seize the King into their own hands and dispose,
which they did, removing him out of the Isle of Wight, and making him Prisoner
in Hurst-Castle.

November the 30th. the Army then fell to purging the Parliament, apprehending
forty Members thereof, that were persons of the most known integrity, and
highest resolution, denying admission to 150 more; and suffering none to enter
the House, save such whom they knew would serve their designs. Which
Army-Members revived those Votes of no more Addresses to the King; the Votes
for a Treaty with the King, and of the satisfactoriness of his Concessions,
they razed out of the Journal Book. And then proceeded to vote, That the
supreme authority of the Nation resided in themselves; That to raise Arms
against the Peoples Representatives, or the Parliament, was High Treason; That
the King himself took Arms against the Parliament, and so was guilty of the
bloodshed throughout the Civil-war. And therefore this fag-end of a Parliament
was resolved to have his Majesty brought to his Trial, in order thereto giving
their commands for his bringing up to London; and January the 19th, he was
accordingly brought to St. James's. When the factious Members whom the Army had
licensed to sit, proceeded to constitute a Court for the Trial of the King,
giving it the specious name of the High Court of Justice; which said Court they
empowered to convene, hear, judge, and execute Charles Stuart King of England.
These proceedings the House of Lords detested, so did the Parliament of
Scotland, the Judges of the Land affirmed it to be contrary to the known Laws
and Customs of England, for the King to be brought to Trial; and the
Presbyterian Ministers did both publicly and privately dissuade them from this
horrid action, though all in vain. And the more to animate the Kings Judges in
their illegal proceedings, that Pulpit-Jester Hugh Peter's preached before them
on that Text, Psalm. 149.8, To bind their Kings in chains, etc. such honor have
all his Saints; when he assured them, that they were the Saints there meant,
often in his profane Sermon calling them the Saint Judges; and professed, that
he had for a certain found upon a strict scrutiny, that there were in the Army
5000 Saints, no less holy than those that now conversed in Heaven with God
Almighty. Afterward kneeling in his Pulpit, weeping and lifting up his hands,
he earnestly begged them in the name of the People of England, that they would
execute justice upon that wretch Charles, and would not let Benhadad escape in
safety, etc.

January the 20th. his Majesty was brought before the High Court of Justice in
Westminster Hall, where he boldly and cheerfully took the Seat prepared for
him, and the Charg^ was re^d against him with all those reproachful terms of
Tyrant, Traitor, and Murderer, and impleaded in the name of all the People of
England. But General Fairfax his Lady from a Scaffold adjoining, cried with a
loud voice, That not half the People of England were guilty of that crime, but
that 'twas by means of that Traitor Cromwell that this wickedness was done. The
King alleged to the Court that he could not make his defense, unless they
first produced their Authority for the trial of him their King, which they not
being able to do, (except that of the Sword) remanded him to the place of his
captivity.

January the 22d. the High Court of Justice met again, when the King being
brought to the Bar, Solicitor Cook required that he might be put upon it,
either to give in his positive answer, or else that the charge against him upon
his refusal to plead, might be taken for confessed. The substance of which
Charge was, That he the said Charles Stuart King of England had been the
Occasion, Author and Contriver of the Wars, and therein was guilty of all the
Treasons, Murders, Rapines, Burnings, Spoils, Desola^io^s, damage and mischief
to this Nation, acted or committed in the Wars, or occasioned thereby. To the
Charge, President Bradshaw required the Kings answer; but his Majesty firmly
persisting in the disowning of their Authority, and offering to give reasons
why he could not own their Court, the Court was adjourned to the next day.

January the 23d. the King was again brought before his fictitious Judges, when
he was again pressed to give in his reasons why he could not own their
Authority; alleging, that to own this new Court was against the Privileges of
the People, and the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom: whereupon the President
commanded the Clerk to record the default, and the Guard to take back the
Prisoner, which was accordingly done.

January the 27th. his Majesty was again brought to the Bar, where he still
refused to own their illegal Court, but said he had some matters conducing to
the good of the People, which he desired to have liberty to speak before the
Members of both Houses, which the Court would by no means yield unto, but
commanded the Clerk to read the Sentence against him, which was, That whereas
the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, have appointed them a High
Court of Justice for the Trying of Charles Stuart King of England, before whom
he had been three times convened, and at the first time a Charge of High
Treason, and other crimes and misdemeanors was read in behalf of England, etc.
To which Charge the said Charles Stuart refused several times to answer, etc.
for all which Treasons and crimes mentioned in the Charge, this Court does
adjudg the said Charles Stuart as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and public
enemy, to be put to death, by severing his Head from his Body. This Sentence
being read, the Members of the Court approved it by holding up their hands. His
Majesty offered to speak after the Sentence, which Bradshaw would not suffer
him to do, but commanded him to be taken away; when in his passing along, the
Soldiers reviled him with many irreverent taunts, blew their stinking Tobacco
into his face, which they knew to be very distasteful to him, and one or two
more barbarous than the rest, spit in his face, the good King wiping it off
again, and saying, My Savior suffered far more than this for me. And when the
rude Soldiers, instructed by their Commanders, cried out, Justice, Justice,
Execution, Execution; this pious King pitied their blindness, saying, Poor
souls! for a piece of money they would do as much for their Commanders. Such as
pulled off their Hats, or bowed to him, as he was carrying back to his
imprisonment, the Soldiers beat with their fists and weapons, and knocked down
one dead, but for saying, God be merciful unto him.

January the 28th. this right Christian King was guarded from Whitehall to St.
James's, where Dr. Juxon Bishop of London preached before him on these words.
In the day when God shall judge the secrets of all men by Jesus Christ,
according to my Gospel, Romans 2.16.

January the 29th. the Lady Elizabeth and Duke of Gloucester being admitted to
take their last Farewell of their condemned Father; his Majesty after he had
given his blessing to the Princess Elizabeth, bad her tell her Brother James
whenever she should see him, that 'twas his Fathers last desire, That he should
no more look upon Charles as his Eldest Brother only, but be obedient to him as
his Sovereign, and that they should love one the other, and forgive their
Fathers enemies. He also bad her to read Bishop Andrews Sermons, Hooker 's
Ecclesiastical Policy, and Bishop Laud against Fisher, which would ground her
against Popery; wished her not to grieve for him, for he should die a glorious
death, it being for the Laws and Liberties of the Land, and for maintaining the
Protestant Religion. Bad her tell her Mother, That his thoughts had never
strayed from her, and that his love should be the same unto the last. Then gave
her his Blessing, bidding her to send his Blessing to the rest of her Brothers
and Sisters, and commendations to all his friends. To the Duke of Gloucester he
said, He heard the Army intended to make him King, but that he told him he must
not accept so long as his two Elder Brothers were living, commanded him to fear
the Lord, and he would provide for him.

Tuesday January the 30th. in the morning, the Bishop of London read Divine
Service in his Majesty's presence, when the 27th. Chapter of St. Mathew's
Gospel, the History of our Saviors Crucifixion fell out to be the second
Lesson. After Morning-prayer, the King received the Sacrament, and performed
private Devotions in preparation to his Passion; which being ended, about Ten
of the Clock this most Christian King was brought from St. James's to Whitehall
by a Regiment of Foot, and a private Guard of Partisans, the Bishop on one hand
of him, and Colonel Thomlinson (who had the charge of him) on the other, both
bare headed. His Majesty walked very fast, and bad them go faster: thus saying,
That he now went before them to strive for an Heavenly Crown with less
solicitude, than he had often encouraged his Soldiers to fight for an Earthly
Diadem. Being come into the Cabinet-Chamber in Whitehall, where he used to
lodge, he there passed the time for near two hours in his Devotion, about Twelve
he eat a bit of bread, and drank a glass of Clarret; and toward One, Col.
Hacker with other Officers and Soldiers brought him through the
Banqueting House, and through a Window of that upon a Scaffold which was hung
with Black. Diverse Companies of Foot, and Troops of Horse were placed on each
side of the Street, which hindered the approach of the very numerous spectators;
therefore the King directed his Speech chiefly to Col. Thomlinson, therein
declaring his innocence, how that he began not the War with his two Houses of
Parliament, calling God to witness that he never intended to incroach upon
their privileges, but they began upon him; and that he believed that ill
instruments betwixt him and them had been the cause of all the bloodshed. Then
acknowledged Gods Judgments to be just upon himself in suffering an unjust
sentence to pass upon him, for that he had suffered an unjust sentence to be
executed upon another (meaning upon the Earl of Strafford.) Then declared
himself to be a good Christian, having forgiven all the World, and even those
in particular, who ever they were, that had been the chief causers of his
death; desiring God to forgive them, and that they might repent of that great
sin; praying with St. Stephen, that this might not be laid to their charge; and
wished they might take the right way for the peace of the Kingdom, which was,
he said, by giving God his due in regulating rightly his Church according to
the Scriptures. By giving the King his due, being directed by the Laws of the
Land. By giving the people their due, in having Government under those Laws, by
which their lives and goods might be most their own, and not be subject to an
Arbitrary power; for the opposing of which, said he, it is, that I am brought
to the Scaffold: for if said he, I would have given way to an Arbitrary power,
or way to have all Laws changed according to the power of the Sword, I need not
to have come here; and therefore I tell you (and pray God it be not laid to
your charge) that I am the Martyr of the People. Then he declared he died a
Christian according to the Profession of the Church of England, as he found it
left him by his Father. After this he discoursed with the Bishop, to whom he
gave his George to be sent to the Prince; then preparing himself for the Block,
he said, I have a good cause, and a gracious God on my side, I go from a
corruptible to an incorruptible Crown, where is no disturbance, no disturbance
in the world. Then having said a few words to himself, as he stood with hands
and eyes lift up, he laid his neck upon the Block, and after a short pause,
stretching forth his hands, the Vizarded Executioner at one blow severed his
Royal Head from his Body. Whose blood was taken up by several persons for
different ends, by some as Trophies of their Villainy, by others as ^^licks of a
Martyr. His Corpse embalmed and wrapped in Lead, was conveyed to Windsor by some
of his Servants. And February the 9th. 1648. was there Interred in the
Chappel-Royal, by the Duke of Richmond, Marquess of Hartford, Earls of
Southampton and Lindsey, and the Bishop of London.

A Prince he was very temperate, chaste, humble, affectionate to his People,
eloquent, notwithstanding some small hesitation in his utterance; exceeding in
fortitude and patience; most devout in, and constant to his Religion. His Issue
were, first Charles-James, who died almost as soon as born; Charles the Second
whom God preserve: James Duke of York, Henry Duke of Gloucester born July 8th.
1640, Mary born the 4th. of November 1631, Elizabeth born the 28 of December
1635, Anne born March the 7th. 1636, Katharine Henrietta Maria born June the
16th. 1644, In his troubles he composed an excellent Book entitled, Eikon
Basilicon; he had begun the repairing of St. Paul's at London; he built that
famous Ship called the Royal Sovereign, whose burden was 1636 Tuns, her length
127 foot, her breadth within the Planks 46 foot, her depth from the breadth 19
foot, carrying 100 piece of Ordinances wanting four; her Lanthorn so large that
ten men might stand in it; her building cost Eighty thousand pounds.

An. Dom. 1625, was a great Plague at London, whereof died within the Bills of
Mortality 41313.

A. D. 1632, and February the 11th. happened a great Fire on London-Bridg.

1635, Thomas Parre died, being aged 152 years, and was buried in the
Abby-Church at Westminster.

The Names of the Regicides who sat when Judgment was for murdring the King,
were Sergeant John Bradshaw President of the Court, Oliver Cromwell, Henry
Ireton, Thomas Lord Gray of Groby, John Danvers, Hardress Waller, Thomas
Maleverer, John Bourchier, William Counstable, Michael Livesey, Gregory Norton,
Knights: John Lisle, William Say, William Hechingham, John Blakestone, Gilbert
Millington, Cornelius Holland, John Carew, Miles Corbet, Francis Allen,
Peregrin Pelham, Humphrey Edwards, Gregory Clement, Thomas Wogan, Thomas Scot,
William Cawley, Anthony Stapely, Nicholas Love, Augustine Garland, John
Dixwell, Simon Main, Daniel Blagrave, Esquires, Valentine Walton, Thomas
Harrison, Edward Whaley, Thomas Pride, Isaac Ewer, Henry Marten, William
Purefoy, John Berkstead, Edmund Ludlow, John Hutchinson, Robert Tichburn, Owen
Roe, Robert Lilburn, Adrian Scrope, Richard Dean, John Okey, John Hewson,
William Goffe, John Jones, John Moor, John Alured, Henry Smith, Edmund Harvey,
John Venne, John Downs, Thomas Horton, Thomas Hammond, George Fleetwood, James
Temple, Thomas Wait, Colonels: Isaac Pennington, and Thomas Andrews Aldermen of
London: Vincent Potter, and Peter Temple: Officers belonging to the High Court
of Injustice, were Dr. Dorislaus, Ask, William Steel (who excused himself by
sickness) John Cook Solicitor, Dendy Mace-bearer, Broughton, and Phelps Clerks,
Isaac King Crier, Woolfred, Pain, Radley, Powell, Hull, Messengers and
Door-keepers, forty of these men of blood. The Warrant for the Kings Execution
was directed to Colonel Francis Hacker, Colonel Huncks, and Lieutenant Colonel
Phayre, to see it done. But who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords
Anointed and be guiltless? Sam. 26.9. My Son, says the wise man, Fear thou the
Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change, for their
calamity shall rise suddenly.

Mayors and Sheriffs of London in his Reign.
In his first year 1625. Sir Allen Cotton was Mayor. Thomas Westraw, Ellis
Crisp, died. Jo. Pool, and Christopher Cletherow, after Sheriffs.


In his second year 1626. Sir Cuthbert Hacket was Mayor. Edward Bromfeild,
Richard Fenn, Sheriffs.


In his third Year 1627. Sir Hugh Hamersley was Mayor. Maurice Abbot, Henry
Garraway, Sheriffs.


In his fourth Year 1628. Sir Richard Dean was Mayor. Rowland Backhouse,
William Acton Knight and Baronet, Sheriffs.


In his fifth Year 1629. Sir James Cambell was Mayor. Humphrey Smith, Edmund
Wright, Sheriffs.


In his sixth Year 1630. Sir Robert Ducie, Bar. was Mayor. Arthur Abdy,
Robert Cambell, Sheriffs.


In his seventh Year 1631. Sir George Whitmore was Mayor. Samuel Cranmore,
Henry Prat, Sheriffs.


In his eighth Year 1632. Sir Nicholas Raynton was Mayor. Hugh Perry, Henry
Andrews, Sheriffs.


In his ninth Year 1633. Sir Ralph Freeman, and Sir Tho. Moulston, Mayor.
Gilbert Harrison, Richard Gurney, Sheriffs.


In his tenth Year 1634. Sir Robert Parkhurst was Mayor. John Heylord, John
Cordell, Sheriffs.


In his eleventh Year 1635. Sir Christopher Cletherow was Mayor. Thomas Soame,
John Gayer, Sheriffs.


In his twelfth Year 1636. Sir Edward Bromfeild was Mayor. William Abell. John
Garrat, Sheriffs.


In his thirteenth Year 1637. Sir Richard Fenn was Mayor. Thomas Atkin, Edward
Rudge. Sheriffs.


In his fourteenth Year 1638. Sir Maurice Abot was Mayor. Isaac Pennington,
John VVollaston, Sheriffs.


In his fifteenth Year 1639. Sir Henry Garraway was Mayor. Thomas Adams, John
Warner, Sheriffs.


In his sixteenth Year 1640* Sir Edmund Wright was Mayor. John Towse, Abraham
Reynardson, Sheriffs.


In his seventeenth Year 1641. Sir Richard Gurney was Mayor. George Garret,
George Clarke, Sheriffs.


In his eighteenth Year 1642. Isaac Pennington was Mayor. John Langham, Thomas
Andrews, Sheriffs.


In his nineteenth Year 1643. Sir John VVollaston was Mayor. John Fowke, James
Bunce, Sheriffs.


In his twentieth Year 1644. Thamas Atkin was Mayor. William Gibbs, Richard
Chambers, Sheriffs.


In his one and twentieth Year 1645. Thomas Adams was Mayor. John Kendrick,
Thomas Foot, Sheriffs.


In his two and twentieth Year. Sir John Gayer was Mayor. Thomas Cullam, Simon
Edmonds, Sheriffs.


In his three and twentieth Year 1647. Sir John Warner was Mayor. Samuel
Avery, John Bide, Sheriffs.


In his four and twentieth Year 1648. Sir Abraham Reynardson was Mayor. Thomas
Vyner, Richard Brown, Sheriffs.


Thomas Andrews Mayor, in room of Reynardson, sent to the Tower.

CHARLES the Second.
A. D. 1648
JAnuary the 30th, Charles the Second was then in Holland when his Father King
Charles the First was murdered; and that tail of a Parliament sitting at
Westminster were resolved instead of admitting him the lawful Heir unto the
Government of England, to assume it unto themselves. To which end, they first
set forth a Proclamation, That no person whatsoever should presume to proclaim
or any way to promote Charles Stuart Son of Charles Stuart, late King of
England, or any other person, to be King or chief Magistrate of these Kingdoms,
but he that should attempt any such thing should be adjudged a Traitor. After
this they voted the House of Lords to be useless and dangerous, and Kingly
Government to be unnecessary and burdensome, and therefore they abolished
both. Howbeit the Marquess of Ormond caused his Majesty to be publicly
proclaimed King in Ireland, and the Scotch Parliament did the like in Scotland.
But the Members at Westminster having a Victorious Army on their side,
proceeded to establish their Projects, caused all public Writings to be issued
out in the name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England by Authority of
Parliament; ordering a new great Seal to be made with the Cross and Harp on one
side, and this Inscription, The great Seal of England; on the other side the
picture of the House of Commons, with this Inscription, In the first year of
freedom by Gods blessing restored 1648. And afterward they appointed that all
moneys to be coined, should be stamped with the Cross and Harp on one side, and
the Cross on the other, with this Motto, The Commonwealth of England, God with
us. And instead of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, they imposed an
Engagement upon the people, To be true and faithful to the Commonwealth, as it
was then established without King or House of Lords. A Council of State they
constituted by the name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, consisting
of forty persons, who were to have the executive part of the Government. Thus
was Englands ancient Government soon changed by about 50 persons who styled
themselves a Parliament, and the Representative body of England. The maxim upon
which they grounded these their alterations, and all other their illegal
proceeds, was this, That all power and authority is originally in the people;
and that they were the peoples Representative. When this Junto had made such a
module of Government, they erected another High Court of Injustice for the
trial of Duke Hamilton, as Earl of Cambridge, of the Earls of Holland and
Norwich, the Lord Capel, and Sir John Owen, all which were condemned to die for
engaging in their Sovereign's cause; but the Earl of Norwich and Sir John Owen
were reprieved, the other three were beheaded in the Palace-yard at
Westminster, March the 9th The ever loyal Lord Capel in his speech on the
Scaffold declared, that he died against the Justice of the known Laws of the
Land, and for no other cause than his asserting the Fifth Commandment; prayed
heartily for the King, for his restoration, long life and prosperity; shutting
up his Speech with a profession of his cheerfulness in forgiving his Enemies.
Other good Subjects they put to death in other places of the Nation, Lieutenant
Colonel Morris, Mr. Beaumont a Minister, Major Monday and Cornet Blackburn. And
many were the loyal persons that were now proscribed, and had their Estates
confiscated, as the Marquess of Newcastle, Earl of Bristol, the Lords
Cottington, Widdrington, Culpepper, Byron, Sir Edward Hide, Sir Philip
Musgrave, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, Sir Richard Greenvill, with others. And all
that had been in actual Arms for the King, or other service, were forced to
compound for their Estates if they had any, to the great impoverishing of the
Royal party.

A. D. 1649, and April the 7th, The Members at Westminster, for the better
supply of their Army, and taking away of free quarter, passed an Act for the
levying of 90000 l. a Month upon England for six months. Then took into
consideration the sale of Dean and Chapters Lands.

May the 15th, diverse Troops of the Army for mutinying were surprised by
Fairfax at Burford, where some few of the Ringleaders were shot to death, and
the rest disbanded. There were of that party a people called Levellers, who in
those times of distraction would have all things in the Commonwealth ordered
according to their wild humors; and yet all their cry was for the Liberties of
freeborn English men.

About this time Dr. Dorislaus, whom the disloyal Members had sent over as
their Agent into Holland, was there slain by Colonel Whitford a Scotch man; and
not long after one Ascham another of their Agents sent into Spain, was there
slain by one Sparks.

May the 30th, in the City of London, England was proclaimed a Free State. And
June the 13th the House ordered that no ceremony should be used to the Kings
Children, the Duke of Gloucester and Lady Elizabeth then in the Junto's custody.

In Ireland the Kings Lieutenant the Marquess of Ormond in order to promote the
Kings cause there, concluded a peace with the Irish, and June the 22d he
besieged the City of Dublin; but August the 2d Colonel Michael Jones with his
whole strength, being betwixt 8 and 9000, sallied out upon the besiegers who
were 19000 Horse and Foot, and routed them totally, slew of them about 3000,
took Prisoners 2517, took all the Marquess's train of Artillery and Ammunition,
and a very rich booty in the Camp. August the 16th, Oliver Cromwell landed with
his forces at Dublin, and after a short stay there, marched with great
expedition against Tredagh, or Drogedah, where Sir Arthur Ashton was Governor;
the defendants of that Town did bravely behave themselves, howbeit Oliver
gained it by storm, giving strict order to his Soldiers, that they should
afford quarter neither to Man, Woman, or Child, but should kill all. He vowed
to one of his Commanders, That he would sacrifice their bodies to the souls of
the English men they had formerly murdered. Next Oliver besieged Wexford, which
through the treachery of one Strafford, was yielded: And shortly after this,
many engarisoned places were reduced, by Olivers forces. The Plantation of
Virginia, that had refused subjection to the new Republic of England, was
forced to a conformity by Sir George Ayscoughs Fleet.

October 23, Mr. John Lilbourn, the Leader of the Levelling party, one that had
wit enough, but of a thwarting, turbulent spirit, was tried at Guildhall in
London, for writing against the Members at Westminster and their Council of
State; but he so well pleaded his case, and had so lucky a Jury, that he was
quit in despite of his Judges.

About this time Prince Rupert, the King's Admiral, was distressed and put to his
shifts by the Junto's Fleet, losing most of his Ships, with his Brother Prince
Maurice, who was then cast away.

A. D. 1650. In the beginning of this year, the truly Loyal and Magnanimous
Marquess of Momross was defeated in Scotland by Major General Straughorn; the
Marquess himself by quitting his Horse, and shifting himself into an ordinary,
Highlanders habit, made a shift to escape for the present; his standard was
taken, in which was pourtrayed the Head of King Charles the first lying a
bleeding, and severed from the body, with this Motto, Judge and revenge my
cause, O Lord. The Marquess after some days wandering about in by-places, came
to the Lord of Astons House, a person whom the Marquess had done several
kindnesses for; but this false Scot, whether for fear or lucre, betrayed this
distressed Peer into the hands of his Enemy David Lesley, who sent him to the
City of Edenbrough, where the common Hangman met him at the Towns end, and
first pulled off his Hat, then forced him into a Cart which had a high Chair
placed in it, in which the Marquess was seated, that thereby he might be the
more obnoxious to the scorns of the vulgar. But his noble soul was not at all
dismayed, for God he said, did all the while most comfortably manifest his
presence to him, and furnished him with courage to overlook the reproaches of
men, and to behold him for whose cause he suffered.

After the sentence of Parliament was passed for the bereaving him of his life,
he expressed to them how much he was beholden to them for the honor they had
conferred on him; For, said he, I account it greater honor to have my head
stand on the Prison-gate for my loyalty to my King, than to have my Picture
placed in his Bedchamber; and I wish I had flesh enough, not only to be set up
in four Cities, but to have a piece of it sent to every City in Christendom,
for a testimony of my loyalty to my King and Country.

May the 31st, he was brought to the place of his Execution, where being
mounted on a Scaffold, he told the people, That God does sometimes suffer a
just man to perish in his righteousness, and a wicked man to prosper in his
wickedness; prayed God to forgive his enemies, for he did; declared that what
he had done in that kingdom, was in obedience to the most just commands of his
Sovereign. That he esteemed the late King lived a Saint, and dyed a Martyr,
praying God he might so end as he had done. That he believed never people could
be more happy, than they might in His present Majesty. Gave God thanks that he
went to Heavens Throne with joy, though death looked upon him in its most ugly
shape. Then desired their charity and prayers, concluding thus: I leave my soul
to God, my service to my Prince, my good will to my Friends, and my name and
charity to you all. Then having prayed a while, he received from the
Executioner a cord, whereat hung a Declaration of his fact, to hang about his
neck, which accordingly he hung there, saying, that he thought himself not more
honored by the Garter, than by that Cord and Paper: adding, That if they had
any more dishonor to put upon him, he was ready to accept it. And then with a
cheerful countenance he submitted himself to the execution of the sentence, to
be hanged on a Gallows Thirty foot high, for the space of three hours. Which
being done, he was taken down, and had his head cut off, which was fixed on
Edenborough Talbooth; his quarters were sent to be set up in several places,
and the rest of his mortal part buried under the Gallows.

This may serve for a taste of the rebellious and diabolical spirit of that
malicious Consistory. When this noble Lord first heard of the murder of King
Charles the first, it is said, that with the ^oint of his Sword he wrote: Great,
Good, and Just! could I but rate
My griefs, and thy too rigid fate,
I Would weep the world to such a strain,
That it should deluge once again.
But thy loud-tongu'd blood demands supplies
More from Briareus hands, than Argus eyes,
I Will therefore sing thy obsequies with Trumpet sounds,
And write thy Epitaph with blood and wounds.


Shortly after the death of this Peer an agreement was concluded betwixt the
King and the Scots at Breda, from whence the King went to the Hague, and took
Shipping for Scotland; and at the Spey in the North of that Country, he safely
arrived; hereupon the Members at Westminster fearing lest the Scots should
invade them, resolved to invade Scotland, and to make that the seat of War: in
order to which, they sent for their Idol Cromwell out of Ireland, whom at his
coming to London they made their Capt. General, for Thomas Lord Fairfax laid
down his Commission, as not willing to engage against his Presbyterian Brethren
the Scots.

June the 28th, this new Capt. General Oliver, advanced with his Army toward
Scotland. August the 10th, King Charles the first's Statue in the Royal
Exchange, by order of the Westminster-Members, was defaced, (the Head being
broken off) and this Inscription set over, Exit Tyrannus ultimus Anno
libertatis Angliae restitute primo, Anno 1648, January the 30th. And about the
same time were the Kings Arms ordered to be erazed in all public places; and
in lieu of them the States-Arms (being St. Georges Cross and the Harp) were set
up in Courts of Judicature.

August the 22d. was Col. Eusebius Andrews Beheaded on Towerhill for receiving
a Commission from His Majesty. In Scotland the English Army under Oliver having
made themselves masters of some Garrisons, on September the first marched to
Dunbar, whither the Scotch Army followed them, and pent them up on a neck of
Land not a mile and a half from Sea to Sea; great were the streights of the
English Army at this time; many of the Soldiers being sick and disabled, and
the whole Army shut up as it were in a pound; but these extremities instead of
disheartning them, set the greater edge to their courages, and resolved they
were on September the third 1650, either to force their way through their
enemies, or nobly to dye in the attempt: to which end a party was sent to gain
Coopers Peth-pass from the Scots; which being effected, the whole English Army
charged, and after about an hours hot engagement the Scots Horse were routed,
and thereupon the foot threw down their Arms, and made the best use they could
of their Legs. In the Scots Army was this day near 16000 Foot, and 6000 Horse,
whereof 4000 were slain, and near 10000 taken Prisoners. The English Army were
not above 7500 Foot and 3500 Horse, besides disabled men. There was taken from
the Scots in this fight 27 field Pieces, 10000 Arms, many Prisoners of note,
and near 200 Horse and Foot-Colours, which were afterward hung up as Trophies
in Westminster Hall.

September the 8th. the virtuous Princess Elizabeth died in her Confinement at
Carisbrook Castle in the Isle of Wight. And in August following, the Prince of
Orange died at the Hague in Holland; and sometime after this, the
mock-Parliament to free England of the Royal blood, sent the Duke of Gloucester
to Heidleburgh, ordering him an allowance of 1500 l. per Annum.

October the 8th. some Cavaliers took Arms in Norfolk, for which about twenty
of them were Executed.

December the 24th the strong Castle of Edenbrough was yielded into the English
hands, though not without suspicion of some treachery.

January the first, to begin the New-year, the Scots Crowned His Majesty at
Scoon in Scotland, after he had conceded to some Kirk-conditions. A little
before this time there were three different parties in Scotland: David Lesley
and his Army were for King and Kirk, the Marquess of Montross and his Followers
were for the King without the Kirk: and Colonel Kerre and Straughan were for
the Kirk without the King. Col. Kerries party was routed and himself taken
Prisoner by Col. Lambert; and Straughan and Swinton deserted the Kirk,
complying with the English, for which the Kirk Excommunicated them.

March the 4th. Sir Henry Hide was Beheaded before the Royal Exchange, because
being the Kings Leiger at Constantinople, he had opposed Bendish who was sent
thither by the States of England.

A. D. 1651, and March the 29th. was Captain Brown Bushel, an expert Seaman,
Beheaded under the Scaffold on Tower Hill, for taking part with his Sovereign.

In Ireland the Deputy thereof, Ireton, was very successful against the
Marquess of Ormond, the Lord Inchequin, Marquess Clancard, Earl of Castlehaven,
and other the Kings friends, taking many Garrisons from them; the like did
Oliver in Scotland from the Kings friends there.

Howbeit His Majesty hoping that now at length England might be favorable to
his just Cause, he advances into England by the way of Carlisle with about 16000
men, bending his course by a swift march for the West of England; though it was
hoped by his friends he would have directed his course for London. But August
the 23, the King with his Army entered the City of Worcester, and Cromwell with
all have marched after him, by the way joining with Fleetwood, Desbrough, the
Lord Gray of Groby, Lambert, Harrison, and the Militia-forces of several
Counties; so that his Army when he was come to Worcester, could not amount to
fewer then 80000 men. In Lancashire the Earl of Derby had raised for the King
near 1500 Horse and Foot, against whom Colonel Lilbourn marched, and routed
them, taking many persons of quality; the Earl of Derby himself with much ado
escaped to the King at Worcester, where on that twice fatal, but once Lucky
day, September the 3d, his Majesty being surrounded by his Enemies, resolved to
sally upon them with his whole force; which accordingly he did, and at the
first made the disloyal party retire somewhat disorderly the King himself
performing the part of a Valiant Soldier at the head of his Horse. But at
length his Army being overpowered by the numerous fresh supplies of his
enemies, His Majesty's side was put to the worst, his Horse flying amain
toward the North, and his Foot into Worcester, whither they were followed at
the heels by their Victors, who entered the City with them, which they plundered,
killing and taking most of the Scots Prisoners; those Horse that fled were
pursued, and great part of them taken, and the poor straggling Scots were either
made Prisoners, or killed by the Country People. The number of the Kings party
slain, were judged to be about 3000, and of Prisoners taken in the whole near
10000; amongst whom were Duke Hamilton, the Earls of Shrewsbury, Derby,
Cleveland, Lauderdaile, Rotho, Carnwath, and Kelly, the Lord Synclare, Sir John
Packington, Sir Charles Cunningham, Sir Ralph Clare, Major General Piscotty,
Major General Mountgomery, Colonel Graves, Mr. Fanshaw the Kings Secretary, the
Adjutant General. Marshal General, General of the Ordnance, together with five
Colonels of Horse, 13 of Foot, 17 Lieutenant Colonels, 19 Majors, 109 Captains;
there was also taken 158 Colors, the Kings standard, Coach and Horses, Collar
of SS, and Star-Cloak, with other things of great value; His Majesty through
the good providence of God escaped the hands of his enemies, wandering about
England in disguise for six weeks; at length being transported from a Creek
near Shoram in Sussex to Freccam near Haure de Grace in France, although his
foes made the strictest search for him possible, withal menacing those that
should conceal him, and promising high rewards to those that should discover
him.

A little before this fight at Worcester, diverse persons, many of them
Presbyterian Ministers, were seized on for holding correspondence with Charles
Stuart, (none might, as they loved their lives and estates, call him King) and
on August the 22, were two of them, namely Mr. Christopher Love Minister, and
Mr. Gibbons, beheaded on Tower Hill.

The common Prisoners, Scots and English, taken at Worcester, were sent up to
London; and that they might no further trouble the States of England, they were
transported into Foreign Plantations.

October the 15th, the Earl of Derby was beheaded, and Sir Timothy
Fetherstonhaugh dyed the same death also, for the same crime, viz. for
honoring the King. In short time after the fight of Worcester, the
Mock-Parliament had the welcome news of reducing the Isle of Man, the
Barbados, the Isle of Jersey, and Cornet Castle in Guernsey; but a little to
allay their transport, they had the unwelcome news of the death of their
Admiral Popham, and Ireton their Deputy of Ireland; this last dyed of the
plague under the Walls of Limirick, but was buried in great State in
Westminster-Abby.

All was now in a calm at home, and Scotland and Ireland both almost subjected
to the English States; they therefore in this leisure-time judge it seasonable
to vindicate themselves on the United Netherlands, for the affronts done to
their Ambassadors Oliver St. John, and Walter Strickland, in Holland, and their
incroaching on the English merchants trade, and slighting the English States,
who proffered strict amity and alliance.

Hereupon they prohibited the importing any Foreign Commodities except upon
English bottoms, or such as were of the Country whence the goods came,
beginning withal to stand high upon the claim of dues, and reparations for the
prejudice done the English in their Trading; and when no satisfaction would be
given, but the Dutch grew rather more Lordly, calling into question the English
Sovereignty in the narrow Seas, and refusing to give the English the honor of
the FLAG, the States of England resolved to beat them into better manners. And
in the Year of our Lord, 1652, on May the 19th, was the first Sea Fight between
the States of England and the Netherlands, the fight continued about four
hours, till the night parted them; without much cause of boasting on either
part; that which was, the English had a right to. But shortly after this,
Admiral Blake took twelve Dutch men of War.

August the 16th, Sir George Ayscough with a squadron of seven Ships, charged
through and through the Dutch Fleet, consisting of sixty men of War, in which
Encounter Captain Pack was slain.

September the fifth, as the French Fleet (who took part with the Dutch) were
going to the relief of Dunkirk, most of them were taken by General Blake; and
about the conclusion of the same month, the Dutch were banged to purpose by
Blake, at a place called the Kentish-Knock, and were pursued by the English
into their very Harbor. But in the beginning of Winter, Blake was worsted by
the Dutch in the Downs, losing the Garland, Bonadventure, and two Merchantmen.
Upon the 18, 19, and 20th. days of February, the two Fleets fought again, when
the Dutch were forced to fly, the English taking fifty-two of their
Merchantmen they had in Convoy, and nine men of War.

A. D. 1653, and April the 20th, Oliver Cromwell took upon him to put a period
to the fitting of those long winded-Members at Westminster, objecting to them
when he came to displace them, That they delayed, if not utterly neglected the
redressing of public Grievances; that they designed their own interest, and
perpetuating themselves; therefore they were to sit there no longer. Instead of
these Members turned out of doors, Oliver and his Officers constituted a
Council of State to rule the Commonwealth, though they resolved to rule the
Council of State.

June the 2d the English and Dutch Fleets engaged again in Fight, when at the
very first shot made by the Dutch, General Richard Dean was slain. June the 3d
the Fleets joined again, and the dispute was very hot and bloody, till at
length the Dutch tacked about, and made haste to their own Coasts. Of the Dutch
were taken Prisoners six Captains, 1350 others, Eleven men of War were taken,
and two Hoys, six of their best Ships were sunk, and two blown up. Of the
English were slain besides Admiral Dean, one Captain, and a hundred and twenty
others, but not one Ship lost or disabled.

Cromwell this while, with some of the leading Officers of the Army, had made
choice of certain persons, not above 150 for the three Nations, who were to
have the Legislative power, and to be styled a Parliament. These
Parliament-Gentlemen and Soldiers of the new-fashioned Election, met July the
4th. at Westminster, where they chose Mr. Rouse for their Speaker; but not
agreeing amongst themselves (for about sixty of them contested hard for the
taking away of Tithes from the Ministers as Antichristian) they fairly
re-delivered their power into Oliver's hands, December the twelfth, after they
had Enacted a Law, That Justices of the Peace and not Ministers should join
persons together in sacred Wedlock.

But while this cunning thing called a Parliament, was doing little, or little
to the purpose, the active Dutch were again put forth to Sea with about 120 Men
of War, and before the Texel were Encountered by the English, July 29th, the
Fight was vigorously maintained on both parts, till the Dutch Admiral Van
Trump, fighting in the midst of the English Fleet, was with a Musket Shot shot
into the left-Pap, and slain outright, whereby the rest of their Fleet was so
discouraged, that they made to the Texel as speedily as they could. The Dutch
in this Fight lost 30 Men of War, and about 1200 of their Men were taken. The
English had slain on their part, Graves, Owen, Chapman, Newman, Tailor, Crisp,
Cox and Peacock, Captains, and 400 common Seamen. The Ship named the Oak was
fired, and two or three disabled. For this eminent piece of service, the little
Parliament ordered that Chains of Gold should be presented to the Admirals
Blake, and Col. George Monk, Vice Admiral Pen, and Rear-Admiral Lawson; and
that other Chains likewise should be presented to diverse Flag-Captains, and
Medals of Silver to the Officers of the Fleet.

But to return to Oliver, who after his patcht Junto had dissolved themselves,
called a Council of Officers, with some others of his Creatures, to consult
about the settlement of a Government, and these at length, after great
pretenses of seeking Gods mind herein, concluded to have a single person again
to be the head of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging. And was accordingly installed
with much formality and ceremony, in the Chancery-Court at Westminster, before
the Judges, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, with the chief Officers of
the Army, on December the 16th. Immediately after which, all public Writings
changed their style from that of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, to
that of Oliver Lord Protector of England, etc. And the City of London to
manifest their good liking of this Government and Governor (at least to make
show of it) invited the Protector to a magnificent Feast at Grocers-Hall on
Febr. 8. and Oliver to gratify them for this favor, Knighted Thomas Viner
then Lord Mayor.

Aspiring Cromwell having thus obtained the Supreme Authority, in short time
yielded to a peace with the Dutch, who had been brought exceeding low with the
War with England.

A. D. 1654. and in the Month of May, upon an accusation of a Plot to destroy
the Protector, seize the Tower, raise an Army, and bring in the King, there
were diverse Royalists apprehended and committed to prison, three of whom were
condemned by an High Court of Injustice, and two of them Executed, namely Col.
John Gerrard who was Beheaded on Towerhill, and Mr. Vowel who was hanged at
Charing Cross; on the same day with Col. Gerrard was Beheaded Don Pantaleon Sa,
Brother to the Portugal Ambassador, for a Riot made in the New Exchange; but
death was so terrible to this person, that his heart was nigh quite dead within
him before his neck came to the Block.

September the third, a pretended Parliament met at Westminster, where after
they had heard their Master Oliver's Speech, and chose William Lenthall for
their Speaker, they debated, Whether the Legislative power should be in a
single person and a Parliament, or in a Parliament only. The Protector's
faction were for the former; those called the Commonwealth-party, that were for
a Democratical Government, were for the latter; one declaring, That as God had
made him an Instrument in cutting down Tyranny in one person, so now he would
not endure to see the Nations Liberties shackled by another, whose right to the
Government could be measured out no other way than by the length of his Sword.
But when these things were reported to the Usurper Oliver, he hasted from
Whitehall to Westminster, and there declares to his Parliament, that he would
have them to take notice of this, That the same Government made him a
Protector, as made them a Parliament: That as they were entrusted with some
things, so was he with others: That there were certain Fundamentals which could
not be altered: as, That the Government should be in a single person and
Parliament: That Parliament's should not be perpetual: That in Religious
matters there should be liberty of Conscience, etc. And then he enjoined them
to sign this Recognition of the Government, viz. I do hereby promise and engage
to be true and faithful to the Lord Protector and Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and shall not (according to the tenor of the Indenture,
whereby I am returned to serve in Parliament) propose or give my consent to
alter the Government as it is settled in one person and a Parliament. The
subscription to this was refused by several Members; the rest who subscribed it
were permitted to sit till January the 24th, 1654, at which time Oliver
dissolved them, because they delayed to settle him in the Government.

December the 19th. Pen and Venables with a Fleet of thirty Ships, wherein were
three thousand forces, put to Sea, and in April following arrived at
Hispaniola, and came within sight of that Golden Town Sancta Domingo, upon
which their first and chief enterprise was designed; but through the excessive
heat of the Clime, want of fresh water, and some other discouragements, great
numbers of the Soldiers perished, and that design was fruitless; therefore they
set sail for the Island Jamaica; where being arrived, they were there so
successful, as in short time to possess themselves of the chief Town called
Ottranto, bringing the whole Island into subjection.

In England the Royal party were busy to take down the Protector's Greatness;
but the Plot was discovered before it was ripe for execution, and many of the
Conspirators in several places seized on by the Olivarians. At Salisbury, March
the 11th. a party of about 200 Cavaliers were in Arms, but were dispersed, and
some of their chief Leaders taken, as Mr. Grove, Lieutenant Colonel Penruddock,
Major Dean, Jones, etc. Others there were in Arms about Shrewsbury,
Sherwood-Forest in Northumberland, and another party in Yorkshire, where Sir
Henry Slingsby was taken: Lieutenant Colonel Penruddock, and Mr. Grove, were
beheaded at Salisbury, and some others of them were hanged.

A. D. 1655. about the beginning of this year Admiral Blake with his Fleet
performed a daring piece of service at Tunis, where demanding from the Dye or
Governor of Tunis reparation for the losses the English sustained from Turkish
Pirates, and having a scornful answer returned, he boldly pressed upon their
Ships lying under the Castle of Goletta, and there burnt nine Ships with but
the loss of 25 men; in the mean time plying continued Broadsides upon the
Castle within Musket Shot of it.

In England the Protector constituted a new kind of Officers called
Major-Generals, who were each of them (being eleven in number) in their several
limits assigned them to supervise the actions of the poor Royalists, and to
decimate their Estates, and indeed to do what they listed; but these after they
had tyranized a while, were laid aside.

February the 16th. did the Spaniard at Dunkirk declare open War against
England, and immediately thereupon was a Peace concluded betwixt France and
England, one of the Articles of which was. That the King of France should
exclude Charles Stuart (King of England) and all his Relations and Adherents
out of his Dominions, and accordingly the Duke of York was Complemented to
depart France by such a time; nor was his Retinue to stay after him; had his
Majesty himself been there, he must have expected the same dealing.

February the 21. died that Learned Prelate Dr. Usher A. B. of Armagh, and was
buried in Westminster Abbey.

A. D. 1656, To begin this year well for fortunate Oliver, some of his Fleet
under the Admirals Blake and Mountague, not far from Cades or Cales, set upon a
Fleet of eight Spaniards, one of which they sunk, two burnt, one run ashore,
and two the English took, one whereof had a great quantity of Plate and
Cochenel in her, the other laden chiefly with Hides.

September the 17th. another of Oliver's Parliaments assembled at Westminster,
where before they were admitted to enter the House, they must severally engage
not to act any thing prejudicial to the present Government; whereupon some of
them returned home, the rest entering the House, chose Sir Thomas Widdrington
their Speaker, and set themselves to act suitably to Oliver's wishes, passing
an Act for renouncing and disannulling the title of Charles Stuart unto the
Government of the Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc. and making it
to be treason against the Protector, as it formerly had been against the Kings
person; then ordained moneys to be raised in the three Nations for paying the
Armies. And ordered a years rent to be paid the Protector for every House built
upon a new foundation within ten miles of the City of London.

Yet notwithstanding the provision made to secure the Protector's person, there
were diverse attempts made to kill him, and a printed paper was published,
entitled, Killing no Murder. One Miles Sindercomb formerly a Soldier in the
Army, had determined to shoot, or by one means or other to rid the world of
him; but his design being betrayed, he was condemned to be hanged and
quartered; to prevent which he procured his own death, it is said, by snuffing
up a poisonous powder into his head; wherefore as a self-murderer he was dragged
at a Horses-tail from the Tower to Towerhill, where being turned naked into a
hole, a stake spiked with iron was driven through him.

A. D. 1657. This year commenced with a Conspiracy of Fifth-Monarchists to have
pulled down Oliver; but the Plot was discovered, and the Projectors
apprehended; the chief of whom was Major General Harrison, Vice Admiral Lawson,
Col. Rich, Major Danvers, and Captain Venner; their Standard which they had in
readiness, had pourtraied in it a Lion couchant Gules in a field Argent, with
this Motto, Who shall rouse him?

April the 20th, Admiral Blake performed another notable exploit, for at Sancta
Cruz in Teneriffa, the chief Island of the Canaries, and belonging to the
Spaniards, he fired and sunk 16 great Ships, among which was the Admiral,
Vice Admiral, and Rear-Admiral, and two or three Gallions; the Spaniards
besides the loss of their whole Fleet, had many hundreds of men slain on the
shore; yet in this notable Action, the English had but 48 men slain, and 120
wounded; the Protector to gratify the Admiral for this his brave service, sent
him a Diamond Ring worth 500 l, and Captain Richard Strainer who led the first
squadron, was at his coming into England for this and his other good service at
Cadiz, honored with Knighthood.

And now the Parliament, who had been long debating concerning the settling of
his Highness, at last present him with a certain thing called, The humble
Petition and Advice, desiring him to take the government of the three Nations
upon him, with the style of King; which style he refused, as foreseeing this
would disgust the Sectarists generally; therefore contented himself with the
Power Royal, and his old style of Lord Protector, which the Parliament
confirmed. And June the 26th, his Highness was with great State and
Magnificence installed in his Office of Protector in Westminster Hall; where
the Speaker in the name of the Parliament, presented him with a Robe of
Purple-Velvet, lined with Ermine, a Sword, a large Bible richly gilt and
bossed, and a Scepter of Gold. And when the Speaker, Earl of Warwick, and Sir
Bulstrode Whitlock had vested Oliver, then the Speaker administered the Oath to
him in these following words: I do in the presence and by the name of Almighty
God, promise and swear that to the utmost of my power, I will uphold and
maintain the true reformed Protestant Religion, in the purity thereof, as it is
contained in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, and encourage
the profession and professors thereof, and that to the utmost of my power, I
will endeavor as chief Magistrate of these three Nations, the maintenance and
preservation of the peace and safety, and just Rights and Privileges of the
People thereof, and shall in all things according to my best knowledge and
power, govern the People according to Law. This Oath being taken by him, he was
immediately proclaimed Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. And
that done, some Soldiers and others cried, God save the Lord Protector. Oliver
thus established in his mightiness by Parliment, he falls to fashion his family
after the manner of a Kings Court, has his Yeomen of the Guard in their livery
of gray Cloth, welted with black Velvet; over whom commanded Walter
Strickland; His Lord Keeper was Nathaniel Fines; and Lord Chamberlain, Sir
Gilbert Pickering, etc. And the better to strengthen himself at home, and to
raise his Family into esteem, he gave his eldest Son a Command in the Army, his
younger Son he made Lord Deputy of Ireland; his two younger Daughters that were
not yet disposed of in marriage, he matched the elder of them with Mr. Robert
Rich the Earl of Warwicks Grandson, and the youngest with a person of great
Honor. And that he might be as King-like as possible, and withal check the
Commons in Parliment, he constituted an Upper House of Parliament instead of
the House of Lords, 62 in number. most of them his own creatures; amongst whom
were Colonel Hewson, one by trade next kin to a Cobbler; and Colonel Pride,
formerly a Brewers servant; who before this had been made two of his knights
errants. And to honor his Mushrooms, he elected to set in his Upper House some
few Noble men, as the Earl of Warwick, etc.

February the 20th, the Parliment that had been adjourned, now reassembled; but
because they admitted those Members to sit with them, who at first refused to
subscribe to Olivers Instruments; and because they questioned the Protectors
power in erecting his Upper House, (which in contempt they called the other
House) Oliver hereupon sent for them to his Upper House Bar, where he made a
large speech to them, and in conclusion told them, That it did concern as well
the peace and tranquillity of the Nation, as his own interest, to terminate that
Parliament, and therefore he did at this time put an end to their sitting,
February the fourth.

A. D. 1658. This Year began with a discovery of a most horrible Plot, as
Oliver called it, and indeed he had an excellent Art for the discovery of
Plots, having his mercenary trepans and instruments of falsehood, who
counterfeiting themselves forward Royallists, thereby insinuated themselves
into the Counsel of the Kings friends, and then betrayed them. And the King
himself was troubled with one of these false Creatures about his own person;
for Captain Manning, one of his Secretaries Clerks, was taken in the very act
of receiving Letters from Thurloe Olivers Secretary, for the which he was
instantly Shot to death. But the Loyal Confederates in the late discovered
Plot, were diverse of them apprehended, as Dr. Hewit, Colonel Edward Ashton, Mr.
Mordant, the Earl of Peterboroughs Brother, and others, who were indicted of
High Treason for endeavoring to levy War against his Highness and the
Government, and to promote Charles Stuart to the Government of these Nations,
and for holding correspondency with the said Charles Stuart. Mr. Mordant was
acquitted; but Dr. Hewit, and Sir Henry Slingsby were beheaded on Tower Hill
June the eighth, though many endeavors were used by diverse persons of quality,
and Ministers, for the saving of their lives, especially the Doctors; Colonel
Ashton and others were hanged and quartered in London.

Near about this time there came up the Thames, as far as Greenwich, a Whale of
a very great length and bigness.

June the 25th, the Town of Dunkirk was surrendered by the Spaniards to the
French, who immediately resigned it to the English forces, which had been the
main instrument in gaining it; this resignation was made according to former
Articles agreed upon between the King of France and Lord Protector of England.

But whilst the English were rejoicing abroad, Oliver had occasion of sorrow at
home; for his most dearly beloved Daughter Mrs. Elizabeth Claypole, on August
the eighth departed this Life, whose body was interred in the Royal Chapel at
Westminster. It Is said of this Gentlewoman, that she was much troubled at the
harsh usage of the Royal party, and that upon her knees she begged of her Father
to save Dr. Hewits life; but his hard heart would not yield thereto, though he
loved this Daughter so passionately, that he never enjoyed himself after her
death; but growing pensive and melancholy, in short time was seized with a
Tertian ague, which ended his life at White Hall, on September the third. He
was born in the Town of Huntingdon, and descended from a worshipful family of
the Cromwels, alias Williams; his Mother was the Daughter of Sir Richard
Steward, and his wife Elizabeth the Daughter of Sir James Bourchier; He was of
a very martial Spirit, and of excellent conduct, and attended with very good
success in his attempts. Nor was he a Soldier only, but also a very good
Orator and deep Politician; and so great a Dissembler, that he could shed
Crocodillian tears at pleasure, when those would at any time advantage him
among the Religious; an high pretender he was to Religion, though, as his
actions manifested, it was only thereby to obtain his ambitious ends; so
impiously resolute for the effecting his designments, that he valued not the
violation of the most solemn promises, or sacred Oaths; nor the shedding of
any, though the blood of the Lords anointed. Yet was this Man courted or feared
by most of the Princes in Europe; and the Kings of France and Sweden were
entered into so strict a League with him, as had he lived, might have troubled
good part of the world.

In Olivers stead, Richard Cromwell his eldest Son, whom he had appointed his
Successor, was proclaimed Protector. Shortly after which, several Addresses,
protesting both love and obedience to Richards Highness, were presented from
the Armies of the three Nations, from the London-Ministers, from diverse
Counties, Cities, and chief Towns of England. And the Foreign Ambassadors then
in England pretended to lament with Mr. Richard for the death of his Father;
desired the continuance of that League and Amity, which was granted, and
maintained by his late Highness Oliver Lord Protector.

November the 23, were the Funerals of Oliver Solemnized (after his Hearse had
lain in the greatest State some weeks in Somerset House) at a vast charge, and
in greater Pomp than had formerly been used for the greatest English Kings; his
Corpse had been privately interred many days before in the Chappel-Royal of
Henry the Seventh, at Westminster. But the vast expenses of those Funerals were
never discharged; but those Tradesmen who had hopes of gaining the most by it,
sat down the greatest losers at last. As soon at the Funeral-rites of this old
Fox Oliver were accomplished, his Son Richard proceeded to the carrying on of
matters of public concernment.

The first of which was the sending a Naval-supply to the King of Sweden, for
the aiding him against the King of Denmark. The next of any moment was the
calling of a Parliament to convene January the 27th, at Westminster; where when
they were met, they chose for their Speaker, Mr Challoner Chute; and the
Members severally took the Oath, not to alter the form of Government. Which
done, they went to purge out those Members who had born Arms for the King; then
after many debates it was at length resolved, that the House of Commons would
transact with the persons of the other House, as a House of Parliament, during
the present Parliament: but with this proviso, That it was not intended thereby
to exclude such Peers as have been faithful to the Parliament, from their
privilege of being duly summoned to be Members of that House.

Then they took into their consideration, the Cases of diverse persons who had
been imprisoned in the time of Oliver; Major General Overton, and others of the
Commonwealth party they released. The Duke of Buckingham was also freed out of
Windsor-Castle, upon his Father-in-Law the Lord Fairfax's giving 20000 l.
security, that he should not seek by any means to promote the interest of
Charles Stuart. Next, after long and tedious debates, they yielded that the
Members, who had been returned to serve for Scotland and Ireland, should
continue to set amongst them as Members for that present Parliament. They
likewise proceeded to draw up a bill, which should be entitled, An Act of
Recognition of his Highness his right and title to be Protector, and chief
Magistrate of the Commonwealth of England, etc. But this was never perfected.

A. D. 1659, The Army now grew jealous of his Highness, complaining of his
company that he kept; how that diverse of them were no better than Cavaliers;
censuring his Religion also; giving out, that Godliness was discouraged by him;
that he rather favored those of loose principles, than the zealous professors
of the Gospel.

April the 6th, General Charles Fleetwood presented the Protector a
Representation from the Officers of the Army, wherein they complained, That
they who had born the brunt of the War, were now despised, and like to be laid
aside; That the Cavaliers held dangerous meetings in and about London, That
lists of the names of such who were the Tryers of the old King, were Printed in
red Letters, and scattered about, as if they were men appointed for
destruction: That the famous actions of the long Parliament, and his late
Highness, in and since 1648, were traduced and vilified. Therefore they desired
that his Highness would be pleased to represent these things to the Parliament,
and procure their remedies. The Army also began to grow jealous also of the
Parliament, as if they were too favorable to the Royal party, and joined with
the Protector to bring the Officers of the Army into subjection. Thereupon the
General-Council of Officers, held many meetings and consultations, which the
Parliament hearing of, voted that there should be no meeting nor General
Council of Officers, without consent and by order of his Highness the Lord
Protector: And that no person should have any command in the Army, who should
refuse to subscribe that he will not disturb the free meetings in Parliament,
or their freedom in their debates and counsels. These votes the Protector sent
to the Officers of the Army, which they valued not at all, but on the contrary
resolved, that the Parliament should be dissolved. And in order thereunto
Desbrough with other chief Officers, went to the Protector and forced him to
sign a Commission for the Parliaments dissolution; and accordingly the
Parliament was dissolved. Which being effected, their next work was to put a
period to the Protectors power, by restoring that remnant of the Long
Parliament, which his Father had turned out; to which end the Officers of the
Army invited those Members of Parliament, who continued sitting till April the
20th, 1653. and promised them that they would be ready in their places to yield
them their utmost assistance, that they might set and act in safety. These
Members accepted their invitation, and accordingly took their places in
Parliament, May the seventh; and upon notice that these were again housed,
diverse of those that were secluded in 1648, attempted to have taken their
places, but were repulsed.

Then these Members caused the Protectors Great Seal to be broken, and voted
their own old Seal up again. Then sent to the Protector for an acknowledgment
from him of his submission to their government; and accordingly on May the
twenty-fifth he made his resignation and submission; declaring in writing, That
though in respect to the particular engagements that lay upon him, he could not
be active in making a change in the Government of these Nations; yet through
the goodness of God, he would freely acquiesce in its being made; and that he
held himself engaged, as (with other men) he expected Protection from the
present Government; so to demean himself with all peaceableness under it, and
to procure to the utmost of his power, that all in whom he had interest should
do the same. In short time after this, Henry Cromwell came over, and yielded up
the Lieutenancy of Ireland unto the Members sitting at Westminster; who
appointed five Commissioners for the Government of that Kingdom. General Monck
in Scotland conformed himself to their directions; and Colonel Lockhart,
Governor of Dunkirk, likewise submitted to their Authority.

Then this Junto commanded all such as had been in Arms for the King, to depart
twenty Miles from London; passed an Act for settling of the Militia in the
respective Counties of England and Wales. Ordered a whole years Assessment at
35000 l. a month on England, 6000 l. the month on Scotland, and 9000 l. on
Ireland, to be paid into the Treasury before the eleventh of August next
following. Ordered the immediate sale of White Hall, Hampton Court, and
Sommerset-House, toward payment of the Armies Arrears. To their quondam
Protector they were so friendly, as to protect him from all arrests; and withal
to promise the payment of all his debts (for his Fathers Funeral and other
occasions), which amounted to 29640 l. but this they never performed.

The while these things were in agitation, the Kings friends were very busy in
promoting his interest, by engaging as many as they could for his service in
all places of England; and so successful was the Kings Commissioners, that
great part of the Nobility and Gentry of England and Wales, were interested by
them in the Kings quarrel; and a day was fixed in July for their appearing in
Arms; the first rising was to be chiefly of such as had never engaged on the
Kings side in the late Wars, thereby to draw the Army unto a more faint
opposition. Sir George Booth, Sir Thomas Middleton, and some other of the old
Parliamentarians, raised a party in Cheshire, Flintshire, and Lancashire, to
the number of about three or four thousand men; who declared for a Free
Parliament, and the due rights and privileges of the Nation, against that
Phanatick and unlawful power which now usurped dominion over them. But Major
General Lambert marching speedily against them, and encountering them, his old
Soldiers without much bloodshed totally routed them near unto Nantwich; August
the 17th. Colonel Charles White raised a small party in Nottingham and
Derby-Shires: other inconsiderable parties were raised in other parts, but
dispersed themselves again; for the Rulers at Westminster, having met with some
hint of this designed rising, had so ordered their standing-Army and
Militia-forces in most places of the Land, that no considerable parties of the
Kings friends, could have opportunity to get into a Body.

After the defeat of Sir George Booth's Forces, the Members at Westminster
prepared an Act for sequestring of the Estates of such persons as were engaged
in this rising; and in token of their favor and gratitude, they ordered
Lambert a thousand pound for his good service, which he presently distributed
amongst his Soldiers, thereby to engage them the more firmly to his designs:
for though himself and other Grandees of the Army carried fair with the Junto,
yet were they not well pleased with them, because since their last sitting they
had somewhat lessened the Armies power, in giving order to their Speaker
William Lenthall to issue out Commissions for Commanders, which had been done
before by the General; and had withal reserved the chief command of the Army to
themselves, without any Captain General. Therefore now whilst they were
flustred with their late Victory, they drew up their Propositions to be
presented to the Parliament, which they entitled, The humble Petition and
Proposal of the Army under the Right Honorable the Lord Lambert, in the late
Northern expedition; therein desiring that the Army might be commanded by
Fleetwood as chief General, by Lambert as the next superior General, etc. This
was sent up to London from Lambert's Army, to be presented to the Parliament.
But Sir Arthur Haslerigg being made acquainted with it before it was delivered,
immediately informed his Fellow Members thereof, alleging that it was a matter
of most dangerous consequence. The Junto hereupon passed a Vote, That the
having of more general Officers, was a thing needless, chargeable and
dangerous. But the Army Officers of Lambert's party still-prosecuting their
intentions of gaining the whole ordering of the Army into their own hands, the
Junto thereupon passed this Act, That it should be Treason in all persons
whatsoever, to raise, levy, or collect moneys without consent of Parliament;
designing hereby to bring the Army into subjection, because otherwise they
could have no maintenance; they likewise ordered that Lambert, Desbrough,
Kelsey, Berry, Ashfield, Cobbet, Packer, Barrow and Creed, should be
discommissionated, and that others should enjoy their commands. They also
ordered the Government of the Army to be in Seven Commissioners in whom the
power should jointly reside; these were Fleetwood, Monk, Ludlow, Walton,
Morley, Overton, and Haslerigg. But Lambert and his Accomplices were resolved to
try a tug with the Junto who should be Masters; and to that end they engaged
diverse Companies and Regiments about London to side with them; and the Junto
drew two Regiments to Westminster to take part with them; but when these two
parties had stood at Westminster in a hostile sort, almost a whole day, facing
each other, and sometimes ready to fall to it in good earnest; toward the
evening the two parties fairly agreed to draw off to their respective quarters.
And the next day, and forward, Lambert took care to guard the Parliament-doors
that none of the Members might enter into the House. And now the Junto being
once more laid aside, Lambert's party made choice of Lieutenant General
Fleetwood to be Captain General of the Army; Lambert (who it is thought aspired
to Sovereignty) to be Major General, and Desbrough to be Commissary General.
They framed likewise a new Government, on October the 26th. nominating
Twenty-three persons to have the management of public affairs, whom they would
have to be called a Committee of Safety. Their names were, Bulstrode Whitlock,
Edmund Ludlow, Sir Henry Vane, Sir James Harrington, Sir Archibald Johnson,
General Fleetwood, General John Lambert, Colonel Desbrough, Colonel Sydanham,
Major Saloway, Colonel Berry, Mr. Lawrence, Colonel Thompson, Colonel Hewson,
Colonel Lilburn, John Ireton Lord Mayor, Alderman Robert Tichburn, Walter
Strickland, Cornelius Holland, William Steel, Clerk, Bennet, Brandrith. Thus
was miserable England subjected to the Arbitrary power of an Army, to have what
Lords and Laws they pleased. But the time of its liberty approached, the
principal instrument whereof was General George Monk, who pretending to a
re-settlement of the Junto, and not to be able to see the Nation so inslaved by
Lambert and his factious party, drew his Army out of Scotland, having first
changed some of his Officers. The Committee of Safety exceedingly courted this
General to comply with them, and when that would not do, Lambert drew his Army
into the North, with design to impede General Monk's march to London, but all
their projects availed nothing with the General. And to help forward his
Majesty's interest, and the Nations deliverance, the City of London grew very
discontented and surly against the Army; the Fleet, that declared for the
Junto; likewise many of Lambert's party withdrew themselves from him, and the
Country in general was full of discontents and murmurings; insomuch that the
Committee of Safety perceived themselves to be in a very unsafe and kind of
desolate condition; and therefore with great submission they sent for the
Speaker, desiring him with the rest of his follow-Members to return to the
exercise of their trust; which accordingly they did on December the
twenty-sixth, and Colonel Lambert finding that all now went bad on his side,
privately slipped away from his Soldiers (then about Newcastle upon Tine) and
they returned to their obedience to the Junto; who upon their resettlement,
Discommissionated Lambert, with diverse Colonels and Commanders of the Army;
published a Declaration for a Commonwealth, without a single Person or House of
Lords, for preservation of the Laws, upholding of the Ministry, the University
and Tithes (all which had lately been in great danger) for maintaining liberty
of Conscience. General Monk in the mean time advanced with his new-modelled
Army toward London, all the way being caressed by the Gentry of the several
Counties as he passed along, with all testimonies of affection, and petition
for the restoring of the Secluded Members, and procuring of a Free Parliament,
Commissioners were sent to him from the City of London, with the like request
for a Free Parliament; but the General wisely concealed his inclinations and
intentions, pretending strong resolutions to be faithful to those Members
sitting at Westminster; and yet carried himself with so much evenness, that the
City and Country had hopes he would stand their friend, as the Junto could see
but little cause to misdoubt his real good meaning toward them, howbeit to
make him the surer on their side, they ordered him and his heirs a 1000 l. per
Annum.

February the third, General Monk came to London with his Army he had drawn out
of Scotland; the Army which had been quartered there, having marched out the
night before by the Junto's command, though not without discontent, and some
disorder and mutiny: The next day his Excellency was conducted to the
Parliament House, where he received thanks from the Members for his good
service; after which he acquainted them with the numerous Addresses he had
received from the Counties for the admission of the secluded Members, and a
Free Parliament; minding them also of the danger themselves and Nation would be
in, if the Fanatic party should be continued in Civil or Military power. But
the General's Speech was not well liked of by Mr. Tho. Scot, and some other of
the Members. And the City of London, with whom they thought his Excellency too
gracious, gave them greater cause of discontent; for the Common Council was now
resolved to pay no more Taxes, till such time that the House was filled up with
equal Representatives. Hereupon the Junto resolved to punish the City; and to
make the General instrument in it, ordering him to seize upon eleven of the
most active of the Common Council, and commit them to the Tower, and also to
pull down, and break the Posts, Chains, Gates, and Portcullices of the City;
which he put in execution accordingly on February the ninth, though not with
any pleasure to himself, but of necessity, that so the House might not take any
occasion from his disputing their commands to vacate his Commission, and put
him out of capacity to accomplish the blessed end he designed. Howbeit this
action of the Generals did exceedingly amuse the loyal-hearted Citizens, and
other good Subjects, and made them almost quite to give over the good hopes
they had formerly had of him: But his Excellency, to put them out of all doubt
concerning his intentions, bravely resolved to put an end to the Junto's power.
And in order thereto, the very next morning he sent a Letter to the House,
therein complaining, that they gave too much countenance to Lambert, Vane, and
several others that engaged with the late Committee of Safety; that they had
too much favored a Petition lately delivered by one Praise, God Barebone, and
other Fanatics; and then concludes with a prefixed day, before which they
should issue out Writs for a New Parliament, that so they might terminate their
sitting, and come to a dissolution. The Junto receiving the Generals Letter,
dissemble their resentment of it, and order him the Thanks of the House for his
faithful service in securing the City; yet the very same day, that they might
limit his power, they past an Act for the Government of the Army by five
Commissioners, he to be one of them, the other their own Creatures. The General
hearing hereof, with all convenient speed drew his Army together, and marched
to Westminster, where he gave the Secluded Members readmission into the
Parlia-House, February the 21, to the great grief of the Rump-Parliament, (for
so the Junto was now called in scorn and contempt) and to the exceeding joy
both of City and Country. And now the Parliament vote General Monk to be
Captain General of all the Forces in the three Nations; constitute a new
Council of State; set at liberty Sir George Booth, and such of his party as
were Prisoners, also all such as had been imprisoned for petitioning for a Free
Parliament; caused the Rump Militia, consisting most of Sectaries, to be
disbanded; made such Acts as might the best conduce to the settlement of the
Nation; as, for the taking away all places of trust and power out of the hands
of the Sectarian party; also voted a Full and Free Parliament to be chosen and
to sit at Westminster, April the 25th. This Parliament was called Free, yet (as
in all the Protectors Parliaments) no Loyalist that had been in actual Arms for
the King, was capable of being elected for a Parliament Man.

March 17, the Long Parliament dissolved themselves, leaving a Council of State
to govern till the next Parliament should assemble. But in the interim, that
the Parliament was busied for the recovering the peace and freedom of the
Nation, some malcontents were very active for sowing the seeds of division in
the Army, especially in that part which had been for the Committee of Safety;
yet by the care and prudence of General Monk (who displaced most of the
Fanatic Officers) their designs were frustrated. Lambert, after the
dissolution of the Parliament, attempted to involve the Nation again in a Civil
War; but Col. Richard Ingoldsby dispersed his small force; and took him
prisoner.

A.D. 1660, Apr. 20, the Free Parliament assembled at Westminster; on May 1.
voted, That according to the ancient and fundamental Laws of this Kingdom,
Charles the II. is the lawful and undoubtful King of these Nations.
Transcendent was the joy all over England, which issued from this good news.
His Majesty from his Court then at Breda, had sent his Letters to both Houses
of Parliament, to General Monk, and to the City; to Admiral Montague, and the
Officers of the Fleet, with also a Declaration to all his loving Subjects, the
substance whereof was, That he did grant a free and general pardon to all his
Subjects that should within forty days lay hold upon his grace and favor,
excepting such persons as should be excepted by Parliament. That he would show
all possible Indulgement to tender Consciences. And such as differ in matter of
Religion, so they did not disturb the peace of the Kingdom, that he would
preserve them free from injury in their lives and estates; and that all things
relating to sales and purchases, (for there had been more lands bought and sold
in the late usurping times, than what the right owners (loyal Subjects) had
consented to, should be determined in Parliament: That he would take care for
the full satisfaction of the arrears of the Soldiery under the command of
General Monk, and that they should be received into his service, upon as good
pay and conditions as at that present they enjoyed. The Parliament considering
that his Majesty had for many years been deprived of his Revenues, and
therefore could not but be in want of money, they therefore ordered that the
sum of 5000 l. should be sent him for a present; 10000 l. to the Duke of York,
and 5000 l. to the Duke of Gloucester. The City of London likewise to testify
their gratitude to his Majesty, sent him 10000 l. and to his two Brothers a
1000 l. apiece, and 300 l. they presented to the Lord Mordant, and Sir John
Greenvil, who brought them his Majesty's Letters, to buy each of them a Ring;
and the Parliament for the same reason gave 500 l. to Sir John Greenvil to
purchase a Jewel.

May 8. by order of Parliament, Charles the II. was at London with very great
solemnity proclaimed, The most Potent, Mighty and undoubted King of England,
Scotland, etc. at which time the Acclamations of the people were wonderful
great, and their joys such, that they could not find ways to express them. May
22. his Excellency G. Monk set forth of London in order to meet his Majesty;
and May 23. his Majesty with his Brothers set sail for England from the Hague,
and on Friday landed at Dover, where the loyal General received the King. About
2 miles from Dover his Majesty forsook his Coach, and took Horse, his Brothers
riding on his right hand, and the General on his left; after whom the Duke of
Buckingham, and many other Noblemen and Gentlemen followed in gallant Equipage.
For the excellent service that G. M. had done for the King, and his Kingdoms
his Majesty was pleased to dignifie him with the honor of being Knight of the
Garter, Master of his Horse, Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torrington, Baron Monk
of Potheridg, etc. Chief General of all his Landforces in the three Kingdoms,
and one of his Privy Council, May the 29th, His Majesty made his Triumphal
Cavalcade through the City of London, whither he was welcomed with all the
expressions of Joy possible. And being come to White Hall, he there in his
Presence Chamber offered the Sacrifice of Peace and Thanksgiving, unto Almighty
God for his wonderful reffauration. Then applied himself to the ordering of his
Court, and appointed the chief Officers of State; His Highness James Duke of
York he invested with the Office of Lord High Admiral. Sir Edward Hide (whose
Daughter the Duke of York married) he constituted Lord Chancellor. The Earl of
Manchester, Lord Chamberlain. The Lord Worthsley, Earl of Southampton, Lord
High Treasurer. Sir Edward Nicholas, and Sir William Morris, chief Secretaries
of State, etc. And others who had been constantly Loyal to him, or had
performed any eminent good service for him, he advanced to places of High trust
and dignity in the Court and Commonwealth. But because the persons were
numerous that had in an extraordinary sort been serviceable in promoting the
Kings interest, and his Majesty had no other way to express at present his
gracious acceptance thereof to many of them, he therefore honored their name
and family by conferring on them according to their merit the Titles of Duke,
Earl, Viscount, Baron, Knight. Jun. 6. the Parliament set forth a Proclamation,
wherein it was declared, That all such of the late Kings Judges as would not
render themselves within so many days to their mercy, should be excepted out of
the general pardon then preparing; whereupon 20 of the Regicides came out of
their coverts, and presenting themselves to the Speaker of the House of
Commons, were committed to custody. In August following, the long expected Act
of Indemnity was passed, by which all that had been any ways engaged against
the King were pardoned, save the Regicides and a very few others; and amongst
those there were three who were freed in respect of life, liberty, and estate,
because they had given evident signs of their hearty sorrow for that crying
sin. It was also Enacted that the 30. of January should to all Posterities be
observed a day of Humiliation for that great wickedness of murdering Gods
Vicegerent the King. Also, that May 29. should in all succeeding ages be
observed a day of Thanksgiving for the Kings peaceable Restoration to the
actual possession and exercise of his Legal authority over his Subjects. An Act
for Pole Money was likewise passed, and an Act for enabling Soldiers of the
Army to exercise Trades in any Corporation, that thereby they might be in a
capacity of living honestly and comfortably after their disbanding.

September the thirteenth, That hopeful Prince Henry Duke of Gloucester
departed this life; and on the same day the Parliament was adjourned to the
sixth of November following.

In October, Major General Harrison, Mr. John Carew, and other of the
Regicides, were arraigned at the old Bailey in London, where they were all found
guilty and condemned to die the death due to Traitors. Of the Regicides now
condemned, were hanged and quartered at Charing Cross, Harrison, Carew, Cook,
Peter's, Scot, Scroop, Jones, and Clement; and at Tyburn Hacker was hanged; and
Axtel, a busy promoter of the Kings death was hanged and quartered. All save
Hugh Peter's, dyed very resolutely. The persons whose names follow, had the
favor to be reprieved after Condemnation, because they delivered themselves to
the Parliaments mercy upon their Proclamation, Hardres Waller, Wait, Tichburn,
Marten, Pennington, Row, Holland, Downs, Garland, Temple, Millington,
Hevingham, Lilburn, Fleetwood, Smith, Meyn, and Hulet. This last was accused to
be one of those two which in a Frock and Vizard assisted in the horrid
execution of the King; but because the evidence against him seemed to the
Judges not sufficiently clear, he had his reprieve.

December the 24th, Mary the Princess of Orange dyed at White Hall, and on the
29th of the same month was buried at Westminster; and the Parliament on the
same day dissolved. At the dissolution whereof, the King gave His Royal consent
to these Acts, amongst many others, viz. An Act for granting to the Kings
Majesty 400000 l. by Assessment of 70000 l. per mensem for six months, for
disbanding the Army, and paying the Navy. And an Act of Attainder, which was
made to attaint the Judges and other Actors in the murder of the late King;
Cromwell, Ireton, Bradshaw, Pride, and all the rest of the Regicides deceased,
are adjudged to be convicted, and attainted of High Treason to all intents and
purposes, as if they and every of them respectively had been attainted in their
lifetime. And all persons fled for that Treason, that is to say; John Lisle,
William Say, John Berkstead, Valentine Walton, Edward Whaley, Edmund Ludlow,
Sir Michael Levesey, John Okey, John Hewson, William Goff, Thomas Challoner,
William Cawley, Miles Corbet, Nicholas Low, John Dixwell, Daniel Blagrave,
Andrew Broughton, Edward Dendy, and every of them, stand and be adjudged
convicted of High Treason, etc.

After his Majesty had given his Royal assent to the Acts presented him, he
made a Speech to both Houses, wherein he used these memorable expressions, That
this Parliament should be called to all posterity, The Healing and the Blessed
Parliament.

In the beginning of January Following, whilst his Majesty was accompanying his
Royal Mother, and Sister Henrietta Maria, part of their Journey to France, an
inconsiderable number of the fifth Monarchists raised a great disturbance in
London, killing some of the City-watch, and two nights with great desperateness
opposing the Trained-bands and other force, till at length diverse of them being
wounded, and others slain, the rest, that could, made their escape. And in a
few days after, was Captain Vennor, and twelve more of them, executed in
Coleman-street over against their meeting house, and other parts of London.

January the thirtieth, were the dead bodies of those infamous Traitors,
Cromwell, Ireton, Bradshaw, (all buried at Westminster) taken out of their
Coffins, and drawn upon Hurdles to Tyburn; they were hanged by the neck for
some hours, then had their heads chopped off, which were perched upon
Westminster Hall; and their bodies thrown into a hole under the Gallows.

This Year of Jubilee were the lands of the Kings Loyal Subjects restored to
them that had been unjustly taken from them, by the late Usurper; the Bishops,
Deans, and Chapters lands were likewise restored to the use of these Churchmen.

A. D. 1661. The entrance of this Year was made famous by the magnificent
Coronation of King Charles the Second, who was Crowned at Westminster on St.
Georges day, by the hands of Dr. Juxon Archbishop of Canterbury. May the
eighth, according to His Majesty's summons, the Parliament met at Westminster,
and elected Sir Edward Turnor for their Speaker.

May the twentieth, by order of Parliament was the Scots Solemn League and
Covenant, that had been imposed on the Kings Subjects without his consent,
burnt in London by the hand of the common Hangman. May the 27th, James Marquess
of Argile for his former disloyal and treasonable practices, was beheaded at
the City of Edenbrough in Scotland. November the 26, John James a
Fifth-monarchist, was drawn, hanged and quartered at London, for speaking
certain Treasonable words.

January the 27th, the Lord Mounson, Sir Henry Mildmay, and Mr. Wallop, three
instruments in procuring the death of the late King, were shamefully drawn upon
Hurdles from Newgate to Tyburn, and from thence back again.

February the eighth, happened a most violent Wind, the like to which had not
been known in the memory of any then living; it did very much harm in many
parts of the Nation, by tearing up of Fruit and Timber Trees, and ruining
Houses. This year the Book of Common Prayer was restored to the Church, and
confirmed by Act of Parliament.

A. D. 1662, and April the 19th, three of the Regicides, namely, Berkstead,
Okey, and Corbet, were drawn upon Hurdles from the Tower to Tyburn, and there
hanged and quartered.

May the 14. Katharine the Infanta of Portugal, arrived at Portsmouth, where
she was married to Charles the Second King of England, Scotland, etc.

May the 19th. at the Prorogation of the Parliament, was the Bill for
Hearth-money signed.

In the beginning of June was Sir Henry Vane, and Lambert, tried at the
King's Bench Bar, for formerly disturbing the peace of the Nation, etc. and were
found guilty of Treason, and condemned; and on June the 14th, was Sir Henry
Vane beheaded on Tower Hill; but through his Majesty's Clemency, Lambert had
his life respited. On St. Bartholomew day did many Ecclesiastical persons
relinquish their benefices, rather than conform to the Church Discipline: and
declare their unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing contained and
prescribed in and by the Book of Common Prayer: and subscribe the following
acknowledgment, Viz, I do declare, that it is not lawful upon any pretense
whatsoever, to take Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that Traitorous
position of taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those
that are Commissionated by him, etc. That I will conform to the Liturgy of the
Church of England, as it is now established by Law. And I do declare, that I
hold there lies no obligation on me, or any other person, from the Oath,
commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any change and
alteration of Government, eitheir in Church or State; and that the same was in
it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this Kingdom against
the known Laws and Liberties thereof.

A. D. 1663. and May the 31, dyed that reverend Prelate Dr. Juxon Archbishop of
Canterbury: into whose See the Learned Dr. Sheldon, Bishop of London, was
Translated.

A. D. 1664, Numerous complaints being made unto the Parliament of the many
injuries and depredations done by the Dutch to the English Nation; they freely
declared that they would with their lives and fortunes assist his Majesty to
the redressing of his Subjects wrongs, and to the curbing again of that
ungrateful people. In order to which, great preparations were made to furnish
out a gallant Fleet, and War was proclaimed against the United Netherlands. And
that nothing might be wanting to further this great undertaking, the House of
Commons voted His Majesty a supply of Two Millions five hundred thousand pounds
to be raised in three Years time. And to hasten the Naval preparations, the
City of London lent him Majesty 100000 l.

December the 24th, a Blazing-Star appeared, and two others shortly after
darted down their malign influences upon London, and other places in England.

March the 7th, the London Frigate, as she was coming up to Lee, was fired; to
supply which loss, the City of London speedily built another; this his Majesty
was pleased to name the Loyal London.

A. D. 1665, and in the month of May, began that transending Plague in London,
whereof dyed in little more than a years space, near 100000 persons; many other
places of England were sorely visited at this time with that dreadful Judgment
of God, the Pestilence.

June the 3d. was that eminent Victory obtained upon the Dutch Fleet.

October the 3d. The Parliament met at Oxford, by reason of the infection at
London.

A. D. 1666, and in the month of June, was the second great Fight betwixt His
Majesty's Naval Forces and the Dutch, which took up part of the 1, 2, 3, and 4.
days of the said month. July the 2d. was the 3d. great Fight, wherein the Duke
of Albemarle through the great number of his enemies Ships, was very hardly
tasked, till Prince Rupert with a squadron came in to his aid unlooked for; but
then the Dutch were soon sent home. In this War the Dutch were assisted by the
French.

CHARLES II.
UPon the Second of September, about two of the Clock in the Morning, began
that dreadful Fire in London, which lasted till Thursday following, the Sixth
of the same Month: It began in the House of one Fariner a Baker in
Pudding-lane near the Bridge, and spread it self in length (besides breadth)
from the Tower of London, to St. Dunstans Church near Temple Bar in
Fleet Street; by which, according to the Computation of Surveyors, were
consumed 373 Acres of Building, within the Walls of London, and 63 Acres 3
Roods without the Walls; 87 Parish Churches, 6 Consecrated Chapels, the Royal
Exchange, the Guild Hall of the City; with many stately Halls belonging to
several Companies; and according to the best account, Thirteen thousand two
hundred Houses. The total of the loss sustained by these devouring Flames, was
valued to be Nine millions and nine hundred thousand pounds Sterling. That the
hand of God (for the punishment of the sins of this City and Nation) was
visible in this Fire, no man will deny; but whether carelessness or design, were
the immediate occasions of it, is variously believed and discoursed of. As it
happened in the time of a War with the French and Dutch, so many at that time
did conclude it to be a treacherous Act of one, or both of these People;
especially seeing one Hubert a crazy-brain'd melanchollick French Man,
confessed he did the Fact, by putting a Fire-ball into the House of the Baker
where it began; and was therefore hanged at Tyburn. But of late one Mr. Oats,
of whom more particular mention shall be made hereafter, lays the guilt of this
merciless Action on a knot of Jesuits, Friars, and Irish men, in all to the
number of 80 or thereabouts; who having laid the project long before, could not
conveniently put it in execution till this unlucky time.

This fatal Accident, the forerunner of many more of the same kind, that
happened in His Majesty's Dominions afterward, gave the King a sad opportunity
of exercising His Compassion and Care toward many distressed and distracted
Families, who then lodged in the open Fields, under the Canopy of Heaven: His
Majesty therefore not only issued out Proclamations to Justices of the Peace
for causing Provisions to be sent into the Markets, and ordered His Sea-stores
to be opened for a present supply of Bread in Ship-bisket; but likewise past a
Declaration for preventing such lamentable Accidents for the future, That none
should offer to re-build until necessary measures were appointed for rendering
the New Structures more secure and lasting.

The Parliament met on the 18th of September, and having given the King
Supplies for carrying on of the War, passed an Act for establishing a
Judicature, to take Cognizance of, and determine all, differences that might
arise among Parties, concerning burnt or demollished Houses. A new Model of
Building was appointed, and the Parliament was prorogued till the 10th of
October following.

The Court seldom escapes free, when Combustions rage in the City, nor did it
at this time, for by carelessness in using of a Candle, a Fire taking in the
Horse-guard at White Hall, a great part of that Building was burnt down; but by
the special care of His Majesty and His Guards, its progress was quickly stopped.

His Majesty at this time meeting with bad usage from many hands, in order to a
redress, published several Proclamations; one for prohibiting the Importation
of Canary Wines, and all Commerce with those Parts; another to the same effect
with France, and all the French Kings Dominions; a third upon the humble
Address of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for banishing the Kingdom all
Priests and Jesuits, and a fourth for open War with Denmark.

The City now ashamed to lie longer smuthered under ashes, was by Sir Jonas
Moore, upon his Conformity to the Scantling and Model of Building, appointed by
the Committee, first rowsed in Fleet Street, from which beginning it grew so
hastily toward a perfection, that in a few years it out did all its ancient
Splendor and Glory, and appeared again far more beautiful than by its fall it
had been desolate and abject; no less a wonder than the suddenness of its
overthrow.

Scotland at this time shared likewise in Combustions, though occasioned by a
Fire of another nature; for a seditious Zeal having inspired some malcontents
with revenge against Sir James Turner for executing (too vigorously as they
pretended) the Laws against them, they committed an insolent Riot upon his
Person, and hardly forbore the cutting of him in pieces. This Tumult was at
first raised by a small inconsiderable Rabble, but in a short time they
increased to a body of 1600 men, who marching straight toward Edenbourgh, were
encountered and defeated by His Majesty's Forces, commanded by Lieuteant General
Dalyell and Major General Drammond. Many of the Rebels were slain, more taken,
whereof the Ringleaders were executed, and the rest either proscribed or
otherways punished by Law.

The Convention of Estates of Scotland meeting in January after 1666/7, for
composing of the affairs of that Kingdom, and for preventing both intestine and
foreign dangers that might threaten it, resolved to put the Country into a
posture of defense, and for maintaining of such Forces as were necessary for
his Majesty's Service, assessed the Kingdom in an Imposition of 6000 l. per
month.

About the later end of this year, the Lord Willoughby set out from Barbados
with a considerabe well-man'd Fleet, with design to annoy the French and Dutch
Plantations in the West Indies; but by a violent Hurricane his Fleet was
dispersed, and himself with many more cast away.

The Swedes having the year before offered a Mediation for a Peace between the
King of England and the States of the United Provinces, Anno 1667.
prevailed this year with the King to condescend thereunto, and to accept of
Breda for the place of Treaty.

The Dutch in the mean time are busy in making preparations for continuing the
War, upon a fair and approved Maxim of State, That with an Enemy it is surest
treating with sword in hand. The King of England not ignorant of their doings,
resolved to make them spend the Summer in needless expenses of War, and only
keep himself upon his Guard.

The English therefore having but a small Fleet abroad, the Dutch put to Sea
betimes, and about the later end of April made an attempt on Burnt-Island in
Scotland; but were beaten off with loss.

Their next attempt was upon the Fort of Sheerness, which being a place of
small Force, was (after a short but stout resistance) abandoned by Sir Edward
Sprague; and so the mouth of that narrow River was left open. After this they
assaulted and were beaten off from Languard Fort, engaged a squadron of the
English, with a squadron of theirs, and were worsted; showed themselves before
Portsmouth, and made some slight attempts in Devonshire and Cornwall; and after
De Ruyter, their Admiral, had been civilly complemented by the Earl of Bath in
the West, and had received Advice of the Conclusion of the Peace, they sailed
back for Holland.

This Peace was concluded at Breda, the Twenty first of June; the Ratifications
interchanged the Fourteenth of August, and proclaimed afterward in London, thee
Twenty fourth of the same month.

This year died the Earl of Southamppton, Lord high Treasurer of England, which
place the King thought fit to supply by Commissioners (viz.) the Duke of
Albemarle, the Lord Ashley Cooper, since Earl of Shaftsbury, Sir Thomas
Clifford, Sir William Coventry, and Sir John Duncomb.

The Parliament was to have met in July, but was prorogued till the Tenth of
October; in which Session several Acts were passed, amongst others, one for
banishing and disabling the Earl of Clarendon; the Parliament then adjourned
till February.

In America, Sir John Harman with a squadron of English Ships, attacqued a
squadron of French in their Ports with so good success, that he burnt their
Admiral, and six or seven of their best Ships; all the rest but two being
sunk, either by the Enemy or the English Shot, and that with very small loss of
men, or damage to his Ships.

The King to encourage the re-building of the City this year, was pleased
auspiciously to lay the first Stone himself in the Foundation of the
Royal Exchange; as shortly after his Royal Highness laid a Foundation Stone for
a second Pillar thereof.

About the beginning of February, the Parliament, according to their
Adjournment, met; and upon their humble Petition to His Majesty, procured a
Proclamation to be emitted, for enforcing the Laws against Conventicles, and
for preserving the Peace of the Nation against unlawful Assemblies.

This month was proclaimed the Peace with Spain, which had been (much to the
advantage of Commerce) concluded in May last.

About the end of March, in Easter week, some licencious idle Persons,
pretending former custom, took the liberty to pull down some Houses of bad
repute about the Suburbs of London.: Though the Prentices bore the blame of
this Riot, yet others were found guilty; whereof four being apprehended, were
convicted and executed, and two of their Heads set upon London Bridge.

In May the King passed some Bills in the House of Lords, whereof one was for
raising an Imposition on Wines and other Liquors; and the Parliament was
adjourned till the 11th of August following.

In June News was brought to London of the burning of the Bridge Town in
Barbados, where besides the loss of most of the Houses, the Magazine, to the
great prejudice of the public, as well as of private Persons, was blown up.

The Duke of York in September near to Dover, took the usual Oath of Warden of
the Cinque Ports.

The Parliament that was to have met in August, was by Proclamation Prorogued
till the Tenth of November ensuing, and the Duke of Monmouth, upon the
resignation of the Lord Gerrard, was made Captain of his Majesty's Life-Guards
of Horse.

Sir Thomas Allen made Peace this year with the Algerines; and the Parliament
which met at the appointed time, and adjourned till March, were in December, by
Proclamation, prorogued till the Tenth of October following.

About the middle of January 1668/9, the Duchess of York was brought to Bed of
a Daughter, christened by the Name of Henrietta, by the Archbishop of
Canterbury; the Duke of Ormond assisting as Godfather, the Marchioness of
Dorchester and Countess of Devonshire, having the Honor of being Godmothers.

In March 1668/9, the Prince of Tuscany, in pursuance of his Travels, came to
visit England, where being honorably received and magnificently treated by His
Majesty, and several Persons of Quality of the Kingdom, he departed for Holland
in his way homeward.

Anno 1669.
The beginning of this year the Earl of Carlisle was sent Ambassador
Extraordinary to Sweden. As he was at Copenhagen, on his way, he received a
Letter from the King of England, in answer to an obliging Letter of the King of
Denmark, to be delivered to that King. This Letter was so acceptable to the
Dane, that upon the Ambassadors instance, he dispatched Orders to all his
Ports and Mercantile Towns, especially in Norway, for restoring the English to
their former Freedoms and Privileges in Trading.

Being arrived in Sweden, he presented the King with the George worn by the
Knights of the Garter; and was afterward, as His Majesty's Proxy, solemnly
installed in the Order at Windsor.

This year was the stately new Theater of Oxford, the noble Gift of Dr.
Sheldon, Archbishop of Canterbury, according to the intent of the Donor, put
into the Possession of that University: And upon his Graces declining the
Chancellourship, the Duke of Ormond was installed Chancellor of the University
of Oxford.

Whilst the King was taking his Divertisement with the Duke of York, in the New
Forest in Hampshire, they both received an Express of the death of their
Mother, the Queen Dowager of England, who died at Columbee the last of August,
and was buried in St. Denis in November following.

About this time arrived at Dublin the Lord Roberts, as Lord Deputy of Ireland.

The Exchange of London ever since the Fire, had been kept at Gresham College
in Bishopsgate-street, till now, to the great satisfaction of the City, the
Merchants returned to the Royal Exchange in Cornhill; a Fabric as far
exceeding the old one in Beauty and Structure, as the City rebuilt does that
which was destroyed.

At the day of October prefixed, the Parliament met, to whom the King, amongst
other things in his Speech, proposed the uniting of England and Scotland into
one Kingdom; this Project in the Sequel had no better issue, than another set
on foot by King James for the same purpose. The Parliament having sat above a
month, and done but very little, were prorogued till the 24th of February
following.

The Parliament of Scotland sat at Edenbourgh at the same time that the
Parliament of England did at Westminster; in the which the Earl of Lauderdale
represented His Majesty as His Commissioner. In this Session of Parliament,
amongst many other Acts, that of asserting his Majesty's Supremacy in all
Causes and over all Persons, Civil and Ecclesiastical, passed A necessary Act
for securing the Rights of Monarchy against popular and unwarrantable
Innovations; and a duty, which had it not been forgotten, or trampled upon in
these later times, might (with Gods Blessing) have preserved both Nations from
scandalous and fatal consequences.

A splendid and magnificent Embassy was this year sent to Taffelette, Emperor
of Morocco, in the Person of Mr. Henry Howard, since Duke of Norfolk; which by
reason of the troubles of that Country, and the inability of the Emperor to
secure a safe conduct to a Person of that quality, proved of small
consequences; and the Ambassador returned without seeing the Emperor, or
performing his Embassy.

The later end of this year died the Duke of Albemarle, his Duchess not many
days surviving him. The King as a mark of gratitude to the deceased Duke, sent
his Son, the present Duke, his Fathers Garter, continued to him many of his
Honors and Preferments; and sent him word, that he himself would take care of
his Fathers Funeral.

The Parliament met again at the appointed time; and the King among other
things, re-minded them of the project of Union between the two Kingdoms.

This year, in the beginning of April, Anno 1670,
the King having passed some Bills, the Parliament was adjourned to the 24th of
October: Amongst others, was an Act for authorizing such Commissioners as His
Majesty should be pleased to nominate for treating with the Scottish
Commissioners about the projected Union; who being nominated, and having
afterward met with those sent from Scotland, many Conferences were held; but
insuperable difficulties appearing in the matter, it was wholly laid aside.

At this time, the Lord John Berkley arrived in Dublin, and was invested Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland.

The Princess of Orleans made now her last visit to her two Brothers, the King
of England and Duke of York, at Dover; and upon her return, which was shortly
after, took her journey out of this World: for to the great grief and surprise
of the Court of England, she died suddenly.

Captain Beach being in the Straits with four English Frigots, met a squadron
of seven Algier Men of War, full of Men; gave them Battle, and after a short
dispute, forced them all ashore; where two of them were burnt by themselves,
and the rest by the English: most of their Men were lost, and 250 Christian
Captives set at liberty.

In October, The Parliament met again, according to their Adjournment, and then
was the Peace between England and Spain beyond the Line, concluded and ratified.

The Prince of Orange came this year into England, and having visited both
Universities, after a short stay he returned.

During this Session of Parliament, the Lords and Commons having humbly
represented to His Majesty, their fears and jealousies of the growth of Popery;
the King by Proclamation commanded all Jesuits, and English, Irish, and
Scottish Priests, and all others that had taken Orders from the Sea of Rome,
except such as were to wait upon the Queen and Foreign Ambassadors, to depart
the Kingdom, upon pain of having the Laws and Statutes of the Realm put in
execution against them.

Anno 1671.
In the beginning of this year, died at St. James's, her Royal Highness Anne,
Duchess of York, Daughter to the Earl of Clarendon; and was shortly after
privately buried at Westminster.

The Parliament still sat, and amongst others, having past an Act for an
addition to the Kings Revenue, by an Imposition on proceedings at Law; by an
humble Address they Petitioned His Majesty, that he would be pleased by his
Royal Example to encourage the wearing of the Manufactures of his own Kingdom,
and to discountenance the use of Foreign; to which the King having graciously
condescended, they were Prorogued till the 16th of April next ensuing,

In June, Sir Edward Sprague, Admiral for the King in the Mediterranean Sea,
burnt and took under the very Guns of the Castle of Bugia, nine of the best men
of War of Algier. This News so incensed that people, that in a tumultuary
manner they cut off the Head of their King, the Aga having done the like to
their General, and forced their New created King to make a Peace much to the
advantage of England.

The Parliament was again Prorogued from the 16th of April following to the
30th of October, 1672.

This Year his Majesty was pleased to Honor the City of London with his
Presence at the Lord Mayors Feast, being the first, that since the Fire was
kept in their Guild Hall, after it was advantageously repaired.

The King having long concealed his Just displeasure against the Dutch, and his
resentments of their unworthy dealings toward him, intends now an open War
with the United Provinces. In order thereunto, in January, 1671/2 his Majesty
declared, that seeing his Neighbors were making great preparations, both by Sea
and Land, he looked upon himself as obliged to put himself into such a Posture,
as might best secure his Government and People: And that seeing Money, which
was absolutely necessary for that end, was wanting, he was unavoidably forced,
(which otherwise he would not have done,) to put a Stop to the Payment of all
Moneys brought in, or to be brought in, to his Exchequer for the space of one
whole Year.

In the mean time, Sir George Downing, his Majesty's Ambassador in Holland,
Presses the States hard with the Business of the Flag; but finding his Demands
shifted of with Delays, and his Negotiation like to prove successess, he
returned back in a short time to England; where he was committed to the Tower,
for not having punctually obeyed his Instructions.

In March 1671/2, there was War declared by the King of Great Britain, the
Dutch by this allarmed, and by the proceedings and preparations of the French
King, which they knew tended to a rupture with them, fortified themselves with
all diligence as well by Forces at home as Allies abroad, and made the Prince
of Orange their Captain General at Land, and Admiral at Sea, for the ensuing
Years actions.

This Year the beautiful Escurial in Spain, one of the most Magnificent
buildings in Europe, and reckoned one of the Wonders of the World, was consumed
by fire. Besides the many Varieties that here were lost, the Famous Library
perished; a loss hardly ever again to be repaired.

The French King being now joined with the English in War against the Dutch,
Anno 1672.
in the beginning of this year marches at the head of his Main Army, toward
the Frontiers of the Netherlands, and sends his Fleet to join the English.

In May both Fleets were joined at Sea, under the Command of His Royal Highness
the Duke of York making all together about 160 Sail. They had had often sight
of the Dutch, but no Engagement till the 28th of this Month, and then in
Southwold Bay a sharp Fight began about five of the Clock in the Morning, and
was obstinately maintained on both sides till Night, the Dutch then bore away,
and the Duke stood after them, keeping within sight of their Lights all Night.
In this Engagement died the Earl of Sandwich, Captain Digby in the Henry, Sir
John Cox hard by the Duke in the Prince, Sir Frescheville Hollis, and Monsieur
de la Rabiner, the French Rear Admiral. Several other Officers were slain and
wounded, about Seven hundred common Seamen lost, and as many wounded; the Royal
James burnt, and the Katherine taken, but by her own men rescued again. On the
Dutch side were killed Admiral Van Ghent and Captain Brakhel. Their great Ships
were sadly shattered, two sunk; one taken, and one burnt; many others were
missing, whereof no account could be given, and a great many of their common
Seamen killed and wounded. The French at the same time, to increase their loss,
took several of their Towns and Forts by Land.

Next day after this Engagement, in the Afternoon, The Duke of York put twice
out his bloody Flag upon sight of the Dutch; but was as often prevented from
Engaging them by thick Fogs and Mists, which gave the Duch opportunity to
retreat; and so no more considerable Action at Sea was performed this year.

The States being thus pressed (in all probality) above the strength of so
small a Republic; having the French on the one side, the Bishop of Munster on
the other, by Land, and the English by Sea, to deal with, were not able to
repress the Tumults and Insolences of the exasperated People. The Burghers of
Dort in a tumultuary manner, got the Prince of Orange created Statholder, which
was afterward confirmed by the States. And at the Hague, not long after, a
masterless Rabble hall'd out of Prison the Ruart van Putten, and his Brother De
Wit, who had been condemned to lose their Dignities and be banished, for some
Designs against the Prince, and barbarously murdered them, dragging their
Bodies through the Streets, hanging them on the Gallows by the Heels, and
afterward inhumanely tearing and cutting them to picces.

The Parliament of England which was to have met in October, was prorogued till
the Fourth of February following.

This year was the Earl of Essex sent into Ireland, to succeed to the Lord John
Berkley, as Lieutenant of that Kingdom. The Lord Keeper of England, Bridgeman,
now aged and infirm, having resigned his place, the Earl of Shaftsbury was made
Chancellor of England, and Thomas Lord Clifford Lord High Treasurer.

Toward the beginning of December, the Duke of Richmond, who had been this year
sent Ambassador Extraordinary into Sweden, died in his Calesche, as he was
upon his return to Elsenore, from being aboard of the Yarmouth Frigate. No other
reason could be given for the suddenness of his death, but the extreme coldness
of that piercing Air, to which his Body was not accustomed.

The time of Prorogation being expired, the Parliament met again; and upon the
removal of Sir Edward Turnor, their Speaker, to be Lord chief Baron of the
Exchequer, Sir Job Charleton was made Speaker; but he shortly after falling
Sick, Edward Seymour Esquire succeeded. This Session of Parliament voted the King a
supply of 18 months Assessement, not exceeding 70000 l. a Month; but began to
be dissatisfied with the Kings indulgence and toleration to Phanaticks, though
his Majesty by a gracious Answer to an Address of theirs, endeavored to remove
that scruple.

Anno 1673.
About the later end of March, an Act for a general and free pardon past in
Parliament; and then both Houses adjourned till the 20th of October following.

One James Piercy, upon the death of the Earl of Northumberland, in whom the
male race of that ancient Family expired, came into England, laid claim to the
Title and Estate, and thereupon petitioned the Parliament; but his Petition was
rejected, and himself looked upon as an Imposter.

The Island of Tobago was this year taken by the English from the Dutch, in
exchange whereof, the Dutch took St. Helena from the English; which might have
proved of very bad consequence to the English East India Trade; had it not been
re-taken by Captain Monday, with three Dutch East India Merchant Men besides,
which fully paid the charges of its reprisal. For this good service Captain
Monday was Knighted.

The Dutch this year were first at Sea, and attempted a vain project, of
stopping up those narrow Channels that give entry to the River of Thames.
Prince Rupert, who commanded the English Fleet, put out to encounter them; but
they retreating to their own Shore, the Prince stood to the Westward, that he
might join the French and part of the English Fleets. This being shortly after
done, the whole Fleet made toward the coast of Holland; and the Prince finding
them before Schonvelt, secured by their Banks and the shallowness of the Water,
on the 28th of May detached a Squadron of Thirty five small Frigots to provoke
them to an Engagement: The Dutch, contrary to expectation, came forth in good
order and engaged. The French and English emulous for honor, fought with
extraordinary eagerness, and somewhat entangled each other; but at length,
after a sharp dispute, the magnanimous Prince forced the Enemy to run, and
followed them as far as the Sands and Water did permit, till Night put an end
to the conflict; and the Dutch regained their former station. The English lost
but a few common Seamen, and not one Ship. Captains were slain, Fowls, Finch,
Tempest, and Woorden. On the Dutch side were killed Vice Admiral Schram, Rear
Admiral Vlugh and six Captains more. They lost considerably in Men, but only
one Ship called the Deventer.

On the fourth of June happened another Engagement, wherein no great Execution
was done on either side, it being managed at great distance, and most part in
the night time.

And that the Series of this years Warlike Actions, may be continued without
interruption, on the Tenth of August, both Fleets met again at Sea, and gave
the last stroke to this War. The Dutch being about the Goree, got the Wind of
the English, and bore briskly down upon them, the Fight was obstinate and
bloody on both sides, especially between Sir Edward Sprague and van Tromp; but
the French making as if they stood off for the Wind, did it in reallity, that
they might have the convenience of being Spectators. Prince Rupert and de
Ruyter, who had been engaged together all day, finding themselves at distance
from their respective Squadrons, stood back again to their assistance; and de
Ruyter designing to have cut off the blew Squadron from the rest of the Fleet,
was so smartly charged by the Prince, that he was fain to give way; so that had
the French made use of their Wind they had, the Dutch had certainly sustained
far greater loss then they did, and not so easily drawn off by favor of the
Night. In this Engagement Sir Edward Sprague, as he was shifting from one Ship
to another, had his long Boat by a Random Shot shivered to pieces under him,
and so to the grief and regret of all that knew him, was drowned; his Ship
strangely disabled, was by his valiant Second, the Earl of Ossory, brought off.
Captain Neve was slain, Reeves and Heywood died of their Wounds, and Martel
only of the French was killed. The loss of common Seamen was not very great on
the English side. The Dutch lost two Flag Officers, several Captains, and about
a 1000 common Seamen.

About the middle of June, the Lord Clifford resigned his Treasurers Staff, and
Sir Thomas Osborn, created Viscount Osborn of Dumblain in Scotland, and
afterward Earl of Danby in England, was made Lord High Treasurer.

The Parliament, according to their last Adjournment, meeting in October, were
prorogued till the 27th of the same month; then meeting again, they were
prorogued till the 7th of January following.

Soon after the King issued out His Proclamation, requiring all Judges and
Justices of the Peace, effectually to prosecute the Laws against all Papists
and Popish Recusants.

About the later end of November, his Royal Highness the Duke of York, was
married to the Princess of Modena.

Though the Preparations for War went on vigorously, both on the English and
Dutch sides, yet overtures of Peace were still set on foot; and His Majesty
condescended to a Treaty at Cologne, which took no effect. The Dutch in the
mean time thought it not fit to desist; but by another way of Negotiation, that
is to say, by intercourse of Letters, they at length prevailed so far, as to
receive a condescending Letter from the King of England in February 1673/4,
which was shortly after followed by a conclusion of the Peace by them so much
desired.

Peace being now concluded, Anno 1674.
this year affords no great Transactions of importance; the Consultations of
Government being chiefly directed to the preservation of quietness and unity at
home; in order to which His Majesty emitted several Proclamations against
Papists and Jesuits.

The Duke of Monmouth upon resignation of the Duke of Buckingham, was chosen
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, The Earl of St. Albans giving up
the Staff of Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household, his place was given to
the Earl of Arlington, to whom Sir Joseph Williamson succeeded as Principal
Secretary of State.

Upon the 22th of September, His Majesty by Proclamation prorogued the
Parliament, which was to have met the 10th of November, till the 13th of April
ensuing.

His Majesty having been pleased to accept of the Freedom of the City of
London, was in December, by Sir Robert Vynor, Lord Mayor, in Name of the City,
presented with the Copy of his Freedom; in a large square Box of Massy Gold,
the Seal appended, being in a Box of Gold, set all over with large Diamonds.

About the beginning of January 1674/5, her Royal Highness was brought to Bed
of a Daughter, Christened at St. James's by the Bishop of Durham, by the Name
of Katharina Laura; the Duke of Monmouth being Godfather, and the Lady Mary and
Lady Anne Godmothers.

Anno 1675.
The Parliament, according to their last Prorogation, met on the 13th of April;
but having sat till a week in June, and a difference arising between the two
Houses, concerning an Appeal made by one Sherley to the Lords, His Majesty upon
the 9th of June prorogued them till the 13th of October following.

There happened this year a dangerous Plot carried on with great secrecy by the
Blacks of Barbados against the English, which upon the very nick of being put
in execution, was detected, and the Conspirators punished.

The Natives of New England, under the command of King Philip Hegamore, rose
likewise against the English, and did them considerable damage; but were in a
short time curbed from their insolences, and driven to their skulking holes

In September, most part of the Town of Northampton was by a dreadful Fire
burnt down, nothing left standing except a few Houses in the out-skirts of the
Town.

The Parliament met again at the prefixed time, but the former difference
between the Houses being revived, they were upon the 22th of November prorogued
again till the 15th of February 1676.

In the French Army, this year the Champion of France, the renowned Marshal
Turenne, as he was viewing a Pass maintained by the Germans, fell by a Cannon
Shot, fired by a Battery raised by Montecucully, the Imperial General; to the
great grief of his Master the French King.

On the Fifth of March 1675/6, Sir John Narborough concluded an honorable
Peace, and of great advantage to the Trade of this Nation, with the Government
of Tripoly.

The French last Campaign lost their famous Marshall Turenne; Anno 1676.
and the Dutch Marine Expeditions are this year ushered in with a fate as
unlucky to the States: for their Darling, Admiral De Ruyter, on the twenty
ninth of April, died of his Wounds, which he had received some days before in
an Engagement with the French, in the Bay of Augusta, on the Coast of Sicily.

But to return home, The first thing we meet with this year, of note, is a
dreadful Fire which happened the 26th of May in the Borough of Southwark: It
began about four in the Morning, and continued all day and part of the night;
and notwithstanding the indefatigable pains and diligence of his Grace the Duke
of Monmouth, of the Earl of Craven, and Lord Mayor, yet about 600 Houses were
burnt and blown up by this sad accident.

His Majesty, for securing Trading to and from his Ports, which was much
disturbed by the insolency of Dutch, Spanish, and French Privateers, amongst
whom the War still continued; on the second of June caused a Proclamation to be
published, declaring all Ships of what party soever, that should put into any
of his Ports, to be under his protect on during their stay there; commanding
His public Officers, and all other His Majesty's Subjects, to use their best
endeavors to hinder the roving of any private Men of War so near his Coasts,
as might give apprehensions to Merchant Men; That if a Man of War of one party,
and one or more Merchant Men of another, should come into His Majesty's Ports,
the Merchant Men should have the privilege to sail out two Tides before the
Man of War. That none of his Seamen should presume to enter and list themselves
on board of any Foreign Man of War, or any Ship designed for Traffic or the
Fishing Trade, without His Majesty's leave first obtained: with several other
Rules relating to the securing of Trade, and His Majesty's Sovereignty in these
Seas; in pursuance of which Proclamation several Privateers were stopped and
detained in many of the Ports of this Kingdom.

August 20th, her Royal Highness was brought to Bed of a Daughter, Christened
by the Name of Isabella; the Lord High Treasurer being Godfather, and the
Duchess of Monmouth and Countess of Peterborough Godmothers.

October 26th, His Majesty passed an Order in Council, That none of His
Subjects, except the Queens Domestic Servants, should repair to her Majesty's
Chapel, or to the Houses or Chapels of any Foreign Ambassadors or Agents,
there to hear Mass, or English Sermons, upon pain of having the Laws severely
executed against them; and His Majesty appointed Messengers of the Chamber, and
other Officers, to wait without at the Houses of Foreign Ambassadors and
Agents, and to take notice of such of His Subjects as should come out of the
said Chapels from Religious Worship, and bring them or their Names to the
Council Board. The Principal Secretaries of State, were by His Majesty likewise
required, to repair to the said Ambassadors and Agents, and in His Majesty's
Name acquaint them with His Royal Pleasure in executing His Laws, that they
might have no Cause to complain of disrespect offered to their Character, or of
any purpose of infringing their Privileges.

February 15th 1676/7, the Parliament, pursuant to their last Prorogation, met
at Westminster.

Anno 1677.
April 16th, His Majesty in His Royal Robes, with the usual Solemnities came
into the House of Lords, whither the House of Commons being called, several
Bills were passed; amongst others, an Act for raising the sum of Five hundred
eighty four thousand nine hundred seventy eight pounds, two shillings and two
pence half penny, for the speedy building of thirty Ships of War: another for an
additional Excise upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, for three years; and a
third for erecting a Judicature to determine differences touching Houses burnt
and demollished by the late dreadful Fire in Southwark; and then both Houses
adjourned till the 21th of May following.

This Month the Duke of Newcastle and Earl of Danby, Lord high Treasurer of
England, were installed Knights of the Garter at Windsor.

May 21th, Both Houses, according to their last Adjournment, met again at
Westminster, His Majesty having before by Proclamation required all the Members
to be present, in order to the debating of Matters of great importance. In this
Session the House of Commons made an Address to His Majesty, that he would be
pleased for the security of the Nation, and repressing the growing greatness of
France, to enter into some Leagues proposed by them in their Address; to which
on the 28th of the same month, he gave them His Answer at the Banqueting
House; which Answer being made public in Print, we shall refer you to the
Answer it self. His Majesty farther told them, that it was His pleasure the
House should be Adjourned to the 16th of July following: and that if he
intended they should sit again before Winter, he would give them notice by His
Proclamation. Accordingly both Houses were adjourned till the 16th of July
ensuing.

July 16th, both Houses met again, pursuant to their last Adjournment, and
forthwith Adjourned again, according to His Majesty's Direction, till the third
of December following.

August the fourth, His Grace the Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
began his Journey for that Kingdom.

And now His Majesty thinking it fit to put a stop to the French Victorious
Proceedings in Flanders, bethought himself of entering into Alliances with some
Princes and States abroad, and began to raise Forces for that purpose; of whom
the year following will afford more matter of Discourse.

October the ninth, The Prince of Orange landed at Harwich, and went from
thence directly to Neir-Market, in His Majesty's Coaches, that attended His
Highness there.

The 26th of the same month, His Majesty issued out a Proclamation for the
Adjournment of the Parliament, from the third of December till the fourth of
April ensuing.

Sunday, November the fourth, The Marriage between her Highness the Lady Mary,
and his Highness the Prince of Orange, was privately celebrated at St. James's,
by the Bishop of London, in the Presence of His Majesty, their Royal
Highnesses, and some of the chiefest of the Nobility: And on Wednesday
following Her Royal Highness was brought to Bed of a Son, who was Christened by
the Name of Charles, but died in December following.

November the 11th, About nine a Clock in the Morning their Highnesses the
Prince and Princess of Orange, parted from Whitehall, in order to their
imbarking in the Yachts appointed to transport their Highnesses to Holland; His
Majesty and His Royal Highness having accompanied them to Erith, where their
Highnesses went on Board.

The two Houses of Parliament meeting on the third of December, in order to the
Adjourning of themselves, according to the Kings Proclamation, received a
Message from His Majesty, That upon weighty Consideration His Majesty thought
fit to meet them sooner; and that therefore His Majesty's Pleasure was, they
should Adjourn to the 15th of January following, which was accordingly done.

This month was the celebrated Town of Stetin in Pomerania surrendered to the
Elector of Brandenburgh by the Swedes; a Town which having so courageously
maintained so long and bloody a Siege, to the admiration of all, and shame of
some of its Neighbors, deserves an honorable mention in the Histories and
Annals of all Europe.

The Parliament, pursuant to their last Adjournment, having met at Westminster,
received an Intimation from the King, That His Majesty had matters of very
great Importance to communicate to both Houses, in order to the satisfaction of
their late Addresses for the preservation of Flanders; but matters not being
then ripe enough, it was His Majesty's Pleasure they should be Adjourned till
the twenty eighth of the same month; and accordingly they were Adjourned.

At the prefixed time they met again, and the King in a gracious Speech
acquainted both Houses to this purpose, That according to His Promise to them,
that He would do somewhat for their satisfaction before they met again, he had
made Alliances with Holland for the preservation of Flanders, which if seconded
by plentiful Supplies from them, and due Care from the Spainiards for their own
Preservation, might be able by Arms to restore such an honorable Peace to
Christendom, as might not be in the power of one Prince alone to disturb; which
he had endeavored to do by a fair Treaty: That He had married His Niece to the
Prince of Orange, and so engaged himself to maintain his Interest: and having
laid before them the expenses He had been at, and what an actual War would
needs require, with very pressing considerations, His Majesty demanded of them
answerable Supplies.

March, the 20th 1677/8, Amongst other Bills in Parliament, there passed an Act
for raising Money by Poll and otherways, to enable His Majesty to enter into an
Actual War against the French King; with a Prohibition of all French
Commodities.

Many of the Forces raised by His Majesty since September last, Anno 1678.
being already in Flanders, and more going over daily, His Majesty, that he
might put himself in a posture of acting by Sea as well as Land, caused a
Proclamation to be published the beginning of this year, strictly charging all
Seaman, His Subjects, who had lifted themselves in the service of Foreign
Princes or States, forthwith to with draw and return home; and that none for
the future should presume without permission from His Majesty, to engage in any
such service.

About this time at Bruges in Flanders, happened a great Disorder, occasioned
by a rude Action of a Burgher, who in time of a Procession, struck a Dutch
Captain with a lighted Torch over the Face, because he did not uncover himself
so soon as the Townsman would have had him; this occasioned presently the
drawing of many Swords; and the English being falsely accused of the Tumult,
some Soldiers were killed in the Streets; but by the care of the Magistrates
and Officers, the Stir being quieted, and the truth of the matter discovered,
the Magistrates of the Town imprisoned and punished some of the Authors of the
Tumult; and to satisfy their trouble at the accident, treated the English
Officers and Soldiers, and published a Placaet in their Justification, charging
all Persons to use the said Soldiers with all kindness and civility.

On Saturday, April the 13th, A Woman of Swansey was brought to Bed of a dead
Female Child, which had two perfect Heads and Necks upon one Body, with all the
parts of each Head exact, and the Members of the Body perfect.

May the 13th, His Majesty being come into the House of Lords with the usual
Solemnities, and the House of Commons being sent for, His Majesty was pleased
to give His Royal Assent to several private Acts, and then commanded the Lord
Chancellor to prorogue the Parliament till the twenty third of this month;
and accordingly the Parliament was prorogued.

The Parliament, pursuant to the last Prorogation, having met the 23d. of May,
and continued sitting till the Fifteenth of July following; His Majesty that
day in His Robes, came into the House of Lords, and there gave His Royal Assent
to several Acts; amongst which, to one for raising Money for Disbanding of the
Army, a great part of which was now in Flanders, another for granting an
Additional Duty to His Majesty upon Wines for three years; a third for burying
in Woollen; and a fourth for the relief and discharge of poor distressed
Prisoners for Debt. After which the Lord Chancellor, by His Majesty's Command,
acquainted the two Houses, That His Majesty had thought fit in the present
Conjuncture of Affairs, to prorogue them to the first of August following; and
so to keep them in call by short Prorogations; His Majesty not knowing how soon
He might have need of their farther Service and Assistance; but that His
Majesty's intention was, they should not meet till toward Winter, unless there
were occasion for their Assembling sooner, of which he would give them timely
notice by Proclamation: And accordingly the Parliament was prorogued till the
first day of August.

In pursuance of this Prorogation, the Parliament met at Westminster the first
day of August, and were then by Commission Prorogued till the 29th of the same
Month; at which time his Majesty being willing they should mere, and continue
Sitting for the dispatch of weighty Affairs, did issue out a Proclamation,
requiring all the Members to give their Attendance at Westminster the said day.
But the face of Affairs abroad being much altered by the conclusion of the
Peace betwixt the French King, and the States of the United Provinces, which
was Signed at Nimeguen the First of August; his Majesty thought fit likewise to
change his resolution: And therefore by Proclamation declared, that both Houses
should be Prorogued from the 29th of August, till the first of October
following; and afterward by another Proclamation to the one and twentieth of
the same Month, at which time his Majesty required a full Meeting of the
Members, in order to their Sitting for the dispatch of weighty Matters; which
indeed happened to be of greater concern than was imagined.

The Prince of Orange was now marched with his Army to the Relief of Mons, at
this time Blockt up by the French under the Command of the Duke of Luxembourg,
before he had the News of the Peace: And his Highness, accompanied with the
Duke of Monmouth, about the beginning of August, being advanced near the
Enemies Camp at St. Denis, bravely attacqued it, and after a long and brisk
dispute forcing the French to dislodge, possessed himself of their Ground. The
Prince and Duke of Monmouth were in great danger in this Engagement, but both
came off without any hurt, the Earl of Ossory commanded his Majesty's Subjects
that were in the States Service, who gained not the least share in the Honor
of this Day's Action, though many Gallant Men perished in the Attempt.

In September came to light, a Design which had been doubtless long contriving
in the blackest Cell of Darkness: A Plot that amazed most Men, allarmed all,
and gave work enough since to his Majesty, Parliament, and Judges of the Land;
but seeing it is not as yet so fully diclosed, (at least to the Public) as may
sufficiently warrant an authentic Relation thereof to Posterity, no man can
expect much to be said on it in this Abridgement; which intends only to point at
the most remarkable Occurrences of the English History, and is proposed rather
as an Index than Chronicle to the Reader.

The matter then was briefly thus. One Mr. Titus Oats having received his
Education and Orders in the Church of England, some Years ago, went over the
Seas into Flanders, and afterward into Spain, ingratiating himself among the
Jesuits by such means and to such purposes as are set down in his Depositions
lately made Public; upon his Return, soon after, this Gentleman, advises with
one Doctor Tongue, about the Discovery of what he had learned abroad, and so
these two went together to Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, whom Mr. Oats informed of a Plot hatched by Jesuits,
Priests, and others of the same Roman Catholic Persuasion, against the Person
and Life of his Majesty, the best of Kings, and the Subversion of the
Protestant Religion, and Government of the Kingdom. And for confirmation of
what he said, discovered many persons of several Qualities, who were engaged in
the Design; some as Instruments for assassinating his Majesty, and others for
carrying on the remaining part of the work, by Arms, Foreign Assistances, and
such other Expedients, as they Judged necessary for the Success of their
Enterprise His Majesty and the Council being acquainted with this, Orders were
given out for the apprehending and committing to custody of many persons; of
whom some have since suffered, some died in Prison, and many more are still in
Custody. To enumerate all, would be more tedious than necessary in this Manual;
and to name but a few, would be injurious either to those mentioned, or to the
Public, in omitting of others who stand accused of the same combination: we
shall therefore speak only of those who have been since brought to public
Trial, and leave it to Time, and the Care of our Governors, to make Public
the rest.

Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, who had taken, and given in to the Council, the
Depositions of the Evidence, was on Saturday the Twelfth of October, missing
from his House, and no News could be heard of him till Thursday following; at
which time he was found dead in a Ditch by Primrose-hill, with a Sword thrust
through his Body, but nothing, except his Pocket Book, taken from him. This
Murder was concluded by all Men to be an Act of Revenge, or some spightful
Malice, and not of unlawful desire of Lucre; seeing his Money and Rings, which
were no inconsiderable Prize, were left with him: And therefore His Majesty
being returned from New Market, caused a Proclamation to be Published the 20th
of October, for the Discovery of this Inhumane Murder; promising a Reward of
Five Hundred Pounds to any that should discover the Murderers, or any of them;
and if the Discoverer proved to be one of the Malefactors, not only his Pardon,
but likewise the promised Sum.

After the Parliament, according to the last Prorogation, had met the 21th of
October, which was their last Session; the King being informed that some who
could give information of the Manner and Circumstances of the Murder of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey, did forbear to do it out of fear to their Persons from the
Murderers Friends; His Majesty emitted another Proclamation, promising on the
word of a King, not only the said Reward of Five Hundred Pounds, but such Care
for the Security of the Discoverer, as he should in reason propose.

These two Proclamations at length inspired courage into William Bedlow,
formerly a Servant to the Lord Bellasis, to make a Discovery of this Murder,
which he and one Praunce a Silver Smith in Princes street, that confessed
himself to have been in the Fact, made out afterward against three of those
that were Guilty, the rest having Fled. And according to his Majesty's Promise,
Mr. Bedlow (as Mr. Oats had been before) was allowed Guards for his Security
and Accommodation and Subsistence at his Majesty's Charge in Whitehall.

The King and Parliament being surprised at the strangeness of this mischievous
Plot, betook themselves to the most probable ways of discovering the same, and
preventing the fatal Effects thereof; and therefore in the first place, upon
the humble Petition of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, his Majesty caused
a Proclamation to be published for a general Fast throughout the whole Kingdom,
to be observed on Wednesday the Thirteenth of November, for imploring the mercy
and and protection of Almighty God to his Majesty's Royal Person, and in him to
all his Loyal Subjects; and to pray that God would bring to light more and more
all sceret machinations against his Majesty and the whole Kingdom. This day of
Humiliation was accordingly observed throughout all England, and a form of
Prayer by his Majesty's Command composed and published for that purpose.

In the next place, His Majesty caused several Proclamations, and Orders of
Council to be published for the Discovering and Disabling of Popish Recusants:
The First of the 30th of October, commanding all Popish Recusants, or so
reputed, to depart from the Cities of London and Westminster, and all other
places within ten Miles of the same, was seconded by an Order of Council, on
the second of November, wherein his Majesty promised a reward of Twenty Pounds,
to those that should Discover any Officer or Soldier of his Majesty's Guards,
who having formerly taken the Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, and the Test, had
since been perverted, or should hereafter be perverted to the Romish Religion.

The Ninth of November, his Majesty came in his Robes into the House of Lords;
whither the Commons being called, his Majesty made a Gracious Speech, thanking,
both Houses for the Care they showed for the safety and preservation of his
Person, promising the like on his part for them, and offering his ready Assent
to the passing into Laws all such Bills as might secure their Religion, not
only during his own Reign, but also in the Reign of His Successors; provided
they did not impeach the right of Succession in the true Line, nor restrain the
power and just rights of His Majesty or His Protestant Successors.

Shortly after His Majesty issued out several Proclamations, as one for
confining all Popish Recusants within five miles of their respective dwellings;
another for apprehending some persons therein named, who were accused of the
hellish Plot; and a third, promising a present reward of twenty pounds to any
that should discover and cause to be apprehended, any Popish Priest or Jesuit,
except those that were privileged by the Law of the Land or that of Nations,
as serving the Queen or Foreign Ministers.

November 21, One William Staley a Goldsmith, being indicted at the Kings Bench
Bar of High Treason, for Treasonable words against His Majesty's Life, was
convicted and condemned to be drawn hanged, and quartered; which sentence was
on the 26th of the same month executed at Tyburn.

November 27th, Edward Coleman Esquire who on Friday before had been arraigned at
the Kings Bench Bar for High Treason, in conspiring the Death of the King,
subverting His Government, and extirpating the true Protestant Religion, came
to his Trial, and being upon full evidence convicted, had Sentence pronounced
against him next morning to be drawn, hanged, and quartered; which was
accordingly executed on the third of December following; he being the first
that suffered for the Plot, whereof many besides himself were, and stand still
accused.

November 28th, His Majesty at the humble request of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, assembled in Parliament, was pleased by Proclamation to declare, That
if any Person or Persons should before the twenty fifth day of December
following, make any further discovery of the horrid Design against His
Majesty's Sacred Person and Government; he, or they so discovering, should not
only have the reward of two hundred pounds for every such discovery upon due
proof thereof, but if guilty of the said Design, or otherwise of concealing it,
they should have His Majesty's Pardon.

November 30th, His Majesty in the House of Lords, gave His Royal Assent to an
Act for the more effectual preserving the Kings Person and Government, by
disabling Papists from sitting in either House of Parliament; and in December
following put out a Proclamation for disarming and securing all Popish
Recusants, or justly so suspected.

December 30th, His Majesty present in the House of Lords, was pleased to
Prorogue the Parliament till the fourth of February following; which was
afterward by Proclamation January 25th dissolved, and a new Parliament summoned
to meet the sixth of March 1678/9.

January 17th 1678/9, William Ireland a Jesuit, Thomas Pickering a Lay-brother
of the Benedictin Monks, and John Grove an Ale-house-keeper, were arraigned and
convicted at the Old Bailey, for having conspired the destruction of His
Majesty's Royal Person, the subversion of the Government, and extirpation of
the Protestant Religion. The chief evidence against them were Mr. Oats, Mr.
Bedlow, and one who had been a Serving Maid to Grove; they had Sentence
pronounced against them to be drawn, hanged, and quartered; and accordingly
January 24th, Ireland and Grove suffered at Tyburn, Pickering lying still
reprieved in Newgate. His Majesty's Forces that were recalled from Flanders,
began this month first to come over again.

Monday the 10th of February 1678/9, Robert Green, Henry Berry, and Lawrence
Hill, three of the murderers of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, were brought to their
Trial at the Kings Bench Bar, for the said murder; the main evidence against
them were the abovenamed Bedlow and Praunce, the first declaring that he had
seen the dead Body, and the other confessing he had had a hand in the murder;
which was briefly thus committed: Praunce, with the aforesaid Green, Berry and
Hill, and some others, having laid their design before, and several times
dogged Sir Edmondbury Godfrey; on Saturday night, the twelfth of October
finding him in the Strand, as he was returning home; upon a plausible pretext
of keeping the peace between two Gentlemen that were (as they made him believe)
a quarrelling; wheadled him into Somerset House, and there with a twisted
Hankerchief clapped about his Neck, some of them strangled him, whilst Praunce
and Berry watched at the Gates. His dead Body they lodged in Somerset House
till Wednesday following, and then carried it out in a Sedan as far as Sohoe,
where they mounted the same on a Horse, and so conveyed it to the Ditch,
leaving it there barbarously pierced through with a Sword: Upon this evidence
they were found guilty, condemned and executed.

At this time, Sir Joseph Williamson having resigned the Seals of Secretary of
State into his Majesty's hands, the Right Honorable, Robert Earl of
Sunderland, was in his place made one of the Principal Secretaries of State,
and accordingly took place at the Council Board.

The time of the Sitting of the New Parliament drawing near, his Majesty, that
he might remove all Jealousies from the minds of his Subjects, thought fit to
command his Royal Highness the Duke of York, to absent himself; who with his
Duchess, in obedience of his Majesty's Commands, on the third of March took
leave of his Majesty, in order to their going beyond Sea, where now they are at
Bruxelles in Flanders.

Thursday March the sixth the lately Summoned Parliament met at Westminster.
The King thinking it fit to wave the Solemnity of Riding used at the Opening of
the Parliaments of England, went in his Royal Barge to the House by Water; and
there in a gracious Speech, which was enlarged by the Lord Chancelour; His
Majesty told both Houses what he expected, and the Country stood in need of,
from their unanimous and wise Deliberations.

And now that the Joint and Healing Councils of his Gracious Majesty and this
present Parliament may so effectually operate in composing the Divisions,
uniting the Minds, and settling the Peace of the People of this Nation, as may
afford many Volumes of Noble Acts, at present to be transmited to grateful
Posterity, no other ways than by hearty Wishes; it is and ought to be the
fervent Prayer of all who truly fear God, honor their King, and desire the
Welfare and Prosperity of his Kingdoms.

Mayors and Sheriffs of LONDON, to the 31th Year of His Reign.
In his First Year, 1649. Thomas Foot, was Mayor. Christopher Pack, Rowland
Wilson died in the Year. John Dethick, Sheriffs.


In his 2d. Year, 1650. Thomas Andrews, was Mayor. Robert Tichborn, Richard
Chiverton, Sheriffs.


In his 3d. Year, 1651. John Kendrick, was Mayor. Andrew Richards, John Ireton,
Sheriffs.


In his 4th. Year, 1652. John Fowke, was Mayor. Stephen Eastwick, William
Underwood Sheriffs.


In his 5th. Year, 1653. Thomas Vynor, was Mayor. James Phillips, Walter Big,
Sheriffs.


In his 6th. Year, 1654. Christopher Pack, was Mayor. Edmund Sleigh, Thomas
Aleyn, Sheriffs.


In his 7th Year, 1655. John Dethick, was Mayor. William Thompson, John
Frederick, Sheriffs.


In his 8th Year, 1656. Robert Tichburn, was Mayor. Tempest Milner, Nathanial
Temms, Sheriffs.


In his 9th Year, 1657. Richard Chiverton, was Mayor. John Robinson, Thomas
Chandler, died in the Year, Richard King, Sheriffs.


In his 10th. Year, 1658. John Ireton, was Mayor. Anthony Bateman, John
Lawrence, Sheriffs.


In his 11th Year, and part of the 12th 1660. Sir Thomas Aleyn, Baronet, was
Mayor. Francis Warner, William Love, Sheriffs.


In his 12th. Year, and part of the 13th. 1661. Sir Richard Brown, Baronet, was
Mayor. Sir William Boulton, Sir William Peake, Sheriffs.


In his 13th. Year, and part of the 14th. 1662. Sir John Frederick, was Mayor.
Francis Menill, Samuel Starling, Sheriffs.


In his 14th. Year, and part of the 15th. 1663. Sir John Robinson, was Mayor.
Sir Thomas Bludworth, Sir William Turner Sheriffs.


In his 15th Year, and part of the 16th 1664. Sir Anthony Bateman was Mayor.
Sir Richard Ford, Sir Richard Rives Sheriffs.


In his (...) of the 17th 1665. Sir John (...) ^ayor. Sir George W^^^^^ (...)
Charles Do, Sheriffs.


In his 17th Year and part of the 18th 1666. Sir Thomas Bludworth was Mayor.
Sir Robert Hanson, Sir William Hooker, Sheriffs.


In his 18th Year, and part of the 20th 1667. Sir William Boulton, was Mayor.
Sir Robert Vinor, Sir Joseph Sheldon, Sheriffs.


In his 18th Year, and part of the 20th 1668. Sir William Peak, was Mayor. Sir
Dennis Gauden, Sir Thomas Davis, Sheriffs.


In his 20th Year, and part of the 21th 1669. Sir William Turner, was Mayor.
John Forth Esquire Sir Francis Chaplain, Sheriffs.


In his 21th Year, and part of the 22th 1670. Sir Samuel Starling, was Mayor.
Sir John Smith, Sir James Edwards, Sheriffs.


In his 22th Year, and part of the 23th 1671. Sir Richard Ford, was Mayor.
Samuel Forth, Patience Ward, Sheriffs.


In his 23th Year, and part of the 24th 1672. Sir George VVaterman, was Mayor.
Sir Jonathan Daws died in the Year, Sheriffs. Sir Robert Claiton, Sir John
Moore, Sheriffs.


In his 24th Year, and part of the 25th 1673. Sir Robert Hanson, was Mayor. Sir
William Pritchard, Sir James Smith Sheriffs.


In his 25th Year, and part of the 26th 1674. Sir William Hooker, was Mayor.
Sir Henry Tulse, Sir Robert Jeffry, Sheriffs.


In his 26th Year, and part of the 27th 1675 Sir Robert Vynor was Mayor. Sir
Nathaniel Hern, Sir John Lethieulier, Sheriffs.


In his 27th Year, and part of the 28th 1676. Sir Joseph Sheldon, was Mayor.
Sir Thomas Gold, Sir John Shorter, Sheriffs.


In his 28th Year, and part of the 29th 1677. Sir Thomas Davis, was Mayor. Sir
John Peak, Sir Thomas Stamp, Sheriffs.


In his 29th Year, and part of the 30th 1678. Sir Francis Chaplain, was Mayor.
Sir William Royston, Sir Thomas Beckford, Sheriffs.


In his 30th Year, and part of the 31th 1679. Sir James Edwards, was Mayor. Sir
William How, Sir John Chapmau, Sheriffs.


A LIST Of the Names of the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons of the
Cinque Ports, that are Returned to serve in the Parliament of England, begun
the sixth of March, 1678/9.
Bedfordshire.
William Lord Russel. Sir Humphrey Munnox Bar.
Town of Bedford.
Pawlet St. John, Esquire Sir William Franklin, Knight.
Berks.
Sir Humphrey Forster Bar. William Barker Esquire
Borough of New Windsor.
Ralph Winwood, Esquire John Starkey, Esquire
Borough of Reading.
John Blagrave Esquire Nathan Knight Esquire
Borough of Wallingford.
John Stone Esquire Scory Barker Esquire
Borough of Abington.
Sir John Stonehouse Bar.
Bucks.
Thomas Wharton, Esquire John Hampden, Esquire
Town of Bucks.
Edward Viscount Latimer. Sir Peter Tyrril, Bar.
Borough of Chipping Wiccomb.
Sir John Borlase, Bar. Thomas Jews, Esquire
Borough of Aylesbury.
Sir Thomas Lee, Bar. Sir Richard Ingolsby Knight. of the Bath.
Borough of Agmondesham.
Sir William Drake, Knight. Sir Roger Hill, Knight.
Borough of Wendover.
Richard Hampden, Esquire Edward Backwel, Esquire
Borough of great Marlow.
Sir Humphrey Winch, Bar. John Borlase Esquire
Cambridge.
Gerrard Russel, Esquire Edward Partherich, Esquire
University of Cambridge.
Sir Thomas Exton, Knight. James Vernon, Esquire
Town of Cambridge.
William Lord Allington Sir Thomas Chichely, Knight.
Chester.
Henry Booth, Esquire Sir Phillip Egerton, Knight.
City of Chester.
William Williams, Esquire Sir Thomas Grosvenor, Bar.
Cornwall.
Francis Roberts, Esquire Sir Richard Edgcomb, Knight. of the Bath.
Borough of Dunhivid, alias, Lanceston.
Bernard Greenvill, Esquire Sir Charles Harbord, Knight.
Borough of Leskard.
John Buller, Esquire John Connock, Esquire
Borough of Lestwithiel.
Sir John Carew, Bar. Walter Kendall, Esquire
Borough of Truro.
William Boscawen, Esquire Edward Boscawen, Esquire
Borough of Bodmyn.
Hender Roberts, Esquire Nicholas Glyn, Esquire
Borough of Helston.
Sir William Godolphin, Bar. Sir Viell Vivian.
Borough of Saltash.
Bernard Greenvil, Esquire Nicholas Courtenay, Esquire
Borough of Gamelford.
Sir James Smith, Knight. Russell, Esquire
Borough of Port Pigham, alias, Westlow.
John Trelawney, Mayor of Westlow, Esquire John Trelawney, Senior, Esquire
Borough of Cram pound.
Sir Joseph Tredenham, Knight. Charles Trevanniam, Esquire
Borough of Eastlow.
Sir Jonathan Trelawney, Bar. Henry Seymour, Esquire
Borough of Penryn.
Francis Trefusis, Esquire Sir Robert Southwell, Knight.
Borough of Tregoney.
Hugh Boscawen, Esquire John Tanner, Esquire
Borough of Bossiney.
William Coriton, Esquire John Tregegle, Esquire
Borough of St. Ives.
Edward Noseworthy, Senior, Esquire Edward Noseworthy, Junior, Esquire
Borough of Fowey.
Jonathan Rashley, Esquire John Trefry, Esquire
Borough of St. Germains.
Daniel Elliot, Esquire Richard Elliot, Esquire
Borough of St. Michel.
Sir John St. Aubin, Bar. Walter Vincent, Esquire
Borough of Newport.
John Coryton, Esquire Ambrose Manaton, Esquire
Borough of St. Mawes.
Sidney Godolphin, Esquire Henry Seymour, Junior, Esquire
Borough of Kellington.
Sir John Coryton, Bar. Samuel Roles, Esquire
Cumberland.
Sir John Lowther of White-haven, Bar. Richard Lamplugh, Esquire
City of Carlisle.
Sir Philip Howard, Knight. Sir Christopher Musgrave, Knight.
Borough of Cockermouth.
Sir Richard Grahme, Bar. Orlando Gee, Esquire
Derby.
William Lord Cavendish. William Sacheverell, Esquire
Town of Derby.
Anchetill Gray, Esquire George Vernon, Esquire
Devonshire.
Edward Seymour, Esquire Sir William Courtenay, Bar.
City of Exeter.
William Glyde, Esquire Malachy Pine, Esquire
Borough of Totnes.
Sir Edward Seymour, Bar. John Kelland, Jun. Esquire
Borough of Plymouth.
Sir John Maynard, Knight. His Majesty's Sergeant at Law. John Spark, Esquire
Town and Borough of Oke-hampton.
Sir Arthur Harris, Bar. Josias Calmady, Jun. Esquire
Borough of Barnstaple.
Sir Hugh Acland, Bar. John Basset, Esquire
Borough of Plympton.
George Treby, Esquire Richard Hillersdon, Esquire
Borough of Honiton.
Sir Walter Young, Bar. Sir Thomas Put, Bar.
Borough of Tavistock.
Sir Francis Drake, Bar. Edward Russel, Esquire
Borough of Ashburton.
Thomas Raynel, Esquire William Stawell, Esquire
Borough of Clifton Dartmouth, and Hardness.
John Upton, Esquire Sir Nathaniel Hern, Knight.
Borough of Beeralston.
Sir William Bastard, Knight. Sir John Trevors, Knight.
Borough of Tiverton.
Samuel Foot, Esquire Sir Henry Ford, Knight.
Dorsetshire.
Thomas Strangeways, Esquire Thomas Freake, Esquire
Town of Pool.
Thomas Chafin, Esquire Henry Trenchard, Esquire
Borough of Dorchester.
Sir Francis Hollis, Knight. and Bar. Nicholas Gould, Merch.
Borough of Lyme Regis.
Sir George Strode, one of his Majesty's Sergeant at Law. Henry Henley, Esquire
Borough of Waymouth.
Anthony Lord Ashley. Sir John Coventry, Knight. of the Bath.
Borough of Melcomb Regis.
Thomas Brown, Esquire Michael Harvey, Esquire
Borough of Bridport.
Wadham Strangeways, Esquire John Every, Esquire
Borough of Shaftson, alias Shaftsbury.
Henry Whitaker, Esquire Thomas Bennet, Esquire
Borough of Wareham.
Thomas Earl, Esquire George Savage, Esquire
Borough of Corfe Castle.
Sir Nathaniel Napper. John Tregonwell, Esquire
Durham.
Sir Robert Eden, Bar. John Tempest, Esquire
City of Durham.
Sir Ralph Cole, Bar. William Tempest, Esquire
Essex.
Sir Eliab Harvey, Knight. Henry Mildmay, Esquire
Borough of Colchester.
Sir Harbottle Grimstone. Bar. Sir Walter Clarges, Bar.
Borough of Malden.
Sir William Wiseman, Knight. and Bar. Sir John Bramston, Knight. of the Bath.
Borough of Harwich.
Sir Anthony Dean, Knight. Samuel Pepys, Esquire
Gloucestershire.
Sir John Guyse, Bar. Sir Ralph Dutton, Bar.
City of Gloucester.
Evan Seys, Sergeant at Law. William Cook, Esquire
Borough of Cirencester.
Sir Robert Atkins, Jun. Knight. Henry Powle, Esquire
Borough of Tukesbury.
Sir Henry Capell, Knight. of the Bath. Sir Francis Russel, Bar.
Herefordshire.
John Viscount Scudamore. Sir Herbert Crofts, Bar.
City of Hereford.
Bridstock Hartford, Esquire Paul Foley, Esquire
Borough of Lempster.
James Pits, Esquire John Dutton Colt, Esquire
Borough of Weobly.
William Gregory, Sergeant at Law, John Birch, Esquire
Hertfordshire.
Silus Titus, Esquire William Hale, Esquire
Borough of St. Albans.
Thomas Pope Blount, Esquire John Gape, Gent.
Borough of Hertford.
Sir Thomas Bide, Knight. Sir Charles Caesar, Knight.
Huntingdonshire.
Ralph Mountague, Esquire Robert Apreece, Esquire
Borough of Huntingdon.
Sydney Wortley, alias Mountague, Esquire Sir Nicholas Pedley, Knight.
Kent.
Sir Vere Fane, Knight. of the Bath. Edward Dering, Esquire
City of Canterbury.
Edward Hales, Esquire William Jacob, D. of Physic.
City of Rochester.
Sir John Banks, Bar. Sir Richard Head, Bar.
Borough of Maidstone.
Sir John Tufton, Knight. and Bar. Sir John Darel, Knight.
Borough of Queenborough.
James Herbert, Esquire Sir Edward Hales, Bar.
Lancaster.
Charles Gerrard, Esquire Peter Bold, Esquire
Borough of Lancaster.
Richard Kirkby, Esquire Richard Harrison, Esquire
Borough or Town of Preston in Amounderness.
Sir Robert Car, Knight. and Bar. Edward Rigby, Sergeant at Law.
Borough of Newton.
Sir John Chicheley, Knight. Andrew Fountain, Esquire
Borough of Wigon.
Charles Earl of Ancram. Roger Bradshaw, Esquire
Borough of Clithero.
Sir Ralph Ashton, Bar. Sir Thomas Stringer, Sergeant at Law.
Borough of Liverpool.
Ruishen Wentworth, Esquire John Dubois, Merchant.
Leicester.
Sir John Forstop. Bennet Lord Sherrard.
Town of Leicester.
John Gray, Esquire Sir Henry Beaumont, Bar.
Lincoln.
George Visc. Castleton. Sir Robert Car, Knight. and Bar.
City of Lincoln.
Sir Thomas Meers, Knight. Henry Monson, Esquire
Borough of Boston.
Sir Anthony Irby, Knight. Sir William Ellis, Knight. Sergeant at Law.
Borough of Great Grimsby.
William Broxolme, Esquire George Pelham, Esquire
Town of Stamford.
Sir Richard Cust, Bar. William Hyde, Esquire
Borough of Grantham.
Sir William Ellis, Bar. Sir John Newton, Bar.
Middlesex.
Sir William Roberts, Bar. Sir Robert Peyton, Knight.
City of Westminster.
Sir Stephen Fox, Knight. Sir William Pultenay, Knight.
LONDON.
Sir Robert Clayton, Knight. Sir Thomas Player, Knight. William Love, Esquire Thomas
Pilkington, Esquire
Monmouth.
Charles Somerset Lord Herbert of Ragland. William Morgan, Esquire
Borough of Monmouth.
Sir Trevor Williams, Bar.
Norfolk.
Sir John Hubbart, Knight. Sir Nevil Catlyne, Knight.
City of Norwich.
William Paston, Esquire Augustine Briggs, Esquire
Town of Lynn Regis.
John Turner, Esquire Simon Tailor, Gent.
Town of Great Yarmouth.
Sir William Coventry, Knight. Richard Huntington, Esquire
Borough of Thetford.
Sir Joseph Williamson, Knight. William Harbord, Esquire
Borough of Castlerising.
Sir Robert Howard, Knight. James Host, Esquire
Northampton.
Sir Roger Norwich. Bar. John Parkhurst, Esquire
City of Peterborough.
William Lord Fitzwilliams. Francis St. John's, Esquire
Town of Northampton.
Sir Hugh Cholmley, Bar. Sir William Farmer. Bar.
Town of Brackley.
Sir Thomas Crew, Knight. William Lisle, Esquire
Borough of Higham Ferrers.
Sir Rice Rud, Bar.
Northumberland.
Sir John Fenwick, Bar. Sir Ralph Dalavell, Bar.
Town of New Castle upon Tine.
Sir William Blacket, Bar. Sir Francis Anderson, Knight.
Borough of Morpeth.
Edward Lord Morpeth. Sir George Downing, Knight. and Bar.
Town of Berwick upon Tweed.
Ralph Gray, Esquire John Rushworth, Esquire
Nottingham.
Sir Scroop How, Knight. John White, Esquire
Town of Nottingham.
Robert Pierrepont, Esquire Richard Slater, Esquire
Borough of Eastretford.
Sir William Hickman, Bar. Sir Edward Nevile, Knight. and Bar.
Borough of Newark.
Robert Lord Deincourt. Sir Robert Markham, Bar.
Oxon.
Sir Edward Norris, Knight. Sir John Cope, Bar.
University of Oxon.
Heneage Finch, Esquire His Majesty's Solicitor General. John Edisbury Dr. of Laws.
City of Oxon.
William Wright, Esquire Broom Whorwood, Esquire
Borough of New-Woodstock.
Sir Littleton Osbaldeston, Bar. Nicholas Baynton, Esquire
Borough of Bandbury.
Sir John Holman, Bar.
Rutland.
Philip Sherrard, Esquire Sir Thomas Mackworth, Bar.
Salop.
Richard Newport, Esquire Sir Vincent Corbet, Bar.
Town of Salop.
Sir Richard Corbet, Bar. Edward Kinnaston, Esquire
Borough of Bruges, alias Bridgenorth.
Sir Thomas Whitmore, Knight. of the Bath. Sir William Whitmore, Bar.
Borough of Ludlow.
Francis Charlton, Esquire Somerset Fox, Esquire
Borough of Great Wenlock.
Sir John Wild, Knight. William Forrester, Esquire
Town of Bishops Castle.
Edmund Waring, Esquire William Oakely, Esquire
Somerset.
Sir Hugh Smith, Knight. of the Bath, and Bar. Sir John Sydenhan, Bar.
City of Bristol.
Sir Robert Cann, Knight. and Bar. Sir John Knight, Knight.
City of Bath.
Sir William Basset, Knight. Sir George Speak, Bar.
City of Wells.
Edward Berkly, Esquire William Coward, Esquire
Borough of Taunton.
Sir William Portman, Bar. and Knight. of the Bath. John Trenchard, Esquire
Borough of Bridgewater.
Ralph Stawel, Esquire Sir Haswel Tynt, Bar. Sir Francis Role, Knight.
Borough of Minehead.
Francis Lutterel, Esquire Sir John Mallet, Knight.
Borough of Ilcester.
William Strode, Esquire John Speak, Esquire
Borough of Milhorneport.
John Hunt, Esquire William Lacy, Jun. Esquire
Southampton.
Edward Noel, Esquire Richard Norton, Esquire
City of Winchester.
James Lord Annesly. Sir John Clobery, Knight.
Town of Southampton.
Thomas Knowlys, Esquire Benjamen Newland, Merch.
Town of Portsmouth.
George Leg, Esquire Sir John Kempthorn, Knight.
Borough of Yarmouth.
Sir Richard Mason, Knight. Thomas Lucy, Esquire
Borough of Peters-Field.
Sir John Norton, Bar. Leonard Bilson, Esquire
Borough of Newport, alias Medona.
Sir Robert Holms, Knight. Sir Robert Dillington, Bar.
Borough of Stockbridge.
Henry Whitehead, Esquire Oliver St. John, Esquire
Borough of Newton.
Sir John Holmes, Knight. John Churchill, Esquire
Borough of Christ Church.
Sir. Thomas Clargis, Knight. Henry Tulse, Esquire
Borough of Whit-Church.
Richard Ayliffe, Esquire Henry Wallop, Esquire
Borough of Limington.
John Button, Esquire Bartholomew Bunkley, Esquire
Town of Andover.
Francis Pawlet, Esquire William Withers, Esquire
Staffordshire.
Sir Walter Baggott, Bar. Sir John Bowyer, Bar.
City of Litchfield.
Sir Henry Littleton, Bar. Michael Biddulph, Esquire
Borough of Stafford.
Waller Chetwind, Esquire Sir Thomas Armstrong, Knight.
Borough of New Castle under Line.
Sir Thomas Bellot, Bar. William Leveston Gower, Esquire
Borough of Tamworth.
Thomas Thynne, Esquire John Swynfen, Esquire
Suffolk.
Sir Jervase Elwes, Bar. Sir Samuel Barnardiston, Bar.
Borough of Ipswich.
Gilbert Linfield, Esquire John Wright, Esquire
Borough of Dunwich.
Sir Philip Skippon, Knight. Thomas Allen, Esquire
Borough of Orford.
Lionel Lord Huntingtower. Sir John Duke, Bar.
Borough of Alborough.
Sir Richard Haddock, Knight. Henry Johnson, Esquire
Borough of Sudbury.
Sir Robert Cordell, Bar. Jervase Elwes, Esquire
Borough of Eye.
Sir Charles Gaudey, Knight. and Bar. Sir Robert Reves, Bar.
Borough of Saint Edmundsbury.
Sir Thomas Harvey, Knight. Thomas Jermin, Esquire
Surrey.
Arthur Onslow, Esquire George Evelyn of Wotton, Esquire
Borough of Southwark.
Sir Richard How, Knight. Peter Rich, Esquire
Borough of Blechingly.
George Evelyn of Nutfield, Esquire Edward Harvey, Esquire
Borough of Ryegate.
Roger James, Esquire Dean Goodwyn, Esquire
Borough of Guilford.
Richard Onslow, Esquire Thomas Dalmahoy, Esquire
Borough of Gatton.
Sir Nicholas Carew, Knight. Thomas Turgis, Esquire
Borough of Haslemere.
Sir William More, Bar. James Gresham, Esquire
Sussex.
Sir John Pelham, Bar. John Lewkener, Esquire
City of Chichester.
Richard May, Esquire John Braman, Esquire
Borough of Horsham.
Anthony Eversfield, Esquire John Mitchell, Esquire
Borough of Midhurst.
Sir William Morley, Knight. of the Bath. John Alford, Esquire
Borough of Jews.
William Morley, Esquire Edward Bridger, Esquire
Borough of New Shoreham.
Robert Fag, Esquire John Cheale, Esquire
Borough of Bramber.
Henry Goring, Esquire Nicholas Eversfield, Esquire
Borough of Steyning.
Sir John Fagg, Bar. Sir Henry Goring, Bar.
Borough of East-Grimstead.
Thomas Pelham, Esquire Sir Thomas Littleton, Knight.
Borough of Arundel.
William Garraway, Esquire James Butler, Esquire
Warwickshire.
Sir Edward Boughton, Bar. Robert Burdet, Esquire
City of Coventry.
Richard Hopkins, Esquire Robert Beak, Esquire
Borough of Warwick.
Sir Henry Puckering, Bar. Sir John Clopton, Knight.
Westmerland.
Sir John Lowther of Lowther, Knight. Allen Bellingham, Esquire
Borough of Apulby.
Richard Tufton, Esquire Anthony Lowther, Esquire
Wiltshire.
Sir Richard Grubbam How, Knight and Baronet. Thomas Thinn, of Long Leat, Esquire
City of New Sarum.
Sir Thomas Mompesson, Knight. Alexander Thiftlethwait, Esquire
Borough of Wilton.
Thomas Herbert, Esquire Thomas Penruddock, Esquire
Borough of Downton.
Maurice Bockland, Esquire Sir Joseph Ash, Bar.
Borough of Hindon.
Richard How, Esquire Thomas Lambert, Esquire
Borough of Westbury.
Richard Lewis, Esquire William Trenchard, Esquire
Borough of Hetsbury.
William Ash, Esquire Edward Ash, Esquire
Borough of Calne.
Sir George Hungerford, Knight. Walter Norborn, Esquire
Borough of the Devizes.
Sir Walter Ernley, Bar. Sir Edward Baynton, Knight. of the Bath.
Borough of Chippenham.
Sir Edward Hungerford, Knight. of the Bath. Sir John Talbot, Knight.
Borough of Malmesbury.
Sir William Estcourt, Bar. Sir James Long, Bar.
Borough of Cricklade.
Hungerford Dunce, Esquire Edmund Web, Esquire
Borough of Great Bedwyn.
Francis Stonehouse, Esquire John Dean, Esquire
Borough of Lugdersal.
Thomas Neal, Esquire John Smith, Jun. Esquire
Borough of Old Sarum.
Eliab Harvey, Esquire John Young, Esquire
Borough of Wooton Basset.
Lawrence Hyde, Esquire John Pleydall, Esquire
Borough of Marlborough.
Thomas Bennet, Esquire Edward Goddard, Esquire
Worcestershire.
Samuel Sandys, Esquire Thomas Foley, Esquire
City of Worcester.
Thomas Street, one of his Majesty's Sergeants at Law. Sir Francis Winnington,
Knight.
Borough of Droitwich.
Henry Coventry, Esquire Principal Secretary of State. Samuel Sandys, Jun. Esquire
Borough of Evesham.
Sir James Rushout, Bar. Henry Parker, Esquire
Borough of Bewdey.
Philip Foley, Esquire
Yorkshire.
Charles Lord Clifford. Henry Lord Fairfax.
City of York.
Sir John Hewley, Knight. Sir Henry Thompson, Knight.
Town of Kingston upon Hull.
Lemuell Kingdone, Esquire William Ramsden, Esquire
Borough of Knaresborough.
Sir Thomas Slingby, Bar. William Stockdale, Esquire
Borough of Scaresborough.
William Thompson, Esquire Francis Thompson, Esquire
Borough of Rippon.
Sir Edmund Jennings, Knight. Richard Stern, Esquire
Borough of Richmond.
Thomas Craddock, Esquire Humphrey Warton, Esquire
Borough of Heyden.
Sir Hugh Bethell, Knight. Henry Guy, Esquire
Borough of Burrowbrigg.
Sir Thomas Malleverer, Bar. Sir Henry Gooderick, Knight. and Bar.
Borough of Malton.
William Palms, Esquire Sir Watkinson Payler, Bar.
Borough of Thirske.
Sir William Frankland, Bar. Nich. Sanderson, Esquire
Borough of Alborough.
Sir John Reresby, Bar. Henry Arthington, Esquire
Borough of Beverly.
Sir John Hotham, Bar. Michael Warton, Esquire
Borough of North-Allerton.
Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Bar. Sir Henry Calverly, Knight.
Borough of Pontefract.
Sir John Dawney, Knight. Sir Patience Ward, Knight.
BARONS Of the CINQUE PORTS.
Port of Hastings.
Sir Robert Parker, Bar. John Ashburnham, Esquire
Town of Winchelsey.
Creswell Draper, Esquire Thomas Austin, Esquire
Town of Rye.
Sir John Robinson, Knight. and Bar. Thomas Frewen, Esquire
Port of new Rumney.
Sir Charles Sedley, Bar. Paul Barret, Esquire
Port of Hyeth.
Sir Edward Dering, Bar. Julius Deeds, Esquire
Port of Dover.
William Stokes, Esquire Thomas Papillon, Esquire John Strode, Esquire
Port of Sandwich.
John Thurburn, Esquire Sir Ja. Oxenden, Knight. and Bar.
Port of Seaford.
Sir William Thomas, Bar. Herbert Stapley, Esquire
WALES.
Anglesey.
Henry Bulkeley, Esquire
Town of Bewmarris.
Richard Bulkeley, Esquire
Brecon.
Richard Williams, Esquire
Town of Brecon.
Thomas Mansel, Esquire John Jefferies, Esquire,
Cardigan.
Edward Vaughan of Trouscoed, Esquire
Town of Cardigan.
Hector Philips, Esquire
Carmarthen.
John Lord Vaughan, Knight. of the Bath.
Town of Carmarthen.
Altham Vaughan, Esquire
Carnervon.
Thomas Bulkeley of Dinas, Esquire
Town of Carnervon.
Thomas Mostin of Glotheth, Esquire
Denbigh.
Sir Thomas Middleton, Bar.
Town of Denbigh.
Sir John Salisbury, Bar.
Flint.
Mutton Davies, Esquire
Town of Flint.
Roger Whitley, Esquire
Glamorgan.
Bussy Mansel, Esquire
Town of Cardiffe.
Sir Robert Thomas, Bar.
Merieneth.
Sir John Win, Knight. and Bar.
Pembroke.
Sir Hugh Owen, Bar.
Town of Pembroke.
Arthur Owen, Esquire
Town of Haverfordwest.
William Wogan, Esquire
Montgomery.
Edward Vaughan, Esquire
Town of Montgomery.
Matthew Price, Esquire Edward Loyd, Esquire
Radnor.
Rowland Gwyn, Esquire
Town of Radnor.
Deerham, Esquire
HIS MAJESTY'S Most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
HIS Highness Prince Rupert. William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Heneage
Lord Finch Lord Chancellor of England. Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury Lord
President of the Council. Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal. James Duke
of Monmouth, Master of the Horse. John Duke of Lauderdale, Secretary of State
for Scotland. James Duke of Ormond Lord Steward of the Household. Charles Lord
Marquess of Winchester. Henry Lord Marquess of Worcester. Henry Earl of
Arlington, Lord Chamberlain of the Household. James Earl of Salisbury. John Earl
of Bridgwater. Robert Earl of Sunderland, one of His Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State. Arthur Earl of Essex, first Lord Commissioner of the
Treasury. John Earl of Bath Groom of the Stole. Thomas Lord Viscount
Falconberg. George Lord Viscount Hallifax. Henry Lord Bishop of London. John
Lord Roberts. Denzill Lord Hollis. William Lord Russel. William Lord Cavendish.
Henry Coventry Esquire one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State. Sir
Francis North Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. Sir Henry Capel
Knight of the Bath, first Commissioner of the Admiralty. Sir John Ernly Knight,
Chancellor of the Exchequer. Sir Thomas Chicheley Knight, Master of the
Ordnance. Sir William Temple Baronet. Edward Seymour Esquire Henry Powle Esquire
Commissioners for the Treasury.
ARthur Earl of Essex. Lawrence Hide, Esquire Sir Edward Deering. Sidney Godolphin.
Sir John Ernly Chancellor of the Exchequer. Secretary to the Treasury, Henry
Guy Esquire.
Commissioners for the Execution of the Office of Lord High Admiral of England.
SIr Henry Capell, Knight of the Bath. Daniel Finch, Esquire.
Baronets.
Sir Thomas Lee, Sir Humphrey Winch, Sir Thomas Meers,
Esquires.
Edward Vaughan, and Edward Hales,
FINIS.
BOOKS sold by Abell Swalle at the Sign of the Unicorn at the West End of St.
Paul's.
Folio's.
PLutarch's Lives in English. Sir Rich. Baker's Chronicle, 1679. Mr. Joseph
Mead's Works. Mr. Abr. Cowley's Poems. Hugonis Grotii, Opera omnia Theologica,
4. Vol. 1679. Episcopii Op. Vol. 1. Suarez de Legibus.
Quarto's.
Cluverii Geographia in figuris. Zelidaura Queen of Tartaria. A Dramatick
Romance, written in spanish by the command of the King of Spain, made English.
1679
Octavo.
A Conference between Dr. Stilling-fleet, and Dr. Burnet, with Coleman, 1679.
Sermons on several Occasions. By John Tillotson, D. D. Dean of Canterbury.
Scriptural Catechism, or the Duty of Man laid down in express words of
Scripture. A Discourse concerning the Blessedness of the Righteous, by Mr. How,
M. A. Tou's Le's Devoires de T'homme' on La Practique devertus Chre'tiames.
Dict. Dutch. Grammar. Festan 's French Grammar. A Discourse concerning the
Period of Humane Life.
Twelves.
French Bible. French Testament, Psalms. French Common Prayer.

