portrait

A la Ecella, y SERENISSIMA MAGESTAD, DE DOnA CATARINA De BRAGANCA Infanta de
Portugal, y Reyna de la Gran Bretana, etc. Que Dios guarde Con acrecentamientos
de toda Felicidad Imaginable, Segun los mas humildes, los mas Entranables
Desseos, y Devociones De

Don Diego Howel.
En Londres 1662.
A NEW ENGLISH Grammar, Prescribing as certain Rules as the Language will bear,
for Forreners to learn English: There is also another Grammar of the Spanish or
Castilian Tongue, With some special remarks upon the Portugues Dialect, etc.

Whereunto is annexed A Discourse or Dialog containing a Perambulation of Spain
and Portugal, which may serve for a direction how to travel through both
Countries, etc.

For the service of Her MAJESTY, whom God preserve.

LONDON, Printed for T. Williams, H. Brom, and H. Marsh. 1662.

GRAMATICA De la Lengua Inglesa, Prescriviendo Reglas para alcancarla;

Otra Gramatica de la Lengua Espanola o Castellana, Con ciertas Observaciones
tocante el Dialecto Portugues Y un Discurso conteniendo La perambulacion de
Espana, y de Portugal. Que podra servir por Direction a los que quieren caminar
por Aquellas Tierras, etc.

Por el servicio de su MAGESTAD Que Dios guarde.

LONDON, Printed for T. Williams, H. Brom, and H. Marsh, 1662.

To the Sagacious REDER.
HE who will pry well into the pedigree of the English Language will find that
she is of a high Descent, For she has the Highdutch (the most ancient German
Tongue) to her Gran Mother, And the Saxon (the prime dialect of the Highdutch)
to her Mother, For the ancient Britains and Hibernians, I mean the Welsh and
Irish have no other name for Her (and her Nation) to this day.

She may be said also to have the French for her Mother-in-law, her Laws
being couched therein, for it is 600. complete years within five, since the
Norman took footing here, who with his Leopards endeavored to bring in his Laws
and Language.

But whereas Mothers-in-law or Stepmothers seldom use to be kind, yet the
French has bin so to the English, For she has not only enriched, but
civilized and smoothed Her with many thousands of words derived from the Latin,
whereby she is grown the more copious, nor indeed is there any Language fuller
of Synonymas, in regard she has for most things both a Saxon and a French
word, as Stout valiant; Bold hardy; Godly devout; Wise prudent; Anger choler; a
spit a broche; Board table; Town City, etc. But it is worth the observing that
her Monosyllables are all Saxon or Dutch, which made one say, that the
Englishman capapie from top to toe is Dutch in all the parts of his body, in
his drinking and eating He is Dutch, at bed and board he is Dutch; He is all
Dutch at Sea, as also when he holds the plough, in his numbers in the days of
the week (not the months) He is Dutch; in his clothing he is Dutch, (though
French in his fashion) He is Dutch in his Fishing, but in Fighting,
Fortifying, and Fencing, as also in Hawking, Hunting, and Heraldry, in Dancing,
Riding, and Painting, in his Music and Airs he is all French, etc.

Add herunto that the English grows every day more and more Copious by an
adoption she makes of the choicest foreign Words, which insinuating themselfs
into Her by degrees do in tract of time as it were Naturalize themselfs and
become free denisons; In so much that the English may be said to be Dutch
embordered with many other Languages.

Now, touching this new English Grammar, let not the Reder mistake, as if it
were an English Grammar to learn another Language, as Lilly is for Latin, and
Littleton for French, etc. No, This is a mere Grammar of the English it self,
for the use of Forreners; With a modest reserche into some Solecismes that are
in the ortography and speaking.

It is a hard task to make a Grammar of a Mother Tongue, A harder task to make
one of a Dialect, But to make an exact Regular Grammar for all parts of a
Subdialect (as the English is) is a task that may be said to be beyond the
reach of human understanding, the subject being not capable of it: Mr. Ben.
Johnson a Weighty man, and one who was as patient as he was painful in all
his composures confessed, the further he waded herin the more he was still
gravelled.

Concerning the Spanish, The best Gramarians and Artists have bin consulted
withal, besides the Authors own observation who breathed air a long time under
that Clime; The Castilian is a clear and grave lesurly Speech, it carries a
kind of state, and deliberation with it; Therefore it affects long words as what
we express in one Syllable, the Spaniard has five or six Syllables, as
Nacimiento birth, Murcielago a batt; Levantamiento an uproar, etc. Now, as
English may be said to be nothing else but Dutch inlayed with French, so the
Castilian Tongue is nothing else but Latin inlayed with Morisco words; But the
difference is, that the English is made the smoother by association she has
with the French, But the Castilian Tongue is grown more rugged by the admission
and mixture of the Morisco words, who coming from the Arabic have a guttural or
throaty pronunciation.

The several parts whereof this BOOK consists.
FIrst, a new English Grammar prescribing as certain Rules as the Language will
bear for Forreners, (the Spaniard especially, into whose Tongue it is rendered)
to attain the knowledge of the English.

2. Of diverse superfluous letters that are used in writing English which may be
well omitted, whereby the language will be more easily for Forreners to learn:
As also of some Solecisms used in the common practice of speech.

3. A Grammar of the Spanish or Castilian Tongue.

4. Some special remarks upon the Portugues Dialect, and how it differs from
the Castilian, with a short Dictionary of such words as are merely portugues.

5. A Discourse by way of Dialog twixt Charles and Philip containing the
perambulation of Spain and Portugal, which may serve for a Guide to them who
may desire to see those Countries.

6. A familiar Letter composed of above fourscore Spanish proverbs conducing
all to one subject, and rendered into English;

7. Another familiar Letter consisting of English proverbs, and tending all to
one subject rendered into Spanish.

A New ENGLISH Grammar Rendered into SPANISH GRAMATICA INGLESA Rendida en
CASTELLANO.

The English Grammar.
GRammar is the Art of Letters, as the Greek word (...) (whence it is derived)
imports: Of Letters are made Syllables, of Syllables Words, and by the
coagmentation of letters, syllables, and words, is framed Sermocination or
Speech, which is one of the eminentst Praerogatives of Mankind above all other
sublunary Cretures; for though others (as some volatils) by Art, and hardship
are brought to utter some broken words, yet they understand not what they speak,
because they are destitut of the faculty of Reason, Mar. only being the child
of Reason.

Of the English letters, with their pronunciation, and some special remarks upon
them.
Touching the Abcee (or Alphabet) of the English Tongue, there are four and
twenty letters in all which are written in Great and Small caracters; the Great
are shaped thus,

ABCDEFGHIKLMNOPQ RSTVWXYZ.
These great Caracters serve for proper names ^ persons, places and ivers, etc.
as Charles Carlos^ Katherine Catalina, London Londres, Lisbon Lubona bona,
Severn Sabrina, Trent Trenta; some of them are of great account, for they are
numerical, as I stands for One, V for Five, X for Ten, L for Fifty, C for a
Hundred, D for Five hundred, M stands for a Thousand.

The lesser caracters of the Abcee are thus formed, abcdefghiklmnopqrstvwxyz.

Now, what the four Elements are to all corporeal cretures in point of
Generation, the same are the letters to all Languages in point of Locution or
speech: And as of the Elements, though so few in number, such infinite kinds of
compounded and differing mixd cretures are produced, as from their simple and
primitive principles; so from so small a number of Letters such a world of
different words are composed, and such an infinity of Volumes penned and
printed, which is a remark of wonder that has fallen but under the capacity of
few.

We will now consider all the Letters severally by themselfs, which are the
original ingredients that go to the composition of Speech.

These Letters divide themselfs into Vowels and Consonants, so called because
they have no sound at all without a Vowel go before or after; as B has e after
it, F has e before it to make it pronounceable: Of which Consonants four are
called Liquids, called so because they melt as it were in the mouth, and have a
softer kind of pronunciation then the rest, which four are l m n r.

The Vowels are 5. in number, viz. a e i o u, There is a word in Spanish which
no other Language has, that comprehends all the five, which is oveja, a Sheep:
It Is true that the transcendent eternal name of Iehova has them likewise
together, but that h only (which is but an aspiration) interposeth.

Now, the Vowels deserve to have the precedence of all the rest of the Letters,
because no Consonant can be pronounced or is soundable without one of them
before or after, (as 'twas said before) therefore are they called Consonants or
co-sounding.

A.
The Vowel a is the first letter in all Languages, and it merits the priority
of all other, because it is the first and most natural easy motion and
ouverture of the lips; it is also the letter of Absolution and comfort, as
Cicero has it. The French have a Proverb that makes much for the honor of A,
viz. Il est marque a l' A, He is marked with A; that is, he is right honest
man: This may happily be the reason why A has such a large Dominion among the
English, for she is a praepositive article (with The) to most Substantifs and
Adjectifs, as A man un hombre, A Knight un Cavallero, A sword una espada, A
learned man un hombre cientifico, A valiant Knight un Cavallero valiente, A
bright sword una espada luziente.

A in the English Tongue has two differing sounds, the one open and full, as
Abraham, Alabastre alabastro; the other pressing, and as it were half mouthed
and mincingly, as Ale cerveza, Awake despierto, etc. Whereas in Spanish (and
other Languages) it bears the first open prolation, as Da Dios alas a la
hormiga para que se pierda mas ayna God gives wings to the Ant that she may
destroy herself the sooner; a Proverb alluding to proud ambitious men.

A, when it comes before lm sometimes drowneth the l and turns to an u, as
Calm is pronounced Caume, Psalm Psaume, Balm Baume, etc. but the a receives
thereby a more open sound, and makes as it were one syllable of two.

E.
E the second Vowel is pronounced in English as in Spanish and other Languages;
when it concludes a word it is pronounced carelessly and faintily, as Bare nudo,
There alla, Fire, Fuego, etc. as the Spaniards also do in combat a Fight,
combite a Feast, escabeche Pickle, padre Father, madre Mother, etc. But in the
monosyllable article The it is pronounced sharp. Where e comes after l having two
Consonants before it, it has a strange transposition, for it leaps before l,
and takes the half sound of i, as Epistle Epistel, epistola; Thistle Thistel,
cardo; Little littel, poco; Prickle prickel, espina: e passes also obscurely,
where it ends a word with a consonant, as spoken hablado, broken quebrado,
Coffer cofre, brewes sopa, etc. When e also comes before d, to conclude a word,
she loses often her sound by an Apostrophe, as tired tired, cansado;
restrained restrained, restrenido: and so in all Participles of the
Preter-tense. When e comes before a it drowns the a, but makes the
pronunciation longer, as beast bestia, disease enfermedad, feast combite, etc.

E and I have such a friendship in the English language, that they supply one
another place sometimes, and are used indifferently, as Enterchange or
Interchange, trueque; her or her, ella; endure or endure, sufrir; endevor or
endeavor, diligencia, etc. And it is so likewise in Spanish, as mesmo or mismo,
the same; pedir or pidir to pray: The Italian also does it often as refiutare
or rifiutare, reputare or riputare; but the Florentine more affects i.

I.
The Vowel i has a very peculiar sound in some English words, which differs
from other Nations; for the Spaniards with others pronounce it as ee in
English, as mi tio my Uncle, me teeo; pimienta Pepper, peemeeenta; cinco five,
ceenco: But the English pronounce in most words i as if it were the Dipthong
ei, as Pilot peilot, pilota; a pipe peipe, pipa; a hide heide, cuero; license
leicence, licencia: which pronunciation is a pure Anglicisme.

I, may be called an amphibolous letter, for though she be naturally and by her
birth a Vowel, yet she degenerats often into a Consonant, (which she never
uses to do in the Hebrew and Greek) which Consonant has an affinity with g,
insomuch that she may claim (like v) two caracters, as having two such
capacities, viz. of Vowel and Consonant, as James is pronounced Giames, Diego;
Javelin Giavelin, javelina; joy geoy, alegria; Jeffrey Gieffrey, Godefrido, etc.

O.
The Vowel O is pronounced with a round: mouth than any other, therefore she
has properly an orbicular figure, and is a letter in English of much change
and incertainty; sometimes she is pronounced sharp, as Collar collar, corn
grano, cross cruz, Crocodile Crocodilo, etc. sometimes o is pronounced flat, as
Color color, Cosen primo, mother madre, taking thereby the half sound of u.

Upon the u, o sounds smart, as Round redondo, sound sonido, bound atado,
etc. But in the last syllable before n she loses her strength, as Devotion
devocion, compassion compassion, person persona: Before w also at the end of
words she loses he^ strength, and becomes an u, as hollow hueco, hollu; Tallow
tallu, cevo, etc.

When o ends a word she is pronounced strong and clear, as in these
Monosyllables, Go and ad, so assi, no no, etc. Before v consonant o has
various pronunciations, open and shut, as Dove paloma, glove guante, grove
arboleda, Jove Jupiter, etc. Priscian says, that some Cities in Italy had not o
at all but u, and in other places they had no u at all, but o in the place of
it, as in old Writers we read volgus for vulgus, poblicum, polchrum, colpam,
for publicum, pulchrum, culpam; and let this suffice for this inconstant letter.

V.
The Vowel u as well as i has the privilege to become Consonant very often,
which make some call them the mongrel letters: V never ends any word in
English for the nakedness of it, but clothes her self with a Dipthong, and at
other times hath^ to follow her, as New nuevo, knew conocia, blu: azul, true
verdadero, etc. The English pronounce oftentimes u like the French, in a
whistling manner which sound is quite differing from the Spaniar^ and Italian,
who prolate it in a manner like oo, as un one, oono; usanza use, oosanza, etc.
But the English and French pronounce u as if it were the Dipthong ew, as Cocu a
Cuckold is pronounced as if (...) were written Cokew; Cubit Kewbit, etc. The
German is subject often to turn b to u, as there is a facetious tale of a
Duchman, who thinking to complement with his French Hostess said, Ma foy
Madame vous avez veaux enfans, Truly Madame you have Calves to your children;
whereas instead (...) veaux calves, he should have said beaux fair.

W.
W is pronounced with a larger roundnes of the lips then the letter o, and with
far more force if (...) has h next it, as Whale balena, Wheel rued^
Whirligigg peonca, etc. but where h does not immediately follow it is pronounced
soft, as Whirlwin^ remolino, where the first w is far more emphatic^ then the
second.

The Saxons or high Dutch themselfs, whence the English derive their origin and
language, cannot pronounce this w before h with that vigor, but (...) lieu of
What they say Wat, Where were, etc. which shows that the English have stronger
lungs.

The Spaniard has no w, nor the Italian an^ French.

Y.
Y, although it be pronounced like i, yet she is more constant to her self,
scorning as it were to degenerat from her first being, and from a vowel to turn
consonant; therefore she may well deserve to be called the letter of Philosophy,
or Phythagoras his letter.

In French she is of that weight that she makes sometimes a whole word of her
self, as Voulez vous y aller, Will you go thither? and is an Adverb both of
person and place: In Spanish she frequently makes a syllable of her self, as
yxar the flank, yzar to lift up, etc.

Of Dipthongs.
Thus much of the Vowels, which may be called the ligaments or Arteries that
knit the bones or Consonants together, and put life into them, else they were
but so many dead trunks. We will now to the Dipthongs, which because they are
merely made of Vowels, it is fitting they should precede the Con^onants.

Dipthongs are as it were the associating of some Vowels to make them issue
forth a joint sound, so that two sounds may be had in one syllable. The English
Dipthongs may be reduced to ten, as ai o^ ay, as Maid moca, afraid amedrentado,
May May, day dia: the second au or aw, as Austere austero, autentico autentico,
law ley, awe obedience: the third ea, as East Levante, Earl Conde, seat sede,
yea s^^ the fourth ei, as Weight peso, straight derecho: the 5. ew, as Dew
rocio, few pocos: the 6. oi or oy, as Toil trabajo, soil terra, boy muchacho,
joy alegria: the 7.00, as Food bastimento, good bueno: the 8. o^ or ow, as
Stout animoso, Tongue lengua, now agora: the 9. ui or uy, as Juice cumo, the
last uoy, as Buoy.

There are but three words wherein the Dipthong eo is found, viz. People,
Jeopard, Yeoman. The Dipthong ae is not used neither in English or Spanish.

Of the Consonants.
B.
B is the first Consonant and second letter of the Abcee; it is the first that
brings our lips together after we are born, therefore it is called the prime labi^l
letter: In English it is pronouncd as in other languages, but not always as it
is in Spanish where it is promiscuous with v in sundry words, as bisono a young
Soldier, or visono; vimbrera an Ozier, o^ bimbrera; in Greek also (...) is
turned often to (...), which made the Duchman to say as wittily as waggishly,
Si beta est veta, tunc bibere est vivere. But the highest commendation of B is,
that it is the letter of Innocence, it being the bleating tone of the Sheep,
which is the emblem of Innocence.

C.
There are some critical Authors who bear no good will to C, calling it the
mongrel androg y nous letter, nor male nor female, but rather a spirit or
monster; and that by her impostures she trencheth upon the right of s k q,
assuming their sounds; that she might be spared in our English Abcee because of
the identity or sameness of sound she has often with them three: But surely
they are deceived, for how could we pronounce Cheshire cheese, chisel,
Chivalry, without her? In Italian she borrows also the sound of g, as castigo
for gastigo: In Spanish (and French) when she sounds like s she is attended
with a train, having a semicircle underneath c, and then she is called C
cedilla, as caratan the Canker, capato a shoe, carca a bramble, etc. which are
pronouncd saratan, sapato, sarsa.

D.
D is so dainty a letter in English, that she admits of no other Consonant to
be her Gentleman Usher but r, as Dreams suenos, drink bevida, drop gota, dragon
drago, drum atambor, etc. She is pronounced as in other languages, but in
Spanish when she is between two Vowels, or before any Vowel in the midst or end
of a word, she uses to melt into th, as we pronounce them in that or the in
English, as Dadivas entran sin taladro, Gifts enter without a Wimble; which are
pronounced as if they were written, Dathivas entran sin talathro: dd in the
British or Welsh agree with the Spanish in this pronunciation, as heb DDuw heb
ddiiw, Nothing without God.

F.
F has the honor to make one of the highest notes in Music, and, which is
more, to be the first letter of the highest spiritual virtue, Faith; she is
pronounced as in other languages.

G.
G has a diffring pronunciation in the English, one before a, o and u, as Guard
guarda, gold oro, gulf golfe, etc. and another before e and i, as Gentleman,
hidalgo, German Tudesco, Gibbet hor^a, Giant gigante, etc. Yet there be some
words when she comes before i, that are pronounced as if she came before a, o
or u, as giddy vertiginoso, gift dadiva, girdle cinta, etc.

H.
H is the letter of breath or aspiration, and therefore may be called the letter
of life, for when the breath is gone, farewell life: Therefore I wonder why the
Greeks came to give her no place in their Alphabet. Some call her a spirit, but
whether letter aspirat or spirit, the Alphabet would be breathless without her.
Some call her the Queen of Conscnants.

In some words she is written but not sounded, as in Humor humor, honor honra,
humble humilde, host huesped, etc. which are pronounced, umor, onor, umble,
often: The Spaniard also leaves her our in most words.

Th has two sounds in English, the one strong* like the Greek ^ theta, as
Thunder trueno, Thursday Iueves, thousand mil, thirsty sediento, thief ladron,
thought pensamiento, etc. but th in other words are pronounced gently, like d
in Spanish, as in This esto, that aquello, thine tuyo, thither la, thence de
la, then entonces, therefore por tanto, thou tu, etc.

H after w has a stronger aspiration in the English then in any other
language, as What que cosa, wheat trigo, wheel rueda, when quando, where
adonde, whore puta, whale balena, etc.

Ph is pronounced alike in English as in Spanish (and other languages;) but
indeed there is no ph in Spanish or Italian, for they turn it into f, as
Philosopher Filosofo, Philip Felipe, fantasy fantesia, etc.

Ch is pronoun^d in English as in Spanish (and the Italian) as China, chamber
cama, cheese queso, cherry ceresa, etc. In which words ch is pronounced as the
Spaniard does in chico little, chichon a bile, chirlar to chirp: But the French
differs very much herein, for he prolates ch as sh, as chamber shambre, China
Shina, Cheshire cheese Sheshire sheese, Chichester Shishester, etc.

K.
K is so stately a letter, that she scorns to serve either the Spaniard or
Italian, nor the Latin or French either, but in the word Kalendae; therefore
they make c to be such a drudg to them in her place, but the English makes
equal use of them both; yet k goes in English before no Consonants but n, as
Knight cavallero, knowledge ciencia, knave vellaco, knife cuchillo, knee
rodilla, etc.

L.
L has the honor to make the highest tone in Music, for she has a kind of
gentle melting pronunciation, therefore she is called by some (...), because she
seems to sweeten the roof of the mouth.

The English pronounce l as the Spaniards do, but where ll is found in the
beginning or middle of any word in Castilian, the last l turns to i, as lloro
lamentation, call a street, callar to hold ones peace, lleno full; the
Spaniard pronounce them as lioro, calie, caliar, lieno.

The Britains or Welsh have also like the Spanish a particular sound of ll,
which no other Nation can pronounce unless one be bred there very young; it is
so difficult to the English that they are forced to turn it to fl, as Floyd for
Lloyd, etc.

M.
M may be well called a labial letter as well as b, nay, it is a question which
of them makes the lips meet first in an Infant. We read that the Phrygia^ child
upon whom Ptolomey tried his conclusion* Which language was the most natural,
spoke Be^ first, which signifies Bread in that language: But the ancient
Britains hold that m is the first letter which makes the lips meet, because
there is no other word for Mother in Welsh then Mam, which all Infants, be they
born under any Climat whatsoever, use to pronounce articulatly as soon as they
come into the world.

M is pronounced clear in the beginning, meanly in the midst, and obscurely in
the conclusion of a word in English; but it is always prolated with a kind of
humming, as Mamalukes Mamaluques, Marjerom Origano, Mamora Mamora, martyrdom
martyrio, etc.

N.
N in English is pronounced as in Spanish, (and other languages;) but in the
Spanish tongue it has this singularity, as to have a straight stroke on the
top, as for example n, and then she must be pronounced as if i immediately
followed her, as Fue la Negra al bano, y tuvo que Contar todo el ano, The Negre
went to the Bath, and she had news enough for the whole Twelmonth; in this
Proverb bano and ano must be pronounced as if they were written banio, anio.
This letter n ringeth somewhat in the Nose, and has three degrees of sounds,
full in the beginning, weak in the middle, and flat at the end of a word.

P.
P may be called the third labial letter after b and m, for she also makes the
lips meet: In the Italian she is often metamorphos'd to an u, as soprano
sourano, coperta coverta.

Q.
Qhath much encroch'd upon the freehold that k had in former times among our
Saxon Progenitors, who scarce knew this bumm letter q, but before the Norman
Conquest they writ kuill for quill, kuire for quire, etc. But the
French-Normans bringing in diverse Latin words, as question, quantity,
quintessence, and others, much trenched upon the Saxon k; yet this q is so
beggarly a letter, that unless u follow she has no being in English.

R.
R. There is a most mighty populous Nation next the Sunrising called the
Chinese, who read and write perpendicular not collateral, that have not the
letter R at all, therefore they call their next neighbor the Tartar, Tata,
leaving out both the R's: And it may be the reason is, because R is the Dogs
letter, and seems to snarle in the sound, -- sonat haec de nare canina litera,
This letter sounds of a Dogs nostrill. The French women do oftentimes out of
wantonness leave it unpronounc'd at the end of words. In English it is pronounced
as in other languages.

S.
S, though it be called the Serpents letter because of her hissing sound, as
also for her shape, yet she hisseth but gently against the gums; she varieth
her powers much in our pronunciation, in the beginning she has a quick sound,
as Sables z ebeliu^ Sabbath Sabado, etc. but in the middle and end of words,
unless she go doubled, she is pronounced meltingly as z, as Rose rosa, wise
sabio, gems ^oyas, rimes rimas, etc. but if the s be doubled, it is pronounced
hard and sharp, as Distress, oppress, less, dress, tresse, etc.

T.
T has one constant prolation, except where it precedes i, toward the ends of
words, as Generation, action, nation, faction, generation, action, nation,
faction, etc. and then t turns to c, as those words use to be written in
Spanish.

X.
X has scarce the account of a letter in the English, because there is never a
word in the whole language that begins with it; in the middle it comes often,
as Sixty, vex, perplexe, sex, etc. And it ends many words, as Pox las buvas,
flax estopa, Fox raposa, six seys; which sound as if they were written Pocks,
flacks, Focks, sicks: For x has the prerogative to be made up of three
Consonants, (which no other letter has) viz. k, c and s, which being so, the
Anagram that was made of Uxor and Orcus was not unwitty, -- Uxor and Orcus
idem. But x is very frequent in the Spanish, both in the beginning middle, and
end of words; which came from the Mores, who for 700. years did almost inhabit
the greatest part of Spain, and by so long coalition infected them with a
guttural tone.

Z.
Z is the last of all the letters, and it is properly so, being commonly the last
sound that one makes in the mouth at his going out of the world, when he begins
to throttle: There are but two or three words in all the English Tongue (besides
some Greek proper names) that begin with z, viz. Zeal, zealous, zealot, with some
terms of Astronomy, as Zone, Zenith, Zodiac.

And so much of single letters.
Of Syllabes or Syllables.
Having done with the Elements or simples of Speech, we will now proceed to the
compounds of letters, and first of syllables.

A Syllable is part of a word, which may of it self make a full articulat
sound; it is sometimes (as (...) Spanish also) of one letter, as Amazd
espantado, (...) quippage aparejo, imagination imaginacion, omino^^ desastroso,
usurer logrero; where a, e, i, o and u is the beginning make a syllable of
themselfs.

A syllable of more letters is made either of Dithongs or Vowels only, as Ayder
ayudador, auditor audienciero, eating comiendo: Now though a Vo^ el has the
privilege to make a syllable of her sel^ yet no Consonant can do so, unless it
shake han^ with a Vowel. Syllables with a Consonant are e^ther of two letters,
as No no; or of three, as the which in the English uses often to be written
shoth^ thus, ye; or of more letters, as That, then, with, aquello, entonces,
con; which are written short, yt yen with; of 5. letters, as There, which, alla,
que; which are written short, year which.

There are some syllables that have two Consonants to one Vowel, as Cry grido;
some three, as Dr^^ ramera; some 4. as Dregs heces; some 5. as Strin^ cuerda; some
6. as Strength fuerca; some syllabl^ have 7. Consonants to one Vowel, as
Strengths ^^^erca; but that's the utmost number: And it is observable what a virtu
a little Vowel has, to give (...) to so many Consonants. But the Pole has
(...) Consonants attending one Vowel, in so much tha when he speaks he hurls
his words at ones fa^ like stones.

Touching the position or quantity of syllabl^ there is no language, I know of,
has exact rules, restraints, examples and cautions to that purpo^^ but the
Greeks and Latins; there is not so much (...) and trouble used in the English or
Spanish (or (...) other Occidental Tongue) because their metri^ Compositions,
Verses and Rimes are merely ^rived from an instinct of Nature, such as Arist^
speaks of, (...), viz. Of a volu^tary and natural free composition, without
(...) enslavd so much to the quantity of syllables. (...) were the Greeks
before Homer, nor the Roman b^^ fore Livius Andronicus, so curious in observing
punctually the length and shortness of syllables.

It is consentaneous to order and reason, we (...) now speak of the Accents of
syllables, which (...) it were the tuning or the toning of the voice, and the
not observing of the Accent may make a word to be in danger of mis-tuning. For
there are multitudes of words which are written alike, and have punctually the
same letters, yet have they clea^ contrary pronunciations, as Desert a
wilderness, de^sierto, and Desert mericimiento; torment tormento torment
atormentar; object objecto, object objectar; incense insenso; convert
convertido, conv^^ convertir: Now it is the Accents duty to make (...) pronounce
aright, and where we find the Accen^ we must give a force and Emphasis to that
syllable.

In Adverbs commonly the Accent is in the (...) syllable, as Merrily
alegramente, heavily tristemente. Dissyllable and trissyllable words have also
mo^^ commonly the Accent in the first syllable, as Winter Invierno, Summer
Estio, Singular singular, pessilence pestilencia, providence providencia. Words
also terminating in able, be they of 3. or 4. syllables, have the Accent in the
first, as Fable fabul^, sensible sensible, sociable amiable: except Abominable
abominable, detestable detestable, etc. Words terminating in tion or sion, have
commonly the Accent in the syllable next before, as Contention contienda,
confusion confusion, abomination abominacion: But the Spaniard has always the
Accent is the last syllable of such words.

All Dissylables ending in ish, ry, er, el, et, or (...) have the Accent in the
first syllable, as Slavish ^clavoso, marry esposar, hover menear, damsel
do^zella, packet paquete, gammon pernil, bacon toci^ Words ending in nt have
the Accent commonly in the last, as Lament lament, content contentamiento,
extent extension, etc.

We come now to the quality of words, to know whether they are Primitives or
Derivatives. Most of the primitive words in the English Tongue are
Monosyllables; go unto a man's body from top to toe, the parts thereof are all
Monosyllables, as Head cabeca, heart coracon, guts entranas, knee rodilla, foot
pie, etc. which clearly discovers her to be a daughter of the High-Duch. The
Spanish clean contrary abound and delight in words of many syllables; and where
the English expresses himself in one syllable, he does in 5. or 6. as Thoughts
pensamientos, fray levantamiento, etc. which is held a part of wisdom, for
while they speak they take time to consider of the matter.

There are also simple words and compounded words, as Love amor, lovely amoroso;
man varon, manly varonil; wise sabio, unwise necio: And herein, I mean in point
of composition of words, the English Tongue is as happy, and as hardy as any
language, except the Greek, (which goes beyond all other in that kind:) For the
English does often join and coagment two Substantifs together, as (...)
cortador de bolsas, self-love amor de si mesmo, (...) de molino; and sometimes
there is a (...) Substantifs in one word, as Tap-house-kee^^^* bodegonero, a
Foot-ball-player jugadora pelota, etc.

Of the Parts of Speech in the English Tongue.
There be Eight Parts of Speech in the English Tongue, as in other Languages,
viz. Noun, Pronoun, Verb, Participle, Adverb, Conjunction, Preposition,
Interjection; whereunto we add the prepositive articles The and A, which the
Latin only lacks; whereof the first is definit and terminats the understanding,
as The sword la espada, the book el libro, which denotes some particular book or
sword; the other is indefinite, as A sword una espada, a book un libro, which
denote the general Idea of swords and books. There is also another difference
twixt the articles The and A, viz. that the first may be applied to the plural
number also, as The swords las espadas; but the article* A is applied to the
singular number only. Proper names are incapable of these articles. Now of the
parts severally by themselfs.

Of Nouns.
Nouns are either Substantifs, which can stand and be understood by themselfs,
as Church Yglesia, sheet call; or they are Adjectifs, which signify no real
thing, unless they be applied to some Substantif, as White blanco, fair lindo,
etc. The English Tongue has this singularity above other languages, (but she is
nothing the more commendable for it) that he uses to put the Adjectif before
the Substantif, as Brown bread baco pan, a wise man sabio hombre; whereas other
Nations postpose the Adjectif, and say Pan baco Bread brown, hombre sabio a man
wise.

Noun Substantifs are either Common, as Bridge puente, River rio; or Proper, as
Rialto Rialto (a particular bridge in Venice) Severn Sabrina; or Personal, as
Charles Carlos, Katherine Catalina.

There are five Genders that belong to these Nouns, the Masculin, which
comprehends all Males under a masculin Idea, as Bulls toros, men hombres, etc.
The Feminin, which comprehends whatsoever is of a femal kind, as Woman hembra,
Does ciervos. The Neuter gender, whose notion conceives neither sex, under
which are comprised all inanimat things, as Cities, Rivers and Ships; for
though there be names of other Genders, yet they are spoken of as she is; as
Eboracum York, Rhenus the Rhine, the Charles Royal. The fourth is the Epicene
or promiscuous gender, which understands both kinds, as dogs, horses, deer;
under which words both sexes are intimated, as Hounds and Bitches, Geldings and
Mares, Bucks and Does. The fifth is the common or rather doubtful Gender, which
has a near affinity with the former, as friend, gossip, neighbor, cousin, etc.
which comprehend either sex: But in Spanish (and other languages) they are
distinguished by their masculin and feminin terminations, as Amigo amiga,
vezino vezina, prim^ prima, etc. which is an advantage the English Tongue has
of others.

Diminutifs are proper to all Languages; in English the Diminutifs of some
Substantifs end in ell, as Cock cockrell, part parcel, etc. some in ing, as
Goose gosling, duck duckling, etc. some in ock, as Bull bullock, hill hillock:
some in et, as Baron Baronet, etc. There are also Diminutifs of Adjectifs, as
Cold coldish, black blackish, green greenish, etc.

There are likewise diverse Diminutifs of proper names in English, both of men
and women, as Christopher Kitt, Gregory Grigg, Richard Dick, Magdalen Maudlin,
Katherine Kate, Elizabeth Besse, etc. but there are some names which bear no
Diminutifs, as Peter, James, Stephen, etc. but the Spaniard herein has more
Diminutifs and Sub-diminutifs then any other language, as Simon, Simoncico,
Simoncillo, Simoncilillo; Miguel, Miguelico, Miguelillo; Catalina, Catalinica,
Catalalinilla, etc.

The English Adjectifs have their degrees of Comparison, as well as those of
other languages; nay, to some words they have two Comparatifs and Superlatifs,
which other languages have not; they express the one either by the word more,
or adding er to the end of the Positif, as Wise more wise or wiser, stout more
stout or stouter, etc. so the Superlatif is expressed either by the word most,
or adding est to the end of the Positif, as Wise most wise or wisest, stout
most stout or stoutest. But from this general rule few are excepted, as goood
better best, bad worse worst, little lesser least. Adjectifs which end in ous
admit of Comparatifs and Superlatifs only by the Words m^ore or most, as
Glorious, more glorious, most glorious; so Specious, famous, victorious, etc.

The English Adjectifs commonly have no Plural number, but the singular serves
for both, which is a great ease to the language, as Stout man stout men, wise
man wise men: But the Substantifs have their Plurals, some terminating in s, as
King Kings, stagg staggs, park parks, wood woods, etc. Others terminat in n, as
Man men, Woman women, Ox Oxen, hose hosen: As in all other languages so there
are some irregular words, (though they be few) that swerve from the former
terminations; as the plural of Mouce is mice, of Louce lice, of Tooth teeth, of
Foot feet, etc.

There are some Substantifs that admit of no plural number at all, (and they are
weighty ones) as Gold, silver, Brass, Copper, Tinn, and all Minerals; (no more
have they in the Spanish, as Oro, plata, bronza, cobre, estano) with diverse
other, as rest, bread, etc. these Substantifs have the plural only, as goods,
riches, necessaries, etc. where it is observable that necessaries the
Substantif, is begot of the Adjective necessary.

We com now to the Pronouns, so called because they stand sometimes for Nouns;
we will take them in their degrees, and begin with the Persons, I, tho^, he,
we, ye, they: which are declined thus:

The first Person.
Plural. Singular. Nom. I Yo We Nosotros Genesis of me of us Dat. to me to us
Accus. me us Voc. o me o we Abl. with or from me. with or from us.

The second Person.
Singular. Plural. Nom. Thou Tu Ye Vosotros Genesis of thee of you Dat. to thee
to you Accus. thee you Voc. thou o you Abl. from or with thee. from or with
you.

The third Person.
Singular. Plural. Nom. He el o aquel They ellos Genesis of him of them Dat. to
him to them Accus. him them Voc. o he o they Abl. with or from him. with or
from them.

There are in English four Pronouns possessives, My or mine, mi o mio; my
comes always before a word beginning with a Consonant, as My cloak mi capa, my
hat mi sombrero, etc. Mine comes always before a Substantif beginning with a
Vowel or h, as Mine Aunt mi Tia, mine heritage mi her^ncia, etc. but mine
stands oftener by it self for a possessif, specially in answer to a question, as
Whose sword is this? mine; whose Glove is that? mine, The Plural of my and mine
is our ours, which also are possessifs.

The second Possessif is Thy thine, as Thy house tu casa, thine arm tu braco,
thine hand tu mano; and thine as mine come before a word beginning with a
Vowel. Thine also stands for a Possessif of it self to a question, as Whose
land is that? Thine; cuya a tierra es aquella? la tuya. The Plural of thy thine
is you yours, which are also Possessifs.

The third Possessif is Her hers, with their Plurals their theirs; as Her
Distaf su rueca, her Maiden head su Virginidad; whose ring is this? hers. But
the Spanish (nor the Italian and French) has not this distinguishing feminin
Possessif, but uses su and suyo for both.

Which, who and that are Relatif Pronouns, depending on the words before, but
which and why properly relate to living things, and that to inanimat; as The
man which preached yesterday, the Lady who passed this way, the stones that
went to build Paul's, etc. What and Whose are Interrogative Pronoun, and so are
the foresaid which and wh^ sometimes.

There are some compounded Pronouns, as my self, our selfs, thy self, your self,
him self, her self, it self, the self same, etc.

Of a Verb.
VErb is one of the most principal and necessary parts of Speech: nay, it may
be called the Genius and Soul of Speech, for pack all the words of the world
together, no Sentence, whether Interrogative or other, can be made without it;
for what Vowels are to Words, the same Verbs are to Speech, they animat both;
which makes it have such a latitude in the Latin tongue, that the word Verbum
extends to all parts of Speech.

A Verb in English as in Spanish (and all other languages) has 3. Tenses or
distinctions of times the Present-tence, as I pray or do pray; the time past,
as I prayed or did pray; the Future or time to come, as I shall or will pray.
The Terminations (...) Verbs in English is the same both in the singular and
plural number, (except the second and third person in the singular) as I live,
we, ye, they live, etc. (...) not so in Spanish, as yo vivo nos vivimos, etc.
(...) in other languages, which is a mighty advantage and ease for the learning
of the English language.

There are in English Verbs Aclifs, Passifs and Neuters, as in other Toungs, as
I love yo quiero, (...) Actif: I am loved yo soy querido, is Passif by addition
of the Auxiliary Verb Am, soy: the Neuter verb is where am cannot be added, as
I live vivo, I weep lloro, etc.

There are in English, as in other languages, four cadences and Conjugations of
Verbs: Verbs of the first Conjugation some end in all, as to Call llamar, to
fall cayer, to install, to inthrall, etc. whose Participles are made by
addition of ing and d at the end, as calling called, installing installed, etc.
Some end in are, as to dare, to pare, to share, etc. whose Participles also end
alike, as pared paring, etc. Some end in ace, as to chase, to face, to grace, to
lace, to trace, to embrace, etc. whose Participles also are made like the
former.

Verbs of the second Conjugation some end in ear, as to bear, to sheare, to
tear, to wear, etc. whose Participles end in ing and orne, as borne, shorn,
torn, bearing, shearing, tearing. Some Verbs end in ease, as to ease, to
please, to displease, etc. Some end in ead, as to lead, to knead, to read, to
spread, to tread, etc. Some in ind, as to bind, to find, to wind, to grind, etc.
Some in end, as to bend, to send, to lend, etc.

Verbs of the third Conjugation some end in ite, as to bite, to write, to
endite, etc. Some end in ight, as to fight, to fright, to light, to plight, to
right, etc. Some end in ell, as to quell, to tell, to sell, etc. Some in ink, as
to d^ink, to sink, to sink, to think, to shrin^, etc.

Verbs of the last Conjugation some terminat in), as to cry, to die, to fly, to
ly, to try, etc. Some in ire, as to hire, to desire, to inquire, etc. Some end
in ine, as to shine, to dine, to fine, to decline, to uncline, to confine, etc.
Among which Verbs it is to be noted, that the Monosyllable Verbs come from the
Dutch, the other from the French. Note also that all Participles of the
Present-tence end in ing, of the Preter-^ence in d, most commonly in all
English Verbs, except some Irregulars, which is left to observation.

Of the two Auxiliary Verbs, I have yo he o tengo, and I am yo soy.
These Verbs I have and I am are called the Auxiliaries, and are most
subservient to all other Verbs; for without the second there could be no Verb
Passif, and without the first there would be no Participles of the Preter-tense:
Therefore being so useful it is requisite they should be here declined at large;
and first of I have, because it is also auxiliary to I am.

The Conjugation of the Verb I have.
The Indicative or declaring Mood.
Present tense.
I have, thou have, he has: we have, ye have, they have.

Preterimperfect tense.
I had, thou had, he had: we had, ye had, they had.

Preterperfect tense.
I have had, thou have had, he has had: we have had, ye have had, they have
had.

Future tense.
I shall or will have, thou shall or wilt have, he shall or will have: we shall
or will have, ye shall or will have, they shall or will have.

The Imperatif or commanding Mood.
Have thou, let him have: let us have, have ye, let them have.

The Optatif or wishing Mood. Present tense.
Oh that I had, oh that thou had, oh that he had: oh that we had, oh that he
had, oh that they had.

Preterperfect tense.
I should have, thou sholdst have, he should have: we should have, ye should have,
they should have.

The Subjunctif Mood. Present tense.
If or in case that I have, if or in case thou have, if or in case he had: if
or in case we have, if or in case ye have, if or in case they have.

Infinitif Mood.
To have, aver, Having aviendo.

The Auxiliary Verb I am. The Indicative or declaratory Mood. Present tense.
I am, thou art, he is: we be or are, ye be or are, they be or are.

Preterimperfect tense.
I was, thou wast, he was: we were, ye were, they were.

Preterperfect tense.
I have bin, thou have bin, he has bin: we have bin, ye have bin, they have
bin.

Future tense.
I shall be, thou shall be, he shall be: we shall be, ye shall be, they shall
be.

The Imperative or commanding Mood.
Be thou, let him be: let us be, be ye, let them be.

The Optatif or wishing Mood. Present tense.
God grant I be, God grant thou be, God grant he be: God grant we be, God grant
ye be, God grant they be.

Preterperfect tense.
Would God I were, would God thou werst, would God he were: would God we were, would
God ye were, would God they were.

The Conjunctive Mood. Present tense.
Seeing that I am, seeing that thou art, seeing that he is: seeing that we be,
seeing that ye be, seeing that they be.

Preterperfect tense.
Although I be, although thou be, although he be: although we be, although ye
be, although they be.

The Infinitif Mood.
To be, to have bin, being.

Note, that Verbs of all Conjugations in English have their Passifs generally
ending in d, as I love yo amo, I am loved yo soy amado; I fear yo temo, I am
feared yo soy temido; I fire yo quemo, I am fired yo soy quemado, etc. Except
Verbs ending in ell, who commonly have their Passifs ending in old, as I tell I
am told, I sell vendo, I am sold soy vendido, etc. As also Verbs ending in ind,
who commonly have their Passifs in ound, as I bind ato, I am bound soy atado; I
find hallo, I am found soy hallado; I grind molo, I am ground soy molido, etc.
As also diverse Verbs whose Actifs end in ear, have their Passifs in orn, I
swear juro, I am sworn soy jurado; I tear lacero, I am torn soy lacerado, etc.
But in Spanish estoy serves to make a Paffif as often as soy, as shall be noted
in the Spanish Grammar. Now the difference 'twixt ser and estar is, that ser
signifies the essence of a thing, as ser bueno to be good; estar signifies the
local condition of a thing, as estar ^n Londres, To be in London, etc.

An Instance for the declining of a Verb both Actif and Passif in English,
(...) may serve for all other.
The Indicatif or declaratory Mood.
The Present t^nse.
Actif. Passif. I desire I am desired thou desire thou art desired he
desires: he is desired: we desire we are desired ye desire ye are desired they
desire. they are desired.

The Preterimperfect tense.
I did desire I was desired thou did desire thou wast desired he did desire:
he was desired: we did desire we were desired ye did desire ye were desired
they did desire. they were desired.

The Aorist or Preterperfect tense.
I desired I was desired, as before. thou desiredst he desired: we desired ye
desired they desired.

The Preterpluperfect tense. Here the Verb, I am, turns to the auxiliary Verb,
I have.
I had desired I had bin desired thou had desired thou had bin desired he
had desired: he had bin desired: we had desired we had bin desired ye had
desired ye had bin desired they had desired they had bin desired

The Future tense.
I shall or will desire I shall or will be desired thou shall or wilt desire
thou shall or wilt be desired he shall or will desire: he shall or will be
desired: we shall or will desire we shall or will be desired ye shall or will
desire ye shall or will be desired they shall or will desire. they shall or will
be desired.

The Imperatif or Mood of command.
Desire thou Be thou desired let him desire: let him be desired: let us desire
let us be desired desire ye be ye desired let them desire. let them be desired.

The Optatif or wishing Mood.
The Present tense.
God grant I desire God grant I be desired god grant thou desire god grant thou
be desird god grant he desire: god grant he be desired: god grant we desire god
grant we be desired god grant ye desire god grant ye be desired god grant they
desire. god grant they be desird

The Preterperfect tense.
Would I desired Would I were desired would thou desir'st would thou werst desired
would he desired: would he were desired: would we desired would we were desired
would ye desired would ye were desired would they desired. would they were desired.

The Conjunctif Mood.
Present tense.
Seeing that I desire Seeing that I am desired seeing that thou desire seeing
that thou art desired seeing that he desires: seeing that he is desired:
seeing that we desire seeing that we be desired seeing that ye desire seeing
that ye be desired seeing that they desire. seeing that they be desired.

Preterimperfect tense.
Although I desire Although I be desired although thou desire although thou
be desired although he desires: although he be desired: although we desire
although we be desired although ye desire although ye be desired although they
desire. although they be desird.

The Infinitif Mood.
To desire To be desired to have desired to have bin desired desiring. being
desired.

According to this Example other Verbs Actif (unless they be Irregulars) and
Passif may be formed.

There are also in English as in Spanish (and all other languages) Impersonal
Verbs which are not distinguished by Persons, as it grives me, it irketh me me
pesa, it behooves me me importa, it concerns me me toca, etc.

We have hitherto treted of the principal parts of Speech, we will now proceed
to the rest, and first of

Adverbs.
An Adverb is a word without number that is joined to another, and it comes
either before or after a word, as well-bred bien criado, better-bred meior
criado, ill-bred mal criado, etc. But most Adverbs com after, with this
syllable ly, as courageously animosamente, devoutly devotamente, etc. And as in
English most Adverbs end in y, so in spanish and Italian) they end in ente, as
the former examples show.

Adverbs are either of quantity as much much^, too much demasiado, enough
bastant-emente, together juntamente, etc. Or they are Adverbs of quality, and
first of number as once, twice, thrice, una vez, dos vezes, tres veces; The
second are of Time, as yesterday air, then entonces, when quando, presently
luego, ever siempre, etc. The third are of Place, as here aqui, there alla
where adonde, yonder aculla, etc. The fourth are of Affirmation or Negation, I,
yea, yes, si; no, not, nay no; The fifth are of Calling, as ho, hola, or
exhorting or approving, as so, so, well, well; Or of Wishing o, if: The sixth
are of Similitude, as likewise, so, even so, assi, tambien, etc.

Interjections.
Interjections are either of mirth, as ha ha ha; or of grief, as Ah, alas, woe
is me, hay ay de mignay de mi; or of rejection, as fie, fy-fy, ba; or of scorn,
as tu^h, etc. st is an Interjection of silence; rr (...) set dogs together by
the ears.

Prepositions.
Prepositions are separable as before delante, behind atras, according segun,
among enter, without sin, before antes, under or below debaxo, against contra,
opuesto, enfrente; over sobre, near cerca, etc.

Inseparable Prepositions are they which express nothing unless they be
annexed to a word, as incapable incapaz, undon deshecho, relief alivio, repress
reprimir, resolution resolucion, etc.

Conjunctions.
Conjunctions are called so because (...) words together, as and y, my father
and mother (...) padre y mi madre, and this is called the (...) conjunction.
Some are severing as but (...) although, though aunque, some are dis junctif as
nor, neither, ni, nor I nor you, ni yo ni vos; some are of reasoning, as for
porque, because para que; some are of Illation as therefore, wherefore, so that
portanto, etc.

Of the points of Words and Sentences.
The English language as the Spanish (and others) has her points or Notes of
Sub-distinction, of Middle-distinction, and of a Full-distinction; which are
called comma, colon, and period: A Sub-distinction or comma is a Note of a
short breathing or pausing and is figured thus, The Middle-distinction has a
longer time of breathing, and is a perfect part of the period which is figured
thus: The period is the entire whole sentence, and is Note^ with a plain single
point thus.

There is also a Parenthesis which is two hal^ Moons, and is figured thus ()
which though it (...) an included sentence, yet albeit it be omitted the speech
remains perfect.

There is also a Note of Interrogation, and is figured thus?

There is likewise a Circumflect which is used when a word is contracted, which
goes thus figured*

There is besides a Note of Admiration which thus!

And lastly, there is an Apostrophe when a (...) is cut off and is figured thus*
but the Span^^^ Tongue to her greter commendation has none this.

Gramatica Inglesa.
GRamatica es el Art de Letras, como la palabra Griega (...) (de la qual ella
se deriva) denota^ de letras se hazen sylabas, de sylabas palabras, y de la
coagmentacion de letras sylabas y palabras nace el Hablar o Sermocinacion, lo
qual es una de las mas eminentes prerogativas que tiene el Genero Humano sobre
las demas Criaturas sublunares; porque aunque algunas dellas por Art y Dureza
vengan a proferir ciertas palabras, toda via no entienden lo que hablan por
falta de la Facultad de la Razon, Siendo Hombre solo el hijo de Razon.

De las Letras Ingleses, y de su pronunciacion, con ciertas observaciones sobre
ellas.
Tocante el Abecedario (o Alfabeto) de la Lengua Inglesa, tiene veynte quatro
Letras en todo, las quales se escriven en grandes* y menudos Caracteres, los
Grandes se figuran assi,

ABCDEFGHIKLMNOPQ RSTVWXYZ
Estos grandes Caracteres se usan por los Nombres propios de personas, lugares,
rios, etc. como Charles Carlos, Katherine Catalina, London Londres, Lisbon
Lisbona, Severn Sabrina, Trent Trenta; Algunas dellas son de gran cuenta,
porque son numericas, como I haze uno, V cinco, L cinquenta, C ciento, D
quinjentos, M mill.

Los menudos caracteres se figuran assi, abcdefghiklmnopqrstvwxyz.

Ahora, lo que los quatro Elementos son en rispeto de todas criaturas corporeas
en punto de Generation, lo mismo son las Letras a todos Lenguajes, en punto de
Pronunciacion; y como de los Elementos, aunque pocos en numero, tan infinitas
differentes species de criaturas son produzidas, como de sus primitivos y
simples principios; Assi de tan pocas letras tanta infinidad de differentes
Vocablos son compuestos, y inombrables Volumes, escritos y imprimidos, lo qual
es una especulacion que ha caydo en el entendimiento de pocos.

Estas Letras se dividen en Vocales y Consonantes, llamados assi porque no
tienen algun sonido sin aver un vocal o adelante o atras, como B tiene e atras,
F tiene e adelante por hazerse pronunciable: Destos consonantes quatro ay que
se llaman Liquidas, porque se van diritiendo en la boca, y hazen la
pronunciacion mas blanda, las quales Liquidas son l m n r.

Los Vocales son 5. aeiou, La Castellana tiene un Vocable (que ningun otra
Lengua tiene) el qual comprehend todas las cinco, es a laber oveja; Verdad es
que aquella transcendiente eterna palabra Jehova las tiene tambien, mas la
letra h (que no es otra cosa sino una aspiration) se entrepone.

Ahora, las letras Vocales merecen bien la precedencia de todas las demas,
porque ningun Consonante puede ser pronunciado sin que tenga una dellas
adelante ^atras (como se dezia antes) y por esto se llaman consonantes.

A.
La letra Vocal A es la primera letra de todas las otras en cada lenguage, y
tiene esta prioridad por ser el mas natural movimiento y abertura de los
labios; Siendo tambien (segun Cicero n) la letra de Absolucion y de consuelo;
El Frances tiene un Refran mucho por la honra de A, viz. Esta senalado con A,
que quiere dezir es muy hombre de bien: Esta podra ser la razon porque A tiene
tanto dominio enter los Ingleses, porque ella (con The) sirve por articulo
prepositivo a los Substantivos y tambien a los Adjectivos, como a man un
hombre, a Knight un Cavallero, a sword una espada, a learned man un hombre
cientifico, a valiant Knight un Cavallero valiente, a bright sword una espada
luziente.

A en Ingles tiene dos prolationes differentes, una abjerta y clara como
Abraham, alabastro; La otra mas cerrada, y como a media boca: Mas in Espanol (y
otros Lenguajes) tiene siempre la primcera prolacion, como Da dios alas a la
hormiga, para que se pierda mas ayna; un Refran que sentiende de los sobervios
y ambiciosos.

A precedien^o lm en Ingles anega la letra l, y se buelue en u, como en calm
bonanca, que se pronuncia caume, Psalm Salmo Pseaume, Balm Balsam^ baume; mas
a recibe por esto un sonido mas abjerto, y dos sylabas vienen a ser una larga.

E.
E la segunda letra Vocal, se pronuncia en Ingel^s, como en otras lenguas:
Quando concluye una palabra ella se pronuncia floxamente, o con discuydo, como
en There alla, Fire fuego, bare nudo: El Espanol haze lo mesmo, como Alcayde a
Warden* combat a fight, combite a feast, escabeche pickle, Azauache Jett,
padre father, madre mother: mas en el articulo prepositivo The el o la, e tiene
siempre una pronunciacion aguda. Adonde e viene tras l teriendo dos Consonantes
adelante, una estrana transposicion acontece porque ella salta antes de l
tomando el sonido de i, como epistle se pronuncia epistel, epistola; Thistle
thistel, cardo; little littel, poco; prickle pri^kel, espina, etc. E passa
tambien obscuramente quando ella concluye la postrera sylaba de un vocablo con
el consonante n atras, como spoken hablado, broken quebrado, coffer cofre,
brewes sopa, etc. Quando e precede d por concluyr una diction ella pierde a
vezes el sonido con un Apostrofo, como tired cansado, se pronun^ia tired,
restrained restrained; quande e viene en el medio dio delante de a anegala,
pero haze assi la sy^aba mas larga, como beast bestia, disease enfermidad,
feast combite, etc.

E y I tienen tal amistad en Ingles que una supple el lugar de la otra, y se
usan indifferente mente a vezes, como Enterchange o Interchange, trueque; her o
her, ella; endure o endure, sufrir; endevor o endeavor, diligencia: Lo mesmo
acontece en Espanol en ciertas palabras, como mismo o mesmo, pedir o pidir: El
Italiano lo haze amenudo, como refiutare o rifiutare, referire o riferire,
reputate o riputare, mas el Florentino queda mas aficionado a i.

I.
I tiene un sonido muy particular en Ingles, que es differente de los demas
lenguajes, porque el Espanol (y otr^os) siempre pronuncia i, como el Ingles
su^le pronunciar ee, como Mitio me teeo, pimienta pepper, peemeeenta; cinco
ceenco, etc. Mas el Ingles pronuncia i como si fuesse el Dipthongo ei, como
pilot peilot, pilota; pipe peipe, sampona; license leicence, licencia: la qual
pronunciacion es puro Anglicismo.

I se puede llamar una letra amfibola, porque annque sea voc. l por su navidad,
toda via ella degenera muy amenudo en consonante, (lo que ella nunca haze en la
Hebrea y Griega) el qual Consonante tiene una affinidad con la letra g, de
suerte que ella puede pedir dos caracteres teniendo ansi dos capacidades, como
James Iago, se pronuncia Giames; Javelin javelina, giavelin; joy alegria, gioy;
Jeffrey Godefrido, Gieffrey, etc.

O.
La letra vocal o se pronuncia con boca mas redonda que las demas, por esto
tiene una figura orbicular; es letra de mucha inconstancia en Ingles; A vezes
tiene un sonido abjerto, como en collar collar, corn grano, cross cruz,
Crocodile Crocodilo, etc. A vezes ella se pronuncia mas flacamente, como en
color color, Cosen primo, mother madre, tomando ansi el sonido de u.

Sobre la u, o tiene un sonido rezio, como round rodondo, sound sonido, bound
atado, etc. Mas en la postrera sylaba delante de n ella pierde su sonido, como
en devotion, compassion, person: Delante de doble ^ o W, tambien ella quita su
sonido natural, tomando ^l de u, como hollow hollu, hueco; Tallow tallu, cevo,
etc.

Quando o fenece un vocablo se pronuncia reziamente en Ingles, como en estas
Monosylabas, Go andid, so assi, no no, etc. Antes del v consonante o tie^e
varias pronunciaciones, como Glove guante, Dove paloma, grove arb^leda, Jove
Jupiter. Prisciano dize que ciertos lugares en Italia no tenian o mas u en
sulugar, y en otros lugares no tenian u, sino o en su ^ugar, como leemos en los
Autores antiguos muy amenudo Volgus, poblicum, polchrum, colpam; y ^asta lo
dicho desta letra inconstante.

V.
La letra vocal u como i tiene privilegio deha^erse consonante muy amenudo, por
tanto algunos las llaman las letras mestizas: V por su nudeza nunca fenee algun
vocablo en Ingles, mas se fortifica con ^n Diptongo, y otras vezes toma e por
seguirla, como en estas instancias, new nuevo, knew conocia, blue azul, true
verdadero, etc. A vezes el Ingles pronuncia u como el Frances en manera de
sylvar, el qual sonido es differente del Espanol y el Italiano, los quales la
pronuncian como oo, como uno oono, usanza oosanza, etc. Mas en Ingles y Frances
u se pronuncia como fuesse un Diptongo de ew, como Cocu cornudo, Cubit codo, se
pronuncian como si fuessen escritas Cokew, Kewbit. El Tudesco esta sugeto de
tornar b en v a vezes, como ay un donozo cuento de un Aleman, qui
complementando su huespeda Francesa dixo, Ma foy Madame vous avez veaux enfans,
A fe senora teneys hijos muy bizerros, en lugar que avia de dezir beaux enfans,
hijos bizarros.

W o doble uu.
W o doble uu se pronuncia en Ingles con mayor redondez de los labios que la
letra O, y con mucha mas fuerca especialmente si h sigue immediatamente, como
whale balena, wheel rueda, whirligigg peonca; pero adonde h no sigue tient una
prolacion mas mansa, como en whirlwind remolino, do la primera w es mucho mas
emfatica que la postrera.

Los Tudescos mismos, donde los Ingleses sacan su Original y lenguage, no
pueden pronunciar w ante de h por esto dizen wat p^r what, were por where, que
es sendl que el Ingles tiene mejores livianos en el pecho.

El Espanol no tiene esta letra w, ni menos el Italiano y el Frances.

Y.
Y se pronuncia como i, toda via ella queda mas constante a si mesma como
teniendo en disden de degeuer ar de su primero ser, y de vocal hacerse
consonante; por tanto ella puede bien merecer el titulo de la (...) de
Filosofia, o la letra de Pythagora.

Y en Frances tiene tal peso que ella haze a vezes un vocablo de por si como
voulez vous y aller, Quereys yr alla, tambien es Adverbio de lugar y persona:
En Espanol ella frequentemente haze una sylaba de por si como en yxar, yzar,
etc.

De los Dipthongos.
Basta lo que dicho es de las letras Vocales que se pueden llamar los
ligamentos o las Arterias que atan los huessos o consonantes; y los vivifican
que sin esto serian como troncos muertos: Agora passaremos a los Dipthongos
Ingleses, y por ser compuestos de los Vocales es bien razon que precedan a los
cons^nantes.

Los Dipthongos juntan unos Vocales para que pisendan proferir un sonido
mesclado, de suerte que dos sonidos se juntan en una sylaba: Los Dipthongos
Ingleses son diez, el primero ai o ay, como maid moca, afraid amedrentado, May
Mayo, day dia: el segundo au o aw, co^o austero austero, authentik authentico,
law ley, awe obediencia: el tercer^ ea, como East Levante, Earl Conde: el
quatro ei, como weight peso, straight derecho: el 5. ew, como dew rocio, few
pocos: el 6. oi o oy, como toil trabajo, soil tierra, boy muchacho, joy gozo:
el 7. 00, como food bastimentos, good bueno: el 8. ou o ow, como stout animoso,
tongue lengua, now agora: el 9. ui o uy, como juice cumo: el postrero uoy, como
buoy.

No ay mas de tres palabras en Ingles en las quales se hallan eo por Diptongo,
viz. people pueblo, jeopatd riesgo, yeoman labrador. El Diptongo ae no se usa
en Ingles o en Espanol.

De los Consonantes.
B.
B es el primer Consonante y la segunda letra del Abecedario; ella es la
primera que junta los labios despues de nacidos, por tanto se ^ama la letra
labial: En Ingles B se pronuncia como en otros lenguages, mas no siempre como
en Espanol, donde ella se confunde muy amenudo con u en muchos vocablos, como
Bisono o Visono a young Soldier, bimbrera o vimorera an Ozier. En Griego
tambien (...) raese tornae much as vezes en (...), que hizo el Tudesco dezir
donosamente, Si Beta est Veta, tunc bibere est vivere. Mas la may or alabanca
de B es, que ella es la letr^ de Innocencia, por ser el tono de la oveja, que
es emblema de la Innocencia.

C.
Algunos criticos Autores ay qui no quedan aficionado a la letra C, llamandola
la letra mestiza, siend^ ni varon ni hembra, mas un monstro o espiritu, que por
sus imposturas ella toma los sonidos de sk q, que ella es superflua a causa del
mesmo sonido que tiene con ellas; mas sin duda ellos senganan, porque com^
podriamos pronunciar Cheshire cheese, chisel, Chivalry, y otros vocablos sin
ella? En la l^ngua Italiana ella emprunta tambien el sonido de g algunas vezes,
como castigo por gastigo, En Castellano (y Frances) quaendo se pronuncia como
s, ella and a suportada con un semicirculo abaxo c, y entonees ella se llama C
cedilla, como caratan the Kanker, capato a shoe, carca a bramble, etc. que van
pronunciados como si fuessen escritas saratan, sapato, sarsa.

D.
D es una tan delicada letra en Ingles, que ella no admite algun otro
Consonante de seguilla eceto R, como dreams suenos, drink bevida, drop gota,
dragon drago, drum atambor, etc. ella se pronuncia en Ingles, como en otros
lenguajes, mas en Espanol quando se halla enter dos Vocales, o antes qual quier
otro en medio o en la fin de una palabra, ella se va derritiendo en th, como el
Ingles las pronuncia en that o the, como Dadivas entran sin taladro, las quales
palabras van pronunciados como si fuessen escritas, Dathivas entran sin
talathro: La lengua antigua de los Bretones corresponde con la Castellana en
esto, porque ellos pronuncian dd en la mesma manera, como Heb ddew heb d^im,
Nada sin Dios.

F.
F tiene la honra de hazer uno de los mas altos tonos en la Musica, y que es
mas, de ser la primera letra de la mas alta virt^ud espiritual es a saber la
Fe: Ella se pronuncia en Ingles como en otros lenguajes.

G.
G en Ingles tiene dos differentes pronunciationes, una delante de a, o, y u,
como guard guarda, gold oro, gulf golfe, etc. Otra delante de e y i, como
Gentleman hidalgo, German Tudesco, Gibbet horca, Gian^ gigante, etc. toda via
muchos vocablos ay que quando ella precede i, se pronuncia como delante de a,
o, y u, como giddy vertiginoso, gift dadeva, girdle cinta, etc.

H.
H es la letra del aliento o aspiracion, por tanto se puede llamar la letra de
la vida, porque sin aliento no ay vida; por tanto me ofpanto porque los Griegos
no vinieron a dalla lugar en su Alfabeto. Algunos la llaman un espiritu, mas
sea espiritu, letra o aspiracion, el Abecedario scria sin aliento sin ella,
otros la ilaman la Reyna de los consonantes.

En algunas palabras h se escrive mas no tiene sonido, como en humor humor,
honor honra, humble humilde, host huesped, etc. las quales se pronuncian umor,
onor, umble, ost.

Th tiene dos sonidos en Ingles el uno fuerte comola Griega th theta, como
thunder trueno, Thursday Iueves, thousand mil, thirsty sediento, thief ladron,
thought pensamiento, etc. mas th en otras palabras se pronuncian mansamente,
como d en Castellano, como this esto, that aquello, thine tuyo, thither la,
thence de la, then entonces, thou tu, etc.

Htras w tiene unamas rezia aspiracion en Ingles que en algun otro lenguage,
como what que cosa, wheat trigo, wheel rueda, when quando, where adonde, whore
puta, whale balena, etc.

Ph se pronuncia en Ingles como en Espanol (y otras lenguas;) mas se observa
que en Espanol y Italiano no se halla ph, porque ellos la tornan en f, como
Philosopher Filosofo, Phillip Felipe, fantasy fantasia, etc.

Ch se pronuncia en Ingles como en Espanol (y Italiano tambien) como China,
chamber cama, chee^e queso, cherry cereza, etc. En los qualos vocablos ch se
pronuncia como el Espanol pronuncia ch en Chico, chicon, chirlar, Mas el
Frances pronuncia ch muy differentemente como sh, como China Shina, Chalupa
Shalupa, etc.

K.
K es traviessa que desdena servir el Espanol o el Italiano, ni el Latin o el
Frances, si no en esta palabra Kalendas, por tanto ellos se sirven de c en su
lugar; mas el Ingles las usa indifferentemente; toda via k en Ingles no precede
algun otro Consonante si no n, como Knight cavallero, knowledge ciencia, knave
vellaco, knife cuchillo, knee rodilla, etc.

L.
L tiene la honra de hacer el mas alto tono en la Musica, porque ella tiene una
prolacion gentily mansa, por esso algunos la llaman (...), porque ella ablanda
el techo de la boca.

Los Ingleses pronuncian l como los Espanoles, mas adonde se hallan ll en
Castellano, sea en el principio o en el medio de una palabra, la postrera l
torna en i, como en lloro, call, callar, lleno, que se pronuncian como si
fuessen escrias lioro, calie, caliar, lieno.

Los antiguos Bretones en Ingalatierra tienen tambien un muy particular sonido
de ll, el qual ningun otra nation puede pronunciar, si la persona no se cria
enter ^llos muy moco; la pronunciacion es tan difficil al Ingles, que queda
forcoso de tornalla en fl, como Floyd por Lloyd, etc.

M.
M bien se puede llamar letra labial con b, y duda ay la qual dellas hacen
juntar los labios primera en un (...). Leemos que el Frigio Infant, del qual
el Rey Tolomeo se servia por sober qual lengua era la mas natural al genero
umano, produzia primero Bec, que significa Pan en aquel lenguaje: Mas los
antiguos Bretones en Ingalatierra tienen que m es la primera letra que haze
juntar los labios, porque (...) ay otr^ vocablo por Madre en Ingles que Mam,
que todos infantes nascanse debaxo de qualquier Clima que sea pronuncian
articulatamente luego que entran en el mundo.

M se pronuncia clara en el principio, mas cerredamente en el medio, y
obscuramente en la fin de un vocablo Ingles, como martyrdom martyrio, Marjerom
Origano, Mammalucks Mamaluques, etc.

N.
N en Ingles se pronuncia como en Espanol, (y otros lenguajes;) mas en
Castellano tiene esta singularidad, de aver unariga direcha encima, exempli
gratia fi, y entonces se deve pronunciar como si i siguiesse immediatamente,
como en este Proverbio, Fue la Negra al bano, y tuuo que contar todo el ano; en
estas palabras bano y ano han de pronunciarse como si fueran escritas banio
anio. Esta letra n suena algo en las norizes, y tiene tres grados de sonidos en
Ingles fuerte en el principio, flaco en en medio, y escuramente en el fin.

P.
P se puede llamar la tercera letra labial tras de b y m, car ella tambien
hazen los labios toparse; en Italiano ella se transforma algunas vezes en u,
como soprano sourano, coperta couerta.

Q.
Q se ha apoderado del lugar que k tenia en los siglos atras enter los antiguos
Saxones nuestros tartar abuelos, los quales a penas conocieron esta letra
culatica que mas antes de la Conquista Normana solian escrevir kuill por quill,
penna; kuire por quire, coro, etc. mas los Franceses-Normanos trayendo consigo
muchas palabras Latinas, como question, quantity, quintessence, y otras,
quitaron el uso de k; toda via q es tan pobre letra en Ingles, que no tiene
lugar sin que u la siga immediatamente.

R.
Ay una Nation muy populenta y grande hazia el Levante, llamada los Chinese,
(los quales escriven y leer perpendicularmente) qui no tienen la letra R en su
Alfabeto, por esto llaman los Tartaros sus vezmos mas cercanos Tataos, y la
razon puede ser porque la letra r se llama la letra canina o perruna segun el
Poeta, -- sonat haec de nare canina litera, Esta letra suena de una nariz
perruna: Por esto las mugeres de Francia la dexan sin pronunciar en fin de
palabras muchas vezes. En Ingles R se pronuncia como en Espanol y otras lenguas.

S.
S aunque sea llamada la letra serpentina a causa de su chifladura, y tambien
por su figura; toda via ella chifla mansamente contra las enzias: ella tiene
diversas pronunciaciones en Ingles, en el principio tiene un sonido agudo, como
en Sabbath Sabado, sable zebelina, etc. mas en el medio y fin de vocablos (si
no va doblada) tiene un sonido manso como Z, como Rose, wise, gems, rimes; mas
donde ella va doblada se pronuncia agudamente.

T.
La letra T tiene una prolacion constante en Ingles, eceto que quando ella
precede i hazia el fin de palabras, como en generation, action, faction, do t
torna en c, como se eseriven en Espanol, generation, accion, faccion.

X.
La letra X a penas tiene la estima de letra en Ingles, porque no ay ningun
vocable qui comienca con ella; mas en el medio, y en la fin se halla amenudo,
como en sixty sesenta, vex congojar, sex sexo, etc. tambien X concluye
algunas palabras, como flax estopa, fox raposa, six seys, que se suenan como si
fuessen escritas flacks, focks, sicks: Porque X tiene esta prerogativade ser
compuesta de tres Consonantes (que ningun otra letra tiene) es a saber de c K
s, loqual siendo assi el Anagramma de Orcus que se hizo de Uxor, era algo
ingenioso, -- Uxor and Orcus idem. En Espai^ ol la letra X se usa mucho en el
principio, medio y fin de vocablos, que vino de los Moros, los quales tuvieron
la mayor part de Espana 700. anos, como Xarcias, Xapin, Xarava, etc.

Z.
La letra Z es la postrera del Abecedario, y muy propiamente, porque es el
postrer sonido que se haze en la boca al salir del mundo; no ay en Ingles mas
de los o tres palabras en todo que comiencan con Z, viz. Zealous, zeal, zealot,
con algunos terminos de Astronomia, como Zona, Zenith, Zodiaco, y ciertos
nombres Griegos, como Xenefon, Xerxes, etc.

Y basta lo que dicho es de las letras senzillas.
De las Sylabas.
Aviendo tradado de los Elementos de Hablat, ^or a procederemos a las
composiciones de letras y pri^ero de las sylabas.

Sylaba es part de palabra la qual rende un sonido ^^^iculado; se haze a vezes
(como assi en Espanol) (...) una sola letra, como amazd assombrado, equippage
arejo, imagination imaginacion, ominous deastro^^ usurer logrero; en los quales
vocablos a, e, i, o, u en principio hazen una sylaba enter a de por si.

Sylaba de mas letras esta compuesta o de Dipthon^^ o Vocales solos, como ayder
ayudador, auditor au^nciero, eating comiendo; not arse ha que aunque un (...)
puede hazer una sylaba, toda via ningun Conso^^te puede hazer lo sin un Vocal
anadido: Sylabas (...) Consonante se hazende dos letras, como no; o de (...),
como the el, que se suele escrevir corto en Ingles ^esta manera ye; o se hazen
sylabas de mas letras, como that, then, with, aquello, entonces, con, que se
escriven cortas a vezes, como yt yen with; sylabas ^y de 5. letras, como there
alla, which que, se escriven cortas assi year with.

Sylabas ay qui tienen dos Consonantes por un Vocal, como cry grido; otras
tienen tres, como drab puta; o^ras tienen 4. como dregs heces; otras 5. como
string cuerda; otras 6. como strength fuerca; algunas sylabas ay qui tienen 7.
Consonantes por un Vocal, como strengths fuerca; lo que muestra quanta virtud
tiene (...) Vocal de poder dar vida a tantos Consonantes. El Polacco tiene a
vezes diez Consonantes s^rviendo un Vocal solo, de suerte que se dize que el
Polacco quando habla arroja sus palabras como piedras en lal ^ara.

Tocante la posicion o cantidad de sylabas, no ay otra lengua, que yo sepa,
ecceto la Griega y la Latina, qui tiene algunas reglas ciertas para esto; no ay
tanta ^arte y trabajoen Ingles o Espanol, o algun otro lenguaje Occidental
porque sus composiciones metricas, ^versos y rimas se derivan del solo instinto
de la Natura, y como dize Aristoteles, (...), es a saber de una libre, y
natural composicion sin ^^ser cautivado a las cantidades de sylabas. Los
Griegos tampoco antes de Omero, y los Romanos antes Livio Andronico, ^o eran
tan curiosos en la observacion de la cantidad de sylabas.

Agora es consentaneo a la razon, que hablemos de los Accentos de sylabas, que
son como los tonos de la voz, y no observando el accento puede ser que una
palabra venga a ser muy mal pronunciada, como desert eremo, y desert
mericimiento; torment tormento, torment atormentado; object, object, object
objectar; incense incenso; convert convertido, convert convertar: Agora toca al
accento de hazernos pronunciar rectamente, y adonde se halla el accento es
menester proferir aquella sylaba emfaticamente y con mayor fuerca.

Enlos Adverbios el Accento es ordinariamente en la primera sylaba, como
merrily alegramente, heavily ^ristemente. Las Dissylabas y Trissylabas tienen
tambien por lo commun el accento en la sylaba primera, como Winter Invierno,
Summer Estio, Singular singular, providence providencia. Vocablos tambien
terminantes en able sean de 3. o 4. sylabas tienen el accento en la primera,
como Fable, sensible, sociable, amiable; ecceto abominable, detestable.
Palabras terminando en tion o sion, tienen el accento ordinariamente en la
sylaba que precede, como contention contienda, confusion confusion, abomination
abominacicion: Mas en Espa^nol tiene el accento en tales vocables en la sylaba
postrera.

Cada Dissylaba feneciendo en ish, ry, er, el, et, o on, tienen el accento en
la primera sylaba, como slavish esclavoso, marry esposar, hover menear, damsel
donzella, packet paquete, gammon pernil, bacon tocino. c^no. Palabras
fenecientes en nt tienen el accento communemente en la postrera sylaba, como
lament, extent, content, etc.

Agora venimos a la calidad de palabras, por saber si son Primitivas o
Derivativas. La mayor part de vocablos primitivos en Ingles son Monosylabos;
los miembros del cuerpo lo son capapie, como head cabeca, heart coracon, guts
tripas, knee rodilla, foot pie: lo que discubre la Inglesa de ser Hija de la
Tudesca. El Espanol todo al contrario se deleyta en Polysylabas; y adonde el
Ingles sexprime en una sylaba, el se sirve de 5. o 6. como thoughts pens
amientos, fray levantatamiento, etc. lo que se estima un punto de subiduria en
el Espanol, porque mientras que habla tiempo toma para pensar en la materia.

Tambien ay en la lengua Inglesa vocablos simples y compuestos, como love amor,
lovely amoroso; man varon, manly vironil; wise sabio, unwise necio: Y en est a
composicion de palabras, la lengua Inglesa es assi tan feliz, y atrevida que
qualqueir otra, sacando fuera la Griega, que sobrepuja a todas en este
particular; porque el Ingles suele juntar dos Substantivos, como Cutpurse
cortador de bolsas, self-love amor de si mesmo, a Milhorse cavalio de molino,
etc. y algunas vezes una junta ay de tres Substantivos en un vocablo, como
Tap-house-keeper bod^gonero, a Football-play jugador a pelota, etc.

De las parts de Oracion en la Lengua Inglesa.
Ocho parts ay de la Oracion en Ingles comoen otras lenguas, viz. Nome,
Pronome, Verbo, Participio, Adverbio, Conjunction, Preposition, Interjection; a
las quales anadimos los Articulos The el o la, y A un una, que los Latinos no
tienen, de los quales el primer Articulo es definito, y termina el
entendimiento, como The sword la espada, the book el libro, que denota una
particular espada o libro; el otro Articulo es indefinito, como A sword una
espada, a book un libro, que denotan la Idea general de espadas y libros. Ay
otra differencia enter The y A, porque The se puede aplicar al numoro plural
tambien, como the swords las espadas; mas el Articulo A se aplica solo al
singular. Los Nombres propios son incapazes destos articulos. Agora de las
parts cada una de por si.

De Nombre.
Ay Nombre Substantivo y Adjectivo, el primero se puede entender de si mismo,
como Yglesia a Church, call a street, etc. El Adjectivo no tiene realidad
alguna sin que se aplique a un Substantivo, como Blanco white, lindo fair, etc.
El Ingles tiene esta singularidad sobre otras lenguas, (mas no merece mucho
loor por ello) que el Adjectivo precede el Substantivo, como brown bread baco
pan, a wise man sabio hombre; mas otras Naciones postponen el Adjectivo,
diziendo pan baco, hombre sabio.

Los Nombres Substantivos o son Comunes, como bridge puente, river rio, etc. o
son Propios, como Rialto (particular puente en Venecia) Severn Sabrina; o
Personales, como Charles Carlos, Katharine Catal^na.

Cinco Generos ay que pertenesen a los Nombres, el Masculino, que comprehend
las cosas debaxo de una Idea masculina, como Bulls toros, men hombres, etc. El
Feminino che comprehend qualquier cosa feminina, como woman hembra, Does
ciervos. El Genero Neutro cuya nocion concibe ni el otro sexo, debaxo del qual
las cosas inanimatas se comprehenden, como Civdades, Rios, Navios; porque
aunque se llaman por nombres masculinos, toda via hablamos dellos en el genero
feminino en hiscurso; como Eboracum la cividad de York, Rhenus el rio Rheno, el
Carlos Real un galeon. El quarto Genero es el Epiceno o genero promiscuo, quo
comprehend ambos sexos, como dogs, horses, dear, cavalgadura, venado, etc. los
quales vocab^os significan ambos sexos. El quinto es el comun o duvoso Genero,
como friend, gossip, neighbor, cousin, etc. los quales tambien intiman entrambos
sexos: Mas en Espanol (y otros lenguajes) se van differenciando por la
masculina y feminina terminacion, como Amigo amiga, vezino vezina, primo prima,
etc. que es una ventaja que la Inglesa lleva sobre las demas Lenguas.

Ay ciertos Diminutivos propios a todas lenguajes; los Diminutivos de algunos
Substantivos en Ingles fenecen en ell, como cock cockrell, part parcel, etc.
otros en ing, co^o Goose gosling, duck duckling, etc. otros en ock, como Bull
bullock, hill hillock: otros en et, como Baron Baronet. Los Adjectivos tambien
tienen sus Diminutivos, como cold coldish, black blackish, green greenish, etc.

Ay tambien Diminutivos de Nombres propios de hombres y hembras en Ingles, como
Christopher Kitt, Gregory Grigg, Richard Dick, Magdalen Maudlin, Katherine
Kate, Elizabeth Besse, etc. Mas algunos nombres ay que no tienen Diminutivos,
como Peter, James, Stephen, etc. Mas el Espanol en esto tiene Diminutivos, y
Sub-diminutivos mas que otros, como Simon, Simoncico, Simoncillo, Simoncicico,
Simoncicillo; Miguel, Miguelico, Miguelillo; Catalina, Catalinica, Catalinilla;
Francisca, Francisquita, Francisquilla, etc.

Los Adjectivos Ingleses tienen tambien sus grados comparativos, y algunos
tienen dos comparativos, y dos superlativos, que otros lenguajes no tienen;
exprimen el uno o por la palabra more mas, o anadiendo er a la fin del
Positivo, como wise more wise, or wiser, stout more stout, or stouter, etc.
Ansi el superlativo sexprime o por la palabra most, o anadiendo est ala findel
Positivo, como wise most wise wisest, stout most stout stoutest, etc. Mas ay
ciertos Adjectivos ecetuados desta regla general, como good better best, bad
worse worst, little lesser least. Adjectivos terminnado e^ ous admiten sus
comparativos y superlativos solamente por estas palabras more y most, como
glorious, more glorious, most glorious; ansi Specicus, famous, victorious, etc.

Los Adjectivos Ingleses ordinariamente no tienen el nombre plural, mas el
singular sirve por entrambos, que es una not able ventaja; mas los Substantivos
tienen sus plurales unos terminando en s, como King Kings, stagg staggs, etc.
Otros terminan en en, como man men, woman women, ox oxen, etc. Como en otros
lenguajes ay ciertos Irregulares vocablos (aunque sean pucos) que declinan las
dichas terminacione, como Mouse mice, louse lice, tooth teeth, foot feet, etc.

Algunos Substantivos ay que no admiten el nombre plural (y son de peso) como
Gold oro, silver plata, brass bronzo, copper cobre, tinn estano, (y otros
minerales tampoco tienen plural en Espanol) rest, bread, beer, ale, etc. Otros
Substantivos tienen el plural solo, como goods bienes, riches, necessaries, do
se ha de observar que necessaries el Substantivo nace del Adjectivo necessary.

Llegamos ahora alos Pronombres, llamados assi porque suplen algunas v^zes el
lugar de Nombres, y los tomaremos cada uno en su grado comencando con las
personas, I, thou, he, we, ye, they, Yo, tu, el, nosotros, vosotros, aquellos:
que se declinan ansi:

The first Person.
Singular. Plural. Nom. I, Yo We, Nos o nosotros Genesis of me, de mi of us, de
nos o nosotros Dat. to me, a mi to us, a nos o nosotros Accus. me, me us, nos o
nosotros Voc. o me, o me o we, o nosotros Ablat. with me, comigo. with us, con
nosotros.

The Second Person.
Singular. Plural. Nom. Thou, Tu Ye, Vos vosotros Genesis of thee, de ti of you,
de vos de vosotros Dat. to thee, a ti to you, a vos o vosotros Accus. thee, te
you, vos vosotros Voc. o thou, o tu o you, o vos o vosotros Abl. from or with
thee, de ti o contigo. from or with you, de o con vos o vosotros.

The third Person.
Singular. Plural. Nom. He, El They, Ellos Genesis of him, de el o del of them, de
ellos o dellos Dat. to him, a el o al to them, a ellos Accus. him, el them,
ellos o a elloss Voc. o he, o el o they, o ellos Abl. from or with him, del o
con el. from them, de ellos o dellos.

Ay en Ingles quatro Pronombres Possessivos, my o mine, mi o mio; my adelanta
siempre una palabra empecando con Consonante, como my cloak mi capa, my hat mi
sombrero, etc. Mine adelanta un vocablo comencando con Vocal o h, como mine
Aunt mi tia, mine heritage mi herencia, etc. mas mine se halla mas amenudo de
por si por un possessivo, particularmente en respuesta a una pregunta, como
whose sword is this? mine; cuya espada es esta? lamia. Los Plurales de my y
mine son our ours, los quales son tambien possessivos.

Los segundos Possessivos son Thy, thine, como thy house tu casa, thine arm tu
braco, thine hand tu mano; y thine como mine adelantan vocablos comentando con
un Vocal. Thine tambien es possessivo de si mesmo a una pregunta, como whose
land is that? thine. Los Plurales de thy thine son your yours, que son
Possessivos de si mesmos.

Los terceros Possessivos son Her hers, con sus Plurales their theirs; como her
distaf su rueca, her maidenhead su virginidad; whose ring is this? hers. Mas el
Espanol (ni el Italiano o el Frances) no tiene ^ste feminino Possessivo de
distinction, sirviendose de (...) y suyo.

Which, who, that son Pronombres Relativos refe^iendo a las palabras delante;
mas which y who refie^en propiamente a cos as vivas, y that a cos as
inanima^^s, como the man which preached yesterday, el hom^^e que predicava
air; the Lady who passed this way, la dama que passava por aqui; the stones
that went to build Paul's, las piedras que yvan a fabricar San Pablo. What,
whose son Pronombres Interrogativos, tambien lo son which y who sobredichos a
vezes.

Ay ciertos Pronombres compuestos, como my self, thy self, him self, her self,
etc.

Del Verbo.
EL verbo, es una de las mas principales y necessarias parts de una lengua: se
puede llamar el alma de la Habla, porque aunque todas las palabras del mundo se
junten, toda via ninguna sentencia, sea Interrogativa o qualquier otra se puede
hazer sin el: Y como los Vocales animan Palabras, assi los Verbos animan
sentencias; que puede ser la razon porque tiene tanta latitud en la lengua
Latina, porque la palabra verbum se extend a todas las parts de la Oracion.

Verbo en Ingles como en Espanol (y otras lenguas) tiene 3. distinctiones de
tiempos, el Present, como I pray or do pray, yo ruego; el tiempo passado, como
I prayed or did pray, yo rogava; el Futuro o el tiempo venidero, como I shall
or will pray, yo rogare. Las terminaciones de Verbos en Ingles es la misma en
ambos nombres (eceto la segunda y tercera persona en el singular) como I live,
we, ye, they live, etc. no es assi en Espanol, como yo vivo nos vivimos, etc.
ni en otros ^eng^ajes, lo qual es gran ventaja a los que aprenden ^^ngles.

Ay en la lengua Inglesa Verbos Activos, Passivos y eutros, como en Espanol,
como I love yo quiero, es ^ctivo: I am loved yo soy querido, es Passivo
anadiend endo el Verbo Auxiliario Am soy: El Neutro es donde el Verbo am soy,
no puede ser juntado, como I live vivo, I weep lloro, etc.

El Ingles como los otros lenguajes tiene sus Conjugaciones y cadencias de
Verbos: Los Verbos de la primera a Conjugacion algunos fenecen en all, como to
call, to fall, to install, to inthrall, etc. cuyos Participios se hacen
anadiendo ing y d, como calling called, installing installed, etc. Otros
terminan en are, como to dare, to pare, to share, etc. Otros en ace, com^ to
chase, to face, to grace, to lace, to trace, to embrace, etc.

Verbos de la segunda Conjugacion algunos fenecen en ear, como to bear, to
sheare, to tear, to wear, etc. Cuyos Participios terminan en ing y orne, como
bearing, shearing, tearing, borne, shorn, torn. Otros fenecen en ease, como
to ease, to please, to displease, etc. Otros en ead, como to lead, to knead, to
read, to spread, to tread, etc.

Verbos de la tercera Conjugacion unos terminan en ite, como to bite, to write,
to indite, etc. Otros en ight, como to fight, to fright, to light, to right,
etc. Otros en ell, como to quell, to sell, to tell, etc. Otros en ink, como to
drink, to link, to sink, to think, to shrink, etc.

Los Verbos de la quarta Conjugacion unos terminan en y, como to die, to ly, to
cry, to fly, to try, etc. Otros en ire, como to hire, to desire, to inquire,
etc. Otros en ine, como to shine, to dine, to fine, to decline, to confine, to
incline, etc. Notarse haque los Verbos Monosylabos vienen de la Tudesca, los
otros de la lengua Francesa. Tambien se ha de notar que los Participios del
Tiempo present terminan en ing, y del Tiempo preterito end, por lo mas, en
todos verbos Ingleses, ec^to ciertos Irregulares.

La Conjugacion del Verbo, I have yo he.
El Modo Indicativo o declarativo.
El tiempo present.
Yo he, tu has, aquel ha: nosotros avemos, vos aveis, aquellos han.

El tiempo preterito imperfecto.
Yo avia, tu avias, el avia: nos aviamos, vos aviades, ellos avian.

El tiempo preterperfecto.
Yo uve, tu uviste, aquel uvo: nos uvimos, vos uvistes, aquellos uvieron.

El tiempo futuro.
Yo avre, tu avras, el avra: nos avremos, vos avreis, ellos avran.

El Modo Imperativo o de mandar.
Ave, aya el: ayamos, ayed o ayays, ayan ellos.

El Modo Optativo, o de dessear. El tiempo presence. Oxala.
Si yo oviesse, si tu oviesses, si el oviesse: si no oviessemos, si vos
oviesses, si ellos oviessen.

El tiempo imperfect.
Yo avria, tu avrias, el avria: nos avriamos, vos avriades, ellos avrian.

El Modo Subjunctivo. El tiempo present.
Como yo aya, como tu ayas, como el aya: como nos ayamos, como vos ayays, como
ellos ayan.

El Modo ayudadoro Yo soy.
El Modo Indicativo o declaratorio.
El tiempo present.
Yo soy, tu eres, el es: nos somos, vos soys, ellos son.

El tiempo preterimperfecto.
Yo era, tu eras, el era: nosotros eramos, vosotros erades, ellos eran.

El tiempo preterperfecto.
Yo he sido, tu has sido, el ha sido: nos avemos sido, vos aveys sido, ellos
han sido.

El tiempo futuro.
Yo sere, tu seras, el sera: nos seremos, vos sereys, ellos seran.

El Modo Imperativo o para mandar.
Se tu, sea el o aquel: seamos, sed vosotros, sean ellos o aquellos.

El Modo Optativo o de dessear. El tiempo present.
Que yo sen, que tu seas, que el sea: que nosotros seamos, que vosotros seays,
que ellos sean.

El tiempo preterperfecto.
Si yo fuesse, si tu fuesses, si el fuesse: si nos fuessemos, si vos fuessedes,
si ellos fuessen.

El Modo Conjuctivo. El tiempo present.
Como yo fuere, como tu fueres, como el fuere: como nos fueremos, como vos
fueredes, como ellos fueren.

El tiempo preterperfecto.
Aunque yo sea, aunque tu seas, aunque el sea: aunque nos seamos, aunque vos
seays, aunque ellos sean.

El Modo Infinitivo.
Ser, haver sido, siendo.

Se ha de observar que los verbos en Ingles tienen sus passivos generalmente
terminando en d, como I love yo amo, I am loved yo soy amado; I fear yo temo, I
am feared yo soy temido; I fire I am fired, yo yo quemo yo soy quemado: Eceto
Verbos en ell, qui tienen sus passivos en old, como I tell I am told, I sell I
am sold, etc. Y Verbos en ind, cuyos passivos terminan en ound, como I bind I
am bound, yoato yo soy atado; I find I am found, yo hallo yo soy hallado; I
grind I am ground, yo molo yo soy molido; con muchos otros tambien que fenecen
en orn, como I swear I am sworn, yo juro yo soy jurado; I tear I am torn, yo
lacero yo soy lacerado, etc. Mas en Espanol estoy sirve por hazer un verbo
passivo tan amenudo que soy, como se ver a en la Gramatica. Agora la
differencia que ay enter ser y estar es, que el primero significa la essencia
de una cosa, como ser bueno; estar significa la condition local, como yo estoy
en Londres, I am in London, etc.

Una Instancia para declinar un Verbo Activo (...) assivo en Ingles, que pueda
servir por los demas.
El Modo Indicativo o declaratorio.
El ^iempo present.
Activo. Passivo. To desseo yo soy desseado tu desseas tu eres desseado el
dessea: el es desseado: nos desseamos nos somos desseados vos desseays vos soys
desseados ellos dessean. ellos son desseados.

El tiempo Preterimperfecto.
Yo desseava Yo era desseado tu desseavas tu eras desseado el desseava: el era
desseado: nos desseavamos nos eramos desseados vos desseavades vos erades
desseados ellos desseavan. ellos eran desseados.

El Aoristo o tiempo preterperfecto.
Yo dessee Yo fui desseado tu desseaste tu fuiste desseado el desseo: el fue
desseado: nos desseamos nos fuimos desseados vos desseastes vos fuistes
desseados ellos dessearon. ellos fueron desseados.

El tiempo Preterpluperfecto. Donde ser torna en el Verbo Ayudodor aver.
Yo avia desseado Yo avia sido desseado tu avias desseado tu avias sido
desseado el avia desseado: el avia sido desseado: nos aviamos desseado nos
aviamos sido desseados vos aviades desseado vos aviades sido desseados ellos
avian desseado. ellos avian sido desseados

El tiempo futuro.
Yo desseare Ye sere desseado tu dessearas tu seras desseado el desseara el
sera desseado: nos dessearemos nos seremos desseados vos desseareys vos sereys
desseados ellos dessearan. ellos seran desseados.

El Modo Imperativo o de comandar.
Dessee tu Se tu desseado dessee el: sea el desseado: desseamos nosotros seamos
nos desseados desseed vosotros sed vosotros desseados desseen ellos sean ellos
desseados.

El Modo Optativo o de dessear. El tiempo present. Oxala o plega a Dios.
Que yo dessees Que yo sea desseado que tu dessees que tu seas desseado que el
dessee: que el sea desseado: que nos desseemos que nos seamos desseados que vos
desseeys que vos seays desseados que ellos desseen que ellos sean desseados.

El tiempo preterperfecto.
Si yo desseasse Si yo fuesse desseado si tu desseasses si tu fuesses desseado
si el desseasse: si el fuesse desseado: si nos desseassemos si nos fuessemos
desseados si vos desseassedes si vos fuessedes desseados si ellos desseassen.
si ellos fuessen desseados.

El Modo Conjunctivo. El tiempo present.
Como yo desseare Como yo fuere desseado como tu desseares como tu fueres
desseado como el desseara: como el fuere desseado: como nos dessearemos como
nos fueremos desseados como vos desseareys como vos fueredes desseados como
ellos dessearen. como ellos fueren desseados

El tiempo preterimperfecto.
Aunque yo dessee Aunque yo sea desseado aunque tu dessees aunque tu seas
desseado aunque el dessee: aunque el sea desseado: aunque nos desseemos aunque
nos seamos desseados aunque vos desseeys aunque vos seays desseados aunque
ellos desseen. aunque ellos sean desseados

El Modo Infinitivo.
Dessear Ser desseado aver desseado aver sido desseado desseando siendo
desseado.

Segun este exemplo otros Verbos Activos (eceto ciertos Irregulares) y Passivos
se pueden formar.

El Ingles tiene tambien sus Verbos Impersonales, como el Espanol (y otros) los
quales no van distinguidos por personas, como it grieves me, it irketh me, me
pesa, it behooves me me importa, it concerns me me toca, etc.

Hasta agora avemos tratado de las parts mas principales de la Oracion,
procederemos a las demas, ^ primeramente de

Los Adverbios.
Adverbio es palabra sin nombre que se junta con ^^ra, y viene adelante o tras
de una palabra, como well (...) bien criado, better bred mejor criado, ill bred
(...) criado, etc. Mas los Adverbios por la mayor (...) vienen atras, como
courageously animosamente, devoutly devotamente, etc. y como en Ingles todos
^dverbios casi fene^en en y, assi en Espanol (y Italia^o) fenecen en ente.

Los Adverbios o son de cantidad, como much (...), too much demasiado, enough
bastantemente, to^ether juntamente, etc. o son de calid^d, y los prime^^ de
numero, como once, twice, thrice, una vez, ^os (...), tres vezes: los segundos
son de tiempo, como ^esterday air, then en^onces, when quando, (...) luego,
ever siempre, etc. los terceros son de (...), como here aqui, there alla, where
adonde, (...) aculla, etc. los quatros son de afirmation o negacion, I, yea,
yes, si; no, not, nay, no: los quintos son parallamar, como hola ola: otros son
para amonestar o aprovar, come so, so-so, well, assi, bien esta: otros dessean,
como o if: los seys son de similitud, como, as, so, likewise, even so, assi,
tambien, etc.

Interjeciones.
Interjeciones son o de alegria, como ha, ha, ha: o de congoja, como ah, alas,
woe is me, hay, ay de mi, guay de mi: o de aborecimiento, como fie, fy-fy, foh,
ba: o de desden, como tush, etc. st es Interjecion de silencio: rr para incitar
los perros.

Preposiciones.
Preposiciones o son separables, como before delante, behind atras, according
segun, among enter, without ^in, before antes, under or below debaxo, against
con^^ra, opuesto, enfrente, over sobre, near cerca, etc.

Las Preposiciones inseparables no exprimen and a sin ^^r juntadas con otro
vocablo, como incapable incapaz, ^ndone deshecho, relief alivio, repress
reprimir, re^lution resolucion, etc.

Conjunciones.
Conjunciones se llaman assi porque ata^ las pala^^^, como and y, my father and
my mother, mi pa^^^ y mi madre: y esta se llama la conjuncion copula^va: otros
apartan, como but mas, albeit although a^nque: Otras son Disjunctivas, como
nor, neither ni; ni yo ni vos, nor I nor you: otras proceden de razanando, como
for, because porque: otras son de ilacion, como therefore, wherefore, so that,
por tanto, etc.

De los puntos de palabras y sentencias.
La lengua Inglesa ^omo la Castellana (y otras) tiene sus puntos y not a^ de
Subdistincion, de media distincion, y de complida distincion, que se llaman
Comma, colon y periodo. Una subdistincion o Comma es nota do corto aliento, y
se figura assi, La media distincion tiene aliento mas largo, y se puedo dezir
cumplida part del Periodo, y se sigura assi: Periodo es la sentencia entera, y
va figurada de un punto senzillo assi.

Ay tambien l^ Parenthesis, que se figura como dos medias Lunas assi () y
aunque sea incluyda en la sentencia, toda via en ometiondola, la sentencia no
dexa de ser perfecta.

Ay tambien nota de Interrogacion, que se figura assi?

Mas desto ay nota de Circumflexion, quando el vocablo va abreviado, y se
figura assi*

Ay tambien not a de Admiracion, que se figura assi!

En conclusion ay not a del Apostrofo, quando una le^rase corta, y se figura
assi' Mas la Castellana por su mayor alaban^^a no usa tales Apostrofos,

TOuching the Syntaxis, which is an orderly series and connection of Nouns,
Verbs, Adverbs, and other parts of Speech according to the propriety of a
Language in a due cohaerence, the English tongue may be said to have the same
that other vulgar Languages and dialects have; But the English being a
sub-dialect to other toungs, as was touched in the Epistle to the Reader, and
having such varieties of incertitudes, changes and Idioms, it cannot be in the
compass of human brain to compile an exact regular Syntaxis thereof, Mr. Ben.
Johnson a great Wit, who was as patient as he was elaborat in his re-serches
and compositions, as he was framing an English Syntaxis, confessed the further
he proceeded, the more he was puzzled; Therefore herin we must have recours to
that great Mistress of all knowledge Observation, it being a true maxim, Quod
deficit in praecepto, suppleat Observatio.

Concerning the English prosody, the same may be said thereof as was spoken
before of the Syntaxis; But touching Poesy and Metrical compositions, the
English is as punctual in observing the number of feet, syllables, and
cadences, as any other vulgar language; And there are couched in Her as strong
concepts, and as sinewy expressions, with such high Idaeas and Raptures of Wit
and Invention as in any language whatsoever; nor is any so copious of
Allegoires, and so constant in the poursuit of them; Her ordinary rithmical
composures consist of ten feet, whereof I thought good to produce these (yet
bleeding) examples.

Upon His late Majesty's Decollation.
SO fell the Royal Oak by a wild crew
Of Mongrell shrubbs* which underneath Him grew;
So fell the Lion by a pack of Currs;
So the Rose withered 'twixt a knot of Burrs;
So fell the Eagle by a swarm of Gnats;
So the Whale perished by a shoal of Spratts.
Indignabundus sic cecinit, J. H.

Upon CHARLES the First, (...).
If to subdu ones Self, if to obtain
A Conquest over the Passions, be to Reign,
Here lies the Gretest King (who can say more?)
Of all can com behind, or went before.
I. H.

Of diverse superfluous Letters in the English Orthography; And some Solaecisms
discovered in the common practice of the Language.
HE may be siad to do his Mother Tongue a good office, who makes her the more
docible and easy to be learnt by Forreners: Now, there is not any thing which
tends more to the easy attaining of a Language, and to allure a stranger to the
study thereof, as when the writing and pronunciation of words do both agree. I
have known diverse Forreners much affect the English Tongue, but when they went
about to study her, and found such a difference betwixt the printed words and
the pronouncing of them, (which proceeds from the superfluous letters) they
threw away their books in a kind of passion and dislike. The French finding
lately this inconvenience, have garbled their Tongue of such letters; and under
favor (as we imitat the French in all things else) it may well become the English
to follow him in this; to which purpose these few rules may serve.

1. If those words which have the Latin for their Original, we write them as
the Latin does, not as the French, (and it is the more credit so to do) as Afric,
Logic, Physic, etc. labor, honor, favor, etc. whereby the words are as fully
pronouncd, as if (after the French) they were written Afrique, Logique;
Physique, labor, honor, favor: and there are two letters saved in the three
first words, and one in the second, which makes the words to be pronounced as
they are written.

2. That in such words as end in inn and unne, the last n and the e should be
left out, as sin, ginne, pin, shinne, tin, win, etc. gunne, nun,
run, shun, sun, etc. which should be written sin, gin, pin, shin, tin,
win, etc. gun, nun, run, shun, sun, etc. whereby two letters are saved, yet they
have altogether as full a pronunciation; but herby strangers will not be
subject to make two syllables of them, as sin-ne, pin-ne, etc. gun-ne, nun-ne,
etc.

3. That all Adverbs which end in lie, as bodile, merrily, sadly, etc. should
be written with y, as bodily, merrily, sadly, etc. whereby a letter is saved,
and strangers will not be subject to read them bodili-e, merrili-e, etc.

4. That such words as end in tle, kle, sle, etc. should be written with the e
before the l, as for Epistle epistel, twinkle twinkel, whissle whissel; wherb^
the word retains still its true pronunciation, and strangers will not be subject
to read those words, epist-le, twink-le, whiss-le, etc.

5. That in such words as end in ear the e should be omitted, as Bear bear,
fear fear, dear dea^, forbear forbear, etc. whereby Forreners will not be
subject to read them Bear-e, fear-e, forbear-e, etc. As also words

6. That these Monosyllables me, she, be, he, ye, etc. should be written me,
she, be, ye, he; and so be read as they are pronounced. And that in those
words which end in ue, the e also should be left out, as true, blue, crew, due,
etc. they should be written true, blu, cru, du, etc.

7. That in words ending in gh the g should be left out, as Chough chouh, cough
couh, trough trouh, etc. whereby the Forrener will pronounce it more easily. As
likewise in words ending in ght the g should be left out, as bright briht, fight
fiht, height heiht, might miht, etc. which will render them more easy to the
Forrener, and save a letter.

8. That the superfluous p should be left out in many words, as Consumption
consumtion, presumption presumtion, assumption assumtion, etc. and the b also
in doubt, and the i in Parliament may well be omitted.

9. C might well be spared when it comes before k, as fickle fikle, pickle
pikle, tickle tikle, etc. f^r the word retains still its full sound.

10. That in these words some, done, sum, come, etc. e were left out, for
forreners read them as if they made two syllables, so-me, do-ne, co-me, etc. As
also words ending in arre, as war, bar, jarre, etc. which may be very well
writ, war, bar, jar, etc.

11. In those words which end in tt, the late^t may be well omitted, as Wit
wit, hitt hit, bitt bit, committ commit, etc. As also most words ending ^n ll,
the later l may be spared, as Bell bell, fell fell, tell tell, mongrell mongrel,
etc. and the sound of the wo^^ remains as full. Herunto may be added all
Infinitif Moods terminating in err, as confer, refer, defer, where the
last re is superfluous, and may be writ as well confer, defer, refer, etc.

12. That words in ear and in ease should leave the a, as for Fear fere, for
tear tere, etc. for pleasure pleasure, leisure lesure: and then Forreners will
not be subject to read them fe-are, te-are, ple-asure, le-asure, etc.

There is a Maxim in Logic, that Frustra fit per plura, qucd fieri potest per
pauciora, More is too much when fewer will serve: and as this Rule holds in all
things else, so it may well do in Orthography.

They say abroad, that none write better Latin then the English, and none
pronounce it worse; This proceeds principally from the odd prolation of i,
which all other Nations pronounce like ee, as Nisi neesee, tibi teebee; which
the English does not iu many words, and he should not do amiss to frame his
mouth in pronouncing Latin after that sound.

There is a Solaecism used in English, in putting the word most before a
Superlatif, (as if any thing could be higher then the Superlatif) as most
highest, most brightest, etc.

You is also used where ye should be, as you Gentlemen of the Jury, whereas ye
Gentlemen, etc. is the true English; for you in the Nominatif case should relate
but to one person, and ye to many; though you in all the other cases serves
for both.

The English also is censured abroad for putting the Adjectif before the
Substantif, as white bread, etc. as also for proposing Questions negatively,
which he should do affirmatively, as Were you never in France? you have not bin
in France, Sir? etc. whereas we should say, Were you ever in France? have you bin
in France, Sir? An affirmatif being held more noble then the negatif.

I hope I shall not incur a Praemunire (among the discreeter sort) for my
temerity in pointing at these particulars, which, if we could obtain leave of
(that great Tyrant) Custom, to reform both in Ortography and speking, it would
(humbly under favor) be nere the worse for our Language.

The English has some things (that other Toungs have not) which tends much to
the advantage and ease of the Foreign Lerner, for all Verbs terminat alike in
the singular and plural, through all the Moods, except in the second and third
person singular.

There be diverse words that are both masculin and feminin, without change of any
letter, as friend, neighbor, cosen, gossip, etc.

The English also has two Comparatifs, and two Superlatifs for most Adjectifs,
(which other Languages have not) as Devout, devouter or more devout, devoutest
or most devout; strong, stronger or more strong, strongest or most strong. She
has also a shorter way of expression in diverse words, as once, twice, thrice;
which the Spanish, French and Italian cannot do but by two words, viz. one
time, two times, three times, una vez, une fois, una volta, etc.

Lastly, the English Adjectifs have but one number, which is the singular, that
serves for both, as a black pudding, black puddings; a fair maid, fair maids;
hansom whore, hansom whores, etc.

Touching the Premises let the Reder observe this Exampel.
The War which began in Bohemia, foretold by that fatal Comete in the
year, 1618. (and by the intemperance of the Calviniste and the Jesuit) was
directly or collaterallie the cause of all the confusions which happened in
Christendom ever since; it brought the Swede into Germany, (like a cold
Snake into ones bosom) who did so harasse the whole Country, and so
pitifully grind the faces of the poor People, that they have not recovered
their right Countenances to this very day in many places.

The same written as it is commonly pronounced.
The War which began in Bohemia, foretold by that fatal Comet in the year,
1618. (and by the intemperance of the Calvinist and the Jesuit) was directly or
colateraly the cause of all the confusions which happened in Cristendom ever
since: it brought the Swed into Germany, (like a cold Snake into ones bosom)
who did so harasse the whole Cuntry, and so pitifully grind the faces of the
poor Peepel, that they have not recovered their right Countenances to this very
day in many places.

In this short Exampel there are above 27. letters saved, and the words made fit
to be pronounced by any Forrener being written as they are uttered: Now, as
there was a hint given before, He does his native Tongue a good office, who finds
a way to spread her abroad, and make her better known to the world.

And so much (yet) of the English Grammar.
Gramatica DE LA LENGUA EspanolA o CASTELLANA.

Con un Discurso conteniendo la Perambulacion de Espana y Portugal.

A Grammar of the Spanish or Castilian Tongue.

With a Discourse containing the Perambulation of Spain and Portugal; which may
serve for Directions how to travel throuh both Cuntres.

El Abolengo de la Lengua Espanola o Castellana.
LA Lengua Espanola ha la Latina por su madre, y la Arabiga o la Lengua Morisca
por su madrasta: En uno de sui Apellidos toma el nombre de la primera, porque
ella se llama Romance, como habla vm Romance, quieredezir Espanol? y parece
gloriar se desta decendencia, porque ella haze sus diligencias cada dia de
estrechar la afinidad que tiene con la Latina: Mientras que la Italiana y la
Francesa esfuercanse de allexarse della, teniendo cierta ambicion de hazerse
Lenguas de por si, y no Dialectos: esta es la razon porque sentencias enteras
se pueden formar, que serian buen Latino, y buen Espanol; lo que no se puede
hacer en Italiano o Frances, aunque ellas tambien sean hijas de la Latina.

La Espanol se puede dezir de aver la lengua Morisca por su madrasta, porque
los Moros, por la infame traycion del Conde Don Julian, qui los introduxo para
vengarse de Don Rodrigo, qui era entonces Rey de Espana, por aver desvirgado su
Hija Dona Cava: digo que los Moros teniendo firm possession de la mayor part
de Espana cerca de 700. anos; Aviendo tan larga coalicion pegaron muchos de sus
vocablos en la lengua Espanola; los quales se pueden facilmente distinguir de
los qui se derivan de la Latina, porque ordinariamente comiencan con al, x, y
z; o fenecen con x, como Alcalde, Alcayde, Alguazil, Almoxarife, Xaral,
Xarcias, Xopaypas, Zorro, Zurrana, Zurrador, Guadix, etc.

Agora la Morisca bien se puede llamar madrasta a la lengua Espanola por aver
la corrumpido d^ una pronunciacion mas aspera y gutural, como consta en g, i, x
precediendo, o atrassando tales Vocales; como se hallara en la Gramatica
siguiente.

Mas por dezir la verdad, la primera y maternal lengua de Espana es la
Bascuenca, o la lengua de Cantabria, el qual vocablo denominava toda la Espana
en los siglos atras: Yes cosa observable, que ni los Romanos, ni los Godos, ni
los Moros pudieron conquistar la Biscaya; por tanto parecen de tener gran
correspondencia en muchas cosas con los antiguos Bretones de Ingalatierra, (los
de la tierra de Gale^) porque como ellos (con su lenguaje) son sin duda l^s
primeros habitantes de esta Isla, y connaturales con ella; Assi son los
Cantabros o Biscaynos de Espana: De suerte quando algunos dellos aya de ser
Cavallero del abito, no se haze alguna buscadura o diligencia si esta limpio de
la sangre de Moros, ni de su hidalguia.

No ay sobre la redondez de la Tierra alguna lengua ^as llana y facil a
aprender, qui la Castellana, porque pronuncia siempre la palabra entera, sin
admitir algunos Apostrofos: Pero la causa que algunas sylabas son escabrosas y
gargantiles fue la mescla, y la conversacion que tuvieron los Espanoles con los
Moriscos tantos siglos como fue dicho, y esto ha rendido la pronunciacion mas
difficultosa al Forestiero: De suerte que estiman a el de aver alcancado la
lengua qui sabra bien pronunciar este Refran gargantil:

Abeja y Oveja, y Piedra que rabeja,
Y pendola tras Oveja, y lugar en la Ygreja,
Dessea a Hijo la vieja.
A Be in the hive, and a sheep in the fold,
A stone that does whirl, and an ear-ring of gold,
A place in the Church, is all the boon
The good old wife does wish her son.
The Pedigree of the Spanish or Castilian Tongue.
THe Spanish or Castilian Tongue has the Latin for her mother, and the Arabic
or Morisco Tongue for her stepmother: She bears the name of the first in one of
her Appellations, for sometimes she calls her self Romance, as habla vm Romance,
do you speak Spanish? and it seems she glories to be so well decended, for she
endevors daily to have the nearest affinity she can with the Latin; while the
Italian and French do labor to eloniat themselfs, and keep at a further
distance from the Latin, having a kind of ambition to be Toungs of themselfs,
and not Dialects: this is the reason that whole sentences may be made which will
be good Latin and good congruous Spanish, (as I have showed else where) which
cannot be don in Italian or French, though they also descend from the Latin.

The Spanish may be said to have for a kind of stepmother the Morisco
Language, because the Moors (by the infamous treachery of the Conde Don Julian,
who brought them over to revenge himself of the then King of Spain Don Rodrigo,
for deflow^ing his daughter Cava,) I say, the Barbarians or Moors having kept
firm footing in Spain about 700. years, by so long a coalition they insinuated,
or as it were indented and pegg'd diverse of their words into the Spanish Tongue;
which may be easily distinguished from those that are derived from the Latin,
for they commonly begin with all, x, or z; or end in x, as Alcalde a Judge,
Alcayde a Jailer, Alguazil a Sergeant or Baylif, Almoxarife a Receiver of
customs, Xaral a Thicker, Xarcias the tacklings of a Ship, Xopaypas Fritters,
Xabon Soap, Zorro a wolf, Zurrana a Pigeon, Zurrador a Tanner, Guadix a Town,
etc.

Now the Morisco may be well called a stepmother to the Spanish Tongue, because
she has corrupted her with a more rugged and guttural pronunciation, as
appears in g, i, x preceding, and followlowing some Vowels, as will appeer in
the ensuing Grammar.

But the truth is, that the first and maternal Tongue of Spain is the Bascuence,
or the language of Cantabria, which word in Ages past denominated the whole
Country: And observable it is, how neither Roman, Goth or Moor could conquer
Biscay; in so much that there is a great analogy 'twixt the ancient Britons in
England called Welshmen, and the Biscayners; for as They (and their language)
without controversy are the first inhabitants of this Island, and as it were
connatural with Her: So the Cantabrians or Biscayners are of Spain; in so much
that when any of that Country is to be made Knight of any of the three habits,
there is no scrutiny made of his Gentility, or whether he be clear of Morisco
blood, as is used before others are dubbed.

There is not any language among men so plain and easy to be learnt as the
Castilian; for she pronounces always the whole word without admitting any
Apostrop hes: Now the reason why some syllables are cragged and throaty, is the
mixture and conversation the Spaniards had so many ages with the Moors, as was
said before, which has rendered the pronunciation more difficult to strangers;
so that he is thought to have attained the language to some perfection, who can
well pronounce this old throaty Adage in Spanish, viz.

Abeja y Oveja, y Piedra que rabeja,
Y pendola tras Oveja, y lugar en la Ygreja,
Dessea a Hijo la vieja.
A Be in the hive, and a sheep in the fold,
A stone that does whirl, and an ear-ring of gold,
A place in the Church, is all the boon
The good old wife does wish her son.
A Grammar of the Spanish or the Castilian Tongue.
Of the Spanish Alphabet.
THe Spanish Alphabet consists of the same, and the same number of Letters as
the English does, k only excepted, which is supplied by c, and sometimes by q,
as Calendar Calendario, Kintall Quintal.

Now the difficulty and difference, which if found in the Spanish Tongue, is the
pronunciation of these nine letters, b, c, d, g, j, ll, n, x, z; which have a
differing prolation in many words.

The first is b which often degenerats into v, as Barba remojada medio rapada,
A Beard wetted is half shaved: where the second b is pronounced like v, as if
it were written barva; bandera or vandera a banner, bobo or bovo a fool, etc.
but when b comes before any of the Liquid Consonants, l, m, n, r, it retains
constantly the sound of b, as lumbre light, hablar to speak, etc.

The second is c called C cedilla, which comes not but before a, o, u, and then
it is pronounced like s, as campona a Shepherds pipe, quica it may be, (...)
lame, currador a tanner, etc. and this C cedilla is seldom or never under a
great C.

The thi^d is g, which oftentimes degenerats to Ishota, as lenguage lenguaje, a
language; page paje, a page; which are pronounced both alike superficially from
the Throat, or like the aspiration h, as if they were written lenguahe, pahe;
but they have this guttural pronunciation only before e and i, before a, o, u,
they are pronounced as in English. And sometimes g turns to x, as tigeras
tixeras, a pair of Sheers, etc.

The fourth is j called Ishota, as jamas never, jerigonca gibberish, joya a
jewel, hijo a son, Iuev^s Thursday, etc. which are pronounced in the throat as
the former g. But i in general must be pronounced in Spanish, as ee in we,
thee; as Ni olla sin ^ocino, ni Sermon sin Agustino, Nor an ollia without
Bacon, nor a Sermon without Saint Austin.

The fifth is ll, which is pronounced as in French like ll in fille, the second
l turning into i, as En casae llena presto se guisa la cena, In a full house
Supper is soon dressed; where llena is pronounced as if it were liena: so in
llorar to weep, liorar; llevar to carry, lievar; lluvia rain, liuvia. But great
care must be taken that the l and i with the next Vowel be pronounced as one
syllable, making a kind of Dipthong, as Quien no ha visto Sevilla no ha visto
maravilla, Who has not seen Sevill he has not seen wonders; where the last l
being turned into an i, as Sevilia, maravilia, the lia must be pronounced as
one syllable l^a: and so in Mundo Mundillo nacido en Bilbao muerto en Bustillo,
Such is the world, born in Lancaster dead in London.

The sixth is n, called N tilde or contilde, which is pronounced as if i also
immediately followed, as Vina, nina, peral, y havar malas cosas de guardar, A
Vine, a Child, a Pear Tree, and a Bean-field are hard to be kept: where vina and
nina must be pronounced as if they were written vinia, ninia.

The seventh is u, which often degenerats into a Consonant in Spanish, (as in
all other Languages) and then she has a different closed caracter, as v: being
still a Vowel u is pronounced as oo, as Pan reziente, y uvas, a las mocas ponen
mudas, y a las viejas quitan las arrugas, New bread and grapes paints young
women's faces, and takes away wrinkles from the old; where uvas and mudas are
pronounced as if they were written oovas, moodas.

The next is x, which is pronounced also in the throat, as Xaramago y tocino
manjar de hombre mesquino, Wild Radish and Bacon is the food of a miserable
man: Xabonar cabeca de asno es perdimiento de xabon, To wash an Asses head is
throwing away of Soap: where x is pronounced in the throat like g and Ishota,
as was formerly said. And indeed he that will pronounce well these three
letters in Spanish, must pronounce them as (...) in Greek, which the old
Britains in England do pronounce more naturally than any other Euro^ean Nation:
And I have observed, that a guttural pronunciation is the mar^ of the antiquity
of a Language, for the Hebre^ with her Dialects, the Chaldaic, Syriac and
Arabic with all the Oriental and Southern Languages, besides the Greek, do so.

Z is pronounced sometimes as the English pronounce it, as azul blu, azemila a
great mule; but sometimes she turns to c, and then she is pronounced more
rudely, as hazer hacer, etc.

G coming before n is not pronounced in Spanish, as digno worthy, significar to
signify, are pronounced dino, sinificar; signar to sign, sinar, etc.

Gue and gui, que and qui found in words, are pronounced in Spanish as large as
the letters will bear, as Aguelo a Granfather, garguero the throat, etc.
quento, cinquenta fifty, etc. which the Italian and French do not, but contract
them, ghe ghi, che chi: but some are excepted, as quinientos five hundred, quasi
almost, which are pronounced kinjentos, casi, etc. but especially que and qui,
which are pronounced ke and ki, etc.

The letter d has a differing pronunciation in Spanish from other Toungs, for
most commonly it is pronounced meltingly, as th in that or the, as Hombre
narigudo pocas vezes cornudo, A long-nos'd man is seldom a Cuckold: which must
be pronounced, Hombre narigutho poca^ vezes cornutho.

HAving don with the Alphabet, we com now to Syllables, and dictions or words,
and first of the Spanish Articles, which are subservient to the declining of
all words that are capable of declension, for there is no other means to know
the variation of ^^ses otherwise: now there are in Spanish three Articles, the
Masculin, the Feminin, and the Neuter, which are declined thus:

The Masculin Article is declined thus:
Singular. Plural. Nom. El, the Los, the Genesis del, of the de los, from the Dat.
al, to the a los, to the Accus. el o a el, the los o a los, the Abl. del, from
the de los, from the.

The Feminin Article is declined thus.
Singular. Plural. Nom. La, the Las, the Genesis de la, of the de las, of the Dat.
a la, to the a las, to the Accus. la o a la, the las o a las, the Abl. de la,
from the de las, from the.

The Neuter thus:
Singular. Nom. lo, the Genesis de lo, of the Dat. a lo, to the Accus. lo, the
Abl. de lo, from the It is to be observed that this Neuter Article has no
Plural, nor can it be applied to any Noun either masculin or feminin, but it
seems to be rather a Demonstratif Pronoun, for there are no Neuter Nouns in the
Spanish.

The Article El is always put before Nouns of the masculin gender, beginning
with a Vowel or Consonant, as el libro the book, el pecho the breast, el air
the air, etc. And sometimes it comes before Feminins, specially before such as
begin with a, to avoid too much gaping, as el alma the soul, el agua the water;
not la alma, nor la agua; as also to avoid Apostrophes, which the Spanish hates.

This Article el becomes sometimes le at the end of a word, and so is ranvers'd:
but it becomes so only at the end of Imperati^ Moods, as matadle kill him,
abracadle embrace him; which are pronounced matalde, abracalde, by postposing
the d to the l.

The Spaniards have a peculiar mode of speking to one in the second person,
using this Article el and le instead of vos you; for they hold vos you, to be a
mean manner of speking, and use it toward their Inferiors, and is little
better esteemed then tu thou; as Si el hardesto, if you will do this: quiere
cenar comigo? will you sup with me? whereas the words import, if he will do
this, will he sup with me: Insomuch that the Spaniard herein is higher in
complement then the French or Italian, who commonly use you; in lieu whereof the
Spaniard uses frequently the third person he and him, she and her. But el is
often o^itted, being included in the Verb, which is of the third person, as ha
comido, have you dined? whereas it is meant ha el comido. In other cases except
the Nominatif le is used, as Yo le digo, I tell you, whereas the true sense is, I
tell him.

The Spaniard has another mode of complement by these two words, vuestra
merced your favor, which they generally use instead of you, and it is above el
the third person formerly spoken; some pronounce it at length, vuestra merced,
some vuesa merce, some vosaste, some vueste; but in writing two letters only stand
for it, viz. VM. as Hago brindis a VM. I drink to you: Embio a VM. con el
portador desta, I send you by the berer hereof. Yet the Italian surpasses the
Spaniard herin in point of complement, for in lieu of vuestra merced your
favor, he uses vostra signoria your Lordship at every word, applying it to
every ordinary Gentleman, as Fo brindesi a vostra signoria, I drink to you;
which two words in writing he expresses only by US. as Poco fa chio scrissi a
US. I writ to you lately.

The Feminin Article la comes always before feminin Nouns, as la cabeca the
head, la yglesia the Church; but el takes place before words before words
beginning with a, as 'twas said before, as el ama the nurse.

Lo, though it cannot properly be called an Article, because there are no Neuter
Substantifs in the Spanish, yet it comes before Adjectifs, and then it has the
power to turn them to Substantifs, as Lo bueno que yo recebia, the good which I
received; lo malo que me hizo dios se le perdone, the ill which you did me God
forgive you. It comes also very often before and after Verbs, and then sometimes
it is a Relatif, sometimes Demonstratif, as lo digo a VM. de veras, I tell it
you in good earnest; or digo lo a VM. de veras: Tengo de hazer lo de buena
gana, I will do it willingly.

Of Nouns, and their Genders, and Terminations.
There are in Spanish, Nouns masculins, and Nouns feminins: Some end in Vowels,
viz. e or o, as lumbre light, renombre renown, Cielo heaven, Infierno hell: and
it is observed that there are but two Nouns feminins which end in o, through all
the Spanish Tongue, which are mano the hand, nao a ship.

But most Noun Substantifs in Spanish end in one of these Consonants d, l, n,
r, s, x, y, z: those that end in d have the accent in the last syllable, and
their Plurals in es, as Abad an Abbot, abades; merced a curtesy or favor,
mercedes; virtud virtudes virtue.

Some terminat in l, and they also have the accent in the last syllable, and the
Plural in es, as animal animales, a living creture; b^t^l a boat, bateles;
badil a Drying Pan, badiles; caracol a young inail, caracoles; azul blu,
azules, etc.

Some Substantifs end in n, and their Plurals end also in es, as pan bread,
almazen a storehouse, celemin a peck, sazon seson, A^un the Tunny fish: whose
Plurals are panes, almazenes, celemines, sazones, atunes. And for the most part
Sub^tantifs in n have the accent also over the last (...), specially if they
end in on, as devocion, compassion, generation, etc.

Some Substantifs end in r, and they also have the accent in the last, and also
their Plurals in es, as havar a Bean-field, havares; muger a woman, mugeres;
martyr a martyr, martires; acor a hawk acores.

Some Substantifs terminat in s, and they also most commonly have the accent in
the last syllable, and their Plurals in es, as Dios God, Dioses; feligres a
parish, feligreses; mes a month, meses; montanes a mountaneer, mountanes.

Other Substantifs end in x, and they commonly are Morisco words, but they
often change the x in the Singular to ges in the Plural, carcax a quiver,
carcages; relox a clock, reloges, etc.

Some Substantifs end in y, and they also have their Plurals in es, as ley the
law, leyes; rey a King, reyes; buey an ox, bueyes.

Lastly, some Substantifs end in z, and they also have the accent at the end,
and their Plurals in es, as paz peace, pazes; juez a judge, juezes; perdiz a
partridg, perdizes; toz a cough, tozes; cruz a cross cruzes, etc.

Herby it appeers that the Plural of all Spanish Substantifs end in s, and some
Singulars end so, but they are very few.

Of the Declensions of Nouns substantifs proper and common.
IT is to be observed that Nouns proper differ from common in two things;
first, they have no Prepositif article, then they have no plural nombers.

Examples of proper Nouns.
Singular. Singular. Nom. Carlos Charles Catarina Katharine Genesis de Carlos of
Charles de Catarina of Katharine Dat. a Carlos to Charles a Catarina to Katharine
Accus. Carlos Charles Catarina Katherine Voc. o Carlos to Charles o Catarina o
Katharine Abl. de Carlos from Charles. de Catarina from Katharine.

Instances in common Nouns.
Singular. Plural. Nom. el Cielo Heven Los Cielos the Hevens Genesis del cielo of
heven de los cielos of the hevens Dat. al cielo to heven a los cielos to the
hevens Accus. el o al Cielo heven los cielos the hevens Voc. o cielo o heven o
cielos o heaven Abl. dal cielo from heven. de los cielos from the hevens.

Singular. Plural. Animal a beast Los Animales ganapan a porter los ganapanes
pastor a shepherd los pastores relox a watch los reloxes muger a woman. las
mugeres.

All which must be declined according to the example of cielo.

Of Noune Adjectifs, and of their Declensions.
The Spanish Adjectifs have two terminations, one masculin in o, which changes
into a feminin, as virtuoso virtuosa: The other termination is in e, as
valiente, and it signifies both masculin and feminin, as hombre valiente a
valiant man, hembra valiente a valiant woman, cosa grande a great thing: but
heed must be taken to this word grande, for coming before a Substantif that
begins with a Consonant, it loses de, as grancosa, gran Bretana, etc. but
grand becomes a Substantif it self sometimes, as un Grande de Espana, a high
Peer or Grande of Spain, who are permitted to cover themselfs before the King,
but when he speaks to them, or they to him.

The same holds in bueno and malo, good bad, in the Masculin gender, and when
it comes before Substantifs of the masculin only, as tiempo bueno, buen tiempo
a good time; hombre malo, mal hombre an ill man.

This abridgment holds also in tanto and quanto, before Adjectifs and Adverbs,
and sometimes before Substantifs, as tan rico so rich, tan glorioso so glo^ious,
tan tarde so late, tan temprano so early; quan admirable how admirable, quan
bien habla vm, how well do you speak? but when tanto and quanto come before
these Adverbs mas, menos, more, less, they are pronounced whole, as also
before mayor greter, menor lesser, as Quanto mas yole respeto, tanto menos me
quiere, The more I respect him, the lesser he loves me.

Before the Nouns Comparatifs they also keep their whole length, as Quanto
mejor es el vino, tanto mas se beve, The better the wine, the more it is drunk:
quanto mayor es el hombre, tanto menor es s^ seguridad, The greter the man is,
the lesser is his security.

The Spaniards have a peculiar Idiom, to use que tanto for quanto in
Inter^ogations, as que tanto es del mes? what day of the months is it? que
tanto ay de Londres a Lancastra? how far is it from London to Lancaster?

The article lo is joined to Neuter Adjectifs, and then it becomes a kind of
Substantif, as seas contento con lo tuyo, y no busques lo ageno, Be contented
with thine own, and seek not what is another.

Possessif Neuters are made of the Pronouns, lo mio, lo tuyo, lo suyo, lo
nu^stro, mine, thine, his or hers, ours, yours; as Necio es qui pierde lo suyo,
He is a fool who loses his own: Dios me haga contento con lo mio, God make me
contented with mine own.

Of the words mucho, poco, harto; much, little, enough.
Mucho and poco, though they be Adverbs of quantity, yet they become sometimes
Nouns Neuters, as Lo mucho que Dios me ha dado, The much that God has given
me: Lo poco que le pago, The little which I pay him. They are sometimes
Adjectifs before inanimated Substantifs, but only in the singular, as Mucho
vino emborracha, much wine makes one drunk: mucho azeyte y poeo vinagre hazen
buena ensalada, much Oil and little Vinegar make a good Sallet. But in the
Plural number they are used indifferently before any Substantifs, as Muchos
componedores cohonden la novia, Many attirers confound the Bride: Portugueses
pocos y locos, The Portugueses are few and foolish, etc.

Harto enough, is sometimes an Adverb, as Ay harto, si no ay demasiado, There is
enough, if there be not too much. Sometimes it is an Adjectif, as De^pues de harta
ca^^a Marta, Martha is merry when she has enough: Hartos ducados tiene qui se
contenta, He has Crowns enough who is contented.

Of the Spanish Diminutifs.
THe Spanish is more copious for Diminutifs then other Languages: Some end in
illo illa, ico ica, ito ita; as capitanillo a little Captain, mugercilla or
mugercita a little woman, loquillo loquilla, or loquito loquita a little fool,
etc. Some end in elo ela, as borrachuelo a little drunkard, moco mocuelo a
little boy, a little maid. But in proper names they have Diminutifs,
sub-diminutifs, sub-sub-diminutifs, and sub-sub-sub-diminutifs, as Simon,
Simoncico, Simoncicico, Simoncilillo: Francisca, Francisquita, Francisquicita,
Francisquililla, etc.

Of Numerical Nouns, and of their Terminations.
Vno One dos two tres three quatro four cinco five seys six siete seven ocho
eight nueve nine diez ten unze or onze eleven doze twelve treze thirteen
catorze fourteen quinze fifteen dezieys sixteen diez y siete seventeen diez y
ocho eighteen diez y nueve nineteen veynte twenty veynte y uno one and twenty
veynte y dos two and twenty, and so taking the single nombers aforesaid all
along. Treynta Thirty Treynta y uno one and thirty, and so taking the single
nombers aforesaid. quarenta forty quarenta y uno one and forty, and so taking
the single nombers aforesaid. cinquenta fifty sesenta sixty setenta seventy
ochenta eighty noventa ninety noventa y uno ninety one, and so taking the
single nombers aforesaid. Ciento a hundred dozientos 2 hundred trezientos 3
hundred quatrocientos 4 hundred quinientos 5 hundred seys cientos 6 hundred
setecientos 7 hundred ocho cientos 8 hundred novecientos 9 hundred Mil a
thousand dos mil 2 thousand tres mil 3 thousand, etc. Cien mil 100 thousand
dozientos mil 200 thousand quinientos mil 500 thousand un millon or un cuento a
million dos millones two millions, etc. millar a million of millions.
Observe that this word ciento a hundred, being to be put before a word it
loses the last syllable to, as cien millones a hundred millions, cien soldados
a hundred Soldiers, not ciento soldados: and sometimes it becomes a kind of
Substantif, as un ciento de hombres a hundred of men, but then un goes before.

Numbers are of two kinds, cardinal, as those which went before, and ordinal
numbers, which are Adjectifs, as follows:

Primero the first segundo the second tercero the third quarto the fourth
quinto the fifth sexto the sixth septimo or set ^^no the seventh. octavo the
eight nono or no veno the ninth decimo or dezeno the tenth.
Some stop here the ordinal number, and take the cardinal number to go higher,
as soldado onze the eleventh soldier; yet these five are admitted, onzeno the
eleventh, dozeno the twelf, trezeno the thirtinth, catorzeno the fourtinth,
quinzeno the fiftinth; but after, the cardinal number, one, two, three, etc.
then you must proceed to vieynteno or vigesimo the twentieth, treynteno or
trigesimo the thirtith, quarenteno or quadragesimo the fortith, cinquenteno or
quinquagesimo and cinquentesimo the fiftith, sesenteno or sexagesimo and
sesentesimo the sixtith, setenteno or setentesimo the seventith, ochenteno or
octuagesimo and ochentesimo the eightith, noventeno or noventesimo and
nonagesimo the ninetith, centeno or centesimo the hundredth. But it is to be
observed that primo and tercio, not primero and tercero come after vigesimo and
the rest.

Of Pronouns.
PRonouns are certain words which supply the room of Nouns, and they serve only
to demonstrat the person or thing without naming of it. There are diverse sorts
of Pronouns, as Primitif, Possessif, demonstratif, derivatif, relatif, and
reciprocal Pronouns: the Primitif have three persons, which are yo, tu, de si
that has no Nominatif; yo is thus declined:

Singular. Plural. Nom. Yo I No o nosotros we Genesis de mi of me de vos o
vosotros of us Dat. a mi to me a nos o nosotros to us Accus. me me nos o
nosotros us Abl. de mi from me. de nos o nosotros from us.

Singular. Plural. Nom. Tu Thou Vos o vosotros Ye Genesis de ti of thee de vos o
vosotros of you Dat. a ti to thee a vos o vosotros to you Accus. te thee vos o
vosotros you Voc. o tu o thou o vos o vosotros o you Abl. de ti from thee de
vos o vosotros from y.

The Singular is the same both for masculin and feminin, but os is turned to as
in the feminin Plurals of nosotros and vosotros, as nosotras as vosotras, but
nos and vos by themselfs serve for both genders.

Mi and tu coming before the Substantifs turn to Possessifs Pronouns, as mi
espada my sword, tu sombrero thy hat.

Nos implying greatness or dignity, comes before proper names of the singular
number, as No Don Carlos por la gracia de Dios Rey dela gran Bretana, etc.

Vos used in Spanish in speking to a person is held as mean as thou: with a
preposition vos is used, as no digo mal de vos, I speak no hurt of you; morire
por vos, I will die for you, etc. but after any other Noun it turns to os, as yo
os digo, I tell you: as also coming to the end of a word, as quiero hablaros la
verdad, I will tell you the truth.

The Pronoun de si himself, has no Nominatif nor Plural, and is delcin'd thus:

Genesis De si of himself Dat. a si to himself Accus. se himself Abl. de si from
himself.
There is an observable phrase in Spanish, Que sera de mi? que sera de ti? What
will become of me? what will become of thee?

Mismo or mesmo my self, is used after all the three persons through all the
cases, adding s to the Plural.

Singular. Plural. Nom. Yo mismo or mesmo I my self. Nosotros mismos we
ourselfs Genesis de mi mesmo of my self de nosotros mismos of our selfs Dat. a mi
mesmo to my self. a nosotros mismos to our selfs Accus. mi mesmo my self
nosotros mismos we our selfs Abl. de mi mesmo from my self de nosotros mismos
from our selfs

Singular. Plural. Nom. Tu mismo thou thy self Vosotros mismos ye your selfs
Genesis de si mismo of thy self, and so through all cases. de vosotros mismos of
your selfs, and so through all cases.

Singular. Plural. Nom. El mesmo he himself Ellos mesmos they themselfs Genesis
de si mesmo of himself, and so through all cases. de si mismos of themselfs,
and so through all cases.

The Spaniards use proprio or propio instead of mismo, as yo proprio I my self,
tu proprio thou thy self, ella propria she her self, de si propio of himself,
etc.

The Pronoun El is declined thus:
Singular. Plural. Nom. El he Ellos they Genesis del of him dellos of them Dat.
al to him a ellos to them Accus. el him ellos them Abl. del from him. dellos
from them.

Ella she, and ellas they, are declined after the same manner.

Of Pronouns Possessifs.
Mio Mine, tuyo thine, suyo his, nuestro ours, vuestro yours, with their
feminins in a, are called Pronouns Possessifs; but before a Substantif they
turn to mi, tu, su, as mi capa my cloak, tu guante thy glove, su libro his book.

Lo, being put before mio, tuyo or suyo, make them a kind of Substantifs, as mi
cuydado es de guardar lo mio, my care is to keep mine own: tu cuydado sera de
asseguarar lo tuyo, thy care must be to secure ^^ine own: su amo bien guarda lo
suyo, his master looks well to his own. Su is sometimes used in Spanish for la,
and it is only used in Spanish, as vi que notenia su firma del Author, I saw it
bore not the signature of the Author.

Cuyo and cuya whose, are Pronouns possessifs, but the Italian and French have
none such, and commonly they are put before Interrogatifs, as cuya ropilla es
esta, whose coat is this? cuyo cavallo es aquel, whose horse is that?

Cuyo and cuya are also used as Relatifs in the middle of sentences, as guay
aquel hijo cuyo padre va al Parayso, Woe be to that son whose father goes to
heven: saluda la muger a cien passos lexos, cuyos cabellos son roxos, salute a
hundred paces off that woman who has red hair.

There are Demonstratif Pronouns, as este or esta this, esse or essa that same,
aquel or aquella he, she or that: there is also aqueste and aquesse, which
sigfies the same as este esse, but not so much used.

Este declined.
Singular. Plural. Nom. este or estae this Estos or estas these Ge. de este or
deste of this de estos or destos of these Dat. a este to this a estos to these
Accus. este or a este this estos these Abl. deste or desta from this. de esto
or destos from these.

Esse or essa, aqueste or aquesse this very same are declined alike.
No. aquel or aquella that aquellos those Genesis de aquel of that de aquellas of
those Dat. a aquel of that a aquellos to those Accus. aquel that aquellos those
Abl. de aquel from that de aquellos from those.

Observe that esto this, esso this very thing, aquello ello that, are Neuters,
and so have no Plurals.

The Pronouns este and esse are joined often to otro, and then the e is lost,
yet they never use the note of Apostrophe, as estotro hombre this other man,
estotra muger this other woman: and so essotro is used.

There are two Pronouns which have no singular number, viz. ambos ambas,
entrambos entrambas, whereunto one may add ambos and dos, all which signify
Both or both together: as Querria que entrambos veniessen aca, y yo os
emoregare entrambos sus obligaciones, pero si no veneys ambos no tengo de darse
las, por tanto digo que ambos ambos juntos, que sera por la ventaja de
entrambos: I could wish that you both came hither, and I will deliver you both
your bonds, but if you com not together, I will not deliver them, therefore I
say that you com both of you, and it will be for the advantage of both.

Of Pronouns Relatifs.
There are three other Pronouns Relatifs, viz. quien, que, qual, as quien canta,
who sings? que is what or that, que es esto, what is this? el cavallero que yo
digo, the Gentleman which I speak of: qual in sense is the same as que, as qual
hombre puede digerir esto, what man can digest this?

Que has no Plural, as quien and qual have, as quien es aquel hidalgo, who is
that Gentleman? quien es son aquellos mercaderes, who are those merchants? but
quien in the singular is counted more elegant, as quien son ellos mercaderes?

Qual has los or las before it in the Plural, as Las donzellas las quales yo
saludava, the maids which I saluted: los soldados los quales yo nombrava, the
soldiers which I numbered.

In lieu of qual what, and como how, these two words que tal are used, which is
a pure Spanicism, as que tal est a mi hermano, how does my brother? que tal se
halla mi madre, how does my mother? as que tanto is used for quanto, which is
also a pure Spanicism, as que tantas leguas ay enter Londres y Glocestra, how
many miles are there 'twixt London and Gloucester? que tanto ha que VM. ha buelto
del palacio, how long is it that you have returned from Court? whereof we gave
instances before.

To these Relatif Pronouns quien and qual there is often adjoined quier and
quiera, which of themselfs are Verbs, as quienquiera, qualquier whosoever, as
Hablare Castellano con qualquier hombre que sea, I will speak Spanish with any
man whatsoever. Sometimes que quiera is used for Whatsoever, as que quier a que
digan las gentes a ti mismo para mientes, whatsoever they say of thee take heed
to thy self Roma es la patria de qualquiera, Rome is any man's count^y.

Of me, te, se, the Reciprocal Pronouns.
Me and te serve Ve^bs oftentimes in the Datif case, as Di me con quien andas,
y dezirte h^ quien eres, Tell me with whom thou do keep company, and I will
tell thee who thou art: sometimes they serve in the Accusatif, as no me trates
en esta suerte, do not use me thus. Se comes also before or after Verbs, as el
se va, he goes away: vase VM. a Londres, do you go to London? no me voy, I go
not.

Sometimes for a fuller signification me and te follows se very often, as que se
me da a mi, which form of speking is a pure Spanicism, and cannot be englished
verbatim but thus, What have I to do with it, what care I for it? que se le da
a el, what does he care for it? se me da mucho, it concerns me much: Deve
algo para pascua, y hazerte se ha la quaresma corta, Borrow money to be paid at
Easter, and Lent will seem short unto thee.

Se, is very often used in the Datif case before the article lo, as Priest me
su espada, y yo se la bolvere incontinente, Lend me your sword, and I will
return it speedily: yo se lo dire, I will tell it you: yo se lo dare, I will
give it you: yo se lo embiare, I will send it you.

There is also another mixture 'twixt se, me and te, and le and lo does associat
often with them, as quien eres que tu te me vendes por tan discreto, who art
thou that make thy self so wise? or according to the words, That sellest thy
self unto me for such a wise man? which kind of phrase is a Spanicism: no se
le da nada, he cares not for it: madre mia a donde os me llevan, O my mother,
whither do they carry you from me?

The Particles mi, ti, si, do join oftentimes with the preposition con, and
with go, as comigo with me, contigo with thee, consigo with himself, as Cada
Frances lleva un frenetico consigo, Every Frenchman carries a madman about him.
Andad comigo oy, and yo ire contigo manana, Go with me to day, and I will go
with thee to morrow.

Of Verbs.
WE are com now to the Verbs, which may be called the ligaments or great
arteries which tie words and sentences together: There are in Spanish three
Conjugations of Verbs, the first in ar, the second ending in er, and the third
in ir: There are also Verbs Actif, Passif, Neuters and Impersonals, and they are
declined by five Moods as in other languages; The Indicatif or demonstratif,
the Imperatif or Mood of command, the Optatif or wishing Mood, the Conjunctif
and Infinitif Mood. There are two subservient or auxiliary Verbs, without which
no other can be thoroughly formed, and they are Aver to have, ser to be,
therefore we must first conjugat these two Verbs, before we treat of the
other, but because Yo he I have, and yo tengo I hold, are often confounded, and
of the same sense before other Verbs, we will conjugat them together.

The Indicatif Mood. Present tense.
Yo he Yo tengo I have tu has tu tienes thou have aquel ha el tiene he has
nosotros hemos o havemos tenemo we have vosotros heys o aveys teneys ye have
aquellos han. tienaen. they have.

Preterperfact tense.
Yo havia o avia Tenia I had tu avias tenias thou had el avia tenia he had
nos haviamos teniamos we had vos aviades teniades ye had ellos avian. tenian.
they had.

Perfect tense.
Yo huve o uve Tuve I had tu uviste o oviste tuviste thou had el huvo o ovo
tuvo he had nos uvimos tuvimos we had vos uvistes tuvistes ye had. ellos
uvieron. tuvieron. they had.

Perfect indefinit.
Yo he avido Tenido I had had tu has avido tenido thou had had el ha avido
tenido he had had nos hemos o avemos avido tenido we had had vos aveys avido
tenido ye had had ellos han avido. tenido. they had had.

Future tense.
Yo avre Tender o terne I shall have tu avras tendras o ternas thou shall have
el avera tendra o terna he shall have nos averemos nos tendremos o ternemos
we shall have vos avreys vos tendreys o terneys ye shall have ellos avran.
ellos tendran o ternan. they shall have

The Imperatif Mood.
Have tu Ten tu Have thou aya el tenga el let him have ayamos tengamos nosotr.
let us have haved tengays vosotros let you have ayan. tengan ellos. let them
have.

The Optatif Mood.
Oxala, plega a Dios que, aunque, dado que, como quiera que, puesto que: O
that, would to God that, although, howsoever that, put case that.
Yo aya Tenga I had tu ayas tengas thou had el aya tenga he had nos ay^nos
tengamos we had vos ayays tengays ye had ellos ayan. tengan. they had.

The Conjunctif Mood. Si, o si: If, o if.
Yo uviesse Tuviesse I had tu uviesses tuviesses thou had el uviesse tuviesse
he had nos uviessemo^ tuviessemos we had vos uviessedes tuviessdes ye had
ellos uviessen. tuviessen. they had.

Quando is often used in Spanish before the Optatif and Conjunctif Moods, and
then it signifies as much as although, or bien que, which is also used, as

Present tense.
Quando, bien que: Though or although.
Yo uviesse Tuviesse I had tu uviesses tuviesses thou had el uviesse tuviesse
he had nos uviessemos tuviessemos we had vos uviessedes tuviessedes ye had
ellos uviessen. tuviessen. they had.

Perfect tense.
Oxala, plega a Dios, aunque, puesto que: O that, I would to God, although, put
case that.
Yo ay avido Tenido I may have tu ayas avido tenido thou may have el aya
avido tenido he may have nos ayamos avido tenido we may have vos ayais avido
tenido ye may have ellos ayan avido. tenido they may have.

Pluperfect tense.
Oxala, o si, aunque, etc. Oh that, although, o if, etc.
Yo uviera Tuviera I had had tu uvieras tuviera thou had had el uviera
tuviera he had had nos uvieramos tuvier amos we had had vos uvierades
tuvierados ye had had ellos uvieran. tuvieran. they had had.

Future tense.
Quando, when.
Yo uviere Tuviere I shall have tu uvieres tuviere thou shall have el uviere
tuviere he shall have nos uvieremos tuvieremos we shall have vos uvieredes
tuvieredes ye shall have ellos uvieren. tuvieren. they shall have

The Infinitif Mood.
Haver o aver Tener To have aver avido aver tenido to have had estar por aver.
estar por tener. to be to have.

Thus we see that tengo I hold, is used oftentimes for the auxiliary Verb He,
but tengo alludes to the possession of a thing, as tengo cobrado mi dinero, I
have recovered my money: It comes more often after digo then any other Verb, as
tengo dicho antes, I have said before, etc. dixo me que yo ternia mi dinero
manana, He told me I should have my money to morrow: quando yo le diesse todo
quanto tengo, aun no se contentaria, Although I should give him all that I had,
yet I should not content him.

The Conjugation of the Verb, Yo soy I am, and of Yo estoy I am or stand, which
although they differ in Variations, yet they are alike oftentimes in
Signification, as shall be showed further.

The Indicatif Mood. Present tense.
Yo soy Yo estoy I am tu eres tu estas thou art el es el esta he is nos somos
estamos we are vos soys estays ye are ellos son. estan. they are.

Imperfect tense*
Yo era Estava I was tu eras estavas thou wast el era estava he was nos eramos
estavamos we were vos erades estavades ye were ellos eran. estavan. they
were.

Perfect tense.
Yo fui Yo estuve I was tu fuiste tu estuviste thou wast el fue estuvo he was
nos fuimos estuvimos we were vos fuistes estuvistes ye were ellos fueran.
estuvieron. they were.

Perfect indefinit.
Yo he sido Estado I have bin tu has sido estado thou have bin el ha sido
estado he has bin nos hemos o havemos sido estado we have bin vos aveys sido
estado ye have bin ellos han sido. estado. they have bin.

Preterpluperfect tense.
Yo avia sido Estado I had bin tu avias sido estado thou had bin el avia sido
estado he had bin nos aviamos sido estado we had bin vos aviades sido estado
ye had bin ellos avian sido. estado. they had bin.

Future tense.
Yo sere Yo estare I shall be tu seras tu estaras thou shall be el sera el
estara he shall be nos seremos nos estaremos we shall be vos sereys vos
estareys ye shall be ellos seran. ellos estaran. they shall be.

There is a second Future tense that belongs to these two Verbs, (and indeed to
most of the rest) with he or tengo before the Infinitif Mood.

The second Future tense of ser and estar.
Yo he o tengo de ser De estar I shall or must be tu has o tienes de ser de
estar thou shall or must be el ha o tiene de ser de estar he shall or must
be nos hemos o tenemos de ser de estar we shall or must be vos aveys o
teneys de ser de estar ye shall or must be ellos han o tienen de ser. de
estar. they shall or must be.

The Imperatif Mood.
Se tu Esta tu Be thou sea el este el let him be seamos nos estemos nos let
us be sed vos estad vos be ye sean ellos. esten ellos. lot them be.

The Optatif and Conjunctif Moods. Present tense.
Oxala, plega a Dios que, aunque, puesto, dado que, etc. O that, would to God
that though, put case that, etc.
Yo sea Este I be tu seas estes thou be el sea este he be nos seamos
estemos we be vos seays esteys ye be ellos sean. esten. they be.

Imperfect tense.
Oxala, etc. O that, etc*
Yo fuesse Estuviesse I were tu fuesses estuviesses thou werst elfuesse
estuviesse he were nos fuessemos estuviessemos we were vos fuessedes
estuviessedes ye were ellos fuessen. estuviessen. they were.

When si if, or o si o if, and quando, when it is taken for Although, comes
before these Tenses, they are declined alike.

Future tense.
Yo fuere Estuviere I shall be tu fueres estuvieres thou shall be el fuere
estuviere he shall be nos fueremos estuvieremos we shall be vos fueredes
estuvieredes ye shall be ellos fueren. estuvieren. they shall be.

The Infinitif Mood.
Ser Estar To be aver sido estado to have bin siendo. estando. being.

The difference which is 'twixt ser and estar consists chiefly in this, that
ser signifies the humor or essence of a thing, as yo soy colerico, I am
coleric; tu eres valiente, thou art valiant; el es piadoso, he is charitable:
and so denotes the quality of the Substantif.

But yo estoy relates most properly to some local posture, or the being in some
place, as yo estoy a pie, I am a-foot; yo estava entonces en Lisbona, I was
then in Lisbon. Estar is much used in salutation, and in reference to health,
as como esta mi padre, how does my father? then answer is made, esta bueno
loado sea Dios, he is well praised be God: como esta V M. how do you do Sir?
estoy achacoso, estoy malo, I am sickish, I am ill; where it is observable that
bueno and malo are used in these phrases for Adverbs, viz. for well and ill.

The difference 'twixt these two auxiliary Verbs, Yo he or yo tengo, and yo
soy, is this, that the first serve the Participles in the Preter tense of Verbs
Actifs, as yo he amado, I have loved; yo tengo almorzado, I have broke my fast
already. Besides, yo he is an auxiliary to it self, as yo he avido, I have had;
yo avia avido, I had had, etc. But soy I am, makes Passif Verbs only, as yo soy
ensalcado, I am exalted; yo soy querido, I am loved.

Observe that tengo serving for auxiliary, makes the Participle and the thing
to agree in number, as Los donayres que yo tengo contados son graciosos, The
jests that I have related are pleasant: but yo he does not so, las hazanas que
yo he recitado, the exploits that I have recited: But in the Toscan Italian it
does, as Io ho letta la lettera, I have read the letter; Io ho pagati i danari,
I have paid the moneys, etc.

Spanish Verbs have their tern inations in ar, er or ir: They in ar are of the
first Conjugation, they in er of the second, and they in ir of the third;
wh^rof there shall be examples of each, and according to them all other Verbs
must be formed, except Irregulars which shall be spoken of apart.

The Variation of Buscar to seek, being of the first Conjugation.
The Indicatif Mood. Present tense.
Yo Busco I seek tu buscas thou seekst el busca he seeks nos buscamos we seek
vos buscays ye seek ellos buscan. they seek.

Imperfect tense.
Yo buscava I did seek tu buscavas thou did seek el buscava he did seek nos
buscavamos we did seek vos buscavades ye did seek ellos buscavan. they did
seek.

Perfect definit.
Yo busque I sought tu buscaste thou soughtst el busco he sought nos buscamos
we sought vo (...) ye sought (...) they sought.

Perfect indefinit.
Yo he buscado I have sought tu has buscado thou have sought el ha buscado he
has sought nos hemos buscado we have sought vos aveys buscado ye have sought
ellos han buscado. they have sought.

Plusquam perfect.
Yo avia buscado I had sought tu avias buscado thou had sought el avia
buscado he had sought nos aviamos buscado we had sought vos aviades buscado
ye had sought ellos avian buscado. they had sought.

Future tense.
Yo buscare I shall or will seek tu buscaras thou shall or wilt seek el buscara
he shall or will seek nos buscaremos we shall or will seek vos buscareys ye
shall or will seek ellos buscaran. they shall or will seek.

The second Future.
Yo he o tengo de buscar I must seek tu has o tienes de buscar thou must seek
el ha o tiene de buscar he must seek nos hemos o tenemos de bu. we must seek
vos aveys o teneys de bus. ye must seek ellos han de buscar. they must seek.

The Imperatif Mood.
Busca tu Seek thou busque el let him seek busquemos nosotros let us seek
busqueys vosotros seek ye busquen ellos. let them seek.

The Optatif and Conjunctif Moods. Present tense.
Oxala, aunque, etc. O that, although, etc.
Yo busque I may seek tu busques thou may seek el busque he may seek nos
busquemos we may seek vos busqueys ye may seek ellos busquen. they may seek.

Imperfect tense.
Oxala, aunque, o si, si, etc. O that, although, o if, if, etc.
Yo bucasse I should seek tu bucasses thou sholdst seek el bucasse he should
seek nos bucassemos we should seek vos bucassedes ye should seek ellos
bucassen. they should seek.

Pluperfect tense.
Oxala, aunque, quando, plega a Dios, etc. O that, although, o if, etc.
Yo buscara I had sought tu buscaras thou had sought el buscara he had
sought nos buscaramos we had sought vos buscarades ye had sought ellos
buscaran. they had sought.

The Uncertain tense.
Aunque, quando, etc. O if, although, etc.
Yo buscaria I should seek tu buscarias thou sholdst seek el buscaria he should
seek nos buscariamos we should seek vos buscariades ye should seek ellos
buscarian. they should seek.

Future tense.
Quando, si, etc. When, if, etc.
Yo buscare I shall seek tu buscares thou shall seek el buscare he shall seek
nos buscaremos we shall seek vos buscareys ye shall seek ellos buscaren. they
shall seek.

The Infinitif Mood.
Bu^car To seek aver buscado to have sought aver de buscar being to seek estar
por buscar being for to seek buscando. seeking.

The declining or sorming of the Verb Holgar to rejoice or to be glad, which
has most commonly one of these Pronouns me, te, se, me, thee, him, before or
after it, as yo me huelgo, or huelgome I am glad.

The Indicatif Mood.
Present tense.
Yo me huelgo, o huelgome I am glad tu te huelgas thou art glad el se huelga
he is glad nos nos huelgamos we are glad vos or holgays ye are glad ellos se
huelgan. they are glad.

Imperfect tense.
Yo holgava, o holgavame I was glad tu te holgavas, etc. thou wast glad, etc.

Perfect tense.
Yo me holgue, o holgueme I was glad or did rejoice tu te holgaste thou
rejoyc'dst el se holgo he rejoiced nos nos holgamos we rejoiced vos os
holgastes ye rejoiced ellos se holgaron, o holgaronse. they rejoiced.

Indefinit perfect.
Yo uve o avia holgado I had rejoiced tu uviste o avias holgado thou had
rejoiced el uvo o avia, etc. he had rejoiced, etc.

Future tense.
Yo me holgare o holgareme I will or shall rejoice tu te holgaras thou shall or
wilt rejoice el se holgara, etc. he shall or will rejoice, etc.

The second Future tense, whereof every Verb is capable.
Yo he o tengo de holgarme tu has o tienes de holgarte, etc. I shall or must
rejoice thou shall or must rejoice, etc.

The Imperatif Mood.
Huelgate tu Rejoice thou huelgase el let him rejoice holguemos nosotros o
holguemonos let us rejoice holgad vosotros rejoice ye huelguense ellos. let
them rejoice.

The Optatif and Conjunctif Moods. Present tense.
Oxala, aunque, etc. O that, although, etc.
Yo me huelgue I rejoice or be glad tu te huelgues, etc. thou rejoice, etc.

Imperfect tense.
Oxala, plaguisse a Dios que, o si, etc. I would to God, though, o if, etc.
Yo me holgasse I should rejoice tu te holgasses, etc. thou sholdst rejoice, etc

Pluperfect tense.
Oxala, aunque, quando, etc. O that, although, etc.
Yo me holgara I had rejoiced tu te holgaras, etc. thou had rejoiced, etc.

Uncertain tense.
Yo me halgaria o holgariame I would be glad tu te halgarias, etc. thou woldst
be glad, etc.

Future tense.
Quando, si, etc. When, if, etc.
Si yo me holgare If I shall be glad si tu te holgares, etc. if thou shall be
glad, etc.

The Infinitif Mood.
Holgar o holgarse To rejoice or to be glad aver o averse holgado to have bin
glad aver de holgar for to be glad estar por holgar. being for to be glad.

Verbs of the second Conjugation ending in er, whose Participles like the third
Conjugation end in ido or ydo.

The Indicatif Mood of Entender, to understand, Present tense.
Yo entiendo I understand tu entiendes thou do understand, etc. el entiende
nos entendemos vos entendeys ellos entienden.

Imperfect tense.
Yo entendia I did understand tu entendias thou did understand, etc. el
entendia nos entendiamos vos entendiades ellos entendian.

Perfect tense.
Yo entendi I understood tu entendisti thou understoodst, etc. el entendio nos
entendimos vos entendistes ellos entendieron.

Perfect indefinit.
Yo he entendido I have understood, tu has entendido, etc. thou have
understood, etc.

Plusquam perfect tense.
Yo avia o uve entendido I had understood tu avias o uviste entendido, etc.
thou had understood, etc.

Future tense.
Yo entendire I shall or will understand tu entenderas, etc. thou shall or wilt
understand, etc.

The second Future tense.
Yo he o tengo de entender I shall or must understa. tu has de entender, etc.
thou shall or must understand, etc.

The Imperatif Mood.
Entiende tu Understand thou entienda el let him understand entendamos nosotros
o entendamonos let us understand intended vosotros understand ye entiendan
ellos. let them understand.

The Optatif and Subjunctif Moods. Present tense.
Plega a Dios, aunque, etc. God grant, although, etc.
Yo entienda I understand tu entiendas thou understandst, etc. el entienda nos
entendamos vos entendays ellos entiendan.

Imperfect tense.
Oxala, si, etc. I would, if, etc.
Yo entendiesse I would understand tu entendiesses, etc. thou woldst understand*
etc.

Plusquam perfect.
Aunque, quando, si, etc. Although, if, etc.
Yo entendiera I had understood tu entendieras, etc. thou had understood.

Future tense.
Quando yo entendiere When I shall understand quando tu entendieres, etc. when
thou shall understand, etc.

The Infinitif Mood.
Entender To understand aver entendido to have understood aver de entender to
be understood ser para entender to be to be understood entendiendo.
understanding.

The Verb entiendo is properly to understand, as Dios me de contienda con quien
me entienda, God send me to have to do with him who understands me: a buen
entendedor media palabra, half a word to the wise. But sometimes it is taken for
to hear, as Entendi que mi padre estava malo, I heard my father was sick.

According to Entender all other regular Verbs of the second Conjugation may be
formed.

Verbs of the third Conjugation ending in ir, have their Participles like the
second in ido, exemplified by the Verb Servir to serve.

The Indicatif Mood. Present tense.
Yo sirvo I serve tu sirves thou serv'st, etc. el sirve nos servimos vos servis
ellos sirven.

Imperfect tense.
Yo servia I did serve tu servias, etc. thou did serve, etc.

Perfect tense.
Yo servi I served tu serviste thou serv'st, etc. el servio nos servimos vos
servistes ellos sirvieron.

Pluperfect tense.
Yo uve o avia servido I had served tu uviste o avias servido, etc. thou had
served, etc.

Future tense.
Yo servire I shall or will serve tu serviras thou shall or wilt serve, el
servira etc. nos serviremos vos servireys ellos serviran.

The second Future tense.
Yo h^ o tengo de servir I shall or must serve tu has de servir, etc. thou
shall or must serve, etc.

The Imperatif Mood.
Sirve tu Serve thou sirva el let him serve sirvamos nosotros let us serve
servid vosotros serve ye sirvan ellos. let them serve.

The Optatif and Conjunctif Moods.
Present tense. Oxala, aunque, etc. O that, although, etc.
Yo sirva I serve tu sirvas thou servest, etc. el sirva nos sirvamos vos
sirvays ellos sirvan.

Imperfect tense.
Oxala, aunque, o si, si, etc. O that, although, o if, if, etc.
Yo serviesse I should serve tu sirviesses, etc. thou sholdst serve, etc.

Pluperfect tense.
Oxala, aunque, si, o si, etc. O that, though, if, etc.
Yo serviria I had served tu servirias, etc. thou had served, etc.

Future tense.
Quando, si, etc. When, if, etc.
Yo sirvire I shall serve tu sirvieres, etc. thou shall serve, etc.

The Infinitif Mood.
Servir To serve aver servido having served aver de servir to have to serve
estar por servir to be to serve sirviendo. serving.

This Verb Servir to serve, does properly signify to serve or obey, as Servir
a la mesa, to serve at the table. Sometimes to avail, as de que sirve todo esso,
what purpose serves all this? Sometimes it signifies to be pleased, as sea
servido de entrar, be pleased to com in: si Dios fuere servido, Dios ha sido
servido, if God be pleased, it has pleased God.

The Spanish Tongue is full of Irregular Verbs, whereof I shall instance here in
the most principal, by giving the chiefest and radical Tenses of them: For
their inflections at length, I refer the Lerner to larger Grammars, the design
of this being Brevity.

Irregular Verbs of the first Conjugation in ar, and their Gerund in ado.
Yo cuelgo, I hang Yo huelgo, I rejoice colgava, I did hang holgava, I did
rejoice colgue, I hung holgue, I rejoiced colgare, I shall or will hang
holgare, I shall rejoice colgar, to hang holgar, to rejoice colgando, hanging.
holgando, rejoicing.

Yo regueldo, I belch regoldava, I did belch regolde, I belched regoldare, I
shall or will belch regoldar, to belch regoldando, belching.

Irregular Verbs of the second Conjugation ending in er, and their Gerund in
ido.
Yo quiero, I love queria, I did love quise, I loved querre, I will love
querer, to love queriendo, loving. This word querer to love, in Spanish, comes
from the word quaerere in Latin, to seek; for whom we love we are seeking for
them ever and anon: The compounded Pronouns qualquier and qualquiera, any, any
whatsoever, comes from this Verb. Querer also signifies to will, as yo quiero
yr a la Missa, I will go to Mass, no quiero yr a la Missa, I will not go to
Mass, etc.

Yo puedo, I can Yo hago, I do podia, I was able hazia, I did pude, I could
hize, I did podre, I shall be able hare, I shall do poder, to be able hazer,
to do pud^endo, being able. haziendo, doing.

Yo (...), I know Yo traygo, I carry (...) I did know traya, I did carry (...)
new truxe, I carried sabre, I shall know traere, I shall carry saber, to know
traer, to carry sabiendo, knowing. trayendo, carrying. Yo buelvo, I return Yo
pongo, I put bolvia, thou did return ponias, thou did put bolvi, I returned
puse, I put bolvere, I shall return pondre, I shall put bolver, to return
poner, to put bolviendo, returning. poniendo, putting.

Yo huelo, I smell Quepo, I contain or am contained olia, I did smell cabia, I
did contain or was contained oli, I smelt cupe, I contained, etc. olere, I
shall smell cabre, I shall contain, etc. oler, to smell caber, to contain or be
contained oliendo, smelling. cabiendo, containing, etc.

This word caber in Spanish has various significations, as esto mi cabe por mi
part, this falls unto me for my share: honra y provecho no caben en un saco,
honor and profit do not hold in one sack: esto me cupo en suerte, this happened
to be my lot, etc.

Irregular Verbs of the third or last Conjugation ending in it or yr, and their
Gerunds also in ido.
Yo oygo, I hear Yo digo, I say oya, thou did hear dezia, I did say oy, I
heard dixe, I said oyre, I shall hear dire, I will say oyr, to hear dezir, to
say oyendo, hearing. diziendo, saying. Yo duermo, I sleep Yo muero, I dye
dormia, I did sleep moria, I did dye dormi, I slept mori, I dyed dormire, I
shall sleep morire, I shall dye dormir, to sleep morir, to dye durmiendo,
sleeping. muriendo, dying.

The Conjugating of the two Verbs yr and andar to go; they are Synonima's in
sense, but with this difference, that yr does simply denote the action of going
or marching from one particular place to another, as yo voy a la Yglesia, I go
to the Church: But andar signifies an uncertain wandering motion of going, as yo
anday por toda Italia, I went through all Italy: And it is used sometimes for
reproaches, as andad para vellaco, go for a rogue; andad para Luterano, go for a
Lutheran. Yr is taken in diverse senses, as como le va, how goes it with you?
que va a mi en esto, what does it concern me? mucho va de Iuan y Lilburne,
there is a great difference 'twixt John and Lilburn, a late brainsick fellow
that was never scarce of one mind: como fue a VM. en aquel negocio, how went it
with you in that business?

They are declined thus:
Yo voy, I go Yo ando, I go yva, thou did go andava fue, he went anduve ire,
I will go andare (not much in use) yr, to go andar yendo, going. andando. Yo
vengo, I com Yo obedesco, I obey venia, I did com obedecia, I did obey vine, I
came obedeci, I obeyed verne or vendre I shall com tengo de obedecer, I will
obey venir, to com obedecer, to obey veniendo o viniendo coming. obedeciendo,
obeying.

It is to be observed that when the Participles of yr and andar come before or
after the Verb soy I am, they are of the same number, as ydo soy a mi casa, I
am gone to my house; ydos somos a la Comedia, we are gone to the Play; andado
es el tiempo de alegria the time of mirth is past; andados son los dias de
mocedad, the days of youth are past.

There is a way of speking in Spanish, and it is held eloquent, as to the Futures
with he and tengo to join me, te, se, le, la, lo, les, las, los, and put the
auxiliary Verb last, as besar me has, you shall or must kiss me; renir te he,
I shall or must chide thee; hazerse ha, it shall or must be don; comerlo has,
you shall or must eat it, etc. And oftentimes the Article coms between the
Pronoun and the Verb, as Embiarte la he, (making as it were but one word) I
shall or must send her unto thee; in lieu of te la embiare.

The second person Plural of the Imperatif Mood having after it any of the
Particles le, la, lo, or their Plurals les, las, los, there is always a
preferring of the l before the d, as llevadle bring him, is pronounced
llevalde; besadla kiss her, besalda; comedlo eat, comeldo; llamadlos call them,
llamaldos, etc.

When le, la, lo, les, las, los, com before or after an Infinitif Mood, the r
(by the figure Antistoichon) is turned to l, to smoothen the pronunciation, as
soy por dezirle, I am to tell him, soy por dezille, I am to tell him; quiero
besarla las manos, I will kiss her hands, quiero besalla las manos, etc.

Of Verbs Impersonals.
IMpersonals are those that have no persons, and yet are made of the third
person of the Indicatif Present tense, and have it before them in English,
which the Spanish has not; A nos pertenece, it appertains to us; a mi
conviene, it is convenient for me: But oftentimes for a greter Emphasis me and
te are added, and os, as Ami me conviene, it is convenient for me; a ti
importa, a ti te importa, it concerns thee; a nos os conviene for a nos
conviene, it is convenient for us: me pesa I am sorry, a mi me pesa: acontece
muchas vezes, it happens often; acaece pocas vezes, it happens seldom.

The Spaniards have but one Gerund terminating always in do. In the first
Conjugation it is formed of the Infinitif Moo^, by putting ar into ando, as
hablar to speak, hablando; holgar to rejoice, holgando rejoicing. They of the
second Conjugation are made by turning er into iendo, as bolver to return,
bolviendo returning. They of the third Conjugation are made by turning r alone
into iendo, as venir to com, veniendo coming: but in very many words the e that
comes immediately before the r in the Infinitif is turned to i, as dezir to
speak, diziendo speking, not deziendo; sentir to smell, sintiendo smelling. Some
other Verbs change i before the Infinitif r into n, as morir to dye, muriendo
dying; dormir to sleep, durmiendo sleeping. The Preposition en coming before
the Gerund has relation to time, as en hablando esto tengo de yrme, as soon as
I speak this I will go; yo ire en acabando de comer, I will go as soon as I
have dined.

The Spanish Participles have their Genders, significations and times, but the
Participles of the Present tense have no genders, as Moco or moca creciente ha
el lobo en el vientre, A growing youth or maid has a wolf in the belly. The
Participles of the Preter tense end in do, and are formed of the Infinitif Mood
as the Gerund, n left out, as hablar to speak, hablado spoken; buscar to seek,
buscado sought, etc. But there are many Irregulars which are excepted, as morir
to dye, muerto dead; dezir to speak, dicho spoken; bolver to return, buelto
returned, etc. which is left to the studious observer.

Of the Indeclinable parts of Speech.
WE have hitherto treted of the parts of Speech which are declinable, we will
proceed now to those that are not capable of declination, and first*

Of Adverbs.
The first are Adverbs of Time, as Oy to day, air yesterday, anteyer or ante
air before yesterday, manana to morrow, por la manana in the morning, ala
mananica betimes in the morning, temprano early, media dio noon, tarde the
evening.

Note, that the Spaniard has this singularity in his salutations relating to
time, to speak in the plural number, as Buenos dias good days to you, buenas
tardes good evenings to you, buenas noches good nights to you, huenos anos good
years to you, buenas Pascuas good Easters to you: but they never use Good
morrow.

Agora, al present now; poco ha, poco tiempo ha a little while since; despues
since, alguna vez, a vezes sometimes; amenudo often, mucho ha a good while
since, muchas vezes oftentimes, pocas vezes seldom, quando when, entonces then,
enter tanto, en este comedio in the interim; hasta que until, mientras while,
por adelante, de aqui adelante, en o por lo venidero hereafter; entonces thence
forward, desde agora hence forward, nunca, jamas never; aun yet or as yet,
contino de contino continually, ya already, luego, subito, encontinente
presently; presto quickly, siempre always, siempre jamas for ever, dende agora
from henceforth, hasta quando until when, hasta tanto until that, desde que
since that, de ay adelante thence forward, despues aca since now, a deshora
unwaringly, de aqui a un rato within a little while, cada dia every day, cada
rato ever and anon, cada momento every moment, quando quiera when you will,
ante, antes, denantes before.

Note, that cada, mucho and poco are sometimes Adjectifs, as cada soldado, every
soldier; cada qual con su ygual, every one with his mate; mucho dinero, much
money; poca fatiga es gran salud, a little toil is great health.

Local Adverbs, or of place.
Aqui here, ay, alli there; de aqui hence, de ay, de alli thence; por aqui this
way, por ay, por alli that way; aca these parts, por aca in these parts, alla,
a^ulla those parts, lexos far, dentro within, fuera without, do, ado, donde,
adonde, where, whence, whither; de do, de donde, por donde, from whence; de
com^ania hermanablemente, brotherly and in company.

Separatif Adverbs.
A part apart, aun cabo at one end, a un lado at one side, de tras behind, a
escondidas secretly, closely; a hurto, a hurtadas, a hurtadillas stealingly;
solo, solamente alone; fuera, excepto, sacando fuero except; no embargante, non
obstante notwithstanding; a escuras in the dark, apartadamente by it self, a
bueltas besides or above, as a bueltas de ducados me dio un a cadena de oro,
Besides or above other things he gave me a Gold chain.

Adverbs of intention.
En todo y por todo altogether, del todo wholly, enteramente, de todo en todo
totally.

Adverbs Personals and Appelatifs.
Comigo with me, contigo with thee, consigo with him, ha senor, ha hermano, ce
ce, o la, o como se llama.

Adverbs of election.
Mas ayna sooner, primero que rather than, mejor better, antes, mas ances
rather; as Antes puto que Gallego, Rather an Ingle than a Galician.

Adverbs of haste.
Luego, subito presently, suddenly; en un momento in a moment, en un cerrar de
ojo in the twinkling of an eye, presto quickly.

Adverbs of similitudes.
Como, ansi como as, so as; ansi, assi so; de la manera que insomuch.

Irregular Adverbs.
De passado, de camino as we passed; al traves athwart, al reves clean came, a
reculas recoyling back, de bruces grovelling, a gatas creeping, a tuerto
crookedly, embalde in vain, debalde gratis for nothing, barato good cheap, a
trueque, en lugar in exchange or in lieu.

Of the Prepositions.
There are some Prepositions in Spanish that serve for Accusatif and Ablatif
cases, which will be distinguished by the Article, and first of those
Prepositions that serve the Ablatif with de.

Cerca nere, de of, antes before, acerca touching, ^^erredor, alderredor about;
entorno round about, fuera without, dentro within, debaxo under, encima upon,
ayuso, de yuso, abaxo below; de sus^ arriba on high, empos del after him, en
frente, de frente against or opposite; a la orilla at the bank or brink, a rayz
all along.

Prepositions which serve the Accusatif.
Sobre, acuestas upon or about; ante, contra against; por, para for, which way,
abaxo, de yuso below, debaxo underneath, arriba, de suso above; atras behind,
do quiera, a do quiera, donde quiera whersoever; aquende this side, allende
that side.

Adverbs of number.
Vna vez once, dos vezes twice, and so to cien vezes an hundred times; thence
to mil vezes a thousand times, etc. by putting the cardinal nombers which were
put down before.

Adverbs of quantity.
Mucho much, poco a little, poquito very little, harto, assaz enough;
demasiado, en demasia too much; de mas de esto moreover; al pie de ciento near
a hundred, al pie de mil about or near a thousand, abundantemente, en
abundancia, a montones plentifully; tanto quanto, tan quan as much as.

Observe that tanto quanto com always before Verbs or Substantifs, tan quan
before Adjectifs or Adverbs; as no tengo tanto seso como vos, I have not so
much brain as you: quanto es del mes, what day of the month is it? tengo tan
buenos parientes como vos, I have as good kindred as you: o quan dulcemente
canta, how sweetly do you sing?

These three Adverbs mas, muy, mucho serve to make Comparatifs of Positif
Adjectifs, as rico rich, masrico more rich, muy rico very rich: mucho is seldom
used in this kind, unless mas com immediately after, as mucho mas hermosa much
more beautiful: The Superlatifs never have these before them, for they say not
mas, muy or mucho riquissimo, hermosissimo, for they of themselfs are
sufficient to augment the quality.

Adverbs of quality.
Bien, buenamente well; mal, malamente ill; osadamente boldly, atrevidamente
audaciously, adrede expressly or purposely, a sabiendas wittingly. When two
Adverbs of quality meet, the foremost loses the two last syllables, as
locamente y temer ariamente foolishly and rashly, mente in the first is lost,
and it must be written and pronounced loca y temerariamente.

Adverbs of negation.
No no not, ni neither, aun no no not yet, tampoco ^i menos as less, nada,
nonada nothing; nunca, ja^as never; en ninguna manera, suerte, modo, by no
means; antes, mas antes rather, but rather; no solament not only. Two Negatifs
affirm not in the Spanish as they do in some languages, as we see in no nada,
menos and tampoco less, are often simple negations: and commonly to
Interrogations, as tienes dinero? no, have thou any money? no: tienes vestidos?
menos, have thou clothes? less: tienes de comer? tampoco, have thou meat? as
little.

Of affirmatif Adverbs.
Si I, yea, yes; si senor I Sir: si is also an affirmatif, but in Italian it
commonly comes after signor; as signor si, tambien also, si cierto, si por
cierto yes sure; si de verdad yes in truth, verdaderamente truly, assies it is
so, Amen; ansi es it is so, sin duda doutles, de veras in good sooth.

Adverbs Optatif, or of wishing.
Oxala (a Morisco word) o that, I would, I could wish; quiera a Dios God grant,
plega a Dios God grant, o si o if.

Adverbs of admonition.
Ea, vaya well then, there then; ea pues, ora pues, or a sus, sus, arasus, well
well, let it pass, let us on: ea alegramente.

Demonstratif Adverbs.
He aqui, Veys aqui look here; ve alli, cataldo aqui, cataldo ay, look here,
see here, see there.

Adverbs of order.
Primeramente in the first place, principalmente chiefly, Imprimis; de nuevo
again, al fin, finalmente, al cabo lastly; item item, de tras behind, a la
postre late or lag behind, adelante, delante before; enter tanto in the mean
while, mientras while.

Remissif Adverbs.
Poco a poco by little and little, dispacio lesurely, passo, passito gently;
quedo, quedito softly; a penas scarce, a malas penas very hardly, casi almost,
a plazer at pleasure, calla callando secretly and silently, callandico softly
without noise.

Adverbs of doubt.
Puede ser, quica it may be; a caso perchance, por ventura peradventure.

Interrogatif Adverbs.
Para que why, to what end? porque, porque razon for what reason, why? a que
proposito to what purpose? por que causa for what cause.

Adverbs Congregatif.
Iuntos, iuntamente together; en uno, a la par, a las parejas equally, in one;
entrambos, ambos, ambos ad^s both together.

Separatif or Adverbs of exception.
Salvo, excepto, sacando fuera except; segun according, junto near, hasta
until, cabe near, tras behind, en in, enter between, hazia toward, aquende
allende this side or that side.

Por and para do both signify For, but the first relates commonly to the
efficient and final cause, and para relates to the profit or damage of a
person, as por amor de Dios, for Gods love; yo muero por ti, I dye for thee;
para quien es esta casa, for whom is this house? es para Don Carlos, it is for
Sir Charles: Araada sobre el Duero para mi la quiero, Aranda upon the Duero
I Will have her for my self: a Proverb of Philip the second, when there was a suit
'twixt him and one of his Grandes for right to that Town in old Castile:
Therefore there is a Spanicism that para comigo signifies in my behalf, para
consigo in his behalf: then it serves often before con, but it makes it more
emphatical, and to change its sense, and both of them signify Toward, as
seamos piadosos para con los pobres, let us be pitiful toward the poor: para
con todos es affable y franco, he is affable and free toward all.

The Preposition hazia toward, has always an accent over the first syllable,
to distinguish it from hazia the Verb, who has the accent over the middle
syllable.

The Preposition cabe near, comes always before the Accusatif case, as
sientese VM. cabe mi hermana, sit next my sister.

Of Conjunctions.
COnjunctions some are Copulatifs, as y and, tambien also, aun yet: Touching y
and, for avoiding the ill sound turns sometimes to e, when the next word begins
with another y, as Margerita e Ysabela, Francisco e yo andavamos juntos,
Francis and I went together; la mano derecha e ysquierda, the right and the
left hand, etc.

The Disjunctif Prepositions are ni, o not, as ni el uno ni el otro, nor the
one nor the other; O San Pablo o San Pedro, either Paul or Peter.

There are some causal or conditional Prepositions, as si if, aunque although,
dado que, puesto que it being granted, pues que since that, para que to the end
that, porque because, mas but, pero but, empero notwithstanding, toda via yet
for all that, a lo menos at least, con tal if, upon condition; tengo de bever
todo esto con tal que VM. me hagarazon, I will drink all this upon condition
you will pledge me: ire alla con tal que VM. vaya comigo, I will go thither
upon condition you will go with me.

There are also Rational Prepositions, as assi que so that, es a saber, conviene
a saber, viz. to wit; luego, pues then; por esso, por tanto therefore.

Of Interjections.
INterjections are certain words which express the motions or alterations of
the mind, according to the accidents that happen, signifying either joy or
grief, fear, anger or wonder, as o bueno, hala, gala, o good, o brave; ay, hay
de mi alas; guay, guay de mi woe is me; amargo de mi, desdichado de mi,
wretched, unfortunat that I am: Jesus, vala me Dios, Jesus, God deliver me:
valgame la madre de Dios que es esto, the mother of God deliver me what is
this? and these are spoken in admiration.

There are three sorts of Ay, the first is the Impersonal Verb Ay, as ay barto
lodo en las calls, there is dirt enough in the streets: The second is the
Interjection of grief, as ay de mi woe is me: The third is the local Adverb
[Ay] and that has an accent over the [y] and is pronounced as two syllables,
as quien esta ay, who is there? Ay esta mi padre, my father is there. Therefore
there must a great heed be taken to observe the accents, though in most Spanish
Authors the Printers are not so careful herein as they should be. The
Impersonal ay is very frequent in the Spanish Tongue in one rense or other, for
it has all the five in the Indicatif Mood, as Ay there is, avia there was, uvo
there was, (Perfect tense) ha avido there has bin, aura there will be.

A Collection of some difficult Words and Phrases which are mere Spanicisms or
Idioms of the Castilian Tongue.
Of the words fulano, hulano, cutano.
THese three words are much used in Spanish, as John an Oaks and John a Styles
in our Law, or Mevius and Titius were used in the Latin: they signify [such a
one] or [how do you call him?] as Fulano es gran soldado, such a one is a great
soldier: Hulano es muy hombre de bien, such a one is very honest. They have
also their Feminins fulana, hulana, but not cutano, which never begins a
saying, as hable a cutano, I spoke to such a one.

The word Hidalgo a Gentleman, has two Etymoligies, according to some it is
derived of hijo de algo the son of sombody, viz. of a known person; or hija de
algo a Gentlewoman, but that is pronounced and written at large, not hidalga.
Others derive it from hijo del Godo the son of a Goth, for the Goths and
Vandals, whence Andaluzia is derived, having first planted Christianity in
Spain, it was held an honor to be called hijo del Godo, the son of a Goth,
contracted to hidalgo.

Hideputa on the contrary is a word of disgrace, being derived of hijo de puta
the son of a whore, but it is used for an Interjection of exclamation or wonder,
and most commonly in an ill sense, o Hideputa, y que Roldan para hazer fieros,
O Hideputa, what a Rowland is this to make bravado's? hydeputa ruyn o hidervin,
base son of a whore.

There are some words, which though they be Substantifs, yet having en before
them turn to a kind of Adverbs, as en cuerpo without a cloak, en piernas
without stockins, en carnes, en puras carnes all naked; as pusole en puras
carnes, he stripped him stark naked. En cuero has the like sense: cuero a
skin, is used also to another sense, as hazerse cuero, to make himself a skin,
that is, to make himself drunk, because in Spain they carry wine in skins.

The Verb alcancar has many significations, as to obtain, acquire and
overtake, but it has one extraordinary sense, Alcancar en la cuenta, to defalk
or abate of the account; alcancado de cuenta, that which remains of the account.

The Verb armar to arm, has other significations, as armar una celada, to
provide an ambush; armar un lazo to provide a trap; armar una cama, to furnish
a bed, etc.

Abaxo below, and aynso under, have remarkable significations, sometimes as Del
Rey abaxo n^ temo algun alma viviente, I fear none breathing after or except
the King: de Dios en ayuso yo le conservava, after God I preserved him.

This word cabo an end, is used diversely, as Estoy al cabo del negocio. I
understand the business; rico por el cabo, extremely rich; al cabo estoy, no me
diga mas, I know your meaning speak no more.

The Verb caer to fall, has remarkable significations, as no caygo en VM. I
cannot remember who you are: no puedo caer en ello, I cannot understand it.

This Verb dar to give, is used diversely, as dar el para bien to congratulat:
el demonio me da penar por ^lla, the devil makes me torment my self for her:
darse mana, to use cunning, etc.

The Verb echar to cast, power or put, is used variously, as se echa de ver, it
seems: echar mano a la espada, to draw his sword, etc.

The Verb estar to be or stand, is variously used, as Estoy en ello, I
understood the business: estoy mal con Fulano, I am not friends with such a man:
quien esta mal con Dios nopuede hazer cosa buena, who is not in peace with God
cannot do any thing good.

The Verb hazer to do, is used diversely, as haze frio it is cold, haze calor
it is hot, haze sol it is clear.

Ha he has, the third person of aver, has various significations, as tres
dias ha, three days since: cien anos ha, it is a hundred years: quanto ha que
vine a Londres, how long is it since you came to London? dias ha, it is a pretty
while since: que tanto ha que estays aqui, how long have you bin here? aura
cosa de media hora, about half an hour, etc.

The Verbs llevar and traer to bring, lead or carry, are indifferently used in
some parts of Spain, but not in Castile; but properly llevar is to bring, and
traer is to carry, as llevaronme und^cado por la hechura, they brought me a
Crown for the making: lleveme el cavallo, bring me the horse: trae una carga
muy pesado, he carries a very hevy burden.

There is also another sense of llevar, as buen camino lleva el negocio, the
business goes well: la eosa no lleva remedio, there is no remedy for it.

Nadie and ninguno none, differ in that nadie relates to Persons, and never
joins with a Substantif, which ninguno does, as no hago mal a nadie, I hurt
nobody: quien esta ay, who is there? nadie nobody. Ninguno joins with Adjectifs,
as obra de una es obra de ninguno, the work of one is the work of none: ninguno
loses o when it comes before a Substantif, as ningun hombre; but ninguna the
feminin keeps a always.

Pararmientes is an extraordinary word in Spanish, it is to beware, as tu que
mientes lo que dizes para mientes, thou which do use to lie take heed what
thon say.

Pedir and preguntar to ask, differ in this, that pedir relates to a thing we
desire to have, and preguntar to a thing we desire to know.

Recado or recaudo is as general a word as any that is used in the whole Spanish
tongue, sometimes it signifies a Message, yo voy con un recaudo, I go with a
message: sometimes it signifies wherewith to do any thing, as no tengo recaudo
para escrevir, I have not wherewith to write: da me recauda para almorzar, give
me wherewith to break my fast, etc.

These Expressions also touching the disposition of the Wether are remarkable
in the Spanish.
Llueve a cantaros, it rains by whole buckets: escampia, y har a buen tiempo,
it leaves raining, and we shall have fair wether: yela tanto que ay
carambanos, it freezeth so that there are Isicles: desyela, y haze lodacares, it
thaws and is very dirty: nieva a copos, it rains fleeces of wool: el tiempo se
escurece, que parect boca de lobo, the wether darkens as it were the mouth of a
wolf: haze sol con unas, y llovisna, the Sun is troubled, and it misles: haze
lindo y estrellado, it is fair and star-like: haze suzio, y lleno de carpas, it
is foul and dirty: ay lodos hasta la cinta, there is dirt up to the girdle: frio
que haze tiritar, cold that makes the teeth to quaver: hae, muy resbaladero y
dislizadero, haze bonanca, it is calm.

Of the Spanish Accents.
There is nothing that conduces more to the right and round speking of Spanish,
as to observe how the words are accented, and to give a force thereunto
accordingly: To which end take these precepts.

All words ending in r have the accent in the last syllable as, muger a woman,
plazer pleasure, muladar a dunghill, albeytar a Farrier; All Infinitif Moods, as
hablar to speak, descansar to rest, descalabrar to break ones head, bolver to
return, apprender to learn, acontecer to happen, hinchir to fill, escupir to
spit, apercebir to prepare, labrador a yeoman, pecador a sinner, orador an
orator, etc. with Proper names, as Gaspar, Balthazar, etc. But alcacar a
castle, acucar sugar, martyr a martyr, are excepted.

Words also ending in d have the accent in the last, as salud health, lealtad
loyalty, humanidad humanity, etc. Proper names of places, as Madrid,
Vallodolid, etc. whereunto may be added the second person plural of the
Imperatif Mood, as and ad go, embiad send, embergad sequester, despavilad
snuff, etc.

Words also ending in l have an accent or Emphasis in the last, as Espanol a
Spaniard, caracol a snail, senal a sign, azul blu, etc. But some are accepted,
as consul, habil able, fertile fruitful, debil weak, arbol a tree, fragil frail,
mobil moveable, etc.

Words also ending in n have the accent in the last syllable, as capitan a
captain, almazen a storehouse, mastin a mastiff, compassion, devocion,
abominacion, etc. but some few are excepted, as orden order, imagen image,
Origin, etc.

Words in x also have the accent in the last syllable, as carcax a quiver,
almofrex a male or great hamper, relox a clock, Amoradax Mariorame.

Words also ending in z have the accent in the last syllable, as sagaz wise,
Axedrez a Chesseboard table, vejez old age, etc. There are some proper names
excepted, as Nunez, Diaz, Alvarez, Perez, Suarez, Rodriguez, Sanchez, Gomez,
etc.

Words terminating in ia have the accent over the i, as porfia, alcanzia a box,
policia, philosofia, alegria mirth, Astronomia, and other words derived from
the Latin. But these are excepted ausencia absence, blasfemia, clemencia,
dolencia grief, escoria dross, eficacia, gloria, industria, infamia, injuria,
etc.

The Future tenses of Verbs in the Indicatif Moods, have the accent over the
last, as buscare, buscaras, buscara, I, thou, he shall seek: And observable it
is, that where the accent is over the last in the singular number, it is over the
last saving one in the Plural, buscare buscaremos, virtud virtudes, capitan
capitanes, muger mugeres, caracol caracoles, relox reloges.

Note that where the accent is found there must be a gentle vigor, acutenes and
force given to the syllable.

Magnifico the Adjectif has the accent over the second syllable, but magnifico
the Verb over the penultime or last syllable saving one.

Carta compuesta de ciertos Frasis y Idiomas, peculiares y propios a la Lengua
Castellana.
A los 8. de Mayo.
MAs de cineo mezes ha que yo no recebi tilde de VM. por tanto estoy con mil
desseos, y no men cuydados de entender que tal se halla mi primo en punto
salud, y como leva a VM. tambien; Todos quantos por aca dizen que mi
Tartarabuelo ha traspassado, por cierto me pesa, porque de mi padre abaxo no
quise mas a algun alma viviente; era devoto por el cabo, haga, que yo sepa que
tanto avra que murio; se echa dever, que VM. o esta malo, o muy ocupado, o que
se le da nada de sus parientes por aca; Tope poco ha con Beltran, que parecia
en cuerpo, y en piernas, y casi en puras carnes tan belitre era; toda via se
avia hecho cuero, y hazia fieros como si fuera Roldan, pensava de dalle palos,
si no uvier a hecho divorcio con larazon.

Supplico a VM. que se sirva de dar recaudo a la que va con esta, y si Fulano,
etc. Esta por aculla, digale que Hulana esta achocosa; despues de muchos dares
y tomares recaudo al fin su dote, que vino a buen recaudo: No soy por mas, si
no que con mis besamanos a cutano Don, etc. y a los chiquitos sus quitapesares,
quedo muy de veras, y de todas mis entranas, su criado mayor.

Fulano.


This Letter were it translated verbatim according to the literal sense, would
prove nothing but absurdities, therefore it must be rendered otherwise, as thus:

A familiar Letter made up of certain Phrasis or Idioms peculiar and proper
only to the Castilian Tongue.
The 8. of May.
It Is more than six months that I received any thing from you, therefore I am
very desirous and careful to understand how my Cosen does in point of health,
and how you also do: All the world here report that my Great-granfather is
dead, truly I am sorry, for after my father I loved him more then any; he was
devout in an intense degree: I pray let me know how long it is since he dyed.

It seems that you are either ill or very busy, or that you care not for your
Kinsmen hereabout. I met lately with Beltran, who appeer'd without a cloak or
stockings, and almost stark naked, he was such a Rogue; yet he had got drunk,
and did so rant it as if he had bin another Roldan: I thought to bang him, had
he not made a divorce with reason for that time.

I pray be pleased to deliver the enclosed, and if such a one B. be that way,
tell him that such a one M. is sickly, and after many Godmorrows she recovered
her dowry, which came in a good time. No more, but that with my service to D,
and to his take away cares, I mean his little ones, I remain in earnest, and
with all my bowels,

The gretest of your Servants, P. S.


LA PERAMBULACION DE Espana, y de Portugal; En un Discurso enter CARLOS y
FELIPE.

THE PERAMBULATION OF Spain and Portugal; In a Discourse 'twixt CHARLES and
PHILIP: Which may serve for a DIRECTORY How to Travel through those Countries.

LA PERAMBULACION DE Espana y de Portugal; En un Discurso enter CARLOS y FELIPE.
Carlos. DIOS le de muy buenos dias Senor Don Felipe, anos ha que no le he
visto; digame si fuere, servido, donde ha estado tanto tiempo? y de donde viene
agora?


Felipe. Sea vuessa merced muy bien hallado Senor Don Carlos, me huelgo en el
alma de velle con falud, y pues que me manda dire donde vengo, soy
rezien-venido de Espana.


Carlos. De Espana? valgame Dios, y qual fue la causa (eon licencia) que le
hizo emprender aquel viaje? pues dizen es tierra muy trabajosa para los
Passageros.


Felipe. Senor, la Curiosidad fue la causa; pero entremos en casa que yo le
contrare por extenso lo que deffeare saber, princ^palmente el modo que ha de
tene rel que tuviere gana de yr a ver aquel Reyno.


Carlos. Primero hemos de comer, y si vm. manda^e, comeremos juntos en aquel
bodegon, que es casa muy limpia y bien proveyda; y despues me contara mas de
espacio en levantando la mesa.


Felipe. Sea en hora buena, que yo accepto la merced que me haze de conduzirme
a tan buena posada que mucho ha que no la hallado tal.


Carlos. Pues que me dize? es possible que no las aya en su viage, siendo
Espana tan buena tierra, y abundante de todo?


Felipe. Buena por cierto pudiera ser, si la gente no fuera tan perezosa,
porque no labran la tercera part de la tierra, la qual de otra manera es de su
calidad harto buena, mas despues de la expulsion de los Moriscos no es tan
labrada.


Carlos. De manera Senor, que la pereza de los Moradores es causa de la
esterilidad.


Felipe. No ay que dudar en esto, porque la Tierra no produze de suyo sin ser
labrada, y no lo siendo, falta lo necessario de la provision; Assi que no se
halla en las posadas mas que el casco de la casa con un poco de ropa blanca, y
a vezes, no ay camas para los Caminantes principalmente esi las Ventas.


Carlos. Haga me merced de informarme que quiere dezir Venta?


Felipe. Ventas son las posadas que se hallan en la campana, y por les caminos
Reales, adonde si se encueutran les Caminantes a hazer jornada han de llevar
las alforjas, bien proveydas de todo lo necessario; Que de otra manera bien
podrian acostarse sin cenar, porque no se halla otra cosa en ellas si no
cevada, y paja para las Cavalgaduras, y si ay algo sera un poco de pan, de
vino, algunos huevos, tocino, o longanizas.


Charlos. Pues por vida suya cuente me el discurso de su Viaje por donde entro
en Espana, y lo que passo principalmente en los lugares mas Senalados, para que
yo sepa Governarme si a caso me viniere gana de yr alla algun dia.


Felipe. Senor, al salir de Francia yo pass el Rio Dordona, que la divide de
Espana, que es cerca de Iron no muy lexos de Fuentarabia, tuve el medio dia en
el dicho lugar de Iron, y la noche gane San Sebastian primera tierra fuerte de
Biscaya, y puerto de Mar.


Carlos. En aquellos lugares fronteros no se hallan Guardas que miran a los
Passageros?


Felipe. Si ay, es verdad que al entrar en Espana no me dieron algun
impedimento; pero una cosa se ha de hazer en llegando a Iron, y es, que se ha
de manifestar todo lo que la persona lleva, Ropa y joyas si tiene algunas, y
aun el propio dinero que tiene por los gastos del camino, y todo se hade de
Registar, y pagar lo que es tassado por los Aduaneros, y despues le dan una
cedulilla que llaman Albaran o Alvala que es tanto como passaporte para que
despues, las Guardas no le quiten lo que lleva a falta de averle Registrado.


Carlos. Y se haze esto a todo genero de personas Estrangeros y Naturales?


Felipe. No perdonan a nadie, y lo que peor es, las Guardas que estan alerta al
salir por la otra puerta si se les antoja os haran apear para mirar y buscar,
por todo si llevays alguna cosa que no este en el Albar^n; pero el mejor
remedio que ay para escusar esta importunidad es echarles un Real de a quatro o
un de a ocho segun la calidad del passagero.


Carlos. De manera Senor que saben quanto dinero lleva un hombre acuestas, y
essi corre peligro de ser seguido por los caminos y robado, y quica aun peor.


Felipe. Esto no se ha de temer, porque en Espana no se habla de ladrones de
camino, o salt eadores, si no es en Catalunia por ser la Provincia mas
frequentada de passageros, que otra ninguna; Porque passan por ella todos les
que van^ y vienen de Italia, o de aquellas parts de Francia para la Corte,
demas que es la tierra mas poblada de toda Espana.


Carlos. Pues al partir de san Sebastian adonde se encaminava?


Felipe. Tome el camino per Navarra, adonde vi a Pamplona Villa principal de
aquel Reyno, y en ella el Castillo muy famoso el quai parece mucho a aquel de
Anveres.


Carlos. Y no es el Reyno de Navarra del Rey de Francia?


Felipe. Aquel Reyno se divide en dos parts, la que esta deste lado de les
Montes Pyreneos pertenece a la Froncia, y la que esta del otro lado es del Rey
de Espana, que es famosa tierra, la gente muy luzida, y no mal aficionada a
nuestra nation Francesa.


Carlos. Y de al^a por donde fue um. pues a mi parecer avia dexado el camino
ordinario de los que van a Madrid.


Felipe. Assi es verdad, que dexe el camino de Victoria, y el puerto de sant
Adrian, y enter por Logrono (harto buena tierra) puesta sobre el Rio de Ebro
cerca de una Montana adonde antiguamente estava la Ciudad de Cantabria, la qual
do el nombre a la Provincia que agora contiene la Biscaya, Navarra, Guipuzcoa,
y otras particulares de cuyos nombres no me acuerdo ahora.


Carlos. Pues no dexe vm. atras otros lugares del Reyno de Navarra, que yo
hallo en la mappamundo.


Felipe. Bien haze en hazer me acordar desso, pues se me avia olvidado dos
Lugares muy senalados; El uno Fstella de Navarra que la universidad de aquel
Reyno, y esta situada la Villa en ^n lugar muy ameno; El otro es La puente de
la Reyna, y demas de aquellos dos ay otro llamado Viana nombre corrompido de
Diana, porque antiguamente avia alli un Templo consecrado a aquella Diosa.


Carlos. Pass vm. adelante y no repare en estos Lugarcitos de poca
consideracion, porque yo creo que vm, tiene una larga jornada que hazer.


Felipe. Pues vm. gusta dello yo hare un salto desde Legrono hasta santo
Domingo de la calcada que es lugar en la Rioja, cerca de los montes de Oca, en
el qual lugar se veen cerca de la y glesia un Gallo, y una gallina vivos de la
casta de aquellos, que ya estando aslados tornaron a vivit por milagro.


Carlos. Por ventura seran de los del milagro de aquel moco peregrino Frances
que fue ahorcado en aquel lugar por ladron, cuyos padres bolviendo de cumplir
su viaje de Santjago, y passando cerca de la horca adonde estava colgando le
hallaron vivo.


Felipe. D^zen que de aquellos mesmos son, y la costumbre es, que los
peregrinos que passan en Romeria por aila traigan en sus sombreros unos
bordoncillos con plumas de aquellas aves, y si no fuera tan larga la H^storia
yo se la contaria, pero quedese para otro tiempo.


Carlos. Toda via supplico a vm, de proseguir lo comencado, que sea en hora
buena.


Felipe. Pues vm. lo manda, y que gusta tanto dello lo hare de Santo Domingo
passay a Burgos Ciudad principal de Costilla la Vieja, enter la qual y Toledo
ha avido grandes porfias por la precedencia.


Carlos. Assi tengo leydo, pero en unas Cortes que juntaron en Toledo, el Rey
Felipe el segundo aparigiuo la contienda muy cuerdamen te por entonces, que
acontecio assi; Los Representantes de ambas Ciudades estando en las Cortes
porfiavan quien avia de hablar primero, la porfia vino a ser algo caliente,
quando el Rey se levantava subito, y dixo, Hable Burgos, que por Toledo hablare
yo.


Felipe. Era un passaje muy senalado, y si no suera por otra cosa Felipe el
segundo merecia el atributo de prudente (que le dan) por esto solo; mas
prosigamos, en Burgos ay un Monasterio fuera de la Ciudad adonde esta aquel
milagroso Crucifixo, cuyas unas y cabellos van crecierdo cada un mes: La
yglesia mayor de Burgos, es un edificio muy pomposo; Tambien ay un Castillo
pero de poca confideracion.


Carlos. Y con su licencia, de Burgos para donde se encamino su merced?


Felipe. A Valladolid, linda villa, y bien poblada, adonde esta una de las
Cancillerias de Espana.


Carlos. Pues llama vm, Valladolid Villa siendo un Lugar tan grande, y adonde
la Corte Catolica residio tanto tempo?


Felipe. Si senor, Villa es, pues no esta cercada de muros, y tambien dizen
alla communmente, Villa por Villa, Vallado^id en Castilla; como Ciudad por
Ciudad Lisboa en Portugal.


Carlos. Bien, no nos detengamos mas en est lugar, vamos adelante si vm. fuere
servido.


Felipe. De alli me fuy a Medina del campo harto buena Tierra, donde ay famosas
Librerias; Pass alli ala tardecica, y a la manana siguiente tome el camino de
Salamanca; Tierra muy grande, y la mas illustre Universidad de toda Espana, yo
vi alli los Colegios que son en gran numero, y muy bien fabricados; Tambien la
puente hecho por los Romanos, y el Toro que esta a la entrada del qual habla
Lazarillo de Tormes.


Carlos. Vio vm. alli por ventura la casa de Celestina?


Felipe. Senor, bien me apuntaron el lugar adonde estava, mas no tuve tanta
curiosidad que suera a vella, y tambien me parece que es cosa fingida.


Carlos. He oydo dezir, que una vez se hallaron en Salamanca quinze mill
estudiantes y licenciados que me parece cosa estrana, siendo Espana tan poco
poblada, y teniendo 16 Vniversidades mas.


Felipe. Bien puede ser, porque Salamanca esta puesta casi en el centro de
Espana donde acuden mas facilmente de todas parts los Estudiantes mas la major
part son Opidanos qui tienen posadas fuera de los Colegios.


Carlos. Tengo leydo un refran, en Salamanca mas vale un maravedi que una
blanca; mas pass vm. adelante.


Felipe. De Salamanca tome el camino de Segovia famoso luga^ por muchas cosas;
que alli se veen, Lo primero el Monasterio de Parral que esta fuera de la
Ciudad; Despues, La Casa de la Moneda; Tras esto el famoso Aleazar, y lo que
llaman la puente de Segovia que no lo es sino un Aqueducto hecho de piedras de
maravillosa grandeza, y lo que es de notar los panos finos de lana que alli si
texen.

De Segovia pass el puerto de Guadarrama aviendo visto de camino un grand
edificio que se llama la casa del Campo harto buena metida enter los bosques, y
passado el dicho lugar de Guadarrama fuy al Escurial el octavo milagro del
mundo; Mas porque seria meneste^ un volume entero para hazer la descripcion
tanto de la yglesia, de la Libreria, de los patios, de los quartos, y los
alojamentos del Rey, y de los Frayles, como de las aguas, jardines, y fuentes
famosos que ay alla, yo lo remito a la diligencia, y curiosidad de los que lo
quisieren saber mas por extenso.


Carlos. Pues yo tengo esperanca de vello todo algun dia si Dios me diere la
gracia; mas grand^osa^ casa es, que una casa sola tenga un Monastero, un
Palacio Real, y una Vniversidad.


Felipe. Partido del Escurial fuy a Madrid, passando antes por la casa del
prado adonde el Rey reside muy amenudo.


Carlos. Pues que avemos llegado a Madrid que me dira vm. de la Corte del Rey
Catolico.


Felipe. No le dire otra cosa a vm. sino que es una Corte muy corta.


Carlos. Como es esto, que siendo el Rey de Espana tan gran Monarca, no tiene
una Corte correspondiente a su grandeza?


Felipe. Vm. ha de saber que ay mucha gravedad y estado en la Corte Catolica,
mas poca gente y ruydo; siendo antes Monasterio que Corte Real.


Carlos. Desta manera poco gasto haze el Rey de Espana.


Felipe. Tan poco que yo osare apostar que el Rey de Francia gasta mas en
Pages, y Lacayos que el de Espana gasta en todos sus Officiales.


Carlos. Es possible esso? Aunque si bien lo miro, pareceme que el acierta mas,
Porque excusa mucho trabajo, y la confusion que ay en la Corte de Francia; y
allende desto es mas el desperdicio que se haze en aquella, que lo que
buenamente se gasta.


Felipe. Vm. esta bien en ello, y en eseto no se hazen alli tantas y
insolencias como en otras Cortes mucho menores; Mas quien quisiere ver la
grandeza del Rey de Espana, que vaya a Naples, Sicilia, Mexico, o Peru, adonde
los Virreyes viven con mayor pomp y luzimiento que no haze el Rey a Catolico en
sn Palacio (porque assi llaman la Corte) en Madrid.


Carlos. Pues dexemos de hablar mas destas Cortes, porque no bastaria un dia
entero para dezir lo que se pudiera de la una y de la otra; y prosiga si vm.
mandare, su viage.


Felipe. Al salir de Madrid tome el camino de Alcala de Henares famosa
Universidad, ye de alli passando por Aranjuez que es otra casa Real mas muy
caluroso, por su situation siendo, como dizen' la tierra circumvezina de un
temple Africano; Alli ay algunas colas muy curiosas; y de Aranjuez me encamine
para Toledo Ciudad principal de Castilla la nueva, y Arcobispado, el qual es el
mas rico de entradas despues del Papadgo, de todos los de la Christianidad:
Alli ay una yglesia rara, y un riquissimo tesoro en ella.


Carlos. Vio Vm. alli la Torre Encantada, y el artificio con que se sube el
agua del Rio hasta lo alto de la Cindad que es tan curioso y renombrado?


Felipe. Quanto a la Torre yo me inform benissimo della, pero no me la
supieron ensena^r, y assi lo tengo por fabla; mas el artificio del agua, aunque
sea bueno, no tiene que ver con los que se hallan en otras Tierras, como yo he
visto en Italia, y Alemana; El pueblo de Toledo es muy grave, y subtle, que fue
causa del refran Del Toledano guarte tarde y temprano; El mas puro Dialecto del
Costellano se habla alli, de suerte que ay una ley en Espana, si huviere alguna
diferencia y ambiguidad en la significacion de alguna Palabra Costellana, un
Toledano ha de ser el Juez. Toledo tambien es renombrada por los Consilios
generales y Ecumenicos que se tuvieron alli.


Carlos. Abrevie vm. si mandare, y pass adelante en su discurso.


Felipe. De Toledo pass por muchedumbre de Lugares, pero no me detuve sino muy
poco; Los mas senalados son Talavera, Truxilla, Merida, y Badaioz postrera
Tierra de Castilla adonde se ha de registrar la Ropa, y el dinero; y a tres
leguas de alli en Portugal se registraron otra vez pagando cierta alcavala a la
salida de Castilla, y a la entrada de Portugal.


Carlos. Que importunidad es aquella de Registrar tantas vezes, y aun pagar
algo del poco dinero que se lleva a cuestas para meter pan en boca.


Felipe. Senor, no ay que apelar sino a la bolsa, y esto puede ser la causa
porque se hallan tan pocos caminantes por aquellas Tierras; y puede Vm. creerme
pienso de aver encontrado mas passajeros enter Paris y Orleans que casien todo
mi viage en Espana.


Carlos. Bien se lo creo sin que vm. lo jure, porque parece casi una procession
la gente que passa por aquella part de Francia.


Felipe. Claro esta, y en efeto pienso que ay mas pueblos en Francia enter los
dos Rios de sena y la Loira, tomandolos desde su origin hasta que se entran en
la mar, que en toda Espana.


Carlos. Pass vm. adelante en el discurso de su via je si fuere servido de
favore cerme.


Felipe. Aviendo entrado en Portugal passeme a Yelvas bonito lugar, y assi a
Villa vieiosa, despues a Evora Ciudad de cuenta, a Estremoso, a Monte major, y
assi passo passico a Lisbona, grandissima Ciudad la qual se puede paragonar a
las mejores, y mayores Ciudades de Europa teniendo siete millas enderedor.


Carlos. Li Lisbona siendo una Ciudad tan renombrada porque ay un Refran, Quien
no ha visto Lisboa no ha visto cosa-boa, supplico a Vm. que me cuente algo
della.


Felipe. For coso es que Lisbona sea antigua, porque suvieio apellido es
Olisippo de Vlisse qui pasto por alla; ella esta situada sobre el Taio, y tiene
trafego y Tierras en ambas las Indias. El primer Descubridor de Tierras agenas
fue el Infant Don Henrique hijo menor de los cinco que gano Don Iuan el
primero (Rey de Portugal) de Dona Felipa hija de Iuan de Gaunt Duque de
Lancastria en Imglatier^a; Este Principe Henrique siendo gran Matematico
descubrio primero los Acores, y la Madera, y otras Islas en el mar Atlantico;
despues la Guinea, y el passaje a las Indias Orientales por el Capo de buena
Esperanca, desde que tiempo Lisbona ha florecido maravillosamente; El hermano
mayor del dicho Principe Don Henrique se llama va Don Edovardo (qui vino ser
Rey de Portugal) el Rey Edovardo tercero, de Ingla-tierra siendo su padrino,
que era la primera vez que el nombre de Edoardo o Duarte fu conocido en
Portugal.

Lisbona esta circuyda de buenos muros y sobre ellos 76 torres, hazia la mar
tiene veynte puertas; Hazia la Tierra firma esta situada sobre cinco
montecillos, y es lugar de infinito comercio, etc.


Carlos. Beso a Vm. las manos una infirnidad de vezes por esta relacion tan
puntual, prosiga, si mandare, a hablar de otras parts de Portugal.


Felipe. Les segunda Cindad en Portugal es Santeren situada tambien sobre el
Tajo; y la Tercera, es Sinira, situada sobre el Mar Atlantico; la 4a Conimbra
sobre el rio Mondego; la 5a Braga un gran Arcobispado; 6a Porto, situada a la
boca del Duero; 7a Miranda 8a Braganca, cuyos Duques eran tan grandes Principes
que la tercera part del pueblo vivian sobre sus Tierras; 9a Eubora,
Arcobispado; 10a Portalegre; 11a Olivenca sobre la Guadiana; 12a Beja: Todos
estos lugares estan situados sobre Rios considerables.


Carlos. Parece que el Reyno de Portugal esta bien aguado, teniendo tantos Rios.


Felipe. Tendra como dizen mas de cien y cinquenta Rios grandes y Pequenos; los
principales son el Tajo, el Duero, Guadiana, Minio, etc.


Carlos. El Reyno de los Algarves no pertenece a la corona de Portugal?


Felipe. Si senor, y tiene buenos lugares, como Faro, Niebla, Villa Maona,
Tavila, Lagos, Sylvia, etc. De suerte que el Reyno de Portugal con los Algarves
tendra cosa de 400 millas de largo, y 100 de ancho.


Carlos. Que son los otros dominios que tiene la Corona de Portugal?


Felipe. En Asia, o en las Indias Orientales tienen tantos que es cosa
difficultosa de nombrarlos; ^ienen Diu en el Reyno de Cambaia; Tienen Goa en el
Reyno de Decan, Damau, Macao en China, y muchos otros lugares y castillos; En
Africa, los Portugueses tienen senorios muy largos en los Reynos de Conga y
Angola; Las Islas del Capo Verde que son nueve en numero pertenecen a los
Portugueses; y Tanger en Berberia situado cerca de la boca del Estrecho de
Gibraliar.

En las Indias Occidentales tienen Brasil, y una grandissima extendida de t
erra, con muy considerables puertos como Todos los santos, Fernambuc, san
Salvador y diversos otros.


Carlos. Muy largos son los Dominios a mi parecer que los Portugueses tienen en
todas las quatro parts del mundo, es a saber en Europa, Asia, Africa, y
America; mas de gracia pass Vm. mas adelante.


Felipe. Antes que de partirme de Portugal tengo de confutar un proverbio que
tienen los Castellanos, viz. Los Portugueses son pocos y locos; mas estos anos
passados se hallan muchos y Manosos; Agora assi lo manda Vm. hare pues un salto
desde Lisbona a Sevilla en Andalusia, Ciudad tan estremadamente rica teniendo
la casa de contratacion de las Indias y magnifica, que ay dos Refranes della,
el uno, quien no ha visto S^villa no ha visto Marauilla; el otro, A quien Dios
quiere bien en Sevilla le da a comer.


Carlos. Ayotro dicho qui yo entendi, que las calls de Sevilla son como
lostrebejos del axedres tantos prietos quantos blancos, referiendo a los
esclavos Moriscos que ay alli en gran numero; y de Sevilla adonde se encaminava
vm?


Felipe. De Sevilla pass por Carmona, yezij^, que son dos indifferences
Tierras, y de la a Cordoua adonde vi la famosa mesquita que los moros llamavan
Ceca, fabrica muy admirable, y el mas entero de quantas he visto en mi vida de
los Antiguos aunque he peregrinado en muchas parts; En Cordoua ay la mas
escogida casta de Ginetes, que son tan sueltos y ligeros que dizen que estan
engendrados del viento.


Carlos. De Cordoua donde fue vuestra merced!


Felipe. A Granada cabeja de un Reyno el ultimo que perdieron ls Moros, adonde
vi el Alhambra cosa grandiosa; De Granada boluimea Malaga el principal ectanco
de vino^, adonde vila la puerta que trae el nombre de Cava hij a de Don Julian
que el Rey Don Rodrigo avi^ desflorecido, y el conde Don Julian su^p^dre por
veng^rse del agravio introduxo los M^ros los qu^les senoreavan en Espana mas de
700 anos, y assii devino Traydor a su patria.


Carlos. Assi lo fue, y muy infame traydor, porque la ofensa siendo particular
no era y gual a la venganz^ que era tan general.


Felipe. Despues yo pass por G^adix, Baca, Lorca, y Cartagena llave del Reyno
de Marcia antigua poblacion, adonde ay un muy famoso y convenable puerto de
mar, el mejor de quantos ay en Espana, porque los navios aportando alli qu edam
^nceroados coma en una caxa, y abrigados de ^as borrascas.


Carlos. He leydo, que Felipe el segundo preguntando a Andrea D^na (gran
navegador) qual er a el mejor puerto de Espana, respondio donosamente, Iunio,
Iulio, y Car^agena, porque en aquellos meses todos puertes son buenos por la
mansedumbre de la sazon; y de Cartagena adoude?


Felipe. A Murcia, que fue cabe ca de un Reyno en tiempo de Moros, el principal
estanco de seda; De al^i pass por Origuela, y Elche a Alicante llave del Reyno
de Valencia lugar de buen comercio; De Alicante pass por Xativa, y otros
lugares a Valencia ci^dad bizzarra en estremo, Tierra muy viciosa, y delicada;
Los animales brutos alli hazen ^us estrados de flores, como de romarino y otros
vegetables odoriferos; De Valencia pass a Morviedre que era Sagunto donde ay
muchos rastros de antiguedad; de alli a Castillon de la plana, y assi a
Saragoca Metropple de Aragon, Ciudad muy sobervia, y la Tierra enderedor
fecundissima donde se come el mejor pan de toda Espana.


Carlos. De Sarogoca por doude aderecava vm sus passos?


Felipe. Por Cataluna; yo pense ver Tortosa, y Tarragona, mas no avia
comodidad, y ansi passando por Lerida lugar muy bien poblado, y Universidad,
gare Barcel^na la cabe ca del Reyno de Cataluna, Ciudad muy rica, y soberbia
por sus edificios; pass tambien por Nuestra Seno^ra de Monserrate, adonde sos
Pelegrinos acuden de todas parts; Desques pass por Gyrona, y assi al condado
de Ruys^llon, adonde esta Perpinan muy buena tierra con un fuerte Castillo, que
agora pertenece al Rey de Francia, y al fin ganando Salsas salj de Espana con
harto trabajo aviendo atravessado dos vezes los montes pyreneos, y alla tambien
las Guardas me quitaron algo del poco dinero que me quedava.


Carlos. Aquellas Guardas son muy enfadosas a los passageros; He oydo hablar de
un pintor Frances, que a viendo medrado vna suma confiderable de dinero trocava
todo en pistoletes de oro los quales tragava; y las Gu^rdas aviendo tenido
noticia a^tes, que traya una cantidad de dinero acuestas, y aviendo escudrinado
por todas pares sin ecetar la boca, y el salvonor echaronle enter quatro muros,
y le dieron pildoras, y ona melezina de suerte que las Guardas hallaron todo el
dinero: Mas como tratarona vm en las ventas por donde passava?


Felipe. Aquellos Venteros son medio ladrones, porque en algunas parts p^den
dos vezes mas que la cosa vale; Por tanto yo concluyre con un donoso cuento de
lo que acontecio cerca de Girona; Un passagero llego a un lugar do avia dos
ventas cercanas vna al otra con un Crucifixo en el medio, el passagero mirando
lo, dixo, a l'oydo de su huesped, nuestro senor esta aqui como estava puesto en
la cruz enter dos ladrones, (entendiendo los dos Venteros. Como senor, ^a
venido vm aqui por afrentarme dixo su huesped, el passa jero replicava, no os
enojeys mi huesped, porque yo os tengo por el buen lad^on.


Carlos. Semejante a este cuento, es un otro de un Tudesco qui passando cerca
de Alcala de Henares donde ay dolces y riquissimos vinos, y llegado que avia a
vna venta, bevio 4 a cumbres de vino, y assi fue todo emborrachado a la cama;
El dia siguiente preguntando a su huespeda que avia a pagar, dixo cinco
acumbres; Esto no puede serreplico el Tudesco, porque no cabran en mis tripas
mas de 4 acumbres aviendolas medido muchas vezes; la hues peda respondio,
senor, como este vino era muy bueno y fuerte, un acumbre subia a la cabeza, y
los demas quedaron en las tripas, que hasen cinco acumbres en todo.


THE PERAMBULATION OF Spain and Portugal; In a Discourse 'twixt CHARLES and
PHILIP.
Charles. GOD give you very good days Sir Philip, It is a great while since I
saw you; tell me, if you be pleased, Where have you bin so long? and whence com
you now?


Philip. You are very well met Sir Charles, I rejoice in my soul to see you
with health; and, since you command it, I will tell you whence I com, I am
newly com from Spain.


Charles. From Spain? God bless me, and what was the cause (under favor) that
made you to undergo such a journey? for they say, that it is a tedious Country
to Passengers.


Philip. Sir, Curiosity was the cause; but let us go into the House, and I will
give you account at large of what you will desire to know, but chiefly the
course that he is to take, who has a mind to go unto that Country.


Charles. But let us dine first, and if you please, we will dine together in
that Tavern which is a very neat house, and well provided; and then you may
please to relate unto me more at lesure when the Table is taken away.


Philip. Be it in a very good hour, for I accept of the favor you do me to
conduct me to so good a House, for it is a good while since I found any.


Charles. What do you tell me? Is it possible that you did not find such in
your travels, Spain being so good a Country, and abounding in all things?


Philip. She might be good, were it not for the slothfulnes of the peeple, who
do not cultivat the ground not ne^r the third part; otherwise of its own nature
it is good enough, but since the expulsion of the Moors it is not so much tilld.


Charles. Then Sir, you infer that the slothfulness of the Inhabitants is the
cause of ill accommodation.


Philip. There Is no doubt of that, because the earth cannot produce unless it
be tilld, therefore there is a want of necessary provision, so that in some
places there is but the cask of a House, with a little napery, but sometimes
there are no beds at all for Passengers in the Inns, or Ventas.


Charles. I pray, do me the favor as tell me what Venta is?


Philip. Ventas are Lodgings which are found in the Country, and on the Kings
highway, where if Passengers meet, they must carry their Knapsacks well
provided of what is necessary; otherwise they may go to bed supperles, for
there is nothing to be had, but Barley and Straw for your Mules; and if happily
there be any thing it is a little bread and wine, and it may be some few eggs,
and puddings.


Charles. I pray do me the favor as relate unto me the success of your
journey when you entered Spain, and that which principally passd in places most
remarkable, that I may know how to govern my self, if perchance I have a
disposition one day to go to that Country.


Philip. Sir, as I took farewell of France, I passed by that River the Dordonna,
that divides her from Spain, which is near Iron not far from Fuentarabia, I had
noon at the' said place of Iron, and at night I gaind San Sebastian the first
fortified place of Biscay, and a sea Port.


Charles. In those frontire places, are there not Gards to look what Travelers
pass?


Philip. Yes that there are; it is true that at your entrance into Spain they give
no obstacle; but one thing must be don when one comes to Iron, which is, that
the party must manifest all which he carries about him, whether Goods or
Jewels, as likewise the very Money he carries for his ordinary expenses, all
which he must register, and pay what is taxed by the Customers; then they give
him a little Cedule, which they call Albaran, and it is a kind of Pasport,
because the Gards may not seize upon what he carries for want of registring.


Charles. And are all kind of persons used th^^, whether Foreign, or Natives?


Philip. They except none, and that which is worse, the Gards who lie at the
Catch at the other Gate, if they please, they will make you alight, for to
search whether one carries any thing that is not mentioned in the Albaran; But
the best course is for preventing this importunity, to throw them a piece of
Money according to the quality of the person.


Charles. By this means, Sir, they know what Money one carries about him, and
so he runs a hazard to be followed and robbed, or it may be to be killed.


Philip. This needs not to be feared; for there is little ta'lk in Spain of
Highway men and Thieves, unless it be in Catalonia, which is more frequented
by Passengers then any other; for all those who com from Italy, or from those
parts of France do pass that way to the Spanish Court; moreover it is the most
populous Province of Spain.


Charles. Well, when you parted from San Sebastian, whither did you direct your
course?


Philip. I took the road of Navarr, where I saw Pampelona the principal City of
that Kingdom; and therein the famous Castle, which is somewhat like that of
Antwerp.


Charles. And does not the Kingdom of Navarr appertain to the King of France?


Philip. That Kingdom divides it self into two parts, that on this side the
Pyrenean hills, which belongs to the King of France; the other beyond the
Hills, which is the Kings of Spain, a goodly Country, and gallant peeple not
ill affected to the French.


Charles. From thence whither did you bend your course? for in my judgment you
left the ordinary Road that leads to Madrid.


Philip. It Is a great truth, for I left the Road of Victoria, and the Port of
Saint Adrian, and struck in at Logronio, a Country good enough, situate upon
the River of Ebro, near a Mountain, where in ancient time the City of Cantabria
was; which gave the name to that Province, which at this day contains, Biscay,
Navarre, Guipuzcoa, and other particular places, which were too long to relate
now.


Charles. Surely you have pretermitted diverse other places which I find in the
Map that are of the Kingdom of Navarre.


Philip. You dovery well to put me in remembrance, and there are two signal
places which I pretermitted; And those are Estella de Navarra (the Star of
Navarre) which is the University of that Kingdom, and the Town is sited in a
place full of amenity; The other place is La puente de la Reyna (the
Queens-Bridge;) And besides those two, there is another called Viana, a
corrupted name of Diana; for in ancient times there was a Temple dedicated
there to that Goddess.


Charles. I pray pass on, and do not make a halt in places of small
consideration, for I believe you have a great journey to make.


Philip. Since you will have it so, I will make a leap from Logronio, to Santo
Domingo de la Calcada, which is a Town in Rioja near the mountains de Oca (of
the Goose) where is to be seen near the Church, a living Cock, and Hen, which
were of the bro^d of those, that being roasted, turned to life again.


Charles. Peradventure they may be those of that Miracle which happened to a
young French Pilgrim, who was hanged in that place for a Thief, whose Parents
returning from performance of their Pilgrimage to Santjago, and passing by the
Gallows they found him alive again.


Philip. They say, they are of the same; And the custom is, that the Passengers
who go in Pilgrimage that way, do take some of their Feathers and wear them in
their Hats; and, were not the story too long; I would give you a more
particular account, but I will put it off to another time.


Charles. However, I pray do me the favor Sir, as to pursue what you have
begun, and may it be in a good hour.


Philip. Since it is your pleasure, and that you delight so much therein, I
will proceed; From San Domingo I passed to Burgos the Cape City of old Castile,
'twixt whom and Toledo there have been often contests for priority.


Charles. I have read so; but in a Parliament which was held once at Toledo,
King Philip the Second, appeased this Contestation very wisely for that time,
which happened thus: The Burgesses of both Cities sitting in Parliament, they
contested who should speak first, and the contest grew very hot, when the King
did suddenly rise, and said, Let Burgos speak, touching Toledo I will speak for
Her my self; and to this day the King is counted Burgess of Toledo.


Philip. It was a very signal passage, and were it for nothing else, Philip the
Second deserved the attribute of Prudent (which is given him) for this speech
alone; but let us go ^n: In Burgos there is a Monastery without the City, where
that miraculous Crucifix is, whose nails and hair are clipped once a month. The
great Church of Burgos is a very stately Fabric; There is also a Castle but not
very considerable.


Charles. And with your favor, Whither did you direct your way from the City of
Burgos?


Philip. To Valladolid a goodly fair Village, and well peepled, where one of
the Chanceries of Spain resides.


Charles. But do you call Valladolid a Village, being so great a place, and
where the Catholic Court kept so long?


Philip. Yes Sir, it is but a Village, because it is not encompassed with walls,
and they have two Proverbs, Village for Village, and Valladolid in Castile;
City for City, and Lisbon in Portugal.


Charles. Well, let us detain our selfs no longer in this place, let us proceed
further, if you please.


Philip. From thence I went to Medina del Campo, an indifferent good Country,
where there are famous Libraries; I went thither in the Evening, nnd the next
morning following I took the Ro^d of Salamanca, a great place, and the most
illustrious University of Spain, I viewed there the Colleges, which are in
great number, and well built; As also the ^ridge reared up by the Romans, and
the Bull which is at the entrance, whereof Lazarillo de Tormes speaks.


Charles. Did it fortune you to see the House of Celestina?


Philip. Sir, they pointed at the place where it was, but I had not so much
curiosity to go and see it, besides, me thinks it is a fained thing.


Charles. I have heard say, that there were at one time fifteen thousand
Scholars in Salamanca, which me thinks is strange, Spain being so thin peepled,
and there being 16 Universities more.


Philip. It may well be so, because Salamanca is situated almost in the center
of Spain, whither they have easy recourse from all parts; But the major part
of the Scholars are Oppidanes, who lodge out of the Colleges.


Charles. I have read a Proverb, A Farthing in Salamanca is better then a fair
Face; but you may please to proceed.


Philip. From Salamanca I took the Road of Segovia, a famous place for many
things which are there remarkable; The first is the Monastery of Parral, which
is without the City; Then the M^nt-house; Then the renowned Alc^sar, and
Segovia Bridge, which indeed is but an Aqueduct made of mavelous big stones;
but above all, the fine Woollen Cloths that are made there.

From Segovia I passed the Port of Guadarrama, having in the way seen a great
Edifice called La casa del Campo, built among Woods; and having passed
Guadarrama, I came to the Escurial, the eighth wonder of the World; But because
there would need a whole Volume to describe as well the Church, the Library,
the Quadrangles, the Kings Quarter, as also the delicate Waters, Orchards, and
Fountains, which are found there; therefore I refer it to the diltgence, and
curiosity of such who desire to know things exactly, and at large.


Charles. Well, I hope to see it one day, if God give me the grace; but what a
glorious thing it is, that one House should be a Monastery, a Royal Palace, and
an University?


Philip. Being departed from the Escurial I went to Madrid, passing in the way
by La casa del prado, where the King uses to reside often.


Charles. Since we are now come to Madrid, I pray what do you think of the
Catholic Court.


Philip. I will tell you no more, but that it may be called a thin Court in
comparison of others.


Charles. How can that be, the Spanish King being so great a Monarch; and has
he not a Court correspondent to his greatness?


Philip. You must know, that there is a great deal of gravity and state in the
Catholic Court, but little noise, and few people, so that it may be called a
Monastery, rather then a Royal Court.


Charles. By this means the King of Spain spends not much.


Philip. So little, that I dare wager the French King spends more in Pages and
Laquays, then he of Spain among all his Court-Attendants.


Charles. Is it possible? Yet when I think well of it, I find that he is more
in the right, in regard that much trouble, and confusion is avoided, which the
French Court is subject unto; Moreover, the wast which is made in that Court,
is more then what is necessarily expended.


Philip. You have reason on your side, besides, there are not so many
insolences committed in that Court which are done in far lesser; but he who
will behold the greatness of the King of Spain, let him go to Naples or Sicilia,
to Mexico or Peru, etc. where the Spanish Viceroys live in greater luster and
magnificence then the King himself does in his Palace, for so they call the
Court in Madrid.


Charles. Well, let us give over speaking further of these Courts, for a whole
day would not suffice to discourse of this subject and pursue, if you please,
your journey.


Philip. From Madrid I took the Road of Alcala de Henares, a famous University;
and passing thence to Aranjuez, which is another of the Kings Houses, but
excessive hot by its situation, being, as they say, with the circumjacent
Country of an African temper: There are many curiosities to be seen there, but
I stayed as little as I could, and went the way of Toledo, the chief City of
Old Castile, and an Archbishopric, the richest for Revenues, except the
Popedom, of any in Christendom; There is there a sumptuous Cathedral with a
rich Tresury belonging thereunto.


Charles. Did you see the Enchanted Tower; As also the great Artifi^e whereby
the Water ascends from the River to the upper part of the City, which is so
curious, and so much spoken of?


Philip. Concerning the Tower I informed my self as much as I could, but I
could find nothing to any purpose, so that I take it for a Fable; But touching
the Artifices of making the River-water to mount up, I have seen better in
Italy and Germany. The peeple of Toledo is grave and subtle, which was the
cause of the Proverb, From a Toledan take heed night and day; The purest
Castilian Dialect is spoken there, so that there is a law in Spain, if there be
any ambiguity, or that there happen any difference about the sense of a word, a
Toledan is to be Judge. Toledo also is renowned for some Ecumenical, and
General Councels which have been held there.


Charles. I humbly thank you for these remarkable observations, and may you
please to go on in your journey.


Philip. From Toledo I passed by many places, but I did not stay any time in
them* The most remarkab^e places were, Talavera, Truxilla, Merida, and Bada^^z
the Confines of Castile, where Goods and Money are to be registered; And three
Leagues thence I was forced to register them again, paying a certain Toll going
out of Castile, and entering into Portugal.


Charles. What an odd importunity (...) that, to register so often, and withal
to pay something out of that small parcel of Money which one carries about him
to put bread in his mouth.


Philip. There is no appeal but to the Purse, and this may be the cause why so
few Passengers are found in those Countries; and truly you may believe me, I
think I (...) more Passengers 'twixt Paris and Orleans, then I found well near
in all this journey through Spain.


Charles. I am easily induced to believe that, because the peeple that pass
that way, are so thick, that it may be called a Procession.


Philip. It Is very true, insomuch that I think there is more peeple in France,
'twixt the Seine and the Loire, taking them from their source till they
disgorge into the Sea, th^n there is in all Spain.


Charles. I pray proceed still in the account of your journey, if you please to
favor me so much.


Philip. Having entered Portugal, I passed to Yelvas a pretty place, and so to
Villa viciosa, then to Evora a City of account; thence to Estremoso, so to
Monte Mayor, and so by degrees to Lisbon, a great City which may be compared to
the best, and biggest Cities of Europe, having seven miles compass.


Charles. Lisbon being so renowned a City, because there is a Proverb, Who has
not seen Lisbon, has not seen a good thing, I pray Sir make some relation of it.


Philip. The City of Lisbon must needs be very ancient, for her old name is
Olisippo, of Ulisses, who passed that way; she is situated upon the River
Tagus, and she has traffic and possessions in both the Indies.

The first Discoverer of Foreign Countries was Don Henrique, youngest son of
five which John the first (King of Portugal) gained of the Lady Philippa
Daughter to John of Gant Duke of Lancaster; The said Prince Henrique being
versed in the Mathematiques, discovered first the Azores, and the Madera's with
other Islands in the Atlantic Ocean; Then Guiney, and after the Passage to the
East Indies, was found out by the Cape of good Hope, since which time Lisbon
has marvailously flourished; The eldest Brother of the said Henrique (who came
to be King of Portugal) was called Edward; Edward the third, King of England,
having been his Godfather; which was the first time that the name Edward, whom
they call Duarte was known in Portugal.

Lisbon is encir^led with good Walls, upon which there are 76 Turrets; toward
the Sea, she has twenty Gates; she is situated upon five Hills, and is a place
of infinite Traffic.


Charles. I thank you a thousand times over for your Relation, which is so
punctual; you may proceed, if it stands with your pleasure, to speak of other
parts of Portugal.


Philip. The second Town in Portugal is Santeren, situated also upon the River
of Tagus; The third is Sintra, upon the Atlantic Sea; The fourth Conimbra, upon
the River Mondego; The fifth Braga great Archbishopric; The sixth Porto at the
mouth of the River Duero; The seventh Miranda; The eighth Braganza, whose Dukes
were such great Princes, that the third part of the peeple of the Kingdom lived
upon their Lands; The ninth Eubora, an Archbishopric; The tenth Portolegre; The
Eleventh Olivenz^ upon Guadiana; The twelfth Beja: All these Towns are situated
upon considerable Rivers.


Charles. It seems that the Kingdom of Portugal is well watered, having so many
Rivers.


Philip. They say it has in all above 150 great and small Rivers, whereof the
chief are Tagus, Duero, Guadiana, Minio, etc.


Charles. The Kingdom of the Algarves, does it not appertain to the Crown of
Portugal?


Philip. Yes Sir, and it has many good Towns, as Faro, Niebla, Villa Maona,
Tavila, Lagos, Sylvia, and others; so that the Kingdom of Portugal with
Algarve, is about 400 miles in length, and 100 broad.


Charles. What other Dominions are there, over which the Crown of Portugal does
Lord it?


Philip. In Asia, or the East Indies, they have so many that there is some
difficulty to number them; They have Diu in the Kingdom of Cambaia; They have
Goa in the Kingdom of Decan, and Dama^; They have Macao in China, with sundry
other Towns, Castles, and places of Fastness. In Afric they have large
Possessions, in the Kingdom of Congo and Angola; The Isles of Cape Verd, nine
in number, are theirs, as also Tanger in Barbary, near the Streights of
Gibraltar.

In the West Indies they have Brasil, with a vast extent of ground, and diverse
considerable Ports, as Todos los santos, Fernambuc, san Salvador, with others.


Charles Truly me thinks those Dominions are very large, which the Crown of
Portugal has in all the four parts of the World, viz. Europe, Asia, Africa,
and America; but I pray proceed further.


Philip. Before I budge from Portugal, I will confute a Pr^verb which the
Castilians have, viz. Los Portugueses son locos y pocos, The Portugueses are
Fools and few; but of late years the Castilian has found them Many, and no
Fools; But now since it is your pleasure, I will make a hop from Lisbon to
Sevil in Andaluzia, a City extremely rich, having the Contratation-house of the
West Indies; so that there are two Proverbs of Her. The first, Who has not seen
Sevill, has seen no Wonders: The other, Whom God loves, he gives him his bread
in Sevill.


Charles. I have heard another saying that the Streets of Sevill are like a
chess-board who has as many black as white men, alluding to the multitude of
Morisco slaves which are there.


Philip. From Sevill I passed by Carmona, and Ezija which are pretty
indifferent places, and thence to Cordova where I saw that famous Mesqu^ta (or
Church) which the Moors called Ceca an admired fabric, and the most entire of
any ancient piece that ever I saw in my life, though I have traversed a great
part of the world; In Cordova there is the choicest race of Ginetts, which are
so fleet and light that they say they are engendered of the wind.


Charles. From Cordova whither did you direct your course^


Philip. To Granada the Metropolis of a Kingdom the last which the Moors lost;
There I saw the Alhambra a glorious piece; From Granada I turned to Malaga the
chief staple of Wine, where I saw the Gate which bears the name of Cava
(daughter to Don Julian) which being deflowered by the then King Don Rodrigo the
said Don Julian her Father to revenge himself of the affront, brought in the
Moors who lorded in Spain 700 years, and so he became a Traitor to his own
Country.


Charles. So he was, an infamous Traitor; for the offense being but particular,
was nothing equal to the Revenge which was so general.


Philip. After that, I passed by Guadix, Baca, Lorca, and so I came to
Carthagena, the Key of the Kingdom of Murica, An ancient Colony, where three is
a famous and convenient Haven, the best of any in Spain, for Ships when they
arrive there are as it were shut up in a box, and fenced from all storms.


Charles. I have read that Philip the second asking Andrea Doria a great Seaman
Which was the best Port in all Spain? he answered pleasantly June, July, and
Cartagena; for in those two months any port is good because of the mildness of
the Season, and from Cartagena whither.


Philip. To Murcia, which was the head of a Kingdom in the time of the Moors,
it is the chief staple of Silk; Thence I passed by Origuela, and Elche to
Alicant the Key of the Kingdom of Valencia, a place of good traffic, though it
have no Port but a Road; Thence I passed by Xativa, and other places to
Valencia, an extreme bewtiful City, and a wanton delicat soil about, so that
the brute animals there make themselves beds of flowers, as Rosemary and other
odoriferous Vegetables; From Valencia I passed to Morviedre, which was old
Sagunto, where there are many pieces of antiquity; Thence by Castillon de la
plana, and diverse j^lly towns, I came to Saragossa the Metropolis of Aragon, a
proud stately Citly, and the circumjacent soil extreme fertile, for the best
bread in Spain is eaten there.


Charles. From Saragossa whither did you direct your journey?


Philip. For Catalunia; I thought to have seen Tortosa and Taragona, but I had
no convenience; so passing by Lerida a wel-peepeld place, and an University, I
gained Barcelona the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Catalunia, a proud City both
for her riches and buildings; I saw also our Lady of Mon^errat, where Pilgrims
of all Nations resort; Afterward I passed by Girona, and so to the County of
Russllion, a good Country with a well Fortified Castle which appertains now
to the King of France; And at last gaining Salsas, I made a sally out of Spain
having twice traversed the Pyren^an hills, and there also they took from me
some of that money which I had remaining.


Charles. Those Gards are very troublesome to passengers; I have heard of a
French Painter who having got a considerable some of money changed all into small
pistolets of gold, which he swallowed down, The Gards having notice before hand
that he carried a quantity of money about him, and searching narrowly every
place, his mouth and his tail not excepted they threw him twixt fowe^ walls,
and administered unto him some pills, and a glister, so that the Gards found all
the money by this means: But how were you usd in your Inns or Ventas as you
passd along.


Philip. Those Inkeepers are half theefs in some places, because they demand
twice as much as the thing is worth; Now, will I conclude with a merry tale of
what happend near Girona; A passenger arrivd at a place where there were two
Inns, and in the middle betwixt them there stood a Crucifix, The passenger
looking upon the Picture of it, said in the hearing of his host, Our Savior
is here, as he was upon the Cross between two Theefs meaning the two
Inkeepers, How Sir, said his Host are you com hi there to affront us? The
Passenger replied, Hold your self contented mine Host, for I take you for the
good Thief.


Charles. Not much unlike to this, is another Tale which I heard spoken of a
high Dutchman, who passing by Alcala where there are sweet, and rich wines, and
being com to a Venta, He drank four quarts of wine, and so went drunk to bed;
The next day, asking his Hostess what was to pay, she said 5 quarts of wine;
That cannot be, for my gutts will not hold above four for I have mesurd them
often this way, The Hostess replied, O Sir this wine being so good, and
strong, one quart went up to the brain, and the other four remained in your
belly, which makes in all five quarts.


Carta COMPVESTA de Ochenta y dos REFRANES, Concurrientes Todos, PARA LA
CONSERVATION DE LA Salud Umana.
Mi Senor Don L:
LA Salud es la cosa que mas importa al cuerpo umano, Es la ioya mas preciosa
de quantas la Natura tiene en todo su retrete por tanto yo le encomiendo tres
Dotores para mantenerla, es a saber, El Dotor Dieta, el Dotor Reposo, y el
Dotor Gozo.

Tocante el postrero, bien se sabe por Experiencia Que es aquel gran espejo de
sabiduria, Que vna onca de alegria vale mas que cien quintales de melancolia,
pesadumbre no paga deudas; y el Cuydado en demasia roe hasta el tuetano;
Coracon contento es gran talento; que puede dezir Alegramente, el diablo es
muerto, y el Italiano dize que poo cibo and men affanno, sanita del corpo
fanno; Tambien dize, Grave dura non ti punga, and sara la tua vita lunga.

To cante el seg^ndo Doto, que mira al govierno del Cuerpo, es mucha verdad que
poca fatiga es gran salud; Bueno es passear hasta que se vea la sangre en la
mexilla, no el sudor en la frente; Porlo que toca al sueno que es el Rey de
Reposo, Duerme el dia quando quisieres, y la noche quanto pudieres; Sea la
noche noche, y el dia dia, y Viviras con alerina; pero, Q^ien quiere bien
dormir que compre la cama de un deudor; Allende desto, Come poco, y cena mas
duerme en alto y viviras; pero sobre la sombra del nogal no te pong s a
acostar; M^s desto, Bueno es madrugar, porque Quien el diablo l a de enganar,
de manana se ha de levantar; Tambien tenga cuenta de yrse a la manana a la
p^scaria, y la tarde a la carneceria, porque piece y huesped presto hieden.

Tocante la cobertura del cuerpo, si quieres vivir sano hazte viejo temprano;
no dexes los pelliscos hasta que vengan los Galileos; Buena regla es, Que yo
ande caliente, y riase la gente, Otra ay mas particular, Euxuto el pie,
caliente la cabecc, por el resto vive como bestia; escuche tambien lo que dize
el To mano, Vesti caldo, mangia poco, bevi assai and vir viai.

Quanto a las parts del cuerpo, adviertase. Que los o jos siendo malos se han
de curar con el codo; Los dientes no piden in mucho cuydado, ni demasiado
descuydo; Quando te dolieren las tripas hazlo saber al culo; Me claro y caga
bien, y higa para el Medico; Anadese a esto, si meare; de color de florin, echa
el Medico para ruyn; Toda via, Quien mea y no pee, va a la Co^te y al Rey no
vee; sepasi tambien, Que a la gota el Medico no vee gota.

Tocante el Casamiento el dicho del Marquis de mirabe^ se ha de observar, el
qual siendo preguntado como avia vivido tantos anos (porque tenia mas de
ochenta) respondio, Caseme tarde y embiudeme temprano; si quieres hembra escoje
la Negra, Porque Muger Negra trementina en ella; Tambien dize Frances, Fille
brunette gaye and net; Escoj^ la tambien el sabado, y no el Domingo; Pero
Muger roxa y barbuda de cien p^ssos la saluda, M^s de esto, muger, anade y
cabra mala cosa siendo Magra, Para mientes tambien a este cumplimiento, Junio,
Julio y Agosto, senora mia no os conosco.

Tocante el Doctor D^eta que pr^domina mucho sobre la salud, es Regla general,
Quien mucho come, poco come, el Italiano dize Bisogna far tree pasti di star
sano, un buono, un cattivo, and ^n mezzano; Quien come bien y bien beve, haze
lo que deve, Pero a buen comer o a mal comer tres vezes haz de bever. Por lo
que toca a la bevanda, Beved agua como un buey, y vino como un rey; El agua
tiene tres excellentes virtudes, Ni enferma, ni adeuda, ni embiuda, Toda via
dizen que Agua fria y pan caliente nunca hizieron buen vientre: Siempre a higo
Agua, ya la pera Vino: Tambien a bocado haron espolado de Vino: Pero vino
transnochado no vale un cornado: Dixo la leche al vino bien vengais, amigo.

Tocante los manjares, es Regla muy saludable, Quien quisiere vivir sano, coma
poco, y cene temprano: Cabrito de un mes, rezental de tres: Un huevo escaseza,
dos gentileza, tres valentia, quatro vellaqueria: Dizese, Que si el Villano
supiesse el sabor de la gallina en el Henero, no dexaria ninguna en el pollero:
Escojase siempre leche de cabra, manteca de vaca, y queso de oveja: Pero, se ha
de observar, Que el queso que vien de corta mano es el mas sano: Alos mocos
esta permitido de comer mas amenudo que a los otros, porque dizen, que el moco
creciente ha^el lobo en el Avientre, mas, to cante los Viejos se dize que Q^ien
hurta la cena al Viejo, no le haze agravio: por tanto es buen precepto para los
de dad Quien no cena no ha menester Avicena, Otros dizen Que mas mato la cena
que no sano Avicena: De suerte que si tuvieres gana de morir cena con carne
assada y echate a dormir: Anadese a esto, que si quieres comida mala, come la
liebre assada. Quien en Mayo come sardina en Agosto caga la Espina: Et Quien
come Caracoles en Abril apareje cera y pavil; Toda via Quando llueve y haze sol
coge el caracol; No ay Caldo como el cumo guijarra; Pero Ni Olla sin tocino, ni
Sermon sin Agustino.

Tocante las frutas y legumbres, observese que Pan reziente y uvas, a las mocas
ponen mudas, y alas viejas quitan las arrugas; Azeytuna oro es vna, dos plata,
tercera mara, Niespolo despedr ado es buen bocado; Pera que dize Rodrigo no
vale un higo; Otros dizen, La Muger y la pera la que calla es buena; El Frances
tiene vna notable caucion tocante esta fruta, es a saber, Apres la poire ou le
vin ou le prestre; Mis, sobre melon, vino follon; Con todo sea sal, porque dize
el Frances, Cest un banquet pour le diable ou il n y a point du sell; Tocante el
Hinojo, y la ruda, ay dos refranes muy senalados, viz: Quien hinojo vee y no lo
coge, diablo es que no hombre: El otro, si supiesse la muger la virtud de la
Ruda la buscaria de noche a la luna, etc.

En Observando estas Reglas se podria vivir tanto quantos un Elefante que es de
mas larga vid^ de quantos animales ay, segun aquel Refian gradual, Un sero dura
tres anos; Un perro tres setos: Tres perros un Cavallo: Tres Cavallos un
Hombre: Tres Hombres un Ciervo; Tres Ciervos duran un Elefante.

No soy Por mas, si no, qu^e desseandole en conclusion, Salud y G^zo, y Casa
con un cor^^t y pozo le quedo de todas mis entran^s su Criado mayor, porque.

Quisiere aunque soy Chico,
Ser, en serville Gigante,
I. H.

The same rendered into English.
Fourscore SPANISH PROVERBS couched in one Familiar LETTER, Concurring All to
one congruous Sense, AND Conducing to the Preservation OF Human Health.
SIR,
HEalth is a thing that most imports a Human Body; It is the most precious
jewel that Nature has in all her Cabinet. Therefore I recommend unto you three
Doctors for the maintenance thereof* to wit, Doctor Diet, Doctor Quiet, and
Docter Merriman.

Touching the last, it is well known by Experience which is the great
Looking-glass of Wisdom, That an ounce of Mirth is more worth then a hundred
stone of melancholy; Sorrow quits no scores; And too much care corrodes, and
eats to the very marrow; A heart content is a great Talent; A heart which may
say Alegramente, the Devil is dead; And the Italian will tell you. That a
little meat and less grief make a healthful body.

Touching the second Doctor, which concerns the Government of the Body, It Is a
great truth, That a little toil is great health: It Is good to walk till the
blood appears in the cheek, but not the sweat on on the brow: Touching sleep
who is the King of repose, Sleep in the day what thou will, and in the night as
much as thou can; but make night of night, and day of day, then thou may
sing welladay; But he who does desire to sleep soundly, let him buy the
boulster of a Bankrupt: Moreover, Dine with little, sup with less, sleep high
and thou will live; But take heed of sleeping on the shadow of a Wall-nut-tree;
Besides, it is good to rise early; for, He who will cosen the Devil, must rise
betimes: Go also early to the Fish-market, and late to the Shambles; for Fish
and Guests quickly stink.

Concerning thy clothes, or coverings of thy body, If thou will be healthful
make thy self old betimes; Leave not thy Furrs till the Galileans come ( viz.
till Ascenfion-day, when that Scripture is read) It was a good saying, Let me
go warm, and let the world laugh at me as long as it wi^: There Is another rule,
Keep thy head dry, and thy head hot, and for the rest live like a Beast (viz.
eat and drink no more then will s^ffice Nature.)

Concerning the parts of the Body, Take notice that when the eyes are sore,
cure them with thy Elbow, (viz. thou must not finger them): The Teeth require
not much care, nor too much neglect: When thy ^uts ache make it known to thy
tail; Piss clear, and go well to stool, and a fig for the Physician: Whereunto
may be added, If thy Urine be bright yellow, piss upon the Doctors head; Our
Gransires said, That he who pisseth without a report backward, goes to C^urt
and sees not the King: Touching the Govt, the Physician is but a l^ut.

Concerning Marriage, the saying of the old Marquis of M^ is observable, who
being asked how he came to live so long in such health, he answered, I married
late, and I became a widdower betimes. If thou desire a wife, choose her upon
a Saturday, rather than upon Sunday (in her fine clothes): And if thou can,
choose a black one, for they say, in a black woman there is Turpentine;
whereunto the Frenchman alludes something, A brown Less is gay and cleanly:
but for a red-hair'd, or bearded woman, salute them a hundred paces off.

Touching Doctor Diet, who predominats much over Human health, it is a general
rule, That he who eats much, eats but little; the Italian says, That to
preserve health, one must make three meals a day, one good, one bad, and
another indifferent meal: it is observed, that he who eats well, and drinks
well, does his business; but, whether you di^e well, or ill, be sure to drink
thrice.

Touching drinks, Drink Water like an Ox, and Wine like a King: Water has
three excellent virtues, for it neither makes one sick, nor puts one in debt,
nor makes one a widdower; yet cold Water and hot Bread never made good belly.
After the Fig, Water; after the Pear, Wine: A jadish bit requires a spur of
Wine; but Wine that stood all night is not worth a mite: The Milk told the
Wine, Welcome friend, Wine upon Milk is mine; Milk upon Wine is thine.

Touching meats: It is a wholesome precept, Who will live healthful, let him dine
sparingly, and sup betimes: Touching flesh, a Kid of a month, and a Lamb of
three, are best: For Eggs, one is scarsenes, two is gentleness, three stoutnes,
and four are roguishnes. They say, that if the Countryman knew the goodness of
a Hen in January, he would not leave one in his roost house: Goats Milk, Cow
Butter, and Sheeps Cheese are best; but for Cheese, that is best which comes
from a miser's hand: Young men are allowed to eat oftener then men in years;
for, they say, a growing Youth has a Wolf in his belly; Therefore who steals
an old man's supper, does him no wrong; moreover he who does not use to sup,
has no need of the Physician; therefore if thou have a mind to dye, sup upon
roasted Mu^ten, and go to bed. Hereunto may be added, If thou desire ill
food, eat a roasted Hare: he who eats Pilchers in May, may shite out the b^nes
in August; and he who eats Mushrumps in April, let him provide Week and Wax;
viz. let him provide for his burial; yet in other months, when it rains in a
Sunshine gather thy Musrumps: There is no Broth like that of the juice of
flint (viz. of water flowing thence); but Pottage must not be without Bacon,
nor a Sermon without Saint Austin: Concerning fruits, and pulse, observe that
new Bread and Grapes paint young Maids, and take away wrinckles from the old:
One Olive is God, two Silver, three Brass: If thou will have a good bit, eat a
gelded Medlar: The Pear which cr^es Rodrigo is not worth a rush; Others say,
That the Pear and the Woman which are silent are best: The Frenchman has a
good caution touching this fruit, That after Pear, the Wine or the Priest (to
confess thee before death); but after Melon, Wine is a Felon: Let there be
Salt with every thing, for it is a banquet for the Devil where there is no Salt:
Concerning Fennel and Rue, there be two notable Proverbs of them, viz That he
who sees Fennel and gathers it not, he is a Devil, and no Man; the other is,
That if the good Woman did know the virtue of Rue, she would look for it in the
night at Moonshine.

By observing these Rules one might by the strength and complacency of Nature
arrive to the age of an Elephant, whom the Naturalists observe to live longest
of any Terrestrial Creture, according to that gradual Proverb of longitude of
life's, viz. A Hedge lasts three years; a Dog three Hedges; a Horse three
Dogs; a Man three Horses; a Stagg three men; an Elephant three Staggs.

No more now, but that wishing you all health and gladness, I rest from my very
Bowels your Gretest Servant for though I am little, I would be a Hercules to
serve you.

I. H.

A CHAIN Of above Threescore old English PROVERBS, couched in one Familiar
LETTER, And conducing all to one Subject or Sense: Rendered into Spanish.
SIR,
I Have much Aquaintance, but few Friends, amongst whom I rank you for one of
the choicest; Therefore, although I am none of those that love to have an Oar
in every man's Boat; or such a busy body as deserves to be hit in the teeth,
that he should keep his breath to (...) his pottage; yet, you and I having eaten
a peck of Salt together, and having a hint that you are upon a business which
will make you, or mar you, viz. Marriage, I would wish you to look before (...)
leap, and make more then two words to^ burgain, in regard that a Man's best or
worst Fortune is a Wife.

It Is true, that Marriages are made in Heaven; It is also said, that Marriage and
Hanging go by destiny; But, if you are resolved to marry, marry a Shrew rather
than a Sheep, for a Foolis fullsom; yet you run a risk also in the other, for
a Shrew may so tie your Nose to the Grindstone, that the Gray Mare will prove
the better Horse: Moreover, There is another old said saw, That every one
knows how to tame a Shrew, but he who has her: If it be your fortune to meet
with such a one, she may chance put you to the charge of buying a long spoon;
for he must have a long spoon who will eat broth with the Devil.

Furthermore, If you are disposed to marry, the Spaniard would have you to
choose a wife upon the Saturday (in her old clothes) not upon Sunday (when she
is tricked up): But by all means do not fetch a Wife from Dunmow, for so you
may bring home two sides of a Sow; Nor from Westminster; For, they say, That he
who goes to Westminster for a Wife, to Paul's for a Man, and to Smithfield for a
Horse, may have a Jade to his Horse, a Knave to his Man, and a Wagg-tayl to his
Wife.

But if you needs must have a wife, let her be rather little than bigg, for of
two evils the least is to be chosen: yet there is a hazard in that also; For a
little pot is soon hot, and so she will be little and loud; If you give her
an Inch, she will take an Ell; She will always have a Rowland for your
Oliver, and two words for one; such a wife, though she be as tender as a
Parsons Lemman, yet she may prove a Wolf in a Lambs skin: Instead of a Rose
you will have a Burr; if you happ too meet with such a one, you may be put to
answer as he was, who having a damnable Scold to his Wife, and being asked by
Sir Thomas Badger, who recommended her unto him? he said, And old Courtier
Sir; What Courtier said Sir Thomas? 'Twas the Devil Sir: The Anagram may well
fit such a wife:

-- Uxor and Orcus idem. Moreover, Take heed of too-handsom a wife, for then
the Italian will tell you, she is likely not to be all your own; And so she
may bring you to your Horn-book again, or rather make you horn-madd, and then
you have brought your Hoggs to a fair market; yet take delight when you have
one to see your wife go hansom, and not to spoil her face: To that end, the
Spaniard would have women when the seson serves to feed upon Grapes and Bread,
for there is a saying, That Grapes and new Breed paints young women's faces, and
takes away wrinkles from the old.

But by all means take heed of a too costly and lavishing a wife, for so you
may quickly turn a Noble to Nine-pence, and com home by broken cross, She
will in a short time make hunger to dropp out at your no^e; She will th^ritten
a Mill post to a Pudden-prick: The Goose will drink as deep as the Gander, and
then when all is gone and n^thing left, What boots the Dagger with the Dudgeon
hest? The Wolf wilbee then still at your d^re, and the black Ox will tread on
your toe: Your neighbors will make mowes at you and say You are as wise as
Walthams Calf, who went n^ne mile to suck a Bu^l, and came home more thirsty
then when he went.

You must also be wary how you marry one who bath cast her Rider, lest you
^all into a Quagmire wherein another was lost, I mean, a Widow, for so you
wilbee subject to have a dead-mans head put often into your d^sh: Touching the
complexion of your wife, the Spaniard holds Black to be the wholsom'st, for
he has a saying, Muger negra trementina en ella; A black Woman has
Turpentine in her. The Frenchman is for the Brown, Fille brunette gaye and
net, A brown Less is gay, and cleanly; but they both will tell you, That
touching a re^d hair'd, or bearded Woman, you must salute them a hundred paces
off.

Lastly, Take heed by all means of doting so far upon any Female as to marry
her for mere affection; It Is true, That one hair of a Woman will draw more then
a hundred yoke of Oxen, yet mere Affection, they say, is but blind Reason, and
there are more Mayds in the world then Malkin: It Is also true, That in love there
is no lack; yet it is as true, That nothing has no savor, nor can any thing be
bought in the Market without Money: There must be Suett, as well as Water and
Oat-meal, to make a Pudding: They that marry for mere love, may have merry
nights but mournful days; In this case, It Is better to buy a quart of Milk
for a penny, then to keep a Cow; And to follow the Italians advice, viz. Commend
the Sea, but keep thy self on the Shore; Commend the Hills, but keep thy self
on the Plain; Commend a Wedded life, but keep thy self still a Bachelor:
According to another wise Proverb, He who marries, does well, but he who
marries not, does better: Whereunto alludes a third, That next to a single
life, the married is best; I will conclude with another, Honest men use to
marry, but Wise men not.

When you read this; I know you wilbee apt to say, That a Fools bolt is soon
shot, or cry out, Wit whither willt thou? Yet though I am none of the seven
Sages, I can look as far into a Millstone as another; And you know that the
stander by sees oftimes more then the gamster.

What I write, is the language of a Friend, and could I stead you any way
herin, I would do it with as good a will as ever I came from School, for I am
such a friend that will shine with you in the dark; And to conclude with the old
Roman Proverb, I am yours Usque ad aras, Yours to the Altar.

I. H.

The same made Spanish.
Cadena de mas de sesenta Refranes Ingleses, Puestos en una CARTA FAMILIAR,
Concurrientes todos A un Sentido, y rendidos en Castellano.
Senor,
TEngo Conocidos muchos, Amigos pocos, enter los quales estimo a vm. Vno de los
mas Escogidos; por tanto, aunque yo no sea del numero de aquellos, qui quieren
tener remo en cada barca, ni tal entremetidor que meresca que le den en los
dientes, que guardasse el aliento para enfriar su caldo, Toda via vm. y yo
aviendo comido juntos un celemin de sal, y oyendo correr la voz que vm esta
empenado en un negocio que podra hazerle o des^^zerle viz. Casamiento, yo le
aconsejaria de mirar bien antes que saltar, y que aya mas de dos palabras a t^l
concierto, porque el casarse es la mayor Dicha o desdicha que pueda acae^er a
un hombre.

Verdades que Casamientos se hazen en el Cielo, Tambien se dize que Casamientos
y ahorcamientos andan por Destino, pero si qued^ resuelto a Casarse, Casese
antes con vna baladrona que con vna bova, porque las mansas en demasia son
enfadosas. Toda via corre riesgo con la baladrona, porque ella le podra atalle
las narizes de tal suerte Que la vaca negta sera mas brava que el toro; Mas
desto, dizen que Cada vno sabe domar vna Baladrona si no el que la tiene por
muger, si a caso se casare con tal, le sera for coso de comprar vna cuchara
larga, porque dizen que es menester un cucharon largo para comer con el demonio.

Allende de esto si es menester que se case no se vaya por muger a (...),
porque assi podar llevar a su casa dos lados de puerca; ni a Vestminsterio,
porque quien v^ a Vestminster por vna muger, a san Pablo por servidor, y a
Smithfield por un cavallo, corre peligro de tener un Haron por cavallo, un
picaro por servidor, y vna puta por muger.

Pero, si ay necessidad que teng^ muger, que sea antes Chiquita que Grande,
porque de dos males el menor se ha de eligir, Toda via corre riesgo con tal,
porque las pucheras pequenas luego se calientan, y assi fera chiqu^ta y
Gridadora, En dandola vna pulgada, ella tomara v na vara, Tiendra siempre Un
Roldan contra su Rodulfo, y dos palabras por vna: Tal muger aunque sea tan
tierna que la manceb^ de un clerigo, toda via se^a quica vna loba en pellejo de
cordera; En lugar de vna Rosa rendra vna Espina: Si los Hados le dieren tal
muger, la mesma respuesta servira a vm, que dio el, qui teniendo vna
endemoniada parlera, y fiendo preguntado por Don Tomas Badger quien se la avia
dado por muger, dixo, un Cortesano viejo me la dio, que Corresano replico Don
Tomas? Era el Demonio, Senor; El donoso Anagramma quadraria bien con tal muger.

-- Vxor and Orcus idem Mas de esto, tenga cuenta que su muger no sea linda en
estremo, porque el Italiano le dira que tal no puede ser toda su ya, y assi
ella podra reduzirle otra vez a su librito cornudo, o aua de hazerle cornudo y
frenetico, y entonces y^a con sus puercos a un lindo mercado: No embargante
esto en teniendo muger deleytese de guardarla linda y limpia con buena cara; A
este efeto que coma con la sazon pan y uvas, porque dizen Que pan reziente y
uvas a las mocas ponen mudas, y a las Viejas quitan las arrugas.

Sobre todo guardese bien de vna muger desperdiciadora, porque en aquel modo un
doblo^ deviend^a luego diez maravedis; E^la le hara passar por la cruz rota;
Ha^a ^a hambre gotear fuera de sus narizes: La gansa bevera tan hondo que el
Ansaron; y entonces la pobreza dara priessa; Porque donde sacan y no pon luego
llegan al hondon; el lobo se hallara a puerta, y el buey negro dara vozes; Sus
vezinos diran Hideputa, soys tan sabio que el bezerro de Waltam, qui fue nueve
mi llas por tetar un toro, y bolviose mas sediento que no era antes.

Tambien ha de guardarse de esposar la hembra que ha ya derribado su
Cavalgador, de miedo que no se cayga en un Atolladero adonde perecio un otro,
es a saber Vna Biuda, porque en esta manera tendra cada rato la cabeca de un
muerto echada en su plato: Tocante la Complexion de su esposa, el Espanol dize
que muger negra trementina en ella; El Frances es por la morenita, porque las
Morenitas son locanas y limpias; Pero el vno y el otro le diran, muger barbuda,
o con cabellos roxos, saludalas cien passos lexos.

En conclusion quardese bien de no dexarse transportar, o Empenarse por la sola
aficion de alguna hembra viviente; Verdad es que un pelo de muger tira mas que
cien bueyes, Toda via la Aficion sola no es otro sino Razon ciega; por tanto
sepa que Mas mocas ay en el mundo que Marguilla; Tambien es Verdad, Que en Amor
no ay mengua; mas otra verdad ay que nada no tiene sabor, Los Casamientos no se
hazen de hongos sino de ducados redondos, porque en la placa no se puede
comprar nada sin dinero; por hazer vna longanica es menester sebo con sangre;
Los que se casan por pura aficion podran aver noches plazenteras, mas dias
pesados: En este caso mejor es comprar un acumbre de leche con su placa, que
guardar vna vaca; y conformarse al consejo del Italiano, Alaba la mar mas tente
en Tierra firma; Alaba los montes mas tente en la vega, Alaba la vida casada
mas tente Saltero; Tambien ay otro, El quien casa haze bien, mas quien no casa
haze mejor; A este se puede anadir un tercero, Despues de la vida soltera, la
casada es la mejor; Concluyre, Que los hombres de bien suelen casarse los,
savios no.

En leyendo esto bien se yo, que vm. dira que el virote des Loco presto
sesolta; Toda via, Aunque yo no sea del numero de los siere Savios, bien se
quantos son cinco, y muchas vezes el vee masque el Jugador.

Lo que yo escrivo aqui, es el lenguaje de Amigo, y si podria serville en algo
lo haria de tan buena gana como jo vine jamas de la Escuela, porque yo soy tal
amigo que luzira con el en las tinieblas; En suma, concluyre con aquel Refran
Romano suyo soy usque ad aras, hasta los altares.

I H.

OF THE Portugues Language, OR SVB-DIALECT, etc.
AS Scotland is to England, so Portugal may be said to be in relation to
Spain, in point of Speech; The Scott speaks somewhat broader, and more gaping;
so does the Portugues compared to the Castilian, and shorter far: for whereas
the Castilian out of an innated humor of gravity is addicted to long-traind
words, the Portugues does use to curtayl diverse of them, some in the middle, some
in the end; But to know the main difference betwixt them, take these Instances.

The Portugues is not much affected to l or n; touching the first, he turns
her to r, the snarling letter, as the Philosopher calls her: For example,
whereas the Castilian says Inglatierra England, he says Ingra^erra; Noble
Ingles, a Noble Englishman, Nobre Ingres; Flamenco a Flemin, Framengo in
Portugues; Blando soft brando; Blanco white branco; Hermoso fair fermoso;
Complido finishd, comprido; Emplear to employ, Empregar; Flaco weak, fraco;
Diablo the Dievil, Diabro o Diabo, etc.

Besides, when ll beginns a word in Spanish the Portugues turns them to ch; As,
Lamar to call chamar; Llama a flame, chama; Llaga a wound, chaga; Lleno full,
Cheo whereby the n. also is lost; Luna the Moon, lue: Llegar allegar to com or
approach, chegar achegar; Llave a key, chiave; Ll^ro weeping, choro: Luvia
Rain, chuva.

Yet the Portugues is not so well affected to ch, when he finds it in a
Spanish word, for then he turns it to yt commonly, as noche night, noyte; Ocho
eight, oyto; Pecho the breast, peyto; Provecho profit, proveyto, etc.

In diverse words he leaves l quite out, when he finds it about the middle, as
Delante before, diante; Cielo Heven, ceo; Candela a Candle, candea; Mala ill,
maa; As Man noyte y faz Filinba, An ill night and maka a girl.

The Portugues likes not also the aspiration ^ in the beginning of a word but
turns it to f, whereby his language comes nearer (in many words) to the Latin,
which is the Mother of both: as, whereas the Spaniard says Hazer to do, the
Portugues says Fazer; Hado Fate, Fado; Horca the Gallows, Forca; Hazana an
exploit, Fazanba; Hacha a Torch, facha; Hablar to speak, ^^lar; H^rno an Oven,
forno; Hormig^ an Ant, formiga; Holgar gandeo folgar; Hidalgo a Gentleman,
fidal^^, etc.

Note also that where the Portugues finds the throaty j, or ishota in a word,
he turns it to lh, As, Abeja a Be, abelha; Oveja a sheep, ovelha; Ojo the Ey,
olho; Aparejar to prepare, aparelhar; Trabajo toil, travalho; etc. But it is to
be observed, that those words in Portugues must be pronouncd as if an i
followd; As, Abelha a Be, abelhia; Travalho toil, travalhio, etc.

Nor is the Portugues much affected to the letter n, for where he finds her in
the middle of a Spanish word, he quite cutts her off; As, for ^adena a chain,
he says cadea; Amonestar to warn, amoestar; Cenar to supp, cear; Corona a
Crown, coroa; Freno a bridle, freo; Buena good, bo^; Mano a hand* mao, etc.

Moreover the Portugues turns Spanish Dissyllables into Monosyllables; As,
Tener to hold, ter; Venir to com, vir; Poner to putt, por; Color color, cor;
Dolor grief, dor; Mayor a Mayor, mor, etc.

The Portugues also turns oftentimes Spanish Trissyllables into Dissillables;
As, Menester need, mister; Ganado a flock, gado; Generar to engender, gerar;
General General, geral: Obispo a Bishop, Bispo, etc.

Furthermore where the Spanish words end in bre, the Portugues turns it to me,
or mem; As, Costumbre custom, costume; Hombre a man, homem; Nombre a name,
nomem; Cumbre the top, cume, etc.

The Portugues also turns the Spanish ble into vel; As, Possible possible,
possivel; Insufrible unsufferable, insufrivel; Mudable changeable, mudavel;
Durable durable, duravel, etc.

The Portugues makes also Trissyllables of Spanish Quatrosyllables often; As,
S^lameme only, somente* Mahamente ill, mamente; Enemigo an Enemy, imigo, etc.
Yet sometimes the Portuges adds a syllable more; As, Duvida to the Spanish
duda, a doubt; Duvidosamente for dudosament, doubtfully; Duo^ for dos, two, etc.

The Portugues also adds e to Spanish words ending in d; As, Mocidade for
mocedad, youth; A^istad friendship, amiz^de; Liberted liberty, libertade;
Liberalidad liberality, liberalidade; Pieded piety, piedede, etc.

Now, Though the Costilian, and the Lusitani^n language be both derived from
the Latin, the first immediately, there oath mediatly by means of the Gastilian,
whereof she is a Dialect, and thereby a subdialect to the Latin; yet she has
diverse words for which she is beholden to neither, nor to the Morisco also,
whereof I thought it worth the while to give a particular Catalog.

A Short DICTIONARY OR, CATALOG Of such Portuges Words That have no Affinity
with the SPANISH.
Portugues, Spanish, English Abafar Garrotar To strangle Abalroar Pelear To
fight Abalo do animo Desaiossiego Trouble of mind Abegaon Rustico A swayne
Abelhaon Colmena A hive of bees Abelhudamente Appressuro Samente Hastily
Abencoer Bendezir To bless Acamar Enfermarse To be sick Agastar Provocar To
provoke Aginha Presto Speedily Agoacento Humedo Watery Alagar Deribar To
overthrow Alapardarse Esconderse To hide himself Alardo Nombramiento de
soldados A list of Soldiers Alar Socorrer To succor Alcunha Sobrenombre A
surname Alem Mas de esto Moreover Alfayate Sa^^re A tailor Alfaqueque Mensajero
A messenger Alvacento Blanquecino Whitish Alvela Milan A kite Aniae Alfiler A
pin^ Amuado Obstinado Obstinat Andorinha Golondrina A swallow A Podar Paragonar
To compan Apupar Aullar To houl Arreceo Miedo Fear Atlhar Impedir To hinder
Atasanero Panadero. A bakee. Bacoro Puerca A sow Bafo Aliento The breath Bafio
Hediondez A stink Balisa Carcel A gaol Baque Cayda A fall Barca Cofre A coffer
Bicho Gusano A worm Bragante Ruyn Lewd Breu Pez Pitch Bugio Mono An Ape Buraco
Aguijero A hole Burrifar Aguar To sprinkle Cachopo Mocito A little boy Cadela
Perra A bitch Canga Yugo A yoke Cardume Muchedumbre A multitude Crestaon Cabron
A goat Carpinha Lamentacion Lamentation Caranca Mala cara An ill face Caramelo
Yelo Ice Cavidarse Guardarse To beware Colheyta Cosecha The harvest Coceyra
Comecon The itch Cocegas Coxquillas Tickling Cossar Aranar To soratch Coyma
Dolor Pain Cafra Yunque An Anvil Cedo Presto Quickly Ceysa Cosecha Harvest
Chambaon Tonto A dullard Cheyrar Oler To smell Decepar Romper To break Derrancar
Corromper To corrupt Desazo Ociosidad Sloth Desdobrar Exprimir To express
Desmicar Aboler To abolish Desmanchar Quebranter To break Devesa Selva A Wood
Dia azinhago Dia Escuro A black day Dia de Hotem Air Yesterday Dianteyra
Frente The forehead Discante Lalyra The harp Doudo Bobo A fool ELche Apostata
An Apostat Embevedarse Emborracharse To be drunk Emblecar Enganar To cosen
Embicar Ofender To offend Embel^r Cunar To rock Emborcar Invertir To invert
Empecilho Obstaculo A stopp Emperrar Porfiar To be obstinat Emposta Ayuda Help
E^^^mpar Obtruder To obtrude Encuica Noticia Knowledge Endoudecer Enloquecer To
grow foolish Enfastiar Enfadar To trouble Engeytar Menospreciar To cast away
Ensejo Ocasion Occasion Entraz Carbunculo A Carbuncle Entulbar Entonalar To
fill up Escavedar Huyr To fly away Esfalsar Cansar To tire Esmechar Herir To
wound Esqueho Tuerto Crooked Espacar Alargar To lengthen Esmolar Dar limosna To
give alm^ Esmera Perfecto Perfect Esmoga Synagoga A synagog Esquecimiento
Olvido Forgetfulness Esterqueyra Muladar A donghil Estulagem Venta An hostry
Estabalhoado Arrebadato Rash Estrondo. Alboroto A noise FAim Lanca A lance Fala
Voz A voice Faisca Centella A flash Fanar Costar To cut Fanchono Mugeril
Effeminat Faqua Cuchillo A knife Fanquey Lencero A linnendraper Fanga Hanega A
bushel Farelo Salvado Bran Febre Delgago Slender Felugem Hollin Soot Felinha
Hijuela A little Girl Figo Lampo Precoz Too soon ripe Fiquar Quedar To stay
Focinho Boca The mouth Folga Gozo Mirth Fraga Pena A rock Franga Polastra A
pullet Fracayro Putaniero A wencher Furna Caverna A den Fuzilar. Relampaguear
To lighten GAbo Loor Praise Gabar Loar To praise Gafern Lepra The leprosy
Gaguo Tartamudo A ^^utterer Galbo Ramo A branch Geyto Ademan de cuerpo Gesture
Gear Yelo Ice Gielho Rodilla The knee HOntem Air Yesterday Huyvar Aullar To
howl IAnella Ventana A window Jentar Comida A diner Ilharga Lado The side
Incar Propagar To propagat Ingoas Las buas The Pox Lapa Cueva A Cave Leycenco
Ladroncillo A little thief Lembrar Acordar To remember MAchado Seguar An ax
Magao Congoja Grief Madraco Picaro A Rogue Mamote Lechoncillo A sucking pigg
Maminher Esterilidad Barrenness Marral heyro Vellaco A cuming knave Madioso
Liberal Liberal Matiz Retrato A picture Matreyro Zorro Crafty Mealherro Casa de
tesoro Exchequer Morno Tibio Lukewarm Morgado Primogenito The first born Mouco
Sordo deaf ORate Mentecato A madman Outiva Arrebatadamente. Rashly PAyxaon
Ensado Trouble Pancado Bofeton A Blow Pao Madera Wood Porolento Mohoso Musty
Patife Desembuelto A loose fellow Pezinho Piojo A lowse Pelouro Bala A bullet
Peneyra Harnero A sive Perto Cerca Near Pinga Gota A drop Pissa Carajo A man's
yard Pomba Paloma A pigeon Povo Pueblo The people Presunto Pernil A gamm^^^
REfenn Caucion A pledge Rilhar Roer To gnaw Roldar Tener centinela To keep watch
Rolda Centinela The watch SAloya Rustica A Country woman Sanden Frenetico Madd
Saluco Suspiro A sigh Sisa Pecho A tax Soada Fama A rumor TAmancas Alpargatas
Wodden shoos Tamalaves Un ratico A little white Tarefa Obra A task Tayvar
Rabiar To rage Tolo Necio A fool Traquinada Ruydo An uproar Trevas Tiniblas The
dark VAlhacouto Refugio A refuge Colhor Cuchara A spoone Ambicar Tropesar To
stumble Calleyro Granja A barn Suncho Hinojo Fenell Sedo De manana Early
Sargueyro Saulze A willow Radea Carcel A gaol Zombar Motejar. To geere

The Portuges in nombring five days of the week differs from the Castilian,
and all other, but it agrees with the Roman, Missal, As Monday, Twesday,
Wenesday, Thursday, Friday are called Segunda, Terca, Quarta, Quinta, Sexta,
Feyra; But saturday and Sunday are called Sabado y Doming^.

THus have I given a short Essay of the Lusitanian Tongue, which, by observing
the differential precepts pointed at before, may be attained with much ease by
any who has but an indifferent knowledge of the Spanish from whom she is derivd
but become somewhat more rugged; so that it may be said, as a Castilian was
making of a Toledo blade, a Portuges came, and taking up the filings he made a
Tongue of them; Indeed, it must be granted that the Castilian is in more esteem,
yea, in Portugal it self, where the best sort of the Gentry and Merchants speak
it, with Church and cloysterd men; most of their Sermons, their musical sonets,
and madrigals, with their stage plays being in Spanish. Insomuch that as it is
a saying in Italy, Lingua Toscana, in Lingua Romana; So there is one among
them, Lingoa Castelhana em b^ca Portugueza; The Spaniard has so little esteem
of it, That he says there is but one good word in all the Portugues Tongue,
and that is Saudades which is a large word, and a kind of Amphibolon, for it
signifies many things, as Tenho mil saud^des de vm. I have a thousands desires
of you; Muero de saudades, I die for sorrows, etc.

Concerning the preceding Spanish Grammar, there went more o isle, and labor to
raise up (as I may say) that little Castle of Castile, wherein an Ingenious
Student may find not only a survey of the Language, but he may take livry and
saisin thereof in a short time; To which purpose we have consulted the best
Artists upon this Subject as Miranda, and Salazar; together with Francios^ni
the Florentin, and Oudin the Frenchman, with others who have laudably taken
pains herin, and are more extensive in the conjugating of some Verbs: For as
soon as the idea of this work entered into the imagination, the first thing we
designd was brevity, yet without making it^ subject to Lamenesse^ or Obscurity.

-- Nec dum Brevis esse Labaro
Obscurus, vel mancus ero --
Liberorum Cerebri Quintus Post Quadraginta. J. H.

FINIS.

