A DISCOURSE OF THE EMPIRE, AND OF The Election of A King of the ROMANS, the
greatest Business of Christendom now in Agitation. AS ALSO Of the College of
Electors, their particular Interests, and who is most likely to be the next
EMPEROVR.

(...).

J. Senesco, non Segnesco. H.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Charles Webb, at the Bores-head in S. Paul's
Churchyard 1658.

The Sum and substance of the ensuing Discourse as it is divided to seven
Sections.
THe proeme, showing the Motives that induced the Author to undertake this task.
The first Section,
Treats of the first Rise of the Roman Empire, and of the sundry Rotations, or
Retrogradations of Government that happened in Rome, etc.
The second Section,
Treats of the Septemvirat, or the Electors of the Roman Empire, their
primitive Constitution, and Power; with their precedence, and offices, etc.
The third Section,
Treats of the style, and title of Emperor, or Caesar, and of the King of the
Romans, etc.
The fourth Section,
Treats of the Diet, or Imperial Parliament, and the Members thereof, with the
Division of Germany, and the strength of the Empire, etc.
The fifth Section,
Consists of a parralel 'twixt the Empire passed, and the present, with the
causes first and last of the declination thereof, etc.
The sixth Section,
Treats of the enlargement of the College of Electors, from seven, to an Octum
virat; And of the Contest that is now 'twixt the Count Palatin of the Rhin, and
the Duke of Bavaria, touching the Vicarship of the Empire, etc.
The seventh Section,
Consists of some reflexes made upon the present conjuncture of things, and the
political Condition of Germany, with a conjecture who is likely to be King of
the Romans, and consequently the next Emperor, etc. A Corollary.
Pauca in multa diffundere est opus Ingenii, Multa in pauca digerere est opus
Artis. A DISCOURSE OF THE EMPIRE, IN A LETTER Sent lately to a Noble Personage.
My Lord,
THe Election of a King of the Romans, and consequently of a Western Emperor,
being now the Gran Business in agitation, and whereon the eyes not only of all
Christendom, but of other Princes (as well Turk as Tartar) are more earnestly
fixed than at other times, because of so long a vacancy, and a kind of demurr;
As also for the opposition that France, with all her confederatts, are like to
make for secluding, and putting by the House of Austria (especially the young
King of Hungary) wherein the German Empire has continued above two hundred and
odd years.

And whereas that after some loose extemperall communications lately upon this
subject, your Lordshipp desired much to be informed of the present estate and
interests of Germany, together with the power and primitive constitution of the
Septemvirat, or the College of Electors, with other reflexes upon that point;
Being returned home, I fell a rummaging my old papers, and such remarques that
I gathered when I was employed in some parts of the Empire, and to comply with
your Lordshipps desires (which shall always be as binding to me as Decrees) I
have digested into this short ensuing Discourse, consisting of seven Sections.

The first Section.
Treating of the first Rise of the Roman Empire, and the sundry Rotations, or
Retrogradations of Goverments that happened in Rome, etc.
NOw for a cleerer illustration of things, and a more regular proceeding, it is
not amiss to fetch in matters from their fundamental (for the furthest way
about is sometimes the nearest way home specially in the reserches of Truth.)
And to do this, we must go to Rome, a City that has had as many strange
traverses of fortune, and turns of Government, as any other upon Earth, having
bin eight several times ravished and ransacked by sundry warlike Nations. First
by Brennus the bold Britain, then by Alaric the Goth, afterward by Ge^sericus
the Vandale, then twice by To^ila the Hun, after him by the Moors and
Saracens, then by three Christian Emperors, viz. by Henry the fourth, Otho the
third, and Charles the fifth when his General the Duke of Bourbon breathed his
last in scaling her walls, (and she was lately like to receive an ill-favored
shock by the Duke of Parma) yet she never fell sans recource as they say, or
was ever laid so flat upon her back, but she recovered herself, and raised up
her crest again, whence it may be inferred, that an extraordinary Providence,
and Tutelar Genius does attend that City; It Is true that the translating of the
Imperial Court by Constantine, to Bizantium (which he christened afterward with
his own name) was fatal to Rome, when the glory of the Tyber and Tyrrhene Sea
passed over to the Hellespont, yet a Spiritual Head preserved her still in some
luster, In so much that when the Pope came to be her Master, she might have bin
said to have bin reduced to her first Principles, and to have passed from one
Shepherd to another, viz. from Romulus, to Sylvester; But there were a world of
vicissitudes and revolutions of goverments intervened, and passed between; Her
primitive, and original way of Ruling was by Kings, but, after a hundred and
forty years continuance, she surfetted upon that, which surfett may be said to
have proceeded from the Peeples wantones rather than from Tarquins lust; Then,
she was governed a while by Consulls, so called a Consulends carrying a memento
of their duty is their names; Then followed the Decemvirs who were put down for
the same vice that destroyed the Kings After that, the Supremacy was delated to
two Tribunes; Then it revolved to Consulls, then to Tribunes again, b^^ more
than two, which lasted a good tract of time above seventy years, then came
Consuls in again the third time, after that Dictators, until Caius Julius
Caesar's time who was the first perpetual Dictator, and a little after the
first Emperor, though it cost him dear, for he might be said to have cimented
the foundation of the Roman Empire with his own blood being murdered in the
Senate by small contemptible tools, yet it remained in his progeny to six
descents, viz. to Domitius Nero.

Thus after so many rotations or retrogradations of goverments, and a kind of
cushion dance of several kind of Rulers, the Imperial was Established at last,
and the successive Emperors were used to be chosen by the Senate, and then
saluted by the Army; But afterward the Legionary Soldiers and Pretorian bands
made Emperors sub hasta in the field, and Galba was the first who was chosen
so, and that with the consent of the Senate; now, it was the most unpolitique
act that ever the Roman Senate committed, which proved so fatal to so many of
the following Emperors who held not their security as much as their life's from
the Soldiers, which took them away at pleasure; for after that the Election
passed from the Senate to the Sword, there were above thirty Emperors that were
put to violent deaths, and some of them very tragical, four murdered
themselfs, many also of those that were adopted Caesar's, and designed to
succeed in the Empire were untimely made away, being raised to that pitch that
they might perish the sooner, as an Author says.

But to go more punctually to work we will muster up here most of those
Emperors that came to immature and violent deaths; Julius Caesar was
assassinated in the Senate. Octavius the first Augustus (called so ab augendo
Imperium, from enlarging the Territories of the Empire) was made away by his
wife Livia; Tiberius by Macro; Caligula by Cassius Chereas; Claudius poisoned
by his wife Agrippina; Nero and Otho slew themselfs; Galba and Vitellius were
done away by the Soldiers; Domitian by Stephanus; Commodus by Letus, and
Electus; Pertinax and Iulianus by the Praetorian bands; Caracalla by Macrinus
command; Macrinus, Heliogabalus, Alexander, Maximinus, Maximus, and Balbinns by
the Soldiers; Hostilianus by Gallus and Aemilianus, and they by the Legions;
Valerianus died in Parthia; Florianus waas ccessary to his own death;
Aurelianus murdered by his own meniall servants; Gallienus, Quintillus,
Tacitus and Probus by the militia, etc.

Now, that which heighned the Spirits of the Soldiery to such infolences, was
the largesses, and increase of salary, that the Praetorian bands used to
receave from the new Emperor, which pernicious kind of bounty was begun first
by Claudius Caesar, and is now practiced by the Turk: for evry new Sultan uses
to enhance the pay of the Spahies, and Ianizaries to so many aspers more for
fear of mutinieng, which in time may be the bane of the Ottoman Empire, for
such has bin the presumption already of the said Ianizaries of late years
that they have murdered two of their Emperors in less than five and twenty
years.

But in the Roman Empire the military bands came to such an exorbitancy of
power, that sometimes they did prostitute, and put the Empire to sale by
public outcry, as we read how Sulpitianus offered twenty Sestertiums (which
are near upon eight pounds sterling apeece) to evry Soldier, but Iulianus
raised the market higher, and out-bad him; But Constantine the great (the first
Christian Emperor and a Britain born) found out the policy to regulat, and
lessen the Praetorian bands, till at last he quite casheerd them, at least
reduced them to such a number that they could do no hurt.

The removal of the Imperial Court to Constantinople, though it proved
advantageous to the Bishop of Rome, who had the City transferred unto him by
way of a pious donation from Constantine about his departure from Italy to the
Levant, as the Church Annals affirm, though some by way of drollery, and
derogation to the Pope do say, that he has the same right to Rome, as Venice
has to the dominion of the Adriatique Gulf, and that they are both inserted
in one patent, though that patent cannot be found upon any record; I say though
this removal was an advantage to the Bishop of Rome, yet it proved very
prejudicial to Italy in general, and to all the Western parts of the Empire,
for many rough-hewn Northern Nations, that desired to come nearer the Sun, took
the advantage hereby to rush in, not only to Italy, and harasse her so often,
but like so many fwarms of Locusts they covered other Countries, (And some
feared the like of the late Swedish Army, had they prosper'd in Poland) The
Huuns took such firm footing that they gave the name to Hungary; The Longobards
to Insubria, and the territoties about Milan; The Goths and Vandales piercing
the very heart of France overcame Spain, and denominated Andaluzia, Insomuch
that the present King of Spain does acknowledge himself to be de la sangre de
los Godos, to descend from the Goths, whereby some would infer that he is a
German not only by extraction from the House of Austria, but also from the
Gothique race, who were a branch of the Teutons, or Germans, taking the word in
the largest sense; but more properly may Germany challenge the French, and
English to be her Children, the first coming from the Territories of
Franconia, the other from the lower Circle of Saxony whereof they bear the names
( Saissons) among the Welsh and Irish to this day.

But to proceed from the main subject, the Eastern part of the Roman Empire
bore up many ages after Constantine with some luster in the Levant, though the
Northwest parts suffered many Eclipses, being so pitifully dilacerated, and
torn by the fury of foreign Nations; Now the chiefest cause thereof may be
ascribed to the remotenes of the Emperors person at Constantinople, who by
reason of so incommunicable a distance could not reach a timely hand to assist
them with auxiliaries; But about the year eight hundred a new kind of
auspicious star appeer'd in the West, which was Charlemain, whom the Germans do
claym to be their Compatriot, though they go a great way back and fetch him
from Pharamond, or the first race of the Kings who invaded Gallia, and by way
of conquest called it France.

Charlemain was the Gran-child of Charles Martell, who being Maire of the
Palace, or chief Steward and Surintendent of the Kings Court got his Son Pepin
to be crowned King of France over the head of Chilperic his liege lord and
master, Martel giving out that he did not follow the ambition of his heart, but
the inspirations of heaven in this act; So the Scotts stories tell us that the
Family of the Stewards came to be Kings of Scotland by taking their Surnames
from their office, for as Charles Martell was in France, so the first of them
was Steward of the Kings Court in Scotland.

Pepin though a little man did great exploits, for he crossed the Alps, and
recovered Lombardy where a race of Goths had bin Kings above 200 years, And at
his return to France conferred the Exarcbatship, or Vicegerency of Italy upon
the Bishop of Rome.

Charlemain his Son did higher achievments, for he clammer'd ore the Pyreneans
and debell'd the Saracens in Spain, discomfited the Saxons, and confirmed the
conquest of Italy, so that he was solemnly saluted Emperor of the West at Rome
by the general voice, and wonderful acclamations of the peeple, and so
confirmed by the Popes benediction ( Leo the 4th. on Christmas day.

Nicehporus in Constantinople stormed extremely at first there should be another
Emperor besides himself, alleging that he was the sole Roman Emperor, and
accordingly used to send his Exarques, or Viceroyes to govern Italy, but not
knowing how to remedy it, he complied at last with Charlemagne who then kept
his Court in Germany, where he died, and was buried at Aquisgrave, leaving
Ludovicus his son to succeed him, who partitioning the Empire afterward twixt
his three Sonns did wonderfully enervat and enfeeble it, as a great River cut
out into many arms, and sluices must needs grow weaker and shallower in her
first bed.

Now, though Charlemain was an extraordinary heroique, and a Magnanimous
gallant man as his actions tell us, yet his children for four descents
together did strangely degenerat, and proved but poor spirited men, His Son
Lewis was called the Gentle for his soft nature, Charles the Bald was of a
baser alloy than he, Lewis the stuttring inferior to both, Charles the gross
the last Emperor and King of France died a most disastrous death; After him
the Empire was soly devolved to the Germans; Charlemain and his Dependants
enjoyed it 118 years, then it came to the House of Saxony who held it 117
years, The House of Suevia 110, other families (whereof the House of the Count
Palatine of the Rhin, and of Nassaw were sometimes) held the Empire 112 years,
until it came to the House of Austria, who have held it longer than any one
Family ever did.

Now, there is a remarquable Tradition how the House of Austria came to that
comble of greatness, which they report thus,

Rodulph Earl of Habspurg returning homeward fromhunting one day overtook a
Priest that had the Eucharist under his habit, coming from visiting a sick
body, The Earl finding he was tired alighted, and helped the Priest a horsback,
and holding the bridle in his hand waited upon him as a lacquay till he came to
the Church, and replac'd the Host upon the Altar, The Priest sang an
extraordinary Mass (where the Earl devoutly attended all the while) and
pronouncing the Benediction at the end, he crossed the Earl, saying that for so
signal, and a sweet Act of piety, His House should be one of the greatest, and
most glorious Families that ever was upon Earth, which proved true, for a while
after not only the German Empire, but the East, and West Indies, with all the
Dominions of Spain, whereof some are the the other side of the world, came to that
Family.

And now, my Lord, I will proceed to the Septemvirat, or College of Electors
(whereof I promised an account in the beginning) whose Creture the Emperor may
be said to be, for it is their breath that makes him.

The second Section,
Touching the Septemvirat, or Electors of the Roman Emperor, their primitive
Constitution, and power with their precedence, and offices, etc.
FOr two hundred years after Charlemain, who was the Restaurator of the
Occidental parts of the Roman Monarchy (which had bin so pitifully shattered
by the irruption of sundry barbarous peeple, as was said before) and therefore
meritoriously styled, the first Emperor of the West, I say for a long time
there was no certain or regular way of Election, and the customs was that the
Emperor regnant used to nominate, and recommend his Son, or nearest Kinsman to
the German Princes, but in the yeerabout 1000 after the Incarnation, Rome began
to raise up her crest, and brussle, by redemanding and challenging the Election
of the Emperor, alleging, 'twas a prerogative of Hers de jure antiquo; The
raking up of the ashes of this old Right, was like to kindle a great fire on
both side of the Hills, for the Italian Princes stuck to Her in the claym; But
Otho the third a prudent Prince found a way to prevent it, by procuring a Cosen
of his to be created Pope by the name of Gregory the fifth, who being a German
born, was so favorable and indulgent of his own Country, that he confirmed the
choosing of the VVestern Emperor to the German Nation, but the Romans, with
some Italian Princes stomaching heerat, they deposed Gregory, and chose the
Bishop of Placentia Pope in his place, by the title of John the ninth: Otho
took this in so great indignation, that he suddenly raised an Imperial Army,
clammer'd over the Alps, and made his way by the point of the Sword toward
Rome, which opened her Gates unto him without much difficulty, so he seaz'd
upon the person of the new Pope, disoculated that counterfeit light of the
Church by plucking out his eyes, and replac'd Gregory the fifth his Cousin in
Saint Peter's chair with triumph.

Otho being victoriously returned to Germany, convoqu'd the chiefest Princes,
and proposed unto them the multiplicity of inconveniences, encumbrance, and
causes of confusion, that the uncertain, and unestablish'd way of choosing an
Emperor, and his immediate Successor, was subject unto, therefore he desired
them to consider of a more regular way of Election; so after many mature
deliberations, and bandings of opinions they fell upon settling a Septemvirat,
viz. seven Princes, in whom a plenary power should be invested, to elect an
Emperor, and his next Successor; Herupon the College of Electors was founded,
and constituted, but they must be all within the German pale; Addresses were
made to the Pope about this business, who not only approved hereof, but was
ready to confirm the Act, provided that three of the said Electors were
Ecclesiastiques; So the Western Empire was made purely Elective, giving
encouragements thereby for Princes of Virtue and merit to aspire.

Herupon the Archbishop of Mentz, the Archbishop of Collen, and the Archbishop
of Tryers were chosen for the three Spiritual, and for the secular the
Palsgrave of the Rhin, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquis of Brandenburg, and in
case their suffrages were equal, the Duke of Bohemia (made about 80 years after
King) was chosen to have a session among them, and whom he named of those two
that they had elected, should be Emperor, so that the Bohemian might be called
rather an Umpire than an Elector in these transactions.

This great Act was solemnly voted, and enrolled in the Imperial Chamber, and
some hundred of years after 'twas ratified and fortified by the famous Aurea
Bulla, the Golden Bull, who regulated matters more punctually touching the
Offices, the Precedencies, and other particulars reflecting upon the said
Electors. The Archbishop of Mentz was made High-Chancellor of Germany, He of
Colen High-Chancellor of Italy, and he of Tryers High-Chancellor of France; The
Duke of Saxony was made sacri imperii Archi-Marascallus, Lord high Marshall of
the sacred Empire; The Count Palatin of the Rhin sacri imperii Archidapifer,
Lord high Sewer of the sacred Empire; The Marquis of Brandenburg was made sacri
imperii Archicamerarius, Lord high Chamberlain of the sacred Empire; The Duke
(now King of Bohemia) was made sacri imperii Archipincerna, Lord chief Buttler
of the sacred Empire, all which offices are contracted in this tetrastique.

Moguntinensis, Trierensis, Coloniensis,
Quilibet Imperii fit Cancellarius horum;
Et Palatinus Dapifer, Dux portitor ensis,
Marchio Praepofitus camerae, Pincerna Bohemus.
Thus in English,

Mentz, Colen, Tryers, let these Three
Each of Them an Arch-Chancellor be,
Duke, bear the Sword; Count, the first Dish take up;
Marquis look to the Chamber, Boheme the Cup.
So the secular Electors are composed of a King, a Duke, a Marquis, and a Count.

Upon an occasion of a new choice, these with the Ecclesiastiques were to be
summoned by the Archbishop of Mentz, to assemble within three months time, and
to be guarded by the Country as they passed along, but their retinue was not to
exceed two hundred horse, whereof there should be but fifty armed.

Being convened, the Ecclesiastical Electors were to put their hands only on
their breasts, the Secular Princes solemnly upon the Book, to choose a fit
Imperial head for Christendom, and they were to do this within the compass of
thirty days, and not to go out of Frankford, or the place where they met in
the interim, and Iury-like to have no other nutriment but bread and water after
the expiration of the said thirty days.

The choice being made by the Assembly of Electors, the new Emperor, according
to the tenure of the golden Bull the grand Charter of the Empire (so called
because 'twas confirmed by the Pope) is saluted by the Title of King of the
Romans, and not Emperor till he be crowned with three Crowns, viz. with the
golden Crown representing Rome, with a sylver Crown representing Germany, and
with an Iron Crown representing Lombardy, which ceremony uses to be performed
at Aquisgrave for all the three places, But he is not to be called Augustus
till confirmed by the Pope.

At the first day of the Emperors Inauguration, the foresayed Electors were to
give their personal attendance in the Emperors Court, but now they are
dispensed withal to do it by proxy.

Before the Palace Gate there used to stand a heap of Oats to the breast of a
Horse, then comes the Duke of Saxony mounted, having in his hand a sylver wand,
and a sylver measure stood by, which was to weigh two hundred Marks, he fills
the measure, sticking his wand afterward in the remainder, and so goes to
attend the Emperor; The three Arch-bishopps say Grace; The Marquis of
Brandenburg comes also on hors-back with a sylver basin of water, of the value
of twelve Marks, and a clean towell which, being alighted, he holds to the
Emperor; Then comes the Count Palatin of the Rhin a hors-back also, and being
alighted he carries four dishes of meat, every dish of the value of three
Marks; Then the King of Bohemia comes with a napkin on his arm, with a covered
cupp of twelve Marks which he presents.

Touching the precedence of the Electors among themselfs one may judge of it by
the manner of their session with the Emperor, when he sitts in Majesty, which
is thus.

The Archbishop of Tryers high Chancellor of France sitts over against the
Emperor; The Archbishop of Moguntia or Mentz, as high Chancellor of Germany
sitts on the right hand of the Emperor; The Archbishop of Collen on the left
hand; The King of Bohemia has his seat on the right hand of the Archbishop of
Mentz, and next him the Count Palatin of the Rhin; The Duke of Saxony fitts on
the left hand of the Archbishop of Collen, and by him the Marquis of
Brandenburgh.

Moreover when they used to go in procession with the Emperor 'twas ordained
in the Golden Bull that the Archbishop of Tryers should go before his Imperial
Majesty, and near him on both sides one of the Ecclesiastical Electors; The
King of Bohemia was to go alone after the Archbishops, and after him the
Elector of Saxony with the naked Sword of the Empire in his hand, having on his
right hand the Count Palatin of the Rhin, carrieng the golden apple which
denotes the world to be under the Roman Empire; And on the left hand of the
Duke of Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenburgh was to march with a Scepter in his
hand, then followed the Emperor himself.

By what has bin spoken the discern Reader may judge who had the priority of
place, the Count Palatin of the Rhin or the Duke of Saxony, a Contest that has
gravelled many.

The third Section,
Touching the style and title of Emperor or Caesar, and of the King of the
Romans, etc.
COncerning the Character, and title of Emperor, it is of a younger date than
that of King, and among the Romans it was in the beginning given to him who was
Commander in chief of the Militia, nor was it near of such a transcendency then
as now it is, He was at firstbut tutoye he was but Thou Would when he was spoken
unto, but afterward in regard he had the prerogative to conferr honors, and
offices, to grant pardons, and patents of grace, with other obliging motives,
the Courtiers, especially the Churchmen began to magnify, or rather deifie him
with sublime attributs, as we read in Symmachus in his Epistles to Theodosius,
and Valentinian, wherein his style unto them is Vestra aeternitas, vestrum
numen, vestra perennitas, vestra clementia, etc. then he began to be called
Divus Imperator; but touching the title of Majestas, which was given ab augendo
Imperium (as was touched before,) or as some would have it a majori statu, it is
an attribut of no great antiquity, for it is not found among the old Authors,
and it came not till Henry the seconds time to France who is not used to be
backward in assuming, and applyengtitle of greatness to her self.

But concerning the dignity of Emperor, as heretofore, so is he still
accounted the prime potentat and Prince paramount among Christians, and not
only among them, but the Turk, next himself accounts the German Emperor the
greatest Monark upon Earth, and esteems him accordingly, which appeer'd in the
person of David Vngnadius, who being not an age since Ambassador in
Constantinople for the Christian Emperor, and coming for audience to the Duana
in the Seraglio, the Perfian Ambassador had come before, and got the chair, but
Vngnadius offering to go away there was an upper chair put for him.

Another time upon the celebration of Mahomet the Thirds Circumcision which
lasted forty days and nights, there being then in Constantinople the Legates of
the greatest Monarks upon Earth, yet He who was Ambassador at that time for
the Emperor Rodulphus the second had always the first place.

Some Civilians exalt the Emperor with diverse transcendent titles, whereof one
is, Dominus totius terrae, the lord of the whole Earth; That Caesar is Proximus
Deo; Caesar is next to God Almighty; But though the Emperor be accounted the
sole supereminent Prince in Christendom yet there have bin other Kings who
assumed that title besides him; Some of the Kings of Spain have bin called
Imperatores Hesperiae; King Edgar whowas rowed upon the river of Dee by four
Kings, whereof the Scot was one, had this title, which appears upon good record
by this bouncing Character. Ego Edgarus Altitonantis Dei largiflua clementia
Anglorum Basileus omniumque Regum Insularumque, Oceanique Britanniam
circumjacentis, Cunctarumque Nationum quae infra eam includuntur Imperator, et
Dominus, He was called also Albionis Imperator.

I Edgar by the bountiful clemency of the highthundring God, King of the
English, Emperor, and Lord of all the Kings, Islands, and seas circumjacent to
Britain, and of all the Nations included therein, he was styled in another place
Emperor of Albion.

Moreover the Realms of England was declared an Empire by Act of Parliament
octavo Henrici octavi and in diverse other Acts the Crown of England is called
the Imperial Crown, and the City of London the Imperial Chamber.

Now touching the respects that other Christian Kings owe the Emperor, they
acknowledge no other but that of precedence only, though Henry the second of
England in his letter (which stands upon record) to Frederique Barbarossa, and
Richard the first in his to Henry the 6. Emperor, seem to acknowledge a kind of
subordination by way of Complement; but Edward the third of England would not
kiss the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria's feet at their Enterview in Colen, and the
reason he alleged, was, because he was Rex inunctus habens vitam and membrum
in potestate sua, etc. because he was an anointed King having life and limb in
his power, etc. which Edward, as the German Annals attest, Ab Electoribus fuit
vocatus, et nominatus Vicarius Imperii, he was called, and nominated Vicar of
the Empire, and as some have it, was offered to be Emperrour, in regard of his
acquests, and glorious Exploits in France, whence he brought the three flower
de luces upon his Sword, after the French had sent him that geering answer that
la Couronne de France n'est pas liee a la quenoville, that the Crown of France
was not tied to a distaff.

Add herunto that the Emperor cannot be called so pure, and independent a
Monark as some other Kings, for besides that he is but Tenant for life and
governed by Diets which are Imperial Parlements, the Electors may be said to
be his Associats, and to have a share in the government; Nay, the Emperor by
the ancient customs of the Empire may be brought to answer in causis pro quibus
impetitus fuerit, says the Bull, before the Count Palatin of the Rhin, but he
can pass no Judgment unless the Emperonr himself be present in Imperiali
curia.

There want no examples that some Emperors have bin deposed for their
mal-administration, an instance shall be made in Wenceslaus in the year 1400.
who was formally degraded by the Archbishop of Mentz upon a public theater in
the plains of Brubach near the river of Rhin by a judicial sentence, which I
thought worthy the inserting here.

We Iehn Archbishop of Moguntia, Prince Elector and Archchancellor of the
German Nation, in the name of other Princes Electors, Dukes, Landgraves,
Counts, and other Lords, Barons, and Potentats of the Empire, in regard of
diverse dommageable interests, and for the special importance of all the Empire,
we do depose, and deprive by common consent, and Mature deliberation,
Wincestaus as negligent, unprofitable, and unworthy of the Roman Empire; We
degrade him of all the dignities and of all the honors which were due to him
from the Empire, and we publish him in the presence of all the Princes, Barons,
and Potentats of the Empire for a profane person, and unworthy of such an
honor, and dignity; Enjoining Evry one of what quality or condition soever he
be, not to yield him obedience as Emperonr, prohibiting evry one to payhim any
kind of tribut, fief, or forfeiture, either by Right or by covenant, or any
office appertaining to the Empire, Nay, we will that those perquisits be
reserved until God does give us the grace to elect an Emperor, that may be
for the benefit of the whole Empire, and the Christian Commonweal. And it is
well known how often he has bin admonished by the Princes Electors both in
public and private, and particularly by every one of our Order that he would
leave his unworthy deportments, and carry himself as his Dignity required.

Concerning the King of the Romans, it is but a modern title, peculiar to him
who is declared Heir apparent, or the designed Successor of the Empire; But at
first, he who was so chosen was called Caesar, and it was the Emperor Adrian
who first called AeliusVerus by that title, insomuch that the family of Julius
Caesar being extinct in the person of Domitius Nero who was the sixth in descent
(as before was told) the name Caesar ceased to be used as the name of a family
or blood, but it was used as a name mere honorary, and precedent to the Empire;
Afterward the designed Successor to the Empire was called Despote, after that
he was called King of Italy, then King of Germany, and lastly King of the
Romans, Romischer Konig in high Dutch, and the Emperor himself was only called
Caesar Keyser in Dutch, which appellation continues to this day; And it was
Charles the 5 who introduced the title of King of the Romans, who since is
acknowleg'd the immediate, and unquestionable apparent Heir and to succeed in
the Empire, whether it be by Resignation, by deprivation, or death, being in
proximo fastigio collocatus to the Emperor; Nay some Civilians hold that the
King of the Romans may make Edicts without the regnant Emperor, being bound
only as they say, Majestatem Imperialem comiter observare, making him hereby to
owe a duty of reverence, but not of superiority to the Keysar or Emperor.

The 4 Section.
Touching the Diet or Imperial Parliament, and the members thereof, with the
Division of Germany, and the strength of the Emperor.
THe German Empire is divided to ten Circles, viz. Austria the high, and low,
Franconia, Bavaria, Saxonia, Westphalia, the lower Circle of Saxony, Burgundy,
the two Palatinatts; The government whereof is principally in the Emperor,
contractedly in the Electors, and diffusively in the Diet or Imperial
Parliament, and other Courts, whereof the Chamber of Spire is the Supreme, whence
there is no appeal.

In the Diets, after the Emperor, the Princes Electors are the prime state,
among whom the Prelates have still the priority; The second state is composed of
four Archbishops, viz. he of Magdenkurg (who is primat of all Germany) He of
Salzburg, he of Besanson, and the Archbishop of Breme, which Archbishopric
the Kings of Denmark have had a long time; Then there are one and thirty
Bishops, and eleven Abbats, whereof he of Fulda is the chief, having above
fourscore thousand rich dollers in annual revenue; Then come the secular
Princes of the Empire, whereof the Archdukes of Austria are first, and they are
divided into two branches, viz. of Germany and Burgundy.

The third Estate is composed of Imperial towns which are about sixty five in
number, some whereof hold soly from the Emperor (which are accounted the most
noble,) and some are Relevant from other Princes. There is another sort of Towns
called the Hansiatique Towns, twixt whom there is a strong confederacy, and
fraternal league in merchantile affairs: They are divided into four classes,
or Metropolitan Cities, to wit Lubeck, Colen, Brunswick, and Danzick, who have
a solemn yearly convention at Lubeck where they keep their Records. The Hans or
Hansiatique Association is of long antiquity; touching the word, some would
fetch it from hand, because they of the Society plight their faith when they
enter into the fraternity; others derive it from the word Hansa, which is
Counsel or advice in the Gothique tongue; Others would have it from Hander see
which signifies a place near the Sea, and this passes for the most current
Etymology, in regard that all their Towns are so situated, or upon some
Navigable river leading to the Sea. The Extent of the old Hans was from the
Nerve in Liefland, as far as the banks of the Rhin, comprehending about 62
towns of trassique, whereof the four great Towns before named were the several
precincts; The Kings of Poland, and Sweden have sued to be their Protector, but
they refused them, because they were not Princes of the Empire; They put off
the King of Denmarque also with a complement, nor would they admit of the King
of Spain when he was most powerful in the Netherlands, though afterward they
desired his help when 'twas too late; They refused also the Duke of Anjou,
notwithstanding that the world thought at that time he should have married Queen
Elizabeth of England, who appeer'd for him in this business, whereby 'twas
probable, they might have recovered their old privileges in England; So that I
do not find that they had any other Protector (unles of late years) but the
great master of Prussia, and their want of a Protector did do them some
prejudice in that famous difference they had with Queen Elizabeth; The old Hans
had Extraordinary immunities conceded unto them by our Henry the third, because
they assisted him in his wars with so many Ships, and, as they pretended, the
King was not only to pay them for the service of the said Ships, but for the
vessels themselfs in case they miscarried; Now, it fortuned, that upon their
return to Germany from serving Henry the third; a great part of their Fleet was
cast away by distress of weather, for which according to covenant they
demanded reparation; Our King in lieu of money gave them some immunities, and
among other acts of grace, they were to pay but one per cent custom, which
continued till Queen Mary's time, and by the advice of King Philip her husband
she Enhanc'd the one to twenty percent; The Hans not only complained, but
clammor'd allowd for breach of their ancient privileges confirmed unto them by
long prescription from thirteen successive Kings of England, which they
pretended to have pourchas'd with their money; King Philip undertook to
accommodat the business, but Queen Mary dieng, a ltttle after (out of a conceit
of the less of Calais, which she said upon her deathbed should be found
Engraven in her heart if she were opened) and he retiring hence, there could be
nothing done; Complaints being made afterward to Queen Elizabeth, she
answered, that, as she would not innovat any thing, so she would protect them
still in the immunities, and condition she found them. Hereupon their
navigation, and traffic was suspended awhile, which proved very advantageous to
the English, for they tried what they could do themselfs herein, and after some
adventures they thrive so well that they took the whole trade into their own
hands, and so divided themselfs to Staplers, and Merchant adventurers, the one
residing constant in one place, the other stirring, and adventuring to diverse
towns abroad with cloth, and other manufactures; This so netled the Hans, that
they devised all the ways they could to draw upon them the ill opinion of
other Nations; Moreover the Hans towns being a body incorporated in the German
Empire, complained to the Emperor, who sent over Ambassadors to mediat the
business, but they returned still re infecta; Herupon the Queen caused a
proclamation to be published, that the Merchants of the Hans should be
entreated, and used as all other strangers within her dominions in point of
Comerce, without any mark of distinction.

This nettled them the more, thereupon they bent their forces more eagerly, and
in an Imperial Diet at Ratisbon they procured that the English Merchants who
had associated themselfs in corporations both in Embden, and other places,
should be adjudg'd Monopolists; whereupon there was a Comitial Edict procured
against them that they should be exterminated, and banished out of all parts of
the Empire, which was done by the activity of Suderman a great Civilian; There
was there at that time for Queen Elizabeth Mr. Gilpin, as nimble a man as
Suderman, and he had the Chancellor of Embden to countenance and second him,
but they could not stop the Edict whereby the society of English Merchants
adventurers were pronounced a Monopoly; yet Gilpin played his cards so well
that he wrought under hand that the said Imperial Ban should not be published
till after the dissolution of the Diet, and that in the interim his Imperial
Majesty should send an Ambassador to England to advertise the Queen of such
proceedings against her Merchants; But this made so little impression on the
Queen, that the said Ban grew to be rather ridiculous than formidable; for the
town of Embden harbored our Merchants notwithstanding, and afterward the town
of Stood; but they, being not so able to protect them against the Imperial Ban
removed, and settled themselfs in Hamburgh; After this the Queen commanded
another proclamation to be published, that the Hansiatique Merchants should be
allowd to trade into England upon the same conditions and payments as their own
Subjects did, provided that the English Merchants might have the same
privileges, to reside, and trade peaceably in Stood or Hamburgh, or any where
else within the precincts of the Hans; This incensed them more, thereupon
endeavors were made to cut off Stood, and Hamburgh from being Members of the
Hans, or of the Empire, but they suspended this dessein till they saw what
success the great Spanish Armada should have which was then preparing in the
year 88, for they had not long before made their address to the King of Spain
which had done them some good offices; Wherefore to this day King Philip and his
Council were taxed of a great oversight, that there was no use made of the Hans
towns in that great Expedition against England.

Queen Elizabeth finding that they of the Hans were not contented with that
Equality she had offered to make twixt them, and her own Subjects, put out a
Proclamation that they should transport neither corn, victuals, arms, timber,
masts, cables, metals, and any other materials, or men to Spain, or Portugal;
And after, the Queen growing more redoubted, and famous by the overthrow of the
Fleet in 88, The Hans began to despair of doing any good; Add herunto that
another disafter befell them, which was the taking of 60 Sails of their Ships
about the mouth of the River of Lisbon by the Queens Ships, that went laden
with ropas de contrabando, or goods prohibited by her former Proclamations into
the Dominions of Spain; And as these Ships were ready to be discharged, she
had intelligence of an extraordinary Assembly at Lubeck, which had purposely
met to consult of means to be revenged of her, thereupon she made absolute
prize of the said 60 Ships, only two were freed to bring home tidings what
became of the rest; Herupon the Pole sent a ranting Ambassador in the behalf of
the Hans, who spoke in a high tone, but the Queen herself did suddenly answer
him in a higher.

These premises being well considered, it proved an advantageous thing for
England that this clash fell out betwixt Her and the Hans, for ever since the
English Merchants have beaten a peaceful and an un-interrupted trade into High
and Low Germany, with their Manufactures of Wool, the Golden fleece of England,
and found also a way through the White Sea to Archangell, and Mosco, which may
be said to have been the chiefground of that increase of Shipping, Mariners,
and Merchandising which she is come unto.

Now, there is one passage in this relation observable, that the Hans-towns, do
not tie themselfs to obey the Bans, and Edicts of the Imperial Diet no further
than it conduces to their own interest, as it appeer'd by the examples of
Embden, Stood and Hamburgh, in the traverses of this business, which towns stuck
still to the English Factories, notwithstanding the public transactions and
prohibitions of the Diet to the contrary, Aeneas Sylvius has a memorable
critical saying of the German Diets when he says omnes Germanorum Dietas esse
valde faecundas, et quamlibet in ventre habere alteram, Ac credible est quia
faemineum sit nomen libenter impregnari, pietas est parturire. All the German
Diets are fruitful, in regard every one has another commonly in its belly,
and it is credible because Diet is of the Faeminine gender she is more willing
to be got with Child; whereunto alluded also the saying of ( harles the fifth,
viz. That the German Diets were like vipers, for as these destroy their Damms,
so the latter Decrees of Diets destroy the former.

I have dwelt longer upon this particular, than my proposed brevity required,
but the Hans being that part of the Empire with whom England has most
correspondence in point of negotiation and comerce, I suffered my self to be
transported till my pen came to a full period.

The fifth Section.
A parallel twixt the Empire passd, and the present, with the causes of the
declination thereof, etc.
THough by the true rule of proportion, no parallel canbe made 'twixt the Roman
Empire passed, and the present, no more than 'twixt an Eagle and a Wren, yet
because comparisons and examples conduce much to the elucidation of things,
something shall be said to that point.

The Roman Monarchy when she was at the highest altitude of greatness, and
glory, may be said to have had no horizon, while she sat upon her seven Hills
she may be said to have overlooked the World; She was once fifty miles in
circuit, and five hundred thousant free Citizens were computed to be within her
Walls, by that famous cense which was made that Vopiscus relates; The Roman
Eagle fixed his talons upon the Banks of Euphrates Eastward, on the Nile South,
on the Danube and the Rhin Northward, and flew West as far as the British and
German Seas; Her annual revenues were then computed at a hundred and fifty
millions, whereof the salary of her legionary Soldiers amounted to above twenty
Milions; some of her Generals usually brought ten thousand talents into her
aerarium, her Exchequer, at their return from abroad, and Gabinius twenty
thousand; Some of her Emperors are recorded to have strewn the Amphitheater
with gold sand in their public spectacles, and triumphs, so she might well
have taken then the 5 Vowels for her symbol A, E, I, O, V, which signified,
Aquila, Electa, Just, Omnia, Vincit. But she may be said to have shrunk since
from a Giantess to a Dwarf, Insomuch that he who has the Empire now may be
said to have an Eagles feather only in his Capp, for he must have something of
his own to support the sacred Caesarian Majesty, else he may be put to live upon
Alms; Take all the tributes of the free Towns, they come but to five thousand
Crowns a year, but for any true fundum, or Real estate there is none; He depends
merely upon the pleasure of the Diet for all public pecuniary erogations, and
taxes; And whereas we read that Charles the fifth had once ninety thousand foot,
and thirty five thousand effectif horse against Solomon, and above that number
against the Lutherans, most of those were leavied in his own Dominions, and
patrimonial Territories, Insomuch that if the Roman Eagles were not imp'd with
Austrian feathers they would be as bald as a Coot.

Yet Germany or Almain, as the knowing statists have delivered their opinions,
is a continent of that large expansion, and so well peepled, that take the
whole bulk together she is able to raise two hundred thousand effectif men, and
maintain them by a general unanimous contribution.

Now, my Lord, if you desire to know the reason of this so great an alteration
and decay of the Roman Empire, there were many causes concurred thereunto, the
main cause was touched before, viz. the translation of Caesar's Court from Rome
to Constantinople, whereby Italy, and the rest of the Western parts of the
Empire were left obvious and as a prey to other Nations; Add herunto the
dismembring of the Empire into East and West, with other accidents pointed at
before.

But for the declination of the Occidental Empire founded by Charlemain, there
was a greater concurrence of caufes; First the unhappy partition that Lewis the
Gentle Charlemains Son, made of the Empire to find a-pannage and portions for
his Sons, whereof he had three; Add herunto, that when the Empire came to be
within the German pale, and Italy became but a Province to Germany, being to be
disposed of by the College of Electors, They who aspired to be Emperors, or to
have their Sons to succeed them used to prepossesse, and oblige the Electors by
donatifs, and indeed no less than bribes, as Charles the fourth to make his
Son VVenceslaus capable to succeed him, offered them a hundred thousand Florins
apeece, as Aeneas Sylvius has it, but having no ready money to satisfy them,
he transferred, and passed over some Imperial towns unto them, whereof the Count
Palatin of the Rhin had three for his share at one time, viz. Openheim,
Inquelien, and Keyserlausen. It is recorded in the Imperial Annals that
Gerardus Archbishop of Mentz was called pro pola Imperii, the Hucster of the
Empire, and having conspired with others of his Accomplices against Albert the
first, and designed to elect another Emperor, the said Gerardus having a
hunting horn about him, and being a potent popular man, he winded out these
words In hoc cornu complures gesto Caesares, In this horn I carry many Keysars,
viz. Caesar's; The Empour taking this in indignation, by the special
benediction of Heaven, he was quit with him, and his confederats afterward, by
making them carry dogs about the Country so many miles, which is acccounted
in Germany the disgracefullest and most opproprious kind of punishment that can
be inflicted upon a Nobleman, or Gentleman, whereas a Boore or Plebean is
condemned according to the quality of his offense to carry only a Chair from
one County to another; such a peculiar punishment there was of old in France,
for whereas there was a law called la loy de la chevelure that none should wear
long hair but the Nobles, he who had committed any degenerous offense was
adjudg'd to have his hair cut off before the tribunal of Justice, and so was
degraded from being a gentleman, his honor going away with his hair, and so
made a Roturier or Yeoman: The story tells us that the Emperor Frederique
Barbarossa made Hermannus Count Palatin of the Rhin, and ten Counts more to
carry dogs above one German mile, for the praedations, and ill balancing of
dollars, with other insolences they had committed while he was in Italy warring
with the Pope, against whom we read he had twelve pitched battails.

Such another clash the Emperor Conradus had with Guelphus Duke of Bavaria,
who bore up a good while against him, at last the Emperor, recruting his Army
with Italian Auxiliaries, shut up the Duke in VVinsberga, and beleagred him so
close that he was ready to famish; And the Emperor having bin provoked so far
that he had vowed to put all to fire and sword, The Duchess being a comely
courageous Lady went through the throng of the army into the Emperors tent,
and made such a flexanimous speech which so melted the Emperor, that he
published a proclamation, that for her sake all the Women of VVinsberga should
have safe conduct to depart and carry away upon their backs as much of their
most precious wealth that they could bear. Herupon the Duchess took the Duke
upon her back, and evry wife by her example her husband, mayds and unmarried
women took up their brothers, and kindred, and so all marched out; The Emperor
being much taken with this witty piece of humanity, published a general act of
Amnestia, and so the Duke was redintegrated into his favor. This memorable
story I couched once into verse, being a task imposed upon me, and the Epigram
runns thus.

Tempore quo Bavarum superarat Roma Guelghum,
Seria festivo Res fuit acta joco;
Conradus victor VVinsbergam oblesserat Vrbem,
Hinc fame, Deditio facta, premente, fuit;
Matribus at miserans Bavaris, sponsaeque Guelphi,
Induperator iis tale Diploma dedit;
Quaelibet ut Mulier tuto cum Rebus abiret
Quas humeris posset sustinuisse suis.
Cum reliquis Comitissa novo Diplomate nixa
Inde viros portant, pondera grata, suos.
Pendebant collo nati nataeque lacertis
Sic abiit licita Faemina Virque fuga;
Hac delectatus Caesar pietate, pepercit
Omnibus, atque novum cum Duce faedus init.
But to return where we left, another cause of the Empours decay, was, that
being often reduced to some exigents for want of money, they used to have
recours to the richest Imperial towns for a supply, who used to lend them
money, and the Emperors paid them their money back with immunities; Many
towns in Italy got their necks out of Caesar's yoke this way, and some of them
very cheap, as Florence, for it cost her but six thousand Crowns, and Luca ten
thousand; etc. In so much that the liberties of most of the free Cities of
Italy, much more of high and low Germany, sprung out of the necessities of the
Emperors, whereby their power as well as their glory did daily decline; Add
herunto that the Bishopps of Rome feathered their nests from time to time with
the Eagles plumes, specially in Italy, for besides the City of Rome, and the
Countries adjacent, such was the high reverence the Church had in those days
that many other territories were given to the Apostolical See, and since, by
well devoted Princes, Insomuch that the Pope is grown herby to he a great
temporal Prince, for the state of the Church extends above three hundred miles
in length, and about two hundred miles in breadth; It contains the Duchy of
Ferrara, Bologna, Romania, the Marquisat of Ancona, Sabina, Perugia, with a
part of Toscany, the Patrimony of Saint Peter, and Latium; in these there are
above 50 Bishoprics; He does signorize also over the Duchy of Spoleto and the
Exarchat of Ravenna, he has the Towns of Benevento in the Kingdom of Naples,
and the County of Venisse in France called Avignon, he has title good enough
to Naples also herself, and Calabria, but rather than incurr the diplesure of
the King of Spain his Champion, and chief supporter of his Chair, he is
contented with an annual heriot of a white Mule with a pursfull of pistols
about her neck; He pretends also to be Lord paramount of Sicily, Urbin, Parma,
and Masseran, as also of Norway, Ireland, and England since King John did
prostrat our Crown at Pandulpho his Legates feet: His Dominions reach from one
Sea to another, viz. from the Tyrrhene to the Adriatique, and these Territories
run through the center of Italy, which enables the Pope to do good or harm to
the Princes about him, and makes him capable to be an Vmpire, or a potent
Enemy, his authority being mixed twixt secular and spiritual, for he can use the
sword, and thunderbolt of Excommunication at pleasure; And (to return to our
chief subject) most of the Countries pointed at before being feathers of the
Eagle did much decrease her strength.

Moreover, as the Roman Church did this way impair the power of the Empire, so
the Reformed Church, and the difference of Religion in Germany did much
enfeeble it; For those Princes who turned Lutherans daily encroach'd upon, and
impropriated the demeans of the Church, which was a great support to the
Emperor, being more devoted to him; than to the secnlar Princes.

But to go a little more particularly to work, we will not rove in Asia and
Afrique where so many mighty parts of the Continent fell from the Roman Empire,
nor will we look so far back in Europe as to speak of the defection of Spain,
France, and Great Britain, which was the first Province that fell from Rome,
though indeed Rome may he said to have fallen first from Her, being not able
by reason of wars she had in other Countries, to protect the Britains against
the Picts, as England says now in point of Religion that she had never fallen
away from Rome, unless Rome had fallen from her self; I say we will not look
so fart back, but come to more modern Times since the Empire came within the
German pale; The Suisses were one of the last that revolted, who being summoned
to the Imperial Chamber at Spire, they sent a rough hewn Ambassadors totell
the Imperial Council in these words, Domini confaederati Heluetii vos vicinos
suos salvere jubent, mirantur vero quod tam crebris citationibus, etc. The
Lords Confaederats of Switzerland do greet you their Neighbors, but they
wonder that by your so frequent citations you would disquiet Them, therefore they
pray and exhort you, that you would no further molest Them. In Charles the
fifts time the Livonians fell off, and He summoning them to their obedience,
and menacing to reduce them otherwise by force, they sent him a geering Answer,
That they believed his Horse would tire before he could reach the skirts of
Liefland, as Thuanus has it. A German Author has it upon record, that since
the reign of Rodolph the first, above two hundred States and Princes have
un-membred, and emancipated themselfs from the German Emperor, who were used
to obey his summons, and make their appearance accordingly.

Touching Germany it self, it is true, that it is a huge Continent, and full of
Princes, which make some compare her to a Firmament spangled with Stars; Others
compare the Emperor to a great Luminary incircled with the seven Planets,
meaning the Septemvirat, or the College of Electors, and not improperly, for
this agrees with the Caesarean Arms, which are Sol, Saturn armed, and crowned
Mars, and the Eagle displayed with two heads; yet, though thereby the Emperor
be called Rex Regum, these Princes are prejudicial to his greatness, whereof
Ibraim Ambassador to Solomon the great Turk gave a hint by an ingenuous Fable
which was thus; When Maximilian the second was chosen Emperor, the foresayed
Ibraim was then at Frankfort, who having bin a Spectator to the ceremony, and
observed what great Princes attended the Emperor that day, and being told that
some of them could raise an Army of them selfs, and maintain it against any
power, The Ambassador smilingly said, That he doubted not of the puissance of
Germany, but he observed that the Minds and Actions, the Counsels and Interests
of the Germans were like a beast with many heads, and tayls, which in case of
necessity being to pass through a hedge, and every head seeking to find a
particular hole to pass thorough, they were a hindrance one to another, every
head drawing after his own fancy, and so hazarded the destruction both of all
the heads body and tayls: But the Empire of Solomon his great Master was like a
beast with many tayls, yet she had but one head, which head being to get
thorough or over any passage, without any confusion, or difference of fancy,
all the tayls, and the whole body followed smoothly after.

Lastly, the fatallst cause of the decay of Caesar was the monstrou; successes
of the Mahumetan, whose half Moon filled out of the Wane of the Roman Empire
both East and West, It being a sad saying, that whersoever the Turks horse sets
once his foot, there is no Christian grass will ever grow there again.

The sixth Section,
Of enlarging the College of Electors from seven to an Octumvirat, And the
Contest that is now twixt the Count Palatin of the Rhin, and the Duke of
Bavaria touching the Vicarship of the Empire.
THe attempting the Crown of Bohemia by Frederiqne Count Palatin of the Rhin,
as it proved unsuccessfull unto himself and Family, so it proved fatal to all
Christendom besides (as the preceding Comet did foretell An. 1618.) for
directly or collaterally it has bin the cause of all the wars that happened
ever since in Christendom, which made King James, as if he had bin Prophet as
well as Prince to say unto his privy Council, upon the first tidings which
were brought him that his son-in-law was gone to Prague, My Lords, this is a
sad business, and the youngest man amongst us shall not live to see the end of
it which proved true.

The Bohemian Crown was first offered by the Revolters to the Duke of Saxony,
but he out of a political prudence, as well as out of the fidelity and
allegiance he owed the Emperor, declined it; Then they reflected upon the
Count Palatin of the Rhin as a Prince that might be par negotio, and able to go
through-stitch with it, In regard of his powerful alliances, The King of great
Britain being his Father-in-law, the King of Denmark his Onckle, the states of
Holland his confederatts, and Maurice Prince of Orange with the Duke of
Bovillon (who was called the old Ardenian fox) being also his Oncles, which
last three, incited him first unto that great Attempt, though he paused a good
while upon it, and resolved twice to decline it, till his lady seemed to
reproach his pusillanimity, telling him, Had you Sir, the courage to venture
upon a King of great Britains sole Daughter, and will you not venture upon a
Crown when it is offered you?

The Count Palatin then was looked upon as one of the fortunatst Princes in
Germany, Having the best lady in his bed, the best stable of horses, the best
library of Books, the best cellar of wine of any of the rest.

Maximilian the old Duke of Bavaria, stuck close to the Emperor in this
quartell, for by his assistance and conduct an army of 25000. was routed by
less then fifteen thousand, and the City of Prague with the whole Kingdom was
recovered for the Emperor; On the otherside by the arms of the King of Spain
and the conduct of Marquis Spinola the Palatinat was conquered, though the
Princes of the Union had an Army of forty thousand effectif men under, the
Marquis of Ansback and others to defend it, but 'twas said that dolus
versabatur in Generalibus, that the Generals were corrupted, and that the
acquest was made more by Spanish pistolls, than by Spinola's Sword.

Herupon at a solemn Assembly of the Electors at Ratisbon Anno 1623, the
Electorship of the Rhin, and the Archidapifership, with all the prerogatives,
and perquisits, the authorities and enfranchisements, and honors annexed
thereunto was conferred upon the Duke of Bavaria for term of life; But in
another Assembly 1628, which was five years after at Prague, this great Grant
was not only confirmed unto him during his own life, but entayl'd upon his
Heirs to Perpetuity, and withal, the upper Palatinat was transferred unto him,
with the County of Cham in consideration of his expenses in the wars, which
amounted to thirteen million of Dollars.

But in the Treaties at Munster and Osnabrug Anno 1652, four and twenty years
after, this Grant was qualified, that in case the Gulihelmian line which is the
House of Bavaria did fayl without Masculine issue, the Electorship of the Rhin,
with the Archidapifership and all the prerogatives thereof should revert to the
Rodulphian line which is the Palatin, being the elder House of the two.

Now, concerning the Gulielmian or Bavarian line there are but 4 living, whereof
two are Churchmen, viz. the Archbishop of Colen, and the Bishop of Frizing,
which can leave no issue behind; Then is there the now Duke of BAVARIA and his
Brother, nor are they also likely to get issue, for as the Tradition in Germany
goes Maximilian the former Duke of Bavaria having married the last Emperors
Sister who was young, and the Duke being old and crazy having 5 issues then
about his body, there were some Jesuitts that brought such a prolifical cordial
from Italy that enabled the old Duke to get children, but those Children should
be impotent and barren, as it has hitherto proved true, insomuch the Palsgrave
is in fair hopes to get the Electorship of the Rhin again in a short time, and
then the eighth Electorship must be extinguished.

Besides, publicae tranquillitatis causa, as the Instrumentum pacis has it,
for settling a firm and general everlasting peace in Germany which had bin so
miserably depopulated and torn by the late wars, which had not only scratched
her face, but rent her very bowels, for about thirty years together, as also
for diremption of all strife for the future, The Count Palatin was created the
eighth Elector, which is termed in the Instrument by a new coynd Epithet or
logical term simultanea Investitura, a joint or contemporary Investiture; And
because there is an office annexed to every Electorat, he was made Arch-treasurer
of the Empire, which he executed at the Election of the last King of the
Romans, and the coronation of the Empress at Ratisbon, by throwing Medaills
some of Gold, some of Sylver among the peeple; under this notion he has a
session and suffrage in the College of Electors, but he must be content to sit
last of all; Moreover by the said Instrument of Accommodation at Munster, he
was to renounce all right pro tempore not only to the upper Palatinat, and the
County of Cham, but he was to part with the Bergstrad (one of the best parts of
the lower Palatinat) and re-deliver it to the Archbishop of Mentz, who had
oppignorated, and pawned it to his Ancestor Anno 1463 for a sum of money, but
cum pacto perpetuae reluitionis, with a proviso that it might be redeemed at
all times.

The Emperor Ferdinand the third, being not long since dead there arose a
contest, which continues still undecided, 'twixt the Elector Palatin, and his
Cosen, and Co-elector the Duke of Bavaria about the Vicarship of the Roman
Empire; And to illustrat this point the better it must be understood that by
the fundamental laws of the Empire, exemplified in the Aurea Bulla, it is
enacted, that in the absence of the Emperor (who was used often in former times
to cross the Alps to Italy) or after his death during the vacancy or
Interregnum, there were two Vicars or Imperial Deputies appointed to manage the
affairs of the Empire, to wit the Count Palatin of the Rhin, for the
jurisdictions of Franconia, Svevia, and the Country about the Rhin, And the
Duke of Saxony for those large Territories that lay within that Circle; The
Bavarian alleges that this prerogative of Vicarship appertained unto the
Count Palatin of the Rhin ratione Electoratus, by virtue of the Electorship, and
the office of Archidapifer or chief Sewer of the sacred Empire, for which he
produces the Golden Bull both in the Original Latin, and also translated into
Dutch; He takes also the great Instrument of Munster for his buckler, wherein
the said Electorship of the Rhin, and the ofice of Archsewership with all the
prerogatives, perquisits, and appendixes thereunto belonging, whereof the
Vicarship is the chiefest, is totally transferred uuto Him and his Issue Male
to perpetuity.

The Count Palatin utterly denies that, and positively affirms that this
office and prerogative of Vicariat was conferred upon him and practiced by his
progenitors before ever the College of Electors, and the subsequent Aurea Bulla
was constituted, which Bull or Magna Charta of the German Empire was not the
Donor but confirmer only of that great Ancestrial prerogative which inconcussa
consuetudine, by an unshaken custom belonged to his family; Avouching further,
that it is an Annexum inseparabile Comitatus, That it is an Heirloome of the
County Palatin of the Rhin, in which County he was formally and plenarily
reinvested in the year 1652: He excepts likewise against the translation of the
said Aurea Bulla into the Teutonique, or High Dutch, alleging it is
erroneous in many passages; And lastly concludes that his Progenitors enjoyed
this prerogative of Vicariat, ratione Comitatus, not Electoratus, as may be
inferred out of the political reason why that office was conferred upon his
Ancestors which was in regard of the position of their ditions and Territories
which lie apposit and proper to have the government of those Countries of
Franconia Svevia, etc. because they are situated near, and some of them
conterminant with the Rhin. This controversy remains still indecided; In the
interim the protestants of those parts make their addresses to the Count
Palatin, and the Roman Catholics to the Bavarian as their occasions require,
either for renewing or letting of leases, the forfeiture of Felons goods, the
protection of Idiots, and Lunatiques, etc.

The seventh Section.
Some Reflexes made upon the present Coniuncture of Things, and the political
condition of Germany, with a Conjecture who is likely to be King of the Romans,
and consequently the next Emperor.
HAving already, my Lord, in a Succinct, but I hope, some Satisfactory way
treated of the German Empire, of the Octumvirat, or College of Electors, with
other matters Concident, and homogeneous with this subject, I shall now wind up
this small bottom, and conclude with some glances upon the present Estate of
Germany, together with the particular Interests thereof.

Your Lordship has read before that the Office of Emperor, in statu quo nunc,
is merely a Title, and like a feather in one's capp, whosoever undertakes it
must have pillars of his own to support it; Now among the Princes of Germany,
the Duke of Saxony, next after the House of Austria, is thought to be best able
to bear the three Imperial Crowns, and at the late Emperors death he began to
be much spoken of, but (as an Observing gentleman, who came lately thence, told
me) all the peeple that are under his subjection did rise up, and with open
mouth protested against it, cryeng out that they would put themselfs under the
protection of another Prince, if he would be the Keysar; Now, the reason is,
that if the Elector of Saxe were Emperor, he must of necessity enhance their
tolls and taxes to support the Dignity.

The Duke of Bavaria since he has bin invested in the upper Palatinat, and the
County of Cham, is grown very considerable, and to be able to counterpoise the
Saxe in power, their yearly revenues amounting to above a million of rich
dollars apeece; Besides, the Bavarian Sylver mines have wonderfully thriven of
late years both for the pureness, and quantity of Bullion; And if Maximilian the
former Duke of Bavaria could lay out thirteen millions for the service of the
Emperor, in consideration whereof he had at first a part of the Territories of
Austria hypothequ'd unto him, and afterward the upper Palts and the County of
Cham transferred unto him, together with the Electorship of the Rhin in full
and valuable satisfaction of the said 13 millions, I say if the former Duke was
so powerful, it may be well inferred that the present Duke is much more, by
the new acquests he has made, and so might be capable of the Empire, but
notwithstanding that the French is said to spurr him on, and that the Elector
of Colen be his Oncle, yet it is not probable he will make any competition with
his Cousin-germin the King of Hungary, his peeple like them of Saxony being
also very averse thereunto, though his peeple be in a surer way of subjection
and vassalage unto him, than other Germans are, there being no great ones in his
Dominions to clash with him.

Touching the Marquis of Brandenburg, though he be great Master of the
Teutonique Order, and has such spacious and large Territories that he can go
upon his own demeans above 500 miles from Cleve to the furthest parts of
Prussia, yet is he thought to be inferiorto the other two in revenues, and
wealth, therefore the less able to bear the weight of the German Empire; Add
herunto that of the eight Electors, five are still Roman Catholics, so that
it is improbable, a Protestant should be chosen, for there are such ceremonies to
be perfotm'd that are incompatible with a Protestant, besides the Pope would
never confirm such an Emperor, and without his confirmation no Emperor can be
called Augustus.

Touching the King of Denmark though he be capable of the Empire being a kind
of German, yet the nature of those Kings and peeple has bin rather to preserve
what they have than to extend their Country further; Moreover the present King
is engaged in an open war against the Swed; There is also a late clash 'twixt
him, and the town of Hamborough about the Huldygen, which is an Inauguration to
be her Protector, as his Father was: for Hamborough was built upon, and stands
still upon the King of Denmarks ground; yet she refuses to Huld him, alleging
that she bought him out for great sums of money, And so pretends to be now an
Imperial free Town, and to hold soly from the Keyser; Whereas others aver that
she is mere Hansiatique within the Verge of Lubeck her Neighbor, which is the
chiefest of the first Precinct of the old Hans, as was touched before.

Add herunto that the last King of Denmark has some particular obligations to
the House of Austria, his great Gran-mother having bin Charles the fifts
Sister. Besides, when General Tilly was like in the eye of human reason with a
Veteran victorious Army to overcom all Holsteyn, Ferdinand this King of
Hungaries Gran-father made a friendly, and favorable peace with Christian the
fourth, who had invaded Germany with a considerable Army, but with little
success, in the behalf of the Count Palatin of the Rhin his Nephew.

The Swed might have bad fair for the Imperial Golden Apple had he took firmer
footing in Poland, and succeeded in his notable designs further; Nay, his Army
being composed of Soldiers of Fortune, might still by new recreuts as they
pushed on their hopes, have proved in time as formidable, and fatal to the test
of Christendom as their Ancestors the Goths and Vandales were of old, who
pierced the very center of Europe to find warmer habitations.

Nor was the Swed altogether incapable to have stood for it in regard of those
Territories which Gustavus got, and annexed to the Crown of Sweden within the
pale of the Empire, viz. Pomerland, and Breme; But the Dane entering into a new
war with him, and the Marquis of Brandenburg deserting him, and having the
House of Austria, the Pole, the Moscovit his actual enemies besides, it is
thought his hopes are blasted for enlarging his dominions at this time, but
it is well if he can now secure Sweden it self, much more the new acquests
aforesaid in Germany; specially his friends (viz. England and France) being so
remote from him, and his enemies so near about him.

The French King, though I believe he be in despair to have it himself, he
being Exterus and non Germanus, a Scranger and no German, and there being a
fundamental Law that no Forrener be Emperor, as there is a Sanction in the
Conclave among the Cardinals, that no Tramontane, viz. one born this side the
Alps can be Pope, I say, though the King of France looks not for it himself,
yet he spends all the interests he has, and is like to employ all the power he
can with all the Artificies besides to cajoll, I will not say, corrupt the
Electors for the secluding of the young King of Hungary, and that the Empire
should not be always a prostitut to one Family. But France they say has few
real Friends in Germany among the Princes; It Is true the Elector of Tryers
being perpetual Arch-chancelor of France, has always bin, and is still
Fleurdelize, he is Flowdeliz'd and Frenchified all over, and France always
sticks to him also upon all occasions; 'twas about him that there was such a
counterbuff 'twixt Lewis the thirteenth, and Gustaphus Adolphus, because he had
invaded part of his Territories; 'twas for his sake, besides the still growing
greatness of Spain, that this present war was denounced by sound of Herald
against the House of Austria, by the last French King: Moreover, it is true that
the Marquis of Brandenburg while he lately adhered to the Swed was devoted to
France, but since he has accommodated matters with the Pole, he has changed
his interest, and is like to enter into the general league they speak of to be
made between the Princes of the Empire for preserving the common peace of
Germany against all that shall attempt to disturb it; And besides the Electors
themselfs, The Duke of Brunswick, Prince of Anbalt, Luneberg, Lawenburg, the
Landgrave of Hesse, Darmstad't, Baden, Newburgh, Wittemburgh, though the last,
and some of the other smell rank of the French interest, yet to prevent a new
war in Germany they are like to enter into the foresayed Patrial league,
together with all the Imperial and Hansiatical Towns.

Touching the Palsgrave, or Prince Palatin of the Rhin, it is true that there has
bin a great deal of intimacy, and reciprocal leagues twixt his Progenitors, and
France, but the last Emperor and his Son the King of the Romans obliged him
(and his brother Prince Rupert) by many recent civilities; At the Treaties of
Osnabrug, and Munster the Emperor would have his business to be dispatched
first, and was very indulgent of him all along the while; The four hundred
thousand dollars which were assigned himself, and to make portions and
apennages for his younger brothers, the twenty thousand dollars that were
awarded the Lady Dowager his mother pro victalitio, and the ten thousand
dollars which were assigned for dowries to evry one of his Sisters, were all
granted as the words of the Instrument run pro benevolo suae Majestatis
Caesareae affectu ergo domum Palatinam, for the benevolent affection his
Imperial Majesty bore to the family of the Palatin, which sums the Emperor
punctually paid; Moreover at the coronation of the Empress, and the creation
of the last King of the Romans, the Prince Palatin officiated in person, and
there were many Endearments passed twixt the Emperor, and him; In so much that
it is thought he will be no back friend to his son the now King of Hungary when
the business of Election comes to be canvas'd.

These Premises, and particular interests being well considered, in the eye of
all humane probality it is thought, that the last Emperors son Leopoldus
Ignatius, now King of Bohemia and Hungary, etc. and being one of the Electors
himself, and chiefest of the Temporals, is like to be the man, and make the
fourtinth Emperor of a direct Austrian line; And they who think thus, ground
their conjectures upon diverse reasons deduced from the present posture of
things.

First, because the Iunta, or Assembly of the Princes Electors is still
deferred, and like to be so, till the said King of Hungary be come to his
Majority, which by the German law in this point is at eighteen years, and this
will be in June next; then being out of his bassage, or minority, he is capable
both to be King of the Romans, and to have a suffrage among the Electors as he
is King of Bohemia, and Archbuttler of the sacred Empire.

Secondly, because if the King of Hungary have the canvas, and be rejected,
there will be an inevitable war in Germany, which she will avoid if possible
she can, having had not only her face scratched, but her very entrails rent
asunder for so many years by a cruentous lingering war, and the deep wounds she
received thence are not yet consolidated in some places.

Thirdly, because there is no Prince so potent and proper to bear the weight of
this great burden than the King of Hungary, or to keep out and encounter the
Common Enemy, to wit, the Turk, as He, for he has not only most of the
Dominions of Austria, but two Kingdoms besides situated on the confines, and
serving as ramparts against him by land, as the Republique of Venice does by
sea; Insomuch that both the danger, as well as security of the House of Austria
is involved with the Empire it self, and indeed of all Europe. Now we shall
find all these Countries in the title of the last Emperor, which runns as
followe's.

Ferdinandus tertius divina favente clementia electus Romanorum Imperator,
semper Augustus, Ac Germaniae, Hungariae, Bohemiae, Dalmatiae, Croatiae,
Slavoniae, etc. Rex, Archidux Austriae, Dux Burgundiae, Bragantiae, Stiriae,
Carinthiae, Carniolae, etc. Marchio Moraviae, Dux Lucemburgiae, ac superioris
and inferioris Silesiae, Wittemburgiae, and Teckae, Princeps Sveviae, Comes
Haspurgi, and Gloritiae, Langravius Alsatiae, Marchio sacri Imperii Romani,
Burgaviae, ac superioris, et inferioris Lusatiae, Dominus Marchiae Slavonicae,
portus Naonis, and Salinarum, etc.

In this accumulation of eight and twenty titles there are but two that he had
from the Empire, viz. the style of Emperor, and Ring of Germany, all the rest
are appendixes of the House of Austria; And the King of Spaiu who is of the
elder House has many more, being great granchild to the Emperor Charlesle
Quint, who made a spontaneous Resignation of the Empire to Ferdinand his second
brother, though as a private Author has it, the second day after his
resignation, was the first day of his repentance.

Now, to raise up the House of Austria to this altitude, six of the greatest
Families of Europe concentred in one, viz. Austria, Burgundy, Castile, Aragon,
Hungary, and Portugal, so that it may be called a palace six stories high,
(though as Emperor he has not a house to hide his head in) Austriacum Domus
Armipotens sex fulta columnis.

Fourthly, because the House of Austria has the good wishes of the Pope, and
of the Iesuitts, who underhand do good offices for him, though the Pope dare
not appeer publicly in the business for fear of giving any distaste to France;
For he may be said to hold France, and Portugal also, as one does a Dog by the
ears, fearing they should run away from him to Patriarks of their own making;
Nor has any King in Christendom a greater temptation to fall away from Rome,
in regard the Gallican Church, by a late computation which was made, has above
three hundred and forty millions of livers in annual revenue, which, should he
renounce the Pope, would devolve most of it to the Crown.

Moreover, this Gentleman told me that the Electors, with the Princes and
Cities of Empire, are more and more sensible to find the King of France should
appeer so much, and as some write, intrude himself into this business, by sending
Ambassadors with such gaudy trains, whose rich liureys are like to be worn out
before the Election day, so that they had needed to have brought a Lantern and
Candle with them coming so long before day, as one made a Pasquill of them in
Frankfort, who with some difficulty did open her Gates unto them, it being an
ancient Constitution of the Empire, that none should be admitted to lodge in the
Town where the Election is to be held, but the Princes Electors themselfs and
their train, which come to nere upon two thousand horse; But the Germans are
more sensible and startled, that the French should draw such forces to their
Frontires as to Metz, Philipsburg, and Brisack (for Brisack-bridg makes now
France and Germany one continued piece,) as if there were a design hereby to
control the Electors in their choice, and embroyl Germany again in a war;
which puts the young King of Hungary to extraordinary expenses, of making new
levies, Insomuch that he will have by the next Spring, as they write, an Army
of 50 thousand effectif men, to confront the French.

But indeed it may be wondered there should be any ambition at all, of aspiring to
the Roman German Empire in statu quo nunc, it being but an ayrie bare shadowy
title, or a Skeleton of part of the old Roman Monarchy, Therefore a late German
Author confesses, Quod nobis est magnum momentum politicum, Exteris est magnum
deridiculum, That which we make to be of so high political a consequence, seems
to Forreners to be but a thing of laughter, alluding to that ado there is used
about the election of an Emperor, as in Venice to creat a Doge who in point of
power is no other than tecta di legno a head of wood.

Nor are those who live under the Empire tied to so strict an obedience, there
is not that exact relation, and reciprocation of subjection, and protection
'twixt the Emperor and his Vassals, as uses to be 'twixt Prince and Peeple in
other places, where the Liegeman is bound to submit, and the Liegelord is bound
to defend; Touching the later, he spoke like a Statist, that said, Defendere
subditos est attributum natural inhaerens visceribus Regiminis, est qualitas
infixa ossibus, et indivisibilis, ita utregimen, and protectio unum and idem
judicatur indivisible. Defense of the Subject is a natural attribut inhaering
in the very bowels of Government, it is a quality infix'd in the very bones
thereof, Insomuch that Protection and Government is adjudg'd to be the self same
indivisible thing: It Is not so in the Imperial Government, where there is a
looser kind of Clientele, and Protection; Nor is the submission of the Liegeman
so absolut, for an Imperial Ban is not so much obeyed there as an Edict in
France, a Prematica in Spain, a Proclamation in England, or a Placart in the
Netherlands, where there is a more punctual obligation 'twixt Prince and Peeple,
the one to obey, the other to defend their persons, and maintain their
privileges; Though some do hold, that a Country giving her self to a Prince,
what privileges soever the peeple reserve to themselfs by contract, they are
all lost when they enter into subjection, which by its nature makes a man
subordinat to another without any exception, whenever the public good is
concerned, and that those privileges by the said subjection pass into the
nature of concessions of Princes afterward, which they may stretch, restrain,
or revoke according to the urgency of their public occasions; And when there
is a necessity to do so, the Peeple are not allowed to revolt, or right
themselfs by violence; It Is true, that in all private particular Treaties the
unobservation of the Conditions, acquitts the parties from the Obligations of
the contract, but this does not reach to Soverain Princes, when the Peeple have
once chosen them for their advantage, and security. But to return to our chief
matter, the Princes, and Towns of the Empire, though they acknowledge the Keyser
for their Sovereign, yet are they not obliged in that strictnes of obedience to
him, as their own peeple are to them; These Princes may be said to be rather
his Colleagues, and Associats in governing rather than Snbjects; It being a Rule
in Germany, that Quilibet Imperii status in suo Territorio tantum possit,
quantum Imperator in toto Imperio, Every state of the Empire within his own
Territory, may do as much as the Emperor in the whole Empire; They have power
of life and death, they may coin money, send Ambassadors abroad, and make
confederacies, and leagues with foreign Princes, with other Territorial
prerogatives; But that power of making leagues was restrained in the late
Treaty at Osnabrug, for the Instrument says, Ius faciendi faedera liberum
esto, Ita tamen ne ejusmodi faedera sint contra Imperatorem, and Imperium,
pacemque ejusdem publicam, Let it be free to make confaederacies, provided that
the said confaederacies be not against the Emperor, and the Empire, with the
public peace thereof; Nay further, the Princes of the Empire have such a
latitude of power that they write se regnare Dei gratia, that they Reign by the
Grace of God; And that within the verge of the Empire the Princes Electors are
not to give precedence to any other foreign Prince, or potentat whatsoever;
Therefore when Charles King of Scotland, was a few years since at Frankfort,
the Count Palatin of the Rhin sent him word that he desired to give his Majesty
a visit, but by the constitution of the Empire he was not to give priority of
place there to any, it being an Imperial Town, but if his Majesty would please
to come to any of his own Territories he would then respect his Majesty in that
point accordingly.

The states of the Empire have also a territorial authority, to change their
Religion at pleasure, by a late Constitution, where it is said, Religionis
mutatio est sequela Territorialis Iurisdictonis, ac inhaeret Territorio sicut
nebula paludi; The alteration of Religion is a sequel of Territorial
Jurisdiction, and is inhaerent in the Territory as a clowd in a pond. By what
has bin spoken it appears what a small extent of power the sacred Caesarean
Majesty has over those that profess obedience to him; Nay, when there is a
King of the Romans it is a question who has the greater power the Emperor or
He; For the Emperor and the King of the Romans may be said to be like two
Suns in one Firmament, the one declining, the other rising, and the later
has more eyes upon it than the former.

By those particulars that have bin pointed at in this Section, a conjecture
may be made, if not a judgment, who stands fairest to be the next Emperor; But
they who harbor some doubts of the King of Hungary, have one shrewd argument
that he may go without it, which is his late increase and amplitude of power,
for he has not only the large Kingdom of Bohemia with the great Territories
annexed thereunto now as hereditary by way of conquest, but there is an
ovverture, if not an offer and private Treaty a foot that the Crown of Poland
will be entayl'd upon him, and his successors for the future; Though this
augmentation of power be good for the Christian Commonwealth in general,
because it enableth the Emperor to bear up the better againgst the Common
Enemy the Turk, yet not only the Electors, but some other Princes of the Empire
conceave some jealousy of this enlargement of the Imperial power, not without
some apprehensions of fear, that if the Eagle should ranew his bill, and have
his feathers come home to make his wings full summed again, he might seize
upon, and make a prey of sundry Towns, and Territories which diverse of the
said Princes hold from the Empire but by crazy weak titles; Nay it putts a
flea in the Venetians ear also, who have bin always jealous of the Austrian
greatness, in regard of contiguity of Territories they both have in Dalmatia,
Croatia, and other places. But it may be well expected that the Princes
Electors will rather look upon the general good and incolumity of the
Christian Commonwealth, as their Oath does bind them, which is as astringent,
and conjuring kind of Oath as possibly the wit of man can draw, or devise, for
they are not to be transported by any Pact, Price, Promise, or Prayer in the
Election. Which Oath runns thus.

The Solemn Oath that's administered to the Princes Electors, when they meet for
choosing a KING of the ROMANS, the Spiritual having their hands upon their
breasts, the Secular upon the book all the while.
EGo R. Sacri imperii Princeps Elector, juro ad sancta Dei Evangelia, heic
praesentialiter coram me posita, quod Ego, per fidem qua Deo, and sacro Romano
Imperio sum astrictus, secundum omnem discretionem, and intellectum meum, cum
Dei adjutorio, eligere volo Temporale Caput populo Christiano, id est, Regem
Romanorum in Caesarem promovendum, qui ad hoc existat idoneus, in quantum
discretio, and sensus mei me dirigunt, and secundum fidem praedictam, vocemque
meam, and votum sive Electionem praefatam dabo absque omni Pacto, Stipendio,
Precio, seu Promisso, vel quocunque modo talia valiant appellari, sic me Deus
adjuvet, and omnes sancti.

IR. Prince Elector of the Sacred Empire, do swear by the holy Gospel of God
put here before me, That I by the Faith wherein I am bound to God, and the holy
Roman Empire, will choose according to all my discretion and understanding,
with the help of God, a Temporal Head for Christian Peeple, to wit, a King of
the Romans to be promoted to be Caesar, one that may be idoneous for it,
according as my discretion and senses shall direct me; and according to my
foresayed Faith I shall give my Voice, and Vote, or forenamed choice, without
any Pact, Stipend, Price, or Promise, or by what names soever such things may
be called; So help me God, and all his Saints.

This tremendous Oath is pronounced in Latin, the Language of the Empire in all
Negotiations with foreign Princes; though the Electors be enjoynd by the Great
Charter of the Imperial Constitutions, viz. the Golden Bull, to speak the
Teutonique or High Dutch, the Italian, and Slavonique Languages.

THE COROLLARY.
THus have we cast the Roman Monarchy as it were into the Eagles egg again, as
it is recorded that Homers Iliads were once put into a Nuttshell, and as
Falconers observe the Eagle can lessen her self into a Lark by her high
Soaring, so we may say the Roman Monarchy has lessn'd her self by her
stooping.

Therefore this small volume is not unsuitable unto Herin point of proportion
as the case stands with Her now, being shrivelled a large Folio to a Decimo
sexto, and mouldred away from a Castle into a Cottage, or rather from a
Mountain to a Molehill. Such is the Method of the all-ruling Providence with
whom the greatest Kingdoms are but as Kittlepins which he tipps down at
pleasure. Ludit in humanis divina potentia Rebus

It Is He who transvolves Monarchies, tumbles down Empires, and cantonizeth them
into petty Commonwealths at pleasure, whereunto the Pagan Philosopher seemed
to allude when being asked what Jupiter did in Heaven? He answered Magnas ollas
rumpit, et ex frustis earum parvulas componit, He breaks great potts, and of
their Fragments makes little pitchers; And remarkable it is how symbolizing in
point of sense and similitude, the Holy Psalmist is with the Philosopher
herein, when he says Tanquam vas Figuli conteres eos, Thou shall bruise them
in pieces ( viz. the Potentates of the Earth) like a potters vessel, which
shows the brittlenesse, the Lubricity, and unfixednesse of all sublunary things
as well Political as Natural, so that to find out a stability, and permanence,
we must travel beyond Trismegistus circle, and seek it in the other World.

To conclude, having thus cast a few glances upon the To. German Empire, I
hope, My Noble Lord, it will suffice to quitt me of that obligation I owe to
your commands, which shall be always to me as Favors and I look upon your
Favors as a considerable part of my Happiness, which makes me delight so much
in the Character of

Holborn Calendis Ianuarii 1658. Your most obedient and ever ready Servant,
Jam. Howell.
Infantium cerebri Quadragessimus.
An Index of the Principal Matters contained in this Treatise.
A
THe Arms of the Empire Fol. 64 Alarick the Goth sacks Rome. 5 An extraordinary
providence watches over Rome. 5 Austrian family enjoyed the Empire more than
any that ever was. 16 Archbishop of Mentz Prime Elector and Arch-Chancellor of
Germany. 21 Archbishop of Colen Arch-Chancellor of Italy. 23 Archbishop of
Triers chief Chancellor of France. 23 Archbishop of Magdenburg Primat of all
Germany. 39 Archduke of Austria chief Prince of Germany after the Electors. 39
A maga animous Speech of the Lady Elizabeth. 69 Augustus a Title soly given by
the Pope. 81 The Austrian House^ six stories high, and how. 90.
B
BRennus the Britain first ransacked Rome. 5 Bourbon breathed his last in
scaling the Walls of Rome. 5 Bohemian King chief Butler of the Empire. 23 A Ban
against the English pronounced by the Imperial Diet, and not obeyed. 45 Boores
carry Chairs, and Noblemen Dogs for a punishment in Germany. 56 Brandenburg
has spacious Territories. 80 Bavaria and the Palatin of the same line, this
the Rodulphian, the other the Gulielmian. 71 The Bavarian Duke grown very
potent of late years. 79 Brisack Bridge makes France and Germany one continued
piece. 92
C
Caesar's issue enjoyed the Empire for 6 Descents. 7 Consulary Government thrice
in Rome by Retrogradation. 6 Claudius Caesar first began the pernicious way of
enhancing the Soldiers pay. 9 Constantines policy to the Soldiers. 10
Constantin gives Rome to the Pope. 10 Charlemain the first Western Emperor. 13
Charles Martel and his Story in brief. 13 Charlemains exploits. 14 Charlemain
proclaimed Emperor in Rome upon Christmas day. 14 Charlemains issue
degenerated. 15 The Civilians exalt the Emperor by high Titles. 31 The Crown
of England called an Imperial Crown by Act of Parliament. 33 The Crown of France
not tied to a Distaff. 34 The Comparison of Germany to a Firmament spangled
with Stars. 64 Count Palatin of the Rhin Arch-Treasurer of the Empire, and
eighth Elector. 68 The Count Palatins Interests. 85
D
THe distance of the Roman Emperor the cause of the declination in the West.
13 Duke of Saxony Lord high Marshal of the Empire. 22 Duke of Brandenburg Lord
Chief Chamberlain of the Empire. 23 Electors how they precede one another. 26
Domitius Nero the last of the race of Julius Caesar. 36 The division of
Germany. 36 The Diets of Germany, or Imperial parliament. 39 Duchess of
Bavaria a courageous Lady. 67 Duke of Bavaria at present impotent of getting
Children, and the reasons thereof. 71 Duke of Saxony a potent Prince. 78 Diverse
reasons why the young King of Bohemia is fittest to be Emperor 88 Of the King
of Denmark. 81
E
THe Empire of Rome put often to sale by the Soldiery. 10 The exorbitances of
the Roman militia. 10 English and French descended of the Germans. 12 The
Eastern Empire. 12 The Exarchat of Italy given to the Pope by King Pepin. 14
The Empire devolved to the Germans. 15 Electors first constituted. 21 Emperors
but Thou Would at first. 29 The Emperors next to God Almighty on Earth. 32 Edgar
an Emperor, and his high Titles. 32 Edward the third of England* Vicar of the
Empire, etc. 33 Embden a great friend to the English. 45 The English declared
Monopolists in Germany. 45 The Empire now but a feather in ones Cap. 55 The
Emperors Titles. 89 The Empire an airy Title in statu quo nunc. 92 The
Electors bound to learn to speak Dutch, Italian, and the Slavonique. 105
F
FRance and Portugal like to make Patriarks of their own. 91 Furthest way about
is the nearest way home in the researches of truth. 4 A facetious comparison of
the German Dietts. 49 A facetious tale of the Archbishop of Mentz. 55 A
facetious answer of the Lieflanders to Charles the fifth. 63 The famous siege of
Winsberga. 57 The Title of Emperor but an Eagles feather in ones Cap. 78
G
GEnsericus the Vandal sacks Rome. 5 Galba the first Emperor chosen by the
Soldiers. 7 A geer upon Rome and Venice. 11 Of the Goths and Vandals. 12 German
Princes do carry Dogs for their punishment. 17 German Princes feather themselfs
with the Eagles Plumes. 61 Germany able to raise 200 thousand electif men. 54
H
HUngary took name from the Huns. 11 Henry the second in France had the first
Title of Majesty. 30 The high power of the King of the Romans. 37 Hans-Towns
whence derived. 42 How Hamburgh first received the English staple. 46 A hundred
and fifty millions the revenues once of the Roman Monarchy. 54 How the Imperial
Towns got out of Caesar's yoke. 59
I
Julius Caesar cimented the Empire with his blood. 7 Iulianus bought the Empire
of the Soldiers. 10 Imperial Towns. 42 Immunities paid for moneys to the Towns
of the Empire. 59 Ibraim the Turks Ambassador his witty Parable. 64 King James
his prophetique saying. 68
K
KIngs continued in Rome 140 years. 7 King a more ancient title than Emperor.
29 Kings of Spain sometimes called Emperors. 32 King of Denmark Archbishop of
Breme 39
L
THe late Swedish army like to have proved such another as that of the Goths
and Vandals of old. 11 Lombardy freed of the Goths by King Pepin. 14 Lutherans
a great cause of the decay of the Empire. 62 The latitude of power which the
Princes of the Empire have. 96 The lubricity of political bodies as well as
natural. 108
M
THe Moors and Saracens sack Rome. 5 The manner of electing an Emperor. 25
Majesty and other high titles how they began. 30 Maximilian Duke of Bavaria
takes Prague from the Palatin with a lesser army. 69 Marq-Spinola takes the
Palatinat. 69 The Mahumetan Moon filled by the wane of the Christian Empire. 65
Of the Marquis of Brandenburg his interest. 85
N
THe names of diverse of the Emperors that were put to violent deaths. 9 A
notable saying of Charles Martel. 13 The names and offices of all the Electors.
21 Nothing so unlike as the present Empire and the old. 53 A notable story of a
Bavarian Duchess 57 The notable symbolisation of sense 'twixt the Psalmist and
a Pagan philosopher. 108
O
ONe of the cause that may oververthrow the Turkish Empire. 9 The new Ottoman
Emperor must increase the Ianizaries pay. 9 Otho the third the first
Establisher of the Electors. 20 The Offers of Wenceslaus to the Electors to
make his Son Emperor. 55 Of the Swed. 82 The tremendous Oath the Electors
take. 103
P
THe present King of Spain a Goth by descent. 12 Pepin a little man, but a
great Conqueror. 14 Pope John the ninth, taken Prisoner, and his eyes plucked
out. 20 Palatin of the Rhin Arch-sewer of the Roman Empire. 22 Parallel 'twixt
the Empire passed, and present. 51 Palatin of the Rhin adjudg'd to carry a Dog
for his punishment. 57 The Pope a great Temporal Prince. 60 The poor revenues
of the Empire. 53
Q
Quarrel 'twixt Rome and Germany for choosing the Emperor. 19 Quarrel 'twixt
Queen Elizabeth, and the Hans-Towns. 43 Quarrel 'twixt the Count Palatin and
the Duke of Bavaria touching the Vicariat of the Empire. 74 Quarrel 'twixt the
King of Denmark, and Hamburgh. 81 A thing like a quarrel 'twixt the King of
Scots and the Palsgrave. 97
R
THe Rise of the Roman Empire. 5 Rome eight times ravished and ransacked. 5 The
Roman Emperors held their life's from the Army. 8 The Roman Monarchy shrunk
from a Giantess to a Dwarf. Reasons why the King of Hungary is likeliest to be
Emperor. 88 The revennues of the French Church 300 millions of livers and 20.
91
S
THe several kinds of Goverments in Rome. 7 The Stewards in Scotland, and
Charles Martel of France had the same beginning. 13 The Septemvirat or the
seven Electors. 18 Staplers their first rise. 43 The Suisse one of the last
that fell from the Empire, etc. 63 The Spaniard the Popes Champion. 61 The
small power of the Emperor. 53 A sad saying of the Turks. 66 The Spaniard
comes from the elder House of Austria. 90 The several Interests of the Princes
of Germany. 85
T
TOtila the Hun sacks Rome. 5 The translation of the Empire to Constantinople
fatal to Rome. 5 Thirty Emperors put to violent deaths by the Army. 8 Two
Turkish Emperors killed in less than 25 years. 9 A Tradition remarkable how
the House of Austria came to be so great. 26 The Turk gives place to the
Emperors Ambassadors above all other. 31 The Titles of the Heirs apparent to
the Empire from time to time. 37 The Territories of the Pope 300 miles in
length. 60 The Pope pretends to be Lord Paramount of England by King John's
Grant. 61 Titles of the House of Austria. 89
V
THe Vastnes of the old Roman Monarchy. 54 The vast circumference of Rome in
Vopiscus time 50 miles compass. 54 A very witty emblem of the Turks Ambassador
touching Germany. 64 A very witty devise of the Duchess of Bavaria to preserve
her husband. 58 The Vicarship of the Empire challenged by the Count Palatin,
and his reasons. 74 A very witty way found by a Iesuitt to make the old Duke of
Bavaria get Children. 71 The Upper Palatinat, the County of Cham, with the
Electorship conferred upon the Bavarian. 79
W
THe wantones of the peeple more than the Tarquins, cause of the expulsion of
Kings. 6 A weak Act of the Roman Senate. 7 The Welsh and Irish have no other
name for an English man, but Saisson or Saxon. 12 Wenceslaus the Emperor,
deposed, and the manner how it was. 35 Why England fell from the Roman
Emperor, and from the Pope. 62
Were not the Imperial Eagles imp'd with Austrian feathers they would be as bare
as a Coot.

Gloria Honorque Deo saeclorum in saecula sunto. Chronogramma.

