THE HEART OF New England HARDENED THROUGH WICKEDNESS: In Answer to a Book,
Entitled the Heart of New England Rent, Published by John Norton appointed
thereunto by the General Court.

The Doctrine of the Quakers Uindicated, his Arguments made void, his Ignorance
manifested, and his lying doctrines brought to light and Judged with the Word
of Truth, and Truth cleared from his Aspersions and slanders.

By him that waits to see the Throne of Righteousness Exalted above all Deceit.
FRANCIS HOWGILL.

And the rest of the men which were not killed by the plagues repented not of
the works of their hands, neither repented they of their Murders nor sorceries
nor worshippings of Devils, Revel. 9. 20, 21. LONDON, Printed for Thomas
Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

NOw, when the Lord of life and glory is appearing in his Power as in the days
of old, and his goodness, mercy, and truth as in the years past, and the riches
of his Grace and Salvation, which he makes to flow forth and spring forth from
the great deep; now when he is manifesting his light from his holy habitation,
and his saving health from his dwelling place, that the sons of men might be
partakers thereof, and praise him who lives for ever and ever, who is the
Author of Eternal Salvation unto them that believe; the pit of darkness has
also opened its mouth, and out of it many unclean spirits does arise, and foggs
and mists of darkness, Ignorance and Error is also arisen out of it to hinder
the light from shining, and to darken the Air, that the Son of Righteousness
might not be beheld, and would dam up the way that the springs of life might
not refresh the City of God, and his tender plants; that so the Prince of
darkness and the King of the bottomless pit might not lose his Dominion, for
this end has he mustred up and is mustring up all his men of War with their
several weapons, and all the Engines of wickedness to resist the Lamb of God,
who is risen to make War in Righteousness, that so the Kingdom of darkness
might still be established, and the Subjects thereof live at ease and peace in
Egypt and Sodom, where Christ and the witnesses are flain; I say for this end
has he sent out his men of War to resist the work of the Lord, which is to
destroy the Devils work; one of his Champions more stout then his fellows is
come out with his weapons of War, which are most of them borrowed, and not his
own, and the City in which he has encompassed himself is a refuge of lies; but
however he appears with the face of Authority and subscribes himself John
Norton Teacher of the Church of Christ at Boston in New England, who was
appointed thereunto by the order of the General Court; his Book he calls The
heart of New England Rent at the blasphemies of the present Generation, or a
brief tract concerning the Doctrine of the Quakers, showing the destructive
nature thereof to Religion, Churches and State.

Now whether John Norton was appointed of the General Court to be Minister of
Boston, or he was appointed by the General Court to tell lies, how the heart of
New England is Rent, whether he intends, should be believed, the Reader may
judge; for his words may be understood of both: however John Norton has
manifested his Master, that it was not Christ who appointed him to be Minister
at Boston, but the General Court that appointed him; neither was it Christ nor
his Spirit that set him to work to publish lies to the World, that the heart of
New England was Rent, but the General Court; neither was it Christ nor the
General Assembly that ordered him to write this Book, which he calls a Tract
concerning the Doctrine of the Quakers, but the General Court they have ordered
thee to tell lies, and thou have received thy Commission and acts it, and
shows it to the World, and the sign thereof is by the appointment of the
General Court: before we go any further, men of understanding will Judge whose
Minister, whose Soldier, whose Warrier John Norton is, and at whose
appointment and Commandment he Ministers and Wars, and has cleared himself to
be no Soldier of Christ, no Minister of Christ, but appointed to Minister and
to War at the appointment of the General Court; and so what will be brought
forth by him in his Tract as he calls it afterward, as to Minister Grace to
the hearers and Readers, the Reader may Judge, seeing that he is a Minister by
the will of Man, and his work is appointed by the General Court; and does John
Norton believe that People will receive his Testimony as that the heart of New
England is broken and Rent, when as the blood-thirsty cruelty and Barbarous
actions and inhumane acts of cruelty, and the noisome smell, and a bad example
have you given to the World, and the Laws and appointments and orders of that
General Court of Boston and New England stinkes in the Nostrils of all sober
People, which is sounded through the World, and your State is as it was with
Israel when blindness hapened unto them through their unbelief, the effect of
it manifested their Apostasy, the Judges then judged for rewards, the Priests
Preached for hire and Prophets devived for money, and the People loved to have
it so in their unbelief, and then ^id the Rulers grind the faces of the Poor,
and chop them in pieces as flesh for the Caldron, even as you have done,
banished some from their Habitations, some from their Wives and Children, and
some you have seized upon their Lands, taken away their goods by the
Appointment and Order of your Courts by which thou art made a Minister, and
appointed to tell these lies, and to utter forth deceit to cover your
wickedness, and to strengthen the Devils Kingdom and the subjects thereof,
against Christ and his Kingdom, who came not to destroy men's lives, but to save
them, who came not to lay burdens, but to take off burdens, who came not to
destroy the Poor and Needy, but to relieve the Oppressed; And have not your
General Courts done all this and much more, which they may see and behold with
confusion of face? And when they have whipped them and scourged them, fined them
and imprisoned them, ceized upon their Lands, taken away their goods, wasted
their Estates, banished them upon pain of death, and when nothing has remained
of all their Estates, have ordered their Children to be sold for Bondslaves,
and this by the appointment of your General Court, and for no other cause but
because they would not put off their Hats to their Equals, or come to your
public Assemblies. Oh! un-heard-of and unparalled wickedness, the name of
your General Court and the Appointments and Ordinances thereof will be crowned
with infamy and reproach from Generation to Generation, but this is com'd to
pass that your hypocrisy might be made manifest, and your skirts uncovered
that your shame might appear, and that might be fulfilled which was spoken by
the Prophet, They cat up my People as men eat bread; Are these the fruits,
Symptoms and Characters that your hearts are rent and broken in New England,
or are they not rather manifest tokens that your hearts are like Adamant, or
like the nether Mil-stone or like flint, which is harder then ordinary stones,
in which there is no remorse or reluctance? And is not this your state, as it
was with Israel when their hearts were hard? Does not Christ say, By their
(...) the false prophets are known, and the Tree is known by its fruits; and
have not you brought forth the same fruits? Do not your (...) and Teachers Rule
and Teach for reward? Nay, are ^hey not worse? Have not you taken money from
them whom you Judged Malefactors to pay your servants for doing of your work
to your Marshals and your bloody Taskmasters and wicked Executioners? Oh!
shameless man and full of impudency that ever thou durst put Pen to Paper, or
that the General Court should ever appoint thee to tell the Nations that your
heart was rent in New England; but the terror of the Lord and the dread of God
you must all know before your hearts be rent, which is yet impenitrable and
hard, or else all these wretched Manifestations and fruits thereof would never
have appeared; but one of thy own Generation if not thy self says, That a
Company of Thieves, Fornicators and Fellons may cry out of deserved punishment
as Persecution as well as we; God has cleared us and redeemed us from those
things, but is not putting off the Hat to ones Equal, or not joining or coming
to your Congregation, that they deserve punishment suitable to Thieves,
Fornicators and Fellons, but Persecutors and blood-thirsty men were ever blind;
for Christ, the Prophets and Apostles and all the Holy men of God who suffered
for the Testimony of a good Conscience, were ever reputed transgressors and
Judged that they suffered deservedly by them who caused them to suffer; Christ
was crucified betwixt two Thieves, and Herod the Governor and his men of War
set him to naught, and he was numbered amongst Transgressors, as it is written
of him, and so were all his followers by them that were in Cains way, and in
Baalams way; and so have thou with the rest of Babylons Merchants these diverse
years numbered us amongst transgressors, every Sect and Opinion hitherto has
joined us to that Opinion or Sect which was contrary to them, but thou would
mar our Countenance more than any, thou has not found a Generation bad enough
to number us with in this age, but is gone back a thousand years to fetch up
Men and Doctrines and Principles, and would fasten them upon us, and so to
represent us odious to People, thou might have spent thy time better then to
have raked in those old moldy Histories, in which I see thou art better
acquainted then with the mind of Christ; but I shall not trouble the Reader
with thy stories, neither vindicate their Doctrines and Principles, which were
counted Heretics, these men are dead and gone, thou might have let them pass,
and have meddled with things that pertained to thy own Generation, but that thy
dead mind feeds upon dead things; and to tell thee and the world plainly, that
thou which will lie and lay things to their charge which they never knew nor
maintained, which may be are living and can reprove thee for thy falsehood and
deceit in this Generation, thou may well speak falsely and lay things to their
charge which they never maintained which are at such a distance as 1600 or 1000
years ago, and if the adversaries of these men did write their Principles and
set down their Errors and Blasphemies as I believe many of them did, I do less
credit their report, and I am not altogether unacquainted with Ecclesiastical
Histories from whence thou have had these Stories, although now I count the
time just lost in which I spent in those things; and though thou Judge that we
vilify the Scripture, yet I prefer it above and before all the Ecclesiastical
Histories that I have read; I shall not trouble the Reader with thy old
Hetrodoxes, as thou calls them, of the heads of Religion, there is many that
knows those things as well as thy self, and as for Praxes, Sabellers, Nestorus
Cerinthius, Eutichas, nor with Quintinius, Swinckfield, Muncer, David George
and John of Leyden, what are these to us? And what are their Principles to us?
Some thing they spoke which was real Heresy, if the Histories be true, whereof
I much doubt, because many such as thy self were the Authors thereof, and
something it may be was truth which might be vindicated, not because they held
it, but because it is truth in it self; And as for thy comparing of them to us,
and their Principles to ours, does not at all detract or invalidate truth as it
is in it self, for corrupt minds may speak true words, and that which is truth
in it self, yet not live in the life thereof, they are Judged though, the truth
in it self stands clear, and so what as they were in their Principles and
Practice in life or in Doctrine, must they give account for; but thou like the
rest of the hireling Priests of England used always to be confuting your
adversaries when they were at a great distance, when they were dead and could
not reply, or at such a distance that they could not hear, and you are such
valiant Champions for the most part as to Disputation, except you have Club-men
and Prison-doors standing open, to fight or to shut them in, you will hardly
enter into a Dispute publicly, or it may be if they be afraid that they shall
be worsted and their* deceit laid open, put a Key in the mouth of one, as some
did in the mouth of Humph. Norton, when he was with one of thy Brethren, and
then cry, The Opposite or Quaker he has nothing to say for himself; and such
dark muddy stories you used to fill up your hour with, as to confute Arius and
Pelagius, men that were hundreds of years dead, and no such Principles holden
in a Nation, and such dead stories you fill Peoples minds with, and confute the
Pope when your elbows was leaning upon the soft Cushons on the Pulpit, and 20
or 30 s. for such a dead Story as you told People, but when have you gone
amongst them and reasoned of the things of the Kingdom of God into their
Dominions, and convinced them by sound Doctrine, and yet you will say Christ
said, Go into all Nations and Preach, and plead that for your Commission, and
it may be stay forty years over a hundred Families.

As for the Hetrodoxes of the Quakers concerning the heads of Religion, as thou
have set down, this I say to thee, and to all the World, we do not hold them
because any man before did hold them, or may hold them after, but because God
has revealed them unto us by his Spirit, which also may be confirmed by the
Testimony of the Scriture of Truth.

As to those which thou sets down as our Tenants I shall answer on the Lords
behalf for Truths sake, and for the rest thou may take them home to thy self.

First concerning the Trinity thou says, they confess the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, and yet they deny the Trinity, and those to bet hree distinct
Persons, for confutation of this thou brings Heb. First and third; He is the
express Image of his Fathers Person.

Thy Trinity is an old Popish term and we love to keep to sound words, but by
Trinity I suppose thou means three, and thy own words shall confute thee* thou
confesses we say there is Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and yet but one God, or
one Eternal being or substance in which they all subsist, but thy word distinct
is thy own and not the Spirits, yet to distinguish betwixt Father, Son and
Spirit we deny not; and as for the first of Heb, it is in another Translation
rendered the express Image of his substance, for Person is too gross a word,
as to express an Eternal and Divine being in, and if thou do hold three
distinct substances thou errs in thy Judgment, for that were to make three
Gods.

Secondly, They deny Christ to be God and man in one Person, and Christ to be a
distinct Person from the Father, and they acknowledge such a Christ as
unchrists Christ; and when they say Christ manifest in the flesh, they mean not
as the Scripture, but falaciously.

Answ. We say according to the Scripture of Truth and not according to thy
falacy, that in the man Christ did the fullness of the Godhead dwell, and God
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, and he says I and my Father
are one, and the Father the Son and the Spirit subsist in one Eternal Power,
Life and Glory, which thou with all thy stupid generation are Ignorant of; and
Christ that we acknowledge is such a Christ as is able to save to the utmost
them that come unto him, and receive him and believe in him, and is such a
Christ is as able to raise them that have been dead, and such a Christ gives
Eternal life to them that believe; And so that Christ that we own does not
un-christ Christ, but by your Doctrine who pleads imperfection and the
continuation thereof, and a continuation in sin for term of life, as one of thy
own said, sin will dwell in the house till the house be pulled down, speaking
of the natural body, which some other of thy own Generation have called the
body of sin, and so it is you that hold such a Christ as unchrists the true
Christ in thy own words; and when did thou enter into our thoughts and into
our heart, or with what do thou search, that thou sits as Judge over the
heart, who knows not judgment in thy self nor of what spirit thou art of, and
so thy lies and deceit is turned upon thee; when we say Christ manifest in the
flesh we say that holy thing which was brought forth and born of a Virgin, and
conceived of the Holy Ghost in whom the fullness of the Godhead, dwells, in
whom the Eternal Power of the Father was manifested, that he was the Christ
which was manifested in the flesh and Justified in the Spirit, Preached among
the Gentiles, seen of Angels, and received up into Glory, and this is according
to Scripture of Truth, and thy judgment must be judged.

Thirdly, Concerning the Scripture considered as the rule of Life, They deny
the Scripture or written word to be the rule of life, and they make the Spirit
without the Scripture to be their guide, they account Church, instituted
worship and waiting upon God for the Efficacious pres^nce and operation of the
Spirit of Grace in the Ministry of the Word and Sacrament for conversion and
edification to be I^^latry, and the Political order of Church Officers and
members they affirm to be an Image.

Answ. Concerning the Scripture we say they are Scriptures of Truth and words
of Truth spoken from the Spirit or Truth, that which gave them a being is
greater then they, as he that Creates is greater then they that ar^ Created,
which is preferred above and before, and yet no Deminishing or Detracting from
the Creature; so the Spirit is greater above and before the words, and yet this
does not Deminish, neither Derogate from the Scripture; these and the like
sound words we have spoken to thy deaf Generation, yet a spirit of slumber
being upon them all, they could not hear that which gives Life, and brings
to Life, and preserves in the Life, is a rule and a guide to them that are
enlivened, the Sons of God who were quickened by the Eternal Spirit of their
Father and of Christ, and raised from death to Life, this was their rule, as it
is written, as many as are the Sons of God are led by the Spirit of God, and we
say it is a sufficient rule of it self, and thou may as well count the rule of
the Sons of God Hetrodox and Heretical, and the Apostles position, who said, as
many as are the Sons of God are led by it, and Christ promised unto believers
the Spirit of Truth to lead them into all Truth, and to bring things to their
remembrance, and to guide them in the path of Righteousness; what has Envy and
madness eaten all the good out of your hearts? Yet the Scripture is not so
excluded by us as thou Judge, though we say the Spirit may lead and direct
with it, or without it, yet not contrary to it, for the Spirit does, will and
may take up what thing it pleases to manifest it self and its mind unto the
Creature, and who art thou? and what art thou? any thing but an Egyptian who
would limit it, and tie it to Paper and Ink, to words and Syllables sounded and
written in diverse Tongues, Languages and Caracters; they that appointed thee
for a Minister never knew Gods Work, and we know that there are several
Ministrations and several operations, yet the same God and the same Spirit who
manifested it self, and forms and Ordains things according to its Heavenly
will, to represent its Heavenly mind to the Creature, and that which Christ
has Ordained and Instituted to be worshipped in, waited in, and his presence
seen in, and the operation of the Spirit of Grace in the work of the Ministry,
which is for Conversion and Edification is dearly owned by us, as that whereby
we have found the Lord and his pure presence through this or that thing, and
without and beyond all Creatures or visible appearances, and this is not
accounted Idolatry by us, as thou falsely says, which God will Judge thee for
in the day when he appears to take vengeance upon his Enemies in flames of
fire, and thou that talks of trying the Spirit by the Letter knows no more of
God then a Horse, but what thou knows naturally; the Jews had it, and they
tried and condemned him for a blasphemer, and the Apostles for breakers of the
Law and makers of it void, and so condemned the Lord of Life, and the Spirit by
which the Prophets and Apostles was led by, even as thou does with us; and I
never heard of any Political order of Church Ordinance or officers or
Ordinances, not of the most dark and sottishest Merchants of Babylon that ever
spoke or wrote yet, there was sundry gifts given and sundry Institutions in the
Primitive times which were signal things of things of a more Heavenly and
Celestial nature which was to be made manifest; he gave some gifts to be
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Apostles, some Pastors, some Teachers, but
these were Ministerial for the work and service which he had appointed, but
this was all by one and the same spirit, but I never heard of any Political
order of Office^, or Political Ordinances ordained in the Primitive Churches;
but it seems you have got such in New England; in the Church of Rome, so
called, I have heard of the order of Benedict, of Francis and Austin, and the
like and of several Ordinances instituted by their Mother to perform; but I
never heard of any such as a Political order of Officers and Ordinances before,
and this may be called an Image indeed, and nothing in the world but deceit,
and is no Hetrodoxy; that ever such a blind fellow as thou should put pen to
Paper, who has crept so into the mudd and dirt, that gross Ignorance and
darkness is in all thy words; But the least of the children of light will see
thy Ignorance, so that I need not say much.

Concerning the magistrate, they own none are lawful Magistrates who are not of
their way, their non-acknowledgement of the Magistrate, as now established, in
all Christian States is more then nanifest

Answ. If thy Aspersion were full proof no more need be said, but the Judicious
will not easily believe thee; that there is a State of Magistracy is granted by
us, and that a true Magistrate that Rules well, and Rules in the Power of God
and is a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well, and are as
nursing Fathers, who preserves men's Persons and Estates from devourers, as a
Father preserves a Child from injury, these are Ordained of God, and such we
are subject unto for the Lords sake and for Conscience sake, and to every
Ordinance of man which is consistant with the honor of God and a pure
Conscience, but I believe you have few of them in New England, who are rather
like Bears and Lions tearing and rending their Estates, and rends and tears
their flesh, and gnawes it like Evening Wolves that the Prophet speaks of, and
would thou have this counted as Gods Authority? and we tell thee and all the
World in singleness of heart and unfeignedness, that our way is Christ the way
to the Father, the Truth and the Life, the Power of God and the Wisdom of God,
and all that Rule not in his Power rule in the Devils power, in the Dragons
power, in the Beasts power, who made War with the Lamb and killed the Saints,
and compelled them to worship, and herein they that Rule in the Power of God
and for God are manifest, and them that rule in the Dragon and Beasts power,
for they that Rule in the Power of God answers Gods witness in every man, and
reaches to that by his Act of Justice in the transgressor, and he restrains
the evil doer within, and limiteth that, and preserves the Creature as much as
him lies from harm, and his Estate from destruction, and also saves the
Innocent, meek and harmless from the violence, and from beating and fighting,
and from them that would destroy their Persons and Estates; and herein the
Magistrate that Rules in the Dragons power and in the Beasts power, he is also
made manifest, he reaches not Gods witness by his Governing, he lests the
transgressor live, and is not a terror to evil works and workers, but a
terror to them that do well and exercise a pure Conscience toward God and
man, and may be cannot go into the House of Rimmon, neither can bow to Baal,
nor be subject to that which another may set up in his will and in his pride,
then he afflicts the body, the Creature, and mars Gods Workmanship and defaces
it, and does violence to the Creature, and rends away his outward subsistence,
and says for his Authority It was so ordered at our General Court. I must tell
thee, the false Church, the Mother of Harlots has ridden long upon the
Scarlet-colored Beast, which has been made drunk with the blood of the Saints,
whose Garments have been red with Scarlet color; and I know no where in any
Christian State (so called) where he reigns in more power then in New England,
and you ride upon the Beast which has risen out of the Sea, which is amongst
you, and the beast carries you, your Church, on his back bears it up, for all
your Weapons are but carnal, and that which wrestles with flesh and blood,
which the true Church wrestles not with, nor with Creatures, but with spiritual
wickedness and principalities and powers of darkness in the Creature, and threw
that down and saved the Creature alive, and redeemed it who was in Captivity.
Oh sottish Children, when will you learn Wisdom, and when will you hearken to
reproof of instruction which is the way to life? but remember this, the beast
shall be taken alive with the false Prophet, and them that have wrought
Miracles before him, and then shall be cast into the Lake of fire.

They pretend to act from an Infallible light within them, and professes
perfection in degrees in this life, and publish smart invectives against
Ministers who teach the contrary.

Answ. We pretend to nothing but to that which God has given us through his
free mercy, which we have a true right unto, having received him as the Father
has tendered him to be a light to open our eyes, and to be a Leader unto us
and all his People, and to be Gods Salvation, even to the ends of the earth to
them that receive him, and he is that Infallible light which the Father sent
into the world, that all men through him might believe, and he is the true
light that lightneth every man, though every man has not received him, the
fault is not in the Giver, nor in the gift, but in them that will not receive,
and he that is the life of all men, has lighted every man that comes into the
world, and he is in us our Hope, and our Glory, the riches of the Gentiles, and
the riches of all them that do believe, he is our Way and our Life and Peace, I
say all Glory unto him for ever, though thou debase him and set him thus at
naught, and for his sake we can bear reproaches and become fools, in that we
have obtained that in which true Wisdom stands and life Eternal; And what is
this Hetrodox to profess perfection of degrees in this life, is not this
Orthodox? used not you and do not you generally hold perfection in part or
parts, and is not that which is perfect in parts perfect in degrees? He that
feels victory over one sin by Christ the Power of God, has not he some part in
that which is perfect, and of that which is perfect? And if he witness victory
over more, is he not come to a greater degree or degrees of the life which is
perfect? And he that knows the blood that cleanses from all sin, is not he
perfect and complete in him who has made him so? But art thou so offended at
perfection that thou do not admit of any part or parts, degree or degrees
thereof, that thou sets this down as a Blasphemy? And its time indeed to
reprove you sharply who are puffed up in pride and knows nothing, who teaches
contrary to the perfect life of Christ, or any degree or degrees thereof to be
attained unto; thou art perfect in wickedness, and a perfect Minister of
Antichrist, and a perfect Heathen, and its time to bear Testimony against you
and lay you open, and your deceit in the sight of the Sun, that them that have
but the least glimring of the Light may behold you; a pitiful Church is that
like to be which thou art Pastor of, by appointment of the General Court, who
cries out against any degree of the perfect life of Christ in this life to be
obtained or enjoyed, a Minister of sin, a Minister of Satan and
unrighteousness, that is thy name, own it.

In the ninth page thou art going about to prove thy Trinity, as thou calls it,
and thou say, The Father is a distinct subsistence, and the Son a distinct
subsistence, and the Holy Ghost is a distinct subsistence, and thou brings John
5. there is another bears witness likewise, speaking of the Holy Ghost, he
calls him another, and this another thou says, Is Intel^ of the Essence, and
then says, What is more manifest then another subsistence, and another
subsistence speaks distinct subsistances, and thou says, The Spirit is called
the hand of Trinity.

Answ. Another is not understood of another being of another life or another
substance, but is understood of another Manifestation or Operation of the same
God who subsists in the same Power in which the Father the Son and the Spirit
subsisteth, as I said unto thee before, another, as to distinguish of the
Operation and Work of the Spirit, and of the Son, we do not refuse; but to make
three distinct essences and beings is ignorance and error, as thou says,
Another is intel^gible of the Essence, and so thou have made three Essences,
three Subsistances, three Persons and three Gods; but we say there is but one
God, and there is three that bears record in Heaven, the Father, the Word and
the Spirit, and these three are one. Now as for Subsistence and Essence, they
are unsound words coined of your selves, from your dark imaginations, in which
there is no truth at all, but to cast a mist; Now where the Holy Ghost is
called a Person in the Scripture I have never read, and where it is called the
hand of Trinity I have never heard of before thee, and so thy blind ignorant
conclusions and Sophistical arguing will have little place with them that are
come to know the Teachings with the Spirit, and also keep to a form of sound
words, which thou cannot.

And thou says, He that sends and he that is sent are distinct, and so the
Father sending the Son, and the Son sent of the Father, and the Father and the
Son sending the Spirit, and the Spirit sent by the Father and the Son are
distinct subsistances, and not the same.

He that sends and he that is sent may be distinguished, but he that sends
and him that is sent is not so distinct and afar off one another, but that him
that sends is with him that is sent; and so God was in Christ reconciling the
world, and then how were they distinct one from the other, and by him was all
things made, and Christ was not so distinct or afar off at a distance when the
Heavens and the Earth was made; so that it is truly said, without him nothing
was made that was made, and the Spirit of God which may be distinguished in
regard of its Operation, yet it was not absent or distinct from the Father and
the Son in the Creation, neither is absent from the Son in the Regeneration, or
work of Redemption.

And then in thy Answer to an Objection which thou make thy self, How the
Doctrine of life was Communicated vocally by the Patriarchs, but it is not so
now; and in thy Answer thou says, The Scripture is not necessary, absolutely,
but it being Gods Will to Communicate life through the Scripture, hence the
Scripture is necessary; and then thou says, Not the letter without the mind of
the Author, nor the Spirit without the Scripture; and that the words in the
17th of John 22. That they may be one as we are one; these words give an
uncertain sound, thou say; and further thou say, Surely, they are under a
Rule of live who hare not the Spirit since the Canon of the Scripture is
closed, so far is the Spirit from being a Rule of life, that to us it is not
the Spirit, except it move in the written word.

Answ. Gross darkness is thy dewlling place, and out of thick darkness all this
pitiful confusion comes, the Doctrine of life was Communicated according to
the will and mind of God, sometime by Dream, sometime by Vision, sometime by
Revelation to the Patriarchs and Believers from Abel till Moses, and by Faith
they were followers of Christ, and doubtless they did Communicate in their
Generation those things that were manifest unto them by the Spirit, which was
the then Rule and Guide to the feet of the upright in the way of Peace before
any Scripture was written, and if the Scripture be not necessary absolutely,
thou have said as much as we say, therefore we' speak of a Rule and a Way which
is absolute necessary, without which no man can know the Father or the Son, nor
the way of Peace, but by the Spirit of truth which gave forth the Words of
truth, which may manifest and does manifest it self as it will, when it will,
where it will, and how it will, for it is unlimitted, and it will not be
limited by its own words as to sound, but may speak words which it never spoke
before, as for instance, Paul by the Spirit said, The second Adam the Lord from
Heaven is a quickening Spirit, which none of the Scriptures before written
speaks in these very words, and if the Spirit be not Spirit without the Letter,
then where the Letter is wanting the Spirit is wanting, and consequently them
that have the Scripture have the Spirit, which were no less then ignorance and
darkness to say, and what Rule are they under who have not the Spirit or no
measure of it, there is but the Spirit of Truth and the spirit of error, and
they that are not ruled by the Spirit of Truth, they are ruled by the spirit of
error, though they may have the words to fight with and quarrel about without
the life; But last of all thou have in plain words set the dead letter before
the living Spirit, and says, That the Spirit is no Spirit except it speak by
the Scripture; and if the words of Christ in the 17th of John give an uncertain
sound, it is but to thy deaf ear and to thy blind understanding, for he spoke
soundly and certainly, and prayed to the Father that as the Father and he was
one, so they also might be one, being guided by the one Spirit of the Father in
the Son, and that they might live in the Unity of it, and have Unity one with
another in it, and with the Father and the Son.

In thy 15th page, though thou have set up the Letter for a perfect Rule of
life, yet here thou throws it down again, and says, It is to be understood as
including consequences, for the greatest part of Scripture is consequences, and
the Scripture cannot be true without consequences, for Thomas and Mary are
neither commanded obedience or forbidden disobedience, for we no where read
thou Thomas or thou Mary are therein commanded obedience or forbidden
disobedience, such a one by name do this or that.

Answ. I told thee the Spirit of God is unlimitted, and whether it speaks of
degrees or measures of a greater or less thing, or whether it speaks the
greater first and the lesser after, whether it speaks from Major to Minor, or
from Minor to Major, or what may truly follow either from the greater to the
less or from the less to the greater it is all truth, but thy Consequences is
no part of this, the Spirit still demonstrates its own mind by what words and
terms and expressions it pleases, and will not be limited or confined to this
or that form of words, and thou errs grossly, neither knowing the Scripture nor
the Power of God, and thy Consequences are false, for there are the individual
persons or names of Thomas and Mary, both commanded obedience and forbidden
disobedience, and if thou have never read this in Scripture, I inform thee and
instruct thee, thou may read the 20th of John 16, 17. where Jesus says unto
Mary, she turned herself and said unto him Rabboni, which is to say Master,
Jesus said unto her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended; here is a
Prohibition, and forbidding that she should not touch him, secondly here is a
command of obedience, But go unto my Brethren and say unto them I ascend to my
Father and your Father, to my God and your God; and in the same Chapter thou
may read in the 27th where Christ spoke unto Thomas by name (after his
Resurrection) then said he to Thomas, reach hither thy finger and behold my
hands, and reach hither thy hand and thrust it into my side; here was a Command
to be obeyed, and be not faithless, there is a prohibition or a forbidding of
unbelief, and so thy foolishness is manifest and ignorance of the Scripture,
some of it thou says is an uncertain sound, and the Scriptures forementioned
thou have denied or else never have read it, and so art unacquainted with thy
Rule which thou quarrels and fights so much about.

And then thou comes and says, Thou will vindicate some Scriptures, and cites
1 John 9. That this was the true light which lights every man that comes into
the world, hence they affirm that there is a light in every man, which being
followed is an Infallible guide, and that this light which lights every man
is the Rule of life, and not the written word; thy Answer is, The sense of the
Text is notoriously false and thy reason is if Christ the true light that
lights every man be the Rule, then righteousness should be by the Law; for
the light which is in every man is not Gospel light, but there is a natural
light or the light of Nature, which is to be construed in opposition to
spiritual, and the light of Nature and the light of the Spirit are
contradistinct, and by this light of Nature there is a difference put betwixt
that which is good and bad, and it will teach us not to lie nor steal, and it
will lead to the Knowledge of one God, and yet it is in opposition to one
spirit, and it will lead to know Eternity omnipotency, and it will lead to know
the Creator, yet it is contradistinct to the spirit.

Answ. The Scripture needs none of thy Vindication, for thou have defamed it
and says Christ's words is an uncertain sound, and thou have said that neither
Mary nor Thomas was commanded obedience; thou may look back of thy lies and
repent of them, and why is the sense of the Text utterly false, that Christ was
the true light that lights every man that comes into the world without
exception, and why is this utterly false, if he be followed, that he who is the
true light is an Infallible guide, and the Rule of life, has he not enlighted
every man that comes into the world? if thou make exceptions where the Spirit
makes none, then thou perverts the Scripture; does not he say I am the light of
the world, the world in the Scriptures account is set in opposition to
believers, for believers are not of this world, but are redeemed out of it, as
for example, God so loved the world that he sent his Son into the world, that
whosoever did believe in him might not perish, but have Everlasting life, for
it is manifest that the Saints and Believers had life given already that
followed Christ and were his sheep, and says Christ, I put them forth and go
before them, and give unto them Eternal life; and he said to them who had not
Eternal life, While you have the light believe in it, that you may be the
Children of it; and is not Christ Gods Righteousness, who is given for a
Covenant of light to the blind, and dead, and lame, and to the dumb to open
their eyes, to quicken them, to make them leap as a Heart, and their tongue to
sing and utter forth praise; we say Righteousness is not by the Law, but by
Christ that lights every man who is the end of the Law, and why is not the
light which lights every man Gospel light, seeing it is said, Go Preach the
Gospel in every Creature under Heaven; go learn what that means, and if natural
light must be construed in opposition to spiritual, and the light of Nature
contradistinct to the light of the Spirit, then it must needs be sinful, for
that which opposes spiritual light and is set in opposition against its
leading, must needs be sinful, and that which is contra or against the light of
the Spirit must needs be sinful; and then if it be as thou have said, and if
this must be the true sense of that Scripture, that it must be understood of
natural light, and that natural light thou construes in opposition to
spiritual, and says it is contradistinct to the light of the Spirit, and in
opposition unto it, that which is against the Spirits light or the light of the
Spirit must needs be darkness, sinful and evil, and yet thou have confessed it
will teach that none ought to lie or steal, and to know one God, and the
Creator, and Eternity and Omnipotency, and yet it must be taken in opposition
to the Spirit, and contradistinct from the Spirit; that which leads to know the
Creator and Eternity and Omnipotency is that Spirit of God, through which God
and the things of God are revealed, and that that teaches that a man should not
lie, that is truth, and that that leads from sin, and accuses for evil-doing
and convicts, that is the Spirits light, as it is written, he shall convince
the world of sin; and so thou like a man who has lost all aim, rambles up and
down in every by-path, and like a blind man gropes, but cannot enter into the
Treasure-house of Wisdom, thou have called the light that every one is lighted
with, the Righteousness of the Law, and no Gospel light, and in opposition to
spiritual, and contradistinct to the Spirit, and in a word has made at it at
the best construction but bad and evil, and then when thou have done thou
confesses that it will put a difference between good and evil, and show that
God is to be worshipped, and Eternity is known and Omnipotency; And are not
these the deep things of God? And so B^bylon is the Land of thy nativity, and
thou reels and staggers up and down like a drunken man, and would be a Teacher,
and knows not whereof thou affirms, nor of what thou speaks.

Further thou says, That this little light there is, is much miscarried, and
thy Reason is, because it is managed by the reigning power of darkness, and the
judgment of man is corrupt, and then thou goes on, the light of nature since
the fall is not to be compared (say thou) with the light of the Image of God
before the fall, and it has no proportion with Gospel light, but is gross
darkness, nay, is worse then gross darkness.

Answ. And how did the light miscarry thou blind-man, and when did the Reigning
power of darkness manage it, seeing that there is no fellowship betwixt light
and darkness, and the light which every man is lighted with has born witness
against darkness and the Reigning power of it, and though the judgment of man
be corrupt, his miscarriage is because he has not minded the light, and
because he has turned his back on it, and then sin entered, and then came to
Reign in the power of darkness, and corrupted the heart, and this has made man
miscarry; and though thou say that the light which lights every man is not
compared with the light of the Image of God before the fall, and has no
proportion, I Will tell thee a riddle go learn what it means, the light of the
Image of God before the fall is the same in it self after the fall, and holds
its proportion, and is no whit lessned or deminished in its purity in its self,
although fallen man do not see it neither can behold it, because sin has
entered and death by sin, and that is it which obscureth the Image of God from
man, and its light, yet the light shined in darkness, but thou concludes it is
darkness, yea worse then gross darkness, and thou brings a proof to prove it,
ye were darkness, the Apostle does not say that the light which shined in
darkness was darkness or worse then gross darkness as thou ignorantly says,
but he said the Ephesians or the men of Ephesus were darkness, and not the
light in them which shined in darkness, though the darkness comprehended it
not; but how now John Norton, what will the General Court of Boston say when
they see thy confusion laid open, and the deceit made manifest to thine and
their shame and ignorance, thou confessed in the 16. page, that it would lead to
know God and the worship of God, and Teach not to lie and steal, and so forth,
and to discover some of Gods Attributes, as Eternity, omnipotency, and the
like, here was some good in it in thy own account, but now its become gross
darkness, in the 18. page and worse then gross darkness, and so has made as
bad if not worse then any Principle that is in a Beast; and it may truly be
said of thee even in thy own phrase.

-- Quanta sub nocte Jacebat
Nostra dies --
But now thou comes to a further interpretation of 1 Job. 9. and thou says the
light which we are enlightened with it is either ^he light of nature the light
of reason or the light of saving Grace, and the light enlightening is either the
Word considered as the second Person or Christ the Son considered as Incarnate.

Answ. It seems that thou knows not which it is, but gueses like a blind man,
and like a wild Archer shootes at random; and why do thou make such
distinction betwixt the Word the Son of God, and Christ the Son of God, thou
made but three Persons in the Trinity before, but it seems by thy arguing thou
would now make four; And as for thy Collective and distributive light, the
distinctions is that which would cast a mist before People eyes, and thou
brings the Judgment of Calvin, Besar, and Piscator, and others, that as
concerning man endued only with the light remaining since the fall, they
conclude him to be darkness and unable to comprehend the light or to improve it
to salvation, their judgments is more sound then thine, though thou would
bring them to strengthen thee that the Son of God has not enlightened every
man, they confess, the man in the fall is in darkness, and darkness is over
him, and in that he is not able to comprehend the light which is in him, and as
to the improvement of it, in the darkness man has not power to improve it to
salvation, but what does this invalidate the light which is in darkness, the
power of improving is in the light being turned to again and received; and what
if I say it is the light of Life in its self though thou deny it, I know what I
speak; for in him was life and is life, and that life is the light of men, and
the light of the world, and so that light which every man is lighted with, is
of the life and from the life, and so may truly be said to be the light of
life in it self, though man in the transgression does not feel it so as to him,
but may truly say it is the light of condemnation, because he feels it so in
the operation thereof, being in the transgression, it convicteth, reproves,
accuses and condemns for evil, and therefore it cannot be the light of life
to him, till it be received closed with obeyed and followed, and then the back
is turned upon the transgression, and man is come out of the darkness; and
therefore the Apostle spoke well and understandingly according to knowledge,
that which was ordained for life wrought death in him, that was because the Law
was against him, and he in the contrary nature to it, the ignorance of many
wise men (so accounted) in this generation is such, that when they see or feel
contrary effects, they judge there must needs be contrary subjects or objects
because there are different effects; for now the same light which shows evil
and accuses for it, and judges for it, there is one operation, and excuses him
that loves it and obeyes it, here is another operation, that which convinces
the world of sin, of Righteousness and of Judgment, and that which consolates
and gives peace to the believer is the self same spirit; so here is not two
spirits or two lights, so that he which kindles a fire in the Earth, and
appears in flames of fire, and renders vengeance upon all them that obey not
the Gospel which is the Power of God, here is one work or operation of Christ,
the same brings Peace, Joy and gladness, and refreshment, and makes the
springs of life to buble up in them that believe, here is another operation yet
the same Christ; these things I write to inform thee and all where this may
come, that that is truly an appearance of Christ which shows sin and
condemns it in any measure, and he alone is the Judge of the quick and the
dead, and if all Judgment be committed to the Son, then to be Judged for lying
for stealing, and for wronging any man, it is the work of Christ and the work
of the Son. Oh man thou have much to repent of, and thy ignorance is great,
which has called Christ the light or the light of Christ, or the light of life
darkness, and contradistinct to the Spirit, and worse then gross darkness, so
this is thy conclusion against the first of John and the 9. that Christ has
not enlightened every man or all men that come into the world, but all men so
qualified of every sort, so then by thy conclusion the first of John and the 9.
verse gives an uncertain sound, like the 17. of John and 22* so then its
qualifications of men that procures light from Christ, and so its not of Grace
but of debt, but if it be of debt, which is owing unto a Person so qualified,
then it is not of gift, but thou errs in thy Judgment, for it is by the gift
of righteousness that Justification comes upon all that believes, it is not
this or that qualification before their conversion which is any cause of Gods
enlightening them, but it is the free love of God unto man without exceptions,
or respect of Persons that he has lighted every man, to the intent that all
and every man might see his Error and depart from it, and turn to him that
shows him it, who would have all men saved and come to the knowledge of the
Truth, and such is the large love of God unto whole mankind, which thou
would restrict and bind up to such and such Persons so qualified, as though
qualifications of Persons were a Meritorious cause wherefore Christ was bound
to give them light, this is rank Popery, and not according to the Doctrine of
godliness.

And thou citest the 2 Pet. 1. 19. We have a more sure word of prophecy, where
unto you do well that you take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark
place, until the day dawn and the day Star arise in your hearts, hence it is
inferred, thou says, that after the reception of the Spirit there is no need
to attend to the Scripture, and so thou goes on and says the word of prophecy
is the Scripture of the Old Testament, that thou art to take heed unto until
the day dawned and the day Star arised in their hearts; and that until
signifies for ever.

Asw. And here thou art in confusion, I know none that makes any such inference
but thy self, for the Scripture is seen most clearly, who know the day dawn and
the day star arisen in their hearts; and first thou says, we are to understand
the Word of Prophecy the whole Scripture, and then in the same page says, that
Peter expounds the word prophecy of the Old Testament only, so then Peter's
Exposition by thy account, and thine is different, thou says he spoke of the
Old Testament, and thy interpretation is of the whole Scripture, but thou have
mist it, both of Peter and thy self, for Peter wrote unto People in that
Epistle in several States, yet they all might be said to be believers,
according to a proportion of faith given unto them, and in that which thou have
cited 2 P^t. 1. 19. we have also a more sure word of Prophecy, Here is to be
understood first a sure word, Secondly a more sure word, for the Apostle in
that Chapter speaking of their diligence toward them that did believe, and
declared unto them that they had not followed devised fables, when we made
known unto you the Power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but are eye
witnesses of his Majesty, verse 16. and heard the voice from this excellent
glory, this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, when we were with him
in the Mount, this was as sure a word to the Apostles as any that ever the
Prophets had spoken before was to them, and so the Old Testament could not be
more sure then this which they had from the excellent glory, but this was not
so sure unto them to whom Peter wrote, and this was only the Apostles
Declaration, but the word of prophecy unto which he exhorted them unto was
nearer them then any of the Prophets words or the Apostles Testimony of what
they had heard in the Mount, the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of prophecy,
to wit that which bears witness against sin and to righteousness, from this the
Prophets spoke, and this was that public thing or Spirit, and they that speak
not from it speak from a private spirit of their own, and this word of
Prophecy or that wherein they could see or foresee things to come, they were
to take heed unto as unto a light which shined in a dark place, and this was
the more sure word which he directed to, which in all thy Book thou quarrels
against, and through this they saw the appearance, and knew the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ in Power and great Glory, and did see the day dawn and the
day Star arise in their hearts, and they were to attend to this not only
before, but also after, for by the Word of his Testimony the Saints did
overcome, and so all thy Interpretations are false, and thine is the private
Interpretation, and not from that sure word of prophecy which the Prophets and
believers took heed unto, and through which they interpreted things truly
according to the mind of God.

As for the story of false Teachers arising and prevailing among People, and
what the signal nature is, and thou say they are sent as scourges and as
judgments to them who have not received the Truth in the love of it, and thou
brings a Scripture, I came in my Fathers Name and ye received me not, John 5.
but if another shall come in his own Name him you will receive.

Its manifest that thou comes not in his name nor in Christ's Name, and if not
so, in thy own name thou comes by the appointment of the General Court at
Boston, and so there will few believe thy fabulous stories which are not worth
rehearsal, which will cast a mist before the eyes of them who cannot see
through thy deceit, and the sum is, thou say, of all that the Doctrines of
Devils audatiously deseminated, pretending themselves to be sent of God, are
signal signs of evil times.

The Doctrine of Devils has long been seminated audaciously by numerous false
teachers and false Prophets, as Christ foretold in Mat. 23. and 24. which John
saw come 1 John 18. little Children it is the last times, ye have heard that
Antichrists should come and even now there are many, and they have Ruled long
in most parts of the Earth, that John said the whole World wondered after the
Beast, and this has been a sad time these 13. or 14. hundred years wherein the
true Church, the Woman clothed with the Sun has been in the wilderness, in a
solitary place exiled because of the Beasts power, and the Dragons Power and
the false Prophets Miracles, and because of the Doctrines of Devils, has made
it a sad time and an evil time, such as thou have taught ( viz.) that the light
which every man is lightened with is gross darkness, and worse then gross
darkness, and that Christ left Political Officers, and that the Lords Supper is
a visible Political Church Ordinance, and that Baptism is a visible Political
Church Ordinance, and that it is blasphemy to hold perfection of degrees in
this life, and that none can be cleansed from sin while upon Earth, these and
the like Doctrines of Devils has been sown which thou now audatiously
Seminates by the appointment of the General Court at Boston, but the time
draws near an end, the night is far spent, and the day is at hand when the
Beast shall be taken alive, and the old Dragon laid hold on, and the Mother of
Harlots burned with fire, and the false Prophets which have wroughts miracles
before the Beast, and has cried as thou cryest him up in New England, who is
able to make War with him, who has shed the blood of the Saints of the most
high God which will lie as a stain upon your Political Church as thou calls it,
which will not easily be washed away, the time of your mirth in Sodom and Egypt
is near an end, though you strengthen one another and make merry, yet woe will
come when all these before mentioned goes down alive into the pit together, and
when the Sea is dried up that your traffic will not go off, then alas shall
be the note of her Merchants, who have traded with her Sorceries and
witchcrafts, and have made People drunk that they have reeled and staggered and
have been all like a Sea unstable, and have not known the Rock of Ages upon
whom all that do believe a^^ established.

Thou says the Gospel is a constitution or effect tempered of the Grace of God
and of the blood of Christ.

Answ. The Gospel thou knows not, but builds with thy untempered mortar, and
unseasoned words, and what is the Gospel an effect of, it is not only an
effect of an operation, but it is that which operates and is the Power of God,
which will confound all this mudd and all these muddy traditions which you mix
with the Scriptures and calls them Gospel.

And now thou comes to the distructiveness of the Doctrine of the Quakers, to
Religion, the Churches of Christ and Christian States, because thou say i^
appears in this from the nature of the object they single out to fight against,
as the Trinity, Christ, the Script^re, Order both Civil and Ecclesiastical as
instituted in (...) Gospel.

As to those Principles I have answered before in part, but do thou (...) of
civil order in your state or in your Political Church as thou calls it, is that
to be counted a civil State, who destroys the Creatures Gods workmanship, and
destroys men's Estates and sells their freeborn Children as bondslaves? do
thou Judge that these Rules well according to the appointment of God, who is a
terror to them that do well, and an encourager of violence and cruelty? as your
late actions has sufficiently evinced, and as for the order of your Political
Church, we have heard of it that you are as a company of wild Bears, rending
and tearing, and stops gloves and napkins, and binds keys over their mouths,
that they may not speak the Word of Truth amongst you, contrary to Primitive
order, and as for the Doctrine of the Quakers, many who knows it better then
thee, knows it to he distructive to nothing, but to the Doctrine of Antichrist
and such ungodly Doctrines as thou have laid down in this Book, as that that
light which Christ has enlightened every one withal is gross darkness, and
worse then gross darkness, and that the Supper of the Lord is a visible
Political Ordinance, and such black doctrines as these our Doctrines are
distructive unto.

And further thou goes on and tells, the work against order is policy against
policy, the policy of Hell against the policy of Heaven.

It seems your order stands in policy both in your Church and State, and in
craft fraud and deceit, and thou Judges that Heaven stands in policy to, but he
that sits in Heaven laughes you to scorn with all your deceit and policy.

And now thou comes to thy proof and says, that Doctrine that denies obedience
to Magistracy in his due Subject, in effect denies the order of Magistracy, but
their Doctrine denies obedience to Magistracy in its due Subject, therefore
their Doctrine denies the order of Magistracy.

Answ. The Major and Minor is both false, for we own Magistracy in its due
subject which stands in the Power of God and in the higher Power, and that
which leads into order and out of confusion and destruction; and thou must not
think to fasten Stork and Muncer upon us for thy proof, what as they did stands
upon their account and not upon ours, and that mischievous spirit of thine is
that which presses on the Magistrate to abuse his Power, and to intrude into
those things which belongs not to him, to keep up your confused Babel which
thou calls a Political Church, which must all be scattered with the breath of
his mouth and with the brightness of his coming, whom thou yet Judges to be
gross darkness.

In thy 18th page, and in the 44th page thou speaks That visible Political
Church, Church Officers and Church-Ordinances are Gospel Institutions appointed
by Christ to continue to the end of the world, and that Command which Paul gave
to Timothy is to be kept, and that visible Political Church Estate is to
continue to the end of the world.

Answ. I see thou art ignorant of God, Christ, Heaven, Church, Church Officers,
Ordinances and Institutions, the Churches of Christ were established by and in
the Power of God, and the Ministers thereof ministered, walked and ruled in the
Power of God, and the Ordinances and Institutions of the true Church of God are
pure and spiritual, but the Church that thou art pleading for the continuation
thereof, is a Political Church, Political Ordinances, Political Officers,
Political Institutions, Political Pastors and Teachers, the Lords Supper a
Political Ordinance, Baptism a Political Ordinance, the spiritual Council which
Paul gave to Timothy about the Elders of the Church, and about the Holy
Practice which they were to walk in, and the godly conversation this thou calls
Political; nay, furthermore thou say, Heaven stands in Policy; and in thy
fourth Chap. says, To Christ belongs the prerogative of being the only
Politician; these and the like damnable doctrines and heresies thou have
uttered forth, and these must be proved from the first of Tim. 3. 1^. and Chap.
3. did Paul when he wrote to Timothy when he gave him direction about Elders
and such as took care of the Church of God, did he say a Bishop is a Political
Officer, and must be blameless? or did he say a Deacon is a Polical Officer and
must be grave? And therefore Reader thou may read these Scriptures; 1 Timothy 6.
14. 1 Cor. 14. 33. and thou may see this Sophister, and this man that is void
of understanding, who cries up the Scripture for a Rule of life, and yet holds
such a Church, such Pastors, such Officers, such Ordinances, such Institutions
which the Scripture makes no mention of, and therefore this man having made a
Monstrous body, a Politic Church, he imagines a head like it, and therefore
blasphemously says, Christ is the greatest Politician; much I need not say
unto this black dark stuff, which is to be confounded, which is imaginary and
deceit, which the wrath of God must scatter; but this I say to thee, there was
no Officers in the Church of Christ, but they were Ministers made so by the
Spirit, and were made so by the Holy Ghost, and were Ministers of the Spirit
and not of the Letter, and some were Elders and Ruled in the Church and
Churches, which was sanctified by God the Father and preserved in Christ Jesus,
and these were spiritual, and not Political; but thou have cleared and quitted
your selves from being any such Church, and that which you call the Sacrament
which thou calls visible and Political, and brings 1 Cor. 12. for thy proof,
did Paul say as often as ye eat this Political bread, and drink this visible
Political Cup you show forth the Lords death till he come? and did Christ when
he sent forth his Disciples to preach and to Baptize in the 28th of Matthew. 19.
which thou pleads must continue until the end of the world? did he send them
and say, go and Teach and Preach the visible and Politic Word of the kingdom,
and Baptize them with visible Political water, and that this should continue to
the end of the world? And little marvel if the Throne of Satan be exalted
among you, and such Ministers as thou who Ministers deceit, and unrighteousness
and ungodliness, art set to be a Teacher, and appointed so by the General
Court, who cannot speak a form of sound words, but like a Philosopher, a
Star-ga^er, an Astrologian or a Stage Player, which them that reads thy book
will see thy tract frothed with such black dark sentences which are like
Enchantments.

As for Beckold and Knipperdolling, and Quintinius and Poquius, thou might have
taken up thy Pen ere now, and not have brought all this rambling stuff out of
the History of the Germans, which thou would cast upon our backs; the Bishops
used to cast it upon your backs, and you upon the Baptists backs; but now we
must bear all, and ^^ou in envy unto us, that thereby thou might represent us
odious to the world has made them all Quakers, and says, they are our
Predecessors, take them to thy self and join them to your Political Church,
and your Political Ordinances, and your Politic Doctrines, which is of the
same nature with theirs, which you maintain and uphold with carnal weapons, as
they did theirs.

And last of all thou art coming to the Magistrates power in matters of
Religion under the Gospel, and thou says, Notwithstanding manifold evils
prevails, and the wiles of the Devil are great and malignant, and heresy which
is a horrid aspect; yet thou says, There is Balm in Gilead, and a Physician
there; and the Balm and the Physician is that thou says, God has armed the
Magistrate with Civil power for the defense of Religion, through the
Concurrences of Devine Benediction, and the Magi^trate is to vindicate the
truth of God, and also exercise his Power for curing the Offenders, and for his
proof he brings 1 Timothy 1. 2^. of whom is Hymenius and Alexander, whom I have
delivered up unto Satan.

Ans It seems your Gospel that you preach has not power in it to prevail
against Heresy, neither your weapons are able to prevail which are but carnal;
and so the Power to suppress Heresy and Convince Gainsayers is wholly without
you, and though you Censure and Excommunicate, and deliver up to Satan, as you
say, yet you being in Satan's power, that which is against you has Power over
you; and therefore you are fain to cry up the Beasts power, which always made
War with the Saints under the name of Heretics, and you say, that in
exercising of his Power is but defensive, I say yes it is offensive and
distructive to the Government of Christ and his Prerogative, unto whom all
Power belongs both in Heaven and Earth, and the Government lies upon his
shoulders, who is a wonderful Councellor, of whose Government there is no end;
and he is able to defend his Church; and further more to take away thy
objection is willing, and furthermore has promised to keep his Church that the
gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; and therefore thou who would have
the civil Magistrate to intrude into those things which belongs not to him,
would have them Usurpers and Traitors unto Christ the Prince of Peace, and the
King of his People and head of the Church his body, unto whom absolute Power
and Soveraignity belongs and Glory, which he will not give to another; And as
for all the proofs which thou brings of the Magistrates under the first
Covenant, they are all invalid, as to the second Covenant, for all the Kings
and Magistrates in the first Covenant what as they did in and about Religion,
as to the punishment of the false prophets, and them that had familiar spirits
and wizards, they were but Typical as in reference unto Christ the second,
Covenant who has another way to kill the false Prophets and to make War
against Heresy and blasphemy, and against all Sorcerers, Deceivers and
Antichrists, by the two-edged sword which proceeds out of his mouth, with which
his enemies shall be slain who will not that he should Rule and exercise his
spiritual Power against his spiritual enemies; Is not Heresy an Error, an
inbred thing? And is an outward sword like to reach to that? Therefore though
thou may press the Magistrates or them whom thou calls so by their Coersive
power, as thou calls it, and promise to them devine Benediction, like the Pope,
for making of Laws against that which thou and others may Judge Blasphemy and
Heresy, and execute them with Whips and Ropes and cutting off Ears, and
destroying the Creature, yet this does not reach to Heresy and Blasphemy, and
all the Balm and Physic that you have in New England, wherein your hope
stands, as has yet appeared, are your knotted Whips and pitched Ropes,
banishment and death; here is Balm and Physic indeed which destroys the
Creation; And what, was Paul a Magistrate who Censured Hym^nius and Alexander?
or else what do thou bring this for?

Thou frames an Objection, and also an Answer, That the into of A^thority in
matters of Religion is violation of Liberty of Conscience; thy Answer is,
Church Authority is Authority, were this Objection good, the Church may not
then, thou says, Authoritatively deal with any of her Members, for holding
forth or teaching of false doctrine, contrary to Gal. 5. 12. and Rev. 2. 2^.

Answ. The Objection is good enough, the interposing of Civil Authority in
matters of Religion is a leading them beyond their line, for that which is
ordained for the ordering of Civil things is not to intrude into that which is
beyond its Sphere; And why may not the true Church Authoritatively deal with
any of her Members for holding forth false doctrine? What do thou think that
Paul in the fifth of the Galatians, when he wished that they were even cut off
that troubled them, that he would have had them killed or beat with pitched
Robes? or would he have had the Galatians to have denied them, and have them
exercised their Authority in the Power of the Lord Jesus Christ? And do thou
bring Rev. 2. 20. to prove that Thyatira had not Power in the Authority of God
to have thrown out and Judged Jezebel? This was their fault, because they
suffered her, who called her self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce, and to eat
things sacrificed to Idols, or thou Judges they wanted some Magistrate to kill
her Authoritatively; And if the Church may not deal with the Members
Authoritatively, who makes defection from the Faith, why have you
Excommunicated and thrown out so many for Heretics in New England?

Thou says, Liberty of Conscience, and liberty for Error and Heresy are two
things; and the Error of Conscience is a Liberty to Bondage, and thou brings,
They shall put you out of the Synagogues, John 16. and to think to murder the
Saints was service unto God, was not from Conscience but Error of Conscience;
but the Ob^ect thou says, Subjected to the Coersive Power must be some Act of
the outward man; and further thou says, There is a difference between quiet
Heresy and turbulent Heresy, Schism and Sedition.

Answ. It is true, Liberty of Conscience and liberty of Error and Heresy are
two things, but these lies both without the Power and the Line of any Civil
Power, as Civil Power to reach unto, the one he should encourage, that is to
say, them who exercise a pure Conscience toward God and toward man; and as
for the other Error in Judgment, its beyond the Power of the Civil Magistrate
to rectify, but as it puts forth it self in outward Acts of wickedness, as to
kill, steal, murder, adultery, defrauding, cozening and cheating in outward
things, then the sword reaches to the Act outward, but can reach no further;
And as for Heresy, Schism, Sedition, turbulent and quiet, as thou makes
distinctions, they are all one in the ground, and you have had too many such
thoughts in your hearts as that you did God service with all your Whipping,
cutting off Ears, bearing with Ropes, casting out of your Assemblies, and not
only so, but out of your Country, and banishing them from their Wives and
Children, and all this you have done, and thinks you have done God good
service, and have cast them out and said (as the Prophet spoke of your
Generation whose hearts were hardened) Let the Lord be glorified; these things
you have to repent of before you know or will feel remission of sins from the
Lord, though thou say you know it belongs not to the Magistrate to compel any
man to be a Believer, nor to punish any for not Believing, but Heretics,
turbulent Heretics, we believe belongs unto him to punish, and who must be
Judge of turbulent Heretics; Is not a Heretic an Unbeliever? And if the
Magistrate ought not to punish an Unbeliever, then not a Heretic, for a
Heretic is an Unbeliever; and they which are in the Power and Authority of
God, can deny such a one and Judge him out by the Power of God, there is his
punishment according to that which thou calls Gospel Institution, and beyond
that or any further Act upon such a one, we do not read of in all that which is
called the New Testament, neither that Christ, his Apostles or any of the true
Churches or Officers or Believers ever Commanded or Commended or Exhorted any
to stretch forth their hand against the person of any who were Heretics really
so, and Blasphemers really so; and therefore see there is neither Command,
Precept nor Example; Does not thou wretchedly err in pressing on them which
thou calls Believers to Act such wretched Acts of cruelty as you have done, and
thou vindicates them in it as their Duty? It Is true, we read of the Beast and
of the Dragon, who made War against the Saints and killed them, and of mystery
Babylon, and of Sodom and Egypt where Christ was slain, and the witnesses
slain; Now if thou will take these for proofs and for a ground thou may, and so
all thy twisting and twining, and vain Arguments falls to the ground; And does
not the Church of Rome account all you as Heretics? and is not their Judgment
that they ought to punish you with corporal punishment? and is not this your
Judgment also page 78 that the Magistrate ought to proceed gradually? That is,
to inflict punishment by degrees with lingering tortures, like their
Inquisitions; And wherein does thy doctrine differ from theirs in this? Take
them to thee and thy doctrine, for thou art but a stem sprung out of the same
Root, and acts from the same Principle, and yet I tell thee and all the world,
I am not pleading for any matter of fact or for breakers of the Law which is
Righteous, for the Law is good if a man use it lawfully, it is against
murderers, man-stealers, and stealers of the Creatures, for Idolaters and
defrauders, and cheaters, and every Act or Fact deserves punishment suitable to
the transgression; Now had it not been more reasonably done of thee to have
produced the Fact of the Quakers in New England, which has deserved all these
barbarous tortures, then to Declare them and Publish them as Offenders in
matter of Fact, and has none to lay to their charge; and I challenge thee and
the rest of thy Adherents to produce some matters of Fact which the Quakers
has done, which is contrary to any Righteous Law of God, or else own your
Condemnation and repent; and thou must not think that this poor Tract of thine
which is full of deceit and confusion, error, blasphemy and madness, though
thou Publish it by the Appointment of the General Court, that it will cover
your wickedness or hide you from being discovered to moderate People, neither
will shelter you in the Day of the Lord.

And thou says, It concerns New England awayes to remember, that originally
they are a Plantation Religious, the Profession of purity of Doctrine, Worship
and Discipline is written upon your foreheads, that after New England has now
shined 20 years, should now go out in the snuff of Morallianism.

Answ. There was something amongst some of you, but you fled the Cross as I
told you before, and so that spirit that persecuted you in the Bishops time got
up in your selves, and that which once you had while you were under affliction
here, yon have lost, not only the Power of godliness but the Form thereof, and
also of sound words; And now as to matter of Religion, its rather become a
place of Ostridges and Owls and Satyrs; and for purity of Doctrine, Worship
and Discipline written in your foreheads, if it must be tried by your Rule,
and if it be the same 20 years that it is now, I have not heard of more
unsoundness in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline which I have read on in many
ages, but especially in the Scripture, and truly your shining now is turned
into blackness, and your Sun is set, and your day is darkness, and your light
is gone out as the snuff of a Candle, because this man boasts of their
Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, take a few things out of many and behold them
in the light of the Lord, and compare them with the Scripture; and so I leave
them to thy Judgment.

1 First speaking of the Trinity, he says, God is a distinct subsistence from
the Son and the Spirit, and that the Son is a distinct subsistence from the
Father and the Spirit in the 9th page; and because it is said, the Father shall
give you another Comforter; this another he says, is Intelligible of the
Essence; so then the Son is a distinct Subsistence and Essence from the Father,
and the Spirit is a distinct Subsistence and Essence from the Father and the
Son; so here is three distinct Essences.

2 And that the Spirit of God without the Letter is no Spirit, that which
obliges a man to obey a Command of God is one Power, and that which
strengthens him and enables him to obey is another Power, page 12. and that
Christ's words in the 17th of John 21. gives an uncertain sound (which are
these, That they may be one as we are one.)

3 That Scripture is a perfect Rule of Life, but not without Consequences.

4 That Thomas and Mary is no where mentioned in Scripture, neither are
commanded obedience nor forbidden disobedience, contrary to John 20. 16, 17, 27.

5 That that light which teaches a man there is a God, and to Worship God, and
that Parents are to be honored, and that a man shall not lie nor steal, and
that which discovers the Creator his Eternity and Omnipotency, is to be
construed in opposition to spiritual light, and contradistinct to the light of
the Spirit, page 16.

6 That the light which is in every man, has much miscarried whilst that it is
managed by the reigning power of darkness, page 17.

7. That that which lets a man see that he should not do to others what he
would not have others do unto him, and shows a man ought not to steal nor to
lie, and that which discovers Eternity and Omnipotency; this indeed, says he,
is darkness, it is worse then gross darkness, page 18.

8 Christ enlightens no man with the light of life, but them that are so and so
qualified.

9 That the Gospel is a Con^^icution or Effect, tempered of the Grace of God
and the blood of Christ.

10 That the visible Political Churches, Political Officers, Political Worship
and Administrations are Gospel Institutions or appointed by Christ, page 41.

11 That there is Policy in Heaven, page 42.

12 Pastors and Teachers are Political Church Officers.

13 That the Lords Supper is a visible Political Ordinance, page 48.

14 That Baptism is a visible Political Church Ordinance.

15 That to Christ belongs the Prerogative of being the only Politician.

16 That there is much darkness in the hearts of all Children of light in this
life, page 42.

Likewise at a Lecture at Boston John Norton taught, That the Justice of God is
the Armor of the Devil.

Take a view of thy doctrines again, and be ashamed and blush, and repent of
thy deceit and false doctrines and lying stories, and cease to pervert the way
of the Lord, for all this which thou have waded through will little advantage
your Kingdom, neither all this covering which thou have made will not vindicate
your wicked practices, nor shelter you from the storms and thunders, and
plagues, and terror, and wrath which is to be poured upon all his enemies, and
then thy order from the General Court will stand thee but in little stead, when
the terror of God comes upon thee, and when the witness of God is awakened in
thee to bring all thy iniquities to remembrance, and thy deceit that has been
hid to the light, then shall thou see that thou have not set thy self only
against man but also against God and his dear servants whom he has redeemed by
his precious blood, who knows a habitation unto which you cannot reach with
your Clubs, Whips and Ropes, and their Habitation is as the Munition of Rocks,
their Bread is sure, and their Water does not fail, and happy are they who
suffer for the truths sake, for they shall receive Honor and Glory and
Immortality, and the Crown of Life which he has laid up for all them that
endure the Cross and despise the shame, which will be given in the day of his
glorious appearance to them that keeps the Word of his patience, and the word
of his Testimony committed to them unto the end.

London, the 12th day of the 11th Month, 1659.
OH! New England whose heart is unbroken, and is as hard as a stone, thy fruits
declares it, and thy Iuhabitants are Rebellious against God, thy Teachers and
People are filled with enmity against the Lord and his People, and they have
not known sorrow, nor are they acquainted with the Lord in his Judgments, but
the Rebellious, and stiff-necked lives in them; and they are covered with a
Profession of Gospel, but are as the Wolves in sheeps clothing, who is covered
with the Saints words and Practices, but are destroying the Lambs of Christ;
oh! New England, what have thou done? how thou have greedily run in the way
that is not good, how have thou opposed the way of thine own peace, and
rejected the loving kindness of the Lord, we have heard, and we have seen, and
we have been sencible of thy wickedness, of thy mercilesness and thy cruelty
which abounds in thee, and art without respect to God and his Eternal Power
which is over you, though you oppose it; yet you are comprehended with it, and
it shall Eternally Judge you; your Church has brought forth bad fruits, even
of Sodom and spiritual Egypt, and in the streets is the Lamb slain, and the
just crucified, and ye are the People that have done it, does not your dealing
toward the People of God called Quakers evidence this unto all the World? and
Nations do hiss at you; what, ye a gathered People? what ye a separated
People? and brings forth persecution in such a manner, exceeding the very
cruelty of the Scribes and Pharisees, and the chief Priests, this Nation has
wondered at your hard heartedness, and sober People are grieved at their hearts
for you, that you should so far endanger your souls to everlasting loss, as to
go on in this way as you have done for years together, every day as it were
heighthening your malice and your fury against the Lamb and his followers; Oh
you Teachers and Professors which has openly appeared under the Dragons;
Colors, who has Warred under his Banner, even the Dragon which sought to
devour the manchild, and by him do you make War against the Lamb and his
followers, with the Dragons weapons, Prisons, houses of correction, whippings,
banishments, cutting off the ears, and such like cruel dealing, which is of the
Dragon his weapons, and not the weapons of the Lamb; oh what have you done, is
there not a wise man among you, are you all besotted, and enchanted, are you
all blind, is there none among you that considers these things, has not your
own doings pierced your hearts? has not the innocent blood that you have shed
yet struck terror upon your consciences? can nothing awaken you, will not your
own doings reprove you? oh consider, for you are not hid from the Eternal eye
of God, it beholds you, and you are naked and bare before it; and your
filthiness and wretchedness is open before it, oh what floods of wickedness do
you cast out? and what wicked practices do you bring forth? we are wounded in
our spirits for you because you have lost all feeling and sense, and are void
of understanding, your ears dull, your eyes blind, and your hearts hardened, and
has neither Religion nor pure humanity; but do you think to prevail against
the Lord by your doings? do you think to weary him out from among you? No he is
stronger and his Kingdom and Government of more force, and though he is long
suffering, yet he can dash you to pieces, and take your breath from you, and
cause you to melt away, and sink you into confusion, and destruction, and his
truth will prevail over you, for there is a seed which you cannot quench, there
is a root which will bring forth though you choke it never so much, and in all
your glory you shall wither and pine away, and your flower shall be cut down,
and your strength shall become weak as water, and your Authority shall sink
into the bottomless pit, and there is no vision unto you of peace and
prosperity in your way; but you shall fall with no small weight of dishonor
and affliction which shall be your portion, for God is just and all Power is
with him to break you to pieces, and he can make you know, that he can do
whatsoever he will, and you are but as the pot-sheards of the Earth which he
will break, and his heritage shall be increased, and he will not be wanting to
it, his People shall have peace when you shall have trouble, his People shall
have joy when you shall have mourning, he shall appear to their joy but you
shall be ashamed; for your portion shall not be like unto theirs, but the wrath
of the Lamb shall torment you, even the long suffering of God, which has been
great toward you, shall be turned into a devouring fire, and into fury to
consume you, this shall doubtless come to pass, for the Lord has said it;
wherefore repent ye Rulers, repent ye Teachers, repent ye hypocrites, and if
there be any among you that will be saved, let him deliver himself by turning
to the Lord.

But besides all that you have done, by way of persecution, imprisonment, lies
and slanders, cutting off ears, banishment and whippings and such like, yet
after all this here is a Book come over, Called the Heart of New England Rent
filled with false reproaches, with slanders, with false Doctrines, and
misinterpretations o^ Scripture, and such like stuff, which we have taken
notice of and viewed over, and returned Answer; what is this your best Divinity
in New England? we have heard of your wicked practices toward the people of
God, but now we have seen the wickedness of your Profession, and the emptiness
of your Religion and Doctrines, and we cannot but turn them back to you again
that if possible the Lord may open your eyes that you may be converted, and
live; and what do we fear your revilings and threatenings and your persecutions,
in the immortal Life is our victory, which Life you cannot Reach, for the Devil
has not power given over it; though you may have power over the body, and over
the goods, yet the immortal Life you cannot touch; and that is Eternal victory,
and that Life is our God bringing forth more and more, and he can deliver if he
will, but if he will not, we cannot bow to your Image; nor say we have done you
wrong in what we write and speak to you; for this is our Religion, that our
Conscience may be kept clear, and our zeal for God is in this, that we may keep
void of offense toward God and toward you; by warning of you from time to
time, and though we are far distant in the outward man, yet we have a witness
in your consciences; and in that we know you, and by that shall be answered in
the dreadful day of the Lord, and that day is coming upon you, and the
Judgments of the Lord the wicked shall not ^scape.

O have you forgotten since you were sufferers your selves, and then it was
well with you, far better then now; for you are at ease in the flesh and have
forgotten God, and lost that sincerity which once was in you, and the very
spirit of the old Bishops which once persecuted you it is entered into your
hearts, and now li^es in you, and acts you, and in the days of your prosperity
you are exalted, and have forgotten the Lord, and you requite him evil for his
love, and seem, to be a people given up to do wickedly till the time of your
destruction, and like Rulers, like Teachers, all in the hard-heartedness, and
in the paths of death and destruction, your Church, your Ministry, your
Religion is all of it a weariness, and abomination to the Lord, while that
spirit of murder, and ^alice lodges in you; wherefore repent, least you
perissh, the day of God Almighty is approaching; the terrible day of the Lord
is at hand; I am a lover of righteousness and a friend to the Seed of God
throughout the world, and that waits for the Redemption thereof.

E. BVRROVGH

THE END.

