THE TRVE INFORMER, Who in the following DISCOVRSE, OR COLLOQVIE, Discovers
unto the World the chief Causes of the sad Distempers in Great Brittany and
Ireland, Deduced from their Originals.

Magna est Veritas, and prevalebit.

And also, A Letter writ by Serjeant-Major KIRLE, to a Friend at VVinsor.

Printed in the Year, M. DC. XLIII.

AN Interlocutory Discourse betwixt Patricius and Peregrin, touching the
Distractions of the Times, with the Causes of them.
Patricius. GEntle Sir, you are well met, and welcome to England, I am heartily
glad of your safe arrival, hoping now to apprehend some happy opportunity
whereby I may requite part of those worthy favors I received from you in
diverse places the other side of the Sea.


Peregrin. Sir, I am as joyful to see you, as any friend I have upon the
earth; but touching favors, they deserve not such an acknowledgment, I must
confess my self to be far in the arreare to you, therefore you teach me what
to speak in that point: But amongst other offices of friendship you have been
pleased to do me from time to time, I give you many thanks for the faithful
correspondence you have held with me since the time of our separation by
intercourse of letters, the best sort of fuel to warm affection and to keep
life in that noble virtue friendship, which they say abroad, is in danger to
perish under this cold Insulary clime for want of practice.


Patr. Truly, Sir, you should have had an account of matters hence more amply
and frequently, but that of late it has been usual, and allowed by
authority, to intercept and break open any letters; but private men need not
complain so much, since the dispatches of Ambassadors, whose packets should be
held as sacred as their persons, have been commonly opened, besides some
outrages offered their houses and servants; nay, since their Majesty's Letters
under the cabine Signet have been broke up, and other counterfeit ones printed
and published in their names.


Pereg. Indeed I must confess, the report hereof has kept a great noise
abroad; and England has suffered much in point of National repute in this
particular; for even among Barbarians it is held a kind of sacrilege to open
Letters; nay, it is held a baser kind of Burglary, than to break into a House,
Chamber, or Closet: for this is a plundring of outward things only, but he who
breaks open ones Letters, which are the Idea's of the mind, may be said to
rip up his breast, to plunder and rifle his very brain, and rob him of his most
precious and secretest thoughts.


Patr. Well, let us leave this dista stefull subject; when these fatal
commotions cease, this custom, I hope, will be abhorred in England: But now,
that you are newly arrived, and so happily met, I pray be pleased to make me
partaker of some foreign news, and how the squares go betwixt France and
Spain, those two great wheels, that draw after their motion (some more, some
less) all the rest of the Western world: and when you have done, I willgive
you account of the state of things in England.


Pereg. I thought you had so abounded with domestic news, that you had had no
list or leisure to hear any foreign; but to obey your commands, you know
that I have been any time this six years a wanderer up and down the world;
and truly I could not set foot on any Christian shore that was in a perfect
condition of peace, but it was engaged either in a direct, auxiliary, or
collateral war, or standing upon its guard in continual apprehensions and
alarmes of fear: For, since that last flaming Usher of Gods vengeance, that
direful Comet of the year 1618. appeared in the Heavens, some malignant and
angry ill-aspected star has had the predominance ever since, and by its
malignant influxes, made strange unusual impressions upon the humors of
Subjects, by inciting them to such insurrections, revolts, and tumults; which
caused a Jewish Rabbi to say lately, that it seems the grand Turk thrives
extraordinarily in his devotions, it being one of his prime prayers to Mahomet,
that he should prevail with God Almighty to continue dissentions still among
Christian Princes. And truly as the case stands, one may say, that the
Christian world is all in pieces; you know well with what fearful fits of a
high burning fever poor Germany has been long shaken, which has wrought a
Lethargy in some of her members, by wasting of the vital spirits, which
should diffuse themselves equally through that great body; and how she still
fostereth a cold Northern Guest within her bosom, and is (...) annual fear
of a worse from the Levant: In the Netherlands one shall hear the half-sterved
soldier murmr in every corner, and railing against his King, and ready to
mutiny for want of pay. In France you shall see the poor Asinine Peasant half
weary of his life, his face being so pitifully ground, ever and anon with new
taxes. You know there are two Sovereign Princes, who have a long time wandered
up and down in exile, being outed out of their own ancient Patrimoniall
Territories, and little hope yet God wot, of restoring them. The world knows
how Savoy is become of late a kind of Province to France. Nay, Spain, who
has been so dexterous to put her neighbors together by the ears, and to
foment war a far off, to keep her own home secure, is now her self in
the midst of two fearful fires, kindled on both sides of her by
quite-revolted Subjects, the Portugues and Catalan, and is so puzzled, she
cannot tell what Saint to pray unto. The Venetian also, with the Pope, and all
the Princes of Italy are arming apace; the Hollander only, Salamander-like,
thrives in these flames; and as I have heard of some, that by a long habitual
custom, could feed on poison, and turn it to nourishment, so Hanse alone
grows fat by these wars.

And being weary of eating my bread in such a distracted world abroad, and
hopeing to take some sweet repose in England, I find that she is in as bad a
case, if not worse, than any other. So much news I give you in a lump, I will
be more particular with you some other time, if you please to spare me now.


Patr. I hear, not without much resentment, these pithy expressions you have
been pleased to make of the torn estate of Europe abroad, and since you mention
that blazing star, I remember what a Noble Knight told me some years ago,
That the Astronomers, who lay sentinel to watch the motion and aspect of that
Comet, observed, that having pointed at diverse Climats, at last it seemed to
look directly to these North-west Islands, in which posture it spent it self,
and so extinguished; as if thereby it meant to tell the world, that these
islands should be the Stage whereupon the last Act of the Tragedy should be
played. And how many Scenes have passed already, both here and in Ireland, we
know, God wot, by too too woeful experience.


Pereg. There is a saying, When your neighbors house is on fire, by its light
you may see in what danger your own stands. And was England so blind, as not
to take warning by so many fearful combustions abroad: When I took my leave
last of her, I left her in such a complete condition of happiness, both in
Court, Country, City and Sea, that she was the envy of all Europe, in so
much, that that Golden Verse might be fitly applied to her then Golden times:
Mollia securae peragebant otia Gentes. The Court was never so glorious, being
hansell'd every year almost with a new Royal Offspring; the Gentry no where
more gallant and sportfull; the Citizen never more gorgeous and rich, and so
abounding with treasure, bullion and buildings, that no age can parallel;
Commerce inward and outward was never at that height; the Customs increasing
every year to admiration; the narrow Seas were never guarded with braver Ships,
nor the Navy Royal for number of Vessels and Magazines of all sorts of
materials was ever so well replenished; the Universities had never such golden
days; and lastly, the Church did so flourish, that amongst the rest of the
Reformed Churches of Christendom, I have heard her called the Church Triumphant.

Besides, Ireland was arrived almost to the same degree of prosperity, for all
the Arrerages of the Crown were paid, and not a penny sent hence for many years
to maintain the standing Army there, or for any other public charge, as
formerly; Traffic came to that monstrous height, that in few years the
Crown-customes came to be five times higher. In fine, Ireland was brought not
only to subsist of her self, but enabled to contribute toward the filling of
the English Exchequer, and to make some retribution of those vast expenses the
Crown of England has been at any time these 400 years, to reduce her to
civilitie; her bogs were almost all dried up, and made good land, her mudwals
turned apace to Brick in diverse places; so that one Summer that I fortuned to
be there, above 50. new Bricke-houses were built in one Town. But it has been
the fate of that Island to be oftentimes near a condition of a settled
happiness, and yet to have some odd accident still intervene to cross it.

In conclusion, there wanted nothing to make England and her united Crowns so
exactly blessed, that she might have assumed the Title of one of the Fortunate
Islands. Good Lord, how comes it to pass, that she is now fallen into such
horrid distempers, and like a distracted body, laying hands upon her self,
would thrust the sword of civil war into her own bowels? I beseech you, Sir,
impart unto me the true cause of this change; for I know none so capable to do
it as your self.


Patr. Infandum Peregrine, jubes renovare dolorem.

First, Sir, in the general you know, that it is with the Regions upon Earth,
as it is with those of the Ayre^ sometimes we have a clear azur'd sky, with
soft gentle ventilations, and a sweet serenitie throughout the whole
Hemisphete; at other times we know the face of the Heavens is overcast with
frowns, with Frog vapors, and thick clouds of various shapes, which look
like Monsters, hovering up and down, and break at last into thunder and
fulgurations, and so disquiet and raise a kind of war in the Aereal Common
wealth. Just so in the Regions that are dispersed up and down this earthly
Globe, and peopled with men (which are but a composition of the Elements) you
have sometimes a gentle calm of peace and quietude, with a general
tranquillity all the Country over; at other times you have ugly misshapen
clouds of jealousies, fears and discontentments do rise up, which break out
at last into acts of disobedience, rebellion, and fury. And as those Aereall
Meteors and Monsters above are ingendered of those watery fogges and mists
which are drawn up out of fenny and rotten low grounds here upon earth; so in
the Region of the mind, the ill vapors which ascend to the brain from rotten
and impostumated hearts, from desperate and male-contented humorists are the
causes of all civil commotions and distempers in State. But they have much to
answer for in the world to come (though they escape it in this) who for any
private interest or respect whatsoever, either of Promotion, Vain glory,
Revenge, Malice, or Envy, will embroyle and plunge their own native Country
in any public engagement or civil war, by putting a partition wall betwixt
their sovereign Prince and their fellow Subjects. Truly, in mine opinion,
these may be called the worst kind of Betrayers of their Countries: but I am
too far transported from satisfying your request in relating the true causes
of these calamities: I will now fall to work, and bring you to the very source
of them.

There is a pack of perverse People (composed for the most part of the scummy
and simplest sort) multiplied in England, who by a kind of natural
inclination, are opposite so point blanke to Monarchy in State, and Hierarchy
in Church, that if they were in Heaven (whither it is to be feared they run a
great hazard ever to enter, it being a Rule, that he who is rotten hearted to
his King, can never be right hearted to his Greatour) I say, if these men were
in Heaven, they would go near to repine at the Monarchical Power of God
Almighty himself, and at the degrees of Angels, and the postures of holiness
in the Church Triumphant. They call every Crotchet of the brain, tenderness of
conscience: which being well examined, is nothing else but a mere spirit of
contradiction and disobedience (to all higher Powers) which posseseth them.
There are no Constitutions either Ecclesiastical or Civil can please them,
but they could cast both into such a mould, which their cracked brains would
fain devise, yet are never able to bring to any perfection; they are ever
laboring to bring Religion to the dock, to be new trimmed, but they would take
down her fore-caste, and scarce allow her the Kings Arms to adorn her; they
are great listners after any Court news, and prick up their ears when any
thing is spoken of King, Queen, or Privy Counselor, and are always ready
though upon loose trust, to take up any report whereby they may whisper in
Conventicles and corners, and so traduce the Government. These great Zealots
use to look upon themselves most commonly through multiplying glasses, which
make them appear to be such huge Santons, that it renders them not only
uncharitable in their opinions of others, but Lucifcrian-like proud in their
own conceit, insomuch that they seem to scorn all the world besides, believing
that they are the only Elect, whose souls work according to the motion of
the Spirit; that they are the Children of promise, whose faces alone look
toward Heaven; they are more pleased with some new reach or fancy, (that may
puzzle the pericranium) than a Frenchman is with some new fashion in clothing;
they are nearest to the nature of the Jew of any people upon earth, and will
converse with him sooner than with some sort of Christians; and as in the
Pharisaicall Disposition they symbolise with the Jew, so in some of their
Positions they jumpe pat with the Jesuit; for though they are both in the
extremes, and as contrary one to the other as the scales of a Diameter, yet
their opinions and practices are concentrique to depresse Regal power; both of
them would bind their Kings in chains, and the Nobles in linkes of iron; they
both deny all passive obedience, and as the one would have the mortar of the
Temple tempered with blood, so the other would beat Religion into the brain
with the Pole-axe. Their greatest masterpiece of policy is to forge
counterfeit news, and to divulge and disperse it as far as they can, to
amuse the world, for the advancement of their Designs, and strengthening of
their party: but the Jesuit does it more cunningly and modestly, for he
fetches his news from far, so that before the falsehood of it can be
controlled, his work is commonly done, and the news forgotten; but these
later Politicians use to raise lies hard by home, so that the grosnesse and
palpablenesse of them is presently discovered. Besides, to avoid the extremes
of the other, these later seem fall into flat profaneness, for they may be
called a kind of enemies to the very Name, Cross, and Church of Christ.
Touching the first, they repine at any reverence to be done unto it, though
spontaneous, not coercive. For the second, which was held from the beginning to
be the badge and banner of a Christian, they cry it up to be the mark of the
beast; and for the last, they would have it to be neither beautiful, holy, nor
amiable, which are the three main properties which God requires in his House.
To conclude, when any comes to be seasoned with this sower leaven, he seems to
degenerate presently from the nature and garb of a Gentleman, and falls to be
of a sordid and low disposition, narrow hearted, and close handed; to be
timorous, cunning and jealous, and far from the common freedom, and
sweetness of moral society, and from all generous and loyal thoughts
toward his King and Country.

These, these have been the chiefest machinators, and engineers of these
unhappy Divisions, who Viper like have torn the entrails of their own mother,
their dear Country; but there were other externe concurrent causes, and to
find them out, I must look Northward, for there the Cloud began to condense
first;

You know Sir, the Scottish Nation were ever used to have their King personally
resident amongst them; and though his late Majesty by reason of his age,
bounty, and long breeding there, with other advantages, drew such
extraordinary respect from them, that they continued in good conformity; yet
since his death, they have been overheard to mutter at the remoteness and
absence of their King, and that they should become now a kind of Province by
reason of such a distance: some of their Nobles and Gentry found not at the
English Court, nor at his Majesty's Coronation in Edinburgh that countenance,
familiarity, benefit, and honors, which happily they expected, and it is well
known who he was, that having been denied to be lorded, took a pet, and went
discontented to his Country, hoping that some Title added to the wealth he had
got abroad, should have purchased him more respect. These discontented parties
tampered with the mercenary Preachers up and down Scotland, to obtrude to the
People what Doctrines they put into their mouths, so that the Pulpits every
where rung of nothing but of invectives against certain obliquities and
soloecismes (and I cannot tell what) in Government, and many glances they had
upon the English Church; yet all this while there was not matter enough for an
insurrection, nor to dispose the Peoples hearts to a mutiny, until by the
policy (as some affirmed) of the said discontented party, the English
Lyturgie was sent thither: this by the incitement of those fiery Pulpiteers,
was cried up to be the greatest Idol that possibly could be brought into their
Kirk, insomuch that when it was first offered to be read, the women and baser
sort of mechanickes threw stools and stones at the Bishops heads, and were
ready to tear them in pieces: and here began the storm. His Majesty having
notice hereof, sent a most gracious Proclamation, signifying, that whereas he
had recommended that Book to be practiced amongst them, wherein he himself
served God Almighty twice a day, he did it out of a pious endeavor to breed
an uniformitie of public Divine Service in all his Dominions, specially in
that his native Kingdom. But since it had produced such dangerous effects, he
was contented to revoke it absolutely; for it was never his purpose to press
the practice of the said Book upon the consciences of any, he did only
commend, not absolutely command the use of it: therefore he exhorted and
required that every one unto whom it had given any scandal, should return to
his pristine obedience, and serve God as formerly, offering here with a
gracious pardon, and to pass an Act of Amnestia for an abolition of all faults
passed.


Peregr. And would not this suffice? In natural motions we find that the
cause being taken away, the effect cease, and will not this hold in civil
Actions?


Patr. No, this would not serve the turn, but there was a further reach in it,
and for an inch to take an ell: you know, the Scots since their single Lion
came to quarter with our three, are much elevated in their spirits, more
respected, employed and trusted abroad, and heightened in their resolutions and
aims, and will questionless be daily more and more. You have heard of a mine
that reached from our Exchecquer to Edinburgh. And I believe you have not
forgot Boccolinies balance, that was showed us in Italy, wherein Lorenzo de
Medici weighed all the States of Christendom, and throwing in England amongst
the rest, you know how much he made her to weigh less by this addition. The
former Proclamation I say, and Pardon would not suffice, but they took
opportunity to fish in those troubled waters, and vent their spleen further,
by an utter extirpation of Episcopacie, and by trampling the Mitre under their
feet, hoping to have some of the birds plumes, being plucked, to feather their
own nests; and they brought their work about. Good Lord, what a deal of dirt
was presently thrown into the Bishops faces by every rural petty Clerk! what
infamous Ballads were sung, what a thick cloud of Epidemicall hatred hung
suddenly over them, so far, that a Dog with black and white spots was called
a Bishop amongst them up and down the streets.

The chiefest Contrivers of this uproar, finding their Design to go on so
well, and perceiving the whole Country so eagerly bent against Bishops, (and
what artifices and suggestions were used to render them so odious is
incredible) but finding withal his Majestic unwilling to alter the Government
his father (of so fresh and famous Memory) had left him, and to which he had
been sworn at his Coronation, they put themselves in Arms, and raised Forces
to beat down the Mitre, with the Sword, if the Scepter would not do it. To the
frontiers they came with a great Army, (not half so great as was bruited)
pretending they came as Petitioners (though they brought their Petition upon
their Pikes point.) Some of the great ones about the King grew cold in the
action: and what a Pacification was then shuffled up, and how a Parliament was
called thereupon in Scotland, with other passages, is a fitter subject for a
story than a discourse.


Peregr. I could have wished two things, that either his Majesty had given
them battle then, having the flower of his Nobility and Gentry with him, who
I understood came with all cheerfulness and promptitude to attend him, or else
that after the said Pacification, his Majesty had shaken off all jealousies,
and with a royal freedom and a commanding confidence gone amongst them to
hansell their new Parliament House at Edinburgh; for it is probable, it had
averted those showers and cataracts of miseries which have fallen upon us
since: but I pray Sir, proceed.


Patr. As they say, There is no wind but blows some body good, so it was
thought, this Northern Cloud did England some advantage, for a Parliament was
summoned hereupon; a Parliament do I call it? It was rather an Embryo of a
Parliament, an Ephemeran of 20 days. In this sitting his Majesty declared
unto both Houses the indignities he had received by his Scotch Subjects, and
therefore purposed a supply to be made of 12 Subsidies to suppress that
Rebellion; and in lieu thereof he was willing to forbear and utterly abolish
the Ship money, which he had reason to think legal at first, being advised
thereunto by Noy his Attorney General, who had such a mighty repute in the
Law; yet he would not rest there, but he advised further with his learned
Council, who concurred in opinion with Noy; nor would he rest there also, but
he had the approbation of all the Judges singly, and afterward the major part
of all the Twelve, jointly upon a Demurre. This was enough to induce his
conscience to hold it legal all this while; it was clearly proved that the
moneys levied this way, were employed to no other but the intended service, The
guarding of the narrow Seas; and not only for that, but to preserve his right
of Dominion in them, being the fairest flower of his Crown, which was not only
discoursed of abroad, but began to be questioned: and touching danger, how
could England be but in apparent dangers? considering how all her next
neighbors were in actual hostility, which made huge Fleets of Men of War,
both French, Dunkerkers, Hamburgers and Hollanders to sail ever and anon in her
Channels, and hard before her royal Chambers: nor came there one penny of that
public Contribution to his private Coffers, but he added much of his own
Demeanes for the maintenance of a Royal Fleet every Summer: yet he was ready
to pass any Bill for the utter abolishing of the said Ship money, and for
redressing of any other grievances, provided they would enable him to suppress
this Scots Rebellion: some say the House was inclinable to comply with his
Majesty's demands, but (as the ill spirit would have it) that Parliament was
suddenly broke up, and I would that they who gave that Counsel had been in
Arabia, or beyond the Line, in their way to Madagascar, who nevertheless have
got to be in high request with this present Parliament.

His Majesty being reduced to these streights, and resenting still the
insolence of the Scot, proposed the business to his Privy Council, who
suddenly made up a considerable and most noble sum for his present supply,
whereunto diverse of his domesticke Servants and Officers did contribute.
Amongst others who were active herein, the Earl of Strafford bestirred
himself notably, and having got a Parliament to be called in Ireland, he went
over, and with incredible celeritie raised 8000 men, who procured money of the
Parliament to maintain them, and got over those angry Seas again in the
compass of less than six weeks. You may infer hence to what an exact
uncontrollable obedience he had reduced that Kingdom, as to bring about so
great a work with such a suddenness and facility.

An Army was also raised here, which marched to the North, and there fed upon
the Kings pay a whole Summer. The Scot was not idle all this while; but having
punctual intelligence of every thing that passed at Court, as far as what
was debated in the Cabinet Counsel, and spoken in the Bedchamber, (and herein
amongst many others, he had infinite advantage of us) He armed also, and
preferring to make England the stage of the War, rather than his own Country,
and to invade rather than to be invaded, He got over the Tweed, and found the
passage open, and as it were made for him all the way till he came to the Tine,
and though there was a considerable Army of Horse and Foot at Newcastle, yet
they never offered so much as to face him all the while. At Newburgh indeed
there was a small skirmish; but the English Foot would not fight, so Newcastle
gates flew open to the Scot without any resistance at all, where it is thought
he had more friends than foes, and who were their friends for this Invasion, I
hope Time, and the Tribunal of Justice will one day discover.

His Majesty being then at York, summoned all his Nobles to appear, to advise
with them in this exigence: Commissioners were appointed on both sides, who met
at Rippon, and how the hearts and courage of some of the English Barons did
boil within them, to be brought to so disadvantageous a Treaty with the Scot,
you may well imagine. So the Treaty began, which the Scot would not conform
himself unto, unless he were made first Rectus in Curia, and the Proclamation
wherein he was declared Traitor, revoked; alleging it would be dishonorable
for his Majesty to treat with Rebels. This Treaty was ad^ourned to London,
where this present Parliament was summoned (which was one of the chiefest
errands of the Scot, as some think, And thus far by these sad and short
degrees, have I faithfully led you along to know the true Originals of our
calamities.


Peregr. Truly Sir, I must tell you, that to my knowledge these unhappy
traverses with Scotland, have made the English suffer abroad very much in point
of National honor; therefore I wonder much that all this while there is none
set a work to make a solid Apology for England in some communicable Language,
(either in French or Latin) to rectify the world into the truth of the thing,
and to vindicate her, how she was bought and sold in this Expedition,
considering what a party the Scot had here, and how his coming in, was rather
an Invitation than an Invasion, and I believe if it had been in many parts of
the world besides, some of the Commanders had gone to the pot.


Patr. It is the practice of some States I know, to make sacrifice of some
eminent minister, for public mistakes: but to follow the thread of of my
Discourse. The Parliament being sat, His Majesty told them, That he was
resolved to cast himself wholly upon the affection and fidelity of his
People, whereof they were the Representative Body; therefore He wished them to
go roundly on to close up the ruptures that were made by this unfortunate War,
and that the two Armies, one domestique, the other foreign, which were
gnawing the very bowels of the Kingdom, might be dismissed. Touching grievances
of any kind (and what State was there ever so pure, but some corruption might
creep into it?) He was very ready to redress them: concerning the Shipmoney,
He was willing to pass a Bill for the utter abolition of it, and to establish
the property of the Subject; therefore he wished them not to spend too much
time about that. And for Monopolies, he desired to have a list of them, and he
would damn them all in one Proclamation: Touching ill Counselors, either in
Westminster Hall, or White Hall, either in Church or State, he was resolved to
protect none, therefore he wished that all jealousies and mis-understandings
might vanish: This, with sundry other strains of princely grace he delivered
unto them, but withal he told them, that they should be very cautious how they
shook the frame of Government too far, in regard it was like a Watch, which
being put asunder, can never be made up again, if the least pin be left out.

So there were great hopes of a Calm, after that cold Northern Storm, and
that we should be suddenly rid of the Scot, but that was least intended, until
some Designs were brought about. The Earl of Strafford, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Judges, and diverse Monopolists are clapped up, and you know who
took a timely flight to the other side of the sea: and in lieu of these, the
Bishop of Lineolne is enlarged, Bastwick, Burton, and Prynne are brought into
London, with a kind of Hosanna. His Majesty gave way to all this, and to
comply further with them, he took as it were into his bosom, I mean, he
admitted to his Privy Counsel those Parliament Lords, who were held the
greatest Zelots amongst them, that they might be witnesses of his secretest
actions; and to one of them He gave one of the considerablest Offices of the
Kingdom, by the resignation of another most deserving Lord, upon whom they
could never fasten misdemeanour; yet this great new Officer will come neither
to the same Oratorie, Chapel, or Church, to join in Prayer with his Royal
Master, nor communicate with him in any public exercise of devotion; and may
not this be called a true Recusancie? To another he gave one of the prime and
most reposefull Offices about his own person at Court, and thereby he might be
said to have given a Staff to beat himself. Moreover, partly to give his
Subjects an Evidence how firmly he was rooted in his Religion, and how much he
desired the strengthening of it abroad; the Treaty of marriage went on 'twixt
his eldest daughter and the young Prince of Orange. Hereunto may be added as a
special Argument of compliance and grace, the passing of the Bill for a
Trienniall Parliament; and lastly, (which is the greatest evidence that
possibly can be imagined, of that real trust and confidence he reposed in
them) He passed the Act of Continuance.


Peregr. Touching the Trienniall Parliament, there come some wholesome fruit
out of it, for it will keep all Officers in awe, and excite the Nobility, and
young Gentry of the Kingdom to study, and understand the Government of the
Land, and be able to sit and serve their Country in this great Senate; but for
this Act of Continuance, I understand it not; Parliaments are good Physic,
but ill meat; they say abroad that England is turned hereby from a Monarchy to
a Democracie, to a perpetual kind of Dictatorship; and whereas in former
times there was an Heptarchie of seven Kings in her, They say now she has
seventy times seven. But in lieu of these unparalleled Acts of grace and trust
to the Parliament, what did the Parliament for the King all this while?


Patr. They promised, specially upon the passing of the last Act, That they
would make him the most glorious, the best beloved, and richest King that ever
reigned in England: and this they did with deep protestings and asseverations.
But there intervened an ill favored accident which did much hurt, viz. A
Discourse (for truly I think it was no more) which some green heads held to
bring up the Northern Army, to check the Puritan party, and the rabble of
the City: This kept a mighty noise, and you know who fled upon it, and much
use was made of it to make that Cloud of Jealousy which was but of the breadth
of an hand before, to appear as big as a mountain. Yet his Majesty continued
still in passing Acts of Grace, and complying with them in every thing. He put
over unto them the Earl of Strafford, who after a long costly Trial (wherein
he carried himself with as much acuteness, dexterity, and eloquence, as
humane brain could be capable of for his defense) he was condemned to the
Scaffold, and so made a sacrifice to the Scot, who stayed chiefly for his head,
which besides those vast sums of money, was given him to boot.


Peregr. Touching the Earl of Strafford, it is true he was full of ability,
elocution, and confidence, and understood the Laws of England as well as any,
yet there were two things, I heard, wherein his wisdom was questioned; first,
that having a charge ready against his chiefest Accusers, yet he suffered them
to have the prioritie of suit, which if he had got, he had thereby made them
Parties, and so incapable to be produced against him. Secondly, that during the
time of his Trial, he applied not himself with that compliance to his Jury as
well as to his Judges, for he was observed to comply only with the Lords, and
not with the House of Commons.


Patr. Howsoever, as some say, his Death was resolved upon, (si non per viam
Iustitiae, saltem per viam expedientiae) which appears in regard the
proceedings against him are by a clause in the Act not to be produced for a
leading case or example to future ages and inferior Courts. I blush to tell
you how much the rabble of the City thirsted after his blood, how they were
suffered to strut up and down the streets before the Royal Court, and the
Parliament it self, with impunitie; they cried out, that if the Common Law
failed, club Law should knock him down, and their insolency came to that
height, that the names of those Lords that would not doom him to death, should
be given them to fix upon posts up and down; and this was the first tumult that
happened this Parliament, whereof so many followed after their example, being
not only connived at, but backed by Authority, for there were prohibitions
sent from the Parliament, to hinder all process against some of them.

These Myrmidons, as they termed themselves, were ready at a watchword, so
that one might say there was a kind of discipline in disorder.


Peregr. Were there any troubled for delivering their Votes in the Houses? I
thought that freedom of opinion and speech, were one of the prime Privileges
of that great National Senate.


Patr. Yes, Those that were the Minions of the House before became now the
subjects of popular malice and distraction, because against the dictamen of
their consciences, they would not vote the Earl of Strafford to death, and
renounce their own judgments, and captivate it to the sense of others, yet
they stood firm to their first grounds, that he was a delinquent in a high
nature, and incapable ever to bear o ffice in any of his Majesty's dominions.


Per. I perceive Sir by your speeches, that one of the chiefest causes of these
combustions may be imputed to the City of London, which may be called the
Metropolis of all these evils, and I little wonder at it, for it has been
always incident to all great Towns, when they grow rich and populous, to fall
into acts of insolence, and to spurn at government; where so many pots (so
many brains) are a boiling, there must needs be a great deal of froth, but
let her look to her self, for Majesty has long arms, and may reach her at
last. But the truth is, that London bears no proportion with the size of this
Island, for either one should be larger, or the other less: London may be well
compared to the liver of a crammed Italian goose, whose fatning emacerates the
rest of the whole body, and makes it grow lean and languish, and she may well
be termed a goose now more than ever, for her feathers are plucked apace; but
now that you have done with the Earl of Strafford, what is become of all the
rest who were committed?


Pat. They are still in durance, and have continued so these two years and
upward, yet are not proceeded against, nor brought to their answer to this very
day, though al theCourts of Justice have been open ever since. Many hundreds
more of the best sort of Subjects have been suddenly clapped up, and no cause at
all mentioned in many of their commitments, and new Prisons made of purpose for
them, where they may be said to be buried alive, and so forgotten, as if there
were no such men in the world: and how this can stand with Magna Charta, with
the Petition of Right (to vindicate which, there was so much pains taken the
last Parliament) let any man of a sane judgment determine, Yet one of the
Judges, who has an empeachment of high treason still lying Dormant against
him, though he be not Rectus in curia himself, is suffered to sit as Judge
upon the highest tribunal of England, whereas another for a pretended
misdemeanour only is barred from sitting there. Others who were at first cried
up and branded to be the most infamous projectors and Monopoliz^s of the land,
are not only got loose, but crept into favor, and made use of.


Per. Has the House of Commons power to commit any but their own members
without Conference with the Lords? Or has any Order or Ordinance of one of the
Houses singly, or of both conjunctly, to enjoyne a virtuall binding power of
general obedience without the Royal consent.


Pat. The power of Parliament, when King, Peers and Commons, which is the
whole Kingdom digested into one volume, is indefinite; but what either of both
Houses can do of themselves singly, or jointly, without the King who is the
life of the Law, I dare not determine: especially when a visible faction
reigns amongst them. -- tantas componere lites
nonopis est nostroe --
But for mine own opinion, I think it is as impossible for them to make a Law
without the King, as it was for Paracelsas to make a man without coition,
either for abolishment of old, or establishment of new Laws. The results of
Parliament without the Royal consent, are as matches without fire; And it is
an incontroulable principle, that the old Law must be our guide, till new be
made, nor is any Act of the Subject justifiable, but what is warrantable by the
old. But to proceed in the true discovery of these Domestic scistures, my Lord
of Strafford being gone, we hoped fair weather would follow, (He who was the
cause of the tempest, being thrown over-boord) but unluckie mists of jealousy
grew thicker and thicker; Yet the Scots were dismissed, having had Fiddlers fare,
meat, drink, and money, for eleven long months together. So his Majesty went
to Scotland, where the Parliment there, did but ask and have any thing, though
it be the unquestionable prerogative of Majesty to grant or deny Petitions,
and to satisfy his conscience before any Council.

But during his sojourne there, this formidable hideous Rebellion broke out in
Ireland, which though it may be said to be but an old play newly revived, yet
the Scene was never so Tragical and bloody as now: for the Barbarismes that
have been committed there have been fo sanguinarie, and monstrously salvage,
that I think posterity will hold them hyperbolicall. The Irish themselves
affirm there concurred causes to kindle this fire. One was the taking off
Straffords head, (who awed them more then any Deputy ever did) and that one of
his Accusations should be to have used the Papists there too favorably.
Secondly, the rigorous proceedings and intended courses against the Papists
here in England. Lastly, the stopping of that Regiment of Irish, who was
promised by his Majesty's Royal word and letter to the King of Spain, who
relying upon that employment, rather than to beg, steal, or sterve, turned
Rebels: And that which has aggravated the rebellion all this while, and
heightened much the spirit of the Irish, is the introduction of the Scot, whom
they hate in perfection above all people else, and the design spoken of in our
Parliament, to make an absolute Conquest, and National Eradication of them,
which has made them to make virtue of necessity, and to be valiant against
their wills.


Per. Indeed I heard that Act of staying the Irish Regiment, considering how
the Marquesses de Valada, and Malvezzi, and Don Alonso de Cardenas, who were
all three Ambassadors here for the King of Spain at that time, having by
relyance upon the sacred word and letter of a King, imprested money, and
provided shipping for their transport, and been at above 10000. Crowns charges,
I say this act was very much censured abroad, to the dishonor of his Majesty,
and our reproach.


Patr. I am very sorry to hear it. Well Sir. His Majesty by his presence
having settled Scotland, was at his return to London received with much joy,
and exultation, but though he was brought in with a Hosanna at one end of the
Town, he found a Crucifige at the other: For at Westminster there was a
Remonstrance framed, a work of many weeks, and voted in the dead of night,
when most of the moderate, and well-thoughted Members were retired to their
rest, wherein with as much industry and artifice as could be, the least moat in
government was exposed to public view, from the first day of his Majesty's
inauguration to that very hour: Which Remonstrance as it did no good to the
public; but fill peoples heads with doubts, and their hearts with gall and
retard the procedure of all business besides, so you may well think, it could
expect but cold entertainment with his Majesty, who hoped his great Council
according to their often deep protestations, had done something for his welcome
home, that might have made him the best beloved King that ever was amongst his
people.


Per. It Is true, there is no Government upon earth, made up of men, but is
subject to corruption, there is no Court of Judicature so clean, but some
cobwebs may gather in it, unless an Act of Parliament could be made to free
and exempt men from infirmities and error; It cannot be denied, but Scotland
might have something to complain of (though I think least of any) and so
leapt first into the poole to be cured; and what she fished besides in those
troubled waters it is too well known. England also no doubt might have some
grievances, which his Majesty freely offered, not only to redress for the
present, but to free her of all fears for the future, from falling into
relapses of that kind; but to redress grievances by Arms, by plunging the
whole Country into an intestine war, this makes the remedy worse then the
malady, it is as if one would go about to cure a sick body by breaking his
head, or let him blood by giving him a dash on the nose; it is as mad a trick
as his was who set the whole house a fire to roast his eggs. But truly Sir, in my
opinion; his Majesty at his return from Scotland might have justly expected
some Acts of compliance and gratitude from his Parliament, considering what
unparalleld Acts of Grace he had passed before.


Pat. His Majesty did not rest there, but complied further with them by
condeseending to an Act for putting down the Star-Chamber-Court, the High
Commission, the Court of Honor; nay, he was contented his own Privy Council
should be regulated, and his Forests bounded not according to ancient
Prerogative, but late custom; nay further, he passed a Bill for the unvoting,
and utter exclusion of the Spiritual Lords from the Parliament for ever,
whereby it cannot be denied, but by the casheering of twenty five votes at a
clap, and by excluding the Recusant Lords besides (who subsist most by his
grace) he did not a little enervate his own prerogative. Add hereunto that
having placed two worthy Gentlemen Lieutenants of the Tower, he removed them
both one after another, and was content to put in one of their Election: And
lastly, he trusted them with his greatest strength of all, with his Navy
Royal, and called home that knowing Knight who had the guard of the narrow
Seas so many years.


Per. Truly Sir, I never remember to have heard or read of such notable Acts of
grace and confidence from any King: but would not all this suffice?


Pat. No, But they demanded all the Land Soldiery and military strength of the
Kingdom to be disposed of by them, and to be put into what posture, and in
what Equipage, and under what Commanders they pleased; And this was the first
thing his Majesty ever denied them, yet he would have granted them this also
for a limited time, but that would not serve the turn; Hereupon his Majesty
grew a little sensible, how they inch'd every day more and more upon his royal
prerogatives and intending to go to his Town of Hull to see his Magazine, he
was in an hostile manner kept out, Canons mounted, Pistols cockt, and leveld at
him. But whether that Knight did this out of his fidelity to the Parliament,
or out of an apprehension of fear that some about the King, being moved with
the barbarousnesse of the action would have pistol'd him, I will not determine.


Peregr. I have read of diverse affronts of this kind, that were offered to the
French Kings, Rochel shut her gates more than once against Henry the great, and
for the King now regnant, they did not only shut him out of many of his
Towns, but upon the gates of some of them, they writ in legible Characters Roy
sans Foy, Ville sans peur, A faithless King, a fearlesse Town. Yet in the
greatest heat of those Wars, there was never any Town refused to let in her
King, provided he came attended only with his own train, and besides other
people abroad, I heard the Scoi's Nation did abhor that Act at Hull. But I pray
Sir go on.


Patr. His Majesty being thus shut out of one Town, he might justly suspect,
that an attempt might be made to shut him in, in some other; therefore he made
a motion to the York shire Gentlemen, to have a guard for the preservation of
His Person, which was done accordingly. But I am come too forward, I must go
back and tell you how the King was driven from Westminster. When his Majesty
was returned from Scotland, he retired to Hampton Court, whence upon the Lord
Maior's and the Cities humble solicitation, he came back to White Hall to
keep his Christmas. But when the Bill against Bishops was in agitation, which
business lasted near upon 10 weeks, a crew of bold sturdie Mechanics, and
Mariners, came from the City and ruffled before White Hall, and
Westminster Hall, and would have violated the Abbie of Westminster, so that for
many nights a Court of guard was forced to be kept in the body of that Church,
(the chiefest Sanctuary of the Kingdom.) Moreover, His Majesty having
impeached some of the Members of both Houses, of high Treason, and being denied
to have them delivered up, he went himself to the Lower House to demand them,
assuring the House they should have as fair and legal a trial as ever men
had. But as it pleased God, they were not there, but retired to London for
refuge; the Londoners grew stark wild thereupon, and notice being sent to all
the adjacent Counties, this Act of the Kings (though it wanted no precedents of
former times) was aggravated in the highest degree that possibly could be.
Hence you may easily infer, what small security his Majesty had at
White Hall, and what indignities he might have exposed himself unto, by that
which had passed already from the Rabble, who had vilified and cried tush at
his Proclamations, and disgorg'd other rebellious speeches with impunity,
therefore he retired to Hampton Court (as we read, our Savior withdrew
himself once from the multitude) thence to Windsor Castle, whence accompanying
her Majesty, with his eldest daughter to the sea side for Holland, and having
commanded the Prince to attend him against his return at Greenwich, the Prince
had been surpised and brought to London, had not the King come a little
before. Thence he removed to York, where he kept his Court all the Summer.

But to return to London, the very next day after their Majesty's departure,
the Country about, especially Bucking hamshire being incited by the City and
Parliament, came in great swarms, and joining with the London mechanics, they
ruffled up and down the streets, and kept such a racket, making the
fearfullest riot that ever I believe was heard of in Parliament time: so those
Members which formerly were fled into the City, were brought to the House in a
kind of triumph, being guarded by land and water in warlike manner by these
Champions: After this, sundry troops of Horse came from all the shires near
adjoining to the Parliament, and Buckingham men were the first, who while they
expressed their love to their Knight, forgot their sworn oath to their King,
and instead of feathers they carried a Printed Pretestation in their hats, as
the Londoners had done a little before upon the Pikes point.


Per. This kept a foul noise beyond Sea I remember, so that upon the Rialto in
Venice, it was sung up and down, that a Midsommer Moon (though it was then
midst of Winter) did reign amongst the English, and you must think that it
has made the Venetian to shrink in his shoulders, and to look but il
favorably upon us, since we will have none of his currants. But Sir, I heard much
of that Protestation, I pray what was the substance of it,


Pat. It was penned, and enjoined by the Parliament for every one to take, and
it consisted of many parts, the first was, to maintain the true Protestant
religion against all Popish innovations, which word Popish (as some think) was
scrued in of purpose for a loop-hole to let in any other innovation) the second
was to maintain the Prerogative and honor of the King; then the power and
privilege of Parliaments; and lastly, the propriety and liberty of the
Subject; for the two first parts of this Protestation, the people up and down
seemed to have uttrly forgotten them, and continue so still, as if their
consciences had been tied only to the two last, and never was there a poor
people so besotted, never was reason and common sense so baffled in any part of
the world.

And now will I go to attend his Majesty at York, where as I told you
before, being loath to part with his Sword, (though he had half parted with his
Scepter before) by denying the Parliament an indefinite time to dispose of the
Militia, (alleging, that as the Word, so the thing was new) He sends forth
his Commissions of Array according to the old law of England, which declares it
to be the undoubted right, and Royal Signiory of the King, to arm or disarme
any Subject. The Parliament sends out clean counter-mands for executing the
said Militia; so by this clashing twixt the Commission of Array and the
Militia, the first flash of this odious unnatural war may be said to break
out. The pulse of the Parliament beat's yet higher, they send an Admiral to
the sea, not only without, but expressly against the Kings special command.
They had taken unto them a Military guard from the City for their protection,
without his Majesty's consent, who by the advice of the Lord Keeper and others,
had offered them a very strong guard of Constables and other Officers to attend
them, which the laws usually allow; yet the raising of that guard in Yorkshire
for the safeguard of his Majesty's person, was interpreted to be levying of
war against the Parliament, and so made a sufficient ground for them to raise
an Army, to appoint a General, with whom they made public Declarations to
live and die. And they assumed power to confer a new appellation of honor
upon him, as if any could confer honor but the King! And this Army was to be
maintained out of the next contribution of all sorts of people; so a great
mass of money and plate, was brought into the Guild Hall, the Semstresse
brought in her silver Thimble, the Chamber maid her Bodkin, the Cook his
Spoones, and the Uintner his Bowls, and every one something to the advancement
of so good a work, as to wage war directly against the Sacred person of their
Sovereign, and to put the whole Country into a combustion.


Per. Surely it is impossible that a rational Christian people should grow so
simple and sottish, as to be so far transported, without some colorable cause,
therefore I pray tell me what that might be?


Patr. The cause is made specious enough, and varnished over wonderful
cunningly; The people are made to believe they are in danger, and a prevention
of that danger is promised, and by these plausible ways the understanding is
wrought upon, and an affection to the cause is ushered in, by aggravation of
this danger, as one would draw a thread through a needles eye: This huge
Bugbear Danger, was like a monster of many heads, the two chiefest were these,
That there was a plot to let in the Pope; And to cast the civil Government into
a French frame; It is incredible to think how the Pulpits up and down London
did ring of this, by brain-sicke Lecturers, of whom some were come from New
England, others were picked out of purpose, and sent for from their own flock
in the Country, to possess, or rather to poison the hearts of the Londoners,
to puzzle their intellectuals, and to intoxicate their brains by their
powerful gifts; It was punishable to preach of Peace, or of Caesar's right, but
the common subject of the Pulpit was either Blasphemy against God,
Disobedience against the King, or Incitements to Sedition, Good Lord, what
windy, frothy stuff came from these fanaticke brains! These Phrenetici
Nebulones, (for King James gives them no better Character in his (...)) who may
be said to be mad out of too much ignorance; who nevertheless are come to that
height of profaneness and pride, that they presume to father all their
Doctrines, all their nonsense raptures and ravings upon the holy Spirit. Nor
did the Pulpit only help to kindle this fire, but the Press also did
contribute much fuel; What base scurrilous Pamphlets were cried up and down
the streets, and dispersed in the Country? What palpable and horrid lies were
daily printed? How they multiplied in every corner in such plenty, that one
might say there was a superfaetation of lies, which continue unto this day! One
while the King of Denmark was coming over from the Sound; another while the
king of France had an huge Army about Calais designed for England; another
while there was an Army of Irish Rebels coming over with the privitie of the
King; another while a plot was cried up and down to burn London; another while
there were subterranean invisible Troops mustered under ground in Wales, and
thousands of Papists armed in Lancashire, and diverse reports of this nature
were daily blown up, and though the Authors of them were worthles and mean
futilous persons, yet the reports themselves had that credit as to be
entertained and canvas'd in the high Court of Parliament. But these false
rumors produced one politic effect (and it was the end indeed for which they
were dispersed) they did atemorize, and fill the peoples hearts with fears,
and so dispose of them to uproares and to part with money.


Peregr. I know there be sundry sorts of Fears; there are Conscientious
Fears, there are Pannik Fears, there are pusillanimous Fears, and there are
politck Fears. The first sort of Fear proceeds from guilt of Conscience, which
turns often to frenzy. The second sort of Fear may be called a kind of
Chymera, it is some sudden surprizall or Consternation arising from an
unexpected strange accident. Pusillanimous Fear makes a mountain of a molehill,
and proceeds from poverty of spirit, and want of courage, and is a passion of
abject and degenerous minds, and may be called cowardice, and this Fear is
always accompanied with jealousy. Politic fear, is a created forged Fear
wrought in another, to bring some Design about; and as we find the
Astronomers (the comparison is too good) do imagine such and such shapes and
circles in the Heavens, as Zodiak, Equinoctial, Colures and Tropiques, with
others, though there be no such things really in nature, to make their
conclusions good; so the politician does often devise and invent false
imaginary Fears, to make his proceedings more plausible amongst the silly
vulgar, and thereby to compass his ends and as the Sun uses to appear far
bigger to us in the morning than at noon, when he is exalted to his Meridian,
and the reason the philosophers use to give, is the interposition of the
vapors which are commonly in the lower Region, through which we look upon him,
as we find a piece of silver look bigger in a bucket of water than elsewhere,
so the politician uses to cast strange mists of fear, and fogges of jealousy
before the simple peoples eyes, to make the danger seem bigger: But truly Sir,
this is one of the basest kinds of policy; nor can I believe there be any
such politicians amongst the Cabalists of your Parliament; who pretend to be so
busy about Gods work, A glorious Reformation; and you know there is a good
Text for it, that God needs not the wicked man, He scorns to be beholding to
Liars to bring about his purposes: But I pray Sir, deal freely with me, Do you
imagine there was a Design to bring in the Mass again?


Patr. The Mass? You may say, there was a plot to bring in Mahomet as soon, to
bring in the Alchoran, or Talmud as soon, for I dare pawn my soul, the King is
as cordial a Protestant, as any that breathes under his three Crowns, which
besides his public deep Protestations, and his constant quotidian exemplary
open practice, many other convinceing private reasons induce me to believe, and
it is in vain to think the Pope can take footing here to any purpose without
the Kings leave. You know as well as I Sir, that of all the Reformed Churches
in Christendom, the Lutheran retains most of the Roman, both in his positions
and practice, and comes much nearer unto him than we do, yet I have observed,
that from the first day of his Reformation, to this, He is as averse, and as
far off from Rome, as the rigidest Calvinist that is; and shall I think,
because there are some humble and handsome postures, and decent vestures
revived in ourChurch, for they were never abolished, because the Communion
Table stands in the East end where it ever stood since Christianity came in
all our Cathedrals, which should be a rule to all interior Churches, which yet
the Seperatist cries out to be an Innovation: because her Majesty has a few
simple Capuchins, fewer than was allowed by the Matrimonial Capitulations,
whither to retire sometimes: Because Schismatickes were proceeded against with
more care, and the Government of the Church borne up lately with more
countenance, shall I believe that the Pope must presently come in? shall I
believe the weakness of our Religion to be such, as to be so easily shaken and
overturned? Yet I believe there was a pernicious plot to introduce a new
Religion, but what I pray? not Popery, but Presbytery, and with it to bring
in the Doctrine of Buchanan and Knox, for civil Government, and so to cast our
Church and State into a Scots mould.


Peregr. Indeed, I heard the English much censured abroad for enslaving as it
were their understanding and judgment in points of Religion to the Scot, whom
they made Christians, and Reformed Christians first, and now for the English to
run to them for a Religion, and that the Uniformite should proceed from them,
they having disdained us formerly, what a disparagement is it think you to the
Anglican Church? This with other odd traverses, as the ecclipsing the glory
of the King, and bringing him back to a kind of minority, the tampering with
his conscience, I will not say, the straining of it so far, the depriving him
of all kind of property, the depressing of his Regal Power, wherein the
honor of a Nation con^^sts, and which the English were used to uphold more
than any other, for no King has more awful attributes from his Subjects, as,
Sacred Sovereign, Gracious and Most Excellent Majesty, nor any King so often
prayed for, for in your morning Lyturgie he is five times prayed for, whereas
other Princes are mentioned but once or twice at most in theirs, I say this,
with interception of letters, some incivilities offered Ambassadors, and the
bold lavish speechees that were spoken of the greatest Queens in Christendom,
and his Majesty's late withdrawing his Royal protection from some of his
Merchant-Subiects in other Countries, has made the English loose much ground
in point of esteem abroad, and to be the discourse, I will not say the scorn
of other people. They stick not to say, that there is now a worse malady
fallen upon their minds, then fell upon their bodies about an age since by the
Sweating sickness, which was peculiar only unto them, and found them out under
all Climes. Others say, there is a (...) amongst them, that they are turned to
Wolves, (as you know it is a common thing in Lapland,) and that the old Adage
is verifyed in them, Homo homini Lupus. Nay our next neighbors give out, that
the saying was never truer then now, Rex Anglorum, Rex Diabolorum. Nor is it a
small disrepute to the English, that the word Cavallier, which is an attribute
that no Prince in Christendom will disdain, and is the common appellation of
the Nobility and Gentry in most parts of the world, is now used, not only in
Libels and frivilous Pamphlets, but in public Parliamentary Declarations, for
a term of reproach. But truly Sir, what you have related touching the Pulpit
and the Press, transformes me into wonder, and I should want Faith to believe
it, did you not speak it upon your knowledge; but the English when they fall
to work upon a new humor, use to overdo all people.


Patr. You have not yet the tith of what I could give you, you would little
think that Coachmen, and Feltmakers, and Weavers were permitted to preach up
and down without controlement, and vent their venom against Church and State,
to cry down our Hierarchy and Liturgy, by most base and reviling speeches.


Per. Touching your Lyturgie, I have heard it censured abroad by the rigidest
Calvinists of Geneva and Dort, yet I never heard any other Character given of
it, but that it is a most Pious, Pathetick, and perfect piece of devotion, both
for the matter and form of it, which I have been a little curious to observe.
It begins with some choice passages of holy Scripture, and a previous
Declaration or Monitory to excite us to the work in hand; The first address
we make to God is by an humble and joint Confession which is applyable to any
conscience, and comprehends in it all kind of sins. Then follows a
pronuntiation of Gods promises and pronesse to pardon and absolve us; We go
on to the Lords Prayer, which having been dictated by our Savior himself, we
often use, and is as Amber thrown in amongst our Frankincense, to make the
Sacrifice more precious and pleasing unto God. Then we proceed to some choice
Psalms, and other portions of holy Scripture taken out of the old and new
testament; Then we fall to the Symbol of says, where of we make a solemn
joint confession in such a posture as shows a readiness and resolution in us
to defend it: and so to the Letany, wherein the poor penitent peccant soul
may be said to breath out her self into the bosom of her Savior by tender
ejaculations, by panting groans, and eviscerated ingeminations, and there is
no sin, no temptation whatsoever that humane frailty is subject unto, but
you shall find a deliverance from it there; it is so full of Christian charity
that there is no condition of people, but are remembered and prayed for there.
Then we proceed by holy alternatif interlocutions (whereby we hear our selves
speak as well as the minister) to some effectual short prayers; because in
long prayers the mind is subject to wander, as some Zelots now a days use to
bring their Hearers into a Wilderness by their Prayers, and into a Labyrinth
by their Sermons. Then go we on to the Decalogue, and if it be in a
Cathedral, there is time enough for the Hearer to examine himself, while the
Music plays, where and when he broke any of Gods holy Commandments, and ask
particular forgiveness accordingly; Then after other choice portions of
Scripture, and passages relating to our Redemption, and endearing unto us the
merits of it, with a more particular Confession of our Faith, we are dismissed
with a Benediction: so that this Lyturgie may be called an Instrument of many
strings, whereon the sighing soul sends up various notes unto heaven. It is a
posie made up of diverse flowers, to make it the more fragrant in the nostrills
of God. Now touching your Bishops I never knew yet any Protestant Church but
could be content to have them, had they means to maintain the Dignity, which
the Churches of France with others have not in regard the Reformation began
first among the people, not at Court, as here it did in England: For unless
there be some Supervisers of Gods house, endowed with eminent authority to
check the fond fancies, and quench the false fatuous fires of every private
spirit, and unless it be such an authority that may draw unto it a holy kind
of awe and obedience, what can be expected but confusion and Atheism? You know
what became of the Israelites when the wonted reverence to the Ark, and the
Ephod, and the Priest, began to languish amongst them: For the brain of man is
like a garden, which unless it be senced about with a wall or hedge, is
subject you know to be annoyed by all kind of beasts which will be ready to
run into it; so the brain unless it be restrained and bounded in holy
things by rules of Canonical authority, a thousand wild opinions, and
extravagant fancies will hourly rush into it: nor was there ever any field so
subject to produce Cockle and Darnell, as the brain is rank and ready to bring
forth tares of Scisme and Heresy of a thousand sorts, unless after the first
culture the sickle of Authority be applied to grub up all such noisome weeds.


Pat. Yet this most ancient dignity of Bishops is traduced and vilified by
every shallow-pated petty Clerk, and not so much out of a true zeal, as out
of envy that they are not the like. And touching our Lyturgie, whereof you
have been pleased to give so exact a Character, people are come to that height
of impiety, that in some places it has been drowned, in other places burnt,
in some places torn in pieces to serve for the basest uses, nay it has been
preached publicly in Pulpit, That it is a piece forged in the devils shop, and
yet the impious foul mouthd Babbler never was so much as questioned for it.
Nor did the Church only echo with these blasphemies; but the Press was as
pregnant to produce every day some Monster either against Ecclesiastical, or
Secular government. I am ashamed to tell you how some bold Pamphleters in a
discourse of a sheet or two, would presume to question, to dispute of, and
determine the extent of Monarchik jurisdiction, what sturdie doubts, what
saucie Quaeries they put, what odd frivolous distinctions they framed, That the
King though he was Gods Anointed, yet he was man's appointed: That he had the
commanding, not the disposing power: That he was set to rule over, not to over
rule the people; That he was King by humane choice, not by divine Charter; That
he was not King by the grace of God, so much as by the suffrage of the people;
That he was a Creature and production of the Parliament: That he had no
implicit trust, nor peculiar property in any thing; That populus est potior
Rege: That Grex lege, lex. est Rege potentior; That the King was singulis
major, universis minor, whereas a successive Monarch -- Uno minor est love --
Sometimes they would bring instances from the States of Holland, sometimes from
the Republike of Venice, and apply them to Absolute and Independent Royalty;
But I find that the discourse and Inferences of these Grand Statists were
bottomed upon four false foundations, viz. That the King of whom they speak
must be either a Minor, an Idiot, an insufferable tyrant, or that the Kingdom
they mean, is Elective; None of all which is appliable, either to our most
gracious and excellently quallified King, or to his renowned Kingdom, which
has been always reputed an ancient successive Monarchy, governed by one
supreme, undeposeable and independent Head, having the Dignity, the Royal
State, and Power of an Imperial Crown, and being responsible to none but to
God Almighty and his own conscience for his actions, and unto whom a Body
Politic compacted of Prelates, Peers, and all degrees of people is naturally
subject; but this is a theme of that transcendencie, that it requires a serious
and solid Tractat, rather than such a slender Discourse as this to handle.

But I pray excuse me Sir, that I have stepped aside thus from the Road of my
main narration; I told you before, how the clashing 'twixt the Commission of
Array, and the Militia, put all things in disarray throughout the whole
Kingdom; The Parliament as they had taken the first Military guard, so they
began to arm first, and was it not high time then for his Majesty to do
something think you? yet he assayed by all ways imaginable to prevent a War,
and to conquer by a passive fortitude, by cunctation, and longanimitie. How
many overtures for an accommodation did he make? How many Proclamations of
Pardon? How many elaborate Declarations breathing nothing but clemency,
sweetness and truth did drop from his own imperious invincible pen, which will
remain upon Record unto all Ages, as so many Monuments to his eternal glory?
Yet some ill spirit stepped still in, between his Grace and the abused Subject,
for by the peremptory Order of Parliament (O monstrous thing!) the said
Proclamations of Grace, and other his Majesty's Declarations were prohibited to
be read, fearing that the strength and truth of them would have had a virtue to
unblinde, or rather unbewitch (for Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft), the
poor besotted people? What deep Protestations, and holy Vows did he reiterate,
that the main of his Designs was to preserve the true Procestant Religion, the
known Laws of the Land, and the just Privileges of Parliament? How often did
he dehort and woo the City of London (his Imperial Chamber) from such violent
courses, so that she may justly be upbraided with the same words, as the Prince
of peace upbraided Jerusalem withal: London, London, How often would I have
gathered thee, as an hen does her chickens under her wings, yet thou would
not?

How often did He descend to acknowledge the manner of demanding the one and
five Members in his public Remonstrances? And if there was an error in his
proceedings, how often did he desire his Great Council to direct him in a course
how to go on in the Empeachment? which they never did, but would reserve the
privilege to themselves to be Judge and Party.


Peregr. Can your Parliament protect high Treason? I am sure the character of
an Ambassador cannot, which the late French Ambassador (who for his time
played his Cards more cunningly than ever Count Gondomer did) knew well; and
therefore, as I heard some French men say, he got letters of Revocation before
his designed time: But it seems strange to me, that the King who is the
Protector of the Law, and Fountain of Justice, cannot have the benefit of the
Law Himself, which the meanest of his Vassals can claim by right of
inheritance; it is strange, I say, that the Law should be a dead letter to him
who is the Life of the Law, but that for omission of some puntillio in the
form of the Process, the charge of high Treason should be so slightly waved,
specially Treason of so universal concernmen^, that it may be called a
complication of many Treasons; for if in every petty State it be high Treason
to treat only with any Foreign Power without the privitie of the Prince, it
must needs be Treason of an higher nature actually to bring them in; and hereof
I could allege you many pregnant instances, ancient and modern, but that I
do not desire to interrupt you in your Relation.


Patr. The Parliament, as I told you before, armed apace, it was not fitting
then his Majesty should sit idle; therefore he summons those Nobles and
others, who had an immediate relation unto him by office or service, to attend
him at York, according to their particular obligation and Oath: but it seems
the Parliament assumed power to dispense with those Oaths, and excuse their
attendance, which dispensation prevailed with some (tender) consciences; yet
the Great Seal posted to Court, and after it most of the Nobles of the Land,
and the flower of the Gentry, with many of the prime Members of the Commons
House; so that were it not for the local privilege, the Parliament, for
number of Members, might be said to be ever since about the King: These Nobles
and Gentlemen resenting his Majesty's case, and what practices there were on
foot to alter the Government both of Church and State, not only advised his
Majesty to a royal War for defense of his Crown and Dignity, but contributed
very cheerfully, and have stood constant to the work ever since.


Peregr. They have good reason for it, for the security of the Nobility and
Gentry depends upon the strength of the Crown, otherwise popular Government
would rush in like a torrent upon them. But surely those Nobles, and those
Parliament Gentlemen, and others, some of whom I understand, were reputed the
wisest and best weighed men for experience and parts thorowout the whole
Kingdom, and were cried up in other Parliaments to be the most zealous Patriots
for the propriety and freedom of the Subject, would never have stuck so
firmly to His Majesty, had they not known the bottom of his Designs, that
it was far from his thoughts to bring in the Pope or French Government; for
thereby they should have betrayed their own posterity, and made their children
slaves.


Patr. To my knowledge, these Nobles and Gentlemen are still the very same as
they were in former Parliaments, wherein they were so cried up for the truest
lovers of their Country, and best Commonwealths men; yet now they are
branded, and Voted to be Seducers and Traitors, because according to their
Oaths and consciences, they adhere to the King their Master and Liege-Lord,
for maintenance of that Religion they were baptized and bred in. Those most
Orthodox and painful Divines, which till the Parliament began, were accounted
the precisest sort of Protestants, are now cried down for Papists, though they
continue still the very same men, both for opinions and preaching, and are no
more Papists, than I am a Pytbagorean. In fine, a true English Protestant is
put now in the same scale with a Papist, and made Synonyma's. And truly these
unhappy Schismatickes could not devise how to cast a greater infamy upon the
English Protestant, than they have done of late by these monstrous imputations;
they would fasten upon him such opinions which never entered into his thoughts,
they would know ones heart better than himself, and so would be greater
Kardiognostickes than God Almighty.

But to draw to a Conclusion; the Parliaments Army multiplied apace in London,
the Kings but slowly in the North, so that when he displayed his Royal
Standard at Nottingham, his Forces were not any thing considerable, so that if
the Parliaments General had then advanced toward him from Northamptou, he had
put him to a very great strait; they increased something at Derby and Stafford,
but when he was come to Shrewsbury, the Welch-men came running down the
mountains in such multitudes, that their example did much animate the English;
so that his Army in less than a month that the Court continued in
Shrewesbury, came to near upon twenty thousand Horse and Foot; nor was it a
small advantage to his Majesty's affairs, that the Nephew-Princes came over so
opportunely. The first encounter Prince Rupert had with the Parliaments forces
was at Worcester, where he defeated the flower of their Cavalrie, and gave them
a smart blow. At Shrewsbury his Majesty took a resolution to march with his
whole Army toward London, but after seven days march he understood the
Parliaments forces were within six miles side long of him, and so many miles he
went out of his road to find them out, and face them: Upon a Sunday morning he
was himself betimes on Edgehill, where the Enemies Colors plainly appeared in
the vale before Keinton; it was past two in the afternoon before all his
Infantery could get to the bottom, who upon sight of the Enemies Colors ran as
merrily down the hill, as if they had gone to a morris-dance. So his Majesty
himself being Generalissimo, gave command the great Ordnance should fly for a
defiance: so the battle began, which lasted above three hours; and as some
French and Dutch Commanders told me, they never remembered to have seen a more
furious fight for the time in all the German wars. Prince Rupert pursued the
Enemies Horse like a whirle-winde near upon three miles, and had there been
day enough, when he came back to the infanterie, in all probability a total
defeat had been given them: So that the same accident may be said to fall out
here, as happened in that famous battle at Lewis, in Henry the thirds time,
where the Prince of Wales (afterward Edward the first) was so eager, and went
so far (by excess of courage) from the body of the Army in pursuance of the
Londoners. His Majesty (to his deserved and never-dying glory) comported
himself like another Caesar all the while, by riding about and encouraging the
Soldiers, by exposing his person often to the reach of a Musket-buller, and
lying in the field all that bleake night in his Coach. Notwithstanding that
many lying pamphlets were purposely printed here, to make the world believe,
that he had retired himself all the time of the fight; what partial Reports
were made in the Guild Hall to the Londoners, and by what persons, I am ashamed
to tell you: But that his Majesty was victorious that day (a day which I never
thought to have seen in England) there be many convincing arguments to prove
it; for besides the great odds of men which fell on their side, and Cannons
they lost, some of their Ordnance were naild by the Kings Troops the next
morning after, in the very face of their army. Moreover the King advanced
forward the next day to his former road, and took Banbury presently after; but
the Parliamenteers went backwards, and so from that day to this, His Majesty
continues Master of the field. It Is true, that in some places, as at Farnham,
Winchester, and Chichester, they have prevailed since, but no considerable part
of the Royal Army was there to make opposition; and I blush to tell you, how
unworthily the Law of Arms was violated in all those places.


Perig. Good Lord, how can the souls of those men that were in the Parliaments
Army at Keinton Battle, dispense with the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance,
besides the Protestation you speak of, they have taken to preserve the Person,
honor, and prerogative of the King, when they thus actually bandy against his
Person, and appear in battle with all the engines of hostility against him.


Pat. I would be loath to exchange consciences with them, and boggle so with God
Almighty; but these men by a new kind of Metaphysick have found out a way to
abstract the Person of the King from his Office to make his Soveraigntie a
kind of Platonic Idea hovering in the air, while they visibly attempt to
asiail and destroy his person (and Progeny) by small and great shot, and seek
him out amongst his Life Guard with fire, and sword; yet they give out they
fight not only not against him, but for him, and that their army is more loyal
to him than his own; who, they say, fight only for the name King, though they
have his person really amongst them, commanding and directing: Thus they make
him a strange kind of Amphibium, they make him in one instant a King and no
King of the same Individuum; a power which the Casuists affirm God Almighty
never assumd to himself, to do any thing that implys a contradiction.


Pereg. Noble Sir, you make my heart to pant within me, by the Pathetick
relation you have been pleased to make me of these ruthful times; But one
thing seems to me to be no less than a miracle, how his Majesty has been
able to subsist all this while, considering the infinite advantages the adverse
party has had of him; for they have all the tenable places and towns of
strength, both by Land and Sea; They have the Navy Royal, they have all the
Ammunition and Arms of the Crown, they have all the imposts and Customs,
Poundage and Tonnage (which they levy contrary to their former Protestation
before the Bill be passed) they have the Exchequer at their devotion, and all
the Revenue of the King, Queen and Prince, and lastly, they have the City of
London, which may be called a Magazin of money and Men, where there is a ready
supply and superfluity of all things, that may feed, clothe, or make men gay
to put them in heart and resolution: Truly considering all these advantages,
with diverse others on their side, and the disadvantages on the Kings, it turns
me into a lump of astonishment, how his Majesty could bear up all this while,
and keep together so many Armies, and be still master of the field.


Pat. I confess Sir, it is a just subject for wonderment, and we must ascribe
it principally to God Almighty, who is the protector of his Anointed, for his
hand has manifestly appeared in the conduct of his affairs, He has been the
Pilot, who has sat at the helm ever since this storm began, and will
doubtless continue to steer his course till he waft him to safe harbor
again; Add hereunto, that his Majesty for his own part, has been
wonderfully stirring, and indefatigable both for his body and mind; and what
notable things Her Majesty has done, and what she has suffered, is fitter
for a Chronicle, then such a simple Discourse.

Hereunto may be added besides, that his Majesty has three parts of four of
the Pceres, and prime Gentry of the Kingdom firm unto him, and they will
venture hard, before they will come under a popular government and
corporations; or let in Knox or Calvin to undermine this Church and State.


Pereg. Truly Sir amongst other Countries, I extremely longed to see England,
and am no sooner come, but I am surfetted of her already, I doubt the old
prophecy touching this Island is come now to be verified. That the Churchman
was, the Lawer is, and the Soldier shall be. I am afraid the English have
seen their best days; for I find a general kind of infatuation, a total
Eclipse of reason amongst most of them; and commonly a general infatuation
precedes the perdition of a people, like a fish, that putrifieth first in the
head; They say abroad, It Is the Scots turn now to be a great Nation. Therefore
I will trusse up my baggage and over again, after I have enjoied you some
days, and received your commands.


Patr. Dear Sir, If you seriously resolve to cross the Seas again so soon, I
may chance bear you company, for as you have since the short time of your
sojourne here judiciously observed a national defection of reason in the
people of this Island, which makes her so active in her own ruin; so by longer
experience, and by infallible Symptoms, I find a strange kind of Vertigo to
have seized upon her, which I fear will turn to the falling Sickness, or such
a Frenzy, that will make her to dash out her own brains; Nor are her
miseries, I fear, come yet to the full; It is the method of the Almighty, when
he pleases to punish a people, to begin with rods, to go on with scourges,
and if they will not do, he has Scorpions for them; therefore, I will breathe
any where sooner than here: for what security or contentment can one receive
in that Country, where Religion and Justice, the two grand Doriqne Columns
which support every State, are fallen down? which makes all conditions of men,
all professions and Trades to go here daily to utter ruin. The Church man
grows every day more despicable, as if he had no property in any thing, nor
is there any way left him to recover his Tithe, but by costly troublesome
suits. The Civilian, a brave learned profession, has already made his last
Will; and the Common Lawyers case is little better; the Courtier cannot get his
Pension; the Gentleman cannot recover his rents, but either they are sequestered
by an high hand of unexampted power, or else the poor Tenant is so heavily
assess'd or plundered, that he is disabled to pay them in; all kind of
Commerce both domesticke and foreign visibly decays, and falls more and more,
into the hands of strangers (to the no small dishonor of the wisdom of this
Nation;) nor can the Tradesman recover his debts, Parliamentary Protections
continue still in such numbers, so that it is a greater Privilege now to be a
Footman to the meanest of the Lower House, than to be of the Kings Bedchamber:
Prentises run away from their Masters, and against their fathers intent turn
Soldiers, and for money, which is the soul of Trade, I believe since the
beginning of this Parliament, above one half of the Treasure of the Kingdom is
either conveyed to the other side of the Sea, or buried under ground, whence it
must be new dug up again. Moreover, all things are here grown Arbitrary,
(yet that word took off the Earl of Straffords head) Religion, Law, and
Allegiance is grown Arbitrary; nor dares the Judge upon the Tribunal
(according to his Oath) do justice, but he is overawed by Ordinance, or else
the least intimation of the sense of the Lower House is sufficient to enjoyne
him the contrary, so that now, more than ever, it may be said here, -- Terras
Astraa reliquit. Peace also has roved up and down this Island, and cannot get
a place to lay her head on; she hoped to have had entertainment in Yorkshire,
by the agreement of the best Gentlemen in the Country; but an Ordinance of
Parliament beat her out of doors, then she thought to rest in Cheshire, and by
a solemn Covenant she was promised to be preserved there; the principal
Agents of that Covenant having protested every one upon the word of a
Gentleman, and as they did desire to prosper, both themselves, their tenants
and friends, should strictly observe it; but the like Ordinance of Parliament
battered down that Agreement.

Then she thought to take footing in the West, and first in Dorsetshire, then
in Cornwall and Devonshire, and by the holy tie of the blessed Sacrament, she
was promised to be preserved there; but another Ordinance of Parliament is
pursuing her, to dispense with the Commissioners of the said Agreement for
their Oaths. Lastly, his Majesty is mainly endeavoring to bring her in again
thorowout the whole Land; but the furious, phrenetique Schismatickes will have
none of her; for as one of them (besides a thousand instances more) preached in
one of the most populous Congregations about the City, It were better that
London streets ran with blood, and that dead carcasses were piled up as high as
the battlements of Paul's, than peace should be now brought in. And now that
Peace is shut out, Learning is upon point of despair, her Colleges are become
Courts of guard, and Mars lies in Mercuries bed. Honor also, with her Court,
lies in the dust; the Cobbler may confront the Knight, the Boor the Baron, and
there is no Judicial way of satisfaction; which makes Monarchy fear she has
no long time of abode here, Public faith also, though she had but newly set up
for her self, is suddenly become Bankrupt, and how could she choose? for more
of the Kingdoms Treasure has been spent within these thirty months, than was
spent in four-score years before; but she hopes to piece up her self again,
by the ruins of the Church; but let her take heed of that, for those goods
have been fatal to many thousand families in this Kingdom: yet she thinks
much, that those public sums which were given to suppress one Rebellion (in
Ireland) should be employed to maintain another Rebellion (in England) And
lastly, me thinks, I see Religion in torn ragged weeds, and with slubber'd
eyes, sitting upon Weeping Cross, and wringing her hands, to see her chiefest
Temple (Paul's Church) where God Almighty was used to be served constantly
thrice a day, and was the Rendezvous, and as it were the Mother Church,
standing open to receive all comers and strangers, to be now shut up, and made
only a thorow-fare for Porters; to see those scaffolds, the expense of so many
thousand pounds, to lie a rotting; to see her chiefest lights like to be
extinguished; to see her famous learned Divines dragged to prison, and utterly
deprived of the benefit of the Common Law, their inheritance: Me thinks, I
say, I see Religion packing up, and preparing to leave this Island quite,
crying out, that this is a Country fitter for Atheists than Christians to live
in; for God Almighty is here made the greatest Malignant, in regard his House
is plundered more than any. There is no Court left to reform Heresy, no Court
to punish any Church Officer, and to make him attend his Cure, no Court to
punish Fornication, Adultery, or Incest; Me thinks I hear Her cry out
against these her Grand Reformers (or Refiners rather) that they have put
division 'twixt all degrees of persons. They have put division 'twixt husband
and wife, 'twixt mother and child: the son seeks his fathers blood in open
field, one brother seeks to cut the others throat; they have put division
'twixt Master and Servant, 'twixt Landlord and Tenant; nay, they have a long
time put a sea of separation 'twixt King and Queen; and they labor more and
more to put division 'twixt the Head and the Members, 'twixt his Majesty and
his political Spouse, his Kingdom; and lastly, they have plunged one of the
flourishingst Kingdoms of Europe in a War without end; for though a Peace may
be plaster'd over for the time, I fear it will be but like a fire covered with
ashes, which will break out again, as long as these fiery Schismatickes have
any strength in this Island, so that all the premises considered, if Turk or
Tartar, or all the infernal spirits and Cacodaemons of Hell had broken in
amongst us, they could not have done poor England more mischief. Sir, I pray
excuse this homely imperfect relation, I have a thousand things more to impart
unto you when we may breathe freer air; for here we are come to that slaverie,
that one is in danger to have his very thoughts plundered; therefore if you
please to accept of my company, I will over with you by Gods help, as soon as
it may stand with your conveniencie, but you must not discover me to be an
Englishman abroad, for so I may be jear'd at and kicked in the streets; I will
go under another name, and am fixed in this resolution, never to breathe
English air again, until the King recovers his Scepter, and the People their
Senses.


A Letter writ by Sergeant-Major KIRLE, to a Friend at Windsor.
Sir,
YOu were pleased to command a constant account from me, as the only requital
you would receive for admitting me an Officer in the Parliament Army; and
though diverse things have come from us, which have been either doubted or
contradicted, and seem to have no other credit than the Close Committee; yet
what I am now about to tell you, shall run none of those dangers, but that with
a great deal of confidence you may report, both in public to the House, and
in private ^o my friends, that I am now at Oxford; nor shall your wonder last
long, for by that time I have declared upon what grounds at first I undertook
that service, and upon what reasons I have since deserted it, I shall without
doubt (where there is Charity or Reason) free my self from the imputation of
dishonor, and undeceive others that are, as I was, seduced.

About the time these distempers began here, I returned from serving the Swede
in Germany, and the States of Holland; in both which Countries, I cannot
without vanity say, I did nothing to the dishonor of mine own: as this
absence made me ignorant of the condition of the Kingdom, so it rendered me more
inclinable to receive an employment from the Parliament: for though neither my
youth, nor this profession are curious after the affairs of State; yet so
common were the grievances in that unhappy conjuncture of time, when I went
abroad, that I retained the same impressions in me at my coming home,
especially when I saw the complaints remain, but did not know that the Causes
were taken away: thus possessed with prejudice, it was no hard thing for me to
believe, that the pretenses of War, (in themso specious) and the employment
therein, to be full of Honor, Justice, and Piety; and that there needed not
the importunity of my nearest friends, or an argument from the necessity
their former severitie had cast upon me, nor an invitation from your self, to
seek for the preferferment you speedily procured me.

How I behaved my selse, while I was of your mind, and in that service, will be
best judged by those, that know that from a Lieutenant I was soon preferred to
be Captain of a Troop raised to my hand: and shortly after, to be
Sergeant-Major to the Earl of Stamfords Regiment of Horse: what prisoners I
took, what contribution I brought in, what places and Towns I secured,
appears by the testimony given of me, and the thanks I received from you. It
is not therefore necessity has made me leave you to go to the King, from whom
you have taken not only His revenues which should give Him bread, but the
benevolences (as far as in you lies) of His people that should maintain His
Army. It is not ambition, to forsake a certain benefit for an uncertain
employment, and (in justice) as doubtful a pardon: it is not malice for any
particular neglect or injury, for I must confess no man received greater
kindness from his superior Officers, or more ample thanks from your selves
then I have done; no civil humane respect, but a perfect discovery of those
false lights, that have hitherto misled me, and the deep apprehension of the
horror which attends the persevering in such errors.

I must confess (though you would little think it) that Master Sedgwicke,
Chaplain to that Regiment, first opened my eyes, and moved me to that
reflection upon my self, which set me since in the right way; not by his
persuasions or conversion, (for I can assure you, you may still confide in him)
but by the Spirit (not that pretended to of meekness and peace, but) of fury
and madness; he revealed the mystery of this war, and in his inspired rage,
brake the shell, Religion, safety of the King, Liberty and propriety; and
showed us the kernel, Atheism, Anarchie, Arbitrary government and confusion
what was meant else by his saucy and impertinent talking to God Almighty,
whom he seemed rather to command than entreat? what was meant else by his
traducing the King and cursing him, while he seemed to pray for him? and
presently with a tone as gentle as his language magnify the Worthies the
Estates assembled in Parliament; what was meant else by encouraging violence,
and sharing in things plundered? nor had one man given me a just prejudice of
the cause, but that I saw the whole lump of these pseudo clergy, seasoned with
the same leaven, who hate (and so instruct the people) an innocent ceremony,
but thirst after blood; who abhor learning and Bishops, but adore ignorance
and division; who while they are severe (and therein they do well) against
drunkenness and adultery, they make robbery, rebellion, sacrilege, and murder
become virtues, because they are in order to effect their designs; and truly I
had not trusted my ears, if the same and much more had not been confirmed by
my eyes; for those few regiments then with us were a perfect model of the
whole Army, and most certain I am, that all the Officers of no one Company
were all of the same opinion what Religion they fought for: some loved the
book of Common Prayer and Bishops, others were zealous for extemporary prayers
and Elders, another thought Bishops so many Elders, and Elders so many Bishops,
and therefore they fought to set Jesus Christ in his Throne, meaning
independencie: Some liked the Chaplain of the Regiment, another thought his
Corporal preached better; some had so much of the spirit they wanted courage,
and when they should fight, thought it better to pray, or else declared it was
revealed unto them they should be beaten, and to fulfill the prophecy, threw
down their arms; and one would think, that every company had been raised
out of the several Congregations of Amsterdam; who wanted not Scripture for
every mutiny; who plunder and call it Gods providence, who if they cannot
prove any of quality to be a Papist, yet as he is a Gentleman he shall want
grace; and that is title enough to possess the estates of all that are more
richer than themselves: and in truth had it not been for this persuasion, you
might have made riots, but not a war; for under the promise of malignants
estates are included, not only those that directly take part with the King,
but all those too that shall not concur with you in all things: hence it is
that those were thought meritorious, who voted Bishops out of the House of
Peers, but are become Malignants, because they will not put them out of the
Church: hence some that contributed with a large hand to this war, received
marks of favor, but are become Malignants, because they will not give all that
they are worth: hence those that in tumults cried for justice were worthy of
thanks, but are become Malignants, because they will not help to depose the
King. I shall not need to tell what dishonorable and indirect means have
been used to these ends, what burdens have been laid upon weak consciences of
some men by Divines, what preferment have been promised to some, what
threatenings have been used to others; the sending of Horses, Money, Plate,
shall expiate for past sins, or cover others which by their busy emissaries
they have found out, and will otherwise discover: he that has power in his
Country and will use it for you may oppress his neighbor, who must not sue
him because he is in their service, and if he would be revenged; it is no hard
thing to procure a warrant and the Sergeants man, and lay him up till he find
an accusation, to produce one he never means to prove. I could instance in
diverse, who have been by these allurements, invited to this war, and so to the
ruin both of themselves and families; nor can I forget that more obvious
artifice, which has made the Press the fruitful Mother of many Bastards; when
the taking three Scouts in an Alehouse, has been made at London, a Castle and
the defeat of a Regiment, and Cler. Parl. has made the Pamphlet sell for a
truth: when a defeat has been voted a victory, and to amuse the People an
Order has been made, that God should be thanked for it, and indeed the
Officers at last found that to tell truth when they had the worst, sometimes
endangered their casheering, always procured them an ill opinion, and when
they saved the labor of doing the contrary, they were the better used, and
therefore of late have justly wracked betwixt this Scylla and Charibdis, while
they rather complied with their humor then obeyed truth, so that Religion is
but the reverent name for blood and ruin: and it is most evident, it was only
used as a disguise, that we might with the more ease devour one another, which
nature otherwise would forbid us to do.

Next to this nothing wrought more upon me, then that strange mystery, that
fighting for the safety of the King was shooting at Him; as at Edge-bill and
elsewhere, where I thank God I was not; for sure the apprehension is so horrid
unto me, that had I been in that action, the wounds of my conscience would
never have been healed. I am told the laws are very severe not only against
those that raise arms against the Crown, and offer violence to the person of
the King, but extend even to the intentions, words and thoughts: certain I am,
Religion and Nature rank Treason and Rebellion among the fowlest sins, and
follows them with the worst of punishments; and doubtless Ravailliac might as
well have excused his bloody fact, by saying the King was in his way, when he
stabbed him, as those that justify these late actions, by saying his Majesty
was among their enemies, when he was on his own ground and amongst his own
Servants. And who ever shall consider what his Majesty has done before this
war began, in reparation of these errors past, what calumnies and reproaches
he has suffered since (injuries not to be born by private spirits how beyond
hope and expectation His Army rise from being despised to be justly feared;
and lastly, what royal promises, and sacred Protestations He has so often and
so solemnly made, cannot but renounce Charity and Honor, or else he must
believe and trust His Majesty, resent his sufferings, and acknowledge the
miraculous hand of God in his preservation.

But I confess the reason of complaining against you for using the King no
better, seems to grow less, whilst the Subject is in a much worse condition.
Laws we have indeed, but they are so little exercised, that shortly they will
be buried in the places of those late risen Fundamentals, which no man yet
could ere discover where they lay; when for the Liberty of the Subject, there
is such good provision made, that whereas one Jail was enough for a whole
County, now there is more than one almost in every Parish; when the
superscription of a Letter (and may be that fained too) the information of a
malicious neighbor, a fear, a jealousy, deprives many of their liberty, some
of their lives; most of their healths and fortunes; when the petitioning for
Laws established, and for Peace (without which we can enjoy neither Laws nor
Truth) are become (with the crime of Loyalty) the only things punished; and
with such a severitie that as no condition, so no age is spared; the Youth
entering into the world, and having undergone the labor of an Apprentiship,
instead of being made free of the City, are to serve again in a prison; and
those reverend Aldermen, who have gone through the several Offices of London
with honor, stooping under the weight of many years, and the infirmities
thereof, have been drawn from their hospitable houses, (and some from their
beds, where extreme age had kept them many years before) to loathsome prisons,
from thence at midnight in cold and stormy weather, in a little Boat to
Gravesend, and from thence to the unwholesome air of some Port-town, that they
might not live long, to bewail that banishment from their dear wives and
children.

And herein I acknowledge the greatest Justice, for Propriety has no
Privilege above Liberty; for being lately at London I found Prisons and
Plundering went hand in hand, and it is worth the observing how these
Disbursements like hasty weeds, grew on a sudden to so great an height; as
first a gentle Benevolence, then Subscription, then sending in Plate, next
Taxations by an Order, at last the twentieth part by an Ordinance; besides
those smaller diversions of Underwriting for Ireland, and spending it in this
War, of gathering for the distressed Protestants of that Nation, and bestowing
that Charity upon the Ministers of our own, whose seditious Sermons, had
brought a just poverty upon them; of sequestring estates and Benefices, of
taking Portions, and keeping Orphans upon Public Faith, of seizing the
Stocks of Churches, till by the same Public Faith, they build or repair the
same; and doubtless were not my thoughts more for the general, than my
private interest, I might easily and by authority grow rich with the spoils
of that Propriety you seem to defend, and as others be gallant with the
overplus taken for the twentieth part; who likewise by an Order take the
Coach-horses of persons of quality, and use them afterward in their visits,
and to Tavernes for the service of the Commonwealth.

I had not made instance in so many particulars, but to justify my self
thereby to all the world for what I have now done, which upon these
considerations will be rather approved than condemned, by any that have not
wholly given up their reason unto Faction, for doubtless dishonor is fixed
upon levitie, ambition, cowardice, upon the persisting in that course which by
conscience is declared unjust and irreligious. The breach of Articles renders
void all Covenants, much more when that which is contracted for, is not only
altered but subverted. They were but pretenses not realities I have hitherto
served under, and Justice and Honor commands me to leave them. Some Soldiers
take Honor in so large a sense, that if they took pay under the Turk they
would not desert him: the comparison is not amiss: but sure where there is
such an indifferency, as to serve any for pay, Religion is no part of their
Honor, but if they be of the Mohammedan persuasion, I shall not blame them to
be true to that service, no more than I do those here, if their consciences
tell them decency and order is Antichristian, and Authority and Magistracy
Heathenish: for certain I am, there is nothing more base and unworthy a
Gentleman and a Christian, than to forsake the dictates of his own reason and
conscience, to persist in an erroneous way, because he has already entered into
it: If this false opinion of Honor should be received as Orthodox, it will be
in the power of every subtle Sophister, and cheating Mountebanke, to engage men
for ever in ignoble actions, because they brought them once to an opinion that
conduced thereunto. And lastly, whereas the end of War is Peace, what hope can
there be of a reconciliation, or that those that have got the Regal and supreme
power into their hands, should ever leave that which they have usurped, to
resume that which they were borne to; or that the Officers of that Army should
consent to a Peace as long as they can have supplies of money: since that then
a great part from being Colonels and Captains, must again betake themselves to
their aprons and shops, and instead of receiving pay, must bethink themselves
how to satisfy their beguiled Creditours: for my part, I am borne to no
inconsiderable fortune, and as I abhor my name should be branded with
Treason, or that forfeited by a confiscation, so am I as loath we should ever
be reduced to have a paritie in either (which is aimed at) or have both buried
in the ruins of this miserable Nation.

I do protest, had none of these promises wrought upon me, yet the very sight
of His Majesty's Army would have done it; the discipline, unanimitic, and
exact obedience thereof, the excellent conversation of so many gallant and
noble personages who know no other emulation than that of Honor, who dare do
any thing but what is base, and (on my soul) daily express hearty desires of
Peace (not out of any defect in the Army) but to prevent the ruin, and
procure the happiness of their Country. To conclude, what English Gentlemen
that ever heard of the ancient Honor of this Kingdom, or would preserve that
of himself and family, can tamely see our courage (terrible sometimes to
foreign Nations) basely degenerate into a Rebellion against our natural
Prince, to whom malice it self can object no crime, and therefore casts upon
Him the faults of others, and since it cannot touch His Person, quarrels at his
Crown: you see Him powerful at the head of His Army, and may see Him glorious
in His Throne of Peace, you ought not to doubt His Justice, and (if you will)
you may (as I have done) obtain His mercy.

Sir, I have freely told you my sense, if it has any proportion to yours and
so incline you to that effect it has wrought in me, I shall take it (next to
the condition I am in) as the greatest happiness, and if I be so fortunate,
since in these dangerous times you cannot safely convey it by Letters, let me
know it by your publishing this, whereby also you may happily benefit others,
and certainly oblige

Your humble Servant, R. K.

FINIS.

