OBSERVATIONS Upon a late LIBEL, called A Letter from a Person of Quality to
his Friend, concerning the Kings Declaration, etc
WE live in an Age where ill humor and Malice to the Government do so prevail,
that men rail without any manner of distinction, and without examining what
things are good or bad in themselves; there seems to be no other Rule allowed
by one sort of Men, than that they cannot Err, and the King cannot be in the
Right: This general Maxim is so easy, by taking the trouble of any further
enquiry, that no wonder if it is cherished and entertained; and those who are
so prepossessed, are ready to turn the best things to a wrong sense, and to
receive such an interpretation of every thing that comes from the Court, as
their Misleaders are pleased to impose upon them.

The Wiser sort of them knowing nothing is so destructive to their ends, as
that the Government should take such measures as might silence their
Objections, have an interest to blast every thing that is done on that side,
and to disfigure with the colors they put upon them, all such things as might
undeceive the People, and reconcile them to the Crown; for at the same time
they appear so eager to have Grievances redressed, their more secret Prayers
are that they may be increased: If the Court makes any false steps, or gives
any provocation, it raises Noise and Clamor, the voice against it is loud;
but the killing grief that afflicts them inwardly, and galleth them to the
soul, is, when the King does a gracious or a plausible Act to the Public.

Of this there cannot be a greater instance than their being so afflicted at
the Kings late Declaration: It was an evidence of their grief, that it was so
long before they answered it: It was received with a silent indignation that
the Court should presume to out-argue them; and though they had rage enough to
rail, yet they were for some time restrained from their usual Dialect by the
reverence that is due to Reason, even when it is contrary to our Passions or
Interests.

At last when they saw the effect it had in the Nation, and being not without
reason apprehensive, that men's eyes might be so opened as to see them through
their popular Disguise, they thought of two ills, it was advisable to choose the
least; and rather than lie under the general reproach of having nothing to say,
they chose to venture a Reply, though they could not make a good one, presuming
upon the success they had met with in their imposing upon the world, and
believing it would be so favorably disposed on their side, that where their
false Arguments could not pass, they would at least be connived at.

This being after more than one Meeting resolved at a Consult, out comes a
Letter to a Friend, which of late signifies little less than a Proclamation
set out by the Authority of the high and mighty Conservators of England, there
is only this difference which is for their advantage, that if these Letters
take in the world, they are imputed to the wisdom of these great Governors; if
not, they are easily laid upon some foolish fellow that would be scribbling; by
which means the veneration due to these Princes of the People remains
unblemished and entire.

This coming with other Pamphlets to me in the Country, I was tempted to make
some short Observations which are submitted to the censure of the unbyassed
Reader. First they are troubled, that though Parliaments are frequent, they are
short and useless.

The King has done his part in calling Parliaments often, for which he is to
be thanked; except it can be made evident it was his fault that they were of no
longer continuance: so far from that, it is plain these men who complain have
been so much the cause of the late Dissolutions, that one would swear they
designed to provoke the King to them, and that he has had in these cases so
much patience, he can hardly answer it to the Nation, whose peace he is
entrusted with and bound to preserve.

The Excesses of the Commons were beyond the cure of lower Remedies, and there
was no other choice left, than either to part with the Parliament, or let the
two Houses continue fitting in a state of Hostility hardly possible to be
reconciled; of which the consequences are so obvious, and might have been so
fatal, that we are to thank God the Constitution of the Government has lodged
this necessary Power in the Crown to preserve us from Ruin upon such occasions.

But fain they would have Parliaments sit as long as they please, and I cannot
blame them, Authority is sweet, and a Member of Parliament that would have us
believe he brings all the sense of his Country or Corporation along with him,
comes to teach the King better manners, and to advise him to keep better
company. I say for such a dignified Creature as this is, by one word of the
Kings mouth to be reduced into his own single self again, is so cruel a charge,
that no wonder if men so degraded are angry at it, and would be glad, instead
of being as little men as their Neighbors, to gain that superiority which
Nature denied them, by virtue of an Authority to continue for their lives.

It seems then by this, that a long Parliament is not in it self a Grievance,
for now they would have one that they think their Party shall prevail in it.

And it is observable that those who were for the first Long Parliament, and
against the second, are now the chief men that would have a third: How far this
should recommend the opinion either to the King or the Nation, I leave every
man to judge; but to do these men right, they are for the present so modest
they will not speak out, so I will do it for them.

The little thing they would have is a House of Commons that may do what they
will, how they will, and as long as they will, that is for ever, whether the
King lives or dies, they must not be discomposed, nor their Authority
interrupted, for I would fain know where lies the real difference between
having a Parliament sit for ever, or till all Grievances are redressed: the
distinction will be very nice in an Age where it is Treason against the People
not to grumble against the Government. These rich Mines of Fears and Jealousies
can never be exhausted in our time, so that the Workmen are sure not only to be
employed for their lives, but to secure their Posterities being so after them.

The Monarchy in the mean time would be in a good case to be under the
continual Wardship of such severe Guardians; and these very Gentlemen who have
upon another occasion affirmed that the very name of King must of necessity
carry the authority along with it, would not fail to give a full instance to
the contrary, if they could ever catch our Master in the Net of a Perpetual
Parliament.

They are troubled that the Declaration should be read in Churches, from which
this Observation naturally arises, that they apprehend the making it so
public, may both expose them, and do the King right to the People; else sure
they would not of a sudden be so well natured, as to discourage the reading
it, if they had thought the weakness of the Argument might have brought any
disadvantage upon the King.

This Paper has laid down Maxims that are very new in our Constitution, The
King can make no ill Orders because they must be by advice of his Council. This
is a new Government, and the Monarchy put so much into the Venetian shape, that
a man would have much ado to distinguish them.

It will be granted that the King is to hear the Advice of his Council, but for
him to be bound by it, would make that greater than the Parliament; where if
the King has right to refuse any Bill that is offered, sure he may in Council
reject any Opinion. I am confident it is not their meaning to attribute such an
Authority to the present Council; I am persuaded it is far from their thoughts
to wish the King should be swayed by a number of men who are so little in their
favor, and especially since it wants the help of those whose abilities and
other Virtues in their opinion did formerly support it. This Complement must
therefore be intended for another Council, a confiding Council that is to be
made up with the rest of the New Model, we may suppose is prepared against the
Bill of Exclusion is passed, and then they do not care how much power they give
to themselves, or take away from the King.

To excuse the not giving Money for Tangier, they pretend they could not be
secure of its being disposed to that use. It is hard they should expect the
world should believe them in this, when it is certain they do not believe
themselves. The experience we have had in our own time may sufficiently
convince them of the injustice of that Objection; and to say Paper Laws are
nothing, is to say our Liberties and Properties are nothing, since we hold them
chiefly by that tenure: But the truth is these men would impose upon us, that
an Act of Parliament will secure nothing they do not like, and do every thing
they have a mind to: For instance, An Act for excluding the Duke is
all-sufficient. An Act for limiting him Impossible. An Act of Exclusion will
secure all. All other Laws are but Cobwebs not to be relied upon. These Riddles
are delivered to us with such authority, that we are to receive them as
Oracles, and it is become a mortal sin for any man to question the sense of
them.

This slender way of reasoning being so openly liable to confutation, and the
disguise so thin that every body must see through it, they have recourse to
that common place, the PLOT, for a Butteress and a support to Arguments that
are too weak to bear up themselves.

It is a retreat when they are beaten in Dispute, an answer to any question at
a pinch; it is but saying there is a horrid Plot against our Religion, the
Kings Life is in danger, the Pilgrims are coming from St. Jago, and the Earl of
Shaftsbury is to be murdered, and the Popular Champion triumphs without the
help of Sense, against his Adversary. That there has been a Plot, is as
certain, as that the men who most exclaim against it are of all men living the
most unwilling to part with it: they cherish and nurse it up with more care
than the Jesuits themselves; they hug it so fast, that it shows how much
they value it, as the dear instrument they make use of to destroy the
Government. The Day of Judgment would not be much more terrible to some men,
how little soever they are prepared for it, than that day which should wind up
the bottom of this beloved Plot, that men might come into their wits again.
Ungrateful men then, that speak ill of the only thing in this world that
supporteth them: But the good men in their hearts are far from meaning it any
harm. Were the Plot once over, the Earl of Shaftsbury would be quite degraded,
lose his respect at Wapping, and his authority in the Coffee-Houses. His
Lordship would put off his dissembling-shape, and in this be a true mourner:
for never man could have a greater loss, and no doubt it would out of grief
make him retire into some hidden corner, rather than see himself reduced to the
miserable necessity of being quiet for want of sufficient matter to trouble
himself and the world with; so that when these men pretend to desire an end of
the Plot, it is a Jest fitter for a Smile than an Answer.

It is said Dangerfield was a Rogue, granted, and yet as I hear, this Rogue was
brought into both Houses just before the Debate, to whip them up into the Bill
of Exclusion, but now they tell a very strange thing, which is, that
Dangerfield is become truly honest. It is much, and in my opinion, it is a
visible but the Knave. That this man should be made honest would be a mighty
Cure, And such a one as some of his Doctors would be loath to work upon
themselves. In the mean time I cannot but put them in mind that it looks a
little Popish, not only to give a general Indulgence to such a known sinner,
but immediately to make a Saint of him. If the Gathered Churches can do such
Miracles, it is well, but if they should endeavor to put false ones upon the
world, it might disparage their prudence, and lessen their reputation; of which
I am so tender, that in kindness to them I give them this warning of it.

It is true that in some respects the Maxim is not inconvenient for these good
men, That there can be neither Fools nor Rascals on their side, and that the
being of their opinion, like the Crown, takes away all Defects: By virtue of
this charm Dr. Oats is a Divine, Mr. Mountague a Protestant, Lord Lovelace a
Saint, Sir Thomas Armstrong a Patriot, and Sir Harry Capel a Statesman.

I cannot but take notice of the fears the Earl of Shaftsbury has for himself,
and in good nature would be glad to ease him of them; in order to it, I beg of
him to believe the Papists are as tender of his life, as his Lordship is of the
Plot: and for the same reason, because he is of use to them, he has absolutely
saved them by spoiling a good Plot, and dressing it so scurvily by the help of
his under-Cook, that now it makes even the best men's stomachs rise at it. He
serves up things so much above the strongest digestion, that few men can be
persuaded to swallow them. So that a man may affirm, that if it was a folly in
the Papists to kill Sir Edmond Godfrey, it would be a madness in them to hurt
the Earl of Shaftsbury.

These Gentlemen are angry with the Guards which are so illegally kept up. Pray
since when are they judged so? is it only since the Duke of Monmouth was put
away from them? strange! that since that time there must be such a change, that
he must be made lawful, and they illegal. It must be confessed, that next to
the Laws, the Guards are the things of the world these men most hate: Fie upon
them naughty fellows, rhey stand between them and home. The good men would fain
have a safe victory, and do their business without venturing their skulls. For
would it not be a cruel thing for an honest well-meaning Mutineer for his Zeal
to destroy the Government, whilst he is about it, to have his brains knocked
out, and so lose the benefit of spoiling the Egyptians. Verily it is much
better to have the Guards down, that he may walk into Whitehal with less peril
of his person, and help to remove the Dukes Creatures out of all places
Military and Civil.

For be it known to all men by these presents, that the Duke is more dangerous
to us as he is the Great Minister of State, than as he is the next Successor.
Say you so, Gentlemen, men guessed before this was your meaning; but I am sorry
for your sakes you are so unwary as to discover it: Why such earnestness to
remove the Successor, when the danger is confessed to be greater from the
Minister? Come, speak out, the Position is, The Duke governs all;
consequently every man in employment is his Creature, for that they are to be
turned out, and these Gentlemen taken in: the design is well enough laid, and
would do them more good than the Bill of Exclusion, which is but a pretense,
and a thing fitted for other ends: But they did not do well to blab this out
before it was time, it is a thousand pities the Scheme should not take, but I
very much doubt it as things now stand, which is to be lamented, that the good
men should have taken so much pains, and all likely to be to so little purpose.

After having arraigned the Declaration, they come to justify the proceedings
of the Commons in the two last Meetings, and speaking of some of their
Addresses, say, The nature, and true state of Affairs would not bear a milder
way of representing things to his Majesty. Let them speak truth, was it not
rather the nature of those men, whose pride and anger made them delight in
handling the King roughly, and persuade the House, when they were asked what
should be done with Tangier, to answer with Popery and a Remonstrance.

In the mean time I admire the caution of those Wise and Good Men, who as the
Paper says, thought the Commons had gone too far, insomuch as mentioning Money
till our safety was fully provided for. They must be very jealous that could
suspect any such danger; for besides that we are very safe in the management of
those that led the House, who no doubt will ever have a most particular care of
us in these cases; one may assure the Wise and Good Men of a further and better
security, which is, that the Government is not yet so low as to sell it self so
cheap. As for what the Commons proposed, whenever they have a mind to deal, it
is to be hoped they will offer some more equal Bargain, than to demand from the
King the whole power of the Crown both Civil and Military, and to propose from
themselves things so general, and so low, that the Supreme Wisdom of the Nation
could hardly be thought in earnest when they offered them.

It is added for a further excuse that jealousies easily arise amongst Numbers,
which is enough to hinder any intended Agreement. The answer to this is, that
it is true, there did arise some jealousies, that the Promoters of an Agreement
with the King did not forget themselves in it; but the Gentlemen who were
concerned being sensible of it, did for their Vindication procure a solemn
Vote, That no Member of the House should receive any place from the King
without the leave of the House, which was so perfect a cure for jealousy, that
they are unjust to be against all expedients, after this had been so
prosperous. I am half in a rapture, when I think of this glorious Vote, worthy
to be written in Letters of Gold, and impossible ever to be enough commended:
By the first part of it they showed their self-denial, and by their second
their deference to a House they thought at least they governed. Great men sure
they must be, and blessed with so happy genius, that could so mingle their
Discretion with their Generosity, as at once to gain honor, and provide for
their interest. The answer to the Kings Charge upon them for their Arbitrary
Orders, is so weak and faint, that it comes very near a confession of their
guilt in it, and it would be unkind to press them too hard in that which they
themselves seem to be ashamed of. I will only take notice of one expression,
which is, That they have erred with their Fathers. If this is not true, it is
no good Argument: and if it is true, they must allow it to be as good a one for
the Papists, as it is for the Commons.

They come next to support their Votes against particular persons, and do very
boldly assert it may be made good by Law, The King ought to have no person near
him who has the misfortune of such a Vote upon him. Great Lawyers no doubt
have their part in this assertion: but they who in so many cases dispute the
Authority of the Crown, must allow men in this to demur to theirs; and I am
troubled that a Vote of the Commons must be called a Misfortune; because it
looks as if chance or sudden heat, rather than the deliberate Debates and
Justice of the House had produced it. Where there is a settled Rule, and that
Right only prevails, as men's guilt makes them fall, so their innocence
absolveth them. But if men must depend upon their good or ill Stars, or upon
the waspish humor of an Assembly when an angry Planet reigns, the consequence
is, that a man though never so faultless may by misfortune without guilt be
transformed by a Vote, into an enemy of King and Kingdom; that is to say, into
a man fit to be knocked on the head, and the Murderer to be rewarded as the
Law formerly directed for killing a Wolf; and yet God forbid one should think
the Commons intended him any harm.

Well, but if the House declares they have just reason to fear such or such a
person dangerous, must there be Order and Process of Law before he can be
removed?

When the Commons have just reason to fear such a thing, it is to be hoped the
whole House knows that just reason, or else they would not Vote it: whenever
therefore they will tell that just reason to the King, he is to blame in case
he finds it so, if he does not comply with them; but if he judge otherwise,
he has as much right to refuse, as they can pretend to have to ask. But if it
must be so, that not only the real, but the pretended fears of some angry men,
who may have influence enough to mislead an Assembly not sufficiently informed,
are to have such an Authority, that the Kings Negative to them is disallowed,
it is such a change of the Constitution, that the Legislative Power is wholly
melted down into one of the parts that has yet no power to do any Act that is
binding without the concurrence of the Lords, and the Kings Royal Assent.

This does so much out-go even our modern Plato, that it will be a harder
matter than perhaps these Gentlemen think, to get either the King or the Nation
to consent to it. Men are not so well edified with the practice of the Commons
in this last Age, or the justice that has been usually distributed by their
Sovereign Committees, as to devolve the whole power into their hands, thinking
it much better lodged where it is by the present Constitution. But it is said
the Commons by their late Methods do not fine men, nor deprive them of Life,
Liberty, Lands or Offices beneficial. I would first ask, is it not a Fine, and
to many men the worst kind of Fine, to be excluded from the lawful advantages
every Subject is born to. Would not a Merchant think it a Fine, if he were
sentenced never to go to Sea again? Or to come nearer, Would not these very men
of Law who will have this pass upon us, take it unkindly, and think it a Fine,
if they were excluded from all Practice? It Is true, if they would always argue
for their Clients; as they do now for the Commons, their loss perhaps might not
be very great; but presuming better things of them, I conclude the sentence
would be very heavy, and that they would think it so.

Concerning Life, if the definition of an enemy to King and Kingdom is a
certain creature that is not fit to live, then the Commons have done all they
can to take away the lives of those they have so sentenced, except they had
sent a select Commit to strangle them, which had not been so convenient till
the Laws are removed, which would have made it Murder; so that they must
either say that a man who does what lies in him to kill me, means no hurt to
my life, which is but indifferent sense; or they must confess there was plain
Murder in the intention of those Votes.

For to borrow their own style, it may be resolved by the authority of
impartial reason, that whosoever Voted any of those persons enemies to King and
Kingdom with any other intent than that the said Persons should be absolutely
destroyed, is a Madman, an Idiot, a Promoter of Lunacy, and an enemy to Common
Sense.

Then for Liberty, see whether that is touched or no. If Liberty signifies a
power of doing every lawful act, and that it is a lawful act for every Subject
to have access to his Prince, then without some act committed to forfeit that
common right, it is a wrong in any one man, or any number of men to Address to
the King for the incapacitating any one man in this case. Sure men will not say
our Liberty is not invaded except we are thrown neck and heels into a Dungeon.
It is a tenderer thing than that comes to, and it has been formerly judged
even by a House of Commons, that men's being sent away against their wills upon
Foreign Employment, was a Confinement. By this it may appear that it is possible
to make an unjust Demand as well as to give an unjust Sentence: And though the
King has power to refuse any thing that is asked of him, whatever some men
would persuade us to the contrary, yet that does neither absolve the Commons,
nor any other man from the guilt of making a request that is not just, nor from
the folly of making one that is not pertinent.

Let us see now whether even men's Lands would not have been reached by these
Votes, if these good Gentlemen might have had their will; for by the same rule
that a true Protestant Jury must have been directed by them not to find it
Murder in any man to kill an enemy to King and Kingdom, they must upon any
dispute of title of Land, give it without going from the Bar against any man so
branded and proclaimed. Sure a French or Dutchman, at a time when they are in
open War with us, would hardly hope to carry a cause against an Englishman in
Westminster Hall; no more is a man to pretend, whilst under a Character that
puts him into a state of Hostility with England, to keep up a suit against a
Neighhor, or expect the benefit of the Law, which is to give no protection to
public Enemies.

As to Offices beneficial, it must be confessed they show some gentleness at
last, and give so much indulgence to those they have displaced by their Votes,
that I do not see but any of them may upon due application, and expressive and
fit remorse for the insolence of resisting their high and mighty pleasure, be
admitted to be a Constable or Headborough in Wales or Cumberland, or some such
unexpected Office in which the Public State Affairs are not immediately
concerned, where they may exercise their Magistracy, and enjoy their dignity
without prejudice to the Nation.

This Grace seems the fitter to be acknowledged, not only because it is
perhaps the first evidence that party has given of their good nature, but
because they do in this deal more gently with those against whom they have
Voted, than they do with his Majesty himself as well as they love him; for by
what I can perceive, the King is only to eat and drink, and perform some
offices of nature. They are kind men; but it was not artificially done to leave
it out, that A King is to have some Pocket-money for play things, since it is
but reasonable for them to use a thing kindly, which if they can have in their
power, they intend to make so good use of.

That wise and great Princes have sometimes hearkened to Addresses of this
kind, is not truer, than that they have oftener denied them: for the King to do
in all cases like a wise and a great Prince, as it is a general proposition,
all who do not know him have reason to wish it, and all who do have very good
grounds to hope it. But as far as one sort of men may be concerned in their own
particulars, I guess wrong, if it would not be too fatal a thing to them ever
to join in Prayer for it.

The Votes to forbid men to lend the King money, are to these men's thinking not
only justifiable, but very wise ones too. These are Epithetes which it seems
belong to every thing they do, or else I would ask where is the Justice of
doing that for which they have no authority, or the Wisdom of doing that which
has no effect; only it shows their good will, by throwing the greatest
indignity they could upon the Government. Men will lend still notwithstanding
this mighty Vote, and perhaps upon easier terms than these Gentlemen would
require for any money they part with in Parliament. In the mean time would
these equitable men take it well, if by their example the King should send to
all the Buroughs and Counties in England not to choose such and such men, nor
to trust those with a share in making Laws, who have in the late Parliaments
assumed to themselves the privilege of breaking them? The argument is at least
as strong on the Kings side, without any Complement to Majesty, as they can
pretend to make theirs, upon the pretense of distrust, or the mis-application
of the Public Money: and yet I persuade my self, they would hardly allow such
a proceeding, or commend it, as they do their own, to be wise and justifiable.

They take so much care of the Household, that one would ordinarily suspect they
had some Correspondence with the discontented Reformadoes of the Green-Cloth. I
who live in the Country will never speak against the smell of Beef, no more
than I will recommend that of Match to be at White Hall instead of it: But I am
far from apprehending the Country Farmer to be concerned in the late
Retrenchments; for ever since the Tables were removed out of the Hall, and the
Brewis turned into Fricassees, they have lost their part in them, and
especially since the Kings coming in, not only the Country Farmer, but the
Country Gentleman; and if you will the Country Lord too might have been
shrewdly disappointed if they had depended upon the Hospitality of the
White-Staves for a Dinner: That whole business was brought into so unpopular a
shape, that the Nation will hardly take up Arms to restore three or four
Tables; they are rather pleased to see them put down, since they were so
transformed, and wholly altered from their first institution.

The Bankers are called the Bane of the Nation; if so, I have a great mind to
believe, if it was possible, it was for that reason alone, the Earl of
Shaftsbury broke them. I never was partial to that sort of men, and so will
leave them to make their own Apologies: but I must say, it seems a little
hard to me to make these Positions, The Bankers nor any body else must lend the
King Money. The Kings Wants are only to be supplied by Parliament. The
Parliament is not to give the King a farthing. These laid together, have in my
judgment a very odd appearance: Ay, but the King shall have money enough upon
good terms from the Parliament: Shall he so? These good terms are to come; for
those that have hitherto been offered are so far from tempting, that they may
rather fright the King from dealing with the same Chapmen. Would these
Gentlemen grow a little kinder and treat for a Mortgage of the Crown, allowing
equity of Redemption, it might incline the King to hearken to them; but by all
that appears yet, we may conclude nothing less will satisfy than a total
surrender and passing away his title to them.

In the case of 35 Eliz. it is pretended the Commons did not assume the power
of suspending Acts of Parliament: what was it then? They did a thing they had a
mind to in a manner they cannot justify; they have as much right to make a
Law, as they have singly to declare what is Law: but because they seem to give
up the cause by the flatness of their answer, I will only add, that as their
zeal in this case transported them beyond their bounds, it is to be hoped, time
and second thoughts will reduce them to a better temper against the next
Meeting.

In Mr. Fitz-harris's Case it is said the Commons could not come to a
Conference before they came to a Resolution: suppose it, what then? must that
Resolution of necessity produce such Votes? If they had upon a cool Debate
resolved that they were in the right, and sent to confer with the Lords either
to have brought them to their opinion, or laid it aside if the Lords could have
used arguments strong enough to convince them, they had prevented all
objection. But to say the Commons could not resolve this amongst themselves
without such injurious and unparliamentary terms as they were pleased to make
use of in their Votes, is to say, if I have a difference with another man, and
would discourse with him to compose it, I must needs for the better asserting
my own right, send him word beforehand, he is a Rogue and a Villain, as a
fitting Preliminary for a friendly Conference in order to an Agreement. For
their Votes upon this occasion have, as much as in them lay, put the House of
Lords under an Interdict, and fixed such a Character upon their whole Body,
that if it were not a little sanctified by that chosen Remnant of Protesting
Lords, I do not know but it might bear an Action, to be called by the
Scandalous name of a Peer, after a Sentence that puts all the Lords in as
ill a condition as those few that in the former Parliament they bestowed their
Votes upon. How much soever these Gentlemen may flatter themselves in this
matter, I can assure them, we in the Country understand it otherwise than they
would have us: for by the infinite heat and struggling to put off his Trial both
in and since the Parliament, and by the Character of the Persons who
principally appear in it, we are apt to conclude so warm a Contention must be
grounded upon something very considerable; and we take it to be, that could
this point be gained, men might either speak or act Treason with impunity; and
that would be of such excellent use to some men, that no wonder if they are
very earnest to compass it.

I am very glad to hear there is nothing to be said for those angry Men who
have particular designs; if any thing could have been said, I am confident it
might concern some of those who have had a hand in this Paper, so far as to
have persuaded them to venture at their Apology.

There is an Assertion made with the modesty and truth which belongs to their
Party, viz. That all who are out of their places might have kept them. If I am
either rightly informed, or may be allowed to guess from what they deserved, it
is perhaps the only excuse those men have for their ill manners, that from the
prospect they had of being turned out, they chose to prevent the Kings Justice,
and to gain popularity, by endeavoring as much as in them lay to throw the
affront upon him.

The Court has long lain under the scandal of Popery, but it was news to me
that they were for a Commonwealth too: This is so very unlikely, that for the
sake of our Religion which depends so much upon their credit, I must give
them warning to be a little more cautious in their Accusations, and take care
that one part of their charge may agree with another; else as it happens to
their Mufti Dr. Oats, men will be tempted by their alleging things impossible,
to have doubts even of that part of their Evidence which may be true.

The last Paragraph tells us how we shall be happy, and the King be himself.
I was eager to know this receipt, having a great mind for my own sake, and for
every bodies else, to have such a thing compassed; but by taking the sense of
the words as well as I can, it is no more than this in short: All will be well
if the King will be entirely governed by the House of Commons; for we know they
alone signify the Parliament, as they have more than once given us to
understand by their Votes: and that their Advices are to be Commands, is no
more a doubt, than that their Orders are to be Laws. I shall give no answer to
this, but may be permitted to guess the Kings will be le Roy s'avisera. In the
mean time I have so great a desire to be happy my self, and that the Nation may
be so too, that if any thing may be received under the unwelcome name of
Expedients, I would beg leave to offer a few to their better consideration.

I. That no man who has by notoriety of the fact within seven years last past
promoted or connived at Popery, be thought now in earnest when he bawleth
against it, or ever be admitted into Public Employment. II. That no man who
has Principles against all Kings, may pretend to advise Ours. III. That none
who would have Places for themselves, shall have any Vote to put others out of
them. IV. That none who have thought fit to leave the Council, should ever so
disparage themselves as to return into it. V. That none may ever be thought fit
for Counselors, or any other Employment, who have so little wit as to expect
the Nation should be angry with the King, because they are afraid for
themselves. VI. That no Member of either House who in former Parliaments never
consulted his Conscience, be now allowed to be a Martyr for it. VII. That no
man who is a known Ass in his own business, may be thought fit to meddle with
the Kings.
These things being granted, it is clearly my opinion, the King should stick at
nothing the next Parliament can ask of him. Men's minds would be so quieted when
they saw a Foundation laid of such impartial Justice, that we might hope for
Peace and Union; and when the Vizzard of Popularity is taken off, to see
England look like it self again. This is to be desired for many reasons; and
besides those which relate to the Public, I wish it for a particular
satisfaction to my self, who being void either of the ^^^tion or the merit of
pretending to any share in business, should think my self very happy in the
enjoyment of (...) ^ens Conversations, whose Politics I cannot so well agree
with, being confident that this would be a kind of Act of Exclusion upon these
measures* and that the greatest number of the complaining men would be at
liberty and unemployed.

Printed for C. Mason. 1681.


