A DISCOURSE ON PERSECUTION, OR, Suffering for CHRIST's Sake.

Clearing the Notion of It; AND Making a Discrimination of Just from Unjust
Pretensions to It.

AND Passionately Recommending True Christian Suffering to all Those who shall
be Called Thereto.

Occasionally Representing the Folly and Sinfulness of Illegal, Arbitrary
Courses for the Prevention of It, and the Security of our Church.

By JOHN HOWELL, A M. Rector of Radnor Nova in the County of Radnor.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Kettlewell, at the Hand and Scepter over against
St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1685.

To the Worthily Honored JOHN STONE, Of Brightwel-Place in Oxfordshire,
ESQUIRE.
SIR,
IT seems very wonderful to me, that after the clear Revelation of Scripture,
and the Instructions of Men; after the many Renowned Examples of Christian
Suffering, the Repeated Instances of every Age; after all Men's Fears and
Apprehensions, Reasonable and Unreasonable, (for either of these are apt to
awaken, and engage to Consideration) the generality even of Christians
themselves should be such utter Strangers (as I find they are) of the True
Notion and Nature of Persecution.

Now to Rectify the Mistakes, and Clear the Understandings of the Ignorant
Herein, is the main Design of the ensuing Discourse.

And truly, I am not out of all hopes of giving some Light to the Doctrine in
hand; at least wise, of doing somewhat toward the Satisfaction of Those (if
this small Piece shall happily fall into their Hands) who either have not heard
of, or have not had leisure to peruse, or possibly have not been able to
procure the Larger and more Elaborate Discourses on this Subject. Were I sure
it would prove wholly useless, (tho I am apt to Hope, and induced by Learned
Friends to Believe, it will not) I should wave the Publication of this Address
for Your sake, and of the Discourse for my own.

Sure I am, it can do no harm, nor justly give any Offense, being written with
the Faithfulness and with the Tenderness of a Spiritual Surgeon. Alas! our
Breaches are overwide already; they need not be widned more by harsh Reflection,
and keenness of Expression. Some Spirits are naturally Perverse and Froward,
and ought (if possible) to be Corrected and Sweetened, not Exasperated more, not
stirred into a greater Ferment.

Of this I am extremely sensible; and desire not to Provoke, but to Heal. If I
were (tho, praised be God, I am not) of another Frame of Spirit, I am sure I
should take an ill time to show it in, when I address to You; to You (Sir), who
seem to be made up of Gentleness and Temper. Your Reasonings with Dissenters
(who do therefore choose to apply themselves to You) they are Sedate, and Calm,
and full of an Obliging Condescension. Your Delight it is (and You make it Your
Business) to Argue Fairly, and Lovingly persuade Men to Conformity. And when
all Your Arguments, and Winning Behavior will not do it, (And who can promise
himself a never-failing Success?) You gain This Point howsoever, They come over
to a better Opinion of our Church and Churchmen: They are satisfied by You,
that it is the Churches Desire, as it is Yours, to Invite, rather than Compel;
to Convince, that it may not Correct them.

Thus do You discharge Your Duty diligently, and cheerfully, like a True Son of
our Church, a Faithful, Exemplary Magistrate, a Loyal Subject, and a Good
Christian: I ought to add, like a True Friend of our Clergy; for such do You (I
must needs acknowledge it) upon all Occasions approve Your self: (For of This
(to say nothing of others) Your Favors to me, Many and Great, are a pregnant
Argument: forasmuch as I can in no wise attribute them to any the least Merit
of mine, but to Your Goodness, and Respect to my Gown.) And thus while You
temper Your Prudence with Piety, and join Sobriety and Candor, to an
inviolable Loyalty, and Reverence to the Church, You stop the Mouths of
Gainsayers; and even Those who Suffer under You, cannot be angry. This is
certainly the most Christian, and most feasible Course for the filling our
Churches; and it is Yours. And if Men will stand out notwithstanding; if they
will not learn by Your Example, nor bow to Your Reasons, nor hearken to Your
Counsels and Persuasions; they become still the more inexcusable; they may
thank themselves for what they endure; and are as far from what may be termed
Persecution, as they are from Conformity: unless You will say, they are their
own Persecutors.

I pray God to make 'em sensible of their Errors, and thoroughly satisfied of
the High Injustice of arraigning their Governors for that which it is their
Duty to do.

The Subordinate Magistrate is obliged to see that the Laws be put in
Execution; and the Supreme is obliged to take care that there be such Laws as
are apt and qualified to Engage, and to Preserve Men in Peace, Concord, and
Uniformity. The Government it self cannot well, I was going to say, it cannot
innocently Tolerate Men in a Schism; certainly it cannot give any Man License
to sin: neither is it in the Power of any law, or Dispensation, to make that
Justifiable and Lawful, which in its own Nature is Evil and Sinful. Such,
unquestionably, is all Separation from This, or any other Established Church,
that is Sound, and Pure, as Ours is.

But and if the Government could (as it cannot) make Separation no Schism, and
no Sin; yet (I would observe, and I hold my self obliged upon This occasion to
vindicate the Proceedings of our Governors herein) That neither has the
Government any reason to grant, nor our Nonconforming Brethren any reason to
expect a Toleration, or Relaxation of the Laws.

I know, These two things are almost co-incident: however, they will severally
admit of a distinct and particular Consideration.

1. Then, I would observe, That the Government has no reason to grant a
Toleration, etc. For if These Men do not Suffer, the Government in all
likelihood will; there being nothing more destructive of the Public Peace,
than a General Liberty of all sorts of Worship.

Of This we have had Late and Sad Experience. When every man did that which was
right in his own eyes, it was little considered, whether it was right, or not,
in the eyes of others. Men abused their Liberty into Defiance of Authority;
perfect Lawlesness being the Result. When one Man out of a giddy humor wandered
about in search after Truth, another thought he might as easily find it at
home: When This Man thought he might serve God in any way, his Neighbor was of
opinion, that 'twas altogether as good, and much more easy, not to serve him
at all. So then, we may easily divine, by what we have seen and felt, that a
Connivance, or Toleration of all sorts of Religion, is the ready way to destroy
all that looks like Religion; and that (had it not pleased Heaven to direct our
Governors herein) our Nation would have sunk by degrees to downright
Skepticism and Infidelity; to as little Sense of Religion, as some of a
Neighboring Country are said to have done, who, by a general Allowance of all
sorts of Worship, had made their Consciences so pliable, that they could
renounce their Bible, when it served a Turn, and cry, they were Hollanders, and
not Christians.

But, secondly, As the Government has no reason to grant, so, it may be
considered further, that our Dissenting Brethren have no reason to expect a
Toleration.

And here I shall not need to mind them of the Old Non-conformists Opinion in
the Case; who plainly declared, that to Allow of different sorts of Worship,
was inconvenient, unreasonable, and extremely dangerous to Church and State. I
would only offer to consideration, Whether We (if We were in Their
Circumstances, and They in Ours) might in any reason expect This Liberty from
Them. What (would they say) shall we admit of That which we verily believe is
unlawful? Would you have us Allow, openly to Allow of That in others, which we
cannot Allow in our selves? Would you have us wanting in our Re^pect and Care
for your Souls, which we are obliged to upon a double account, as Christians,
and as Governors? To countenance That which is, or That which is taken for a
Sin, is a Sin: And to encourage it by the way of Toleration, is to countenance
it with a witness: And how can we do This thing, and sin against God, and our
own Consciences? This sure is what every of them would be ready to offer: This
is what they with reason might. And now do but invert the Scene, and we have
the plain Case between us and them. Our Governors know, and are persuaded,
that Separation from our Church is Schism; and that Schism is a very grievous
Sin. They cannot unconcernedly see any Persons engaged in it: and for Those who
are under their Government and Care, they cannot give them That Liberty, which
would prove mischievous in the abuse of it, and is therefore only desired,
that it may be abused: So that for them to expect a Toleration, is to expect
That which cannot reasonably be expected: it is to expect That which they
themselves, if they were in Power, would never grant, or think it reasonable
that it should be expected from them: indeed, it is to expect That, which
several of them will not at present Allow to their own Children, and Dependents.

I would not be mistaken: I do not, nor can I approve of Compulsion in all
Cases. Religion is such a Worship and Service of God, as supposes the
Concurrence of the Will; and now the Will cannot be forced, it is free as
Thought, and is persuaded by Words, rather than Blows, as Lactantius well
observed: No Humane Laws or Power can possibly take hold of it; it is out of
the reach of Fire and Faggot, and all the Affrighting Instruments of Cruelty;
so that it is impossible to be Compelled (properly speaking) to any Religion;
and therefore it is unreasonable any Man should be Compelled to the Profession
of any. Indeed it does not lie in any Man's power to be of what Religion himself
pleases, tho as to the outward Profession it does: and now no one can be
obliged beyond his Power: And certainly it is very hard, that a Man should
Suffer for not Professing that Religion, which he cannot heartily embrace, and
is therefore obliged not to profess.

But then I must observe, on the other hand. That there are some Opinions have
a natural tendency to Mischief; to Civil Jars, and Unchristian Divisions; to
Fatal Disturbances in Church and State: And tho a bare Dissent in Judgment may
not, should not; yet These, wherever they are found, do justly come under the
Lash of the Law: and if the Church had no Power to shut out the Refractory and
Disobedient; nor the Civil Magistrate any to suppress Heresies, and Schisms,
and Disorders in the Church; there were nothing then to be expected, but
Anarchy, and Confusion, and every Evil work. Alas! we do not live in a Golden
Age, that Men should be supposed Governable without Laws, or Laws available
without their Sanctions, Rewards, and Punishments. Some Men cannot, others
hardly can, be kept within tolerable Bounds, notwithstanding them. And what
would these be, what would they do, if there were none? Conscience is
frequently, too too frequently abused, and made a Cloak for all manner of
Villainies; at best, it is a prevailing Principle with those only who have it:
many have it not; and the Magistrate's Sword of Justice has more Rhetoric far,
than the Terror of the Lord, to persuade such Men: And Those whom Religion
cannot allure or engage, the Gibbet can, and often does Affright into
Obedience. Many, who would not stick at Assassinating Princes, Destroying the
Church, and Massacring Man, Woman, and Child that stood in their way, are yet
kept in by the Execution of wholesome Laws; and he must be a Bigot indeed, of a
very lewd Religion too, that shall do these things, when he must run the
danger, the immediate danger of his Life for his pains. So then, You see the
Necessity of Laws for Societies, and Sanctions for Laws, and may readily guess,
how miserable This Church and Nation were, if there were none; or indeed, if
those that are, should never be Executed.

These things considered, I cannot see with what Forehead any Man can blame our
Governors, either for Making, or Executing the Laws: especially they have none
at all against mere Dissenting; much less any that are Sanguinary, as our Roman
Neighbors have: they have none of any kind, that in the least savor of
Cruelty or Rigor. They never do, after the manner of Rome, extort Men's
Opinions from them by Racks and Tortures; and then let loose the Laws upon
them, after a Discovery. They are favorable as may be, and slow in inflicting
of Punishment: of which This is a fair Argument, That the loud, reiterated
Clamours, and Outcries of the Faction, are not punished at all. These would
not, certainly they would not be more favorably dealt with in any Established
Church of Christendom; neither could we (as I said before) expect more, or so
much Favor from them, if they were (as some of them have been, and have again
endeavored, very lately endeavored to be) in the Seat of our Governors.

Surely then it would much better become them, and they would act more like
good Subjects, and good Christians, and Men of Reason, if they would consider
of things, before they presume to complain of their Governors, and
over-liberally promise themselves a Reward for I know not what Services, to I
know not whom; I am sure, for none to Christ, and his Religion, when they
Suffer (as generally they do) for their Disservice and Disobedience to That
Authority which Christ has given to the Higher Powers, and whereto he has very
plainly commanded all of us to be Subject. I say, It were Wisdom in them, and
it is their Duty, to consider, seriously to consider These things, before they
presume to speak evil of their Rulers, and charge them with Rigor, Tyranny,
and what not? If they did This, as they ought, they would find, that there are
(as I show in the Discourse) certain Qualifications and Conditions requisite to
True Christian Suffering; and that without These no Man can justly pretend to
It: and if any should challenge the Title, they would certainly miss of the
Crown of the Martyr.

But enough of This; I wish You do not think it more than enough: howsoever it
be, I am satisfied of Your Candor and Goodness, and depend upon These, Your
Patronage, and Favorable Acceptance I do now stand in need of, and do greatly
value, and do here beg. I must confess, I cannot be sorry for what I have done;
indeed I must have offered violence to my Nature, and could not have easily
excused my self, had I not (now that so fair an Opportunity presents it self)
used my Endeavors, my Honest, tho Mean, Endeavors, to convince Men of their
Errors, and let them see the Injustice of their Clamours against the Easiest
and Best of Governments. And why may not the Honesty of my Design bear me out,
as well as the bare Pretense of it does others? I must needs say, I see no
Reason for it.

But indeed, the Design is not only Honest; it is Great, and Noble. Loud is the
Noise, and Many are the Complaints of Persecution; and, I fear, of dangerous
consequence they are, ( Complaining of the Government, being a kind of
Libelling and Persecuting it:) So that to remove These, is to Ease the
Government; to do something toward it, is a proportionably Good and Laudable
Office; and even for him who endeavors it only, his Design is as Good and
Great, though his Success be not.

That the several Persons by whom These Offenses come, may become daily more
and more satisfied of the Guilt, and the Vnwarrantableness of them; and that
You may long continue among us for This, and other Excellent Purposes: That we
may long see (as now we do) the Happy Effects of Your Diligence and
Faithfulness in Your Administration of Justice; of Your Care and Prudence in a
very Regular Family; and of Your Excellent Example (joined to the vigorous
Endeavors of the Worthy Pastor) in a very Conformable Parish: And that Heaven
would Bless You, and Yours, with all Health and Happiness, Spiritual and
Temporal, is the hearty Prayer of,

(Honored Sir) Your most Obliged, and most Obedient Servant, John Howell.

A DISCOURSE ON PERSECUTION, OR, Suffering for Christ's Sake.
WHatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, and of good report; if they promise any thing of Satisfaction, of
Complacency, and Delight; they are readily observed; they are cheerfully obeyed
upon the least Intimation, or slightest Injunction: Men hardly need the
Exhortation of a Savior, or an Apostle, to think of these things. But where
there is any thing that suits not with their Interest, or their Natures; where
there is any thing clashes with their Temporal Designs, or the Gratification of
their Carnal Appetites* here they are apt to cry, with the Disciples in the
Gospel, This is a Hard Saying; who can hear it? or, with Naaman the Syrian, In
This thing the Lord pardon thy Servant.

The truth is; He that, in stead of Reason, consults only Flesh and Blood,
cannot very easily yield to the Hurting of the one, or the Exhausting of the
other. To desire the Tortures of the Rack, or the Scorchings of the Flames,
looks like a ridiculous piece of Gallantry, an Extravagancy allowable only in
Romance, or Phrenzy: I mean, to the mere Carnalist, to one that sees not beyond
the Grave. But whosoever looks within himself, and has an eye to the Recompense of
Reward, and perceives the Influence, the Aids, and Comforts of the Holy Spirit,
and expects more; can (if he would please) defy his Executioner, and dare him
into a severer Treatment;

And indeed, if we consider things as we ought, we shall find, that Happiness
and Misery are not to be measured by the Enjoyments or Sufferings of this Life;
that a Man may in wisdom prefer a Gibbet to a Crown, and be happy under the
Severities even of an Inquisition.

For tho Pains and Tortures are uncouth and irksom; though they grate upon the
Flesh, and grieve the Spirit: yet Nature her self recommends them to us, not
only as Expedient, but, as extremely Desirable; as those that will work for us
a far Greater, a more Certain, and more Durable Good: for Such they will always
prove (we may depend upon it) when our God, who desires our Happiness, and is
able to procure it, appoints them for us. We readily assent to our Physicians
Prescriptions, take Potions tho never so Unpleasant, suffer our Members to be
Coup'd, Cauteriz'd, or otherwise Tortured; and all in expectation, or, it may
be, but Deluding Hopes of an Uncertain Recovery.

And yet this is no more than what is reasonable; no more than what Nature
prescribes, when she teaches us the Doctrine of Self-preservation, when she
enclines us to the love of our selves, and to the pursuit of our Chiefest Good.

How much more reasonable therefore is it, how much more a Dictate of Nature,
that we should bear a Light Affliction, which is but for a Moment, in order to
a Great and Sure Reward; in order to an Eternity of Happiness, the Certain
Recompense of Suffering here for Christ; as I shall have occasion to show,
before I have done with you? At present it may suffice to observe, That the
Apostle looks upon it as an Instance of the Divine Favor; which he could not
well do, if there were not a future Reward annexed to it: Unto you it is given
(says he) in the behalf of Christ, not only to Believe on him, but also to
Suffer for his sake, Phil. 1.29.

I shall bring what I have to say into this Order.

1. I shall inquire, When a Man may be said to suffer for Christ's sake? 2. I
shall show, That those among us who renounce our Communion, and suffer for it,
do very unjustly pretend to Suffering for Christ. 3. I shall show, That all
those Christians who suffer rather than they will conform to the Church of
Rome, do truly and really suffer for Christ: Provided always, that they do not
allow themselves in any known Sins; but that they equally, heartily forsake
them all. 4. I shall consider the Excellency and Usefulness of true and real
Suffering for Christ. 5. And lastly, I shall offer some Motives to a resolute
and cheerful Suffering, at what time soever it shall please God to call us
thereto.
1. Then, I am to inquire, When a Man may be said to suffer for Christ's sake:

And that will be found to be then, and only then, when these three
Circumstances concur.

1. When his Cause is good. 2. When he has a Call. 3. When he has heartily
forsaken all his Sins.
1. That a Man may be said to Suffer for Christ's sake, it is required that his
Cause be good. As no Man ought to Die, or think any Suffering acceptable, but
when it is for a Truth; so all kinds of Truth cannot place him that Suffers for
them in the number of the Persecuted, or indeed justify or excuse him that
Dies for them. There are many Truths which don't at all concern God, or
Religion; and he is accessory to his own Death, who freely offers his Life a
Sacrifice for them. To be of opinion that the Earth is Round, and to Die for
that Opinion, rather than smother it, tho he be in the right that asserts it,
yet is it so far from being a Virtue, that it is utterly inexcusable: And for
him who lost his Bishopric upon such an account, I cannot tell which to accuse
most, him of Obstinacy and Folly, or his Adversaries of Tyranny, Ignorance, and
incorrigible Stupidity.

And as those Truths which concern not Religion, cannot justify any Suffering;
so neither do I hold him unblamable, that should lay down his Life for some
Trifle, some small Puntillo in Religion. We reckon not all that Die in the
Field, good Soldiers; and we have as little reason to conclude all that Die in
Matters of Religion, Martyrs. We owe more Respect to the Commandment of God,
and to the Law of Nature of Self-preservation within us, than that we should
Destroy our selves (for so I must style it) upon a Ceremony, or Indifferent
Point. He must be of a very untractable temper, who cannot yield to such petty
Observances, and wink at those Matters, wherein there is nothing of Impiety, or
Immorality; nothing but what he himself adjudges Indifferent.

But whosoever Suffers on a Fundamental Point of Religion, for an Article of Faith,
or Matter of Practice, and so for the discharge of a sure and good Conscience;
he it is that is Persecuted for Righteousness, for Christ's sake. Whatsoever a
Man's Sufferings are, whether they be by the Cross or by the Flames, by
Scourgings or by Imprisonments, by Slanderings or by Revilings, or but the
least Indignity whatsoever; if this be the Cause, our Savior pronounces him
Blessed, and he shall be Blessed: Blessed are ye, says he, when men shall
Revile you, and Persecute you, meaning for Righteousness sake, which he
expressed before. So that not only he that Dies, but he that is Reviled also,
he that is any way Persecuted for Righteousness sake, is so far forth a
Sufferer for Christ, a Martyr of his.

But then, on the other side, he that Suffers upon any any other account, when
it lies in his power to avoid it, what Reward or Applauses soever he may
receive from his own Party, or Admirers; he must not expect any Reward or
Approbation of God; for he obeys no Command, no Injunction of his; and has not
the least Tittle in his Word to encourage him thereto.

2. That a Man may be said to Suffer for Christ's sake, it is required that he
have a Call. To Suffer for Christ, when a Man is put to the severe Dilemma of
his Enemies, either of Denying Him, or Suffering for Him, is Laudable,
Glorious, and Honorable; but where This may be cautiously avoided, where Death
may be escaped with the security of Religion and Reputation; here Nature,
Prudence, and Christianity teach us Preservation of Self. Without God's Command
we cannot Suffer Martyrdom: Die we may, but not Martyrs; Suffer we may, but not
for Christ's sake: for to Suffer for Christ's sake, is to Suffer when he
requires the same; that is to say, when Providence has put us under an
unavoidable Necessity either of Suffering, or Transgressing any Command of His:
for where there is such a fatal Necessity, there is His Call, His Appointment,
His Command to Suffer; and it is This that makes the Martyr: But and if we
choose Sufferings in any other Case, we do it for our own sakes, rather than
His; for the gratification of a Humor, it may be; not the pleasing Him.

It Is our Fault therefore, and not our Duty, to draw down Evils upon our
selves; and These can only entitle us to greater. When we run to the Stake
without a Call, we may thank our selves for the Punishment of our Folly. Christ
will say, Who has required This at your hands? What Commission, what Warrant
have you from me? You are your own Executioners, will he say; you are your own
Murderers; and who must bear the Blame, the Punishment, but your selves? It Is
no part of our Religion (what the Romanists reckon of theirs) to punish our own
Iniquity with the Rod, and our Sin with Scourges: We have not so learned
Christ. No, it is a Call, it is a Command that must hallow our Sufferings:
without This, we are our own Martyrs, not Christ's; and for any thing we can
learn from his Word, those Flames we run into may be but the Passage into Hell
Fire.

I am not ignorant, how that some Primitive Christians have out of great zeal
invited their Executioner, nay, forced him, as it were, to do his Office: but
this was out of a Zeal not according to Knowledge; and tho Infinite Goodness
may have pardoned them, their Mistake being unaffected, their Design noble, and
their Love pure and Seraphical; I say, tho God may, as he is abundantly
gracious, have pardoned, accepted the Men, yet we have no reason to conclude
them Martyrs.

3. That a Man may be said to Suffer for Christ's sake, it is required that he
have heartily forsaken all his Sins.

It Is possible some Men, out of a blind mistaken Zeal, would readily Die for
God, and Religion, yet very difficultly quit a Lust for them. There may be
Those, who can be content to lose their Lives for their Faith; but not to part
with a darling Sin: whether it is, that they think their imaginary Martyrdom
will atone for all, for all their dearly-beloved Vices; or, that these
Bosom-friends cannot hurt them, as being very consistent with God's Grace and
Favor: or whether it be, that they are possessed with a sullen Moroseness, an
Enthusiastical Temper, an overhasty Desire of Glory, or, perhaps, of an
unhappy Mixture of These.

Now, as to the Case of any such Person, (if indeed there be any such, as I am
apt to believe there have been, and therefore may be again) this I do affirm;
That whoever he be, he is not a Sufferer for Christ; because he harbors a
professed Enemy of His. I say, should any Man Die, and very strongly fancy, that
he Dies for Christ; yet if he should retain any one Lust, one Sin, till he Die,
(how favorable an Opinion soever others may have of him, or he of himself) I
cannot allow him the Crown, nor indeed the Name of a Martyr; no, nor the plain,
but honest, Character of a good Christian. And I give this Reason for it; To
retain any one Sin, is to retain a professed Enemy of Christ; which it is not the
part of a true Martyr, or of a good Christian to do. Indeed, for the same Man
to Die in Sin, and to Sin; or, (if you please) to Crucify Christ, (as every
one does who wilfully sins against Him) and yet at the same time to be
Crucified for him, is as far from being possible, as it is to serve Christ, and
Belial; God, and Mammon. In truth, it amazes me to consider, how any Man should
fancy, that he Dies to avoid Sin, and yet at that very time entertain and
cherish Sin in his Bosom: For is it to be imagined, that he should Die rather
than offend God in one Point, when he actually offends him in another? Is It to
be imagined, that he should Die for the Love of Christ, when he does not show
any Love (where he chiefly ought) in keeping His Commandments? Or, in other
Words, that he should Love the Lord his God with all his Heart, when he suffers
Sin to lodge there too? Believe me, vain Man, whosoever thou art, if This be
thy Case, thou art under a Delusion: For, alas! one little puny Vice will be
enough to keep thee from a Crown; and (which is worse) will be enough to weigh
thee down to Hell. For there is nothing can alter the Nature of Sin: no
Sufferings, but those of our Savior, can wash away the Guilt of it; and
nothing but an unfeigned Repentance, can make even These available to thee; if
thou look pleasantly on any one Sin, if thou give it thine Heart, and wilt
never shake Hands with it, thy Sufferings will not, Salvation it self cannot,
save thee.

Thus I have given (as I humbly conceive) the true Notion and Requisites of
Suffering for Christ.

And this prepares the way for the second thing proposed, which was,

2. To show, That those among us, who renounce our Communion, and Suffer for
it, do very unjustly pretend to Suffering for Christ.

And this we shall easily do from the Principles now laid down: For if no Man
may be said to Suffer for Christ, but he whose Cause is good, who has a Call,
and has heartily Forsaken all his Sins; it is visible to the weakest Eye, that
the Persons I am speaking of, do very vainly pretend to it, neither of these
being their Case: For,

1. Their Cause is not good. They do not Suffer for any Article of Faith, nor
any Matter of Duty, but, on the contrary, for pure Disobedience to the Laws of
the Land. And now These do not require any thing to be Believed, or Done, but
what is agreeable with, or not contrary to the Laws of God: and we are in all
such Cases to be subject to the Higher Powers; we are to submit to every such
Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake: So that to disobey the Laws of the Land,
(those, I mean, which are not purely Penal) is in very deed to disobey the Laws
of God: and if their Transgression of those Laws be not, then neither is their
Suffering for it in Obedience to the Laws of God: and, if so, we are to look to
the Rule; That cannot be Suffering for Christ's sake, which is not in Obedience
to some Law of God.

2. They have no Call.

They are not under a Necessity of Suffering or Sinning. Themselves do many of
them acknowledge, That there is nothing sinful in our Communion; and so many of
them I reckon self-condemned: and for the rest, if they know any thing so, let
them produce it, let them make it appear: I am sure they cannot; and would they
but peruse those Useful and Excellent Discourses, which are lately written for
their Satisfaction herein, they must needs see, and, if they have any spark of
Ingenuity, yea, or any sense of Religion, (as I hope they have) they must needs
acknowledge too, the unreasonableness of such a Charge, and choose, rather than
complain of their Sufferings, to repent of the Occasion.

3. They have not heartily forsaken all their Sins.

That Schism is a Sin, a great one, is allowed on all hands; and that those who
divide and separate from us, are engaged in a Schism, is not to be denied. For
Schism, in plain English, is nothing else but Division, or Separation; and, in
Scripture Language, is the Division of, or Separation from, the Holy Catholic
Church: And to suppose that they do not separate from the Catholic Church, who
separate from Ours, which is a sound, a pure, and considerable part of it, is
as absurd, as it is to imagine, that the Hand may be divided, cut off from the
Arm, and yet continue still a Member of the Body.

So then, it is very clear, that all those who make a Separation from Our
Church, (forasmuch as it must be a causeless Separation) will be found guilty
of a very deadly Sin, of a Sin that certainly unchurches them, destroys their
Membership, and all their Relation to Christ's Body, the Church: insomuch, that
they are very greatly mistaken, who think they may suffer for Him in these
Circumstances.

Indeed, it is impossible, in the Judgment of the Fathers; and so it is in the
Nature of the Thing, for a Man who is out of the Church, to suffer in the true
Gospel-notion of the Word; for Suffering in the Gospel sense, presupposes Life
in the Gospel-sense: That which is dead, being void of Sense, it feels no Pain,
apprehends no Evil: And now the Man that is out of the Church, is perfectly
dead in the Gospel-reckoning; for he is no Member of Christ's Body, and
therefore has no Life, no Vital Sense or Influences from Him: it being with
this Mystical Body, as it is with the Natural; its Virtue, and Influence, and
Vital Powers are confined to its own Members: and whatsoever is out of the
Sphere of its Activity, is dead, and senseless with respect to It.

So then, the Schismatic (who is never the less out of the Church for his
thrusting himself out of it) can never suffer, as Christ and the Gospel account
Suffering; because there is no Suffering without Life; no Gospel- suffering
without Gospel-life; and no Gospel-life but from Christ, who is the Way, the
Truth, and the Life: and there is nothing of that derived from Christ, but what
is communicated to His Members.

I shall not dispute the possibility of the Salvation of those who die in a
Schism; but this I will say, now that I am slidden into this Argument, (and out
of pure Charity and Compassion, out of a tender regard to their poor Souls, I
say it) They are out of the ordinary way to Salvation. Whether, or how far they
are some of them excusable; (for I am apt to believe, and forward to allow,
that some of them are well-meaning, and grossly ignorant:) I say, Whether, or
how far the Ignorance, and sincere Endeavors of these will excuse them, I
leave (as I ought) to the superabundant Mercy and Goodness of the great Judge
of us all; and would only advise them seriously and frequently to cast with
themselves, and put it home to their own Consciences, whether they do seek
Peace, and ensue it, in good earnest? whether they do endeavor, to the utmost
of their power, to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace? whether
they do, whereto they have already attained, walk by the same rule, and mind
the same thing; conforming to our Church, and communicating with it, as far as
their Consciences give them leave? If they did this, (as they cannot deny but
they ought to do) we might then hope for a general, a through Union, and
Conformity; we might then expect their Complaints would cease with their
Sufferings, the Occasion of them: for certainly, they that will go as far as
they may, in compliance with the Orders and Offices of our Church, can never
sit down under a through Conformity: there being nothing required, or expected
in our Communion, but what is very decent, inoffensive, and orderly; nothing,
but what may be to the edifying, and satisfaction of any Man, that has but his
Thoughts and Reason about him.

I proceed,

3. To show, That all those Christians who suffer, rather than they will
conform to the Church of Rome, do truly and really suffer for Christ: Provided
always, that they do not allow themselves in any known Sins; but that they
equally, heartily forsake them all.

For the clearing of this Point likewise, I need not say much. An easy
Reflection on the Principles foregoing, together with some few Doctrines and
Practices of the Church of Rome, will abundantly suffice.

Be it therefore considered, That where the Laws of any Church, or Society of
Men, do clash and interfere with the Laws of God, the Apostolical Rule ought to
be ours; we are to obey God, rather than Man. The Reason is plain: The Commands
of God are directly, constantly, and universally binding; whereas the Laws and
Injunctions of Men do no farther oblige, than as they agree and square with
These. If they do, and as far as they do, run counter to the Laws of God, the
Matter of them is sinful; and they are, for that Reason, null and void: Neither
is it in the power of any Humane Law, or Dispensation, to make them obligatory
or lawful.

And now this is the Case of those Christians, who suffer rather than they will
conform to the Church of Rome. That Church requires several things to be
believed, that ought not to be believed, as being false and erroneous;
repugnant to the Doctrines of Christianity, and the Light of Reason: It
requires several things to be performed, that cannot be performed without Sin,
without a Transgression of a Divine Law: insomuch that if She should be obeyed,
God would be disobeyed; an Universal Obedience to both, being absolutely
impossible.

Let all things be done to edifying, says the Holy Spirit by the Apostle;
particularly forbidding all Prayers, and other Public Offices, in an unknown
Tongue. Ay, but (says the Church of Rome) you must pray in Latin, whether it be
edifying, or no; whether it be a Known, or Unknown Tongue.

Our Savior said, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him Only shall thou
serve. As for the worshipping of Angels in particular, an Angel forbad it: See
thou do it not, was the Charge of one of them to St. John in the Revelation.
And as for Saints deceased, they do not (if we will believe the Scripture),
(and it is a part of their Happiness, that they do not) understand the Affairs
of the World. Thus Solomon tells us, The Dead know nothing at all; and Abraham
is said to be Ignorant of us: And now those that are Ignorant of us, and know
Nothing relating to us, must be very improper Objects of our Prayers. But so it
is, he that will he a Papist, must worship Angels; he must pray to Gods that
neither understand nor hear him; to the Souls of Departed Saints, and of
notorious Miscreants; yea, and to such Imaginary Men, as in all probability had
never any Being upon Earth; to the verifying of that of the Apostle in the most
Literal sense, An Idol is Nothing in the world. Again,

The Scripture tells us, (and it is a considerable part of our Christian Faith)
That Jesus Christ ascended into Heaven, and sits at the Right Hand of God
the Father Almighty; and that (having continued there till the end of the
World) from thence he shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead: And our
Reason tells us, that a Body cannot be in two several Places at the same time;
insomuch that the Angel's Inference was strong and irrefragable, He is not
here, for he is risen. And yet, in contradiction to the Holy Scripture, in
contradiction to all Sense and Reason, the Church of Rome does believe, and
does exact this Belief of all her Members, that he is Bodily present upon
Earth, where, and whenever the Priest shall please to command him down; that is
to say, as often as he shall think fit to offer the Sacrifice of the Mass; for
Christ himself is that Sacrifice, (if you will believe them) and you must eat
Him, Flesh, and Bones, and all; and believe that you do so, at least declare
that you believe it, if you would pass for a true Roman, if you would do as
they do. And now should you declare your firm Assent to This, That you eat the
real Body of the Son of God, and at the same time believe nothing less; why?
you would sin beyond all the Pardons and Indulgences of Rome; and nothing but a
sincere Repentance could set you right: Indeed you would make a Declaration
against your own Judgment, and be evidently self condemned.

And now this is the Case of those suffering Christians we speak of. They know,
and are assured, that Prayer in an Unknown Tongue is unedifying, and unlawful,
forbidden by the Apostle, and unpracticed by the Primitive Church. They are
fully satisfied of the sinfulness of Saint-worship, and Angel-worship, with the
rest of the Idolatrous Practices of the Romish Church. They do steadfastly
believe, that their Savior is in Heaven, there to abide till the Day of
Judgment; and therefore not on Earth. They cannot reconcile the several
Contradictions of the Bodily Presence in the Sacrament; and being they cannot
reconcile them, (and indeed it is impossible they should) they will not, nor
can they believe them; and being they cannot believe them, they will not upon
any Terms profess that they do.

These are the Reasons, with many others, (which I forbear to reckon up,
because I need not) I say, These are some of the Reasons which prevail with
them to stand out against all the Temptations and Terrors of Rome: They cannot
comply with That Church, because their Compliance would be sinful; and they
therefore suffer, because they cannot comply. They embrace Suffering, not out
of choice, not for the love of its self; but out of a Principle of Obedience,
out of pure Obedience to plain, particular Commands of God: So their Cause is
Good; they would certainly sin, if they did not suffer: And That is their Call.

4. I am now to consider the Excellency and Usefulness of True and real
Suffering for Christ. And this will appear,

1. In that Persecutions and Sufferings for Christ's sake are so far from
weakening and depressing Religion, that they advance and improve it.

It must be confessed, that Persecutions may, and sometimes do prevail so far,
as to debar those that labor under them of Public Prayer, of the Public and
Solemn Administration of the Word and Sacraments, and of other outward
Exercises of Religion: But these are but Means to promote and encourage, to
signify and declare to the World our Faith and Obedience; which two are the
only Substantials of Religion. But now no Tyranny, no Rage of Persecutors, can
force us to quit These. To Believe, and to Obey, it is the Gift of God, and,
through his Grace, lies in our own power; so that Religion may be maintained
amidst the worst, and most bloody Persecutions, abound and flourish under a
Nero, or Diocletian.

It Is true indeed, a Public, Solemn Profession of Faith, and the several
outward Acts of Religion, are very highly convenient, yea, and necessary too,
when Men are at liberty for the one and the other: But where this Liberty is
perfectly denied, their Necessity is ceased, and a Dispensation follows of
course; God accepts here (we need not doubt it) the Will for the Deed. He knows
when, and how far we believe: He knows the Measures of our Obedience, and from
what Principle it flows; and where he finds us sound at the Heart, he easily
dispenses with the rest. He is infinitely Wise, and sees what we would do: He
is infinitely Just, and requires not Impossibilities.

Thus may our Religion live and stand out, maugre all the Enemy's Batteries
against it, maugre all the Powers and Stratagems of Hell called out for its
Destruction.

And indeed, if That must have suffered according as its Professors did, it had
been in every Man's power to rob us of it; nay, what through the Malice and the
Wiles of the Devil, and what through the Power and Wickedness of Men, it had been
lost, undoubtedly lost, stifled in its Infancy, and we had scarce heard of the
very Name of a Christian.

But (thanks be to God) the Case is quite otherwise: For Christianity
flourished most under its heaviest Pressures. The Sufferings of some made
others in love with such a Suffering Religion; and for one Martyr, there were
gained several Converts to Christianity: for there was a kind of Seminal
Principle in the Martyrs Blood, and out of their Graves sprung Christians.

And truly, I cannot see why Religion may not thrive in the most Troublesome
Times. A sound Belief, and a suitable Practice, Piety and an entire Resignation
of Mind, Meekness and Sobriety, Justice and Charity, with the rest of the
Principal Duties of Religion, may be as religiously exercised, and therefore as
well accepted, in Evil, as in Prosperous Times.

Nay, some eminent Virtues there are which must be reserved for Foul weather,
for a day of Adversity; for indeed they cannot be exerted at any other time. For
instance; To be Patient, presupposes Sufferings, under which we may be so. How
can we take up the Cross, unless there be one? How can we forgive Injuries,
unless they have been offered us? How can we do Good to our Enemies, if we have
none? There must be some that Despitefully use us, and Persecute us, or how can
we Pray for them that do so? So that Persecution does Promote the Exercise, and
consequently Heighten the Glory of Christianity, and does rather prune than
root out its Professors: which is agreeable to that of the Apostle to the
Philippians, c. 1, v. 12, 13, 14. But I would you should understand, brethren,
that the Things which happened unto me, have fallen out rather unto the
furtherance of the Gospel; so that my Bonds in Christ are manifest in the
Palace, and in all other places; and many of the brethren in the Lord waxing
confident by my Bonds, are much more bold to speak the Word without fear.

Then what if we should suppose our Church to be in danger of Popery? We may
not, we must not endeavor to preserve it by any Unlawful means, and with the
loss of our Innocence. No; Religion needs not our help, or our defense: at
least, it requires not any Irregular course to support it. If the Lord please,
he can and will defend it, against all the Oppositions, all the Machinations of
its Adversaries: If, on the other side, it be his pleasure to let it fall, (as
indeed our Provocations, many and great, give us reason to fear it is) fall it
must, notwithstanding all the Vnjustifiable Proceedings and Endeavors of Men.
Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain: And do we
think, that the ready way to engage him to keep it, is to offend him? or that
he will take care of us, and our Religion, when we neither care for him, nor
his Laws? Or, do we entertain a Fancy altogether as idle, That he must assist
us, whether he will or no; that he is under a fatal necessity of giving us his
encouraging, his helping Hand? No, certainly: As he is in no wise forced to
assist us, so our Presumption, and our other Sins, are in no wise likely to
invite him to it: He sees nothing in our Irreligious Practices so pleasing, as
to oblige him to look upon us: He sees nothing so inviting as our Resignation
and our Obedience. If we Resign up our selves wholly to him, and Obey him in
all his Commands, he can, and he will protect us; for he that puts his trust
in the Lord, shall want no manner of thing that is good. The holy Lives, and
the effectual fervent Prayers of the Righteous avail much: but and if those few
who mourn in Sion should not, will our Sins be able to preserve us? If
Obedience cannot, will Treason and Rebellion secure us? Good God! that ever any
who pretend to Reason, yea, and Conscience too, should go about to secure
Religion by the Violation of it! that ever any should fancy they may be safe in
their Sins, yea, and made so by them! Certainly there is somewhat of Witchcraft
in Rebellion, and more than a bare Resemblance betwixt them; or Men could never
take up such Devilish Resolutions, against all Law, Reason, and Religion; and
that too with a private self-flattery, with the leave and with the applause of
Conscience.

Then let us not bow to the sly Insinuations, to the enchanting Delusions of
the grand Deceiver. If the Lord be God, follow him, and depend upon him. This
is Wisdom's Advice, Commit thy Works unto the Lord, (says she) and thy thoughts
shall be established; that is, thou shall see the Accomplishment of all thy
Laudable, of all thy Innocent Designs and Desires.

Then why should we place our Hopes in our Armies, and an uncertain Multitude,
for the Security of our Church; when we may, and ought to look up unto him who
is the Author and Giver of all good things? It is better to trust in the Lord,
than to put any Confidence in Man: It is better to Trust in the Lord, than to
put any Confidence in Princes. If the Lord be on our side, we need not fear
what Man does unto us. Tho all Nations compassed us round about, yet in the
Name of the Lord we should destroy them. He can turn the Heart of the most
Persecuting Governor, or he can hold his Hand, that he shall not hurt us.
Blessed be God, we have no reason to expect or fear any thing like Persecution:
but, on the contrary, as we do at present enjoy all the Blessings of an easy
Government, and a most Gracious Prince; so we have abundant reason to hope for,
and to expect the continuance of them: For Mercy and Smoothness sit triumphant
on the Royal Brows; there is something of the Divine Philanthropy runs in the
blood, and is adopted into the Royal Line: and it is a symptom of an evil Mind,
to suspect any danger of cruelty or severity there, where these good Qualities
Reign.

Let us, however, put the Case, for Argument sake, in the very worst
Circumstances, That a Popish and Tyrannical Prince should Reign over us, We
must not oppose, and fight against him; for so we should fight against God:
For, whatever his Opinions, whatever his Practices be, he is His Vicegerent, he
is appointed and substituted by Him. It Is not for us then to cry, with the Sons
of Belial in the Parable, We will not have This man to reign over us: It Is not
for us to use any Unwarrantable Means to shut him out. No; This were to
distrust Providence, and to fight against it, This were to do Evil, that Good
might come of it; and we know the Resolve of all sober judicious Casuists in
the Point, That we should not commit one single Sin, tho 'twere to save the
whole World from Destruction.

Now therefore, if to Distrust Providence, and to Fight against it, be (as we
may reasonably conclude it is) a forfeiting all our Title to the Divine
Protection; what security, what grounds of Hope can we have, or propose to our
selves, by any Illegal, any Unchristian Proceedings? What? can we hope to
conquer the Almighty with our Armies? or terrify Him into a compliance with
our Wishes? Are we stronger than he? David said, My trust has been in the
Lord, therefore shall I not fall: So that, by the Rule of Contraries, we may
conclude, That if our Trust be not in the Lord, we shall fall an unpitied
Sacrifice to our own Folly, and to an Offended God. And indeed God himself has
declared as much; Woe to the rebellious children, (says the Lord) that take
counsel, but not of me; and that cover with a covering, but not of my Spirit,
that they may add sin to sin, Isa. 30.1.

Then far be it from us to take Ill Courses for the Security of our Religion,
seeing all such must of necessity be uneffectual; or, if they were not, yet,
that it is more Christian-like, and more Prudent, to engage God in our cause,
by an entire Submission to, a hearty Acquiescence in his Dispensations; for so
should we Secure our Religon, and our Innocence too; and, come what would, we
could but Suffer unto Death; when our Religion would Advance by our Fall;
Spring up and Flourish by our Martyrdom: So that it is every whit as
Unreasonable, as it is Impious to go about to Secure Religion by the breach of
its Laws, to secure it from Persecutions; seeing it is raised, promoted, and
ennobled by them. So glorious are the effects, so great is the Excellency, and
the Usefulness of Suffering for Christ: which yet will appear farther, if we
consider,

2. How that it promotes Peace and Unity amongst our selves.

That Peace and Unity are Excellent and Amiable, I presume needs no proof;
especially in a Christian Country; these being the proper badges of
Christianity.

How very apt Persecutions are to Cement and Quiet the Minds of Men, let it be
our present consideration. And we shall certainly find Them the most
practicable, ('it is well if they be not the only) Expedient now left for the
bringing back of that Unity, which has so long withdrawn it self, is so
greatly talked of, and yet so little contended for in good earnest by this our
Broken, and miserably Divided Nation.

When he must pass for the best Religionist, whose Tongue, or Pen is keenest,
and traduces his Neighbor most according to Art. When it is the diversion of
some, the business of others, the Custom of very many, first to create
Differnces, and then to maintain them: To sow Divisions, inflame our
Disagreements, and to stir up Strife all the day long.

What cure, what remedy more proper for such Feuds and Animosities among us,
than that which diverts our thoughts another way, and employs our Minds in our
own concerns?

Now This is the effect of Suffering for Christ's sake, This the good Office of
our most Cruel Persecutors: For while they Persecute us from City to City; they
give us little leisure, or opportunity to fall out by the way; whilst they
continually Molest and Abuse us, we have little stomach, or occasion to molest,
to abuse one another, or to draw (our Pens I mean) unless it be for manifestos
of our innocence, and in the defense of our common cause, So that the Pressures
of our Enemies (like those on Arched Buildings) make our Union the firmer, and
those Storms without us (as it were by an antiperistasis) produce a Calm within.

We find this experimentally true in former times. When Heathen Persecutors
reigned, there was a perfect Harmony and Agreement among Christians. They laid
aside all Picques and Anomisities between themselves, and employed their Minds
in better thoughts. They were in continual expectation of leaving This World,
and therefore in continual preparation for another. The Clouds that hung over
their Heads, engaged them, as far as they might, to keep at home: Or if they
happily wandered about; 'twas for their own safety; not for the Destruction of
their Neighbors, their Friends, and Contrymen, and Fellow Christians; not
for the Destruction of their most bitter Enemies; of those very Enemies, who
made them wander.

Hence was it, that Christians then lived like true Fellow Members of Christ
their Head: And as they owned one Common Religion, so they embraced one and the
same Fate; and cheerfully marched together through the Flames, There were then no
Separatists, no Dissenters among them; but and if their Flames (like those of
the Theban Brethren) diffused, and spread; 'twas not out of Enmity, or Dislike;
but for greater Splendour, for Triumph,

Let us in the 3d. place consider the Excellency of Suffering for Christ in
those four noble Virtues which are its inseparable attendants, namely,
Fortitude, Patience, Faith, and Love.

1. All Suffering for Christ's sake is attended with Fortitude.

That Christianity obliges us to be Valiant, we may learn from St. Paul, where
he sets out the complete Armor of a Christian: He bids us take the Helmet of
Salvation, the Word of the Spirit, and the Shield of Faith, with other such
like accoutrements; wherewith (says he) you shall be able to quench all the
fiery Darts of the Wicked.

Now what signifies an Armor to a Dastardly Spirit, to one that will not,
dares not use it?

I shall take for granted then, that as we are Christians, we should be Valiant.

And that those who Suffer for Christ's sake are truly (if not only) so will
appear from the formidable Power and Resolution of the Enemies, they encounter,
conquer. And they are that terrible Triumvirate, the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, These indeed are the mortal enemies of all Mankind; but they are the
most violent opposers of all Suffering Christians: Not that they are against
Suffering in general (for that is their aim and endeavor) but against their
Suffering for Christ's sake; such as will give them a very clear Title to an
infinitely greater share of Bliss.

Now then let us a little examine the strength of their Forces, that we may
more easily guess at the Courage of their Conquerours.

And first for the World; and that suggests to them the undoubted reality, and
experimental sense of Earthly Felicities; displaying its several Pomps and
Vanities; and setting them off to the best advantage.

Thus it represents Honor, as the delight of the Soul, and spring of
endeavor; the source of all generous undertakings, and the reward of them too:
And at the same time insinuat's that Suffering is an argument of an Ignoble
Spirit, the sure forerunner of Disgrace: Or, if it does pass (as sometimes it
must) for Virtuous and Honorable, the Honor that attends it is but the shadow
of Virtue, and less than a shadow the other side the grave.

To Riches it gives the flattering Title of a God, the certain procurer of all
that is needful; of all that makes Men great, or happy; undervaluing,
ridiculing Heaven, and its Treasures, the unsearchable Riches of Christ;
calling it a Vain Creature of fancy or the imaginary issue of hope.

Next it proceeds to cry up Pleasure as most friendly to Nature, and most
agreeable to Flesh and Blood; the center of all Men's wishes and desires, and
the relisher of all conditions. Then does it enlarge upon the free use of the
Creatures; averring, that they were made to be enjoyed; and that they then only
answer the design of their Being, when they serve to the Delight and Pleasure
of Man, to the through Gratification of all his Senses.

In comes the Flesh, and seconds it; asserting upon its own Experience the
agreeable sense of Worldly Delights, the pleasing, the ravishing variety of
wild Mirth, and more sober Epicurism; and remonstrating the Uneasiness of
Self-denial, of Suffering in any way; the rude, and terrible assaults of Pain
and Torture, the unmerciful Pangs of a sudden and violent Death; the most
exquisite sense of an unnatural hastened Dissolution.

Nor is the Devil all this while idle: He very well understands, to whom the
Crown is promised; even to them that are Faithful unto Death; and These are the
prime Objects of his envy; to These he lays the closest Siege. Hence is it that
he is always ready to back, and strengthen the others reasons; and to offer new
ones of his own: So that we need not wonder if he terms it Folly, Madness, Any
thing, to Deny our selves, and to Suffer freely any way in obedience to we know
not what; to an invisible God, and to an unaccountable thing called Conscience.

These, or such like, may we imagine, are the Arguments made use of, the
Spiritual Forces rallied, against Suffering: And tho they be in themselves very
far from invincible; yet all circumstances examined they will be found very
difficultly conquerable: Forasmuch, as besides that the World with its gilded
Vanities is present and sensible; and so more apt to affect the Mind; besides
that the Devil, such is his Power, has a secret influence on Men's Souls and
Faculties; and such is his subtilty, is forward to embrace every promising
opportunity, and suit his Arguments to the temper of the Persons; a fair way of
prevailing: I say, besides all this, there is the Flesh, a treacherous Friend,
that is to say, the worst sort of enemies, which opens the Door to the rest,
and makes them flexible, inclinable to yield: So that upon all, or either of
these accounts we have reason to expect, or a very great Courage, or a very
little opposition.

And yet if we consider farther, how that Self-preservation is a Law, a
Principle Implanted in them; and that there is a violence done to Nature in
very Suffering, greater or less according as the Suffering is: We cannot but
conclude, that these, and the like considerations must work very powerfully
upon any Man whomsoever; and consequently (which is the thing I would be at)
that That Courage which engages and baffles them all, and buoys Men up against
all these Tumults and Disorders of the Mind, must be as truly great, as it is
victorious and successful.

And now This is the Courage. This the Glory of our Suffering Christians, who
bravely prefer Torments, and Death it self to the Tempting Vanities of the
World; boldly resist the Devil, a powerful and daring, a subtle and a
malicious Adversary; and answer withal to the feeling arguments of Flesh and
Blood, as the Captain of their Salvation did before them, not my Will but thine
be done.

Now that This Courage so conspicuous in them does truly, and really deserve
the name of Fortitude, will appear from the general notion and usage of the
Word. For with Moralists the nature of Fortitude consists in a mediocrity
between rashness and fear. But now those who Suffer for Christ's sake are
equally careful in avoiding the extremes. They will not over-hastily Throw away
their lives; they will not Sacrifice them to a Passion or Humor; but consider
before hand the goodness of the Cause; when, and how it may oblige them to
Suffer; with all the other Circumstances.

And as for the other extreme of Valor, Fear; they are as far from that, as
from an inconsiderate Fool-hardiness: They Fear God indeed; but that is a Fear,
that has no Torment; a Fear, that is consistent with love; They fear Him, and
for that reason are incapable of Fearing Men, incapable of Dreading even the
Tortures of the Rack, or the Tedious Loathsomness of a Dungeon; because from
the Fear of God arises the observance of his Commands: And he that keeps the
Commandments of God will not (nor need he) Fear, tho the Earth be moved; and
tho the Hills be carried into the midst of the Sea. So then, they will not be
Afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can
do: Why? Because they Fear him that ought to be Feared; Him, who, after He has
killed, has power to cast into Hell.

Thus do they keep the middle way betwixt Rashness, and Fear; thrusting not
themselves into dangers, when they need not; and sparing not to show their
Valor, when occasion requires.

2. All suffering for Christ's sake is attended with Patience.

That Patience is a Virtue is in every Man's Mouth: That Suffering is necessary
to the exercise of it, I have already observed. It remains that we consider the
Excellency, the Surpassing nature thereof.

Now the Gallantry of Passive Courage is such, as is beyond the ambition of
ordinary men. There are few that have it in that full measure, as to endure the
Terrible tests of Torments. By this it is that the Upright Christian Shows, how
Great he truly is, Whosoever impatiently bears Affliction makes it appear, that
they that inflict them are greater than himself; but he, who braves it, shows
that it is out of the power of any thing but guilt to make him Tremble.

It Is Great, and it is Glorious to show a Bravery in the Field, a Fearless
daring of the Enemy, and Defiance of danger: And yet this may be owed to the
hopes either of revenge or victory; and to the promising probability of an
escape. But to behold a necessary, and an unavoidable Grave; to mount the
Scaffold with an undaunted Look, and an undissembled Courage, this is most
eminently Brave and Noble, I had almost said, peculiar to a Suffering
Christian, to a Christian Suffering for Christ's sake.

3. All Suffering for Christ's sake is attended with Faith.

The excellency of that Faith for which, and by which we Suffer is evident, in
that it transcends our reason, and the Examinations of Sense. To Believe a
thing, we see with our Eyes, or fathom with our reason, is not Faith, but
knowledge or persuasion; but to Believe that, which neither Eye has seen, nor
Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive; to Credit
that which we could not Believe, but that we Believe withal, that there is an
everlasting Being, who can do all things: This is Faith, an Heroic, an Exalted
Faith.

I must confess, I cannot approve of that resolution of Tertullian, Credo, quia
est impossible: I do therefore believe, because it is impossible. No; nor of
His, who said there were not Impossiblities enough in Religion for an Active
Faith; if he means (as he should) not seeming, but real ImImpossibilities: My
reason is This; the very being of an Impossibility implies a contradiction: It
supposes a thing to be, and not to be; to be possible, and not to be possible
at the same time; which I am sure is impossible to conceive.

Well; but my Faith will soar thus high: I Believe a thing let it seem never so
Strange, (and only not Impossible) to me, because God has said it, who cannot
lie.

And as for Miracles, and the Mysteries of our Religion; I esteem that Faith
the noblest, which least concerns itself in prying into them: And like not that
slow-paced Faith of Nicodemus, signified by a How can these be? Our Christian
Sufferer questions not the truth of any thing his Savior has told him, tho it
seem to run almost counter to his reason. That his scattered ashes shall all be
reunited, and his Soul recalled to its former habitation; tho it be Marvelous,
yet he believes it; tho he knows not how, and it looks like Impossible, yet he
is assured of it as much as if 'twere already come to pass. He is fully
persuaded of a Heaven in the midst of the Flames; and tho it does not yet
appear what he shall be; he is Confident he shall be in a state of Bliss; and
convert his Groans into Halelujas. And This I call a Generous; a very Excellent
Faith.

4. All Suffering of Men for Christ's sake is attended with Love; a Love of
their Savior for whom, and a Love even of their Persecutors, by whom they
Suffer.

1. A Love of their Savior for whom they Suffer.

They thoroughly contemplate his Love to Them, which was so Great, as to Die for
them; and cannot (having an opportunity, and knowing his desire) I say, they
cannot but Love Him again, with the same Effects, with Dying for Him. Thus, as
one flame enkindles another, does the Love of Christ beget a Love in them, a
Love only inferior to His. Thus are they drawn with the cords of a Man; not
such Cords as bind and must be born; but such, as, like the Nerves and
Ligaments, are endued with a quality, not only of Binding, but of Supporting
too. Hence is their Love both firm and noble; a Love, that sooths and ravishes
the Heart amidst the acutest pains; for it reconciles Tortures to the most
tender Constitution; and is such a Perfect Love, as, according to the Apostles
Description, casts out fear.

2. Their Suffering is attended with a Love, even of their Persecutors, by whom
they Suffer.

If you Love them that Love you, what reward have you? do not even the
Publicans the same? And if you salute your Brethren only; what do you more than
others? do not even the Publicans so? There is nothing of Generosity or
Gallantry in this above other Men, above the most Barbarous of the Heathen, for
they kiss and embrace those that are Nearest and Dearest to them. But to Love
your Enemies, to Bless them that Curse you, to do Good to them that Hate you,
and to Pray for them that Despitefully use you, and Persecute you, This is
Generous, This is Heroic; it is worthy of a Christian, and like one, and truly
shows you to be Disciples and Followers of Christ.

And now our Sufferers for Christ do certainly bear such a Love to their
Persecutors; for they would otherwise disobey Christ, who requires it of them.
But that a Man should Love Him with All his Heart, (as Suffering for Him does
imply) and not keep His Commandments, All His Commandments, is (what I have
observed before to be) against his Doctrine, and against Reason.

If This will not do, we have the Exemplary Love of our first Martyrs for an
Argument, a Demonstration of the Matter in hand. How Cheerfully, how Kindly did
They take their Sentence of Death? some of them Thanking their Judges, as if
'twere a Favor, as if they had designed to Oblige them by it; all of them
expressing an undissembled Love, in an unfeigned Prayer for them: fearful they
were, and unwilling, that Misery and Torments should be their Portion, by whom
themselves were to be sent to Heaven, to be sent to Heaven in a nearer and more
compendious way; by whom (because Persecuted) as they did deserve, so they
might expect a greater degree of Bliss.

5. I come now at length, in the last place, to offer some Motives to a
resolute and cheerful Suffering, at what time soever it shall please God to
Call us thereto: Of which there are several; but I shall sit down with two or
three.

1. Then, I would have it considered, That all those who are called to It, do
meet with extraordinary Encouragements and Assistances of the Holy Spirit.

We are sure of This, That God will require no more of us, than we shall be
enabled to bear, or perform; and where we do want Strength of our own, we may
very safely depend upon His.

And now to suffer is so repugnant to Nature, and so uneasy to the Flesh, that
tho it be an extraordinary Privilege, yet a Man had need of very great
Encouragement to resolve upon it, and greater still to go through with it. It
must be the Work of that Holy Spirit, which alone can order the unruly Wills
and Affections of Men, who works in us both to will and to do of his good
pleasure, yea, and to suffer also, when he sees it expedient. If we are not
sufficient of our selves to think a good thought, as of our selves, much less
is it in our power to Deny our selves in this signal manner, in undergoing
those Bodily Pains, which the mere Natural Man dreads the thoughts of. We must
therefore of necessity recur to a Divine Influence, to the Supernatural
Assistance of God's Grace. And indeed, as no Man can Believe at all, unless it
be Given him from above, unless God help his Unbelief; so no Man can show his
Faith in such an eminent Instance, without a more than ordinary Effusion of
that Blessed Spirt, which should actuate his Faith, enlarge his Hope, enkindle
his Love, and every way prepare and arm him against the Fiery Trial.

Whence otherwise could it be, that so many Christian Heroes rejoiced in their
Sufferings, and Braved it in the last Agonies of their Souls; when the Devil
and his Torturing Instruments did their Worst, and Cruelty displayed it self in
the most direful Instances of Pain and Horror? Whence could it be, but from
the still small Voice of the Comforter within them, from the Encouraging and
Assisting Hand of the Almighty?

I will instance in one or two, whose Memories are fresh, their Names, among
others, generally and deservedly reverenced, and their Cases very remarkable.

How can we suppose, that Rose Allen should be the Burning of her Hand without
any the least complaint, or regret; that she should bid her Tormentor add to
her Pains and sing for Joy at the place of her Execution? I say, how can we
supppose, that she a poor Maidservant should prove so courageous, did not He,
who can do all things Assist her in This; or lessen her Pain, or enable her to
bear it

To what other means, than the Divine Impulse and Assistance, can we attribute
the good Bishop Farrar his Wonderful Assurance of his own future Courage and
Behavior, and then his answerable deportment, when the time came, and his
Sufferings required it? he declared before hand to a Friend, and (as I have
heard) to other spectators also; that if he once stirred in the Pains of the
Burning in any irregular way; they should give no credit to the Doctrine he had
before Preached to them, and was then about to Die for: And not only so, but
(what crowned the rest) he really stood unshaken, undisturbed, and Triumphed
rather than Suffered in the Flames; and so he had continued past all
Peradventure, but that he was knocked down by a malicious, a Cursed Hand; for
Cursed sure was the Hand that dared strike, what the Lord had so plainly so
signally upholden: And Cursed was his Family for his sake; for the Family of
the Gravels (which was then considerable enough) came quickly after to beggary
and want; and (as far as I can learn) there is nothing now remaining of it, but
the Name, and one single person (a Manservant) to secure it: And may It never
be lost, at least as long as Popery has a being in the World.

We must, we must ascribe This also to the Finger of God: We must believe it to
be the Lords Doing; for it is marvelous in our Eyes. And if this be the Work of
the Almighty; we may by an easy, and natural inference conclude the other is so.

2. Another motive, I would offer to your consideration, is the Example of all
those Saints, Confessors, and Martyrs, who have gone before us,

So great were the Sufferings, those blessed Saints underwent; so bravely did
they behave themselves under them; that, as it is our Duty to imitate, so it
may be the highest of our ambition to equal them. Whoever sees the list of
their Sufferings with the History of their Severe treatment, may be furnished
with a Catalogue of well nigh all the Sufferings Humane Wit can devise, or
Humane Nature bear. Wild beasts, the Fire, the Scalding Bath, the Scaffold, and
the Rack, with the rest of those terrible Instruments of Heathenish Cruelty
took away so many of them, that it must have been a Miracle as great as their
Patience was, that there was any one Christian left.

Of all the Apostles, only St. John died a natural Death: nor did he escape
without a Miracle: Escape, did I say? he did not escape; unless to Die daily be
not to Die at all; unless a long Banishment, and the Scalding Oil, for which he
both deserved and had a Church Festival, a Day of Martyrdom, might be termed an
escape.

And so for the rest: There were almost as many Martyrs as Christians; and to
be Baptized into the Death of Christ was in effect to resolve to Die as he
died; and the day of Martyrdom was in the ordinary account of those times the
Birthday of the Christian.

Wherefore seeing we are compas'd about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses; let
us lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset us; and let us
run with Patience the Race that is set before us. We may with much more ease
traverse these Rough Paths, as being somewhat plained, and smoothed by the
footings of those that have gone before. If so many thousands of Saints have
marched before us, and defied all the Threats and Tortures of their Enemies;
shall we be afraid to follow after them? We, who are taught by their Example,
that there is nothing unsufferable, nothing too hard for a firm Faith, a lively
Hope, and a Love that is pure, and obstinately bent upon Duty. Did they hardly
allow themselves the Name of Christians, till they were haled to Martyrdom, and
had Sealed their Faith with their Blood? And shall we strike Suffering out of
the Laws of Christianity, out of the number of Duties? Certainly we have no
Reason, no Authority for it: But, and if they bore the Cross, who had especial
tokens of God' Love, it is our part to Bear it too; and Bear it we must, as
ever we hope for the Benefits of it. And as Christ suffered for them, leaving
them an Example, that they should follow His Steps; so He, and they too in some
sense, have suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow
Theirs: Which if we do, we shall arrive at the Haven where They are, and where
We would be; we shall receive the same Reward of our Sufferings, the same Crown
of Glory they are possessed of; which is another Motive to the Duty I am
recommending, to a resolute and cheerful Suffering for Christ's sake.

And here I shall briefly consider, 1. The Certainty of this Reward. 2. The
Greatness of it.

1. The Certainty of this Reward.

There is nothing more Certain, (for there is nothing more Clear and Evident in
Scripture) than that a constant, sincere, and universal Obedience entitles Men
to all the Promises of the Gospel.

And now Suffering for Christ's sake, does undeniably presuppose, or imply all
this.

It implies a Constancy, or Perseverance unto the end: for if we have forsaken
Christ at any time, we have at the same time disowned him, and put our Names
out of the List of his Martyrs.

It implies Sincerity: for what can possibly show the Reality of our Love to,
and Affiance in Christ, if Real Pain and Voluntary Suffering cannot do it.

To conclude: It implies withal an Universal Obedience: for, as I have noted
before, the Man that allows of any one Sin, is a professed Enemy of Christ; not a
Martyr of His, not a Sufferer for Him.

But that which puts the Reward of Suffering out of all doubt, is the Word of
God, in the most plain, express Terms that can be devised: If you suffer, you
shall also reign with (Christ), said the Apostle. Blessed are they that are
Persecuted for Righteousness sake: for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, said
our Savior himself. And many other Texts there are to the same purpose, as
clear as Words can make them, and withal so commonly known, that I shall not
trouble you with the repetition of them; but rather choose to hasten to,

2. The Greatness of this Reward. And with that I will conclude.

And here I shall not pretend to describe what has not entered into the Heart
of Man to conceive. I only observe, That as it is above our Conception, so it
is beyond our very Wishes and Desires? And what can be offered more Encouraging
than This? What can possibly more Cherish our Hopes, and more Animate the
Suffering Part of us, than that we shall see, and enjoy for our Suffering here,
all, yea, more, infinitely more, than all that we can desire or wish for?

Yes; there is something more, and greater behind; tho I am equally at a loss
for Words, and for Ideas of it: For, the lowest Degree of Happiness in Heaven,
comes up to all that has yet been offered concerning it. But now the true
Christian Martyr is a Star of the First Magnitude there: his Happiness
surpasses that of other Saints, as far as his Sufferings did: This Light
Affliction, which is but for a Moment, working for him a far more Exceeding and
Eternal Weight of Glory.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Robert Kettlewell at the Hand and Scepter in
Fleet Street.
1. THe Measures of Christian Obedience: Or, A Discourse showing what Obedience
is indispensably necessary to a Regenerate State, and what Defects are
consistent with it, for the Promotion of Piety, and the Peace of Troubled
Consciences. By John Kettlewel, Vicar of Coles-hill in Warwickshire, the
second Edition Corrected. In Quarto, Price bound 8 s. 2. A Journey into Greece
by Sir George Wheeler, in company of Dr. Spon of Lions, in six Books.
Containing, 1. A Voyage from Venice to Constantinople. 2. An Account of
Constantinople, and the adjacent Places. 3. A Voyage through the Lesser Asia.
4. A Voyage from Zant through several parts of Greece, to Athens. 5. An Account
of Athens. 6. Several Journeys from Athens into Attica, Corinth, Boeotia, etc.
With Variety of Sculptures. In Folio, price bound 15 s. 3. A Vindication of the
Primitive Christians, in Point of Obedience to their Prince, against the
Calumnies of a Book, entitled, The Life of Julian, written by Ecebolius the
Sophist. As also, The Doctrine of Passive Obedience cleared, in Defense of Dr.
Hicks; Together with an Appendix, being a more full and distinct Answer to Mr.
Thomas Hunts Preface and Postscript. Unto all which is added, The Life of
Julian, enlarged. In Octavo, price bound 2 s. 6 d. 4. A Sermon Preached at the
Worcester-Feast, by George Walls Master of Arts, and Student of Christ-Church,
Oxon. Quarto, price stitcht 6 d. 5. The Treasures of the Sea, a Sermon preached
to the Mariners, by William Thompson. In Quarto, price stitcht 6 d. 6. An Help
and Exhortation to Worthy Communicating: Or, a Treatise describing the Meaning,
Worthy Reception, Duty and Benefits of the Holy Sacrament, and answering the
Doubts of Conscience, and other Reasons, which most generally detain Men from
it; together with Suitable Devotions added. By John Kettlewell, Vicar of
Coles-hill in Warwickshire. In Twelves, price bound 3 s. 7. Two hundred
Queries Moderately propounded, concerning the Doctrine of the Revolution of
Humane Souls, and its Conformity to the Truths of Christianity. In Octavo,
price bound 1 s. 6 d. 8. A Sermon Preached at the Church of St. Bridget, on
Easter-Tuesday, being the first of April 1684. Before the Right Honorable Sir
Henry Tulse Mayor of London. By George Hicks D. D. Dean of Worcester, and
Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty. In Quarto, price stitcht 6 d. 9. A
Spelling Book for Children. In twenty fours, price bound 6 d. 10. A Good
Subject: Or, the right Test of Religion and Loyalty. In a Sermon, Preached July
the 17th at the last Summer-Assizes held at Buckingham, for the County of
Buckingham. Before the Lord Chief Baron Mountague, and Sir Richard Holloway,
Knight, John Culling Esquire, High Sheriff. By Lewis Atterbury, D. D. 11. A
Dissertation concerning the Pre-existency of Souls: Wherein the state of the
Question is briefly unfolded, and diverse Arguments and objections on both sides
Alleged and Answered; and a free Judgment concerning the Sum of the
Controversy allowed to every one. Being Originally written in the Latin
Tongue, several years since, by the Learned C. P. and now made English by D.F.
D.P. upon tho recommendation of F. M. H. their Friend. In Twelves, price 1 s.
12. The History of Isuf Bassa Captain General of the Ottoman Army at the
Invasion of Candia. In Octavo, price bound 1 s. 6 d. 13. Animadversions on Dr.
Burnet's History of the Rights of Princes in the Disposing of Ecclesiastical
Benefices and Church Lands. In a Letter to a Friend. In Quarto, price 3 d. 14.
A Discourse Explaining the Nature of Edification. Both of Particular Persons in
Private Graces, and of the Church in Unity and Peace. And showing that we must
not break Unity and Public Peace, for supposed Means of better Edifying in
Private Virtues. In a Visitation Sermon at Coventry, May 7. 1684. By John
Kettlewell Vicar of Coles-Hill in Warwickshire. In Quarto, price 6 d. 15. A
Funeral Sermon for the Right Honorable, the Lady Frances Digby, who Deceased
at Coles-Hall in Warwickshire, on the 29th of September, 1684. By John
Kettlewell, Vicar of Coles-Hill in Warwickshire. In Quarto, price 6 d.

