THE INVISIBLE Things of GOD Brought to light by the REVELATION of the ETERNAL
SPIRIT who was an ey-witness of the wonders of the Lord in the beginning.

Wherein is declared the Felicity of all things in the beginning; and the sad
estate of all things after the transgression.

How all the reformed Churches, so called, in Christendom are yet in the
Apostasy.

The estate of the true Church before the Apostasy, and her state in the
Apostasy; And the glory that shall appear after the Apostasy.

By one, who believes, God will shine out of Sion in perfect beauty, again,
after the dark night of Apostasy, called Francis Howgill.

The Light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the
Sun as Seven days. And he will destroy in this mountain, the face of the
covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all Nations,
Isai. 25, 7. London, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1659.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER OR Readers*
TO the upright hearted Reader, in all the Regions of the Earth wherein this
may come, who have walked in the thick fogs and mists which has arisen out of
the botomlesse pit, which has been raised up since the transgression, which
have dimmed your eyes and hurt your sight, so that you could not behold, the
pure Celestial being, nor him that dwells in it, whose presence gives Life, nor
any thing within the vail, because the vail has been spread over all Nations,
and it has been so thick that it has been hard for any to rent it, and the
night of Apostasy and darkness has been so long, since the woman fled into
the wilderness, and since the man-child which was born, has been caught up to
God, that few or none for this many ages past has come to see the end of the
night, but has mourned without hope, and few or none has seen or has been
able to discern the time of the woman's return out of the wilderness again
into which she fled, and few or none has seen to the end of the times after
which she should return, and men's sight in the Apostasy has been so dime, and
in the vexation, that when the man-child, which was caught up unto God, would
appear again, few has had faith to believe, or sight to he hold him, or an
understanding to deserne of the times; But praises be to the Lord God
everlasting, who has opened, is and opening the windows of heaven, and
showring down his wisdom as a mighty rain, and his knowledge as the morning
dew, and an understanding is pouring forth, as the water out of the bottles of
heaven and as the water spouts, so that ages, times, things, days and years is
measured and seen.

And him that was before all things is beholden, by whom all things was made,
who has been, as in a far country, all this long night of darkness, but the
time is fully expired and now is he returning, and his appearance is as a
morning without clouds, as clear as the Sun, and as pure as Crystal, and now
is he scattering the clouds, fogs and mists, as with the East wind, and his
pure breath clears the air, and by his arm which is mighty, is he renting the
vail of the covering, according to his promise, and revealing himself in his
naked glory, that the solitary may rejoice, and the feeble may be comforted,
and them that have erred may come to a good ununderstanding; what I have writ
thou must read me only in that which is invisible and eternal in thy self,
else I am sealed from thee, my words are a riddle, and although the the
dreamers of this age in the apostasy say, Imeditate revelation is ceased, and
not to be looked for; yet I must needs bear my testimony against them all, for
what I have here written I neither received of man, nor from man, nor books,
nor other words, but by the eternal spirit, who saw these things, and was an
eyewitness of them, and God through it has revealed them in me, and to me,
that I might bear my testimony of the hidden things of God which are eternal
although I have made use of the scriptures (and the saints words, and cited
some) it is not for my sake, but thine who reads, that so every truth may be
confirmed, by 2. or 3. witnesses; If thou wait to know and find the key of
David, who opens in what I have declared, thou will see the state of things
before the fall, and after the fall, and how all men in the fall have corrupted
themselves in all administrations, thou will see the state of the Church before
the apostasy, in the apostasy, and what shall be after the apostasy, and if
thou cannot reach into the things as they are declared, judge them not before
the day appear in thy self; for till then, they will be obscure to thee, but
as it appears in thee, thou shall bear me witness that these things are holy,
faithful, and true, and has and shall be fulfilled, in that which is
immutable; I bid thee farewell.

F H.

The chief particulars, or heads in the ensuiug discourse treated upon, and
opened by the Spirit of the Lord, who was an ey-witness unto these things.
1. THe work of the Lord declared which was in the beginning, when the word was
with God, and man in the image of God.

2. Although the heavens and the Earth were created, and all things therein
finished; yet the world was not begun, that lay in wickedness, which the Devil
is the God of; neither was Christ the mystery hid, nor the Lamb slain.

3. The understanding may read the Wisdom of God in a mystery, and also may see
the sottish Doctrine of the apostates.

4. An objection answered.

5. Another objection answered.

6. How peace, joy and delight possessed every thing that God had made; how
every thing which he had formed glorified him with one consent in the beginning.

7. How man lost his state and dominion and unity with God, and all the
creatures, and how the Lamb came to be slain, and the world that lay in
wickedness came to be framed in man after the tempter entered; how endless
misery can in upon all, after the transgression.

8. How sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and how man is dead while
he lives; and all is dead works that he acts, and the state of all the sons
of men, and their works may be seen in the fall.

9. 3. Objections answered about this particular.

10. Self righteousness, deeds of darkness also, and dead works, and are to be
condemned also, and man who acts them in the fall.

11. An objection answered, as to the present state of the Ministry of the
Nations, their practice and their worship.

12. An objection, as to the Churches so called and their worship in the
Nations.

13. The dark and blind Doctrines of the Ranters denied.

14. An objection about reading the Scriptures and conforming to the outward
practice of the Saints in former ages.

15. How all men upon the earth in the degeneration and in the fall have
corrupted themselves, and have been Idolaters in every administration, being
gone from the life and Power of God in themselves, And having lost the Power of
God, man can neither worship, honor nor obey God aright.

16. A few words to that which is called Christendom, who profess Christianity.

17. Something about water-Baptisme, to both Priests and separatists.

18. Something about Rome in the apostasy, and all their worship in the
degeneration.

19. The Protestants or Reformed Churches so called, not yet come out of the
waters nor from under the beasts Power.

20. The Presbyters and Independants are yet under Antichrists Reign, in the
apostasy, and have among them yet the Attire of the Whore.

21. How the woman that traveled in birth, who was clothed with the Sun, and
brought forth the man-child, fled into the wilderness, when the Dragon had
power, and the man-child was caught up unto God.

22. How the woman comes out again, and when, and he that was caught up unto
God, descends again, and appears again to take the Rule to himself, and how he
makes war with the Dragon, and all the apostates, and overcomes them.

23. How the glory of the Lord shall appear after the apostasy greater then
before, and the ministration into which them that follow the Lamb shall be
brought, shall be more spiritual and celestial then before; for that shall
appear in which all visible types and shadows ends in, and shall be the last
that is to be expected by the sons of men, the sight of which has appeared
which yet cannot be uttered.

24 What the day of the Lord is, and to whom it has appeared, and how it is
seen, and discovered.

25 What it is, and what it will be to the wicked, declared.

26. What it is to the righteous, and how he appears to them, and whether we
are to look for it while in the body, resolved.

27. Where it does appear, and how it comes, and how it is to be looked for,
declared.

28. What the Spirit of the Lord is, and how it comes to be received, which
discovers the the things of God.

29. How the spirit of truth works, and operateth in them who are convinced,
and yet have not obeyed it, showed.

30 How the spirit of the Father works in them who hearken to it, and are in
some measure made partakers of its power, shown.

31 Unto whom the spirit of the Father bears witness, and seals assurance of
the Fathers love, and of justification with God, declared.

32 What the grace of God is, which is free, and to whom it has appeared, and
where all is to wait to receive it.

33 whether all have received the grace of God or no, and whether it be a
sufficient teacher in it self, demonstrated.

34 Some objections answered.

35 A word to the wise men of this world who are glorying in the sound of words.

36 Also another to them who are glorying in outward appear ances, and
worshipping visible things in stead of the life.

37 The Kingdom of God and his Christ declared, in some measure as it is
revaled by the spirit, what it is, and where it is to be waited for, and how it
comes to be revealed in them that believe.

38 Diverse Objections answered.

The work of the Lord declared, which was in the beginning, when the word was
with God, and was the Fathers delight, and man made in the Image of God, and
lived in the Lambs Power, and he was man's life, and this was before the
transgression of these declared, as God has manifested them by his Spirit.
IN the beginning was the Word; and the Word was with God; and the Word was
God; the same was in the beginning before the foundation of the Earth was laid,
or the Hills were framed, he was with the Father, and was the Fathers delight,
and he delighted in the Father, and the Father in him, then did the morning
stars sing together, and the Son of God shout for joy. In the beginning were
the heavens created and the Pillars theref set; and the earth was framed by the
Power, and all things both in the Heaven and In the Earth were created by the
Power, Gods Son; every Beast of the field, every fowl of the Heaven, and the
decreed place for the Sea was broken up, and all things that moves therein
were created by the word and by the Power, and man was made by the Power, and
in the Power, and he was the Image of God; as it is written, In the Image of
God created he him, Male and Female created he them, and he had dominion over
all the works of his hands, over every beast of the field, which were created
by the Power, over the Serpent, among the rest, which was created by the Power,
and was good, as he was made in the Power; and by the wisdom they were all
brought forth, and man made in that wisdom that brought them forth, who was
better then them all, and was made partakers of the Power and of the Wisdom
more then them all, and by the wisdom called every thing as is was in its
nature, so named he everything, and the dominion he had was in the Power over
all things, over all the Creation of God, which was good, and the Earth, and
all things that are therein, the tree of knowledge good, that stood in the
garden also, but not for food* so these be the generations of the Heavens and
the Earth, in the day when God created them they were all good, made and
created by God, in the Power Eternal, which is good, unchangeably good, without
variation, and the unchangeable Power, in which and by which they were made,
moved in them all, and they all received virtue and Power from the Power, Gods
Son; and the Power moved in them all, and shined through them all, and ran
through them all; and they were all to abide in the Covenant, in which they
were made, and not any to move or act without the Power, but only as the Power
which was the life of them all moved them and acted them, and so goodness
possessed them all; for all was partakers of the goodness of God, and it was
the life of them, and they were none of them to move nor stir, but as the life
of men, the Power by which they were created, moved them, which was Gods Son:
the Heavens and the Earth were finished, and all things that therein are, and
they were all good; and this saying was true then, which was spoken by Christ
the Power, many generations after, I in them, and thou in me, and all was
perfect in one, the Father was in the Power, the Power was in the Father, and
all the Creatures in the Power: Now was the Father glorified; now was the Son
glorified, now was man in Dominion, in Power, crowned with honor, Lord over
all the works that God had made, in the Power; and now the whole Family both of
Heaven and Earth bowed their knees to the Lamb, to the Power, and this was then
fulfilled, at the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow, both of things in Heaven,
and things in Earth; and his Name was now the Word of God; and this was in the
beginning, and the Word of God is the Power of God: and now both the Celestial
bodies and terresterial bodies were all subject to the Power, and all the works
of the Lords hands were finished, and he rested, and all, both things in Heaven
and Earth rested in the power, and all kept holy day and rejoiced.

Though the Heavens and the Earth were created, and all things wrought and
finished, yet the world was not begun, that lay in wickedness, which the Devil
is the God of, neither was the Power, which is Christ, the mystery hid, neither
was the Lamb slain yet.

Now after all was made and created, and were good, and blessed, and endued
with power, life and virtue, according to the purpose of his heavenly will
which is eternally pure, yet was not the lamb slain, nor the mystery hid, which
is the power, which is Christ; for what should slay him, or what should hide him?
he that reads let him understand; this that I speak of, cannot be reached unto
with that Wisdom that stands in time, which was not in the beginning with
God, that is shut out, but the wise in heart shall understand knowledge, and
the prudent shall know what has been in the beginning, and of his wonderful
works in the days of old, and of the mystry which was before the world began,
when the Lamb was in glory, the Son in glory, Christ in glory, the first born
of every creature, and was born before the world began, he that has an ear to
hear let him hear; when all that God had made and brought forth by the word, by
the Power, was blessed, and stood in the Power, then did the Lamb sit in his
throne, then was he the delight of God, and God in him, and all that was made
by him rejoiced in him, here was love, here was glory, here was purity, unity
and a sweet harmony, joy, peace, love, eternal life, Gods power ran through
all; All was good, Christ was not now hid, he shed himself abroad, and all
things was partakers of his power in which they were made, here was happiness,
blessedness, joy, dominion, everlasting and eternal felicity, innocence,
purity and perfection, and man in it, God in it, the Lamb in it, man in it
after his own image, the Mystery of godliness was not hid, there was nothing
to hide it, or overshadow it, no vail, no covering, but righteousness was
manifest, and was the covering of all, inocency, the clothing of all, purity
the robe of all, and life the dwelling place of all; and all the works of his
hands rested with the Father, with the Lamb, with the Word, with the power,
with Christ in glory, with the Father, in the etenall glory, whereby all was
upheld, in purity, unity, harmony; answering the pure will of God, and man had
power to answer the will of his Maker, which he received from God the Father of
life by the power in which he was made, and to abide in the will of God for
ever, and herein he and all things in heaven and the whole family thereof, and
all the holy host of God bowed to the lambs power, and he reigned, and the
Angels were subject to the first born of every creature, before the Angels or
before any thing was made, he was; his age who can declare, or his generation?
his age runs parallel with eternity, with immortality, and came from the
eternal womb, and from the bosom of the Father, where he is, even where he was
before the world began; he that reads let him understand, now the power ruling
in all, and over all, all was in peace, and was blessed.

Now the Angel stood in his power, moved in his power, and all the Celestial
bodies went in and out at his command, and moved not, nor stirred not, but when
he moved; and this was then fulfilled, let all the Angels worship him, and so
they did, reverenced him, were subject to him, sang and rejoiced in him,
triumphed in in his power, and all the Holy Host moved at his command, and
marched on in his strength to perform his will, and to accomplish his
everlasting purpose, and to fulfill his eternal decree, and gave glory to him
who sat upon the throne of righteousness, and judged in righteousness for
ever, and ruled in righteousness for ever, there was joy in heaven, the Father
rejoiced, the Son rejoiced, the Angels rejoiced, the morning stars sang, the
the Sons of God shouted for joy, the holy Host gave praise, and all praised in
the firmament of his power, in which they stood, moved, walked, lived, and
accomplished the pure perpetual and eternal decree of their maker, Moreover,
the terrestrial bodies were all subject to him, he reigned in all, over all,
moved all, gave Life to all, and was the Life of Adam, of the male, and the
Female, and then was this fulfilled, even then, which was spoken in time,
though by him who was before all time, who was the life of all things; I say he
lived then, and because he lived, man lived also, for he was his Life; now
Christ the power reigned over all, and all in the Lambs power were subject in a
sweet harmony, answering the pure will of their Lord, their King that lived for
ever, who was upon his throne in the heavens, and now his kingdom was over all,
there was joy in heaven, there was peace on earth, the good will of God was
done; In Earth as it was in heaven. Oh beautiful, oh glorious, oh comely, oh
admirable, oh incomprehensible was the glory, my tongue can not express, and
time would fail me to declare the eternal exellency which God has revealed by
his spirit, and that which I see is not Lawful now for me to utter; now was no
mountains nor hills to hide the mystery, but it shined upon all, in all, over
all, and above all, was not hid; As I said there was now no hiding place that
could or did overshadow the mystery of godliness, for the eyes of all things
looked upon him, whether Celestial or Terrestrial, and all and every thing
according to its kind rejoiced in the Light of his countenance, and of his
power was glad, and gloried in him, for then there was not an other; he that
can hear let him: Now the Earth rejoiced, and the floods clapped their hands;
now the great deep smiled, and all things that was therein, the springs thereof
laughed which flowed forth as though they had issued out of a womb, now every
thing that had breath and lived, praised the Lord; neither was there any thing
but bowed and submitted to their Maker; and he Lord and King over all, yet in
eternal glory: yet let the wise in heart understand, this was in the beginning,
and though it was in the beginning, yet this was when the heavens and the Earth
was created, and all things that therein are, even then the Lamb of God was
alive, and the Son of God glorified with the Father, and man in happiness, and
in pure perfection, without sin in Inocency: for nothing that was nocent or
hurtful had yet appeared, neither was there any such thing in all that God had
made.

Here the wise may learn, and they that have a good understanding may read the
wisdom of God in a Mystery, and also see the dark sottish doctrine of the
blind Apostates, who have lost the power, and are keeping people ignorant of
the Mystery of God.
NOw this has been a common doctrine, and received to be orthodox, and as they
call it authentic, that while we are in this life, there can not be an
overcoming of all sins nor no expectation of it in this life; and their main
ground has been this, because we have natural bodies.

Now I say, had not Adam a natural body when he was in purity and perfection,
in innocence, in Paradise, in the garden, yet was this any hinderance to him to
answer the will of his Creator? No; For as the soul, spirit and body was moved
by the power out of which power he was not to stir, then I say he had ability
to perform the will of his maker in the body, for as he was created by the
power in the inward man, that led about the natural and earthly or outward form
according to its will, which will was pure, and kept the body acting in its
place in the power, for then I say all was good, for the Celestial power in
which he was made, moved the whole man according to its will, and while he
stood in the power, he was in innocence, and purity, and without blemish, and
in the power was his health and peace, and he knew no evil.

Ob. But some may say, what is this as to the confutation of the doctrine which
has been taught, as to the freedom from sin in this life?

Ans. This declares that there was such a thing in being, to wit, a natural
body, and an earthen vessel, and yet without sin, as he stood in the power; for
the earthen vessel was good, as all the rest of Gods creation was in its place
to serve the power, as the rest of Gods creatures did in the beginning, and who
ever comes to know that state again, may come to glorify God in soul, body and
spirit, though in the body, in this tabernacle; but take their own phrase for
the clearing of the thing, not to be freed from the committing of sin in this
life, I say in the corruptable life, or the life of unrighteousness, which may
be properly called death, there is no freedom from sin, neither of soul or
body or spirit, but who comes to know regeneration or the Life of men, in which
Adam was created in the beginning, in that incorruptable Life, there is no
transgression, and if he live in man, the body is dead because of sin, and I
know none who have preached any other (...) Life, who has spoke by the spirit
of God, in which freedom from all sin is obtained, but only the life of
Christ, and whosoever comes to know the Lord from heaven, who ruled over all in
the beginning, and was the life of all, and all moved in his Life, before the
fall, whether they were things visible or invisible, and that same power or
Life of Christ, the Lamb of God, who was alive then, if he live in man, and man
come to be guided by his power, as in the beginning he living in man, the soul
and body and spirit being quickened by his power, and raised from under the
bondage of corruption, then death has not power over man (but life) and
because he lives in them, they live also, their souls to praise him, and their
bodies and the members thereof to be servants of righteousness, and so that
unbelieving Doctrine of the world is turned into the pit, and truth is set
above it.

Object. But further it will be objected, that our bodies are not like Adams,
in innocence, we are in the fall, and therefore we say they hinder from being
freed from all sin, and ever will, while upon Earth.

Ans. That the naked truth may appear to them that seek after true knowledge, I
answer freely, that I grant that the soul lies in death, and the creature is
subject to vanity, and the whole Creation groans in travel and in pain, and
waits for the manifestation of the Son of God, and the Redemption of the body;
and in this state is all mankind upon the face of the whole Earth in the first
Adam, but he who is the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, who was in the
beginning, and is now what he was, and shall be for ever, I say, as man comes
to believe in the Son who has life in himself, and he come to be revealed in
man, and man subject to his leading, he brings the soul out of death, to have
union and communion with himself, and restores the creature from his bondage,
and and breaks the bond, and knocks that down which has imbondaged, and so
changes the body, I do not mean the form of the body, but the quality and
nature thereof, for the form of Adams body was not changed, but the quality,
and it was degenerated from its pure nature, wherein it glorified God, as he
stood in the Power; so I say, Christ who is the life of men, the true light
which lights every man that comes into the world, he changes all that follow
him into his own nature, and restores the creature into his first estate again
into purity, that like as the inward man is renewed and restored by the power,
and serves the Power, so the members of the body, is also yielded servants unto
righteousness, and they receive virtue and Power, from the power the Life, and
so the whole man comes out of condemnation, to glorify his maker; and the will
of God is don in earth, as it is in heaven, and he saves to the utmost them
that comes unto him; now if he save the soul and not the body, then he saves
not to the utmost; But this is a high state, blessed are they who waits in the
faith, to the end are happy, that they may see and know the redemption of their
souls, and also the redemption of their body; For I deny redemption in the
grave, or in death, or after this life; for the holy men of God never mentions
a cleansing from sin in the grave, nor after men be dead, for they that have
served sin in their life time, and served the devil as long as they live, and
have yielded their bodies to be temples for uncleanness while they live upon
earth, eternal misery will be their portion, and not redemption; think on this
you who are holding this forth for an article of your Faith in the world, among
poor ignorant people, that they must not expect redemption from all sin in this
life, and so leads them on to Perpetual misery, misery will be your end, and in
the day of the Lord you shall witness this to be true; But to return to the
beginning again, where there was no sorrow, but pure joy and peace, both in
heaven and earth, but I go hither and thither, as the spirit leads, and shall
speak as it gives utterance, though but here a little and there a little, yet
shall it be in truth and righteousness.

How peace, joy and delight possessed every thing that God had made, every
thing which he had formed glorified God their maker with one consent, in the
beginning, before the world was framed, that lay in wickedness.
NOw the Lord rejoiced in all the works of his hands which he had made, and
rested, and all that he had made rested in the power, whether Celestial or
Terrestrial, and rejoiced in him, walked in him in the motion of the power, of
the life, they were happy, and partaked of the life that indures for ever, and
happiness immortal, and knew no evil, for there was none, there was no hell
yet prepared, Tophet yet was not ordained, neither the Devil had yet any being
at all, there was no wrath, no sorrow, no condemnation, no death, vexation,
grief or perplexity, no pit of darkness, no Angel of the bottomless pit, no
shame, no tribulation, no anguish nor pain, no misery; and in a word there was
nothing that did destroy, but all in quietness, in peace, in life, in power,
in wisdom, glorifying him which sat upon the Throne, the Lamb, who was living,
and the life of the male and the female, and of every thing that God had made,
by the power subsisted in the power, and in the motion thereof was good, purely
good; and here was the goodness of him who was eternally good, manifest in
all, above all, and over all, God blessed for ever, even then the heavens
rejoiced, and the innumerable company of Angels was hearty glad, and all the
holy host sang for joy, with a living voice, which none that stands in time
ever yet heard, or can learn, then the earth and all things therein that moved
and had life were in pure solace and mirth, and pleasant joy unspeakable, all
knit together in unity and harmony in one consent, as one family, and were one
body, and there was health in the body, and it was pure and comely, and perfect,
and pleasant to behold, crowned with Dignity, covered with righteousness,
beautified with the comeliness of the Lamb who was the life of all: and now man
had right to the tree of Life, while he moved in the power, and went not our.

Oh happy state, oh beautiful state, oh admirable state, eternal felicity, oh
glorious state, life it self, the life of all, and all in the life, moving in
the power, and man right to the tree of Lif^, while he lived in the lambs
power, had unity with his maker and with all the Creatures that God had made,
and was in Gods pure dominion, and authority, and ruled all, over all things
that God had made, in Gods wisdom; thus in short was the state of all things
in the beginning, as they were created, and brought forth, and these be the
generation of the heaven and of the earth, and of all things that therein are,
in the day when God created them, when the Father was glorified, when the Son
was glorified, and when man was in glory and honor, and in dominion, created
in the Image of God, and yet there was no evil; Time would fail to speak of the
state of all things in the beginning as it was, and as it is revealed by the
spirit of truth, but in that which I have declared, they who have a good
understanding may take a glimps of the happy state of all things, as God has
revealed them by his spirit, which I never received of nor from man, but by the
holy spirit of God which was in the beginning with God, which saw all this, and
was an eye witness of this before the world, that lies in wickedness, began;
and he that has an ear to hear, let him hear, and blessed is his ear.

How man lost his state and dominion and unity with God and all the creatures,
and how the Lamb came to be slain, and the world that lies in wickedness came
to be formed, and founded, and how the curse came, and the woe upon the Serpent,
which was blessed before, and upon man and woman, and the ground that received
the temptation, which was blessed before, in the motion of the Power, came to
be cursed and how endless misery came in upon all, in the transgression,
declared to them who have a good understanding.
NOw the Serpent was more subtle then all the Beasts of the field; for that was
his nature in which he was created, and it was good in the motion of the Power,
and therefore Christ said, be wise as Serpents, yet as harmless as Doves; and
though the Serpent was wise and subtle, more then all the beasts of the field,
till he acted and moved without commandment; and out of the motion of the
Power, he was not cursed; he that can receive it, let him. But he moved in the
subtilty, and wisdom, out of the light, out of the Power, and went out of the
truth; out of his place without commandment or authority from the Power, and
acted and spoke of himself out of the Power, and out of the truth, as it it
written John 8. 44. when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, for he is a
liar and the father of it; now he knew there was a law and command not to eat
of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, for God had forbidden it; now he
went out of the Power, without commandment, of his own accord, without motion;
now he went and talked with the woman, and she was good before, being in the
motion of the life and Power, she also looked out, and not in the Power, and
reasoned with him out of Power, contrary to Commandment beyond the command, or
before the Power, and said unto the Serpent, we may eat of all, but the tree of
knowledge of good and evil we may not eats least we die; this she knew, and the
Serpent knew; now the tree of knowledge was good in the Powers motion, though
not to live upon or for food, for it was not good for food, therefore God, the
truth, the life, the Power, did forbid to taste of it, or to eat of that tree,
but the Serpent out of the Power, and the woman out of the Power hearkened to
him that was out of the truth, who turned the truth that God had spoken into a
lie, she joined to the tempter and hearkened unto him, and eat of the tree of
knowledge without the Power, and she looking out, and the eye ran out from the
life, from the Power, and was deceived, and did eat of the knowledge without
the Power, without the life; and she also tempted the man, and the temptation
entered into a ground which was blessed before, and good, in the motion of the
life, of the Power, but she having transgressed, contrary to the command, and
the man received it contrary to the command, without the motion of the Power,
or the life which all was to move in; he also going out of the power, received
it in, and seed upon knowledge without the life, without the power, out of the
truth, he became one with the woman, one with the Serpent, who went out of
truth, and abode not in it, and they all were disjoynted and cut off from the
Life, and the power; and hear was the beginning of the father of lies, and of
him who spoke of himself, out of the power, out of the truth, and his beginning
is without foundation, now he that is wise in heart, read his generation, or
who made him; now appeared the Angel of the bottomless pit, and not before, and
made war against the power, against the Lamb; and so the heart of man was
turned away from obeying and feeding upon the power, to obey and feed upon
knowledge without the Life or power, and here was the first transgression out
of the power, and the motion of the light which made all things good, and so as
this knowledge was fed upon and grew, man died unto the Life, unto the power,
and wisdom, and dominion that he had over all that God had made, he lost, and
so died unto the power, and lived upon knowledge without the power, and now
became afraid of the power, because he was in the transgression of it; And thus
the Serpent who was most subtle, went out of the truth, and acted in sin, and
led into transgression; and so there became fear where was none, and shame
where there was none, and nakedness where there was no nakedness before the
power was died unto, which was their clothing in righteousness, and there was a
hiding place sought by him, who before iniquity needed no hiding place, and
this is the foundation and beginning of that seed in the transgression, which
shall call to the mountains to cover them, and to hide them from the wrath of
the Lamb.

Oh how is man degenerated now, and grown quite out of the pure quality, and
kind, and nature in which he was made, now afraid of the power that made him,
which before he had union with, and was his Life, and gave him dominion, and
this fulfilled upon man, he was planted a noble vine, a holy, right seed, now
become a degenerate plant of a strange vine; now when the Lord appeared and
examined him, and man knew his fault that he had acted against the power, yet
that which acted in transgression would excuse, here is the fruit of the Devils
work, transgress, and then hide and excuse it, and so the woman put it off to
the Serpent; he was the beginner of it, but if she had stood in the power, he
would have had no place, nor his counsel; but they all went out of the light
and Life, into the knowledge, without the Power and Life, and so the curse came
upon all; Now the man cursed, and the ground for his sake, and the woman
cursed, in sorrow to bring forth, and the Serpent cursed, the beginner of
iniquity, cursed above all the beasts of the field, to go upon his belly, and
dust to be his meat for ever, and an enmity put between the seed of the woman
and his seed for ever, and an eternal decree passed against him for ever; and
he made war against the seed of the woman, which the Lord promised to bruise
his head; now came the miserable estate in, that which led him into
transgression, grew, and he in it, and to be at unity with it, then came hard
ness of heart, and then came the world to be founded in his heart, and he grew
in the devouring beastly nature to follow the earthly imaginations of his
heart, and became earthly, and fed upon that which the beasts of the field fed
upon; And now the Lamb came to be slain, since the foundation of the world, now
was man driven out from the tree of Life, and out of the garden, and could no
way come there again, he had no right to it, the Lamb being slain, and he was
cut off, to wit man, from him which before gave him peace, and from the Power
in which he was made he was driven out from, and the sword set, that go what
way he could, he could not come into the Life again, the image of God lost,
then the joyful day was lost, and rejoicing in the Lord at an end, then the day
of peace was finished, and perpetual misery and woe come in, then unity with the
Lord of glory gone, and now shame and contempt came, and woeful misery.

Now Hell was formed and the botomlesse Pit sprang up, and the Angel thereof
ruled and advanced, and the Lamb slain; and now the Lake was prepared, and
Tophet ordained, now came the day of angnish, of pain, of woe, sorrow* and
misery, blackness and darkness, terror, horror, fear on every side, and the day
of great perplexity, Dominion lost, power lost, Authority lost, peace lost, joy
lost, health lost, unity lost with God, and unity lost with every creature, and
endless misery brought in Alas alas, what is become of him who was the Son of
God? now become as the beasts that perish, now a vessel of wrath, a
dishonorable vessel.

Oh unspeakable loss, forfeited all, Life and all, gone into, plunged into the
deep pit of endless misery, driven from the presence of the Lord, from
blessedness, happiness, into cursednesse and misery, never to come to Life
again, but through the loss of Life; man in honor, in dominion, partaker of
eternal riches, and the durable riches, now turned out of all, and become vile
in the sight of the Lord, and has forfeited Life and all, eternal life, and he
who was in perfect freedom, become a bondsman, a slave to the Devil, and to
noisome lusts; he who was Lord over all, now become a servant to all and every
creature; he who was in dominion, in the power of God, now become base and
vile; He who was the Image of God, now become the image of the Devil; he who
was heir of life and felicity, now become inheritor of death and endless
misery; he was partakers of the unchangeable love, now partaker of wrath; he
that was in the covenant of life in which he had union with God, and all the
Angles, and all the holy host of God, now has union with unclean spirits,
which are cursed from the presence of the Lord for ever; he that had union with
all Gods creatures, has lost the union with all, being gone out of the power
in which all was created, and moreover now in enmity to it, and joined to him
who has the power of death, which is the Devil, and now draws iniquity as
with a Cart-rope, and vanity as with a cord, and he who was joined to the Lord,
and to the Lamb, now joined to the Dragon, who makes war against the Lamb; he
that had union with the seed, the heir of all things, now has union with the
seed of the Serpent, the first borne of wickedness, heir of condemnation and
everlasting vengeance, who is driven from the Lords presence, and cursed for
ever, and to be tormented from the presence of the Lord for ever.

Now the world set in the heart, and the heart gone out after earthly things,
even things that perish, and now his life grew in that and after that which
sadeth, his delight on transitory things, in lust, in pleasure and wantonness,
delighting in the flesh, has forgotten God his maker, and now dishonours him,
Oh let the heavens mourn, and let the earth be without joy, let^ hills lament,
and the valleys be grieved, let gloominesse cover the face of the deep, let the
floods be sorry, and springs lament, let all thau moveable take up a
lamentation, and let it be for a lamentation for ever, misery is spread over
all, the earth is polluted, and defiled, and all is out of order, disjoynted
from the Lord, and great confusion and perplexity is come upon all, and the
whole creation groans and travels in pain, in grief and sorrow, and all is made
subject to vanity, the oppressor bears Rule, the Land mournes, the Lamb is
slain, the serpent and his seed rejoices and triumphs, all is filled with
violonce, the seed suffers, the Lord is is grieved, the Angels mourn, the
proud and presumptions is now counted happy, and now the worker of iniquity set
up to be a Ruler and a Lawgiver now to man, and in man, who before had the
Lord to be his Lawgiver, and his King; Oh woeful change! oh sad state! oh
deplorable condition! gone from honor and glory, into perpetual misery and
contempt; and here all the whole Earth and all mankind may read themselves, as
in a glass, in what state they are in in the fall, in the first nature, in the
disobedience; time would fail me to express the misery, and the sad estate of
all mankind in the Curse, yea it is unexpressable, and undeclare^ble, and
unfathomable, and incomprehensible; by the sons of men in the unbelief, but God
has revealed to me by his spirit, that which is now spoke, and he shall bear
me record that my witness is true; also that of God in every man's conscience,
when the book of conscience shall be opened, and the secrets of, all hearts
revealed, shall bear witness that this is true.

How sin entered, and death by sin into the world, and now man dead while he
lives, and all is dead works that man brings forth, wherein the state of all
the Sons of men may be seen, and their works in the fall.
NOw the serpent being more subtle then all the beasts of the field, in
presumption of himself, moved without the power, and formed a thing without
the power, and began his work, and brought a lie; being gone out of the truth,
sin conceived, and a lie conceived, ^e is the Father of it, and not the power;
he spoke of himself, who was gone out of the light, motion or the powers
acting, man also his eye being abroad out of the life and power, let in the
temptation upon him; but if he had stood in the power, as God had ordained him
and commanded him, and had not moved out of it, he would have seen when the
serpent or any other thing had gone out of the power, and have still had
dominion over it; and though it was evil in the serpent to tempt, who moved
without commandment from the Lord; yet if man had stood in the power, he had
kept him out; and it had been no sin to him, neither condemned should he have
been; and so that blind doctrine of the world, and the teachers thereof is a
lie, who have said and taught that, God ordained him to fall, and upon this
account that so Christ might be revealed and that his Son might be honored;
for if man had not fallen, say they, there had needed no Savior.

This is ignorance and blindness; he created man in his Image to stand in the
power, and ordered and commanded him so to do, and to glorify him, who made
him and to stand in the dominion over all the works of his hands: And this does
not make Christ useless, or of no use; yea he was of use before, and was his
life, and the life of all things, and what if I say salvation, the wise will
understand; the unlearned will say, what needed their salvation, when there is
no sin? yes, there needed salvation and preservation, in that state that he was
made in, that he might be upholden in that state, and saved from any thing that
might hurt him in that state, so as to weaken him, that he might not have power
to fulfill the will of God, and to glorify his maker.

Ob. But some may say he was not saved and preserved but was created and left
to himself, to order himself whether he would stand or fall.

Ans. I say, whose was the fault, that he was not preserved, and saved in that
state, was it in God? nay, and that he was left to himself, is also as false,
and unlearned; he left him in the power, and in the dominion everlasting, and
commanded him to stand there, and he was not to go out of it, but to act in
the motion of the word, and in the power by which he was made, which was
Christ, who was glorified with the Father before the world began; I say
according to Gods appointment and ordination, man was not left to himself, but
to stand in the power and authority of the word, wherein man had power to
fulfill the will of God, and keep all in order according to Gods appointment,
but he going out of the power, contrary to Gods command, giving heed to the
woman, and the Serpent, who were gone out of the command before; I say he of
his own accord going out, when the power commanded him not to harken to any
such thing, but on the contrary forbad him, so let in a lie, and believed the
woman, and the serpent, and so went from his preservation, and protection and
salvation, and so was catched in the serpents snare, who abode not in the truth.

Ob. But then some may say he had a voluntary will to do as he would, and was
not that will good?

Ans. The will was good in it self, as it stood and went out in the life's
motion, but moving or acting contrary to the motion of the life, was not good;
for that was out of Gods order, and appointment, for nothing in man or without
man, of all that God had made, was to stir or act without commandments; now the
Son was not honored by man's faling, but both the Father and the Son was
dishonored, and now the Son or power was not revealed by the fall, but veiled
as from men, so the fogy mists of darkness is scattered, and the blind
doctrines of the World laid waste.

Ob. Some will be ready to say, how do thou say he was in dominion
everlasting? then, how should he fall? that lasted but a while.

Ans. I say he was made by the word which abides for ever, and in it which was
in the beginning with God, and was God; and Gods Son, and his dominion is an
everlasting dominion, and his Throne is established in righteousness for ever
and ever; and in it self it is what it was ever, and after the fall, retained
the same power and authority in it self, and so will do for ever; man's power
stood in it only, out of it he had none, so going out of it, dyed to it, and
not any more power to do, or to will, or to order, or to rule any thing but by
it: but he lost the feeling of it, and the guidance of it, the virtue of it,
and life of it, and became dead to it, and alive in his heart and mind to an
other power, to wit, the power of deceit, and to the power of him which has
the power of death, which is the Devil; so God is clear, no fault in him, nor
in the power, nor weakness in the dominion and authority which he had; but
destruction merely, wholly, and only of himself, and he is to bear the his own
burden.

Thus man receiving in the Devils conceptions, who was gone out of the truth,
and became one with it, feeding upon knowledge without the life (this was evil)
thus sin entered, and death by sin; man cut off from the power, from life, from
the dominion which he had in the power; now man, is dead while he lives, and in
the day he eat he died; dead to the power, dead to the life, dead to good, dead
to truth, dead to purity, dead to Righteousness, estranged and alienated from
it; the grave covers him, death has prehemenence, and bears rule, and not
life, and he gone into its nature, and loves it, and embraces it.

Oh sad life! ah sad state! now his life cursed which is death, he cursed, all
his actions cursed, all his conception cursed, all his works cursed, laboring
in sorrow, in travel, and pain, and grief, and sweat and perplexity; Now all
may as in a line read the happy estate of man before the fall, the sad and
deplorable estate in the fall, which who can declare, or who can measure, or
who can demonstrate the miserable estate of man dead in trepasses and sins? and
life swallowed up of death, death and destruction lives, and man in it; and now
in the grave God is not remembered, but forgotten.

Now the world set in the heart, and the Earth in the heart, the heart becomes
earthly, and vain, thorns and briars springs up and the Earth covers the slain;
now death lives, and man lives in it, and one with the enmity and in enmity
against God, who was before his life, man now in chains of darkness; when any
thing moves Heavenward, the power of death draws the mind down again to the
pit into darkness; Now the nature of all things in the earth set in the heart,
Beasts, Rocks, Hills, Mountains, dogs, swine, and brutish creatures, and man
becomes brutish and vain, they have all dominion over him, he a slave to all,
all rules over him, and death grew; and dead works brought forth, he cannot now
perform any thing whereby he can purchase the love of God, nor give a ransom
for his soul, now the root of betterness grew, and the enmity, and man in lust,
and when his lust is crossed, or his will crossed, then the enmity which lives in
him rises, he would kill that, and destroy that, imprison that, and bring it
into bondage, that the enmity might be Lord over all, and brings the innocent
into bondage; that which is nocent is set up, and the higher deceit grows in
the heart, the more stir it makes and the greater destruction of that which
crosses it; and here came in oppression, murder, cruelty, tyrany, prisoning,
imbondaging, revenge, maliciousness, and envy, rage, sury, headiness, pride;
this is all in the curse, and springs up from the foundation of the world in
the heart, and so being given way unto and loved, grows in strength, and
iniquity multiplies, and the beast grows, and the name great and numberless,
the Serpents root spreads forth it self, and sprouts out in the Earth, and
comes to grow great, and is admired; now the deeds of darkness and the works of
darkness comes to be many, envy, murder, adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
riotousness, sporting, covetousness, defrauding, cheating, maliciousness,
theft, dissimulation, feinedness, hypocrisy, witchcraft, cursed-speaking,
railing, reviling, filthy communication, unsavory speeches, wantonness,
lightness, foolish jeasting, idle talking, vain Babbling, backbiting,
swearing, lying, cursing, blasphemy, slandering, pride, arogancy,
vain-boasting, contention, strife, emulation, mischief; these and many more are
now the fruits of the degenerate plant, and dead works, and the works of
darkness, in man who was once a noble plant, a holy right seed, now the fruits
of Sodom, and the grapes of Gomorah whom God destroyed and overthrew, is
brought forth, and the whole Earth is filled with violence, and these be the
fruits that grow and are become great over all Nations, which are wrought by
the Devil the father of lies; who spoke of himself, and works of himself, in
the dark, in the night, out of the light, out of the day, who went out of the
truth, and now works in all the children of disobedience, who are out of the
light, and out of the power; and here are all the sons of fallen Adam in the
curse, under the woe and these be the works that are wrought and brought forth
which has stained the earth; and the father of them, and man in whom they are
wrought, and the works themselves, is all for condemnation, never to be numbered
among the Saints in light, nor among their works.

Self righteousness, deeds of darkness also, and dead works which though they
be not counted as bad as the former, by them that act in them, yet they are to
be condemned also; And man who acts them being in the fall.
CAin who was the first begotten in the fall, the similitude, likeness and
image of Adam his Father, who had transgressed and disobeyed, and lost the
power, and became dead to it; Cain I say his express Image, out of the says,
out of the Power, he brought a sacrifice, and offered in the same nature he
slew his brother with, and envied him (who was in the says, and was accepted
of the Lord through faith in the Power of God) I say in this nature he offered
and was not accepted, he was in the imitation, out of the life, out of the
Power, in feinedness, and this was self, and not the Lord that moved him: The
Jews in the Prophets time, who were in Cains nature, in envy and
maliciousness, grinding the faces of the poor, and oppressing the needy and
chopping them in pieces as flesh for the pot; they brought sacrifices,
oblations, burnt-offerings, kept fasts, and Sabbaths, and new Moons, and all
these things, and lied, swore, and dealt falsely, and left no room for the
poor, and yet they said the Lord was among them; the Lord sent his servant the
Prophet, to tell them the Lord was weary of them and of their oblations; why?
they were out of the faith, out of the life, out of the Power, and deceit
lodged in their heartts, covetousnese, envy, murder, oppression and violence,
as ravening wolves hunting for their prey; the Prophets prophesied for hire,
their Priests bear rule by their means, and people was one with it, and liked
it, and loved it should be so, the end of those things was misery, the
Judgment of God came upon them, they were scattered among their enemies, their
Prophets slain, and for their sake Sion became as a plowed corn field, and
Jerusalem a heap, and now he that offered an ox, was no more accepted, then if
he slew a man, no more then if he blessed Chemosh, Ashteroth or Baal, all was
sin, and to be condemned by the power out of which they were gone. The Scribes
and Pharisees in Christ's time, great worshippers, devout men, devout women;
zealous men for Temple, Priests, tithes, days, Sabbaths, oblations, and were
acting all those things that were commanded in or about the worship of God, yet
Christ said unto his Disciplrs, except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scrihes and Pharisees ye cannot enter the Kingdom of God:
they might have said (which at least they did in their hearts) this man says he
is the Son of God, and yet says and teaches his Disciples, another
righteousness, then is commanded in the Law, and moreover tells them, except
their righteousness exceed ours, they cannot enter into Gods Kingdom; where is
there in all the earth any better righteousness then ours? we do not as the
heathen worship Idol-gods, we keep the Sabbaths, and purify our selves and
pays tithes, and keeps the Ordinances given by the Lord to Moses and our
fathers; well these things they were doing, but they were but dead works, they
were out of the faith out of the Power and had not Gods word abiding in their
hearts, from which their Power and ability should have come to have answered
the will of God; here was self-righteousness although they did the outward
things which were commanded of the Lord, yet they were dead works; their Temple
left desolate, worship desolate, Jerusalem compassed about with armies, not one
stone left upon another which was not to be thrown down, and they scattered
among the heathen, their Priests slain, and their oblations ceased, plagues,
Judgment prusuing whithersoever they went; did all those things save them from
the wrath? all their works and dead worships and self-righteousness save them?
were they accepted? oh! nay, rejected, a seed of falsehood a crooked generation
an hypocritical generation: these things with many more, which I could
instance, all showing that man in the transgression of the life, of the power,
whether he sinned, or wrought that which he might Judge was righteous, yet they
were but dead works.

Ob. But some may say, what say thou to this generation of Ministers,
preachers and Ordinances? we live in a Gospel time, and are under Gospel
ordinances, and they teach that man is redeemed by Christ, from sins past,
present and to come, and the ordinances that we practice now I hope you will
not call them dead works.

Ans. I say the ministry in these nations, made by man's will, and by the will
of the flesh, and that are seeking their gain from their quarter, and are
suing men at Law, and throwing men in dungeons, and holes to the loss of some
men's lives already, and hundreds have been and are like to be spoiled, only to
uphold their greedy devouring nature who have ravened, and devoured like
evening Wolves, some men's estates wholly, and some times taken ten fold the
value, who ravens from place to place from one end of the Land to another, and
into other Nations also, for filthy lucre, or a greater benefit; I say they are
in the fall, in the transgression, death rules in them, over them, and they are
Ministers of death, and never brought any to God; but of them many other
brethren who are in the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ has borne a large
testimony which any considerate, wise, prudent, and reasonable man may see them
to be Ministers of death, demonstrated by many sound grounds and unanswerable
arguments, and the scripture of truth clearly bearing witness to the same; and
so I refer the Reader to those things, and shall content my self at present in
what I have said in this particular. Now as to the worship, or ordinances or
practices themselves I come unto, and shall speak no otherwise of any thing,
then God by his eternal light and spirit has made me understand in the true
ground of things, else I know well how to be silent.

Now this I say to all sects, opinions, and fellowships (though they be divided
into many heads or societies) man acting or performing any thing of worship,
ordinance, or any practice whatsoever which the scriptures declares has been
or ever was, though they should do it in the same manner, suitable in every
circumstance to that which others did, till all or every man come to believe in
the power again, which man went from in the transgression, all that he does is
selfe-righteousnesse, and dead works, preaching dead, prayer dead, Baptism
dead, their communion dead, their conferences dead, their exhortations dead,
their fasts dead, their offerings like as if one had offered a dead beast under
the law, or a lame Lamb, which had been abomination; even so I say till man
come to that which he has lost in the transgression, till man find the power,
the life, the light, the messiah, and feel him in them, to work, move, lead,
guide, and act, all will be accounted with the Lord, selfe-righteousnesse, dead
works, dead fruit, and if all would examine and try, they might see the Nations
almost spread over with dead men in Adam, and dead works abound, and coverings
which God will rent, and lay all waste together, false rest, imitated forms,
and representations without life, I say till men come into the power again
that Adam went from, and so died in that day, he cannot do any thing well
pleasing to God; and whosoever comes to that again, passes every step through
death, and denies himself and all selfe-actions, selfe-righteousnesse, and
must come to be bare and naked again, even as he was before he came out, he and
his wife were naked and were not ashamed; selfe-acting was not known; now
self-will, self-worship, self-righteousness; nay, they moved in the power
righteousness was their covering, and as I said before, there was no shame, I
might speak largely in this thing, and truly my tongue is the pen of a ready
writer, oh that all had an ear to hear that their souls might live, and that
every one might be unbottomed, of his false rest, false and fained hope, and
faith; and of his own ragged garment, and let go his selfe-righteousnesse, and
his dead works, and come to Christ the life of men again, that man has run
from, that so he might have life and peace.

Ob. But some would say that thou would have all upside down, and unchristian
the Nations, and unchurch Churches, and throw down all our worship, and then
what should we do, all would be as heathens, and turn into Athisme.

I say a time of fanning and ^ifting and trying is come, when nothing shall
stand but that has the image, stamp, and character of the living God upon it,
and all that which has been brought up, and raised up, since man has been in
the transgression, must be turned down into the pit again, and all that have
got a name of Christian, and wants his life, to live among them and in them,
shall be scattered as clouds with the East wind, and all imitated worships, and
will worshippers, and the fained faith, and the fained hope shall be
confounded, and all will worships and worshippers will be overturned who are
not come yet to the true light that lightens every man that comes into the
World, and till man comes to the light, and tries his deeds and works by it, he
never sees what he is doing, nor what he is working, nor what he works; and so
all that man does here in the unbelief, it is but sin, or selfe-righteousnesse
which is brought forth by him who abode not in the truth, in the unbelief; and
so who be come to the power which was in the beginning, before sin entered, and
death by sin, has and does measure all deeds and all works, and man that is in
the loss, in the fall, and sees that a dead man cannot act a living work, nor
bring forth living fruits unto God, nor living works of righteousness, being
in the unrighteousness, neither the fruits of faith being in the unbelief,
neither the works of the day being in the night, neither the works of charity
being in the emnity; in a word, without Christ the power, the light, the life,
which was glorified with the Father before the world began; I say (he said it
himself who is the beginning of the creation, of God, the first born of every
creature) he said, and his testimony will be found true, without me ye can do
nothing, nothing that is wel-pleasing to the Lord, nothing that ever shall be
acceptable; and here is the true state of all the Earth discovered, and all
mankind drove out from God, miserable, naked, hopeless, helpless, faithless,
and so can do nothing as to the glorifying of God his maker, or to the
ordering of any thing in the creation to his glory, having lost his dominion
and Gods wisdom, and this being considered seriously by all, and brought to
the light in all, and their deeds tried by it, would make the lofty bow, and
the stout hearted fear, and the conceited sit down in solitariness, that they
should so long deceive their own souls with a conceit of righteousness and
redemption, when as death yet reigns in them, and over them, and not life
eternal: So the Devil is a distinct being from God, and his works are
distinst, and his deeds, from the works of God, and neither he nor his works
shall ever be numbered among the works of God, but he and they that obey him,
and follow him who is out of the truth, they, their works (of what sort soever
they may seem unto men to be, whose eyes the devil has blinded) so I say all
is to be condemned, and shut out from Gods presence for ever, and to be
destroyed by him who is a consuming fire, and all the righteousness of man
burned, as combustable stuff in unquenchable fire.

Pr. And by what has been said, the principle of that ranting crew (who are
become vain in their imaginations and foolish, their understandings being
darkened) are seen, and their principle overthrown.

As that light and darkness is one, and good and evil one, and sin and
righteousness one, and truth and a lie one, and that God is all and does all,
and what ever is done is of God, and that there is no evil but to him that
thinks it so, and it is only a false apprehention of things, and that there is
no such thing as sin, and that sin is nothing: Unto all these things I might
speak, but the understanding Reader may by what is before written, see each of
these plainly declared, and the true ground of things laid down as the spirit
gave utterance, and this shall at present suffice in this matter.

Ob. But some may object further, and say, will not reading the scriptures and
conforming to the practice of the saints in the use of his ordinances, will not
this make us accepted, and bring us out of the fall, and make us good
christians?

Answ. No, while death has dominion in man, and over man, and the veil over
the heart, man does not understand the mystery of Gods kingdom, neither
understands the scripture which was spoken from the spirit of truth, or any
thing of truth as it is in Christ, for none understands the things of God, but
by the spirit of God, so that every man that comes to have a good
understanding, must come to know the pure spirit of God in him to direct him,
and inform him; (which spirit) was the original of the scripture; for the holy
men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost; and without the Holy
Ghost in some measure be known, and that which is infallible, the sayings, the
writings, the scriptures cannot be understood, and because of the want of this,
all the Earth is run into heads, and sects, and opinions, and large treatises
and volumes, and expositions have been written, and yet differing one from
another, and all from the spirit, and in all these particular sects,
persecuting one another, and envying one another, and hating one another, and
would compel others to believe what they believe in what they say, if they had
but power; and for proof of this, it is most evident in the scripture of truth,
and in latter ages since the Apostles, it has been, and it is evidently seen,
both among the Papists and Protestants, and among all them that are called the
reformed Churches; but all this is in the fall, and in the transgression, and
in the Apostasy, and is an evident token, that they are all under the power of
the beast, who makes War against the Lamb; so all compellation, and they that
do compel, are not worshippers of the Lamb, but of the beast which is to be
destroyed and cast into the lake.

For the Jews under the first Covenant had the Scriptures the good and wholesome
words of God, and the Prophets and read the Law and the Prophets, on the
Sabbath days, and yet the vail was over their hearts, and and though they did
perform many things commanded, yet they being erred from the spirit, did not
understand of what the Scripture spoke, nor know him nor his mind, to wit,
Christ of whom the Scriptures spoke, neither were they accepted of God, but
reproved and rejected by Christ himself, who said they erred, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God, doubtless they did know the words naturally
and read them, but the spirits mind, in so speaking they knew not; and Jude
reproves all such, and said what they knew, they knew naturally as bruit
beasts, and in that knowledge, they corrupted themselves, and therefore Peter
well said* many things were hard to to be understood; which the unlearned
wrested (they that were ignorant of the spirit of the Father, and had not
learned of God, who is a spirit) they I say perverted and wrested the good and
wholesome words of the Scriptures, and were no more accepted of God, then if they
had never heard the words nor read them at all; and as for the Jews conforming
to the outward commands, when the vail was over their hearts, and their hearts
uncircumcised, these things did not make them any whit more accepted then the
heathen, so the Christians since Christ's time, in the Apostles days and after
the Apostles days, who held the form of worship, and the form of godliness, and
the outward part of worship, and holds and retains it in that part which is
above the seed, and denies the power, this no more makes a Christian inward,
then outward circumcision, made a Jew inward; neither any of these things do
recommend any unto God, but are covers made, and rests formed, from that part
which is above the seed, and so man comes to be counseled in those things,
when alas he is miserable and naked, and has not the righteous garment on
which should make man accepted of the Father, through the beloved, Gods
righteousness.

How all men upon the earth, in the degeneration, and in the fall, and in the
transgression, have corrupted themselves, and have been idolaters in every
administration; (being gone from the power) in which man had the ability,
power, and wisdom to worship God aright, and honor the living God of heaven
and earth.
IN the state and condition which man was created in, when he was the image of
God, and lived in the Power of God in which he was created; He in that Power
(which was his life) had wisdom and understanding, and power, to worship the
living God, and to glorify his maker, the which thing I have treated on
before, but being gone from the power, and grew in knowledge without the power,
his thoughts became vain, and his imaginations vain, and his desires earthly,
and corruptable, and so the creatures were worshipped in his heart, and not the
Creator (the life of the creatures) and he bowed to the creatures, and they had
dominion over him, and that nature began to grow and multiply in all the earth,
and that seed, which was at enmity with God, and against the seed, which is
Christ, and few there were that called upon the Name of the Lord in truth and
righteousness; although some, yet few, one in a Nation, or a few in an age, nay
in many ages; and men multiplied in the earth, and wickedness multiplied also,
and idolatry, and the seed of the Serpent grew great; And God saw the
wickedness of man that it was great in the earth, and that the thoughts and
purposes, and imaginations of his heart were only evil continually, Genesis 6. 5.
and the earth was filled with violence and cruelty and oppression, and the
living God forgotten, and not worshipped, but on the contrary they followed the
imaginations of their own hearts; and bowed down to every corruptable thing,
and to every creature, and did not worship the Lord God in their hearts, till
the Lord was grieved at the heart, and repented that he had made man; and this
was before the flood, and after the flood, when the earth was a little
multiplied, iniquity grew in the earth, and the cursed seed sprang from Hams
stock; of whom was Nimrod the hunter (before the Lord) the beginning of his
Kingdom was Babel; of the which became great Idolaters, and of this seed came
the Philistians who were uncircumcised, who were heathens, and the Jebusites,
and Gargasites, and the Canaanites and Hivites; and their generations were
great in the earth, and they were great Idolaters; and committed Idolatry with
stocks and stones, and with brick, having forgotten the Lord, they began to
work exploits in the earth, and to build Cities; and Babel having forgot the
name of God, they would have got a name in the earth, and builded a tower,
whose top might have reached to heaven; but the Lord whom they had forgot
scattered them, and this was the seed of evil doers whom God scattered and
drove out of Canaan, who were great Idolaters and gave it to Abraham, who
feared the Lord, and to Jacob, and to his seed to possess.

And when transgression grew, he added a Law (the sense of Gods power and
wisdom was so lost in man, and they so gone from his wisdom, that a Law was
added after Israel came out of Egypt) which was outward, and written in tables
of of stone, wherein was the statutes and the commands, that they should only
worship him, and that they should not make them Gods of gold and silver,
neither the likeness of any thing in heaven or earth, yet nevertheless, that
uncircumcised part which kept the seed in bondage, and that corruptable earthly
nature that ruled in them, made gods like the heathen Egytians, and they made a
Calf, and bowed to the molten image, and forgot God, and provoked him to anger,
till many of them were consumed in his sore displeasure, and tempted him, and
lusted, and eat and drank, and rose up to play; and committed whoredoms with
the creatures, and abused them; and therefore the Lord sent his Prophets and
rebuked them: they abused the gold and the silver, the stone and the wood,
which were good creatures, but not to make gods of, nor images thereof, nor
idols to draw away their minds from the Lord; but they in whom the seed was not
made manifest, they worshipped dead things, and likenesses of things, which
were not life it self; and so transgressed the Law, acting from that part, and
living in that nature, which the Law was against (which was added because of
transgression) to limit the transgressor and to slay him, and to bruise that
under, till the seed came up that fulfills the Law, but the seed of the Serpent
had so much rule in them whom God had often delivered out of the hands of their
enemies, so that many perished, Corah, and many Princes, and many thousands of
Israel, who followed their own inventions and were cut off in Gods sore
displeasure, being gone from that which was upright in which man was created,
and followiug their imaginations, and out of that mind formed idols and images,
and set them up, and answered that part in themselves which transgressed the
seed, and not that which does overthrow all idols and the ground thereof; And
after they were come to the Land that God had promised them, they were
commanded not to worship idols, as the Canaanites did (that were Hams-stock)
who was accursed, and set up cursed idols, yet, nevertheless breaking the Law
which was to limit that part which had transgressed; that which was contrary to
the Law, was set up in themselves, even the nature of the Canaanites, Gentiles
and heathen, and then they worshipped the heathens gods, or else formed gods
and idols and images of their own, and worshipped Baal, Ashteroth and Chemosh,
and the Sidonians gods, and every Nations gods, and Images where they came, and
so the Lord sent his true Prophets, who feared his name, and worshipped him, to
declare against them, even the house of Israel a distinct people, from the
heathen, great professors, Ezekiel. 14. 4. They set up idols in their hearts, and
put a stumbling block of iniquity before their face the Lord said he would
answer them according to the multitude of their idols, they being gone into
vanity, they hearkened to the Idols that spoke vanity. Zech. 10. 2. And baked
bread and roasted flesh with wood, and of the same made a God, and they
transgressed at Dan, at Bethel, at Gilgal, yea their Idols flood in their
hearts, and they formed such without as was suitable to their hearts, as you may
re^d through many ages and generations before the flood and after the flood in
the wilderness in Canaan, and in the Nations where they were scattered.

Hab. 2. 18, 19. What profits the graven Image, and the molten image and
teachers of lies, woe unto him that says to the wood awake* to the dumb stone
arise it shall teach, behold it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is
no breath at all in the midst of it, seek not to Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal,
for Gilgall shall go into captivity, and Bethel shall come to naught.

Furthermore, they corrupted themselves in those things which God had
commanded, (which were commands in their time) and made Idols of those things
which were but figures or shadows of good things to come, which they should
have waited for, as the Brazen serpent, temple, offering, oblations, Tithes,
Priests, Sabbaths, New Mons, solemn Feasts, Circumcision, Passover, and all
these things were given to be observed til the seed came (the end of all these
things and of the Law for righteousness) but Christ the seed, the heir of all
things, when he came (after many Prophets had declared of him from Moses to
Samuel, from Samuel till John) they exalted those things above him, and
neglected him who had life in himself, and would not come unto him that they
might have had life, and then, their Temple, Priests, Sacrifice, oblations
became Idols, and their practice Idolatry, and so are in blindness to this
day; and so in the days of Christ, they held up those things, and were
counseled in their works and observances, and days and times, and came not to
believe in him in whom all days ends in, and so continued in their large
observations all along in the Apostles days, and did as they had done in the
days of the Prophets, slew the Prophets that were sent of the Lord, and set
dreamers, and such as prophesied for hire and divined for money, and said no
evil should touch them, and they said the Law should not depart from the
Priests mouth, nor vision cease from their prophets, but believed their lies
and prophesied of wine and strong drink, and cried peace to them that Gods
controversy was against, and so persecuted the Apostels from City to City, and
from place to place, till the the wrath of God came upon them, and Jerusalem
compassed about with armies, and not one stone left upon another, and for their
sakes Sion became a plowed corn field, their Temple burnt, their Priests
slain, their sacrifices ceased, and their oblations at an end, and they
scattered among the heathen, and they and all their Idols, and their worship
blasted and cursed from God, and from being a Nation to this day, and thus has
the Lord brought shame and contempt upon all through all ages, who have
worshipped the works of their own hands, or that has holden up any figure,
representation, and have set it up and exalted it above the life, and with it
have opposed the power, the life in which all figures, Types, and
representations ends in; And thus far I have passed through generations, and
also through administrations, that all who have a desire of the true knowledge
of God may see, that man in the degeneration being out of the Image of God,
corrupts himself in all things, and makes idols of all things, being from the
life in which man has power only to fulfill the righteous will of God.

But to descend and to come nearer to our age, because all that which is called
christendom, will say this in nothing unto them, because they hold not up the
heathens Images nor the Jewish Idols, nor the Jewish Types and worship, and
therefore they are no Idolaters; when John the Prophet came and preached
repentance in the wilderness of Judea, which was a preparer of the way, he
baptized in Jordan, and many believed and repented, and were baptized, and
Christ also was baptized, and so was he circumcised and eat the passover, and
observed what was written, because he came to fulfill all righteousness, and
also bad his Disciples hear them that sat in Moses seats for he was not yet
sacrificed up, nor glorified; I say John baptized not in his own name, but bore
witness unto Christ the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world, who
came after him and was preferred before him, whom John said should baptize them
with the holy Ghost and with fire, and many of John's Disciples followed Christ
the true light, that lights every one that comes into the world, and John
was not offended at them for following of Christ but rejoiced; take notice of
this, you baptizers who are offended with them that follows Christ the light
that lights every one that comes into the world, and excommunicates them
like the envyous Jews, out of your assemblies, and says they are deluded, and
are so far from John's spirit, that instead of bearing your testimony to him,
who is the (light) that you would bind them up, and council your disciples not
to go after him, the true light that lights every man (the Christ of God) I
say to you, you are in the Idolatry, who prefer your water before the (light)
but John bore witness to Christ the light, and said he was preferred before
him, and some Imitaters and Idolaters say the baptism of water is the door or
entrance into the Church of God, when as Christ says he is the door, none
comes into the fold but by him, and none comes to the Father but by him, and he
is the way, so who sets up an other entrance unto God, or into the foul or
into the Church, which is the pillar and ground of truth, sets up an Idol, and
prefers an Idol, above the life, and so are in the Idolatry; But let none
mistake, that I say water is an Idol nay, it is a good creature of God, or that
I say John's baptism with water was an idol, nay he was in the power and spirit
of Eliah, and his baptism a figure of a good thing which was to come, which
afterward was received by the diseiples, and Christ's words made good unto them;
John indeed baptized you with water unto repentance, but ye shall be baptized
with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, not many days hence, that was Christ's
baptism. I am not Ignorant of the many and great contests in this age, that
have been about these things, and I know many scriptures that speaks of baptism
all which I have searched narrowly with the measure of Gods spirit given unto
me, into the true ground of things, and the true state of each administration,
and in this thing I am satisfied fully, that the baptism with water was John's
baptism, and not Christ's, and the baptism of the spirit is Christ's, and not
John's; I have no desire to wrangle or Jangle about words, or contest about
shadows, but that all may come to know him in whom all ministrations ends in,
and there will be peace and satisfaction (to wit, in Christ)

But to say some thing to the main bassis, and foundation, which Priests, and
Separatists builds much of their arguments upon, the last of Mat. and the last,
Go teach and baptize all Nations in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost; as for all the Priests about their baptising of Infants, here is no
ground at all, for here is first teach and then baptize, and here is no infants
neither, and so I know, what consequences has been drawn from this by the
unlearned in their imaginations, but them that has the least measure of true
light, will not take a consequence to build a foundation on, for this is
contrary to their own rule, they say the scripture is the Rule, then their
consequence is not the Rule, and if the scriptures be the Rule, let all people
of your parishes know if you can by the Scripture show when John or any
Disciple of his or Christ's, baptized infants and taught them Principles of
Religion ^0. years after, but they are willingly ignorant that sees not you to
be idolaters; and as to the Baptists separates, who builds upon this for their
water baptism, they are as groundles as the Priests, and all their Arguments
are as invalled as the rest; for here is baptizing the Nations in the Name of
the Father in the name of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, and any who are
judicious or wise, and are in any measure of Gods pure wisdom, will not say
that the Name of the Father is water, or the Son or holy Ghost is water; the
name of God is I am, and a strong tower, and the Name of the Son is the word,
and the word is the power, but this is not water; but further they say the
Disciples had received the holy Ghost, and did baptize with water after, and
they were Baptized with water after they had received the holy Ghost, and they
bring diverse Scriptures to prove this.

I shall not deny but Peter Baptized with water, and Paul two or three
families, and thanks God he baptized no more, and said he had declared the
whole counsel of God, and he makes not mention in all his Epistles that
baptism was any part of his command, neither in all his counsel to the
Churches any where does he exhort either Timothy or Titus or Apollo or any of
the brethren to Baptize with water; but as for Peter's Baptizing with water, I
know no more command he had then Paul; as for the commission, which Matthew
writes of, Mat. 28. and 19. and that Mark mentions, 16. 15. there is no water,
and so its the Baptism of John, I grant, and Christ bearing witness to John
that he was a Prophet and did baptize many, and therefore he or they in honor
to John's Ministry might baptize some, as well as Paul did circumcise Titus, and
and then in 1 Cor. 7. 19. said it was nothing, and again in another place,
neither circumcision nor uncircumcision did avail, but a new creature, and
because it was a figure which people did not Idolize so much then, as they did
circumcision, for the weakness of the people, for a time; and the wise in heart
may understand that when any representation or figure outward was set up, it
was not easily denied again, nor an easy thing to be laid down, when the
thing, signified was come; for many of the Jews believed in Christ, and were
said to be brethren, and yet they came from Jerusalem, and troubled the Church
of Galatia, and would have brought them under the figure circumcision again,
and the Apostle, in Gal. 4. asks them, now when ye know God, why turn ye again
to the beggarly Elements, [Circumcision] observing days, months, times and
years; I would ask the moderate a question, whether water be not an Element,
and pertains only to the Elementary part in man, which is to pass away and be
dissolved when the seed is raised up whose nature is not elementary, but
Celestial? I shall say no more to them at this present who are contentions, who
are so zealous for their water upon so weak a ground, but take heed that while
you are striving about your outward water, you neglect not the washing of
regeneration and the cleansing of the spirit; many have been baptized, but
which of you has received the holy Ghost? there is not one among you dare own
or witness an infallible spirit, but rather counts it an error that any should
speak, or witness, or look to enjoy any such thing in these days; well, I say
unto you your day is a day of darkness and gloominess you live in, and thick
darkness covers your tabernacle; for who ever have received the holy Ghost or
spirit of truth in any measure, are led by that which is infallible and not
fallible; and if you look not for this, you are no sons notwithstanding all
your washing the outside; for as many as are the Sons of God are led by the
Spirit of God, and this is witnessed praises to the Lord for ever; the Lord is
unto his people an everlasting light, and this is the sum that water is owned
to be a figure of the one baptism, and was an Element, and pertained to that
which is Elementary; but the Elements shall melt with fervent heat and be
dissolved in the day of the Lord, and then the seed comes up which is heir of
the promise, which is nourished with the water of life, which is not an Element
nor Elementary, but is Celestial, and springs up in them that believe unto
everlasting life, and comes to be born of the water and the spirit, and enters
into Gods Kingdom, dominion, power, life, wisdom, excellency and Eternal glory,
happy is he that believes and abides in patience unto the end.

Now since the days of John, the Kingdom of God has been Preached, and as
many as were ordained to Eternal life believed, and many in the day when Christ
was manifest in the flesh believed, unto whom he declared the mind of the
Father, and by him was the Father glorified, he fulfilled the Law, and did many
works and miracles by the power of the Father, and herein was the Father
glorified, and them that did believe in him, their faith was strengthened; and
he opened the mystries of the Kingdom of God unto his Disciples, and bore
witness and prophesied the destruction of Jerusalem, and of all their worship,
and said, no more at Jerusalem nor at Samaria, but the time was coming when
they that worshipped the Father should worship him in spirit and truth, and
declared against the Pharisees righteousness, and said to his Disciples, Except
their righteousness did exceed the Pharisees they could not enter the Kingdom
of God, and yet the Pharisees performed all the outward things commanded, but
were in the idolatry, and did not believe in the life; Now he declared of his
suffering many things, and also how he would go away, and how he would come
again, and would not leave them comfortless, but these things were hard to be
believed then, by his Disciples, and further he told them he must be betrayed,
and suffer and rise again, and when the hour was come that he was betrayed,
when he was with his Disciples, even the same night he was betrayed, he took
bread, and broke it, and blessed it, and said, take and eat, this is my body
which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of me; and after he took the
cup, and after he had Supped, saying, this is the cup of the New Testament in
my blood, as often as you drink it; do it in remembrance of me, 1 Cor. 11. 23.
24. and Matthew, Mark, and Luke declares the same, and this was real bread,
and real wine, which was a representation of that which was to be enjoyed in
the spirit, and never intended for any further thing, but as a figure or a
representation of the bread of life, and of the cup of blessing which afterward
they came to be witnesses of, and as often as they eat and drank, they did show
forth the Lords death till he came. Now this was practiced among the Disciples
after he was risen from the dead and did converse with them at many times, and
exhorted them and comforted them, and instructed them, and told them that they
should be witnesses of his name unto the ends of the earth; and gave them
commandment to teach all Nations and Baptize them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, and did promise to be with them to the
end of the world, and told how the Comforter would come, and that the Father
would send him in his Name; even the spirit of truth which was with them, and
should be in them to be their teacher, leader and guide, and bring all things
to their remembrance. Now that which he gave them as a figure, and to be a sign
unto them, of the clearer manifestation of himself, which afterward came to be
fulfilled, and they witnesses of it, who grew up in the pure invisible being,
and did see the mystery, through the Revelation of the spirit, which did more
clearly show unto them the mysteries within the vail; for as I said of water,
it was a sign of a good thing to come, so the bread and the cup was also a sign
of a good thing to come, as all outward figures were, but they that did
believe, and grew up in the faith, in the seed, Christ, they came to see the
substance, in whom all figures ends in, and had communion with him, within the
vail after he was ascended, where he was before; now the Apostle he spoke as to
wise men, judge ye what I say, 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16. the cup of blessing, which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we
break is it not the communion of the body of Christ and v. 17. for we being
many are one bread, and one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread;
mark all they that did believe, though they were many, yet they were one bread
and one body, and were all partakers of that one bread, which bread was the
flesh of Christ, John 6. 48. I am the bread of life, and Joh. 6. 51. I am the
living bread that came down from heaven; if any man eat of this bread he shall
live for ever, and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give
for the life of the world: Now I speak unto wise men, and let the wisdom of God
(in them manifest) judge what I say, for where the body of Christ is witnessed,
and the flesh of Christ known, they know that which all the figures ends in,
the Manna that God gave to Israel in the wilderness, they died that did eat
thereof, which was as pure a type of the hidden Manna, as lively a type as
bread outward which was but a type of the of the flesh of Christ, and both they
that did eats the Manna, and they that eat the bread outward and drank the cup
outward are both dead, but he that eat the flesh of Christ and drinks the blood
lives for ever; and he that eats the hidden Manna has overcome death and lives
for ever, and feeds upon the bread of life, feeds upon Eternal life.

Now this is a mystery to the Papists, who are idolaters, who have sprung up in
the Apostasy, though they have Scriptures as it was to the Jews, John 6. 52.
who strove among themselves and said, how can this man give us his flesh ^o
eat? and so the Papists, who strives about the flesh of Christ and his blood,
and yet have the Scriptures, and they say its in the bread and in the wine,
after consecration, and so they worship the imaginations of their own hearts,
not deserning the Lords body, and have killed thousands, and taken away the
lives of thousands, because they would not confess their idol to be of God.

And the protestants they are setting up the bread and the wine, and contenting
themselves therewith, and are making an idol of it, and comes not to discern
the body of Christ, but one saying he has a carnal body, and another a
fleshly body, another a mystical body, another says his body is divided from
his members, and so speaks out of thick darkness, their own imaginations, and
has not communion with the body of Christ, neither knows the flesh of Christ,
which is the bread of life, which is given for the life of the World, John 6.
51.

And as godliness began to work, and the mystery thereof in the days of
Christand the Apostles, wherein the Lord discovered much of his wisdom and
power, and manifested his pure presence, and poured out his spirit plentifully
upon, sons and daughters, and fulfilled that which Joel ^prophesied of, Joel 2.
28. which came to be fulfilled after Christ's ascension, Acts. 2. 17. and they
received the holy Ghost, and spoke the wonderful things of God as they were
revealed by the spirit, which shed it self abroad among them that waited for
it, so also the mystery of iniquity began to work even in that time, and as the
Apostles laid the foundation of truth, and declared the truth, Christ to be the
foundation, even so the Mystery of iniquity did work, and a beginning or a
foundation of error was laid by them, who were gone out of the truth, the false
Prophets, deceivers, Antichrists who were professors and preachers, but they
were such as were covetous and greedy of filthy lucre, and made merchandise of
souls for dishonest gain, and denied the power of God, Christ, and were
enemies to the Cross, and gloried in the flesh, and spoke swelling words of
vanity, and did all live in the lust of the flesh, and were proud boasters, and
denied the Lord that bought them; for denying the power of God, they did deny
Christ, though in words they preached him, as this generation who are their
offsprings do out of strife and contention, as the Apostle writs, and they
held the form of godliness but denied the power, and they were they that once
were convinced of the truth, and came into the form of truth, but denied the
power of truth; but were in craft and deceit, and they subverted whole houses
from the faith, and led them back into the world, into unbelief, in the
Apostles days, and yet had a worship, and did worship, but not the power, not
the life, and this began to work, and wrought more cunningly, and subtly in
the latter times: And the Apostle Paul in many of his Epistles, John and Peter
and Jude, declares against them, and Paul prophesied of them before his
departure, of grievous Wolves, which should spring up, which should not spare
to make havoc of the flock of Christ; so the fall Apostles, deceivers,
Antichrists, and deceitful workers, they went out then and did what they could
to lead disciples after them into the world; inwardly they were ravened from
the spirit, and was gone from it into the earth, into the world, and served not
the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and the God of the world which is
the Devil, and they went into the world, and the world received them; and then
they and their disciples turned against the saints, and they held truth in
words, and the form for a while, but it was in unrighteousness; and here was
the beginners, and the beginning of the Apostats, and of the Apostasy; it was
began in the Apostles days by them that went out of the truth, out of the
light, and were ravened from the spirit, and erred from the faith, and were
enemies to the power of God, and these were the beginners and the layers of the
foundation, and then it grew, that root of wickedness faster then the truth;
for the Jews resisted, and the heathen resisted and the Apostates and false
prophets resisted, and they that were Apostatized they resisted, and they
caused many to stumble, to err, to make shipwreck of their faith, and so the
world went after them, the World, the Nations, the kindreds, the tongues, and
the people went after Kings, Princes and potentates of the earth, and in
process of time they had over run-all and killed the saints, the woman fled
into the wilderness, and the man child was caught up unto God; then all
Nations who were gone from the Rock became as a sea, reeled to and fro,
unstable, unsettled; what were they like to settle in the Sea? then a great
beast arose with his seven heads and ten horns, and the whore which had
defiled the bed, and she sat upon the beast, and she reached out her cup of
fornication to the nations, and all nations was drunk with her cup, and then
the beast made war, and the nations were drunk, and they loved the beast and
received his mark, became cruel, and pushed at the saints (and followed him)
and made war with them, and the whore, she drank the blood of the saints, and
the Dragon appeared, and with his tail drew the third part of the stars after
him to the Earth; the false Prophets they are the tail of the Dragon who were
gone from the testimony of Jesus, the spirit of prophecy, and drew after it the
third part of the stars from the firmament of his power into the earth, Rev.
12. 4. The man child was caught up unto God, which was to rule all Nations with
a rod of Iron, and the woman fled into the wilderness, where God has prepared
a place for her, and then the Dragon went out and made war with the remnant of
her seed, to wit, the woman's seed.

And so out of the Sea arose the beast, out of Nations, kindreds, Tongues, and
peoples, which are waters, and the Dragon gave power to the beast, and his
seat, and great authority, Rev. 13. 2. And all the world wondered after the
beast, ver. 3. and ver 4. They worshipped the Dragon which gave power to the
beast, and the beast likewise; and now the worl^ cried (which wondered after the
beast) who is able to make war with the beast? and ver. 6. he opened his mouth
in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name and Tabernacle, and them that
dwell in heaven, and he made war with the saints, and did overcome them, and
all that dwelt upon the Earth worshipped him, whose names were not written in
the Lambs book of life.

And the beast^ deceived the Nations and them that did dwell on the earth, and
now kindreds, Tongues, and peoples, and Nations, and all the world which
wondered after him, they who had lost the image of God, now became the image of
the beast, that blasphemed God and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in
heaven, and now the Kings of the earth that had drunk the Whores cup of
fornication, and the Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues, and people, who were
become the beasts image, now the image of the beast spoke, and caused as many
as would not worship the beast and the image, should be killed; take notice of
that, all who are called Christians, it was not Gods image, who compelled to
worship or else be killed, but it was the beasts image, and wheresoever
compultion and killing is exercised and practiced, they worship the beast.

Chap. 13. ver. 16. And he causes all both small and great, rich and poor,
bond and free to receive a mark in their forehead, or in their right hand, and
none might buy or sell, but he which had the beasts mark or his name, or the
number of his name; here was worship, but it was the beasts worship, and
Idolatrous worship, and the Dragons worship, who sought to destroy the
manchild, which all the Angels is to worship; all this worship is in the
Apostasy.

So let all take notice of this compelling, causing, forcing, killing, and
destroying about worship, all they that so do yet are worshipping the beast on
which the Whore rides, and this is that generation who slew the Lamb, and they
are of the World, and this is the Dragons brood, who sought to devour the
man-child, and this is the Serpents seed, and a seed of falsehood who made war
with the remnant of the seed of the woman through all ages unto this
generation, and so all that which is called Christendom, is more or less
under the beasts power, and has his Image, even to this day; and yet some of
them are professing the saints words, and imitating their actions, who were
followers of the Lamb, and kept the faith; now this that John saw as come in,
did grow deceivers, antichrists, false prophets, who were before and truth
Churches at Galatia Corinth, and made havoc, brought in deceit and infected
many, as Coloss. Pergamus, Rev. 3. Sardis and Laodicea; but now all Nations
were erred and gone from their maker, their husband, and did drink of the cup
of the whore, and were adulterated from the life, faith, and power, and now
worshipped the beast, and the whole world went after him, there was some of his
adultery, whordome and fornication in the Apostles days, and some had drunken
then, but now Nations, kindreds, Tongues, and people drunk the cup of
fornication, and now Jesabel who slew the prophets, and drunk the blood of the
saints, she reaches out her cup; Kings, merchants, Noble men, great men,
Nations, kinreds, Tongues, and people were made drunk, the manchild sought to
be devoured, floods cast out after the woman, the saints blood drunk, the world
worships the Dragon, and the beast and his great authority, and wonders after
him; now Jesabel the whore, who made the nations drunk, she prophesies, all the
Nations made drunk with her cup of fornication, and drinks in all her false
doctrines, and devised fables, now she is as a Queen, now the Nations worships;
after a beast arises, she gets upon him and rides, she and the beast becomes
one, she drinks the blood of the saints, the beast makes war, compells, kills,
being of one mind with the whore; none to buy or sell but they that have his
mark of his name, or at least some of the number of his name; and who were not
defiled, were killed (or sought to be killed) this is since the apostles days;
so now we have found the whore, her beginning in the Apostasy, having lost the
faith and power that the Saints were in, we have found out the rise of the
beast in the Apostasy, since the Apostles, that all the World wondered after and
worshipped.

Now Rome we have found thy foundation, and the beginning of thy rise, and sees
how thou art elevated, we have thee and all that sprang out of thy stock and
root, betwixt this time and the Apostles, and we read beyond thee, though thou
boast thy self of antiquity, and glory in thy counsels, and convocations, for
thy proof we have sounded thy bottom, I have thee and all the Apostates sprang
from thee betwixt me and the Apostles, the antichrists false-Prophets,
deceivers, false Apostles, they began, they laid thy foundation, who went out
from the Apostles, and denied the cross of Christ and the power of God, and
the Apostle prophesied of their increase, here thy visible members began to
gather, and they went out into the World, and the World received them,
according to Christ's saying, out of the light, out of the power, out of the
faith, out of the life that the holy men of God were in, being ravened from the
spirit, whored from the life, they went out in an outward dress, had a show, a
form of godliness, the Nations received the cup, the Kings of the earth, the
Nobles and the mighty men, thou boasts of, they drank of thy cup and were
inflamed with adultery after thee; and then the Nations over which the
whoredoms spread, kindreds, Dominions, tongues Nations peoples and become
fornicators, all became as a sea, rolling, tossing, foming, raging, casting up
mire and dirt, unstable reeling; then the Kings, the great men, thy Nobles who
were Rulers over the people, being drunk with the Nations cup of fornication,
they sprang up as a great Beast with so many heads and horns, and their teeth
became as Lions, their feet as Bears, and then thou began to ride in the
Nations, and to sit as a Queen, then thou associated thy drunken fornicators
together then thou began to usurp authority and then sit as Judge over the
heritage of God and of the Saints, of the Apostles, and of them that kept the
testimony of Jesus then thou began to kill and destroy and suck the blood of
the Saints, and to be drunk with it; and then thy Kings whom thou calls
converts and Christians having drunken thy cup, they formed Laws and made
Laws to guard thy whoredoms and adultries and Idolatries, then they became thy
executioners, and what thou said was good, the Beast maintained, and what thou
condemnedst by thy Counsels for heresy, they became executioners of; then came
in compelling to worship by the Beast that rose out of the Sea, and then thou
cried Heretics and condemned the just, and then thou got a cover, thou would
not kill, but the beast must upon whom thou rides; then if there was any that
kept their virginity and the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ which was in the
Apostles days, then thou condemnedst them for Heretics; then the Beast
compelled, and caused to worship, but if they would not bow to his image, then
thy Merchants cries up, they despise Governors and Rulers, when both thy
Doctrine and thy Laws is corrupt, then the Beast must kill, then he blaphemes
the God of heaven, and his Tabernacle; and then thou says thou killest none,
but the beast must (upon which thou rides) and shall have a whole Counsel to
confirm it to be lawful; And now thou calls thy self the Catholic and
Apostolical Church, and thy seat the Apostolical Chair, and the Rulers and
leaders defenders of the faith. Nay, we find thee contrary to the primitive
Church, and thy seat and Chair is raised up since, and thy bed of whoredoms
made since, and the Kings and Rulers in thy Dominions are become defenders of
thy idolatries and whoredoms, and are indeed the beast that makes War with the
Saints, and has prevailed, and truth overcome; but he is risen who is able to
make war with the Beast, and to take the whore, and to burn her flesh with
fire, for he is able to judge her; and thy Beasts weapons and thine are carnal,
but the Lambs and the Saints are spiritual, and so thy Doctrine and practice is
quite another thing, patched ^uffe, some brought in from the first Priesthood,
some borrowed from the Jews, as thy Altars, thy vestments (that thy idolatrous
Merchants wear when they celebrate thy great idol the Mass) and the rest
borrowed fragments from the heathen, and the rest invented in the night of
darkness, and all that you have is invented trumpery, as bad as the heathen;
all your Crosses, Altars, Crucifixes, your Cells your Lent, your Fasts, your
Feasts, your Hair-cloth; your Images, Pictures, your Relickes of dead men's
bones, your Tithes, your offerings, oblations, obventions, your Tapers, Beads,
your holy water, your Baptizing of Infants, your Purgatory, your Praying for
the dead, your visiting of old Walls, and old Tombs, and rotten Sepulchers, your
Pilgrimages, your Inquisition; all this is come up since the Apostles days,
and thy consecrated bread and wine, which thou calls the body and blood of
Christ, about which idol thou (and all that have drunken the cup of
fornication,) and the Beast has slain thousands of men in your blood thirsty
cruelty, and all your works you call meritorious they are all dead, and will be
sentenced by the Lamb (who is risen,) to be self-righteousness; and so we have
found out your visible Church had no being but since the Apostasy, since the
Apostles days, and you are erred both in Doctrine and practice, and all your
Ordination of your Ministers, your Schools and Colleges is all in the will of
man, all this is in the fall, in the transgression, and under the curse.

Object. Some of the Protestants or reformed Churches (so called) may say we
like this well that you declare against po^^^y, we agree with you in that; but
we have renounced the Whores cup, and have denied all the powers of the Beast
long since.

Answ. Although many of you Priests have denied your mother, because some Kings
and Rulers, or Dukes or Magistrates have cast off the yoke, and they protect
you, and give you maintenance, yet we cannot but remember you of your
genealogy, and decent, and your doctrine and practice shall prove it, and make
it manifest, and that you take part with the Beast, and worships his image, and
shall be evidenced, more and more, even before this generation pass away; are
not you a stem sprung from the same root? does not the fruits you bring forth
evidence it, and practice, demonstrate it? if you grant that Rome is Apostized
from the faith which the Apostles were in, and their practice (you must not
deny your fathers) who made the Bishops, and ordained them; did not the Pope,
who ordained you Ministers or priests, did not the Bishops, who set up your
Mass-house, with all the Pictures and Crosses in and upon them, which you call
your Church? who established Tithes, offerings, oblations, Easter reckonings,
Midsumer dues, did not the Pope first,, and them that were subject to his
power, who invented Schools and Colleges to fit you for the Ministry, and
qualify you for the Ministry, as you say, is not this set up in, and since the
Apostasy began? your set wages, your baptizing of Infants, your consecrated
Bells, which the Pope hollowed or his emissaries? do not you preach up the
letter for the word, and the letter for the Gospel? and are not you calling
your bread and wine a Sacrament? which word you have received from Rome, your
Pulpets and your hour-glasses, your cushons, your black robes and long robes,
fals-Prophet-like, your funeral for the dead like the Popes exequies for the
dead, your devouring widows houses, and sueing men at the Law, your haling
them to Courts and prisons, your taking away men's goods by force, threefold,
ten-fold; yea, is that which you claim, and from them that you work not for;
neither dare you say this was the Apostles practice, or any of the primative
churches; If you say yea, all that knows the scripture or the least of God in
them to guide them, or to open their understandings, they will see you nearly
related to Rome, and to the Apostates, and deceivers, and falls Prophets of old,
and that you are greatly inflamed with the Whores cup; and did not the holy men
of God speak as they were moved by the holy Ghost and divine inspiration, and
as the spirit of truth revealed it self in them? and do not you all head and
tail deny any such thing to be now? and further concludes, that its a great
error to look for any such thing? then be convinced in your selves, you are
Apostates and Apostatized from that faith, and hope and spirit that was in the
primative times; and now reads old authors, it may be 20. or 30. books before
you can get an hours discourse patched up to hold you dreaming till the glass
be run; and dare you be so impudent and confident as to say that you ^are not
Apostates? and are you not followers of the beast, and have you not his mark,
and bear you not his Image? do not you count that disorder which the Apostles
and the Churches counted order? if any thing was revealed to him that stands
by, let the first hold his peace? are not you apostatized from this order, and
cries take him away, and yet you would be called Apostolical? well, these
things being true, and obvious enough to behold, to any who knows any thing of
God, I need not say much more in this thing, but all wise men will come out
from among you, and out of Babylon the Mother of Harlots, which has made you
and your root and genealogy drunk with her fornication, and this is my call to
separate from her and you, that are in the apostasy; and wait to know the word
which was in the beginning, and the Gospel which was Preached to Abraham, which
endures for ever, whose joyful sound is come forth in power and great glory,
which will shake the foundation of your great City, even mystery Babylon, and
not leave one stone upon another which shall not be thrown down; and then the
holy men of God shall rejoice, and the Saints of the most high shall sing, they
that have been as sheep for the slaughter shall reign over the earth, and shall
say, The Lord God omnipotent Reigns, and let us rejoice and be glad, and he
has taken to himself great power, and is coming to gather his Lambs out of
your mouths, and to feed in a pasture you never saw, which was manifest to the
Saints in light, before you apostates sprang, and shall be again, when you and
all your dark muddy traditions, and inventions, are gone down into the pit,
where there is no remembrance.

Object. But it may be the pure reformed Church of Scotland, as it has been
called, and the old Episcopal and Prelatical Priests of England, who has
borrowed their images to set up here will be ready to say we have denied, the
whore and the beast, and the apostasy, and we have pure reformation, we have
denied Bishops which was made by the apostate the Pope, and now we have settled
all things according to the Primitive Church.

Answ. There never did spring up any deceit since the Apostles or before, but
it called it self, by the best name; as for the Priests of Scotland, their
doctrine and practice is made manifest, and their Reformation by their
principles which I refer the Reader to, entitled the principles of the Priests
of Scotland, their Reformation, and discipline is nearly related to the Spanish
Inqnisition; for their Doctrine, they say grace is not free, and faith is not
without sin, and the Letter is the word of God, and that they are cursed that
say there is a light within which will lead up to God; and as one said,
although it meant Christ; and if any will not submit to their words, and
conform to their practice and traditions, then they call a counsel together, as
their forefathers at Trent, and pronounces him a heretic, and within this few
years banished them, or else took their whole substance outward from them; and
if any out of conscience could not submit unto their invented tradition, then
if he ever came to have any converse with them again, be must have a penance
before he could get an indulgence from them, like the Pope; and furthermore, if
any deny them because they are out of the doctrine of Christ, and are contrary
to the Scripture, then, as I said, they excommunicate them, and charges all
people neither to buy nor sell, nor eat nor drink with them, nor work for them;
and so the beasts power is exercised, compelling to come to their Mass-houses;
and as for the denying the Bishops, then you have denied your fathers that
begat you, and ordained you, then, you have no Ordination; but may be you have
cry^d so for settling your Gospel, you have got a Commitee to ordain you, or one
company to lay hands on another, but when receive ye the holy Ghost? Oh that is
an error in your Church, but are you not got into the old Cathedrals (so
called) and into the Steeple Houses, and the old Masse-houses, and where you
had, may be 20 pounds or forty in the year, now you have gotten a hundred, it
may be two; here is reformation indeed; well, we must needs remember you of your
race and stock, the apostates since the Apostle days, and the former practices
which is found among the old Protestants and Papists is among you, and you are
still drunk with the whores cup, and are crying for Cains weapons to guard you;
well, I say you art part of the dragons tail, that draws to the earth, and to
the pit, which will be the end of all idolaters and Apostates, except they come
to repent.

And as for the Independants Churches, so called, you are a branch of the same
root, you have declared against the Bishops and court Prelates, and said they
were in error, and many of you declared against them for pluralists, because
they had too great benefits, and declared against Tithes, as to be
Antichristian, and whosoever received Tithes, denied Christ come in the flesh, who
are wheeled about, and now takes them your selves, and creeps into the old
Mass-houses, and has taken that up which you condemned in others, and so have
made your former testimony void, and all sober people sees your hypocrisy and
deceit, who have gathered a company together, which you call select people, or
members of your Church, and you exclude the rest who have as good right to your
Ordinance as you, for they profess Christ in words as you do; And yet you will
receive their means, whom you judge not capable of your Ordinance; and your
Church will no more maintain you, then it would maintain them that you have
denied in words, if you had not the beasts power to compel, your vineyard would
starve you, your Gospel and your Preaching is one with the former, and the
people is the same in nature they were before; you have got Bishops Lands,
agmentations and Stypends more large then your forefathers had, for the most
part, and sue men at the Law, and hales them before Judgment seats and takes
away their goods whom you look upon to be in error; yet this stands as good
with you as any Article of your faith, to force to compel, to sue, to hale
into prison, to take away their goods, and get a Scripture for your cover, and
say he that Preaches the Gospel must live of the Gospel, and them that neither
hear you, nor receives you, neither believes your Gospel; yet you conclude, its
lawful to take their goods and if you cannot get them, hale the party into
prison; are not you drinking still the whores cup? and do not you follow the
Beast? and do not you own that Law to be just that compels people to pay money
to you who denies your Ministry, and are none of your sheep? and are not your
Ordinances and worship imitated things from the Scripture, the Saints words,
and yet out of their life and practice, are not you in the Apostasy? have you
not your profession and confession of faith, to make year after year as the
Magistrate changes? does not this evidence, that you are unstable and are yet
in the waters upon which the whore sits, and situated in Babylon, the Mother
of Harlots, who yet makes you drunk, and that makes all the filth and vomit
appear in the earth that stains the earth, and your idols corrupts the earth;
and all seperates under what name soever, who have not denied the ground of
apostasy, but are in the apostasy, for all sects since the apostles days have
taken up some part and left another, since the life has been lost, and the
power lost all has been in idolatry, and the Protestants who have denied the
Papists, yet they have not denied them in the ground of their worship, but has
retained some, part and has kept some part of their worship; and all Sects
sprung out of the Protestants, in them all there is some part remaining, for
they have not denied the ground of the worship set up in the apostasy the
whores cup i^ drunk of, and the Dragon has power which sought to destroy the
man-child, and made war with the remnant of the seed of the woman who was
clothed with the Sun; you all stick yet in Babylon, and the best of you all,
are but yet in the suburbs thereof.

For since the Apostles days their foundation has been either traditions,
Imitations, inventions of their own, or borrowed things from the Jews in the
first covenant, or at the best, the letter has been the ground of their faith
and their foundation, which they have twined and translated this way and that,
according to the wit, and reason of every particular sect and opinion, and
according to the understanding of their private spirits; now all these
buildings, and towers that men have builded up in the Apostasy, they would
fasten upon the writings of the holy men of God, and so has raised an
imagination of their own, and so would have the scripture prove what they say;
and the writings of the Apostles, they all call the Gospel; and the word of
faith, and the light of the Gospel, and the foundation and the tryer of
spirits, and the touchstone and say its the foundation of their faith and
Religion; and so are all in the distraction one envying another, and
persecuting one another about the words of truth, spoken from the spirit of
truth, which cannot be understood again but by the same spirit; and so all them
that have not the spirit of truth, are in the Apostasy, And all Sects
Judgments and opinions that has risen up since the Apostasy, from the faith
that was once delivered to the saints, when the woman traveled and brought the
man-child, which after, because of the Dragons power, fled into the
wilderness, and her child caught up unto God, all the faith and worship, that
since is sprung up since the Whore has sitten as a Queen in majesty, is all
denied, the ground of their worship, Laws, Traditions, Inventions, and all
their invented practices, and forms and Images, and likenesses are denied, and
disowned, as to be the dress and attire of the Whore which has allured people
through her enticing pretenses and shows of holiness, when indeed all is but
spiritual adultery, and this must be all turned under again, the Whores flesh
burned, and her attire plucked off, and her nakedness appear, and her shame to
them that have committed fornication with her, and they shall be ashamed of
themselves, and of her, and abhor themselves, and abhor her, and destroyed
shall she be; and the Lambs wife shall be beautified, and come out of the
secret places into open view, out of the solitary wilderness, into the
beautiful place that the Lord will bring her into, and the time, times, and
half time is out, the thousand two-hundred and threscore days is at an end;
and he bears witness of it who saw her ^fly away upon Eagles wings into the
secret place, which was prepared for her, for these days and times appointed,
and I say he that knows the counsel, of the most High (in this matter) can
account the time, times, and a half, and the days, and what shall be after
the days be expired which is at an end; blessed is he that sees, believes, and
understands, he shall see that which yet has not appeared, neither can it be
believed by the most, though it were declared; but yet a little while and the
Earth grows ripe, and an ear will be opened in many who cannot yet hear, and
for a little while in this I shall be silent, and treasure up that which the
spirit has revealed, till the time be fully accomplished which God has
determined, and then his glory shall be revealed, and all the former things
which have lived since the man of sin has been exalted, shall all dye, and an
utter consumption shall be of all the changeable Laws made since the Apostasy,
and the many changeable dresses of the whore, and attires in which she has
appeared, and Imaginary worships into which all have run since they were
Apostati^ed from the faith; all this shall be disanulled, and come to an end,
and be blasted for ever, the spirit of the Lord says Amen.

How the woman that was clothed with the Sun, and had the Crown of twelve
Stars upon her head, which did fly into the wilderness, comes out again
after the great whore is judged, and her child that was caught up unto God,
comes to appear again.
NOw after the time, times, and half a time, and after the thousand two
hundred and threescore days she returns after the whore is judged, and the
great City Babylon is fallen, which has made the Nations drunk, and brought
forth children in fornication, who had drunk the blood of the Saints in the
Apostasy after the Whore was judged; and the voice was heard in heaven, of much
people that sang Halelujah, salvation, and glory, and honor, and power; Who
witnessed to the righteousness of Gods judgment: And a voice came out of the
Throne, saying, praise our God all his servants, and ye that fear him both
small and great, Rev. 19. 5. and verse the 6. And I heard as it were the voice
of many waters, and as a great multitude, and as the voice of a mighty thunder,
saying, Halelujah, for the Lord God omnipotent reigns; the Whore is now
judged, the mother of harlots condemned with all her enchantments, and
sorceries.

Now the Lambs wife appears, who is the mother of the man-child which was
caught up unto God, she that was clothed with the Sun, with the glorious
everlasting Celestial light, she is both the mother and the wife, he that has
an ear let him hear; now Jerusalem that is from above, (spiritually so called)
who was the mother of all the Saints before the apostasy, she appears again,
and comes to be the wife of the Lamb, and the city of the Saints, and the
mother of them that are born from above; this shall be and is made manifest to
some, but a numberless number shall see it, and the day hastens greatly, and
she is appearing again, and her solitary garments shall be put off; and as she
was beautiful (before the whore made the nations drunk) clothed with the Sun,
and had the Moon under her feet, and a Crown of twelve Stars upon her head (and
though she became child-lesse, and also as a widow, and the remnant of her seed
slain, and destroyed) so shall she appear again in glory and beauty as before,
and shall be made ready, yea, my eye has seen it; she is making her self
ready as a bride for her husband, and unto her is granted, that she shall be
arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, even arrayed in the righteousness of
the saints, which is not self-righteousnesse; the garments of the harlot and
her lovers; but in the righteousness of Christ the Lamb, her husband and child
also, and she shall now bring forth many more children, though her seed have
been slain, yet a numberless number shall appear, and ten thousand thousand
shall be brought forth by her, and glory in her, and reverence her, and rejoice
in her for ever, and they shall be all clad in the same robe which the husband
the Lamb is clothed withal, and the same, the Lambs wife, this woman is
clothed with all, and the same shall all the children be clothed with all,
the fine linen the righteousness of the Lamb which was dead and slain since
the foundation of the world, but now alive and lives for evermore; and here a
heavenly family appears now after the Apostasy, and this shall be seen by all
that have an eye, that can see through and beyond the smoke of the pit, that
have darkened the air while the beast and Dragon has had power; but now has
her child appeared again, the manchild has appeared again, and he that was in
the spirit on the Lords day saw whether he was taken up to the Throne of God,
Revel. 12. ver. 5. and on the same Lords day he saw him after the woman was
fled, and the remnant of her seed was made War with and flain in the earth,
where the Dragon had power. He that was in the spirit saw him alive again after
he was caught up; So he that is in the spirit, now on the Lords day sees the
same man-child who was brought forth by by the woman who was to rule the
Nations, but was caught up to the Throne of God before he came to R^le; and
then the Dragon ruled the beasts and false prophet, the Whore the Mother of
harlots sat as a Queen, and the woman the mother of the heir fled into an
obscure and a retired place, and was hid, times and days (as I said before)
but as she appeared again in beauty, so the man-child the heir he appears also
in glory, Majesty and power, and John saw him, Revelations 19. 11. 12. 13. 14.
15. 16.

And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse and he that sat upon him,
was called faithful and true, and he does Judge and make War in rigteousness
his eyes was as a flame of fire, on his head were many Crowns, and he had a
name written that none knew but he bimself, and he was clothed with a vesture
dipped in blood and his name is called the word of God.

And now the woman's seed is increased again, after the Dragon and the beasts
War, and now they become an Army, and follows the Lamb their leader who is
anointed with honor, glory, and Majesty and renown, strength, power, wisdom,
joy and gladness above all his fellows; yet his followers are anointed too,
and the seed of the woman the inhabitants of the City of the great King, they
are clothed with the same garment and Armor, and rides on in power strength
and Majesty after him, and they are clothed and shall be with the garment of
their Mother, and the garment of their Captain their head; and as he rode on in
innocence, so they ride on after him, and the woman was in heaven, that
traveled, and the child was born there, though he was to rule the Nations of
the Earth; and so who so are of this woman's seed which is born in the City of
the great King Jerusalem unto which the Hebrews were come, Heb 21. before the
Apostasy, and before the woman fled, so now the same City comes to be seen
again, and the children are free born of their mother the Lambs wife, who is
joined to him, and is to be so for ever in the everlasting Covenant; so they
being heavenly children, redeemed from the earth, from under the Dragons power,
they follow the Lamb, the word, Gods power, Revel. 19. 14. And the armies which
were in heaven followed him, upon white horses, clothed in fine linen white and
clean, and out of his mouth goes a sharp sword and with it he shall smite the
Nations; and now comes he to rule them with a rod of Iron, he was brought forth
long before; but was caught up to God again, and the Dragon, beast and whore,
and false prophet ruled the Nations, and killed the Saints, but now he appears
again after the Apostasy, and a great host with him, and the woman also and her
children are many, and they all follow the firstborn; and now comes the woe to
the dragon and Whore, beast and false prophets, and unclean spirits, and on
them that worship devils, and now shall he tread the wine press of the wrath of
God Almighty. And he has on his vesture and on his thigh written, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords.

And now appears an Angel standing in the Sun which the woman^ was clothed
with, and he cried with a loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the
midst of heaven, come and gather to the Supper of the great day of God, and now
must the flesh of the Kings and Captains, and Nobles, and flesh of mighty men
who had drunk the Whores cup, now must drink of the wine of Gods wrath; and the
Beast and the Kings of the earth, and their Armies gathered together to make
War against him that sat on the white horse and his Army; and the beast was
taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought miracles before him, and the
remnant were slain (that took part with the beast by him that sat upon the
horse and his Army; whose sword proceeded out of his mouth, and all the fowls
were filled with their flesh) the Whore is burnt before, the beast, the false
prophet and his Army now slain, and their flesh eaten by the fowls of heaven,
and now the blood comes forth to the horse bridles.

And now the Angel descends having the key of the bottomless pit from whence
the old Dragon, the Serpent, the red Dragon, the Devil came; there is his
beginning, there was he brought forth, and there he grew up, he that reads let
him understand, out of the bottomless pit; for the Nations were never deceived
till he appeared, and he appeared as I have said before, after the heaven and
the earth was made, and all things therein (I say after) he was not before, he
deceived Eve in the garden, now he is grown old, and so is truly called the
old Dragon, grown into a body of deceit; well now must he be taken and bound
and cast into the bottomless pit, from whence he came, that he deceive the
Nations no more, Rev. 20. 1, 2. and all this War is in the bringing out of the
Apostasy, and in order to the Lamb and the Saints everlasting Reign in heaven
and over the earth for ever.

This I have seen, and my heart rejoices, and my mouth shall praise the Lord;
and the woman I say is appearing, and she is clothed with beautiful garments,
and the holy child, the man-child, has appeared, and is manifest again among
the Saints, and in then; and the Lamb which has been slain since the world
began, is alive, and behold he lives for evermore; and now many are his
followers, and an innumerable company shall ride on after him who is King of
Kings; and now is God fulfilling that which John saw in the Lords day, which
should come to pass, the work is begun, he has appeared, out of whose mouth
proceeds the two edged sword which shall hew down all the Dragons army, the
beast and his followers, and though the cry be yet among many, who shall make
war with the beast? and who shall speak against his prophets? yet a little
while and fear shall come, and their vaunts and boasts shall be turned into
doubting, and dreadful fear on every side, for Jacob shall be as a flame, and
Esau and all his race shall be as Stubble, he that reads, let him understand
the wisdom of God in a mystery, and the work of the Lord which shall shortly
come to to pass.

The manifestation of Gods glory shall be as great after the Apostasy, as ever
it was in any age, before the rise of antichrist, and the ministrations (into
which them that follow the Lamb shall be brought) shall be as spiritual, holy,
Celestial, and divine as ever was before; For the end of all our outward
visible appearances shall come, which the whore has decked her self with, and
life it shall be known, in the body and God enjoyed, and worshipped, glorified,
and honored in that which shall never alter, but abides for ever; and this
shall be and is the last ministration that ever shall appear among the Sons of
men.

We who are come out of the Apostasy, knows what was before, and sees what
shall be after, the everlasting Gosple of the Son of God shall be preached again
to them that dwell on the Earth, the same that was preached to Abraham before
either old or new Testament was written; the latter, all sects since the
apostasy call the gospel, and so greatly manifest their ignoance, for that were
to make two Gospels to call the scriptures the Gospel, or that which is
written, and they who so err in their judgments, are yet among the smoke of
the pit, and are yet under antichrists reign, and are ignorant of him who is
the saving health of the Nations; And the living, infalible, true, lasting, and
everlasting spirit of the Father shall be poured out again, and many now
witness it, and a numberless number shall witness it, and the time hastens;
And the Lamb shall stand upon mount Sion, and many who are redeemed from the
earth and from among men which shall be the first fruits unto God, and to the
Lamb, and they shall sit with him, and shall reign with him, and have power
over sin, temptation, and the Devil, Hell and the Lake, and this is to come to
pass, and is coming to pass, and hastens greatly; and the voice out of heaven
shall be heard as the voice of many waters, and the voice of harpers harping
with their harps, and the new song shall be sung, the pure song of the Lamb
shall be sung by all who are redeemed from the earth in every Nation, kindred,
Tongue and people, who have heard, believed and received the joyful sound of
the everlasting Gospel again, and now they shall fear God, and glorify him,
and honor him, even they who have feared the Beast, and glorified him in the
Apostasy, they shall deny his power, and own the Lambs power, and worship him
that sits upon the throne of righteousness, who lives for ever and ever, and
is eternal Life it self; the worship shall be now in spirit and truth, where
the Dragon cannot come, neither the beast, Harlot, false prophet, nor
antichrist, nor none of his followers can come, and here in the ministration
shall be more glorious, after the Apostasy then it was before; the worship stood
before in many outward visible things, and representations, and outward
performances, and ordinances, and I manifestly say, the dragon, beast, whore,
and false prophets and Apostates took up these things, and Nations and
kindreds, and Tongues, and people who drunk of the whores cup, and all that
were gone from their maker their husband, they have been and are acting and
performing, imitating like Jannes and Jambres; but since the days of the
Apostles, they corrupted these things, and has made Idols of them, and painted
themselves with them, and have got the sheeps clothing; therefore now will the
Lord appear and manifest his power, life and glory in away more invisible and
pure, than before, and more divine, celestial and glorious, where never an
hypocrite shall tread in the path; and so the restoration is a mystery that
shall be after the Apostasy, the glory is not to appear in external things,
for there the mother of harlots has hid her self long, which has made all
Nations drunk; but the clothing of the Lambs wife and of the bride shall be
another thing then the attire of the harlot, for the spouse of the Lamb shall
be arrayed, in the same attire, that the Lamb is clothed withal, and with the
same vestment, and the Tabernacle of God is to be with men, and he shall dwell
in them, even the Lord that spirit, and shall walk in them, and they shall be
his people, and God himself shall be with them and in them, and sorrow shall
be done away, and tears wiped away, and that done away which was the cause of
sorrow; Rev. 21. 3. and 4. and there shall be no more death, nor crying, nor
any more pain, for the former things are passed away, to wit, death which
entered in by sin, it shall be destroyed, and the earth out of which the second
beast arose, and the sea out of which the first beast did arise and upon which
the whore sat, and Hell, and the lake which was prepared, and raised up, when
man was degenerated from the Lord, they shall be destroyed, and he also which
has the power of death which is the Devil, he shall be destroyed and his
works, (the cause of scorn) and then they shall see the Lord face to face,
even them that have but seen him darkly, as in a glass, or as in a cloud, they
shall see his pure living countenance, which gives life, and death, and Hell
shall be cast into the Lake of fire, and whosoever is not found written in the
Lambs book of life must be cast into the fire.

Then the new heaven and earth shall be seen, and the heavenly City, which
shall come down from God out of heaven; which no mortal eye shall behold,
neither shall be able to behold, which has twelve foundations, and twelve gates,
and the glory of God shall be upon her, and her light shall be as a stone most
precious, and as clear as cristall, yea all things visible are too short and
not to be compared to it; for in it their need neither Sun nor Moon to shine in
it, for the glory of the Lord shall lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof, and all who shall be partakers of this glorious Ministration, shall
walk in the light of the Lamb; there shall be no night, nor the least
appearance of a cloud or darkness, but transparent brightness, and glory which
shall be permanent, durable and everlasting; for the Lord God and the Lamb is
the Temple of the City, in which the Saints shall worship him that sits upon
the throne for evermore, and shall give unto him glory, and honor, and
dominion, and eternal praise for evermore, who alone is worthy, who lives for
ever in eternal glory, and everlasting light and brightness for cvermore.

And his face shall be seen in whom all figures representations, and shadows
ends in, and the pure river of water of life which is as clear as Crystal,
which proceeds out of the Throne of God and of the Lamb; and all who have kept
the word of his patience shall drink thereof, and be nourished up in
immortality and life everlasting for ever. And the tree of life that stands in
the Paradise of God, them that have overcome shall eat thereof and live for
ever; and the Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, people and Regions, who have heard,
believed and received the everlasting Gospel shall know his saving health; and
the Throne of God and the Lamb shall be seen, and his servants shall serve him
who is their Lord and King, who lives for ever, and they shall see his face,
and his name shall be in their foreheads, and the Lord God shall give them
light and shall be unto them an everlasting light, and they shall reign with
him for ever and ever, over the whore, Beast, false prophet, Antichrists,
deceivers, seducers, the pit, death, hell and the grave; and shall triumph in
his strength over all the powers of darkness, and sing praises to him that
abides for ever; these things are true and faithful, and shall be fulfilled,
and the time is at hand, blessed are they that wait and watch, that they may
discern the signs of the times, and the coming of the bridegroom, that they
may enter into the chamber of rest, and into the Palace of eternal life, into
the City of the great King to sit with him, and eat with him, and rejoice with
him in the glory Eternal, which was before the world began, and shall be when
it shall be no more, the end hastens; he is blessed that is come and coming to
the end of it; for that which is immutable and Eternally glorious shall appear,
the Lord hasten it, says my spirit. Amen.

The day of the Lord and how it is seen.
THe Lord God of the whole earth, who lives for ever, even the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac and Jacob, whose Throne is established in righteousness for
ever; who rides upon the heavens, and shines forth in his eternal excellency,
from the firmament of his power; he is manifesting himself in his power, as in
the days of old, and revealing his righteousness as in the years past, and
pouring forth his spirit upon his sons and daughters, according to his promise,
and they that believe, comes to be made partakers of the blessing of the
everlasting Hills, even the Lord, who appeared at Sinai, unto Moses his servant
in the bush, who rose up from mount Seir, and shined forth in his brightness
from mount Paran, and came with ten thousands of his Saints, even he, from
whose right hand went a fiery Law, so that the people could not behold his
glory; the same is he who has now appeared in this the day of his power, and
is appearing, whose glory shall dazzle the eyes of the world, whose brightness
shall make dim all the worlds glory, and stain its wisdom, and shut it up in
utter darkness, that it shall not appear to have any existance or being, and
the shadow of death shall fly away, and all the haughty and lofty Princes of
this world shall be horribly afraid; the beasts shall go into their dens when
the day appears, and the Lambs of the everlasting fold shall come forth and be
fed in the fat valleys, where the springs of life compasses about all the
banks, and rejoice in their shepherd, and shall say, The Lord is my shepherd;
which many at this time does admire and say, What has the Lord wrought? who
have seen his wonders in the days of old, and have seen his noble acts, which
the fathers have told of, who are fallen asleep, and are at rest in the Lord:
and now many is God bringing to see their witness to be true, and to have the
same fulfilled in themselves; honor and praise unto him for ever, who is the
stay and strength of all his people for ever. And the day of the Lord is
broken, and the light has appeared that manifests all things which are
reproveable; and the day star is risen in the hearts of many, and they are come
to see that fulfilled in their hearts, which Peter exhorted them to wait for,
and to take heed unto the sure word of prophecy, until the day appeared, and
did dawn in their hearts; which day when it appears, and to whom it appears,
discovers all things and makes all things manifest, as it is declared by the
Spirit of truth, in the Scripture of truth; and every man's work shall be tried
of what sort it is, and of what nature it is; and this day has appeared to
many, praises to the Lord, who have waited for it, and now they see every thing
in its ground and rise, and every tree and fruit is seen according to its kind,
whether good or bad, and every man's work is obvious to every one who are in the
day, and upon whom the morning of righteousness has appeared, and the Sun of
righteousness has shined upon, whereby that is seen in every one (by the light
which is truly called day, by the Lord who causes it to spring from on high)
which is reproveable and condemnable, and also whatever is justifiable and
unreproveable, is seen by the day of the Lord appearing in the heart.

The day of the Lord, what it is, and to whom it has appeared, discovered, and
how it is seen.
GOd is a spirit, his day is spiritual, and is seen with a spiritual eye, its
pure light, pure brightness, the pure shining forth of the Lord in his glorious
excellency, the pure shining forth of eternity, life putting forth it self in
its brightness, holiness sheding it self abroad in its glory, purity spreading
it self in its immeasurable excellency, and can only be seen as it is in it
self, by the children of the light that are born of it: there is a natural day
there is a spiritual day; the natural day receives its brightness from the Sun,
the spiritual day receives it brightness from the Son of righteousness, by whom
its brought forth, without whom nothing was made, or is made, or brought forth,
but by him who is the fountain of life; and as the natual day receives its
clearness from the natural Sun, and is discerned by the natural eye of a
natural man; and all things natural are seen and discovered by and in the
natural day, and are perspicuous and obvious to him that has his natural
sight; even so, from the Son of righteousness, the Lord of glory, light and
purity; the day of God receives its brightness, and is issued out from him by
the rays of his brightness, and is discerned and seen only by the spitual eye
of the spiritual man, who is the image of the father brought forth in life, and
in his own nature and quality; (that is to say) from God the Father of life, by
Christ Jesus the life of men, the light of the world; and this is the birth
which is born from above, which is of the nature of the Father, and the Son, and
of the day; and he only comes to behold this day, and discerns all things of
the Fathers Kingdom by it, and likewise discerns all the hidden things of
dishonesty, and the works of darkness which are brought forth by the Prince of
darkness, who is shut up in eternal and utter darkness, which is his dwelling
place for ever, which is his residence, and shall be the residence of all the
workers of iniquity that bear his image for ever.

Ob. But some may be ready to say, It is not yet appeared, and all things are
not yet made manifest, and that day is not yet come, neither has appeared in
this age to any.

Ans. What if a man that is naturally blind say, that there is no light in the
day, nor in the Sun, because he sees none; is therefore there no light in the
day, nor in the Sun? And what if all things be alike unto him, day and night,
so that he can distinguish nothing, does this therefore make void their seeing,
who do see with the natural eyes, both the Sun and the day, and hinder them
from distinguishing or discerning? And what if they who are spiritually blind,
and are children of the night, say they see nothing, nor beholds nothing of the
day of the Lord, or of the discovery of the things of God, or of his glorious
appearence, which many witness; does this therefore make their sight void, or
the discovery of things void to them who have seen into the things that be of
Gods kingdom? the unbelief of some, does not make the faith of them that do
believe void, God forbid.

What the day of the Lord is, and what it will be to the wicked, delcared.
AS I have said, though the day of the Lord be pure light and brighnesse in it
self, and mixeth not with the night, which is of a contrary nature, because
the Lord in the beginning separated them, and set a decree which will last unto
all perpetuity, and that which limited the bounds and circumference thereof now
is the same: I say, though the day of the Lord be pure, and keeps its purity,
and property, and nature, and is still one and the same in it self; (for
nothing can alter its purity) yet it is a day of blackness and gloomynesse,
and a notable terrible day unto the wicked, who hates its appearance, and hates
the light, children of falsehood and of deceit, whose deeds be evil, it makes
them and their deeds manifest; there it is unto them, as it is written in a
certain place, The eyes lids of the morning are unto them as the shadow of
death; the appearance of the Lord affrightes them, and they would run from it
as a thief that diggeth through a wall, and breaks open a house in the night
when deep sleep is upon men; but when the day appears, that discovers his
actions, he is afraid, because he will then, (if he stays there) be seen; and
all that live wantonly upon earth, whose hearts are set to seek after
wickedness as for hid treasure; the day of the Lord will steal upon such as a
thief, and will come as upon a thief, and they being children of the night, and
bringing forth the fruits of darkness contrary to the light, they will have
their portion in utter darkness, and eternal vengeance will comcompasse them
as a wall, and fury as a fire that devoureth all the fuel, so shall the
ungodly perish, and have their portions with hypocrites.

Think on this all you railers, and revilers of the light, and of the
appearance of God, and repent; For as the wild ass that snuffes up the wind,
and they that seeks will not weary themselves with her, yet the time comes
when she may be found and taken; Even so all the ungodly, though they may run
as a wild Ass, and traverse their way as a Dromedary; yet the month comes,
and the day comes they will be overtaken in the midst of security, and they
shall not escape: And though the children of this world, and teachers of this
world, and professors of this world, who profess the Scriptures, have prayed
for the day of the Lord; yet when it comes, it will be as hot burning fire, as
devouring fire, and they will fall as stubble, and as burnt-mountaines before
it, and will not be able to abide; for as I said, whatsoever is reproveable, is
manifested by the day, the light, which is eternal, in which God appears, and
it shall appear even to the wicked, to the ungodly, they shall be made
manifest; that which is manifest, is not hid, but seen, and brought to light,
and beholden: So all you hirelings, who preach for hire, and you people that
love to have it so, you shall not be hid; all gainsayers of the truth, you
shall be found out, all shall be convinced of their ungodly deeds and hard
speeches, and that which makes your deeds manifest will be the day, and that
will convince you; for even the wicked shall see his appearance, although to
condemnation, shame, and contempt, They shall see him whom they have pierced:
And know further, even in the wicked, God has a witness, which is pure, which
checketh often, though they heed it not, because the God of the world has
blinded their eyes; yet when Christ the life shall appear, he will make that see
in the wicked which they have put out, and the God of the world has blinded;
yet he by his power will open even the eyes of the wicked, and they shall see
him and his coming in dread; and his pure appearance, which shall make them
horribly afraid, and his day and appearance will be to their sorrow: Although
they would not see, yet they shall be made to see, and to hear that which they
would not hear, when God sounds his Trumpet, to give warning to all, that the
dead both small and great may arise, some unto everlasting Life, and some unto
shame and everlasting contempt. All that has hated his appearance shall see,
though they would not; Put not this far away, all deceitful workers, drunkards,
Liars, swearers, whores, and whore-mongers Adulterers, Idolaters, who worship
your own Imaginations; and all railers, mockers, and proud, wanton disdainful
people that live in wantonness and pleasure, time-servers, flattererers,
men-pleasers, cursed speakers, vain talkers, foolish jesters, fierce dispisers
of those that are good, who are come out of the pollution that you wallow in;
his appearance will be to their joy, but to your shame and eternal misery,
except you speedily repent.

What the day of the Lord is to the righteous, and how he appears to them, and
whether any are to look for it while in the body, resolved.
THe appearance of God which is eternal Life, in his day, in his immeasurable
Light, a great joy and rejoicing to the righteous; for there they come to
behold him who is unto his people an everlasting light; and in his light they
come to see light; and in his day he reveals the secret mysteries of his
kingdom in them, who sees his day appear in their hearts, which makes all
things manifest, even the secrets of the Lord, and his hidden treasure, and his
durable riches which never cankers nor rusts, but is fresh, and keeps its pure
image and impression, and is still the same; by which all the righteous who
have waited for Gods appearance, comes to see him and his riches, as it is
written, This is he we have waited for, let us rejoice and be exceeding glad;
why? What, is he come you waited for? yea, come, and his reward is with him;
and they that see him come, find contentment in him, and in his reward; and
what is his reward? joy, gladness, peace of conscience, assurance of Gods Love
sealed in their hearts by the pure Spirit of the Lord, the streams of life
flowing forth continually from the great deep, which refreshes and keeps cool
in the greatest extremity and heat of temptation; and this is enjoyed by them
that have waited, and do wait for it even in the body, they bear witness of
him and of his coming; the disciples, what was their witness? The Son of God
is come, and has given us an understanding: Of what? of God, of his day, of
his appearance, of his power, of his wisdom, of his Kingdom, of hope, of
faith, of assurance, of peace, of joy, of comfort and consolation: what in this
Life? yea, a cloud of witnesses I might bring in former ages, and a cloud of
witnesses I might bring in this age, blessed be the Lord; But my witness is
nearer me, that gives me assurance, and is surer to me then all their
witnesses, although they be all true; Abraham the Father of the faithful, and
of the righteous, who believed God, and was accepted, he saw Christ's day, and
was glad. Say, literal professors, that is by faith; yea, what else? He and all
that ever saw Christ and his day, or the Father, they saw him by faith; By
faith they saw him who was invisible. Isa. 12. 2. Behold God is my salvation,
he also is become my salvation; what, do thou enjoy it already? yea, he is
become: And Simon who waited for the consolation of Israel, Luke 2. 30 Now let
thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. And this he
said, who knew Gods comfort and consolation; as our sufferings for Christ does
abound, even our consolation in Christ does much more abound; and they were
made partakers of his Divine nature, and sat together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus. For heaven is his throne, and they that are in him, and injoyeth
him who is the power of God, and the wisdom of God knows peace, and rest, and
salvation, both from guilt and act of sin; And the Apostle wrote to the
Hebrews, After he had purged away our sins (speaking of the atonement) the
everlasting high Priest, he sat down on the right hand on the Majesty on high.
He saw beyond sin even him who had purged away sin; and this comes to be made
manifest unto them, and in them that believe, by the Spirit of Jesus, who is
Christ the Lord, the arm that brings salvation, and is the Author of eternal
salvation unto all them that believe, who begins it in his day, and perfecteth
it in his day; for he works in the day, as he himself said, Hitherto my father
works, and I work; but the night comes when none can work. So that he
destroys the work of the Devil, which is his work in man; which they that are
come to his day feels and sees the handiwork of God in themselves, and his own
works praise him, for they only can; and they that are not come to the day
knows not Gods work in themselves; and they who have not yet heeded that in
themselves which manifests all things reproveable, neither that which does
reprove, they are not come to know the appearance, or the glimmering of light,
or of the day yet in themselves, which the Saints witness in them, even all
they that are sanctified.

Where the day of the Lord does appear^ and how it comes, and how it is to be
looked for, declared.
THey that gaze abroad, whose eyes are abroad, cannot see his appearance, nor
his day which appears. He that knows not wherein it consists, knows not how
to look for it, no more then the Jews who were Scripture Professors, and
learned men, knew wherein the kingdom of God did consist; Even no more do the
litteral professors, whose faith is founded on the Letter, and upon that which
is visible, know what I say, First, all must know wherein it does consist. It
is eternal brightness* shed abroad through all things, which pierces through,
and searches the secretest place, even that which is invisible, and makes
manifest all things; and the nature of every thing, by the day of the Lord
comes to be seen, and it appears in the heart; they were to wait for the day to
dawn, and to break forth in their hearts, and to wait for its appearance there;
and that's it which is to be waited for and upon; that which makes evil
manifest, and brings it to light, and declares against that which is contrary
to its nature, and so the day comes to dawn. Christ the covenant of light,
Gods gift, who is sent and anointed of God to Preach, and to proclaim the
acceptable year of the Lord, and also the day of vengeance he proclaims in the
heart; for he comes not to bring peace on earth, but a sword, and his sword is
the sword of the Spirit, it is that which divides and discerns the intent of the
heart; and his day discovers the desperate wickedness of the heart. And where
he finds no faith in the heart, he kindles a fire in the earthly heart, and
executes his vengeance: And his day unto such is a day of great perplexity,
their spirits comes to be wounded, the heart comes to be made faint, and sorrow
comes to fill their hearts, and trouble to be felt; and in this state are all
in, who are unconverted; he finds no faith, no hope in the heart, therefore he
comes and takes away peace. Many has talked of the day of the Lord, but when
it comes to draw near them, they will not abide it. Whatsoever makes manifest
is light; Now the day makes all things in every one manifest; and when deceit
is seen, and wickedness brought to light, then they that have done evil cannot
abide, but would run to any thing, rather then abide the day, or to see the
Lord of life appear in his day to execute vengeance upon his enemies, and to
destroy his adversaries, and to kindle an unquenchable fire to consume all his
enemies: And who has not seen this yet in themselves, never has seen the day
of salvation, nor of gladness; and this made the Prophet cry out, Who may abide
the day of his coming? And many have been eyewitnesses of the dreadful day of
the Lord which has appeared, wherein all peace has been hid from their eyes;
and all that ever came to see the day of joy and gladness, first did know the
terror and terrible day of the Lord in themselves: Therefore said the Apostle.
We knowing the terror of the Lord, do persuade men. Now it comes not with
outward observation; lo here, or there: So the Pharisees looked the Kingdom
should come, when Christ told them it was within them. So say I, if ever any do
behold the bright shining forth of eternal life, they must wait in that which
is^ pure of God, through which he will manifest his day, and his power in his
day in them; and is thou keep in thy mind to that which manifests unto thee
evil, and shows thee good, thou will see how it appears. Even as the light
shines from the East unto the West, so is the coming of the day of the Lord.
And the eye which is spiritual sees it, and the power and the glory of the Lord
comes to be seen in the day which is pure and spiritual in the heart; and the
eye which is pure, does behold when it comes, where it comes, and how it comes,
and it is hid from Vulterous eyes, and from their eyes which are full of
adultery, and cannot cease from sin. Now the day of the Lord comes not where
the carnal mind may imagine, nor when; Man will neither (according to the
carnal desire of the carnal heart, neither according to the evil eye that looks
out) can see it; but it is seen in Gods own light, and by the measure of Gods
holy spirit. And the day of the Lord is a mystery, the spirit of the Lord is
the only discoverer of it, None knows the things of God, but by the Spirit of
God; and the day of the Lord and his bright shining forth in the heart of man,
is one of the glorious things of God, which only the Spirit of God does give
the knowledge of to man, and in man, and not the letter, nor the Scripture; for
the Jews had the letter, and they had neither heard Gods voice at any time,
neither ever did see his shape, neither did they see the day of the Lord, nor
the power; neither in a word, did see or perceive God or any of the mysteries
of Gods Kingdom at all, but dreamed, imagined, thought and conceived of things
in their minds, their foolish hearts being darkened; for the further a man
draws from the Light, his heart comes to be more dark, and their
understandings closed up, and shut up that they cannot behold the Lord, neither
his glory, which is revealed only by Gods holy spirit, which spirit is near
man, though he sees it not.

What the spirit of the Lord is, and how it comes to be received, which
discovers the things of God.
THe spirit of the Lord is pure, holy, equal, purity it self, holiness it
self, equity it self, and is one with the Father and the Son, The Father, the
word and the Spirit are one, its Life, its pure power, pure strength, purity it
self, which mixeth not, neither joyneth to any thing but what is of its own
nature; its an immeasurable pure substance, its Life issued forth, an active
living power, and is everlasting; alters not, changes not, keeps its holiness,
its purity for ever; it is unsearchable, unfathomable, undeclarable; words are
all too short, too narrow to declare its excellency and glory, but only as it
makes it self out to them that believe, and opens it self, and sheds it self
abroad in them that wait upon it; it is revealed in its own purity, manifest in
its own power, and received in its own Light, felt in its own virtue, the
living Father of Life himself is manifested by it, and appears in his power,
majesty and excellency through it, to man and to the sons of men, to the
righteous and unrighteous, to godly and ungodly, to the upright, and to the
deceitful, to the children of darkness and to the children of Light; that
which searches the heart of man, and sees through all things, and makes
manifest all things, even the hidden things of God, and the secret works of
darkness, and reproves for all evil, all iniquity; that is the pure act of
the spirit, which convinces every man, and as the creature comes to join to
it, it arises and shines forth more clearly, and makes it self known in its
power and operation, its power comes to be felt, it checks and reproves,
judges and condemns all actions which is done and past, and brings them to
the creatures remembrance; and as it is waited upon and hearkened unto, it sheds
its self abroad in its own pure brightness, and brings all things to Light,
even all the deeds of darkness, and makes manifest the intents of the mind,
and manifests all things reproveable: Now as there is a waiting upon the pure
appearance of it, and the mind be still quiet, and calm, the creature comes to
feel and sensibly to know his own condition, and sees his mind is alive to
other things and other lovers, and not to God, and so he sees himself dead to
the things of Gods kingdom, and in the loss, and in the fall, and in the
transgression; now this which shows the vain motions and the vain thoughts,
and checketh them, is an operation of the spirit; and purity comes to be felt
working in the heart, and as it is loved and obeyed, it leads and converteth
the heart to the Lord, and draws toward it self, out of unholinesse, and
from under the dark power, and brings that under, and so it arises in its
strength as it is believed in and waited upon, and judges and condemns for all
evils for it is the discoverer of the mind of the Lord to the sons of men; or
the Father by it makes known his mind to, and in the creature, and does
discover the things that be eternal in their true property and nature (which
only they that have the spirit, and have received it, and are brought out of
the sensuality comes to discern him who is invisible, and the things that
belongs to everlasting happiness, which is not seen by a natural eye, neither
received by the spirit of the world, who never received the things of God,
neither the testimony of them, who were in the Life. Now all that comes to
receive it (that is to say the spirit of truth) must wait in that which is
pure, unto which it joines; it joines not to the corrupt man, neither to the
sensual heart, neither to the vile affections, neither to them whose eyes are
full of adultery, which cannot cease from sin; neither to the seed of
falsehood, neither to the corruptible birth, neither unto that which is born of
the flesh, nor unto the will of the creature; yet notwithstanding, though it
join not to these, yet it is near man, even the natural man; its manifestation
or the shining forth of its brightness makes all these things manifest before
mentioned to be evil; and thus far the spirit of God has appeared to the world
and all mankind, to convince the world of sin, yet still it remains in its own
purity; and while the heart of any man is taken up with that, and joined unto
that which the light reproves, (that is to say) the worker of iniquity; that
man has not received the spirit, neither is made possessor of it, nor injoyes
it, but it stands off man, and from man at a distance, showing the worker of
iniquity and the works of darkness, and manifesting to the creature in its
light, and letting him see to whom he is joined; for so far as a man denies
himself in acting or joining to that which the manifestation of Gods spirit
(shining forth in its own purity) in him reproves; so he comes nearer, and
comes to join in some measure to the spirit of holiness, or the holy spirit, and
to receive it, and to feel the power of God in some small measure, though but
weakly working in him, to the purging out those things which the spirit lets
him see is evil, which has been reproved in him, and so in some measure feels
in himself what to wait upon, and where to wait, and in what, even in that
which gives every one a feeling of their own condition within, and opens their
understandings.

How the spirit of truth works and operateth in them who are convinced, and
yet has not obeyed it, showed.
THough God who is a spirit has appeared by his manifestation unto all, yet
all have not received it; he that hates the light has not received it, The
eyelids of the morning are unto him as the shadow of death; that which
manifests and brings to light all evil, the evil doer likes it not, heeds
it not, receives it not, but still is without God in the world, that lies in
wickedness, and without the spirit, in death, and dead in trespasses and sins a
sepulcher in which the just lies slain; in this state God is not remembered,
there is no remembrance in the grave, nor no thanks in the pit, yet night
shines in darkness, and a man unconverted, yet convinced, in that darkness, and
that which convinces him is the light; so light shines in darkness, in man, in
the greatest darkness; and this may convince all vain disputers, who say every
one is not enlightened, neither that the spirit of God has appeared to all;
good men have it, bad men its near them; they that bring forth the fruits of
darkness, and bring forth the deeds of darkness, they are lighted, yea, they
that are in darkness, and are darkness, the light shines in them, the Spirit of
God shines there in darkness, manifests their darkness, here man is darkness;
the Ephesians were darkness, in the unconverted estate, yet had light shining
in them, Ephesians. 5. 8. the spirits manifestation they had, but were not led by it;
once they were without God in the world, but after were turned unto it, ^it
showed them their darkness, and it leading their minds, they came to be made
light in the Lord, who is that spirit, whose manifestation has appeared to
all, so all are without excuse, for he has not left himself without witness;
and they that have not Gods witness to be theirs, (that is to say) to possess
it, they have no faith nor assurance in God at all, but that which should bring
assurance of salvation unto them; it assures their condemnation, and also
reveals sorrow. Now as every one is turned to the measure of Gods holy spirit,
and keeps his mind into it, he comes to feel and to see its reproof, and so as
the mind is kept still into it, it arises in its purity, and shines forth in
the heart in more brightness, still checking man for disobedience, still
judging, and as it is listened unto, it appears in strength, and lays every
man's heart open, and lets him see how full of unrighteousness he is, how full
of imaginations he is, how his heart is full of vain and idle thoughts, and how
lust abounds in the heart; this makes his trouble to increase and his sorrow
to multiply, and this is always present; none can run from it, but it follows
him, and shall pursue every one to the pit who obey it not, and kindle his
torment; and whatsoever the mind may run into, to take pleasure for a moment,
and the heart be exercised in, yet this measure of Gods Spirit is always
present to condemn it, and judge a man for it; so the strokes of the Almighty
is still heavy upon his back, being still in the disobedience of the spirit; it
never bears witness unto any man in that state, but God through it still sounds
the alarm of War, and terror in his heart; so that fear compasses him about
on every side, and though for moment, the cry may not be heard, and through
disobedience it may seem as dead as unto him, yet if ever the mind be but
still, and a man sober and calm, and ever mind what he is doing, it appears
again; and though a man may take up something, and perform something which is
called religious, and pray in words, and read, and talk of the Scriptures, and
may take up some carnal outward Ordinance, and there content himself for a
time, yet still the witness of Gods holy Spirit, for that, shows him his
hypocrisy, and that he seeks a cover to shelter himself under, that he may
live in disobedience, and be at ease in the flesh, but all in vain, for there
is no peace within, but the measure of Gods Spirit still shows him that he
serves sin, and follows his own will, and in this will brings forth a worship,
and this is will worship; nay, if a man practice all those things which others
who were in the life performed, and were accepted, yet this will not satisfy,
God has no pleasure in this, no more then if one slew a man, or blessed an
Idol, or kissed Baal, all is abomination to the Lord; and though a man may sin
so far against the light of Christ in his own conscience, that the light be to
him as though there were no such thing, yet all this well not do; for the Lord
will thunder from his holy pla^^ ^^ough thou have stopped thy ear as to him,
and closed thy eyes, yet he will cause his terror to strike into thy heart, so
that dread shall compass thee about as a wall, and thou shall be afraid for
that which thou shall see and hear; and though the spirit strives long, yet
being still disobeyed, the long-suffering of God comes to an end concerning him
that has been unfaithful, and then his wrath is kindled as fire, which shall
burn to the lowest H^ll, into which all the rebellious and stif-necked shall be
cast, and have their portion for ever among all the children of darkness;
therefore all who have been convinced long (and still are by Gods holy spirit)
of the way of truth, and yet have not submitted to the leading of the spirit;
think on this (for its the Lords truth which I declare to you) or else eternal
mysery will be your end.

And if thou still persist on after the imaginations of thine own heart, and in
thy rebellious will, thou quenches the spirit and the motions thereof; and
though it be life in it self, yet is as ded unto thee who art in the
gainsaying, and resisting that through which Gods eternal power is manifest in
them that believe; and thou will grow insensible and past feeling, and become
as seared flesh, and be senseless as to the things of God, and hardness of
heart will come upon thee, and thou will be as a stone that cannot be melted,
and woe will be unto such where the spirit of the Lord in them cease to
strive with them, having so long rebelled against, and gain-sayd the pure
drawings of it; that so the Lord is grieved and wearied with their impenitency,
that he gives them up to their vile affections, and to follow the imaginations
of their own hearts ( who receives not the truth in the love of it but in the
enmyty, still remains obstinate) doing despite unto the spirit of grace, his
long-suffering comes to an end, and his fierce wrath comes to be kindled
against such, and that which would have led them out of the world, in true
pure, and everlasting peace, now becomes their tormentor* and they banished
from his presence* and shut up in eternal misery, where the fire is kindled by
the breath of the the Lord that burns for ever, the sentence of condemnation
being past upon them because they had pleasure in unrighteousness, and have
sold themselves to do wickedly, and crucifying the appearance of God in
themselves; which appearance though it live in the fountain of Life, yet
crucified by thee who art out of the Life, yet lives still for ever in it self,
to be thy condemnation eternally.

How the spirit of the Father works in, them who are turned to it, and have
taken heed unto its manifestation, and are in some measure partakers of its
power.
THere are differences of administrations, But the same Lord; and there are
diversity of gifts, but the same spirit; and there are diversities of
operations, but the same God which works all in all. Now the spirit of truth
which is Life in it self, puts forth its own pure act, not only to
convince and detect him that transgresses its appearance, and to manifest evil
which has been committed by man; but also being turned unto, and waited in, it
shows man when motions and temptations unto sin arises; and as the creature is
still, and waits in that which manifests and singly keeps in his mind to
it. It sheds abroad its power, and vanquisheth and subdueth those lusts which
do arise, and condemns the ground from whence they do arise, and it purely
draws the mind after it, and secretly works and breaths forth its pure
life in him that waits in patience and in stillness, not heeding the vayn
thoughts and imaginations that rises in his heart; but rather heeds the
manifestation of the spirit, at whose bright appearance all the vain desires
comes to be extinguished and there comes to be a hunger begot within, to be
made partakers of its purity and of its nature; For God through the operation
of the eternal Spirit lets forth his power, which turns and changes the
heart, and cuts a sunder and divides betwixt a man and those lovers that he
has joined unto, and makes a separation within, and carries a man further from
those things which the measure of the spirit reproves, and this leads nearer to
God: And so they that do believe in the measure of Gods spirit, comes to feel
what repentance from dead works is, and the works and the worker is seen; and
who it is that has wrought, is manifest in the Light* and as there is a
diligent waiting upon it; there is nothing that passes through the mind, but
it discerns, and gives a discerning to every particular heart, who singly and
quietly waytes upon it. But yet after the spirit of truth in some measure be
felt, and its living testymony in some thing; yet it may be a long time before
there be a clear distingushment in the understanding; so that one cannot
clearly discern its moving from all other false motions and high Imaginations
which are above: And hence it is, that the hasty and froward minds follows
their own motions which leads them into deceit, and then the Questioner gets
up, and then they question all that ever the spirit has made manifest unto
them before; a vail then is drawn over, and the enemy lodges in the vail, and
in the darkness (which is entered) and then as soon as any hearkens within to
that which is the uppermost* and does abound, the enemy that lodges in that,
presents motions as to obey this and that, and all is deceit. So therefore all
is to keep back, that they may sensibly feel between the pure motions, and the
drawing of the spirit, and the vain thoughts that arise out of the earthly
heart; and when any thing does arise which the Light does not bear witness to,
it is not to be followed nor heeded, but a quiet, still waiting that things may
be cleared to the understanding; and for want of this many have run out, and
have brought forth Satan's work, and acted things forwardly in their wills, and
so have clean lost the true sense of that, which would guide their minds, and
have followed the spirit of error, and have caused the pure spirit of the Lord
to be evil spoken of; But as there is a keeping back, and a quiet waiting out
of willing, or running and haste; it arises purely and stilly in the heart, and
shines forth in brightness in the heart, so that it gives perfect evidence
and full Testimony of it self, that there will be no doubting nor questioning
of its motion; for it will apparently show forth it self in its own
transparent brightness, with full assurance of its own will, and then after it
be clearly seen, and its motion, then keep under all reasoning, and keep out
all questioning, and give not way to temptation; and that which moves of the
Lord of life, will carry thee through in its own operation and power to
accomplish the will of God, and so thou will have peace (being obedient) and
thy strength will be renewed; for as any are brought to submit unto the will of
God, when it is known, and comes to obey by virtue of its own power; that which
is contrary unto Gods spirit in thee, comes to loose its strength, and to
decay, and be weakened; but as any disobeyes the pure motions of Gods holy
Spirit after it be known, the enemy is strengthened, and that which is of the
flesh nourished, and the spirit comes to be quenched, that which would give
thee power, if thou submitedst unto it: But yet know this, the spirit in it
self never loses its purity, neither can be quenched in its self, but will
bear its pure witness against thee, and none shall be able to stop its
reproof; Thus the diversity of its operation comes to be known as its hearkened
unto, obeyed, loved, and believed in; it puts forth its pure power, and gives
strength, and seals peace to the obedient; but disobeyed and resisted, it
condemns, judges, reproves and seals condemnation to the disobedient, and yet
there is no variation in it self, for it is always one and the same.

But as it operateth upon different natures or objects unto which it joins to,
or stands at adistance from, that is to say, the good ground it causes to
bring forth fruit unto God, and the cursed ground, out of which briars and
Thorns do arise, it kindles a fire in, that shall not quenched; but as there
is a submission unto its pure operation, it burns up and destroys that which
hinders the growth of the seed, and it purges the heart (of them that have
confidence in it) from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and works up
the creature into its own frame and nature, and fashions, and makes, and moulds
all that are in the Faith into the Image of the Father; and so the Fathers love
comes to be shed abroad in the heart: and as the wrath was revealed through the
spirit and condemnation, so now the peace of God comes to be enjoyed, and his
consolation shed abroad largly, in which there is pure rejoicing for ever.

Unto whom the Spirit of the Father bears witness, and seals assurance of the
Fathers love, and of justification with God, declared.
NOne has the witness of Gods Spirit bearing witness to them nor in them who
have not believed in the true light that lights every man that comes into
the world, by whom alone life is begotten, by the powerful operation of Christ
in them that believe in him who is eternal light it self, whose word is spirit
and life, by which the new Creature is framed and formed in them that believe,
unto whom he makes manifest his power; for unto him who is the life of men is
all power committed both in heaven and earth; for nothing was made or created
but by him, neither is any turned from sin but by him, and by his mighty power:
without him is death, in him is life, and the life is the light of men: So that
none but they that are born of the light, and are begotten by him who is light,
can have the spirit of Christ (who is light) to bear witness unto them, neither
the assurance of the Fathers love; for only they that are born of the spirit,
and walk after the spirit, are justified by the spirit of the Lord; for the
assurance of his love is not made manifest to his enemies, but unto them that
are born and brought forth in his own image, in his own likeness and nature,
which is pure and incorruptible without stain or defilement, the holy seed
which is heir of the promise, who knows the living hope which purifies the
heart, and brings the answer of a good conscience unto them that feel and
witness the washing of regeneration, and have known in themselves the clean
water poured forth upon them, which has taken away the stains, and spots, and
blemishes, and the defilements; for where these are no washed out, and the
heart cleansed from them, and that believed in, wherein Gods all sufficiency is
felt, and his power made manifest, there cannot be assurance of the Fathers
love in the heart, nor in the soul; neither does the spirit of the Father bear
witness unto such, nor assure their justification; but on the contrary, where
sin remains unsubdued, and taken away; the spirit of the Father condemns the
sin, and the creature now is joined to it, and is become one with it; for no
sin is brought forth, but there is a consent and an assenting to the
instigation of the Devil, although when a temptation arises either within or
without, there may be a resisting and a striving against it for a little; but
the heart not being kept close to the spirit, the enemy often enters, and so
captivates the understanding, then there is an agreement and a joining to the
adversary, and so the spirit pronounces the sentence of condemnation upon him
who is joined to the harlot, and becomes one flesh, and joined unto strange
flesh which is not the flesh of Christ the seed; and that which has joined and
consented to drink of the cup of fornication, must drink of the cup of
indignation and terror, and bear the stroke of Divine Justice, and lie in
patience under it till that be cut down which has joined to deceit, before
there can be the remission of the transgression, or the Creature justified in
the fight of God: For sin is not blotted out of the book of Gods remembrance
till it be turned from, and repented of, neither does the creature stand clear
in the sight of God, when God judges in righteous judgment, which the light in
every ones conscience shall answer, Now he that is born of God sins not, for
the seed of God remains in him, which is life: And as the creature joins to
that seed which is heir of the Kingdom, and of the Crown immortal, he comes to
be made partaker of its virtue and operation; which seed is Christ, and by his
power by which he limiteth the seed of the Serpent, and weakens his strength in
the creature, as man comes to believe in his strength unto whom all power is
committed, the covenant with Death is broken, and that agreement that the
creature has made with death comes to be disannulled by the arm and power of
the Lord, and so the creature comes to be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, and the new man comes to live, or the new creature which is born of
God, which sins not, comes to be framed and fashioned in the image of the
Father: and the Fathers love is manifest unto him and in him, and he has the
assurance in himself. The Babe that is born from above, of the Spirit which is
from above, of which he is born and brought forth of the just, by the just he
is justified, by the just God, and the just witness of the spirit seals this
in him: And he has the record of his justification; For there is three that
bear record in the earth, the water, the blood, and the spirit; and he that is
born of that which is pure in it self, has the witness of all these three in
himself, for they agree in one: That which one bears witwitness to, and for,
the other does the same, and the record, and testimony, and witness of all
these three has he that is born from above. Moreover, there are three that
bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the spirit, and these three
are one. So he that is born of the Father, and begotten of the Father in Christ
the seed through the Spirit, he and he alone comes to feel the Fathers love
made manifest in him, and is justified in the sight of the Father, and has the
record of all these witnesses before mentioned in himself; so that he has his
assurance and evidence near him and in him, the seal of the Father, the seal of
the Spirit: And so when the adversary comes to tempt and to assault, and would
raise up doubts in the mind, the evidence is near, which puts him out of all
doubt that he is in the love of God, and blessed for ever; and happy are all
they who have waited for these things, have felt these things, and are
witnesses of these things; for flesh and blood has not revealed these things.
Now let every man who reads, this prove himself, and try himself whether he be
in the faith or no, and whether he have the evidence of the Spirit or no, that
he is born of it, and knows a birth that sins not, because the seed remains
in him; who is kept by the power, that the evil one touches him not, and kept
in salvation, and in saving health, alive unto him who has brought him forth
to life, to drink of the cup of blessing, and of the cup of salvation, which
nourishes and refreshes up unto eternal life, them that continue in the Faith.

What the free grace of God is, and unto whom it has appeared, and where all
are to wait to receive it, declared, as it has been revealed by the Spirit.
THe grace of God is pure, and is the free gift of God, and it is perfect, it
is the appearance of Christ, it is a beam of righteousness shining forth, it is
a measure of Gods strength and power, issued out from himself, and a proportion
of his treasure, virtue and sufficiency which comes to be shed abroad in all
them that believe in it; its that through which God makes known his will, and
teaches his by it, and reveals his saving health (through it) to them that are
taught by it, and through it; them that believe in it, are builded up in the
truth, and becomes a habitation for God; no man does any thing to purchase it,
none need say, where may I get it, or how may I know its teaching; its near
thee, it is in thee, it has appeared to all men it shows ungodliness in the
heart of man, by its pure brightness; yea, to all men it shows the motions unto
sin, and that which is not like God in motions, words or actions; it draws
the heart of man from them, as with a cord, it shows the lusts of the heart and
mind, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, it never joined to sin,
nothing can alter its purity or property; as in it self, it is always one and
the same, it is perfect, and will be always so, it stands off, and at a
distance from that which is corruptable and imperfect, and yet beholds it;
and although some that have turned to it, be again turned from it, and may turn
it as in themselves into wantonness, yet it keeps its purity, and still
reproves thy wantonness, and will lay it before thee, and will show thee how
thou have abused the appearance of Christ, and has marred his countenance and
his face, and reprove thee for it; many have been the talkers of it in this
professing age, but knew not of what they spoke, neither ever informed the mind
of man where it was to be waited for, neither how it might be known, or how, or
what the operation of it was, but have cried up their own Imaginations, we are
justified by his free grace, for all sins past, present and to come, and in
this conceit thousands have been led into the pit of darkness, while out of
thick darkness they have cried up, we are justified by free grace in Christ,
while the free grace of Christ, Gods gift, which should have taught them, they
never heeded at all, but got up into conceitednesse, and carelessness, and
presumption, out of the fear of God, and pretending justification, while they
themselves were servants of sin, and bondslaves to corruption, and this is the
state of thousands at this day, and they that have been publishers and
preachers of free grace: Now when the thing it self comes to be witnessed and
declared what it is, and as it is, and where it is; now they say it is not
sufficient to teach any the knowledge of God; but from all such foolish doaters
and blind guides, and ignorant shepherds is God bringing many sheep home which
they have driven away, and they would kill them now, that are fed and taught by
the gift of God, and says its not sufficient, and to make them to dislike their
food, and dislike their shepherd; so would make them deaf and blind, and then
they may lead them into any desert, and feed them among the swine who wallow in
the mire, in filthiness, and lust, and pleasure, and ungodliness, and so
beguil the sheep, and scatter them from the fold, and lead them from the true
shepherd, and from his appearance, which is his grace, and from the shepherds.
voice, which is the word of his grace, which is able to save the soul. Oh all
you blind guides, and you that call your selves Orthodox men and Ministers! and
all you that have been preaching free grace in words, and now when God has
given them that have waited upon him an understanding to declare the thing it
self that you have spoken of, now you cry it is not a sufficient Teacher. Now
let me ask you a question, if that which teaches to deny ungodliness, and
shows it, be the grace of God, and the gift of God, then how say you, its not
a sufficient teacher? If it be not a sufficient teacher, then why did the
Apostles commit them, and commend them to the word of his grace, which was able
to save their souls? And whether is not that which is able to save the soul, a
sufficient teacher? Answer ye wise men, and ye literal Rabbis, If that which
shows sin and temptation be not sufficient, then declare you, and let us see
your skill in the mysteries of God: but to return to them, in whose minds there
is a desire to be informed; seeing then that Gods free grace, which is his pure
appearance, has so far manyfested it self, or God through it shows sin, and
teaches from sin, that which teaches from sin is holy, and that which leads
from worldly lusts is pure, and that which saves from sin is grace, which is
saving in it self, and God has so loved the world, as that he has sent his
Son into the World; and he was and is the light of the world, and has shed
abroad his grace, and has made it appear to all; and all that waits upon it,
and comes to be taught by it, feels its assurance, so all is left without
excuse; therefore wait in that which has appeared in thee, that which shows
the lusts and thoughts and motions unto sin, this is Gods gift, Gods grace,
this is sufficient, Though all men in the World say it is not sufficient, yet
this makes not my faith void, neither thine who has received it; but thou have
the witness of thy faith in thy self, which gives pure and perfect feeling of
the operation of the Spirit of the Lord, and all is to wait within, to hear him
who condemns sin in the flesh within, which by his grace shows man his
transgression and insufficiency in himself, and by the word of his grace saves
all them that believe in it, out of sin, and gives dominion over sin; and this
comes to be revealed in the heart of man, and there must it be waited for, in
that which is pure, that it may be received, and there the operation it comes
to be known, and its virtue partaken of by all that do believe in it, and
receive it, and are subjected to it, they see and feel Gods salvation revealed
through it to their souls, and knows where their strength lies, not in
selfe-acting, but in the free gift of God, the gift of righteousness, the
righteous gift, by which justification comes upon all that believe.

Whether all have received the grace of God or no, declared; and whether it be
a sufficient teacher in it self, to wit, that grace that has appeared to all,
if it be received, demonstrated.
THis wise generation is below the wisdom of God, whose wisdom have
confounded peoples minds with distinctions; as that there is a Twofold grace.
First, that which they call common which they say has appeared to all men.

Scondly that which they call special, and saving, which has only appeared to
the saints, and by giving heed to these distinctions in times past (many years
ago.) I lost my self and my guide, and went from the appearance of it in my
self, to hearken to a thing at a distance from me, and heeded not that at
home, which was near, because it was called common and insufficient, and so
suffered great loss; and therefore I am moved (by him, in whose sight I have
found favor and mercy, and grace) to declare the truth as the Lord has made
it manifest unto me, and in me; that all who seek after the Lord may be
informed, and know where to wait upon the Lord; for unto that grace that showed
me evil and temptations unto evil, I was made to go back unto, after many
years profession (which they called common and insufficient) before ever I
found the Lord, or felt his living power again; For the first they ground upon
the letter, as they judge, where it is said, He causes the Sun to shine, and
the rain to fall upon the just and the unjust. And where it is said, in him we
live, and move, and have our being health and strength, and an understanding in
things natural, and by which men comes to see gross sins and evils; but that
which they call special, is that which the Saints are saved by, and are
established in, in righteousness, and receive the remission of sins. Now he
who has caused the Sun to shine and the rain to fall, and gives health, and
strength, and nourishment to all things living that are visible, in the outward
visible creation, and that discovers gross sins, and open evils to man; the
same is he who is the life of the soul; the same is he that sanctifies, and
purifies, and saves them that believe, and its the same virtue and power that
upholds the natural man in his pure nature, that upholds the spiritual man,
and by which he lives unto God: It Is the same grace, I do not say the same
measure; for the same virtue and power by which all things that are visible and
living were made alive, and subsists in their station and covenant, and bound
where they are set and placed; the same grace, strength power, and sufficiency
upholdeth the heavenly bodies, and moves and acts in a higher sphere or
degree, and preserves all that believe, and are quickened by him who is the
power of God in heavenly places, and the same power and virtue that discovers
the dark places, and the hellish places, and the horrible pit; it is the same
power, life, strength and virtue that leads all that believe into the Land of
the living, into the holy place, into the peaceable habitation into the holy
mountain, into the heavenly Tabernacle made without hands: And in few words, he
that discovers open sins, the same grace and the same purity, discovers
hidden and secret sins, (though the measure of its purity shine in one more
then another, because them that are in the unbelief, the darkness
over-shadowes, and the mountains are high, and the vail is thick, and the
clouds are many, and the air dark, so that it is resplendency and brightness
is not seen because of the vail which shadows it, that it has not much
entrance) but in them that believe, and have received that grace, and is
joined to it, in which they believe, it renteth the vail, and makes the
shadow to fly away, and scatters the clouds, and breaths forth it self in
purity, and makes the air clearer, so that its brightness shines more purely
forth to them, and in them, because the heart is more open to receive its
virtues in, yet the same purity and virtue remains still, and the same grace
keeps its purity and property in it self, and its power and sufficiency is
always the same, though it do not appear so to the creature: So this I say,
and is my testimony of the grace of God which is the gift of God, which has
appeared in some measure more or less unto all men, and convinces and shows
gross and open evils, even the same grace by its virtue and power, leads from
the least or impurest thought, and shows the secretest evils that lodges in
the heart, unbelief, and also every temptation unto sin; and this shall be
witnessed to be the truth by the whole earth in the day of the Lords appearing,
and is now witnessed by all the children of Light who believe, with whom I have
fellowship in the pure living sufficient, perfect grace of God, which is Gods
free gift, which in some measure has appeared to all, whereby all are left
without excuse: And herein is the wonderful love of God made manifest to all
mankind; and all that turns to his grace, will see he has long waited to
be gracious in his grace, which is near, that all mankind might be partakers of
his bounty, love, mercy, favor, and free gift, by which justification comes
upon all that believe.

Therefore my bowels and heart is more open in this unto all, because many have
erred for lack of knowledge, and have wandered aside, because they have not
found a true guide. Therefore in dear love unto all upon the face of the Earth,
where this may come, I write and let out my bosom into this thing, that they
may also be partakers with me of the free love of God, and the free grace of
God, by which I am saved, and know the wall which is salvation, and the gates
which are praise, which the Saints are compassed about with, and entered in at;
and for the sake of such who thirst after God, and the knowledge him, I write
for their information, and not to satisfy critical men, nor them who are in
the Philosophy and vain deceit, who are swollen big in their fleshly
understandings, and puffs up in their earthly minds; for by such I desire not
any testimony, neither acceptance.

But now to come to speak of that which many are doubting about, that is to
say, the grace of God which brings salvation, which has appeared to all men,
whether this be a sufficient Leader and Teacher of it self if it be received;
but in order to the thing in hand, let all take notice of this, that when I
speak of the sufficiency of grace, and that it is a sufficient Teacher: I do
not speak of it distinct from Christ, or of a thing separated from the power of
God, but one with it, and him from whence it comes; for as he is salvation it
self, so the grace of God is of the same nature, by which he manifests himself:
and his salvation to them that believe, and also reveals his witness in them;
for where the appearance and presence of Christ is manifest, there is his power
and strength manifest, either to condemnation or salvation; and though his pure
appearance and presence is one in it self, yet them that have marred his
countenance, and pierced him; his presence always has been, and will be very
dreadful and terrible; but unto them that believe, and have continued with him
in his temptation, and have suffered with him, and have longed for him; his
appearance and presence will be amiable, beautiful, and lovely, sweet,
pleasant, delightful, desirable, glorious, and admirable; so that they who have
seen it, have been melted into tears, and dissolved as into water, because of
his love and beauty, who is the chief of ten thousand. Oh! that all that long
after him may wait for him in patience, in that wherein he will appear, they
shall see him, whose sight will be a recompense for all longing and thirsting,
and desiring, and waiting; the sense of longing and thirsting will be taken
away, when he that makes glad the heart appears, who lifts up the light of
his countenance, and makes whole them whose hearts have been broken for him
whom their souls loved; therefore all wait, and think not the time long: Keep
in your minds to his grace, which is his appearance, and him you will feel, and
see, and be satisfied, and say, This is he we have waited for, let us rejoice
and be exceeding glad; for now he is come, and his reward is with him, to give
every one that wait upon him in purity full contentment and satisfaction, where
peace comes to be felt, and joy unspeable which is full of glory.

And though God, out of his everlasting love unto the sons of men, has
followed man, and has called him to return, yet that nature which is above in
man, which has transgressed the life, does always resist the drawing of the
Lord, and is not subject to the Law of God, neither to the grace of God which
teaches to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts; that has beset and
compassed the creature about as a thick cloud, and always makes War against
the soul; that till there be a listening unto that which shows ungodliness,
(which has power in it self) none has power neither dominion over that in
themselves, which leads into the transgression: Therefore, though God who is
salvation it self, has let out himself so far, and has appeared in his pure
and perfect grace unto all men, yet all have not received grace; For, though
the Lord proffer his gift intentionally, that the creature might receive it,
and so have benefit, and partake of its living virtue and operation; yet while
that has pre-eminence in man, which is contrary to grace, that will never
receive it, because it is contrary to the life of the corruptible, and takes
its life away; and mortifies and slayes the enmity; therefore all must be still
and quiet, and wait in that which is pure of the Lord, that they may feel that
raised up (which receives grace) above the corruptible thoughts and desires of
the carnal mind; but many who talk of free grace, have put no difference
betwixt the precious and the vile, but has put them upon doing and working,
who are in the enmity, and curse, and in death, and so has brought forth dead
works; notwithstanding all performances, they being dead to the life of God,
another acts in them, even he which has the power of Death, which is the
Devil, and so have not known that which was precious in themselves, could not
Minister unto that which was precious in others; but have been Ministers of
Death, and have ministered to death, and so Death nourishes it self in all them
who are not yet come to the separation, to see betwixt the precious and the
vile.

Now though all have not received grace so as to save them from the committing
of sin, the fault is not in God; Israel would have none of my counsel they
stopped their ears: Neither is the fault in the grace which has appeared unto
all men; Neither is it because of it is imbiscility and weakness: but because it
is not hearkened unto, and waited in, and obeyed, believed in and received: for
this eternal truth which shall for ever stand, the least measure of the grace of
God has power in it self to save man from committing of that evil or sin which
it shows man: And as it is received, the power comes more and more to be made
manifest, where all that believes comes to be preserved out of evil.

Object. But some have said, and now say, there is common grace, and preventing
grace, and restraining grace, and saving grace; and the former, that has
appeared to all, but the latter has appeared to the Saints, and to the elect
only.

Ans. Grace is Gods pure and perfect gift, and is but one thing; I speak not of
quantity, but of quality; not of so much as that the fullness of grace has
appeared to all; but of a measure of that fullness which is in Christ the head,
although I do not divide the least measure from the fullness in quality or
nature, for it is one and the same; for that which shows a man he should not
lie, nor swear, that is as pure according to it is latitude and proportion, as
that which shows a man all that ever he has done; and that same grace which
leads a man from drunkenness and excess, is as pure, and of the same kind and
nature as that greater proportion which leads a man from all sin; I speak
what I have seen from the Father, though the dark world cannot receive it: But
people have been blinded and darkened with sounds and distinctions which men
coin and frame in their natural reason, and by their natural parts, which is
out of the life, although I do not condemn natural parts, which are purely
natural, if they keep their bounds and compass, that is to say, to the
management of natural things of the visible creation; but the things of Gods
kingdom are of another quality and nature, and cannot be reached unto by the
natural; but as I said, men through distinctions and names has wracked peoples
minds, and confounded their understandings, and have led them into a thick
wood, or a wilderness; so they know not where to get forth, neither what the
thing is, of which one speaks, because not being spoken through the enticing
words of man's wisdom, which darkens the counsel of God. Now that which shows a
man evil after it be committed, is the pure appearance of God: And that which
shows a man the temptations when they arise, that is the same; now this they
call common and that which preventeth a man, and keeps him back, that he lend
not his heart, nor puts forth his hand to commit evil, but restrains a man from
it, is not that saving out of evil, which stops the adversary in his way that
he enter not; but preserves the creature out of defilement, and saves him from
it, is not this saving? is not this the same thing that the Apostle, who was
well acquainted with the grace of God, and of it is operation, wrote of to
Titus? That grace of God which brought salvation, which had appeared, and does
now appear to all men, which taught self-denial, them to deny wordly lusts, and
also to live godlily, or like unto God in this present world, and now does the
same; is not this sufficient to believe in, and sufficient to save? Now I do
not say but there is a greater measure let out unto them that are converted
unto God, then is to them that are convinced of their evil by the same grace,
yet still it is one and the self-same thing; one gift, yet a greater measure of
one and the same pure virtue and power which is given to them that obeys the
life, which is already made manifest by its appearance unto all.

Ob. But some will be ready to say that this is error, and that which is
contrary to scripture, and to Orthodox teachers; that the grace which is
saving, is near all men, and has appeared to all men.

To that I answer; Though grace be saving in it self, even the grace that has
appeared to all men, and may truly be called saving grace; yet to them that
believe not in it, neither are taught by it, it convinces and shows evil, and
checks and judges for it; yet there is no variation nor change in the gift of
God, but as it works upon different objects; for faith and unbelief are two
different things, as light and darkness are different, and so the word of his
grace is the savor of life unto life, (that is to say) unto them that believe,
and is the savor of death unto death, unto them who are in the unbelief, who
indeed are dead while they live; yet there is the same grace, and the same word
of grace, yet here is different operations; so the Lord kills and makes
alive, yet the same Lord; The spirit convinces of sin, and reproves for sin,
and also consolates and comforts; Here is diversity of operations, yet the same
spirit, which never alters.

Object. But further, some may say, If that it be saving grace, or at the least
a degree, and a measure of saving grace that has appeared to all men, then how
is it that all are not saved by it?

Answ. Because I would all stumbling blocks were removed away, that the path
might be made plain, that all might come to believe in that which is Gods gift,
in which there is power and sufficiency; Therefore I am constrained by the
grace of God to declare of it, and to bear witness to it thus largely, which I
know will be to the edification of all that hunger after righteousness. All are
not saved by it, because they believe not in it, neither are taught by it, yet
its validity, power and virtue is nevertheless in it self, and though them that
are careless, and heedless, say we feel no power nor sufficiency in it to save
us from sin, yet this makes not void their confidence who have received it, and
knows its power which has given them power, and also sufficiency to do the
will of God; what though unbelievers who are in the alienation, say there is no
beauty in Christ, neither form nor comeliness; this makes not his glory void,
who is the express Image of the Father, full of grace and truth; the Disciples
saw it, and bore record of him, who were in the faith, and the Pharisees said
he had a Devil, who were in the unbelief; but in brief, this is my testimony,
that the grace of God, the perfect gift of God, which shows ungodliness, and
leads from ungodlynesse all that are taught by it, is a sufficient teacher of
it self, I mean, as the power of Christ through it is made manifest unto all
them that hearken to it; Paul ^ Minister of the word of reconciliation, who was
wrapped up into the third heaven where he saw things unutterable, came to be
tempt^^d and buffe^ted, with the messenger of S^tan, and fear and doubting
rose up in him, and he prayed unto God thrice, and this answer was given unto
him, my grace is sufficient for thee; so this is evident to all understandings,
who are opened by the Lord, that which showed him the temptations, and Satan's
messengers, and Satan's buffetings, was sufficient to preserve him; and so is it
for all who singly are kept to it and in it, sufficient to show ungodliness
because of its purity, and to lead from worldly lusts by its power, and to
teach the will of God, and to live like unto God in this present world; and
this testimony I bear of it, and to it, even what I have felt, and tasted, and
handled of its sufficiency, and virtue, and power of its operation, for the
confirmation of the same truth, which is believed by many brethren, and also
for the information of them that thirst after the Lord, and for the opposition
of all the gainsayers and opposers of it; which testimony I commend to that of
God in every man, which will witness me herein in the day of God, when all
hearts are opened, and all falsehoods and truth is made manifest, in the mean
time shall rest in that which I have declared of, in which there is pure and
perfect peace.

A word to you wise men of this world, who are glorying in the sound of words,
and worshipping outward appearances; to all wise and litter all professors, who
think you are worshipping God aright, who think to search in to the deep things
of God by your natural wisdom, learning, and parts and study.
GOd has broken open the seals of the great deep, where the wonderful
unutterable things of God is revealed, from whence eternal wisdom is flowing
forth to his little ones whom he has sanctified from the womb, and his power
and glory is he shedding abroad, and making it to flow forth as though it
issued out of a womb, by which power and wisdom you are all weighed, even by
one who is swaddled about with righteousness, and girded up with the girdle of
truth, you are all measured as with a span, and are all weighed as with a
scale; all your parts, tongues, languaguages, interpretations, significations;
wisdom, that is come to be enjoyed by them who have believed in the true Light
that lights every man, which rounds you all as a heap, and measures you all
as with a line, your breadth, length, height, and depth; your parts, Tongues,
Languages, interpretations is but all natural; words are but empty sounds,
although there be many languages, and each have interpretation and a
signification, they are all short to declare the life, the immeasurable being
of eternal Life; you with all these are on heaps, disjoynted one from another;
Your Rhetoric, Philosophy, your framed and devised disputations, your Tongues,
and the significations of all Tongues cannot know the mind of the spirit,
neither knows the original of eternal salvation by all these, and so not
knowing the signification of the living eternal spirit in your selves; you
invent, study, devise forms, and frames up things in your carnal minds, by the
strength of your learned, studied, devised parts, and framed speeches, and has
filled the whole world with your dark muddy conceptions, and has led all out
from seeking after the living wisdom of God, which is from above, which was
before your Tongues and Languages was, and they have sucked in your conceptions
and distinctions, and your devised fables, and your imagined worship, that many
have lost the sense of any thing of God in themselves to guide them, and when
you have come as far as you can in those things, and have divised in your minds
(by the strength of those parts natural) you are farther from the knowledge
then before; and all that hear you and sucketh in your conceptions and
Imaginations into their hearts, they are further off Gods true knowledge, then
they were the day in which they came out of their mothers womb; it is a
lamentation to see how people are gone out of the pure simplicity which is in
Christ, into subtilty and deceit stuffed up full, brimful of that which must be
all poured out as water, before they and you all come to the least measure of
Gods true and saving knowledge. Oh! a dreadful day is coming upon many, and it
lingers not, but will come swiftly as a thief upon you, who have taken away the
key of knowledge, and gives people that which will not open, and tells them of a
litteral carnal thing that must give them entrance; you and all they will be
shut out together among the uncircumcised as fools; though you count your
selves wise men, your wisdom will perish, and your honor will be laid in the
dust; the time hastens, it is the word of truth to you all.

And you literal professors, who have got the Scripture into your head, and
into the carnal mind to talk on, and are run into so many heads, you are almost
past numbering, and has exalted so many horns; yet the number is read, the
number of the heads of the beast, and the number of his name; you have taken up
things, and are exalting a visible shadowish practice, and neglects the life,
and are making Idols of those things which were but a figure and
representation, in their purest time; now you, like the Pharisees, are limiting
the Lord, that if he will not appear unto you in those things that you have
prescribed unto your selves, and fetched in from the letter, and go^ten it into
the fleshly part, which is he^ped up as a mountain in many of you so high,
above Gods pure witness in you, and so high above the appearance of God in you,
that you have quite lost the sight of that in your selves, which should give
you the knowledge of the living God, and make you sensible of his pure
presence; I say, if he appear not in the way you would limit him to, in those
things you would confine him in, you cannot receive him; the Lord open your
understandings, that you may see your selves, and how frothy, vain, light, and
wanton you are; one with the world in all things in the very ground, pretending
liberty in Christ, and privilege in him, when you may see you are servants to
corruptions, and to many noisome lusts that makes war. Again, what are all
outward appearances any more but as a Curtain, or as a vail, and as a shadow,
in respect of Christ, Gods righteousness within; but you are filled too full of
your apprehensions of his righteousness at a distance, that you have forgotten
all at home, and your own conditions; for his righteousness will not be a cloak
for your self-righteousness and unrighteousnes, and if Christ be not formed in
you, Gods righteousness, and live in you, and act in you, and work his work in
you, you are in the self-righteousness, and a talk of imputation, will not save
you while you are not in that capacity, and nature, and faith, unto whom his
righteousness is imputed. Are you not weary with tumbling up and down among the
earthly Hills, among which you have situated your selves? Do you not see your
land grows barren, and your possessions dry, and your worship dead, heaven
rains not on you, the bottles are stopped, the dew falls not on you; you wither
daily as a stick without sap? what, have you found that which will last unto
perpetuity? oh! nay its rusted already, it is canckered already, its moth-eaten
already, it is fading, the glory is staining, the renown of all earthly things
is fading, and all terrestrial appearances, though never so glorious, they are
all to cease; a consumption is coming, blasting is near, there will be no more
glory in these things, they will fly away as a shadow when the Sun arises;
your riches are wasting, when will ye seek after that which endures for ever? I
pity you who have had breathings after God, and has sat down at ease in that
which is not eternal. Be warned, return home, consider, see what corruption
thou have power over now, which had once power over thee. Do thou rest in
that faith, that thou shall never be cleansed here? that faith is cursed, it is
reprobate, its rather properly unbelief; It Is not the faith of Gods elect, by
which they were sanctified, and overcame the wicked one in themselves by the
power of Christ, who is able to save, and manifests his ability in all them
that believe in the light which they are enlightened withal, through which he
manifests himself to the creature, and makes known his power in the creature,
to redeem the soul out of death, and to redeem the creature from under the
bondage of corruption, to serve him in the free spirit of God, in which the
sons are made free from sin, from the act and guilt, they become the Temples of
the holy Ghost: How far you are from this, consider, who are yet temples of
uncleanness, and a habitation for many noisome lusts; repent and mind that
which empties you of your thoughts and conceitedness, that you may know poverty
of spirit, that the kingdom may come unto you, and be yours in possession, else
you are everlastingly miserable; and this is the true state of many of you, own
it and repent, that if it be possible you may find a door of mercy yet opened
unto you and that you may enter in thereat; for it is not setting up, and
conforming to a visible practice without, that will justify you, while that
which is in the transgression, and has transgressed the life, and has
disobeyed the light in your consciences is head in you, and above the pure,
that will not recommend you unto God; neither can you have any access, or
acceptance with God in that state, till you come out of the waters upon which
the Whore sits, which is unstable and boisterous, and reels too and fro, and
unsettled; which is all to be dried up, and all the springs cut off that
nourishes; and you must come to the Rock, before you know any thing that will
endure, to build upon, which rock is Christ, who abides for ever; but you are
all gone from that which should give the knowledge of him in your selves, and
does not retain him in your knowledge; neither that which gives the knowledge of
him, the light of his Spirit which shines in your hearts, making manifest in
your hearts, the intention of your hearts, when motions unto evil do arise;
This must you all come to, before Gods salvation or redemption you come to know
in your selves, or have the witness of Gods holy Spirit, without which there is
neither seal nor evidence, nor assurance enjoyed or felt of the love of God.
The time of restoring is come, and many are restored again into Gods Covenant,
and are delivered out of the jaws of death, and feels him who is the healer of
the Nations, and the restorer of the desolate places to dwell in: but first you
must come to see those places made desolate, wherein the wild nature lodges,
before you come to have a share in the restoration: Come off these barren
mountains where you are feeding, to Christ the life of men, who has lightened
you, and wait in it, that you may feel his mind in your selves, and the
signification of the Spirit of truth, from your own spirits, or else you will
still err for lack of knowledge, and perish for want of understanding, and so
lay down your heads in sorrow.

The Kingdom of God, and of his Christ declared in some measure as it is
revealed, what it is, and where it is to to be waited for, and how it comes to
be revealed to them, and in them that believe; that all who are waiting for it,
may know wherein it consists, and so receive the end of their hope, and the end
of their expectation, and know the Dominion which has no end.
THe Lord has prepared his throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over
all; his dominion is an everlasting dominion, and without end. God is a Spirit,
his Kingdom is spiritual, his habitation is suitable to his own nature; he is
immortal, his Kingdom, is so; he is light, his dwelling place is so, a pure
situation in which there is no uncleanness, nor ever shall be: It Is eternal
dignity, it is an immutable being, that remains always in it is purity and
pleasantness: Eternally glorious, it consists in power, in righteousness, in
purity, in joy, in hope, in peace, in life, in virtue eternal: in quietness,
its a quiet habitation, it is incomprehensible, unsearchable, and
indeclareable; words are too short, they are but as sounds, as vails: It is
unexpressible, in it is the treasure-house of wisdom, out of which all that
believe in him, (who is the King of eternal and immortal glory) comes to
receive of his wisdom, of his life, of his power, virtue, righteousness, and
comes to enjoy him, who is the fullness that fills all things, whether visible
or invisible; whether terrestrial, or celestial; his power is over all, his
dominion is over all, who is eternally blessedness it self, and felicity it
self; who makes all that believe in him to partake of his kingdom, of his
grace, of his power, of his dignity, of his dominion, and of his glory
celestial; but these things are hid from the world, who are not redeemed from
the earth, neither never looks to be while they are in the body: Unto such I
say, Gods kingdom you shall never see nor enjoy, while you are in that faith
which is reprobate, but may be truly called unbelief, although you imagine a
glory, and a kingdom in your earthly minds, and dream of a thing to come,
suitable unto that wherein your glory now stands; but that will all fail* and
those imaginations will be confounded, and dissolved into nothing, because they
are centred in that which is out of the truth, Christ, and so are without
ground or bottom, and are out of that which should give you the sight and
knowledge of God in your selves and his kingdom.

Christ when he taught them that followed him, exhorted them, that first of all
they might seek the kingdom of God, even while they were in the body, Mat. 6.
and 36. The Pharisees were gazing abroad in their earthly knowledge, although
they had the Scripture that declared of Gods kingdom, yet they knew it not;
and this generation is the same who are in the same nature, and in the same
wisdom which is earthly and litteral, and they are imagining as the Jews
were, and are, lo here, and lo there, in this observation and the other, and
look to see it there. Nay Christ said, The Kingdom of God is within you to the
Pharisees: He bad them and others seek it first; what strange doctrine was
this, might the Pharisees say; he says, the kingdom of God is within us, and
yet bids us seek it: Need we seek that which is in us, may professors say? Yea,
it is like a pearl hid in the field; its like a grain of mustard seed among many
great seeds, which is not easily found; it is like a piece of silver lost in the
house among much rubbish, till that be swept away, thou will not find it; thou
must dig deep, sweep clean, search narrowly before thou find it; although he
did say to the Pharisees, The kingdom of God is within you, he did not say they
were possessors of it, or that it was theirs; but to the Disciples whom he
taught to pray in faith thy kingdom come, and they came to find it; that which
they prayed for, that pearl, that groat, that grain of mustard seed which it
was like, and having found it, and believed in it, he says unto them, Mat. 5.
3. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of God. And in
Luke 6. 20. And he lift up his eyes on his disciples and said, blessed be ye
poor, for yours is the kingdom of God. They had seen it, and were possessors of
it, it was theirs. And Christ said unto his disciples, There are some of you
standing here that shall not taste of death till ye see the kingdom of God come
in power. And his words were fulfilled; they declared what they had felt and
seen; and some of them said, The Kingdom of God is not in word but in power.
And Paul to the Romans writes, Romans 4. 17. who was also made partakers of the
same power and the same kingdom; he spoke his knowledge of it, and said. It Is
not meat nor drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost. And
the Colossions who had waited for it, and believed in that through which it was
revealed; the Apostle was in the same Faith, Coloss. 1. 12. and 13. Who has
made us meet partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, who has
delivered us from the power of darkness, and has transformed us into the
kingdom of his dear Son: And those things were seen in the body, and witnessed
in the body: And the Apostle to Hebrews says, He that believes is entered into
the rest. And this and all these things were feeled within by the seed immortal
the birth immortal, and they that witness the birth immortal to live in them:
One said, He has made us joynt-heirs with Christ who is the King of eternal
glory, and they were Joint-heires with him of the kingdom that fades not away,
and all that ever comes to see the kingdom of God in the spirit, which is
spiritual, must wait in the spirit, and in its manifestation; that so God and
his Kingdom, and the things of Gods Kingdom may be felt and seen and enjoyed
in the spirit which is glorious.

Object. All this which thou have spoken may some say is the kingdom of grace;
and that we hold there is a twofold kingdom, the one of grace here, the other
of glory hereafter; which none comes to enjoy glory, or any part of it in this
life, or in the body.

Answ. People has long been blinded with confused distinctions about names;
and being full of imaginary thoughts and conceptions, have brought forth
foolish and unlearned distinctions; and that which God has joined together,
they would separate: grace is glorious, and glory is gracious; he that can
receive it, let him; the kingdom of God, which was like a grain of
mustard seed, afterward it became a great tree; the tree in its strength, and
glory, and height, is more glorious then when its in the seed, yet the seed and
the tree is in nature, and quality, and kind, one; if the kingdom be in
dominion in purity, and power, and glory, is not here unity? yet a greater
measure, yet still the dominion is one, the power one, the glory one, and the
thing one wherein grace stands and glory stands, wherein the kingdom
stands; grace is glorious, Ephesians. 1. 6, 7. Having predestined us unto the
adoption of children, and to the praife and glory of his grace wherein he has
made us accepted in the beloved. In the Fathers house there are many mansions,
places in the kingdom of God, there are many heavenly places, and they that
walked to the praise of his grace, came to sit also in heavenly places, Ephesians. 2
6. through grace, salvation, through grace glory comes to be revealed in the
earth, Isa. 6. 3. The Ear^h is full of his glory; he that makes heaven and
Earth glorious, is glory it self, from whence grace and every degree of gloly
receives its being; the least measure of Gods strength and power is glorious;
and to be gloried in, in the Lord by all that have seen it; Things might be
declared which God has revealed, which is not lawful for me now to utter; for
as one star differs from another in glory, yet all glorious, even so is it with
the children of the resurrection, who are quickened and made alive, and raised
from the dead, and fashioned like unto his glorious body, partakers of the
glory of God, of his kingdom of his power; the power is his, in which the
kingdom stands, the kingdom his, wherein glory stands, the kingdom, power and
glory stands all in him who is the glorious God, and the God of eternal glory,
who is revealing his power, his kingdom, and grace, and his glory, unto all
that patiently wait upon him, in that which yet is as a grain of mustard seed;
they will come to feel his presence, his power and glory revealed in their
hearts, through the spirit, and enjoy God in his kingdom, in his power, and in
his glory, and through faith shall see the weight of his glory, which God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ will reveal unto all that patiently wait for
his appearance, and in his appearance.

Obj. But some will cry out, grievous blasphemy and error; what, I think you
look for no other glory but in this Life, nor for no other Kingdom, but what
you enjoy in this life; thus I know dark spirits reasons.

Answ. The Saints looked not af^ any other glory but that which stood in
eternal life, and in the immortal Life, and in the incorruptable life, and the
Country they sought after, was that which God was the maker and builder of, and
they looked and waited to receive of his power in which the Kingdom stands,
and did in this life (I do not say the full weight of glory) and to know and
enjoy, and to be made partakers of his eternal dominion and authority, is that
which all the Saints in measure witness, and in due time came to enjoy through
faith; for by faith they saw him who was invisible, and the things of his
kingdom, which is invisible, spiritual and eternal; but to speak of the carnal
corruptable life in the flesh, who are dead while they live there, that life,
neither the kingdom, nor the power, nor the glory of God is revealed to them,
not till after the death of that life, and till after the death of him who has
the power of death, which is the Devil, which rules in the hearts of the
children of disobedience, where all the mysteries of Gods kingdom is hid from
their eyes, and ever shall while in that state; and so let the Serpent be
blind, and they that have an ear to hear, blessed is that ear; for the
kingdom of God is come nigh unto many, and the salvation of God, and the power
of Christ is seen by many, honor and praise unto him everlastingly, who is the
only Potentate that puts down all authority under his feet, that God may be
all, in all, but first every one must come to feel the kingdom which is as a
little grain, in himself, and in it believe, before any can come to know the
Kingdom, or wherein it consists, and after it be known in its measure, yet
this is far short of glory in the fullness; so many may come to be partakers of
the power in some measure, yet this is far short of the eternal weight of
glory; He that believes is entered into the rest, and made partakers of the
heavenly gift, and of the heavenly power, and of the heavenly grace, which is
glorious, and does witness a heavenly place in Christ Jesus, and yet many
enemies to be subdued, and much of the heavenly habitation, which they see not,
which comes to be revealed as there is an abiding in the faith, which stands in
Gods power, in which the kingdom stands; the mysteries of God and of his
kingdom comes in due time to be revealed, through death they come to be known,
(that is to say) through the death of death; for Israel the true type, after
they passed over Jordan, and had taken Jericho and Ai, and had made an entrance
into the land, yet there was many enemies to be subdued, and much land and
possessions, which they were not made partakers of long after, even so after
there be of the true rest enjoyed and possessed, and an entrance made into it,
yet there is many enemies to be subdued, and much of the heavenly inheritance
to be enjoyed by them that stand in the power which gives dominion over sin,
the devil, hell and the grave, and they come to be made partakers of God, and
so the enmity being slain, man comes to enjoy God who is eternal life, and
comes to receive the crown immortal, which God the eternal power and strength
gives in due time, to them that wait in patience and in faith, through which
the immortal inheritance comes to be revealed to all the children of light.

And so to conclude in few words, this I say unto all, who are longing after
God, and waiting to feel his power, keep in your minds to the pure measure of
Gods holy spirit, and therein wait to see his kingdom, and his dominion, and to
be made partakers of it, which brings the world to an end; and will let you see
to the end of it too, before it was, and him who is now glorified with the
Father in the kindom of God, with the same glory he had with the Father before
the world began, and who so comes to the end of the world, and to the beginning
again, comes to see him and his glory, and the kingdom of glory which fades not
away, which who so comes to enjoy, are eternally happy.

THE END.
ERRORS.
PAge 14. l. 9. blot out of. p. 25. l. 20. for Angei. r. angel. p. 32. l. 24.
for presumptions. r. presumptious. p. 33. l. 8. f. he. r. the the same p. l.
12. for undeclareble. r. undeclarable. p. 46. l. 23. f, hit. r. his. p. 71. l.
27. f. soul. r. fold. p. 86. l 25. f. ntichrists r. Antichrists. p. 99. l. 18.
f. power. r. popery. p. 101. l. 11. f. neral. r. funeral. p. 124. l. 10. f.
our. r. your. p. 156. l. 3. f. corrupt; ble. r. corruptible. p. 160. l. 24. r.
a moment f. moment. p. 208. l. 12. f. cnrst; r. cursed.


