THE MOUTH OF THE Pit Stopped, AND The Smoke that has arisen out of it
scattered by the breath of TRUTH.

In Answer to a lying Story called Hell broken Loose; or the History of the
Quakers, Published by Thomas Underhill, a seller of the Whores Merchandise,
otherwise called A bookseller; his Lies returned upon him, his accusations
answered and his envy declared, and Truth cleared from all his Reproaches.

By one that waits to see Death and Hell cast into the lake of fire, with the
Beast and the False-prophet, Francis Howgil.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

THE EPISTLE.
Thomas Underhill,
THou seeds-man of Lies and Slanders and false reports, whose Hell is broken
loose, and is spreading where the banks is not set nor the bounds, and thy
greatest madness and rage is at them that trembles at the Word of God, and
works out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling, and thy Lies and Slanders
and false reports we understand is set on sale in such a man's Shop to get gain
upon the Innocent, and the ground is seen, and the Earth in which thou may
sow thy evil seed, and thy Lies, slanders and false reports, who art a man
fitted, whom the Devil has found out to go on in his will, and to do his work,
for a long time has he been fitting of thee, and for a long time has the seed
been sown in thee, and now it is growing and buds forth, and Hell is broken
loose; but thou art taken (and the Hell) who art the Seeds-man of the Devil
that sowes Lies, the prince of death, but all is and shall be taken and cast
into the Lake of fire, the Hell, the Devil the Author of thy work, and thou
except thou speedily repent. Was there ever such a thing heard or seen, that
Thomas Underhill should gather up Lies, slanders and false reports, and set
them to sale at the Star in Paul's Churchyard, as he calls it? there is a
refuge of Lies of his for any to shelter under that are given up to believe
Lies, but that will not save you from the storm nor the wrath of the Almighty,
but the Beesom is witnessed that sweeps all the refuge of Lies into the fire,
and brings the Liar to judgment, and thou will become a shame and a stink to
all modest and sober people, the witness in thy own conscience shall witness
it. And do thou think that the Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland do
not begin to see your Priests and such as thee that holds them up, and such as
thee calls Converts? What a stink and a nasty smell there is in your streets, in
your Towns, in your Steeple Houses, as though you had never heard talk of God,
and Christ; your natures are so unchanged, and your Priests haling up and down
to Courts and Assizes, and casts into prisons till death for their bellies and
their mouths such they do no work for, and your prisoning and persecuting for
not swearing to the Priests Bill, and the Priests rude multitude breaking the
windows, breaking up Meetings, and breaking the heads of people, the Servants
and Messengers of the Lord, that you are almost become like a field of blood,
whipping such as warn you to repent, and here hell has been broken loose, and
thou art a Seeds-man of him that is out of the Truth, who art an Encourager
with thy Lies and slanders these persecutours, but thy own words shall be thy
burden.

G. F.

IT is written, He that watches for Iniquity shall be cut off, and the
wickedness of the wicked shall come to an end, although the long suffering of
the Lord be great, who waits that men might return and cease to work
iniquity, and to strive against his holy Spirit by which he reproves the world
of sin and the wicked of their transgressions, and to this end has he given a
measure of his spirit to every man, (though contemned and despised by the
wicked) that they might see themselves and be humbled for their Iniquity and
repent of their transgressions, yet notwithstanding such is the obstinancy of
many, as that they hate the reproof of Instruction, yea the scorners and the
fools unto whom Wisdom cries, Return at my reproof, so that all are left
without excuse; Yet notwithstanding though they reject the mercy and love of
the Lord and gain-sayeth his holy Spirit, though they do for a while perfist in
their wickedness, yet this shall be the end, the wicked shall not go
unpunished, of that, certain Testimony is given that God has appointed a day
wherein he will judge the secrets of all hearts by Jesus Christ according to
the Everlasting Gospel, which was declared and now is published again by them
that are come and coming out of the Apostasy, and in that day thou Thomas
Underhill shall be convinced of thy ungodly deeds, and of thy hard speeches and
false accusations, and reproachful calumniations and slanders, and of many
false things which thou have charged against a people whom Christ has Redeemed
by his most precious blood, which thou shall be judged for in that day, when
terror shall fill thy heart and wrath come upon thee from whence thou shall not
be able to fly, though thou may call to the hard Rocks and to the high Hills
which are in the transgression, whose hands thou would now strengthen against
the Just, and blind their eyes, that so they might receive thy false
suggestions and instigations, and so would persuade them to stretch out their
hands against them which is to be preserved and cherished, who are dear unto
the Lord as the Apple of his eye, but the Lamb of God who takes away the sins
of the World, who is arisen and arising in his power and might to make War in
Righteousness against the beast and his power, the Mother of Harlots, and her
golden Cup of fornication, against Antichrist and his men of War, against the
Dragon and his Army, and he is traveling in the greatness of his strength, who
shall subdue the Nations to himself, and break all the ungodly that stands is
his way as a Potters vessel, and behold a numberless number has taken part
with him who rides on in the power and strength of his might, the least of
which thou shall not be able to stand before, but shall vanish as smoke, and be
consumed as stubble before the fire, which shall burn up all the ungodly, and
melt them all away that hate the Lord, then shall thou call to the Rocks and to
the Hills, from whence thou now looks for Salvation, that thou might be
preserved in safety still in Babylon where is thy habitation, and in the Region
of the shadow of death which thou have taken up for thy dwelling place) and
that they might suppress that which thou calls Heresy and Blaspemy which has
invaded thy kingdom already, and put out thy light, and is staining that which
thou glories in, and is bringing contempt upon thy mothers Merchandise, of
which thy shop is filled with books of curious Arts, and made up in the
Imaginations of men of corrupt minds, many of which is good for nothing but for
the fire, which has bewitched people from the simplicity of the Gospel, and
has darkened peoples understandings, and brought a mist and a cloud over
peoples hearts, so that the Son of Righteousness could not be seen to arise in
the hearts of people; and now thou (with the rest of Babylons Merchants) which
have long traffickt with their sorceries, art angry because thou have had a
share in her Merchandise, and has gotten gain by selling of such traffic,
which is as unsavory salt, good for nothing but to be trodden under foot of
men, thou cries like Demetrius for his shrines, great is the goddess Diana, and
thou with others who have got a gain and trade by the aforesaid enchantments of
the Harlot and her Merchants, thou cries, The Church the Church, the Ministry
the Ministry, and Religion, the National Ministry, which when the matter is
enquired into, what the Church is, it is found to be no other then the Mother
of Harlots who has sitten upon the waters this many hundred years, and the
Ministry is no other but them that are in Balaams way, and such whose hearts
are exercised with covetous practices, and such as the Prophets and Apostles
declared against, who sought for their gain from their Quarter, and who taught
those things they ought not for filthy lucre; And for Religion, it is nothing
but a profession in words at best without the life, or else some old
traditions, humane inventions, and innovated customs, which has been brought
in since the Apostasy; but I say, because of thy gainful craft, thou art now
busied as thou has been diverse years, not only against the Quakers, but
against others who have separated from your hypocritical worships and deceitful
formalities, and for this end thou have bended thy tongue to tell lies, and thy
ear is open to mischief, that thou might get any thing to accuse the truth
withal, and to set up and promote thy long trading with deceit, what, has not
the Hills and the Mountains, Parliaments, Protectors formerly gratified thee,
that thou art so covetous and greedy of persecution and bloodshed? Though thy
insatiable desire has not yet been satisfied, neither I believe ever shall,
yet thou shall not go unpunished, and when Judgment comes upon thee, then may
thou call to the Rocks and to the Hills to cover thee, and hide thee from the
wrath of the Lamb, and from the presence of his holy Host, but they shall not
be able to save thee.

What, has not all the Beacons that thou have fired given sufficient warning
to all the Dragons host and to all the Beasts Army, and to all the Harlots
Merchants, and to all Babylons children, that they might come out all to
battle? they have been fired these five years, have thou not gotten all thy
host up together by thy Books which formerly thou calledst so, to withstand the
Lamb and his followers, that thou art come on again with a fresh onset to see
if thou can stop the way of Truth, that people might not receive it? for that
is thy end in writing this lying History, as thou thy self has confessed, alas
poor man, is this all thy strength that thou art able to make up, and are these
all the weapons of thy warfare, a company of vain Arguments out of the Priests
Books which have written as thou have done against the Truth, and old stories
which thou have received out of our adversaries writings which thou have heaped
up together to fill peoples minds which prejudice, that they might not receive
the Truth? do thou think this is like to prevail? a company of broken bows
and shattered spears, and lame Chariots, whose wheels have been often taken
off, which we have over run and trampled down, that few will have any trust to
these, or this is but to set briars and thorns in battle against the Lord.

Thy Book thou calls Hell broken loose, or a History of the Quakers, published
to preserve Christians against formality of Religion and Apostasy, and to the
intent that thy Book might not grow old nor stick upon thy hands, as such other
moldy stuff has done, thou says London Printed in the year 1660. and so has
Printed a lie in the Frontize-piece of thy Book, thy Book by that time thou may
hang up with old Almanacks or sell for waste Paper, and if thou begin with a
lie and scorn, how do thou think that this will be an Antidote (as thou calls
it) against formality and Apostasy? Is not a liar an Apostate, is not he that
pleads for Popish Trumpery a formalist in Religion without the Power? he that
reads but thy Title page may see what thy Book is within if he go no further,
the Covenant of death is not yet broken in thee, and the agreement with Hell is
not yet disannulled, and therefore all this smoke is come out of the pit in
which thou delights to dwell.

And is this such a worthy piece in thy account, that thou must needs shelter
it under the wings of the Officers of the Army of England, Scotland and
Ireland? art thou so great a friend to them? and in thy Book tells them they
were the inlet of Heresy and blasphemy, who art but yet an Episcopal stem, or
at best a Presbyteral branch. I believe many amongst them will favor thy
spirit, and know what uniformity and unity thou art for, which may be more
properly called deformity and enmity, and so thy flattering Epistle when they
see thy spirit will hardly merit thanks, and so that wicked spirit which could
not be satisfied in the time of the former Parliaments, and Protectors, still
persists in the unfatiable desire to see if the Army will gratify thee, and
turn persecutors, but thou have mist it far in crying a confederacy to the
reverend Pastors or Priests of Scotland, the Army knows right well or at least
might do, that the Priests of Scotland whom thou so reverencest have been
always hinderers, and obstructors of the way of God and of his work these
diverse years, instance two or three hundred of them before the fight at Dunbar,
who prophesied all like Zedekiah for the poor Scots against the English Army to
go up and prosper; and cursed them and Excommunicated them, and gave them up to
Satan and for destruction; but such Prophets were made fools, and their
divinations was madness, and God gave a sufficient testimony against them and
their deceived followers, which I hope the English Army has not yet forgotten,
and for the Scotch Priests and their Doctrine and practice, it is so grossly
ignorant and abominably profane, as I believe many of the Army do right well
know, but such as are not satisfied, I refer them to a Book called the
Doctrines and Principles of the Priests of Scotland, wherein may be seen their
deceit, and how some of them has said they had reason to curse the Magistrates
from morning to night, because that allowance was granted unto any to worship
God in spirit and Truth who could not be subject to their traditional
uniformity; and thou tells the Army in thy Epistle that ruin is like to come
upon all Religion and Piety, if God prevent it not by you or some other way;
they may see what Religion thou art of, and what God thou trusts in, and what
piety thou art for, which may be rather called irreligious and impious, the
Government of Religion and piety lies upon the shoulders of him who is a
wonderful Councellor, and mighty to save, and able to defend them that are
subject unto him, and would thou have the Soldiers or any others intrude
themselves into Christ's Throne, unto whom all power is committed both to make
Religious and preserve pious them that do believe in him, this were to derogate
from the honor and power which belongs to Christ who is head of the Church,
who will not give his glory to another, and let all take notice of this that
whosoever has sought to take the honor from him, and glory from him, he has
laid their honor is the dust, and their glory is become as the moth-eaten
garment as hitherto it has been evident; and thou tells them they know the
Scripture is Gods written Word and a holy perfect rule of faith and practice,
and that it holds out that Christ is now in his humane glorified body in Heaven.

If thou had said the Scripture is the Words of God written thou had said
something, for the Word of God is one thing, and the words is another, though
the words are a Testimony of the Word, and the Word and the Spirit which is
one, which gave forth the words, are the perfect rule and foundation of faith,
which was before the words, and is greater then the words, as we have often
declared to thy dearest generation though they would not hear; and where does
the Scripture hold forth a humane glorified body in Heaven? thy deceit and
ignorant mind holds out a humane glorified body, we say according to the
Scriptures that Christ's body is spiritual, and he is raised a spiritual body,
and is glorified in a spiritual body and in a Heavenly body, which thou never
knew, neither art, like while the nature lives in thee in which thou now stands.

And thou says in thy Epistle that one day in seventh should be set apart for
rational souls to mind the things of Eternity.

And which is that day that thou will set apart? some of Babylons Merchants
have cried up one day and some have cried up another day, and some have called
the seventh day the Sabbath, and some have called the first day the Sabbath,
and whether was Sabbaths made for man, or man for Sabbaths, and whether was
days made for man, or man made for days? all time is in the hand of the Lord,
and they that have Communion with him do mind the things of Eternity every day,
and so they come to know the day of the Lord in which rest is given to the
soul, and the creature has rest though he labor in the Creation when that is
done away in himself which has oppressed; thou may go learn what this means.

In thy postscript (as thou calls it) thou says if any shall take offense for
thy seeking to civil or Military Power to support Religion, thy defense is, and
thy belief is that thou ought to seek to the higher powers to support Religion,
and this is the Liberty of thy conscience, and that this thou may do more
acceptably then they who cross their own professed opinion as they have done of
late years by motions, Councels books and Papers which they have delivered for
these many years for the pulling down the Ministry and steeple houses, and that
their importuning the Magistrate to pull down Ministry and worship is a
yielding of the cause.

I say thy belief is without the true foundation, and so many properly be
called unbelief, and thou errs in thy judgment, who seeks to civil or
Military power to uphold Religion, which as I said before belongs to him who is
the higher, and highest power; Civil and Military Officers are not for making
Religion or setting up Religion, but are to keep the Peace, and to stop the
violent doer, and to be a terror to evil works and workers, and a praise to
them that do well, and that is their place to govern in righteousness, but not
to exercise Lordship over the conscience, which power belongs only to Christ;
and as for them who have delivered Books and Papers and words and writings to
them who were in Authority to pull down the Ministry and Steeple Houses, or
public Ministry and worship, if thou intend the Quakers, as I believe thou
do, thy arrows being shot only at them; we have delivered, or caused to be
delivered diverse Books and Papers, wherein we have showed them the grievous
suffering of the People of God, by the heavy oppressions which they did suffer
under, because of the hirelings wages and upholding of Mass-houses, things
which has been introduced since the Primitive times in the Apostasy, which
aforesaid things has been guarded and upheld by Laws made in the Beasts
power; now to make null those Laws which were the ground of many oppressions,
and an offense to many tender Consciences, this is not to pull down Religion,
and that Ministry which can be pulled down by taking away of Tithes and forced
maintenance is no Ministry of Christ, but Ministers of Antichrist, and to deny
paying to Steeple Houses, Clark wages, burying for the dead and such other like
invented things, which many has groaned under, is not to pull down Religion;
for this I say to thee, and that which I can say to all, which no reasonable or
equitable man will deny to be equitable or just, take the hireling Ministry to
thee, and give him the fifth part of thy estate if thou will, and erect thy
Steeple-house like Babels Tower, but trouble not us with none of these things,
and for declaring to the Magistrates that these things ought to be done away,
and the Law by which they stood which was made in transgression ought to be
taken away, this is not to pull down the Ministry nor true Religion, but to
overturn deceit and Innovation which has obstructed and hindered pure
Reformation which has been talked on, for these are but the rotten rags of the
Whores Menstruous garment; so thy defense is made void and ours stands true,
that the Magistrate or Military power has nothing to do to prescribe any form
of Religion to bind all unto, for this is an intruding into those things that
belongs not to them.

Thou says that thou do freely and sincerely affirm, that thou have not
knowingly wronged the Quakers in the least, but does engage thy self to mak^
good every thing thou charges against them, that shall require it of thee.

That we shall see afterward how thou will make good that which thou have
charged some with; Have thou not knowingly wronged us, when thou have brought
all those which thou counts Heretics all Europe over, and some parts else, and
whatsoever they did or said, must be imputed unto us. I know thy envy in times
past with the rest of the Priests was as much against them who were separate
from your Assemblies as now against us, and all these things that thou have
racked up in this book out of Histories of Germany, of new England, which I am
not credulous to receive from thy mouth, no more then I shall thy History as
thou calls it of the Quakers, for thou which wilt lie of them which are so near
thee, may report many untruths at a distance, and these things the hireling
Priests were wont to charge upon the Baptists and Independants; but now we are
become the object of all your reproach and your butt to shoot at, but we are in
that which the Devil cannot prevail against, neither the gates of Hell.

In thy third Chap. thou says, Thou will Treat of the Predecessors of the
Quakers, and thou reckons up Simon Magus, Menander, Saturnus, how he taught
that Marriage and Generation was of Satan, and Arians who denied the Divinity
of Christ, and Pelagius a Monk who held that a man without the Grace of God was
able to fulfill all the Commandments of God, and of Balsidies, that he taught
that it was not Jesus, but Simon of Cyrene that was crucified in his shape.

These are none of our Predecessors, take them to thy self; and whether have
thou not knowingly wronged us in these things, and how will thou make every
thing good which thou have charged us withal? These things forementioned and
many more which I shall pass over as not to trouble the Reader with, in which
thou have charged us falsely, wherein thou art required to make good the charge,
or else cease thy clamerous tongue, these that thou have reckoned up you use to
call them Arians, Saturnians and Palagians, but now thou have made them all
Quakers.

In thy 13th page thou manifests what spirit thou art of, thou tells of the old
Church Government being taken away (to wit, the Common Prayer Book, taken out
of the Mass Book) then began Sects to arise; So that it seems thy chief
Reformation and Religion is but the old Lithurgy, which is little better then
the Mass; and the Ministers the old corrupt Bishops that the earth groaned with
the burden thereof, whose Ordination and Call is from the Pope their Original,
and from the Church of Rome your Mother, from whence these State-hirelings
which burdens the whole Creation sprang forth; thou would have all confined
unto this dark mist, and compelled to worship according unto those popish
Traditions held forth for public worship in that time.

Further thou brings a heap of lies out of Baxter, a man at enmity against all
goodness, who has written many lying Books against the living Truth, for which
the Lord God will call him and thee to account.

Thou sets down some of that which thou calls our Principles in the 16th page,
How that we deny all Officers in a Commonwealth; and how we deny all Relation,
as Brother and Sister, Magistrate, Master, Father, Mother, Son and Daughter,
Husband and Wife, and that Husband and Wife should part asunder, and that all
things should be common; All these things shall turn upon thy own head; and now
to the light in thy Conscience I speak, which thou despisest, whether thou have
not wilfully wronged us? and I require of thee according to thy promise, to
make these things good, but I believe thy proof is out of our Adversaries
Books, Baxters and the Priests of New Castle, which things have been answered,
and their lies turned upon their own heads.

In the 17th page thou have gathered some words and Sentences out of our Books,
many of them are so evident and manifest truth to all that are come to a good
understanding, that they need no vindication, for they will vindicate
themselves, and have an evident witness in every ones Conscience that believes,
so far as thou have truly transcribed them; and many of those doctrines and
practices which thou have set down as errors, the Scripture will bear witness
too, and the example of the Saints Evidence, and the judicious will receive
with gladness of heart, and by it thy envious Spirit will be made manifest to
all where thy lying story shall come.

In thy 30th page thy lips being accustomed to utter forth lies and deceit,
thou proceeds and says, That the Quakers say that a man is Justified by the
merit of good works, and inherent Righteousness; and how that we hold the real
Corporal presence of Christ in many places at once, and overthrows the Articles
of Christ's humanity; and further thou say, That Christ is Corporally in
Heaven; But for proof I expect none from thee, for thou speaks as though thy
tongue were thy own, and I charge thee to instance where in all our writings we
have said that a man is Justified by inherent Righteousness, or where thou
finds real Corporal presence, or where it is written in the Scripture that
Christ is Corporally in Heaven; Yet the man Christ is at the right hand of God,
from whence he shall appear to thy Judgment and Condemnation, except thou
repent, and Christ, Gods Righteousness must be revealed within, by which the
Saints are Justified.

In the 31 page thou tells of the Actions and Manners of the Quakers, and thou
says, They will not put off their hats before the highest Authority; and how
they stood covered and thoued, and theed the Chairman and Members of
Parliament, to the great dishonor of the Authority of England, as ever was
admitted; This shows that the Authority of England has in times past been out
of the Authority of God, and in the same Authority which we find mentioned in
the Scripture, before whom the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles were brought
before, though many of the Magistrates then were out of the power of God, yet
they did not reprehend them for want of hats, or caps, or bowings, or saying
thee or thou, and it seems the Committee and Members of Parliament did (...) it
no dishonor, though thou does who art a busy body, but fools loves to be
meddling.

Then thou proceeds on and says, They will not Petition men, (...) the
greatest Power, witness all their Addresses to the Protectors; and also tells,
How a Quaker in Hartfordshire swore against them that pulled down the house
where the Quakers met; It is not consistent with them that are in the truth,
and in the power of God, to come with fained Petitions full of flattery and
deceit, which answers not Gods witness, but rather the wrong part which would
be courted and flattered; which holds under the Just, neither can they who are
in the truth make such fained complemental Addresses as the hireling Teachers
from all quarters of the Nation did to the late Protectors, who flattered them
and told them they would stand by them, and lay down all for that which they
asserted, and called one of them Joshuah and the other Moses, and said, They
committed the keeping of the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ unto them, and such
like Blasphemies; but as soon as the wheel turned about in the next month,
calls them Traitors, Tyrants and Usurpers; and these were your stinking
Addresses and your fained Supplications, which all sober and understanding
people were ashamed of; and thy Priests which thou calls Ministers, and their
Confederates which thou calls Christians, have flattered them and bowed under
every deceit, and turned with every wind, instance in the days of Edw. 6 Hen.
8. Eliz. and Mary, and Charles, and when these were overthrown which you used
to call Gods anointed, then you strike in with what thing soever arises, ^s
instance one Parliament after another, and then for Protectors, and then no
Protectors, but a Parliament; and thus have you flattered each of the Rulers
though never so unjust, till the wrath of God has sunk the most of them,
because they have hearkened to flattery and deceit, and had not their ears open
to them with whom the Counsel of God is; we have Counseled them often, and have
forwarned them in all plainness and nakedness of heart, though our Counsel has
been rejected, yet God has fulfilled our Testimony thus far upon them all; And
as for the Quaker in Hartfordshire, who thou says swore against some who did
abuse him and the Quakers, I do believe he was one of thy own generation, and
lately one of your Popish Parochial Congregations instituted first by Pope
Dionysius, although the man was more moderate then the rest, and did grieve to
see his Neighbors abused, and sober people disturbed, and the house broken
down, and blood shed, and that by the Justification of thy Sir T. H. the man
not being convinced of the unlawfulness of an Oath, did give Testimony against
the riotous persons and evildoers, and against him who encouraged them in it;
And shall he be condemned by thee who acts the same thing, was it evil in him
and is it Righteous in thee? Although I do not justify the thing, for it is
known to many thousands in the Nation that the Quakers will not swear upon any
account, least they should fall into condemnation, but there is none can escape
thy slanderous pen who loves uprightness and truth; but all thy smitings in the
dark will at last fall upon thy own pate.

Further thou goes on and says, We cry up Liberty of Conscience, but are not
willing to give it to others; because thou says, Many thousand times some
Ministers has been disturbed by them in their Religious exercises. That
Liberty which we would enjoy our selves, the same we can and will allow unto
all men, which is most equitable; and though we have gone into the
Steeple Houses and old Mass-houses, and declared against Idolatry and deceit,
formality, feignedness and hypocrisy, or spoken the words of truth and
soberness, either in exhortation, admonition or reproof, this was the manner of
the Apostles of Christ, whose Consciences were exercised in purity toward God;
but that which was order in the Churches of Christ, is counted disturbance by
you Mass-house-worshippers, and yet you would arrogate unto your selves the
name of a Church, and yet are out of Gospel Order, you are for the liberty of
the flesh, and not for the Liberty of a pure Conscience

Thou says, The Quakers are grievous liars, and thy proof is that Richard Hub
berthorn said, That the wicked are not to read the Scriptures; and E. Borough
says, The wicked and ungodly are to read the Scriptures, and not the godly;
and thou says, In this they have not both spoken truth. We know no lie is of
the truth, but of the Devil who abode not in the truth, and we are redeemed out
of lying by the truth which has set us free; and thou art found the liar thy
self, for the words both of R. H. and of E. B. thou have perverted and not
spoken the truth, as afterward may be made more manifest.

In the 35th page of thy lying story thou says, The Quakers has succeeded
much, and has prevailed in these Nations, and beyond the Seas; but thou hopes
where ever thy Book shall arrive before them, the people will so well know them
as to abhor any further acquaintance with them. Here thou have manifested thy
spirit to be like the envious Jews, who crucified the Lord of Life, and
persecuted the Apostles from City to City, sometimes running before them with
their lies, and sometimes after to oppose them, and to stir up the
Vagabond-fellows and the ruder sort of people to oppose and abuse them; yet
notwithstanding the truth prevailed, and many believed on the Name of Christ
through their words which they published unto them; we have found the like
opposition, not only from strangers but also of our own Contrymen, and have
had many such lying stories as thine sent before us, and spread over the
Nations, and yet God has carried on his work, notwithstanding all rage,
opposition and cruelty it has prevailed and shall prevail, for so is the
Purpose and Will of God; and they who shall see thy book, who are but
reasonable men, will abhor and detest thy envious spirit, and truth shall be
more advanced, and that shall be fulfilled, the remainder of the wrath of man
shall turn to the praise of God.

Thou says, They are a very cruel bloody people, if we may Judge the Lion by
his paw, or what is abundantly in their hearts. God Will confound thy lying
lips and thy deceitful tongue; whose blood have we shed? can we not say and
that of a truth, and have our Testimony by Gods witness in every man, that we
are clear of the blood of all men? Nay, on the contrary, has not our blood
been spilt in your places of worship which you account holy, and has not many
suffered in bonds until death, by the reason of the oppression of the
blood-thirsty Priests of this Nation? and thou might well have been silent if
thou had not had an impudent face; have not we much to lay to your charge and
that truly? what do thou Judge of thy godly Ministers in Lancashire and
Cheshire, whom thou calls the valiant Captains of Christ's Army, which preached
up the people into Rebellion upon pain of Damnation? And others said, except
they went to the Randevous, it was much if they were saved; And others said,
the Nations must be purged with blood, to shed the blood of all those that
withstood them; And others said, if God would stand as a Newter, they had men
enough; and such Blasphemous words and doctrines were uttered, which are too
tedious to relate, and all this quarrel they said, was against the Quakers; Now
let the Reader Judge the Lion by his paw, and what is in these men's hearts by
their words and actions before mentioned. And now to conclude this in thy own
words, what would not these men do if they had power to their will? But the
power of the Lord God preserves the innocent, and is against all the workers of
iniquity; I shall not trouble the Reader with what Priest Ford and Fowler of
Redding has gathered up out of Priests books, which they have vomitted forth
against the way of truth, nor what Tho. Underhill has licked up and vomits out
again, which is but that which has been vomitted up before; so that it may be
said of them all as the Prophet says, Their Tables is full of vomit, and
filthy spewing covers them all; all which things has been answered over and
over, but that swine loves to be wallowing in the mire, and dogs loves to lick
up their vomit, and the envy of the wicked will not cease till he be cut off,
nor the evil eye for watching after mischief till it be put out; And now Tho.
Underhill and the rest of thy party, who resist the Spirit, if I would
recriminate, might not I more justly and truly bring many thousand bad examples
acted by your party, who are accounted Christians, and charge them all upon
you, then all these things in thy lying story, which thou have brought against
the Quakers.

If I should go from Parish to Parish, as thou have done from one end of the
Land to another, and also beyond the Seas, and should I reckon up all the
fornicatours and adulterers, all the thieves and murderers, all the proud and
covetous, all the fighters, brawlers, railers, drunkards, cheaters and
defrauders, and should charge all these upon the Presbytery, what a Volume I
might make, And were not this a just Retaliation? would thou count it an equal
thing, or would it be accounted Just in the sight of sober men, if I should
charge the moderate and guiltless with these things before mentioned? then
Judge thy self for thy envy and foolishness, and let thy mouth be stopped for
ever, for accusing those whom God Justifies.

In the 38 page In thy Observation on the whole History, That one may talk much
of God and Christ, and of the things of Religion, and all invain; and how the
coming in of unbelief shuts out Truth, Faith and Pity, and the great danger
the Nation is in by being overrun with hypocrisy and formality in Religion,
and how many has the form of godliness, but denies the power. He whose eye is
open may see the intent of thy History is to resist the power of truth, and to
strengthen deceit, and this shall stand for thy own lot, and for the
Congregations and Assemblies thou art pleading for, who at the best are but in
the suburbs of Babyl^^, who talk of God and Christ, and of the Spirit and of
Religon, but all in vain, for nothing is brought forth among you but formality,
deceit and hypocrisy, and error and unbelief, and a form of godliness has
long covered the Nation, and Truth, Faith and Piety has been rejected, and the
power of godliness; but now has the Lord appeared, and has rent the vail, and
manifested the deceitful workers and hypocrites, and though thou be observant
as to others footsteps, yet thou have not viewed thy self, neither pulled the
beam out of thine own eye, neither has discovered thy envy, nor the murderous
spirit that rules in thy heart from whence all these muddy waters flows forth,
and all this fog and mists arises which darkens the air, which whosoever
receives in, their understandings comes to be darkened; but all that fear the
Lord will see that out of thy corrupt heart all this mischief which thou have
long been treasuring up does now come forth, upon which the day of wrath will
come both upon thee and it.

Thou says, The Quakers has no reason in the world to boast of their
sufferings as they do, for they have suffered as evildoers, for being uncivil
to Magistrates, and disturbing Gods people in their Assemblies, and for being
busybodies and some other known wickednesses, and all their charging Courts
and, Justices with persecution falls flat to the ground. We are no boasters,
but rejoice in our sufferings for Christ's sake, neither are we weary, but are
willing to bear and suffer, till the Lord arise and plead our Cause, and our
sufferings are recorded, and the Lord has considered them though men would
not, and has overturned many and rebuked many for our sakes, and it is he that
justifies us, and who art thou that condemns us? the Testimony of our innocence
and the causeless suffering has a witness in many thousands hearts, who are
not like thine as flint; and what uncivility has any to lay to our charge, as
against Magistracy, whom have we wronged, or what violence have we done to any,
except thou Judge that incivility, because we do not complement, bow and
flatter, and make feigned Addresses, like thy generation? and this, your
Highness, and the other, your Excellency, and another, my Illustrious Lord, and
the next week or next month call them Traitors, Tyrants and Usurpers; and as I
told thee before, that which was order among the Churches, is accounted
disturbance by thee, which evidently manifests that you are in the Apostasy,
and out of the Christian Religion which was professed and practiced among the
Primitive Christians; and for any known wickedness among us, I am out of all
doubt, if thou had any thing thou would preach it upon the house top; known
wickedness has God redeemed us from, which thou yet wallows in and yet takes
delight in; And therefore all these known and wicked abominable falsehoods and
lies is come forth, besides the abusing of our words and false representing
what we have written as our Doctrines to the world, and this thou have done,
sometimes added to our words, and sometimes detracted from them, and sometimes
adds thy own Collections, and then presents them to public view as our Errors
and Blasphemies; and as for Courts and Justices, Magistrates and Rulers, many
of them hitherto has ruled by the Dragons power and not by the Power of God,
and in that, many has encouraged the evildoers, and has not listened to the
cry of the oppressed; therefore has the Lord God overturned them, and their
day is past, and our charges against their wickedness and persecution, neither
our Testimony, neither our sufferings has fallen to the ground, but stands as
a record against them.

And thou says, It is high time for all the redeemed ones, and sanctify ones,
and Children of Grace, the Favorites of Heaven, honest, godly, sincere
Christians, Children that will not lie to improve their entrust in God, for
this sinful divided Nation. What do thou own any to be redeemed and
sanctified, or to be Children of Grace, or that does not lie, and yet cries out
of perfection as Blasphemy, or that any should come to or live by that which
is perfect; if thou exclude the Quakers to be any of these, they will not find
many redeemed, sanctified, honest, godly, sincere Christians; and all your
improvement and your entrust which you have in God and in Christ will but
amount to a small dram, you all of you hitherto as you have said, have improved
your entrust, and has sought God, as you have said, by your prayers and
humiliations for the suppressing of that which you call heresy, and yet you
have had no answer, neither has he listened nor will he listen nor bow down his
ear unto you because your hearts is full of abominations; and as for relapsing
into Popery, you never came out of it, witness the Priests Popish Ordination,
their Popish Attire, your Popish Mass-houses, your Cross and Bells, your Popish
Tithes, Easter-reckonings and Mid-summer dues, your Popish Colleges, your
Popish Crosses and your Popish Images in and about your Idols Temple, and
because of the holding up of these things, the hearts of many of Gods people
are made sad, and because you would hold up your Religion by swords and clubs,
and persecute others who descent from you in this, you are one with the
Papists; And is this all thy Reformation that thy godly Ministry can bring
forth? You have traveled in vain and spent your strength for naught, and
because of these things the hand of God is against all in the Nation who hold
them up, and who is he that can alter the Council of the Lord? and God will not
be reconciled to the Nation till these things be done away, because of these
things and many more grievous oppressions which has been holden up; therefore
God has broken them in the midst of their Councels, and confounded them in the
midst of their devices, and will confound and overthrow all deceitful workers
and unprofitable talkers such as thou art, and one hill shall fall after
another till there shall be a great plain, that the ransomed of the Lord may
walk over and worship the Lord together in spirit and love and truth, in joy
and gladness of heart, even as when Israel kept the feast of Tabernacles.

And now I shall come to let the Reader see how thou have falsified our words
which thou have added thy own imaginations to, and then has quoted our Books
to make people believe they are our words when as they are thy own forged lies,
the which I shall return upon thee.

First, Thou says George Fox In truth defended says that Preaching the Word
Praying and singing are no appointments of Christ, when as he says no such
thing, but the hireling Priests divination and feigned Prayers and other men's
words in rhyme and Meeter are the inventions of men and not the Ordinances of
Christ.

Secondly, Thou says E. B. In truth defended says, The Priest taking Tithes
in the time of the Law was evil, and proved them to be false Prophets and
deceivers; When as he says quite contrary, that the Priests took Tithes under
the Law, according to the command of God, but ^ow the Priesthood was changed,
and the Law was changed; and them that Preach for hire, and seek for their gain
from their quarter, or take Tithes, are in the steps of false Prophets and
deceivers, and no Ministers of Christ.

Thirdly, That its dangerous for the ignorant and unlearned to read the
Scripture, and the Ministers of it are the Ministers of death; Now thou have
detracted from the words; There it is said that it is dangerous, for thee to
take the Scripture to War against the Saints withal, and to make a trade with
it, and give carnal Exposition and then sell them for money.

Fourthly, Thou tells of one Master Kellet in Lancashire and his queries;
Whether did not Christ Institute his last Supper with bread and wine? and R. H.
says, The bread which Christ called his body is his Church, which words thou
have mangled and perverted, as thou have done the most thou has meddled with,
there is no such man as Master Kellet; the words are these in Truths Defense,
103. Christ did not speak of bread and wine, but he took bread and brake it,
and said This is my body; and we witness the breaking of the bread which is his
body, and in this answer, there is not one word of Church.

Fifthly, E. B. In answer to Firmin, his words thou have perverted, and would
bring this as a contradiction of R. H. thou says he allows only the wicked
and ungodly to read the Scripture, such as the Scribes and Pharisees, and not
the godly; And not the godly is thy own adition: he spoke concerning the
Scribes and Pharisees who thought to have Eternal Life in the Scripture, he
says this was spoken to the Pharisees, and not to believers, yet believers is
not excluded from reading the Scripture, for them it pertains to and they
understand it; but thou are like the Spider where the Be gathers honey,
gathers that which is corrupt, and in thy conclusion of thy story thou takes in
hand to supplicate God; and thou says it is for the help of them that need it,
this thou might have spared till the old Prelates had come up again, it may be
some Synod of them will add to the Book of Common Prayer thy late service and
worship; do thou think the Lord will hear thy hypocrisy and lies without
returning his judgment on thy head? Thou tells of some that sets light of
Christ and his blood and Word; thou art one of them that sets light of Christ
and counts his blood as a vain thing, as thy own words in thy Book shall
testify, where the Reader may observe, when we have testified of the true
light which lights every man that comes into the world, who is the way to the
Father, thou has set down our words for blasphemy and error, when diverse of
them are the words of Scripture, and none of them but the Scripture will
testify unto against thee; And as for the blood of Christ and the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, thou accounts a vain thing and an unholy thing, even
which cleanses from sin and and bears witness against it, and subdues it, and
makes them that receive it conquerers over sin, but thou that cries out against
perfection or freedom from sin, and counts this error and blasphemy, ^hou
denies that which sanctifies and cleanses from sin, and counts it unholy and
vain, and so if the Lord should hear thee and grant that thou prays for,
destruction would come upon thee, and thou art one of the formal professors
that had need to repent of thy deceit, before thou can pray unto God either for
thy self or others; but enmity and wickedness lodges in thy heart against the
Lord and the way of truth, and thou have resisted the Counsel of the Lord
against thy self; and therefore woes, plagues, thunders and storms is truly
thy portion, and nothing else must thou expect, which undoubtedly will come
upon thee, except thou repent, and it will be hard for thee to find a place of
repentance, for it is yet hid from thine eyes. So I have answered thy lying
History by which thou would inchant peoples minds, and have discovered thy
deceit, and thy poison which thou have put in that thou calls an Antidote, that
so the simple may not be deceived with thy lies and cheats, neither the
innocent betrayed; only I shall return a few of thy lies upon thy own head,
which thou has forged up against the Quakers out of thy corrupt heart, and out
of the lying stories of the Priests, with whom thou art in league; but he that
sits in Heaven laughs you to scorn, and all whose eyes the Lord has opened,
will have thy lying History in derision and loathe thy enmity, and testify
against thy spirit as not to be of God; And because thou have said in thy
advertisment to the Reader, that thou has not knowingly wronged the Quakers in
the least, I say thou has either knowing or ignorantly wronged them, and both
thou must repent before thou find mercy; and because thou tells the Reader thou
will make good every thing thou have charged against them to any who require
it, I do require thee to make these ensuing things good.

1. That the Quakers deny the death and Ascension of Christ. 2. That we deny
the Divinity of Christ. 3. That the Priests under the Law, that take Tithes did
evil; and for it were counted false prophets and deceivers. 4. That a man is
justified by the merits of his own good works. 5. That the ignorant may not
read the Scriptures. 6. The Quakers are a carnal and bloody people. 7. That the
Quakers are bewitched and possessed by the Devil. 8. That Christians are worse
then Beasts. 9. That the body of Christ is not in Heaven. 10. That Christ as
man had his failings. 11. That man is not reconciled to God until he can stand
by his own power perfect. 12. That Christ was a single man, true man and died
for us. 13. That without the grace of God a man may keep the Commands of God.
14. That they deny the relation of a father, a brother, or a wife. 15. That all
that the Quakers have suffered, is for evil doing, being Malefactors.
These amongst many others thou art required to prove, and to make good, as
thou have promised, or else for ever stop thy lying lips, and own thy
condemnation for thy envy and false aspersions; and these things I lay at thy
door as lies, see how thou will clear thy self in the fight of them unto whom
thou has written thy story; many filthy and ungodly stories is besides in thy
Book, which I shall not trouble the Reader or cumber his mind with thy filthy
stuff, but in what is already declared thy deceit will be made manifest and
laid open, and truth cleared from thy lies; and that will be satisfaction to
him who desires that all who love the Lord may be kept out of the snares and
temptations of the Devil who goes about seeking whom he may devour, like a
roaring Lion; and thou may see whose foot-stepts Thomas Underhill has trod,
who has ranged up and down from age to age, from Nation to Nation, from one
region to another to fetch up lies and fabulous stories to resist the truth
withal, whose reward will be according to his works.

London 29. of 9. Mon. 1659.
FRiend, Consider what thou have done: O how have thou brought a vail of bad
Report upon thy Name amongst all that fear God? And how have thou hurt and
wounded thy self by thy own wickedness? and the Scripture is fulfilled upon
thee; The wickedness of the wicked shall slay him; What have thou no better
use to make of thy time, then to spend it with inventing Mischief against a
despised people that seek not the hurt of any one, but thirsts and waits
for the glorious Appearance of the Son of God? and what thou have sought to do
against them, shall be the weight upon thy own Conscience in the dreadful day
of God, whose heavy Judgments thou can not escape. Alas for thee, poor man,
thou feeble Child of Babylon, whose strength is weakness, and whose wisdom is
mere folly in the sight of the Lord; The Children of Zion do not fear thee,
neither do they regard thy Revilings, for they dwell in a safe Habitation, and
are at perfect Rest, and are above all the fiery darts which in thy envy thou
shootest against them, and thy reward shall be according to thy Works, and the
multitude of men shall not be able to deliver thee from the wrath that comes
against thee from the Lord, and all the false Prophets and Wolves in Sheeps
clothing, with whom thou have taken part against the Lamb and his followers,
they shall be a broken Reed for thee to lean upon; for why? Alas, the
determination of the Lord is against them, and the day of their Sorrow is
approaching; and had thou been wise for God, and for thy own Soul, thou
would not have endangered thy own Soul on their defense; And though we have
no Goals, Prisons, Stocks, nor Whips, nor yet any unjust or cruel way of
dealing toward you as you have had against us, yet we have the Lord to be our
Armor, and he is the only Rock of our Defense, and he is stronger then man,
and in him we trust; And what are all thy Lies and Slanders unto us? And what
though Baalam for a Gift may seek Enchantment against us, yet there is no
Divination found against the Elect Seed; and seeing thou have gone in Baalams
path, thou shall reap his Reward, who art an enemy of Righteousness, and a
perverter of the right way of God, whose end will be We and Misery; Wherefore
consider, O thou vain mortal man, that must die and come to nothing; Wherefore
have thou set thy self against God, and heaped up thy multitude of envious
Words, Lies, and Slanders against his people? What is the Fruit of such a Work,
but eternal Vengeance from the righteous God? And though thou art come in the
end of the Battle, and have helped Gog and Magog according to thy strength, yet
Friend, our City cannot be shaken, its Foundation cannot be removed; And what
art thou, vain ignorant Creature, that have sought against God and his People?

THE END.

