A LETTER TO A DISSENTER, Upon occasion of HIS MAJESTY'S Late Gracious
Declaration OF INDULGENCE.

LONDON: Printed for G. H. 1687.

A LETTER TO A Dissenter, etc.
SIR,
SInce Addresses are in fashion, give me leave to make one to you. This is
neither the Effect of Fear, Interest, or Resentment; therefore you may be sure
it is sincere: and for that reason it may expect to be kindly received. Whether
it will have power enough to Convince, depends upon the Reasons, of which you
are to judge; and upon your preparation of Mind, to be persuaded by Truth,
whenever it appears to you. It ought not to be the less welcome, for coming
from a friendly hand, one whose kindness to you is not lessened by difference
of Opinion, and who will not let his thoughts for the Public be so tied or
confined to this or that Sub-division of Protestants, as to stifle the Charity,
which besides all other Arguments, is at this time become necessary to preserve
us.

I am neither surprised nor provoked, to see that in the condition you were put
into by the Laws, and the ill circumstances you lay under, by having the
Exclusion and Rebellion laid to your Charge, you were desirous to make your
selves less uneasy and obnoxious to Authority. Men who are sore, run to the
nearest Remedy with too much haste, to consider all the consequences: Grains of
allowance are to be given, where Nature gives such strong Influences. When to
men under Sufferings it offers Ease, the present Pain will hardly allow time
to examine the Remedies; and the strongest Reason can hardly gain a fair
Audience from our Mind, whilst so possessed, till the smart is a little allayed.

I do not know whether the Warmth that naturally belongs to new Friendships,
may not make it a harder Task for me to persuade you. It is like telling
Lovers, in the beginning of their Joys, that they will in a little time have an
end. Such an unwelcome Style does not easily find credit: but I will suppose
you are not so far gone in your new Passion, but that you will hear still; and
therefore I am under the less discouragement, when I offer to your
consideration two things. The first is, the cause you have to suspect your new
Friends. The second, the Duty incumbent upon you, in Christianity and Prudence,
not to hazard the Public Safety, neither by desire of Ease, nor of Revenge.

To the first: Consider that notwithstanding the smooth Language which is now
put on to engage you, these new Friends did not make you their Choice, but
their Refuge: They have ever made their first Courtships to the Church of
England, and when they were rejected there, they made their Application to you
in the second place. The Instances of this, might be given in all times. I do
not repeat them, because whatsoever is unnecessary, must be tedious, the truth
of this Assertion being so plain, as not to admit a Dispute. You cannot
therefore reasonably flatter your selves, that there is any Inclination to you.
They never pretended to allow you any Quarter, but to usher in Liberty for
themselves under that shelter. I refer you to Mr. Coleman's Letters, and to the
Journals of Parliament, where you may be convinced, if you can be so mistaken,
as to doubt; nay, at this very hour, they can hardly forbear, in the height of
their Courtship, to let fall hard words of you. So little is Nature to be
restrained; it will start out sometimes, disdaining to submit to the Usurpation
of Art and Interest.

This Alliance, between Liberty and Infallibility, is bringing together the Two
most contrary things that are in the World. The Church of Rome does not only
dislike the allowing Liberty, but by its Principles it cannot do it. Wine is
not more expressly forbidden to the Mahometans, then giving Heretics Liberty is
to Papists: They are no more able to make good their Vows to you, then Men
married before, and their Wife alive, can confirm their Contract with another.
The continuance of their kindness, would be a habit of Sin, of which they are
to repent, and their Absolution is to be had upon no other terms, than their
Promise to destroy you. You are therefore to be hugged now, only that you may
be the better squeezed at another time. There must be something Extraordinary,
when the Church of Rome sets up Bills, and offers Plasters, for tender
Consciences; By all that has hitherto appeared, her skill in Surgery lies
chiefly in a quick Hand, to cut off Limbs; but she is the worst at Healing, of
any that ever pretended to it.

To come so quick from another extreme, is such an unnatural motion, that you
ought to be upon your Guard; the other day you were Sons of Belial, Now, you
are Angels of Light. This is a violent change, and it will be fit for you to
pause upon it, before you believe it: If your features are not altered, neither
is their Opinion of you, whatever may be pretended. Do you believe less than
you did, that there is Idolatry in the Church of Rome? sure you do not. See
then, how they treat both in Words and Writing, those who entertain that
Opinion. Conclude from hence, how inconsistent their favor is with this single
Article, except they give you a Dispensation for this too, and by a Non
Obstante, secure you that they will not think the worse of you.

Think a little how dangerous it is to build upon a Foundation of Paradoxes.
Popery now is the only friend to Liberty, and the known enemy to Persecution:
The men of Taunton and Tiverton, are above all other eminent for Loyalty. The
Quakers from being declared by the Papists not to be Christians, are now made
Favorites, and taken into their particular Protection; they are on a sudden
grown the most Accomplished men of the Kingdom, in good Breeding, and give
Thanks with the best Grace, in double refined Language. So that I should not
wonder, though a man of that Persw asion, in spite of his Hat, should be Master
of the Ceremonies. Not to say harsher words, these are such very new things,
that it is impossible not to suspend our belief, till by a little more
Experience we may be informed whether they are Realities or Apparitions: We
have been under shameful mistakes, if these Opinions are true; but for the
present, we are apt to be incredulous; except we could be convinced, that the
Priests words in this Case too, are able to make such a sudden, and effectual
change; and that their Power is not limited to the Sacrament, but that it
extends to alter the nature of all other things, as often as they are so
disposed.

Let me now speak of the Instruments of your Friendship, and then leave you to
judge, whether they do not afford matter of Suspicion. No Sharpness is to be
mingled where Healing only is intended; so nothing will be said to expose
particular men, how strong soever the Temptation may be, or how clear the
Proofs to make it out. A word or two in general, for your better caution, shall
suffice: Suppose then, for Argument's sake, that the Mediators of this new
Alliance, should be such as have been formerly employed in Treaties of the same
kind, and there detected to have Acted by Order, and to have been Empowered to
give Encouragements and Rewards. Would not this be an Argument to suspect them?

If they should plainly be under Engagements to one side, their Arguments to
the other, ought to be received accordingly; their fair Pretenses are to be
looked upon as part of their Commission, which may not improbably give them a
Dispensation in the case of Truth, when it may bring a prejudice upon the
Service of those by whom they are employed.

If there should be men who having formerly had Means and Authority to persuade
by Secular Arguments, have in pursuance of that Power, sprinkled Money amongst
the Dissenting Ministers; and if those very men should now have the same
Authority, practice the same Methods, and Disburse, where they cannot otherwise
persuade: It seems to me to be rather an Evidence than a Presumption of the
Deceit.

If there should be Ministers among you, who by having fallen under Temptations
of this kind, are in some sort engaged to continue their Frailty, by the awe
they are in lest it should be exposed: The persuasions of these unfortunate men
must sure have the less force, and their Arguments, though never so specious,
are to be suspected, when they come from men who have Mortgaged themselves to
severe Creditors that expect a rigorous observation of the Contract, let it be
never so unwarrantable.

If these, or any others, should at this time preach up Anger and Vengeance
against the Church of England; may it not without Injustice be suspected, that
a thing so plainly out of season, springs rather from Corruption than
Mistake; and that those who act this Choleric part, do not believe themselves,
but only pursue higher Directions, endeavor to make good that part of their
Contract which obliges them, upon a Forfeiture, to make use of their inflaming
Eloquence? They might apprehend their Wages would be retrenched if they should
be Moderate: And therefore whilst Violence is their Interest, those who have
not the same Arguments, have no reason to follow such a Partial Example.

If there should be men who by the load of their Crimes against the Government,
have been bowed down to comply with it against their Conscience; who by
incurring the want of a Pardon, have drawn upon themselves the necessity of an
entire Resignation: Such men are to be lamented, but not to be believed. Nay,
they themselves, when they have discharged their Unwelcome Task, will be
inwardly glad that their forced Endeavors do not succeed, and are pleased when
men resist their Insinuations; which are far from being Voluntary or Sincere,
but are Squeezed out of them by the weight of their being so Obnoxious.

If in the height of this great dearness by comparing things, it should happen,
that at this instant, there is much a surer Friendship with those who are so
far from allowing Liberty, that they allow no Living to a Protestant under
them. Let the Scene lie in what part of the World it will, the Argument will
come home, and sure it will afford sufficient ground to suspect. Apparent
Contradictions must strike us; neither Nature nor Reason can digest them:
Self-Flattery, and the desire to Deceive our selves, to gratisie a present
Appetite, with all their Power, which is Great, cannot get the better of such
broad Conviction, as some things carry along with them. Will you call these
vain and empty Suspicions? have you been at all times so void of Fears and
Jealousies as to justify your being so unreasonably Valiant in having none
upon this occasion? Such an extraordinary Courage at this unseasonable time, to
say no more, is too dangerous a Virtue to be commended.

If then for these and a thousand other Reasons, there is cause to suspect,
sure your new Friends are not to Dictate to you, or advise you; for instance,
The Addresses that fly abroad every Week; and Murder us with another to the
same; the first Draughts are made by those who are not very proper to be
Secretaries to the Protestant Religion; and it is your part only to Write them
out fairer again. Strange! that you who have been formerly so much against Set
Forms, should now be content the Priests should Indite for you. The nature of
Thanks is an unavoidable consequence of being Pleased or Obliged; they grow in
the Heart, and from thence show themselves either in Looks, Speech, Writing, or
Action: No man was ever Thankful because he was bid to be so, but because he
had, or thought he had some Reason for it. If then there is cause in this Case
to pay such extravagant Acknowledgments, they will flow naturally, without
taking such pains to procure them, and it is unkindly done to Tire all the
Posthorses with carrying Circular Letters to solicit that which would be done
without any trouble or constraint: If it is really in it self such a Favor,
what needs so much pressing men to be Thankful, and with such eager
circumstances, that where Persuasions cannot delude, Threatenings are employed
to fright them into a Compliance? Thanks must be voluntary, not only
unconstrained, but unsollicited, else they are either Trifles or Snares, they
either signify nothing, or a great deal more than is intended by those that
give them. If an inference should be made, That whosoever Thanketh the King for
his Declaration, is by that engaged to Justify it in point of Law; it is a
greater stride than, I presume, all those care to make who are persuaded to
Address: If it shall be supposed, that all the Thankers will be Repealers of
the TEST, when ever a Parliament shall Meet. Such an Expectation is better
prevented before, than disappointed afterward; and the surest way to avoid the
lying under such a Scandal, is not to do any thing that may give a color to
the Mistake: These Bespoken Thanks are little less improper than Love Letters
that were Solicited by the Lady to whom they are to be Directed: so, that
besides the little ground there is to give them, the manner of getting them,
does extremely lessen their Value. It might be wished that you would have
suppressed your impatience, and have been content for the sake of Religion, to
enjoy it within your selves, without the Liberty of a public Exercise, till a
Parliament had allowed it; but since that could not be, and that the Artifices
of some amongst you have made use of the Well-meant Zeal of the Generality to
draw them into this Mistake; I am so far from blaming you with that sharpness
which, perhaps, the Matter in strictness would bear, that I am ready to err on
the side of the more gentle construction.

There is a great difference between enjoying quietly the advantages of an Act
irregularly done by others, and the going about to support it against the Laws
in being: the Law is so Sacred, that no Trespass against it is to be Defended;
yet Frailties may in some measure be Excused, when they cannot be Justified.
The desire of enjoying a Liberty from which men have been so long restrained,
may be a Temptation that their Reason is not at all times able to resist. If in
such a case, some Objections are leapt over, indifferent men will be more
inclined to lament the Occasion, than to fall too hard upon the Fault, whilst
it is covered with the Apology of a good Intention; but where to rescue your
selves from the Severity of one Law, you give a Blow to all the Laws, by which
your Religion and Liberty are to be protected; and instead of silently
receiving the benefit of this Indulgence, you set up for Advocates to support
it, you become voluntary Aggressors, and look like Counsel retained by the
Prerogative against your old Friend Magna Charta, who has done nothing to
deserve her falling thus under your Displeasure.

If the case then should be, that the Price expected from you for this Liberty,
is giving up your Right in the Laws, sure you will think twice, before you go
any further in such a losing Bargain. After giving Thanks for the breach of one
Law, you lose the Right of Complaining of the breach of all the rest; you will
not very well know how to defend your selves, when you are pressed; and having
given up the Question, when it was for your advantage, you cannot recall it,
when it shall be to your Prejudice. If you will set up at one time a Power to
help you, which at another time by Parity of Reason shall be made use of to
destroy you, you will neither be pitied, nor relieved against a Mischief you
draw upon your selves, by being so unreasonably thankful. It is like calling in
Auxiliaries to help, who are strong enough to subdue you: In such a case your
Complaints will come too late to be heard, and your Sufferings will raise Mirth
instead of Compassion.

If you think, for your excuse, to expound your Thanks so as to restrain them
to this particular case, others, for their ends, will extend them further; and
in these differing Interpretations, that which is backed by Authority will be
the most likely to prevail; especially when by the advantage you have given
them, they have in truth the better of the Argument, and that the Inferences
from your own Concessions are very strong, and express against you. This is so
far from being a groundless Supposition, that there was a late instance of it,
the last Session of Parliament, in the House of Lords, where the first Thanks,
though things of course, were interpreted to be the Approbation of the King's
whole Speech, and a Restraint from the further Examination of any part of it,
though never so much disliked; and it was with difficulty obtained, not to be
excluded from the liberty of objecting to this mighty Prerogative of
Dispensing, merely by this innocent and usual piece of good Manners, by which
no such thing could possibly be intended.

This shows, that some bounds are to be put to your good Breeding, and that
the Constitution of England is too valuable a thing to be ventured upon a
Complement. Now that you have for some time enjoyed the benefit of the End, it
is time for you to look into the Danger of the Means: The same Reason that made
you desirous to get Liberty, must make you solicitous to preserve it: so that
the next thought will naturally be, not to engage your self beyond Retreat, and
to agree so far with the Principles of all Religions, as not to rely upon a
Deathbed Repentance.

There are certain Periods of time, which being once past, make all Cautions
ineffectual, and all Remedies desperate. Our Understandings are apt to be
hurried on by the first heats; which, if not restrained in time, do not give us
leave to look back, till it is too late. Consider this in the Case of your
Anger against the Church of England, and take warning by their Mistake in the
same kind, when after the late King's Restoration, they preserved so long the
bitter taste of your rough usage to them in other times, that it made them
forget their Interest, and sacrifice it to their Revenge.

Either you will blame this Proceeding in them, and for that reason not follow
it, or if you allow it, you have no reason to be offended with them; so that
you must either dismiss your Anger, or lose your Excuse; except you should
argue more partially than will be supposed of Men of your Morality and
Understanding.

If you had now to do with those Rigid Prelates, who made it a Matter of
Conscience to give you the least Indulgence; but kept you at an uncharitable
distance, and even to your more reasonable Scruples continued stiff and
exorable, the Argument might be fairer on your side; but since the common
Danger has so laid open that Mistake, that all the former Haughtiness toward
you is for ever extinguished, and that it has turned the Spirit of
Persecution, into a Spirit of Peace, Charity and Condescension; shall this
happy Change only affect the Church of England? And are you so in love with
Separation, as not to be moved by this Example? It ought to be followed, were
there no other reason than that it is a Virtue; but when besides that, it is
become necessary to your preservation, it is impossible to fail the having its
Effect upon you.

If it should be said, that the Church of England is never Humble, but when she
is out of Power, and therefore loses the Right of being Believed when she
pretends to it; the Answer is, first, it would be an uncharitable Objection,
and very much miss-timed? an unseasonable Triumph, not only ungenerous, but
unsafe: So that in these respects it cannot be urged, without Scandal, even
though it could be said with Truth. Secondly, This is not so in Fact, and the
Argument must fall, being built upon a false Foundation; for whatever may be
told you, at this very hour, and in the heat and glare of your present
Sunshine, the Church of England can in a moment bring Clouds again; and turn
the Royal Thunder upon your Heads, blow you off the Stage with a Breath, if she
would give but a Smile or a kind Word; the least Glimpse of her Compliance,
would throw you back into the state of Suffering, and draw upon you all the
Arrears of Severity, which have accrued during the time of this kindness to
you, and yet the Church of England, withal her Faults, will not allow her self
to be rescued by such unjustifiable means, but chooses to bear the weight of
Power, rather than lie under the burden of being Criminal.

It cannot besaid, that she is unprovoked; Books and Letters come out every
day, to call for Answers, yet she will not be stirred. From the supposed
Authors and the Style one would swear they were Undertakers, and had made a
Contract to fall out with the Church of England. There are Lashes in every
Address, Challenges to draw the Pen in every Pamphlet; in short, the fairest
occasions in the World given to quarrel; but she wisely distinguishes between
the Body of Dissenters, whom she will suppose to Act, as they do, with no ill
intent; and these small Skirmishers picked and sent out to Picqueer, and to
begin a Fray amongst the Protestants, for the entertainment, as well as the
advantage of the Church of Rome.

This Conduct is so good, that it will be Scandalous not to Applaud it. It is
not equal dealing, to blame our Adversaries for doing ill, and not commend them
when they do well.

To hate them because they Persecuted, and not to be reconciled to them when
they are ready to Suffer, rather than receive all the Advantages that can be
gained by a Criminal Compliance, is a Principle no sort of Christians can own,
since it would give an Objection to them never to be Answered:

Think a little, who they were that promoted your former Persecutions, and then
consider how it will look to be angry with the Instruments, and at the same
time to make a League with the Authors of your Sufferings.

Have you enough considered what will be expected from you? Are you ready to
stand in every Borough by a Virtue of a Conge d'eslire, and instead of
Election, be satisfied if you are returned?

Will you in Parliament, justify the Dispensing Power, with all its
consequences, and repeal the Test, by which you will make way for the Repeal of
all the Laws, that were made to preserve your Religion, and to Enact others
that shall destroy it?

Are you disposed to change the Liberty of Debate, into the Merit of Obedience,
and to be made Instruments to Repeal or Enact Laws, when the Roman Consistory
are Lords of the Articles.

Are you so linked with your new Friends, as to reject any Indulgence a
Parliament shall offer you, if it shall not be so Comprehensive as to include
the Papists in it?

Consider that the employed Conditions of your new Treaty are no less, than that
you are to do every thing you are desired, without examining, and that for this
pretended Liberty of Conscience, your real Freedom is to be Sacrificed: Your
former Faults hang like Chains still about you, you are let loose only upon
Bayl; the first Act of Noncompliance, sends you to jayl again.

You may see that the Papists themselves, do not rely upon the Legality of this
Power, which you are to Justify, since they being so very earnest to get it
Established by a Law, and the doing such very hard things in order, as they
think to obtain it, is a clear Evidence, that they do not think, that the
single Power of the Crown is in this Case a good Foundation; especially when
this is done under a Prince, so very tender of all the Rights of Sovereignty,
that he would think it a diminution to his Prerogative, where he conceives it
strong enough to go alone, to call in the Legislative help to strengthen and
support it.

You have formerly blamed the Church of England, and not without reason, for
going so far as they did in their Compliance; and yet as soon as they stopped,
you see they are not only Deserted, but Prosecuted: Conclude then from this
Example, that you must either break off your Friendship, or resolve to have no
Bounds in it. If they do not succeed in their Design, they will leave you
first; if they do, you must either leave them, when it will be too late for
your Safety, or else after the squeaziness of starting at a Surplice, you must
be forced to swallow Transubstantiation.

Remember that the other day those of the Church of England were Trimmers for
enduring you, and now by a sudden Turn, you are become the Favorites; do not
deceive your selves, it is not the Nature of lasting Plants thus to shoot up in
a Night; you may look gay and green for a little time, but you want a Root to
give you a continuance. It is not so long since, as to be forgotten, that the
Maxim was, It is impossible for a Dissenter, not to be a REBEL. Consider at
this time in France, even the new Converts are so far from being Employed, that
they are Disarmed: their sudden Change makes them still to be distrusted,
notwithstanding that they are Recoriciled: What are you to expect then from
your dear Friends, to whom, whenever they shall think fit to throw you off
again, you have in other times given such Arguments for their excuse?

Besides all this, you Act very unskilfully against your visible Interest, if
you throw away the advantages, of which you can hardly fail in the next
probable Revolution. Things tends naturally to what you would have, if you
would let them alone, and not by an unseasonable Activity lose the Influences
of your good Star, which promises you every thing that is prosperous.

The Church of England convinced of its Error in being Severe to you; the
Parliament, when ever it meets, sure to be Gentle to you; the next Heir bred
in the Country which you have so often Quoted for a Pattern of Indulgence; a
general Agreement of all thinking Men, that we must no more cut our selves off
from the Protestants abroad, but rather enlarge the Foundations upon which we
are to build our Defenses against the Common Enemy; so that in Truth, all
things seem to conspire to give you ease and satisfaction, if by too much have
to anticipate your good Fortune; you do not destroy it.

The Protestants have but one Article of Human Strength, to oppose the the
Power which is now against them, and that is, not to lose the advantage of
their numbers, by being so unwary as to let themselves be divided.

We all agree in our Duty to our Prince, our Objections to his Belief, do not
hinder us from seeing his Virtues; and our not complying with his Religion,
has no effect upon our Allegiance; we are not to be Laughed out of our Passive
Obedience, and the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, though even those who perhaps
owe the best part of their Security to that Principle, are apt to make a Jest
of it.

So that if we give no advantage by the fatal Mistake of misapplying our Anger,
by the natural course of things, this Danger will pass away like a shower of
Hail; fair weather will succeed, as lowering as the Sky now looks, and all by
this plain and easy Receipt. Let us be still, quiet and undivided, firm at the
same time to our Religion, our Loyalty, and our Laws, and so long as we
continue this method, it is next to impossible, that the odds of two hundred to
one should lose the Bett; except the Church of Rome, which has been so long
barren of Miracles, should now in her declining Age, be brought to Bed of One
that would outdo the best she can brag of in her Legend.

To conclude, the short Question will be, Whether you will join with those who
must in the end run the same Fate with you. If Protestants of all sorts, in
their Behavior to one another, have been to blame, they are upon the more
equal terms, and for that very reason it is fitter for them now to be
reconciled. Our Disunion is not only a Reproach, but a Danger to us; those who
believe in modern Miracles, have more Right, or at least more Excuse, to
neglect all Secular Cautions; but for us, it is as justifiable to have no
Religion, as wilfully to throw away the Human Means of preserving it. I am,

Dear SIR, Your most Affectionate Humble Servant, T.W.


