A General Epistle to all who have believed in the Light of the Lord Jesus, and
are called of God to follow the Lamb through the Great Tribulation.
Dear Friends,
WHom God has called out of the world and the vanities of it to serve the
living God in newness of life, and to be worshippers of him in Spirit and
truth, and to be followers of Christ in the regeneration, and to be baptized
with him into his suffering and death, that so you may be partakers of his
resurrection and life, and manifest unto all that you are risen with him out of
the grave of sin, wickedness, and death, by having your hearts renewed, and
your affections and minds set to seek those things which are above, which are
not transitory and visible, but everlasting and immortal, by which the souls of
all the righteous and obedient children are refreshed, and nourished up unto
eternal life, and through the eternal power of the Son of God, which has been,
and is manifest among them that believe, in the measure of his Spirit, and keep
their first love and integrity unto the Lord, all his are preserved out of the
temptation of the adversary within and without, who seeks to root out that
which God has planted, and to nip the blossom, and the bud, which God has
caused to spring forth through his tender love in your hearts, so that you
might die to the good, and be spoiled in that wherein all your happiness lies
now and for ever. Oh therefore all watch and be circumspect, so much the more
against temptations, lest you be ensnared, and your faith fail, and you fall
short of the promise of God, in not continuing faithful to the end; friends, a
care, and a tender love, and a godly jealousy is in my he^rt to you, and over
you all that have believed, that none of you may be lost and scattered again in
the deserts and mountains, and dry and parched places, where you have sometimes
been in the time of unbelief, where the Goats who are rough can feed, that must
go unto the left hand and have the curse: The zeal of the Lord and his truth,
which so gloriously has been manifest among you, above all the people and
families of the earth in our generation, constrains me thus to write unto you,
and to stir you up unto faithfulness in this day of trial, for now Satan
desires to winnow you within, and to sift you without, therefore all watch and
pray that your faith fail not, which now will be tried, and your hope, and your
love, and your zeal to the Lord and his truth, and whether you will confess
him before men, his way, worship, and Laws, and Statutes, which he has
revealed in your hearts, which fallen men opposes and contradicts, and sayers
gainsay, and would not have him to rule, nor his servants to obey, so let it be
manifest to all, you fear God rather then men, and love him, and obey him above
the precepts of men which are against him; and whether you love the things that
are above, beyond the things that are earthly; and whether you will own him,
his cross, reproach, and suffering, or deny it, and have the liberty of the
world which is bondage, and free from righteousness; It Is no time of reserves,
concealing, hovering or halting, for there is an utter discord betwixt Christ
and Belial, and so much the more of Christ, his power and kingdom is brought
forth, so much the more is the hatred, envy, and wrath of the Devil kindled,
who has deceived the Nations, and blinded their eyes, and in his subjects who
oppose the Lamb of God, and tread underfoot the blood of the Covenant, so that
to one or other each one belongs, and which is for each part will be seen, for
there can be no concord or reconciliation, therefore all children of the day
put on the armor of light, and have your feet shod now when we walk through
thorny places, and be not fearful or doubtful, but of believing hearts stand
not aloof off, and idle when others are engaged in this spiritual War, pull
not your necks out of the yoke when others draw, shelter not your selves, when
you see others in jeopardy, love not the world when you see others have thrown
it off; be not entangled in cumbersom things, when you see others throw off all
weights, turn not your backs in the day of the Lords controversy, but follow
the Lamb; this is the day of tribulation we have to follow him in our age, like
as all the Martyrs and Prophets had in their age, whose garments were made
white in the blood of the Lamb; so all that continue and are not faint hearted,
shall receive the Crown, the honor, the reward, and shall reign with Christ,
who now suffers with him; therefore all dear children of God, and followers of
Christ Jesus, let the loins of your minds be girded up, be now ready when the
Lord calls, who is on my side, who will take part with me, who will own my
reproach, who will engage with me, who will gather to my standard of salvation
lifted up, and to my ensign of righteousness held forth in the world to redeem
it, and who is ready and not abroad in the field, neither has to go to the
house top; but that all may say in their hearts, here am I ready to do thy
will, ready to obey thee, and follow thee, and to suffer for thee, for whosoever
draws back, the Lord has no pleasure in such, he that will save his life shall
lose it, and he that will save his liberty will lose it in the Spirit; and he
that will save his earthly possessions, and for the doing thereof will deny
that which God has persuaded him of that he ought to be faithful in, he will
lose his inheritance in the heavenly; In a word, who so fails in holding forth
that testimony, that they know God requires, and is their duty to render unto
him, will lose the testimony of his Spirit they have sometimes felt in
themselves, and will decay, and their love will wear out; Therefore whosoever
are resigned and given up unto the Lord will be approved, and manifest to be on
the Lords part, by obedience unto these things mentioned; Friends, do you not
believe it a duty, that every Christian ought to be exercised in, to meet
together to wait upon him, to worship him, and to admonish, exhort, and
strengthen one another to pray together in the holy Ghost, and one for another,
and to edify and comfort one another; and do you not believe God dvvells not
in Temples made with hands, neither has any fellowship with Idols, but is
worshipped any where, and in every place where the Saints meet in his Name;
again, have you not been comforted, edified, and strengthened in meeting, and
have you not found the presence of the Lord and his face, and have you not felt
his great power working in your hearts when you were assembled together in
his Name, working in you to the opening of your hearts, and quickening and
enlivening you souls unto God, and Judgeing down the evil, and have you not
^elt his living mercies shed abroad in you and the springs of life opened, and
the holy seed refreshed, and Gods witness reached in all, and many Convinced
and Converted unto God in your assemblies, so that all have gone away comforted
and refreshed, and resolved to continue in the grace of God, the Consideration
of these things, dwelling in your hearts, and the sense of your own present
condition should stir you up, and provoke you unto steadfastness in the faith
and practice you have received and walked in from the beginning of the
manifestation of Gods love unto you, so that there should me thinks need little
exhortation, Gods enemies is resolved to do wickedly, be you also so to do
your duty; they seek by any means to make any fall from their principles and
steadfastness, do you seek to escape their snares, and to be kept clear in
your consciences before God; Be valiant for the truth, sell it not, but all for
it, th^^ it may be your all, and then you shall see your lot is fallen in a
good place, and your possession is pleasant, the Lord calls now to suffering,
put now your necks in the yoke, bear one another burden and so fulfill the
law of Christ, and take heed you give not ear to that voice that speaks, save
thy liberty, save thy estate, possess thy own and provide for thy self and
spare thy self, that is the voice of the enemy of your souls so keep over the
world and its spirit, let no sl^ckn^sse appear, for that makes suffering long,
and that gives ground to your adversaries, that they shall prevail, and that
weakens the hands of others, and strengthens not, this confirms our enemies in
their deceit, that we are but as other men and people, that have professed God
in Summer and fair weather, but will make shipwreck of all in a storm and in
suffering, and any turning aside from the holy commandment of God opens the
mouths of Gods enemies. Do not seek every one your own profit, ease, life and
liberty only, but every one another good, and mind not only one member, but
the whole body: heed not them that draw back, that is no pre^^dent for you to
follow, but them that press forward, and is not offended in the time of
hardship, heed not them that will tell you they can keep their hearts upright
to God, and retain their love to truth and friends, and yet will not afford
their presence in your ^ssemblies, but escapes suffering, and denies the
Cross, and neglects their present duty, for that is deceit, and their own
he^rts will deceive them; put not off till to morrow, defer not the time, till
you can see some more ease, and some greater calm, beware of that, for then
coldness, fearfulness, and slavishnesse will enter in, and you will lose your
strength: Moreover, if any have begun well, and be persuaded of the truth of
that they have believed, and continue not unto the end, and do not finish, such
will be reckoned foolish builders, that could not finish, and all will mock
them, and neither God nor men can or will believe them, but your adversaries
will glory over you again when any suffers, or are brought into bonds for
Christ and the Gospel sakes, seek not to get out by any indirect means, neither
make any Covenant with thy adversary, who would sell both thee and all faith
and hope for money, that encourages deceit, and that spirit would buy it self
out of the service of God, and grow weary, give no place to that, be content
every one with your present condition, till God arise and plead our cause, and
make our innocence and righteousness appear as noon day, and make his
adversaries his footstool; which undoubtedly he will do, and make all know
the most High ought to rule, and will rule in the kingdoms of men, and not give
his glory unto another, neither suffer another to take it. Be conformable to
none that goes about under pretense of love, to persuade or counsel you from
your duty to God; neither submit to them that would betray you of your peace,
heed not the frowns of corrupt men, nor the counsel of them who mind their own
bellies, pleasure, ease, profit, and earthly things; let not natural affections
and love either to lands, wife, or children blind your eyes, but love them, and
receive them in the Lord, and enjoy them as though not: stand loose from all
things, and out of all entanglements, and cast your care upon the Lord, who
cares for the fatherless and the widow, and them that has no helper in the
earth; give no occasion or advantage to any that would turn your hearts aside
from following the Lord, least their love betray you; give up all you have and
enjoy to the Lord and his service, and your Souls, Bodies, and Spirits as a
sacrifice unto the Lord, that he may accept you, and pour forth and continue
his blessing amongst you. Never heed the threats of them that are as the Oaks
of Bashan, nor of the great men of the earth, that mind their pleasure and
lusts, who shut you up in Prison, and hale you before Judgment seats for the
Worship of God, and falsely accuse you and condemn you, when God justifies you;
the moth shall e^t them up as a garment, and stain the glory of all flesh that
withstand the Lord, and they shall melt away as Snayls, and as the fat of
Lambs, and the kidnys of Rams, and God will bring the recompense of their own
deeds upon their own pates, and wound the hoary scalp of every one that does
wickedly, who touches Gods anointed, and does harm to his Prophets, and
persecutes his Children; surely judgment is not far from the dwellings of them
who have required the Lord thus, as to render him evil for good: and God will
be avenged on such a faithless, merciless, perfidious people as this, and of
such a spirit which rejoices in iniquity, and makes a mock of sin, and hates
all reproof, and would cloak over all mischiefs with the Name of pure Laws and
Authority, and Decrees of the Holy Church, yet persecutes and gainsayes the
highest power of God in things spiritual, that pertains to the conscience: the
Beast, and false Prophet, and mother of Harlots have joined together, and
flatters one another, and joins their strength together, against the true
Church and heir of all the World, and would, under pretense of doing honor
unto him, shut him out of the earth, and k^ls his subjects, and destroys the
children of the free Woman under pretense of suppressing Herresie, and turns
Judgment into Gall, Hemlock, and Wormwood, and in stead of relieving the
oppressed, ads to their burdens.

Friends, dwell above all these things, and the Devil and his rage; the earth
is the Lords, and the fullness of it; we cannot be banished from Gods presence,
neither shall they fulfill their determination, or ever be able to root out that
testimony which is among us, for Princes shall be given for its Ransom, and
Kingdoms and Nations for its prosperity. The God of power strengthen you all,
that you may quit your selves like men of God, like children of the most high,
whose inheritance is not here in the world, but in the Kingdom that fades not
away: The Lord God of power be with you, and make you to consider what I say,
and to receive this my true love unto you all for the Lord sake, who partakes
with all the suffering members of Christ in their bonds, and shall and can
rejoice in all your comfort and joy. The peace of God dwell in your hearts, and
his heavenly light shine upon all your tabernacles, that you may be as
beautiful in the eyes of the Lord as the Roses of Sharon, and blossom as the
Lillies of the valley, and yield your fruit as the Fig Tree that casts not
his fruit. The Lord takes our part, let none doubt of that, and pleads our
cause, let all consider that; our enemies shall see it, and be troubled at
this, and time shall manifest it: therefore be of believing hearts, and trust
in the Lord, so shall you never be confounded, neither be ashamed, but be as
mount Sion that cannot be moved, and as the mountains are round about
Jerusalem, so shall the mercies of the Lord compass you about from this time
forth and for evermore. Friends, Faith is sealed in my heart, and Love in my
reins, and Gladness in my soul, and Peace in my conscience, so that none does
or can hinder my rejoicing, praised be the Lord for ever, and ever. Amen.

Let this be dispersed among Friends, I desire. The Lords Servant, and yours in
all true, unfeigned, pure love, F. H.

THE END.

