A Letter from a Nobleman in London, to his Friend in the Country: Written some
Months ago. Now Published for the Common Good.
I Assure you, Sir, whatever you have heard to the contrary, my having been in
and out in the present, as well as the two former Reigns, proceeds not from any
incompatibility or uncertainty of humor, but from a true English Temper and
Spirit, that cannot endure Slavery in it self, and abhors to be the Instrument
of it in otherss. I ever exclaimed against the Court Maxim, Live and let
others Live; and watched my fellow Ministers actions; as I desired they would
mine, that our Master might not be defrauded, nor his Subjects oppressed; and
believing nothing could make England unhappy, but a change of our King's
limited, legal Authority, into an unbounded Arbitrary Power, I always advised
my Prince to a steady conformity to the Laws, to place his security on the
affections of his Subjects, which this would gain him, and not on Guards or
Army. These principles were not like to make me thrive in any Court. The
apprehension I had, that the late King's Religion would carry him to that
extreme, made me not only weary of his Service, but uneasy under his
Government, and desirous to change it for a better; which my first heat of
fancy suggested I could not miss in a Protestant; but, my cooler thoughts, what
I have already seen acted, and my Knowledge of what is further designed
convince me of my own and the Nations folly. The reports of Char. II's Murder,
the Earl of Essex's Death, and a supposititious Prince of Wales, all Men of
common sense knew to be false and malicious; but, I confess, I looked upon the
noise of a League with France to be real; (yet without the ridiculous and
spiteful addition of cutting the Protestants throats;) because the King's
circumstances, especially the proceedings in Ireland, made it absolutely
necessary for his own preservation. Yet now it is plain, this also was a pure
invention, and that the Dutch, dull as they are, have outwitted the English;
and by a trick drawn us into a War, to defend them against France: Nor is it
less evident, that Monsieur d' Avaux's Memorial of the 9th. of September (88)
to the States, (impudently pretended by the Scribler of the Desertion, to have
been the cause of the long before intended Invasion,) was, though a Gentiler,
as mere a Stratagem: The King, his Master, not more ascertained of the
Confederacy against himself, than of the Hollander's Preparations against K. I.
hoped by this flight of Generosity, to have wrought into his Interests, Him,
who before had rejected his repeated offers of succor. It Is no wonder each
Party should labor to get England on their side; the balance of Europe put
into either scale, must of necessity have made that outweigh the other: But
now, too late, we find our King was too good a Christian, to believe his Son
and Nephew could gratify his Ambition, at so barbarous a rate; and too much an
English Man, to engage with France, against his Subjects Interests; which
certainly was to ingross the Trade of the World, and safely look on, while the
French and Dutch destroyed each other. But alas! our want of wit, and others
cunning, would not suffer us to be thus happy; fear of Slavery, artificially
spread among the Gentry, and of Popery among the Commonalty, did not only make
way for our ruin, but bewitched our selves to be the Instruments of it. We
dreaded and roared against a standing Army of English, of Protestants, so
zealous, that they would loose their reputation, rather than fight for their
Popish King: Yet now we can kiss the rod that scourges us, tamely suffer an
Army of Foreigners, of Popish, or of no Religion; who will execute, with joy,
the Commands of our new K. their General; whose will, and whose interest it is
to enslave us, You have long known my Opinion about Religion, and the force of
it, among Men of refined Understandings: I laugh at all sorts of bigotry, and
prefer our own Religion to Popery, not as more agreeable to Truth, but as
established by Law; Disputes of this Nature ought, in my Mind, to be banished
the Commonwealth, at least, confined to the Schools; nor should I trouble my
Head, nor would any Man that wanted not Brains, what Religion a lawful
Parliament put down, or set up; provided we could but be secured against
Slavery, and the loss of Abbey Lands. Nor need I tell you, who have as sensibly
felt it, that Slavery is not a more natural consequence of Popery, than of
Presbitery, or any other Sect. If from what I write, you cannot gather why I
make not the same Figure in the State I lately did, read the enclosed advice to
our new K. and communicate it, but one by one, to our Friends, the Earls of K.
and of E. the Bp. of -- and the rest of our knot; it is, Word for Word, taken
from the Original, and it is what cleared my Eyes, and gave me a full prospect
into the bottom of the design; which, after I had for some time labored in
vain to cross, I made a Leg and withdrew; concluding it base and ignoble, for
an English Peer, to join in Council, or act in Concert with a Dutch --, a
French Hugonot, and a Scotch Presbyterian, under a King without Title, whose
Religion is Policy, and whose No-Title and Policy must be supported by a strong
Army, the subversion of the State, and the Conquest of England.

The enclosed Paper was in the following Words.
SIR,
HItherto, it is true, your Affairs seem to have succeeded prosperously; you
have got a Crown, and you have got it with ease; but it cannot be preserved,
without difficulty. Your Interest, as P. of O. Statholder of Holland, is very
different from your Interest, as K. of England; but since you are the one, and
yet for some time must be the other, your game is the harder, and requires
double the skill, that when you landed was necessary. The Prince of Orange, as
Head of the Protestant League, (which among our selves we must own this to be,
notwithstanding that the Spaniards natural aversion to the French, and the
growing Greatness of their Monarchy, have drawn in to it, the whole House of
Austria, and the other Popish Princes of Germany,) is engaged in an Alliance,
the K. of England ought, in prudence, to have avoided: Charles V. and Philip
II. have sufficiently proved the Universal Monarchy a fantastic Dream,
impracticable, impossible; besides the Nature and Situation of the English
Dominion, sufficiently secure it against French Encroachments. England
therefore, in this conjuncture, should have stood Neuter, and enjoyed the great
advantages of Commerce; whilst her Neighbors, especially the Dutch, her Rivals,
for this reason ever to be suspected and kept under, were interrupted by War;
increased her Naval strength, by building new Ships, repairing the old, and
filling her Magazines with all necessary Stores, and erected Forts and
Block-houses where wanting, to secure her against Invasion. The Treaty of
Nimeguen, if it could at all affect the late K. could not have obliged him to
act otherwise: The War being on France's side purely defensive; their being
beforehand in declaring, after they were convinced of the Confederacy, makes no
alteration; it is an effect of the nimbleness natural to that Nation, to make
the first pass when they see their Enemies ready to fall on. But though
Neutrality be the true Interest of England, and must have been the late King's,
supposing him a Stranger to the Invasion, and sure of his Subjects, yet can it
not, for the present, be yours; who have and must carry on, an Interest
directly contrary to the Peoples, till you are better settled in the Throne,
and have forced the English to be indeed your Subjects. This done, you may (as
the Dutch did in the last Confederacy, and, as it is to be feared, they will
again, when they perceive in your acceptance of the Crown, the ill effect of
their own Politics) prevent all others by a separate Peace. In the mean time,
you must mind your own, and not the Nation's Interest, and proceed with your
Confederates, as Prince of Orange; they will, without doubt, desire, as the
States have already done, that you would as K of England, renew and confi^m the
Alliance, and declare War against France; you will for a while stand in need of
their help, and find, though they think otherwise, much greater advantage by
their assistance, than they can have by yours; a Truth they cannot but
discover, if they reflect upon the three principal Causes of this stupendous
Revolution. First, The temper of the English, a beady, (...), inconsiderate,
inconstant People. Secondly, The incompatibility and natural aversion of
Protestant Subjects to a Popish Prince; the Church of England, in vain,
endeavors to exempt it self from this Character; their Public Actions in the
three last Reigns, their Acts of Parliament, Tests, Bill of Exclusion, and Rye-
house Conspiracy, make them p^st of the same stamp with the rest; and they
cannot, without insufferable impudence, but confess, that their pretense of
peculiar contrary principles, is an empty or else, that the whole People of
England are, in Practice, become Presbyterians, irreconcilable Enemies to a
Popish Monarch. So gross an artifice, must not betray you, into a trust and
confidence of their Loyalty, as it did your Predecessor, (who seemed, at least,
to forget the voice of the Nation, That the Duke of York had no fault but his
being a Papist, to make him unfit to Govern and Succeed,) unless you will be
content to run his Fortune and Reputation. The Third and chiefest was, the
King's want of an Army; which, he could not be properly said to have, so long
as they were Protestants, (the few Papists among them deserved not to be
considered under a Name) and taught, it was against Conscience to draw in
desence of a Popish K. the event has shown that Religion had padlocked their
Swords, and bound up their Hands, otherwise he could never have picked up and
trained such a number of Men, all resolved either to fight against him, or run
away from him. These, Sir, are the Shelves on which he was shipwracked, as you
likewise must be, unless you steer a contrary course. Your new Subjects will be
still the same, and, upon second thoughts, cannot but repent, what
inconsideration made them Act hand over head; your being a Protestant Will not
secure you: the odds between a Dutch Presbyterian, and an English Papist, are,
in the Church of England Men's Opinion, either none at all, or so very
inconsiderable, that they cannot turn the Scales, or give you any advantage.
You are sensible with what difficulty your Party, in the two Houses, got the
better of those who were for calling back K. I. on terms, and of those who were
for setting up a Commonwealth: These two Parties will always be your Enemies,
you cannot hope to make them Converts; nor that the third will be long, either
willing, or able to support your Cause: So that nothing but an Army can do your
business: an Army, to the number of fifty or sixty thousand, not of English,
but Outlandish men: who will fight to make you great, what a K. ought, and what
the K. of England needs most to be, Master of his Subjects. Ireland's standing
out, which seems a Cross, is, on the contrary, a Blessing, an opportunity, that
well managed and improved, will establish your Dominion. Till you have gained
this point, you must not only keep fair, but Court and Flatter the Parliament,
at least, till you have engaged them in a War with France, and the reduction of
Ireland; which you must so contrive, that both may be the effect of their own
advice. Your seeming to share the Sovereignty, they have long ambitioned, is
the most proper bait to catch your Fish; it will persuade them to find Money
for the expense, and hereafter screen you from the Peoples murmurings. You have
already given orders for modelling the Fleet and Army, and wisely resolved to
employ in neither, nor in Civil Offices, any English, but such as are Men of no
Fortune, or irreconcilable Enemies to your Predecessor. Endeavor to keep, if
possible, all the Dutch Troops, and to exchange for them as many English; the
Nimeguen Treaty, in which, if for no other reason, you must pretend the Nation
engaged, will rid you of 8000 of 'em; some you may dispatch toward Chester, in
order to the Irish Expedition; and others you may march toward the borders, to
be called into Scotland, in case Makay should find himself too weak, to aw the
Convention and reduce Edinburg Castle. Scotland is too dangerous a back door to
be left open; you ought therefore to be well secured of it, before you think of
carrying your Arms further; the Nobility and Presbytery govern there
absolutely; you have already a list of both, with convenient remarks; all sorts
of Coin will pass among them and it is very necessary you prevent, by good store
of Guineas, the course of Luid' or's, in a Kingdom long allied to France, and
heretosore useful in their Wars with England. You cannot better dispose of the
Irish in the Isle of Wight, than by making them a present to the Emperor, for
his Wars against the Turk, to prevent desertion, if employed nearer home. When
matters are thus settled, you may safely turn your Face toward Ireland, where,
though you could, you ought not to make an end of the War in one Summer: though
of this caution there seems little need: considering, that the long Parliament
was not able, with an old Army of 36000. and a treasure of several Millions, to
Master it, in less than four years, from I^ne 49 till September 53. when
destitute of Foreign Assistance, broken into Factions, spent and impoverished
by a seven years Rebellion and Civil War; a condition very different from their
present. They have enjoyed the fruits of a long Peace, are united as one Man,
thousands of 'em have learned the Art of War abroad, and were not reputed to
want courage: yet, allowing them as great Cowards as they are now represented,
being driven to a Wall, by such a concern as they have at stake, their All,
Life, Liberty, Fortune, and Religion, they cannot but fight manfully,
especially when headed by their own Prince, and supported by France. K. James's
oversights here, will instruct him how to act there; the Protestants he will
disarm, and imprison, at least, the Chief of them, and seize all their Corn and
Cattle: Londonderry, if he do not take, he will starve, before you can succor
it: and, the Papists being reckoned twenty to one Protestant, he cannot want
men for several Armies; nor Arms, Ammunition, nor Money, while the French K.
stands his Friend; who thereby eludes the threatened Invasion from England,
distracts and weakens its Power, and imploys the whole of it, without the least
service or advantage to the Confederates; and who, perhaps, will further enable
him to land some thousands in Scotland; it is a short cut to the Highlands,
where they will be joined by greater Numbers of those wild People, who long for
an opportunity to enrich themselves by the spoils of England. Whence it is
plain, that the reduction of Ireland, is like to prove a Work of time, and of
much greater difficulty, than the Protestants of that Kingdom would persuade
you; and you will find that a complete Conquest of it will require vast numbers
of Men, divided into several Armies, and your being Master, not only at Sea,
but also your employing, constantly, a second Fleet, to transport hence
Provisions, for the subsistence of those Armies. The fatigues of the first
Campaign, lying in the Field, scarcity of Victuals, and the Flux, which the
English never miss, and therefore call it that Country Disease* will discourage
your new Subjects, consume their best Troops, and make Men, already effeminated
by idleness and Luxury, (the usual Concomitants of Peace and Trade,) quite
weary of the Service. However, the importance of Ireland to England, the Trade,
Strength, and Safety of this, depending upon that Kingdom's being continued a
Member of its Dominion, will necessitate the Parliament to beg your regaining
it on any terms, and consent, for that purpose, to your bringing in Danes,
Swedes, Germans, Dutch, and Swissers; who, having done your work in Ireland,
will afterward with ease perfect it here, make you the most absolute Prince,
that ever swayed the Scepter of England. But, in the mean time, you must not
seem to affect any such thing, but rather seem content with the Name of King,
and to leave the Power to the Parliament, chiefly to the Commons, who holding
the Purse-strings of the Nation, ought to have most of your compliance and
condescentions: As for the Lords, it is enough to engage in your Interests, by
charges of Honor, rather than profit, as many as you can of the rich and
popular: their Numbers, as well as other accidents, have made their House the
less considerable of the two; and it will be for your service to treat them
accordingly. After all, you must presuppose the English will, ere long, grow
weary of your Government; and also that the Confederates may come to be so of
the War, before you are able to stand upon your own Legs: the extraordinary
charge must make the First uneasy; and the others, disappointed of your
promised assistance, may possibly give credit to what your Enemies will
suggest, that you have outwitted them, and solicited a League more to
gratify your own Ambition, than for the Common Good, to humble France. The
Parliament having once advised you to the War, will be too far engaged to draw
back, or think of a change; but to make your self sure on that side, you must
hasten your Army to hinder it, in case they should: To prevent the misfortune
from abroad, you must speedily possess your Allies, by Envoys and Ministers,
that the Crown of England was freely offered, and not sought by you; that the
disposal on it was the People's Rights and that their assistance to confirm you
in the Possession is necessary, to hinder the Common Enemies being enabled, as
otherwise he certainly will, by the late King's united Power, to swallow the
Spanish Netherlands, subdue Holland, and give Law to the Empire and the rest of
Europe. Your Protestant Allies you must persuade, by remonstrating the
necessity of their firm adhesion, on a double account, Religion, and Temporal
Interest. The States you must sweeten, more particularly by repaying their
600000 l. and farther promising what advantages they please in the Trade of
both the Indies. Nor must you spare the Wealth of England, to draw the Dane and
Swede into a stricter Alliance: the first may probably be won by the prospect
of his Brother's Interest in the Succession: and the latter prevailed upon by a
considerable yearly Pension, unless a foresight of his own future ruin from
Denmark, when strengthened by Prince George's Possession of the Crown of
England, should make him deaf to your Proposals. It were to be wished the late
King were not beforehand with you, in sending abroad his Agents, and filling
all Courts of his own profession with his Manifesto's; making a jest of the
Parliament and its Pretenses, his own Abdication, and your Election; justifying
all his Actions, even the Dispensing Power, as conformable to the Laws and
essential to the nature of all Government; acquitting himself from all things,
but his being a Papist; representing the League to be all over Protestant, and
designed, at last, for the total overthrow of the Popish Religion: You know how
much this Prince is the Jesuits Darling, and what influence they have in the
Emperor's and all other Courts of Europe; and how probable it is that upon this
Pope's Death, which cannot be far off, another may be chosen, more zealous for
the promotion of his Religion, than for pulling down France, its chief support;
which considerations cannot but quicken you in this point. Now, that you may
begin your Reign, as Princes in your circumstances used to do, by some Acts of
Popularity, recommend to the Parliament the taking off the Chimney-Money,
(which seems a burden on the poorer sort: you need not fear but what they thus
take away with one hand, they must give back with another, till they have put
you into a condition to carve for your self:) and also a Bill of Union, or
Comprehension, of all your Protestant Subjects; and though it is possible
neither may succeed, especially the last, to which the Church Party are not
like to consent; the Clergy in Possession having always been averse to any
change in their Popish Common Prayer Book, and much more to let others share
their Titles and Benefices; the Propositions nevertheless will be very
advantageous to you, in the love and esteem of the generality of the People. As
for Religion, (the common Cloak for Rebellion, but never a security against
one,) you ought to consider it, and the several Sects into which it is divided,
no farther than as may best serve and promote your Interest: In public seem to
favor the Church of England, because the Laws, the Nobility, and best estated
Gentry are of its side; underhand, the Presbyterians, and other Nonconformists
are to be caressed; the Numbers, the Trade, the Riches, and your Protestant
Allies are of their side; the Romanists you must likewise study to oblige; this
may possibly in time wean them from K. I. and will please a considerable part
of your Army, and your Confederates of the same Opinion; who must be taught to
infer from your Actions, that what is in your Declaration against Popery, as
you^ Ministers abroad must also insinuate, was only a Blind, a necessary Cant
to persuade the English to receive, and the Parliament to enable you to invade
France the following Spring, by obliging their King to join in the War, the
main end of your hazardous Winter Voyage. Thus, Sir, in obedience to your
Commands, we have freely and briefly given your Majesty our Opinion;
concluding, that Cowardice, Treachery, and an innate desire of Change having
given you the Crown, nothing can secure it, but such a formidable Army as we
have described; this when you have compassed, you may safely assume the Title
of Conqueror, and, after the Example of W. the First, reserve for your Self
what Land you please, and divide the rest among your Followers; settle in all
your Dominions, such Religion, Laws, and form of Government, as shall best suit
with your own Grandeur, and the extent of your Empire: But if you trust an
English Army, though never so great, and despise our advice, the touchstone of
sincere Counselors, your Reign will be short, and your Ruin inevitable: For
when your Subjects reflect, they have changed a firm Peace for a lasting War,
that the Flower of their Youth is destroyed, by Land and Sea, their Freedom
from Taxes turned into a Grievous Load of endless Impositions, their Trade
lost, their Rents fallen, and the Nation reduced from a Rich and Glorious, to a
poor contemptible People; and to complete their Misery, next door to be
enslaved by Foreigners, that they have brought all these Evils upon themselves,
to secure their Religion, now really exposed to Calvinism or Luther anism,
extremes, in their Opinions, equally pernicious with Popery; of which, before,
the danger was indeeed but imaginary; they will, without doubt, repent, and
contrive such a general Revolution, as happened in 1660. when both the Fleet
and the numerous Army, in the three Kingdoms, conspired with the rest of the
English to call back their exiled Prince. The same causes cannot but produce
the same effects; you will therefore live to see your self more shamefully fly
out of England, than you came into it triumphantly, if the desire of Fame, and
the sense of your own safety, make you not betimes provide against the Storm,
and imprint on your Mind, that it is more Great and Glorious, to owe a Crown to
Merit, than to Chance; to get a Kingdom by Conquest, rather than by Birth:

Which is humbly submitted, etc.
I Have, at last, after above four Months irresolution, concluded, I could not
better serve my Friend, or my Country, than by publishing his Letter, and the
good Advice given our new King; every Body will see a Plot is laid for the
ruin of England; and none can wonder, a Lord, of his great Sense and great
Estate, should refuse to be an Actor in the Tragedy; wherein he would not have
seemed, so long, to have born a part, as he has since often vowed, if he had
not had the vanity, to have hoped he could have persuaded his Master to have
been an English K. to have made good his Declarations, his Promises, and his
Oaths, to have sent back his Foreign Troops, and called a free Parliament, to
reform and settle all our Disorders: But had not he had a large share in our
common infatuation, one so renowned could not have expected this from the P. of
O. who could not be well supposed to have made them, but with purpose to break
them, as soon as they had smoothed his way to the Crown; no Man in his Wits
could imagine, he meant to be a Slave to his Word, or trust the Loyalty of Men,
become his Subjects, by Treachery to their own Prince; and it was more
ridiculous to believe, That, after he got to be K. he would make good the
obligations he had, in order to it, put himself under, than it would be for a
Wife, to hope from her Husband, the performance of the Vows he made her when a
Lover. He that, without regard to Humane or Divine Laws, had Usurped upon the
Rights of an Uncle, Brother, Father, and Wife, was not like to be restrained by
Rules of his own prescribing. We are well enough served, and can justly blame
none but our selves, He understands his Interest and pursues it, though we did,
and still do, grossly mistake ours. Our Treasons have been useful to him, and
he rewards us with hatred and contempt, and cannot believe himself safe, unless
he make us Slaves. He will force us, with the Ass in the Apologue, dearly to
repent our change of Masters. And if we do not account a lasting War, both at
Sea and Land, insupportable Taxes, loss of Trade, hundreds of our Ships (and
among them not a few Royal ones) lost by Storm, and made Prize by France; 14000
of our Army, that was to have Conquered Ireland before last Michaelmas,
destroyed without fighting, eaten up by Lice, Flux, and Famine; and above 5000
of that in Flanders lost by Hunger, Disease, and Desertion; 7000 of our ill
manned Fleet Dead, and above 4000 more Sick; most poisoned by stinking rotten
Victuals, for want of French Salt; an evil like to continue next year also;
unless we, who are far from being Masters at Sea, can take it by force;
frequent Robberies, barbarous Murders, and licentious Extravagancies, of Danes
and Germans, tokens of the Wrath of Heaven, and punishments for our crime, We
shall be concluded to have as little fear of God, as we have had Honor for the
K. But all this we suffer, and more we are yet like to suffer, to be delivered
from the frightful Bugbears of Popery; from Fire and Faggot, broiling and
burning in Smithfield and St. Iohns's; dangers, only of our own devising,
whispered about by Knaves, and swallowed by Fools: To avoid being consumed by
these painted Flames, we have plunged our selves into a real Sea of Misery, and
without a Miracle (which we Protestants, who believe them ceased, must not hope
for) cannot escape drowning. We have long complained of a Design, in the three
last Reigns, to introduce the French Form of Government, and subvert our own;
make the Parliament a Cipher, serve for nothing but to burden the Nation with
Taxes, to support a Standing Army, and make our Kings Absolute. If ever there
was ground for this Outcry, there is at this day, when the Name of Parliament
is made use of, to unhinge the very Fundamentals, undermining in few Hours, by
a servile compliance with an Usurper, our Laws, our beloved Magna Charta, what
our Ancestors were a building up, hundreds of years, with a great deal of Toil
and Blood, to enable their new Master by excessive Impositions, four Millions,
and 800000 l. Sterling. over and above the ordinary Revenue, in loss than one
years time, to raise an Army, under pretense of un-necessary and destructive
Wars, not of English, but of Strangers; not to conquer others, but to enslave
our selves; so bare faced a violation of our Rights and Liberties, was never
before attempted by any of our Lawful Kings, or their reputed Pensioners: But
is not this the Sum Total of our Convention, nicknamed Parliament,
proceedings? What good this immense profusion of our Treasure has produced, is
but too well known: Nor can it but Stomach every true Englishman, that 600000
l. of it should be given to the States of Holland, for contributing to our
Ruin, to serve themselves; their Manifesto of the 28th. of October, has told
us plainly, but falsely, That having understood the Kings of France and England,
had entered into a League, to subvert their State, they had therefore assisted
the P. of O. in his enterprise. Had there been any such League, our K. would
not have refused the French King's offered Succors; which were sufficient to
have prevented our Calamities, and the loss of his Crown: But from a
Commonwealth of Merchants and Hucksters, whose Policy and Religion is Interest
and Gain, we are not to expect Truth, or Integrity, Conscience, or Honor. Our
Parliament had no sooner perfected the Money Bills, and resolved, with a true
zeal, and the wonted courage of their Predecessors, to rouse themselves up from
their shameful slumbers, and enter in good earnest upon methods of redressing
the mismanagement of the Revenue, the ill conduct of the Fleet, non-payment of
Seamens wages, ^^^^^ing the Armies in Flanders and Ireland, the false Musters
in all, the Navy Commanders pirating upon our Merchants, the Dutch and Danish
Insolences, the illegal free-quartering of Soldiers, our other many Public
Grievances, and the ill state of the Nation, than they were kicked out of
Doors, as impertinent Medlers in what was not their proper business, with a
surprising Prorogation, and a ridiculous harangue; deserving the credit, the
exact performance of his former Declarations and Speeches have taught us to
give; That he is sorry the Taxes are so heavy on the People, and that he
intends to free them from the charge, by a speedy reduction of Ireland; against
his Interest and his Practice, pursuant to the excellent advice given him; all
which plainly prove, the spinning out this War, is the only certain way to his
End, a Despotick Arbitrary Power: The Demonstrations of this Truth, and our
Misery, are but too many, and too evident. His now summoning another Convention
of Lords and Commons, by the Name of Parliament, is not to remove, or lessen
our burden, not to satisfy, but amuse; by Coaxing and Cajoleries, the City and
Country enraged at their Oppressions and the unexpected dissolution of the
former, to gain time, for bringing in the rest of his Body of Foreigners, the
intended Instruments of our Slavery, and to try, whethen the Church of
England-Men, whom he inwardly hates and fears, will be catched with chaff,
prove kinder, greater fools than the Presbyterians, grant him more Money, more
than the already impoverished Nation can bear, enough to enable him to compass
his End, an Absolute boundless Power, under the plausible pretense of reducing
Ireland; which, reduced his way, would indeed put an end to Parliament Taxes,
but not to his more Grievous Impositions. He thinks it mean to cringe, and
court, and ask for Money, and longs to throw often his Vizard, to be in a
condition to take it as his own, when, and in what proportion he shall please.
If his common Cant, and empty Word^, which he has been always used to give,
prevail with his new Parliament, he will soon despise his equally b^b^led
Conformist and Nonconformist Friends; laugh at all our Constitutions, and know
no Law, but his own Will, and in the style of Our, by him much envied,
Neighbor, enforce his Edicts, to which Acts of Parliament must give place, with
a For such is our pleasure; the only reason he would fain give of all his
Actions. His Counsels, and his Procecedings here, and in Holland, sufficiently
speak his Imperious Humor, and that this is his ultimate design. If he would
give the World the lie, and be gloriously just to himself, to his Word, to his
Honor, and the good of England, which he pretends so much to affect, let him
send back his Troops of Strangers, lay aside his Crown, and propose to both
Houses at their Meeting, in March, the rewarding his extraordinary zeal for the
Protestant Cause, the calling a Legal Free Parliament, to compose all our
Disorders, and so to settle our Government for the future, that there may be no
possibility of overturning our Laws, or our Religion, whether the Sovereign
happen to be a Protestant, or a Papist, (he must be a stranger to Germany, and
the Power of Parliaments, that thinks such a contrivance impossible, or
impracticable,) his desire that what is past may be pardoned, and the
Succession continued and provided for in the right Line, beyond the hazard of
any illegal interuption. Such a generous proposition would quickly regain, and
for ever establish our Peace and Trade, restore the distracted People to their
Wits, and to their love of him, and prove no small argument to convince the
many Gainsayers, that the P. of O -- 's Dominion, though short, was founded in
Grace: But if, instead of this Heroic Godlike temper, he should still insist,
as we have cause to fear, upon his no-right of Possession, and playing the K.
press for more Subsidies, or, which is tantamount, a fond to enable him to
raise his projected Army, for other ends than that specious one of Ireland: I
hope the H. of Commons will be so sharp sighted, so honest and so wise, as to
observe the Snake hid under this Grass, hold their hands, and not do his
business, before their own and the Nations*; not part with a Shilling, till
they have first secured us against Conquest and Slavery. They, who represent
the People, need not be told, the generality of England wait but for the word,
to show they are yet able and ready to back, them with Lives and Fortunes, in
the defense of their Liberty, Properties and Religion, when, and however they
in Christian Politics shall prescribe. The Armed strangers, which we,
forgetful of Danish cruelties, have suffered to Land, are yet too few, to
master our Women; but if there be not an immediate stop put to their
Inundation, they will soon be an unequal Match, even for our Men. Upon the
whole Matter, Instead of a Moses, a Deliverer, as we were made believe, we have
found a Pharaoh, a heavy Task-Master; and, like true Northern Heroes, have
caught a Tartar with a Witness; and unless we resolve to show our selves Men,
Englishmen, alike zealous for Glory, Liberty, and Lif^* and speedily call for
Succor, a Free Parliament, and our old King, which alone can make one, we
shall be devoured by Foreigners at home, and become the scorn of all the World
abroad.

Dat. 8. of Feb. 1689.
FINIS.

