Some Sober INSPECTIONS Made into the CARRIAGE And CONSVLTS Of the Late
Long-Parliament, Whereby Occasion is taken to speak of PARLIAMENTS in former
Times, and of MAGNA CHARTA, With some Reflexes upon Government in general.

Cupio ut recte Capiar.

London, Printed for Ric. Lownds, at the White Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard
near the West End, 1656.

To His HIGHNESS The Lord Protector.
My Lord,
AMong the multitude of mighty Achievements which your Highness has
performed so much to the astonishment of Mankind, The Dissolving of the late
Long Parliament may well deserve to be ranked in the numbe: For thereby your
Highness Hercules-like, may be said to have quelled a Monster with many heads;
such a Monster that was like to Gormandize and Devour the whole Nation, as will
appear in the ensuing Discourse, which though small in Bulk, yet the Subject
matters is of the greatest Concernment (otherwise I had not ventured on so high
a Dedication) for it treats of the power and practice of English Parliaments in
former times, with the first Rise of the House of Commons, and of Magna Charta,
etc. which will be found to have had but hard births.

There was matter enough to have Compiled a far greater Volumn, but I have
woon'd it upon a small Bottom, in regard that besides my natural hatred to
superfluities and circumlocutionss; I would not be so unmannerly as to hold
your Highness too long, who have suca world of high businesses perpetually in
your thoughts. One thing I humbly promise your Highness, that the quotations
here produced (whereof there are many) are all true, and extracted out of
Authentic Records, but what consequences soever are drawn from them, the
Judgment is still reserved for your Highness, Endernier ressort.

There is a memorable saying of Charles Martell in that mighty Revolution in
France, when he introduced the second Race of Kings, That in the pursuit of
all his actions, he used to say, that He followed not the Ambition of his
Heart, as much as the Inspirations of his Soul, and the designs of Providence:
This may be applied to your Highness in the Conduct of your great Affairs, and
admirable successes.

So craving pardon for this high presumption, and the boldness of the Subject,
for which I humbly beg your protection, I rest in the lowliest posture of
obedience

At your Highness command I. H.

To the Knowing READER Touching The Method of this Discourse.
THere are various ways for the conveyance of knowledge to the understanding,
and to distill it by degrees into the Cells of humane brain; It may be done
either by a downright Narration and continued Discourse; or by Allegories,
Emblemes, and Parables; Or by way of Dialogue, Interlocutions and Conference;
The first, is the Easiest and most Usual way; The second, is the most Ingenious
and Difficult; The last the most Familiar and Satisfactory; When one does not
only inform but remove, and answer all objections and quaeries that may
intervene all along in the pursuit of the matter.

It is the mode and method of this Treatise, which discoursing of the affairs
of England, proceeds by way of Colloquy 'twixt Philanglus and Polyander: The
first a good Patriot, and great lover of the English; The other a person who
had seen much of the world abroad, and studied men, as both their names do
intimate.

Convenient Rebus Nomina saepe suis I. H.

Some Inspections made into the Carriage and Consults of the late long
PARLIAMENT, etc. In a Colloquy 'twixt Philanglus and Polyander.
Gentle Sir,
Philanglus. HOw glad am I to see you so well returned to England after so long
a separation, having breathed air under so many diffe^ing Climes, conversed
with Nations of so many differing complexions, and made so many hazardous
voyages and itinerations both by land and Seas, as I understand you have.


Polyander. It Is true, there is a kind of hazard that hovers over our heads
wheresoever we pass in this transitory uncertain world, the Morning cannot
presage what the Evening may produce, some odd thing may happen 'twixt the cup
and the lip; but the danger of foreign travel, or peregrination is nothing so
great as it is commonly apprehended; one may travel all Europe with as much
security and accommodation as any part of England; one may go from Calis to
Constantinople, as safely as from Bristol to Berwick; one may pass from Vienna
to Venice, from Paris to Prague, from Madrid to Magdenburgh, as securely as
from London to Lancaster, or from Saint David's head to Dover; It Is true, that
before Negotiation and Commerce made mankind more communic^ble, it was an
uncouth thing to travel, or make removes far from home; In this Island, not an
age since, if one were to make a journey from Wales to London, much more from
London to France, it was usual for him to make his last will; but now the world
growing still more populous and people more sociable by mutua* traffic; and
knowledge of languages, the case is altered; In my whole ten years travel, I
thank my Creator, I never rancounterd any danger or difficulty, but I might
have met with the like in England; if one observes these three small
Imperatiss, audi, cerne, tace, hear, see, and be silent, he need no other
passeport to travel the world; But dear Sir, now that I am returned to breath
English air again, I hold it one of the best welcomes to find you so well after
so long an absence, and I embrace you with both my arms, giving you a thousand
thanks for the fair respects, and litteral correspondence you kept with me
while I wandered abroad, for it was my greatest comfort.


Philanglus. Sir, you teach me what I should say to you in this point, but
truly you should have had a more frequent account of matters here, but that of
late years it has been usual to intercept and break up letters, which is a
baser kind of burglary then to break into ones house, or chamber; for this may
be a plundering only of some outward pelf, or baggage of fortune, but he who
breaks open one Letters, which are the Ideas of the mind (as is spoken
elsewhere) may be said to rifle the very brain, and rob one of his most
precious thoughts, and secret'st possessions: But Sir, now that I have the
happiness to re-enjoy you, what do they say abroad of these late revolutions
in England?


Polyander. They say that the English are a sturdy, terrible and stout people,
that the power and wealth of this Island was never discovered so much before
both by Land and Sea, that the true stroke of governing this Nation was never
hit upon till now; Politicians new and old have beaten their brains, and shot
at rovers in writing of diverse sorts of Governments; but the wisest of them
concur in this opinion, that there is no Government more resembling Heaven, and
more durable upon Earth, or that has any certain principles but Monarchy, and
such a Monarchy that has an actual visible Military strength to support it
self, and not only to protect, but to awe the people. Aristotle in his
Politics speaks of sundry species of Governments, he writes of Monarchy,
Aristocracy, Democracy, Oligarchy, and S^ratocracy, (as the Greek tongue has a
faculty above all others in compounding names for things;) but he is irresolut
to determine what Aristocracies are truly perfect, he has only this one
positive assertion, that Aristocracy allows no Aritificer to be a Citizen or
Counselor; Much of his discourse is of the first Founders of Commonwealths, as
Phaleas of the Chalcedonian, Hippodamas of the Milesian, Lycurgus of the
Lacedemonian, Minos of the Cretan, and Solon of the Athenian; then he proceeds
to correct the errors of Commonwealths before he tells us what a Commonwealth
is, which is (under favor) an irregularity in method. In his first book he
speaks only of the parts of a City, or Commonweal, but he tells us not what they
are til he comes to his third Book, where in handling the kinds of Government
in general, he flies backward and forward in a disorderly way; but when he
comes to treat of particular forms, he is full of contradiction and confusion;
in some places he seems to deny any natural right and public interest, (much
more any underived Majesty) in the people, whom he says to be little inferior
to beasts; whereas elsewhere he affords a liberty to every City, to set up
either by force or cunning what government they please, which in effect is to
allow men to do what they list if they be able: But at last he confesses that
after Kings were given over in Greece, Commonwealths were made of them who
waged war, and that all power was summed up in the Government of an Army,
which is pure Stratocracy, or Military Government.


Philanglus. We cannot blame this great Philosopher to rove herein up and down,
it being impossible for any humane brain to prescribe any certain and
infallible universal rules of Government that may quadrat with the nature of
all climes, and be applicable to the humors of all people; all other Arts and
Sciences have apodictical, and undeniable principles, but the Art of Government
has no such Maxims; the reason is the various dispositions of people, and a
thousand sorts of contingencies that attend worldly affairs; it is, you better
know then I, one of the main principles of policy in France to keep the peasan
(which is the gross of the people) still indigent and poor, because they are
of such a volatile instable nature, that if they were rich and fed high, wealth
and wantonness would make them ever and anon to be kicking against Government,
and crying out for a change, whereas this principle of policy is held to be a
paradox in Spain, and other Countries. Some Nations are so fiery mouthed, that
they must be rid with a bit, if not a Martinghal, but a snaffle will serve
others: nor are the same laws fit for the Continent, that are proper for an
Island, nor those of a Maritim Continent fit for a Mediterranean Country.


Polyander. I concur with you there is no Art so difficult, and fuller of
incertainties, as Hominem homini imperare, as the art for man to govern man,
which made one of the deepest Statesmen these modern times afforded to
confess, that though he had served so many Apprentiships, and been a
Journeyman so long in this Art, and reputed a Master, yet he found himself
still a Novice: For State affairs as all sublunary things, are subject to
alteration, the wisdom of one day may be the foolishness of another, and the
week following may be Schoolmistress to the week before in point of experience,
which is the great Looking-glass of Wisdom, and Policy.

Therefore whereas Aristotle uses to be constant to himself in all other
Sciences while he displayes the operations and works of Nature, when he comes
to treat of humane government, he is not only often at a loss, and inconstant
to himself, but he involves both himself and the Reader in ambiguities.


Philanglus. I am of opinion that there is in policy but one true Universal
Maxim, which is, as you said before, to have always a standing visible
effectif power in being, as well to preserve, as to curb a people; and it is
very fitting they should pay for their protection, it being a rule all the
world over, and grounded upon good reason, Defend me, and spend me.


Polyander. It is so indeed every where; how willing is our confederat the
Hollander, so he be protected in his trade, to part with any thing, to pay tols
for what he has either for back or belly; he is content to pay for all beasts
sold in the Market the twelf part for Excise, six shillings upon every Tun of
Beer, two stivers a week for every milch Cow, six pence upon every bushel of
Wheat, and so upon all other commodities: The States of Italy do more, in
Florence, and the Republic of Venice, (which has continued longest, and with
least change in point of Government of any Country upon earth) there is not a
grain of Corn, not a glassefull of Wine, Oil, Eggs, Birds, Beasts, Fish, Fowl,
yea, Grass, Salt, and Sallets, but pay a gabell for the common defense, nay
the Courtisans cannot make use of their own, but they must contribut to
maintain twelve Galleys.

But Sir, now that I have been absent so long, I pray be pleased to tell me
something of the proceedings of the late long Parliament, and of this mighty
revolution; for I find such a kind of transposition of all things in point of
Government, that England may be said to be but the Anagram of what she was.


Philanglus. There is a periodical Fate, that hangs over all Governments, this
of England may be said to have come to its Tropique, to a posture of turning;
The people extremely longed for a Parliament, and they had a long Parliament, for
it lasted longer then all the Parlements that ever were in England since the
first institution of Parlements, put them all together; there was never such an
Idol upon earth as that Parliament, for people thought there was an inerring
spirit tied to the Speakers chair, they pinned their salvation upon it, it was
held blasphemy, and a sin against the holy Ghost to speak against it, nay some
gave out that that blessed Parliament was as necessary for our Refromation, as
the coming of Christ was for our Redemption; such a sottish kind of infatuation
had seized upon some kind of people.


Polyander. But what did that Parliament do tending to the public Reformation?


Philanglus. What did they do? They were like to undo all things, had they
sat longer, which they had done till doomesday had they been let alone, and
their Posteriors never aked; It Is true, they were somewhat modest at first, but
by the lenity of a credulous easy King, they did afterward monstrous things.
They assumed to themselves all the Regalia's of the Crown, they seized upon
Sword, Great Seal, and Sovereignty, upon the Militia, and all the marks of
Majesty, nay, they did arrogate to themselves the Legislative and Supreme power.


Polyander. But does not the Supreme Power reside ^n the English Parliament,
which is an Epi^ome and Representative of the whole Nation?


Philanglus. I will not resolve you in that, till I acquaint you with the
Pedigree, and primitive institution of Parliament, which I will endeavor to do
as succinctly as I can, but in regard that our Parliament was erected at first
in imitation of the Assembly of the three Estates in France, in which
Government you are so well versed, I pray do me the favor as give me a touch
of the mode of France in those public Assemblies, and then I shall apply my
self to satisfy you touching English, Irish, and Scots Parlements, having in
some measure studied the case.


Polyander. In France the Kings Writ goes to the Bailiffs, Seneschals or
Stewards of liberties, who issue out warrants to all such ashave fees and lands
within their Liberties, as also to all Towns, requiring all such as have any
complaints, to meet in the principal City, there to choose Delegats in the name
of the Province to be present at the general Assembly. Being met at the
principal City of the Bayliwick, the Kings Writ is read, and so the Delegates
are elected and sworn; Then they consult what is to be complained of, and fit
to be proposed to the King, whereof there is an Index or Catalogue made, which
is delivered to the Delegats to carry to the General Assembly: All the
Bayliwicks are divided to twelve Classes; but to avoid confusion, and to the
end there may not be too great a delay in the Assembly by gathering of the
voices or suffrages, every Classis compiles a brief, or Book of the grievances
and demands of all the Bayliwicks within that Classis; then these Classes at
the Assembly compose one general Book of the grievances and demands of the
whole Kingdom. This being the order of the proceeding of the Comminalty or
third Estate, the like order is observed by the Clergy and Nobility: so when
the three books or Cahiers (as they call them) for the three Estates are
perfected, then they present them to the King by their Presidents in the open
great Assemby.

The first who presents the Cahiers is ^he President of the Clergy, who begins
his Harang or Oration on his knees, but at ^he Kings command he stands up and
^o proceeds bareheaded; The President ^or the Nobility speaks next in the like
manner; But the President for the Commons begins and ends his Oration on his
knees: whilst the President of the Clergy speaks, the rest of that order rise
up and stand bare, till they are bid by the King to sit down, and be covered;
and so the like for the Nobility; but whilst the President for the Comminalty
speaks, the rest are neither bid to fit, or to be covered. The grievances and
demands being thus all delivered at once, and left to the King and his Privy
Council without further debate or expense of time, the General Assembly of the
three Estates ends, expecting afterward such a redress to their grievances,
as the King and his Council shall think fit.


Philanglus. These proceedings of France are not much unlike the ancient usage
of this Kingdom for many ages, when all Laws were nothing else but the Kings
answers to the Petitions presented to him, and his Council, as is apparent by
many old Statutes, and the confession of Sir Edwar^ Coke; and now to acquit my
self of my former engagement unto you, I will impart unto you the manner and
power o^ the Parlements of Great Britain and Ireland; I confess it is more
properly the business of a Lawyer, which I am none* otherwise then what nature
has mad^ me, so, every man is a Lawyer, and (...) Logitian also (who was the
first Lawyer) as he is born the child of reason, for Law and Logic are merely
founded upon reason; This discoursive faculty of Reason comes with us into the
world accompanied with certain general notions and natural principles to
distinguish right from wrong, and falsehood from truth.

But before I come to the English Parliament, a word or two of the Parlement^ of
Scotland, and Ireland.

In Scotland about three weeks before the Parliament begins, Proclamation is
made throughout the Kingdom, to deliver unto the Kings Clerk or Master of the
Rols, all bills to be exhibited that Sessions, then are they brought to the
King, and perused by him; and only such as he allows are put in the Chancelors
hand to be proponed in Parliament, and no others; and if any man in Parliament
speak of any other matter then is formerly allowed by the King, the Chancellor
tells him there is no such bill allowed by the King: When they have passed them
for laws, they are presented to the King, who with the Scepter, put into his
hand by the Chancellor, ratifies them, but if there be any thing the King
mislikes they raze it out before.

The Parliament in Ireland is after this manner. No Parliament is to be held but
at such a season as the Kings Deputy there does certify the King under the
Great Seal of the land, of the causes, considerations and necessity of a
Parliament; The causes being approved of by the King a License is sent under the
broad Seal of England to summon a Parliament in Ireland, provided that all such
bills that shall be proposed there in Parliament, be first transmitted hither
under the Great Seal of that Kingdom, and having received allowance and
approbation here they shall be put under the Great Seal of this Kingdom, and
so returned thither to be passed in that Parliament; this was called Poinings
Act in the time of King Philip and Mary.

Having thus given a concise account of the usage of Parliament in our neighbor
Kingdoms, I will now pass to that of England.

Every Freeholder who has a voice in the election of Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses to sit in Parliament, ought to know well, and consider with what power
he trusts those whom he chooses, in regard the power of the House of Commons
is derived from that trust: Now that which gives authority for the Freeholders
to make their election is the Kings Writ directed to the Sheriff of the County,
in which is expressed not only the Sheriffs duty in point of summoning; but the
Writ contains also the duty and power of such Knights, and Burgesses that shall
be elected; therefore to know the full extent of the power of Parliament, you
must have an eye, and observe well the words of the Writ; for the Freeholders
cannot transfer a greater power then is comprised in the Writ to those that
they appoint their servants in Parliament. The Writ being used to be in Latin,
few Freeholders, God wot, understood it, or knew what they did; I will
faithfully render the said Writ to you in English.

The King to the Vicount or Sheriff, Greeting.
WHereas by the advice and assent of our Council, for certain arduous and
urgent affairs concerning us, the State, and defense of our Kingdom of England,
and the Anglican Church: We have ordained a certain Parliament of ours to be
held at our City of the day of next ensuing, and there to have conference, and
to treat with the Prelates, Great men, and Peers of our said Kingdom; We
command and strictly enjoin you, that making Proclamation at the next County
Court after the receipt of this our Writ, to be holden the day and place before
said; you cause two Knights girt with Swords the most fit, and discreet of the
County aforesaid, and of every City of that County two Citizen; of every
Borough two Burgesses of the discreet^r and most sufficient, to be freely and
indiffer^ntly chosen by them who shall be present a^ such Proclamation,
according to the tenor of the Sta^utes in that case made and provided; And the
^ames of the said Knights, Citizens and Bur^esses so chosen to be inserted in
certain In^entures to be then made between you and those that shall be present
at such election, whether ^he parties so elected be present, or absent, and
shall make them to come at the said day and place, so that the said Knights for
themselves, and for the County a^ores^id and the Citizens and the Burgesses for
themselves and the Commonalty of the said Cities and Bor^ughs may have
severally from the^^ full and sufficients power to do, and to consent to those
things which then by the favor of God shall there happen to be ordained by the
Common Council of our said Kingdom concerning the business aforesaid so that
the business may not by any mean^ ^^main undo^ for want of such power, or by
reason of the improvident election of the aforesaid Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses; But we will not in any case that you or any other Sheriff of our
said Kingdom shall be elected: And at the day and place aforesaid the sai^
Election, being made in a full County Court* You shall certify without delay
to us in our Chancery under your Seal, and the Seals of them which shall be
present at that Election s^nding back unto us the other part of the Indenture
aforesaid affiled to these presents together with the Writ, Witness our self
at Westminster.

This Commission or Writ is the foundation whereon the whole Fabric o^ the
power and duty of both Houses o^ Parliament is grounded. The first Hour^ is to
parley or have conference, and to treat with the King; the other house is only
to do and consent unto what the other shall ordain by their help and
conference; so that by this Writ we do not find that the Commons are called to
be any part of the great Council of the Kingdom, or of the Supreme Court of
Judicature, much less to have any share in the Legislative power, or to consult
de arduis regni negotiis, of the difficult businesses of the Kingdom, but only
to consent; and Sir Edward Cook to ^rove the Clergy has no voice in
Parliament, uses this argument, that in their Writ also the words are to come
thither ad^onsentiendum, to consent to such things as ^ere ordained by the
Common Council of the ^ingdom; but the other word ad facien^um, to do, is not
in their Writ, action being ^ot so proper for them in regard of their ^lerical
functions.


Polyander. Then it may be well inferred from what ^ou have produced, that the
King with the ^elates and Peers is properly the Common ^ouncil of the Kingdom.


Philanglus. Yes without controversy, nor until the reign of Henry the first
were the Commons called to the Parliament at all, or had as much as a consent
in the making of Laws. Camden in his Britannia teaches us, that in the times
of the Saxon Kings, and the ensuing ages, that the great or Common Council of
the land was Praesentia Regi^ Praelatorum, procerumque collectorum, the
presence of the King with his Prelates and Peers. Seldom also tells out of an
old Cronicle of the Church of Liechfield, that Kin^ Edward by the advice of his
Council of Baron^ revived a Law which has lain dorma^ threescore and seven
years; in the sam^ Chronicle it is said, that William the Co^^querer held a
Council of his Barons, An. (...) Regni sui apud Londinias. The next ye^^ after
he had a Council of Earls and Baro^^ at Pinend^n Heath to decide the great
controversy 'twixt Lanfra^t Archbishop (...) Canterbury, and Odo Earl of Kent.

In the 21. of Eaward the third, there (...) mention made of a Parliament held
5. (...) questoris, wherein all the Bishops of (...) land, Ear^s and Barons
made an Ordina^^^ touching the Exception of the Abbey of (...) from the Bishops
of Norwich.

In the second year of William (...) there is mention made of a Parliament
(...) cunctis Regni principibus. In the (...) of his reign there was another
Parliament at Rockingham Castle, Episcopis, Abbatibus, cunctisque Regni
principibus coeuntibus, wherein the Prelates, Abbots, and all the chief men
convened in Council.

At the Coronation of Henry the first, all the people of England were called,
and Laws were then made, but it was, as the story says, per Commune Concilium
Baronum; In the third year; the tenth year, and the twenty third year of his
reign the same King held a Parliament, or great Council of his Barons*
spiritual and temporal.

Henry the second in his tenth year had a Parliament at Clarindon, consisting
of Lords spiritual and secular: in his twenty second year, he had another at
Notingham, and a while after another at Winsor, then another at Northampton,
wherein there is mention made only of Prelates and Peers.

Richard the first after him held a Parliament at Notingham in his fifth year,
consisting of Bishops, Earls and Barons, which lasted but four days, during
which time there were mighty things transacted; Hugh Bardelf was deprived of
the Castle and Sheriffswick of York the first day; the second day he had
judgment against his brother Johu who was afterward King; the third day there
was granted the King two shilling of every plowd land in England; he required
also the third part of the service of every Knights fee for his attendance to
Normandy, and all the Wool of the Cistercian Monks. The fourth day was for
hearing of grievances; so the Parliament broke up, but the same year he
convoke^ another Parliament of Nobles at Northampton.

King John in his first year summoned (...) Magnates, his great men to a
Parliament a^ Winchester, and the words of the Roll (...) Commune Concilium
Baronum Meorum, the Common Council of my Barons at Winchester.

In the sixth year of Henry the third, the Nobles granted the King for every
Knight fee two marks in silver at a Convention i^ Parliament; he had afterward
Parliaments at London, Westminster, Merton, Winchester, and Marlborough; Now
these Precedents show that from the conqust unt^^ a great part of the reign of
Henry the thir^ in whose days it is thought the Writ (...) election of Knights
was framed first, the B^rons only made the Parliament or Common Council of the
Kingdom.


Polyander. By so many strong evidences, and prenant proofs which you produce,
I find it to be a ^^ridian truth, that the Commoners were no part of the High
Court of Parliament in ages passed: Moreover I find in an ancient Manuscript,
that the Commons were reduced to a House, by the advice of the Bishops to the
King in the brunt of the Barons Wars, that they might allay and lesson the
power of the Peers who bandied so many years against the Crown; yet to prevent
that they should not arrogate too much authority to themselves, (as Asperius
nihil est humili cum surgit in altum) it was done with those cautions th^^ they
had scarce as much jurisdiction given them as a Pyepowders Court has, for they
should neither exhibit an oath, nor impose fine, or inflict punishment upon any
but their own members, or be a Court of Record, or grant Proxies, therefore it
may well be a quere how they can appoint Committees, considering that those
Committee Men whom they choose are no other then their Deputies, and act by
power and proxy from them. But it is as clear as the Sun that the Conqueror,
first brought this word Parliament with him, being a French Word, and made it
free Denizon of England being not known before; for therein the Normans did
imitate the Romans, whose practice was that wheresoever they conquered, they
brought in their language with the Lance as a mark of conquest; I say that
besides those instances you produce, I could furnish you with many in the
Saxons times who governed by the council of the Prelates and Peers, not
admitting the Commons to any communication in affairs of State: There are
records hereof above a thousand year old in the Reign of King I a, Offa, and
Ethelbert; and the rest of the seven Kings during the Heptarchy, They called
their great Councels and Conventions, then Michael Smoth, Michael Gemote, and
Witenage Mote, wherein the King and Nobles with the Bishops only met, and made
laws; that famous Convention at Gratley by King Athelstan was compose'd only
of Lords spiritual and temporal; such also was that so much celebrated Assembly
held by Canutus the Dane, who was King of England, Denmark, and Norway: Edward
the Confessor established all his Laws thus, and he was a great Legislator. The
British Kings also who retained a great while some part of this Island
unconquered, governed and made laws this way by the sole advice of their Nobles
whom they call Arglwyded; witness the famous Laws of Prince Howel called Howel
Dha (the good King Howel) whereof there are yet extant some Welsh records, and
diverse of those Laws were made use of at the compilement of Magna Charea.

But in your discourse before, among other Parliaments in Henry the third's
time, you make mention of one that was held in 55, of his reign, at
Marlbourough, at which time Braston the great Lawyer was in high request, being
Lord Chief Justice: They that would extenuate the Royal Prer^gative insist much
upon a speech of his, wherein he says, The King has a Superior God, he has
also the Law by which he is made; as also the Court, viz. the Earls and Barons,
but not a word of the Commons: But afterward he does interpret, or rather
correct himself, when speaking of the King, he resolves thus, Nec potest ei
necessitatem aliquis imponere quod injuriam suam corrigat and emen^et, cum
superiorem non habeat nisi Deum, and satis erit ei ad poenam quod Dominum
expectet ultorem. Nor (says he) can any man put a necessity upon the King to
correct and amend his injury, unless he will himself, since he has no Superior
but God: It will be sufficient punishment for him to expect the Lord for his
avenge: To preserve the honor of this great Judge, the Lawyers found out this
distinction, That the King is free from the coer^ive power of Laws and
Counselors, but he may be subject to their directive power, yet according to
his own will and inclination, that is; God can only compel or command him, but
the Law and his Courts may only advise and direct him; but I pray Sir excuse
me that I have so much interrupted you in your discourse. You may please now to
proceed.


Philanglus. To prove my assertion further, that the Commons were no part of
the high Court, and Common Council of England, I will make use of the testimony
of Mr. Pryn, who was in such high repute most part of the late long Parliament,
and appeared so eage^ for the privilege and power of the lower House: In his
Book of Treachery and disloyalty, he proves that before the Norman Conquest by
the Laws of Edward the Confessor, the King was to do Justice by the Council of
the Nobles of his Realm: he would also prove that the Earls and Barons are
above the King, and ought to Bridle him when he exorbitates from the law, but
not a syllable of the Commons. He further tells us, that the Peers and Prelates
have often translated the Crown from the right Heir, whereof out of his great
reading he urges diverse Examples; First, after King Edgars decease they
crowned Edward who was illegitimate, and put by Ethelred the right Heir: Then
they crowned Canutus a mere forraigner in opposition to Edmund the lawful Heir
to Ethelred. Harold and Hardicanute were both elected Kings successively
without just title, the Lords putting by Edmund and Alfred the rightful Heirs.
Upon the death of Herold the English Nobility enacted that none of the Danish
blood should reign any more over them; Edgar Atheling was rejected by the
Lords, and though he had the best title, yet they elected Harold. He goes on
further in prejudice of the Commons, saying that the beginning of the Charter
of Henry the first is observable, which runs thus, Henry by the Grace of God
King of England, etc. Know ye that by the mercy of God and Common Council of
the Barons of the Kingdom, I am crowned King. Mawd the Empress was the right
heir, but she was put by the Crown by the Prelates and Barons, and Steven Earl
of Mortmain who had no good title, was heaved up into the Throne by the Bishops
and Peers. Lewis of France was Crowned King also by the Barons instead of King
John, and by the same Barons was uncrowned, and sent back to France. In all
these high transactions, and changes, Mr. Pryn confesses the Commoners had
nothing to do the despotical and ruling power as well as the consultative being
in the Council of Prelates, and Peers; and if Mr. Pryn could have found half
so much Antiquity for the Knights Citizens, and Bourgesses, without question we
should have heard from him with a witness; but while he converseth with Elder
times, he meets not with so much as the names of Commoners in any record.


Polyander. How then came the Commoners to sway so much of late years, and
challenge such an interest, in the public Government, and making of Laws?


Philanglus. It is a certain truth that in former ages the Kings of England, as
well Saxons, Danes, Normans, and English Kings did steer the course of their
government by the advice of their own Privy Council, and in extraordinary cases
by the compass of the great Council consisting only of spiritual and secular
Barons, whom they convoked by royal summons when they pleased; I told you this
word Parliament came in with the Norman; yet the Commons were not called to
Parliament till that reign of Henry the first, which was a good while after the
Conquest; to which purpose Sir, Walter Raleigh writes, saying it is held that
the Kings of England had no formal Parliaments, till about the 18. year of
Henry the first, at which time the Commons were summoned, and the great Charter
was granted: and if we believe Sir Walter Raleigh and others, the House of
Commons, and Magna Charta had first but obscure births, being sprung from
userpers, and fostered afterward by rebellion: for King Henry the first did but
usurp the Kingdom, and therefore to secure himself the better against Robert
his eldest brother, he courted the the Commons, and granted them that great
Charter, with Charta de Foresta; which King John confirmed upon the same
grounds, for he was also an usurper, Arthur Duke of Britain being the undoubted
Heir of the Crown, so the house of Commons and these great Charters had their
original from such that were Kings de facto not de jure.


Polyander. It is observed that usurpers are commonly the best Law makers,
which they do to ingratiate themselves the more to the people, as besides these
Kings you have named, Richard the third did, who was said to be a good King
though a bad man, a character clean contrary to that I heard some abroad give
of the last King* who they said was a good man but an ill King; but I pray be
pleased to proceed.


Philanglus. Whereas I told you before that it was in the reign of Henry the
first, that the people were admitted to the Common Council of the Kingdom, yet
they were not constantly called, for though the said King called them to his
Coronation, and again in the 15. or 18. year of his reign, yet he did not so
always, neither many of those Kings that succeeded.


Polyander. I remember to have read one remarkable passage in the reign of
Henry the first, that in his third year for the marriage of his daughter, he
raised a tax upon every hide of Land, but he did this by the advice of his
Privy Council alone without consulting publicly with either Prelate, Peer, or
People.


Philanglus. So did diverse of his Antecessors, and successors also after the
Commons were admitted to partake of the Common Council; But to illustrate this
point further, notwithstanding that the Commons were sought unto in Henry the
first's time, yet they were not constantly and formally sent unto till Henry
the third, in whose reign the Writs of Summons for elections were first issued;
but the succeeding Kings assumed a power to regulate those Writs at pleasure by
the sole advice of their Privy Council, as we read in the time of Henry the
sixth, who was the first framer of that famous Ordinance, Whereas Elections of
Knights have been made with great outrages, and excessive number of people, of
which most part was people of no value, yet pretend a voice equivolent to
worthy Knights and Esquires, whereby many riots, manslaughter, and division
among Gentlemen shall likely be, Our Lord the King has ordained that Knight of
Shires be chosen by people dwelling in the Counties, every one of them having
lands or tenements to the value of 40 s. per annum, at least, and that he who
is chosen be dwelling and resiant within the Counties where they are elected.


Polyander. But did not the Kings of England reserve a power to except against
any that came to Parliament?


Philanglus. Mr. Camden speaking of the dignities of Barons, says, that it was
ordained and decreed in the reign of Henry the third, that all those Earls and
Barons unto whom the King himself vouchsafed to direct his Writs of Summons
should come to his Parliament, and no others: And this rule Edward the first
constantly observed, and continued; for as C^mden has it, that prudent King
summoned always those of ancient families, and who were most wise to his
Parliament, and omitted their sons after their death, if they were not
answerable to their fathers in understanding; in another place he says, select
men for wisdom and worth among the Gentry were called to Parliament, and their
posterity omitted, if they were defective herein.


Polyander. If the King has a power to except against a Nobleman from sitting
in Parliament, sure, by an argument a majori ad minus, he may do it against a
Commoner.


Philanglus. It should be so in reason, and Queen Elizabeth, who was so great a
darling of her people, did practice her power that way often. But the modesty
of the House of Commons was very great in former times, for they did arrogate
no more power then what the Kings Writ gave them, they evaded matters of State
as much as they could. 13. of Edward the third, a Parliament was called to
consult of the domestic quiet, the defense of the marches of Scotland, and
security of the Seas from enemies; the Commons were desired their advise
herein, but they humbly desired not to be put to consult of things, Queu^ils
n'ont pas cognizance. Things whereof they had no cogn^sance. In 21. of the same
King, the Commons being moved for their advice touching a prosecution of a war
with France, by an elegant speech of Justice Thorp, after four days
consultation, they answered, That their humble desire to the King was, that he
would be advised there^n by the Lords being of more experience then themselves
in such affairs.

In the 6. year of Richard the second, the Parliament was called to consult,
whether the King should go in person to res^^ the great City of Ga^nt, or send
an Army the Commons being ask^d their advice, the humbly answered by Sir Thomas
^uckerin^ their Speaker that the Councils of Wa^ did more aptly belong to the
King and (...) Lords. The next year after the Common are willed to advise of
the Articles (...) peace with France, but they modestly e^cuse themselves as
too weak to counsel in ^ weighty mat^ers: And being charged again as they did
tender the repute of the County, and right of their King, the humbly de^ivered
their opinions rathe^ for Peace then War: such was the moderation and modesty
of the house of Commons in former times that they decline^ the agitation and
cognizance of hig^ State affairs, specially foreign, humbl^ transferring them
to their Sovereign, an^ his Upper Council; a Parliament man then, (I mean a
member of the Commons House) thought to be the adequ^^ object of his duty, to
study the welfare to complain of the grievances, and have the defects supplied
of that place for which he served: The Bourgesse of (...) studied to find out
something that mough^ have advanced the trade of Fishing: He (...) Norwich what
might* have advantage the making of Stuffs: He of Rye, what might preserve
their Harbor from being choked up with shelfs of sands: He of Taverston, what
might have furthered the manufacture of Kersies: He of Suffolk, what conduced
to the benefit of clothing: the Burgesses of Cornwall what belonged to their
Stanneries, and in doing this they thought to have complied with the
obligation, and discharged the conscience of honest men, without soaring to
things above their reach, and roving at random to treat of Universals, to pry
into Arcana Imperii, and bring Religion to the Bar, the one belonging to the
chief Governor, and his intern Council of State, the other to Divines who
according to the erymology of the Word use to be conversant, and employ their
Talent in the exercise and speculations of holy and heavenly things.


Polyander. I am clearly of your opinion touching the two last, particulars;
for Secrecy being the Soul of Policy, matters of State should be communicated
to the cognizance and deliberations of few, viz. the Governor in Chief, and his
Privy Council: And touching Religion, I do not see (humbly under favor) how it
may quadrat with the calling of Laymen to determine matters of Divinity, and
discuss points of Faith. But though the establishment of the House of Commons
be a wholesome thing in it self, I heard it censured beyond the Sea, that there
is a great incongruity in one particular, which is, tha^ the Burgesses are more
in number then the Knights of Shires, for the Knights (...) Shires are commonly
Gentlemen we^ born, and bred, and diverse of them verse^ in foreign governments
as well as the Law^ of the Land: But the Burgesses of Town^ are for the most
part all Tradesmen, and being bred in Corporations they are more inclining to
popular governmen^ and democracy: Now, these exceeding the Knights in number,
carry all before then by plurality of voices, and so puzzle the proceedings of
matters: But now tha^ I have mentioned Corporations, I must (...) you that the
greatest soloecism in the polic^ of this State is the number of them, specially
this monstrous City, which is composed of nothing else but Corporations which
smell rank of little Republiques (...) Hanses; and it was a great error in
the last two Kings to suffer this Town to sprea^ her wings so wide, for she
bears no proportion with the bigness of the Island, but may fit a Kingdom
thrice as spacious; she ingrosseth and dreins all the wealth of the Land, so
that I cannot compare England more properly then to a Cremona Goose in Italy.
where they have a way to fatten only the heart of the Goose, but in doing so
they make the rest of the whole body grow leanand lank: And as it was an error
so to suffer her to Monopolize the trade and riches of the land, so it was in
letting her gather so much strength in exercise of arms, by suffering her to
have such an Artillery garden, and Military yard; which makes me think on a
speech of Count Gondamar the Spanish Ambassador, who being invited by the King
to see a Muster of the Citizens in St. James' Fields; after they were gone, he
was asked by the King how he liked his Citizens of Londons? Truly Sir, said
he, I have seen a company of goodly able men, with great store of good arms;
but, Sir, I fear that these men will do you a mischief one day, for the conceit
wherewith they may be puffed up for the knowledge they have in handling their
Arms, may heighten their spirits too much and make them insolent: My Master the
King of Spain, though there breaths in his Court well near as many Souls as
there are in London, and though he be in perpetual War with some or other; yet
i^ his Court he is so peaceable that one shall see no sign of War at all, he
suffers not any armed men to strut under his nose, there is neither Artillery
Garden, or Military yard there at all, but only a fe^ Partisians that guard
his body; therefore, as I said before, these men may do you Majesty an ill turn
one day, and whether Gondamar was a Prophet herein or no, judge you. But I
pray, Sir, be pleased to dispense with me for these interruptions! give to your
former discourse touching Parliaments.


Philanglus. Having formerly spoken something of the Original duty and power of
the Great Council of the Kingdom with the Primitive institution of the House of
Commons, I will proceed now to that grand question, Where the Supreme
Legislative Power resides? Certainly, if we examine the Writs of Summons for
both Houses, with the Bodies and Titles of our ancient Acts of Parliament, we
shall find the Supremacy and power of making Laws to rest in the King or
Governor in chief: Now when the Parliament is styled the Supreme Court, it
must be understood properly of the King sitting in the house of Peers in
person, and but improperly of the Lords without him; It is granted that the
consultative* directive, or deliberativ^ pa^er is in the House of Peers, the
performing and consenting power, in the house of Commons, but the Legislative
powers lodges in the person of the King; for Parliaments are but his
productions, they derive their being from the breath of his Writs: He as Sir
Edward Cook does positively affirm, is Cap^t, Principum, and finis, He is the
head, he is the beginning and ending, the Alpha and Omega of Parliaments.


Pol^ander. But some affirm that the legislative power is in the two Houses;
and that they are above the King.


Philanglus. The difference 'twixt the King or Supreme Magistrate, and the
Parliament, is this, that the one represents God, the other the people: It Is
true, as I said before, the consultative power is in Parliament, and it is but
by the Kings permission, the commanding power resides still in the chief
Governor, and is inseparable from him, the results and productions of
Parliament, at best are but Bills, it is the Kings breath makes them Laws, till
then they are but dead things, they are like matches unfired, it is the King
that gives life and light unto them: The Lords advise, the Commons consen^, but
the King ordains; they mould the Bills, but the King makes them Laws, therefore
they are ever after called the Kings Laws, the Kings Judgments: The Lords, etc.
have the Indicatif part, but the King the Imperatif: the liberties also of the
people flow all from him, for Magna Charta begins thus, Henry by the grace of
God, Know ye that We of our mere and free will, have given these liberties: in
the self same style runs Charta de foresta.

The Statute of Marlborough. 52. Henry the third, runs thus, The King has made
these Acts, Ordinances, and Statutes which he wills to be observed of all his
subjects high and low.

3. Edwardi primi, the title of the Statute is; These are the Acts of King
Edward, and after it it follows, The King has ordained these Acts; the first
chapter begins, The King forbids and commands that none do hurt, damage,
or grievance to any religious man, or person of the Church; and in the 13.
chapter, The King prohibitet^s that none do ravish, or take away by force any
Maid within age.

6. Edward the first, it is said, our Sovereign Lord the King has Established
the Acts, commanding they be observed within this Realm: and in the 14. chap.
the words are, The King of his special grace grants that the Citizens of
London shall recover in an Assize damage with the land.

The Statute of Westmin 2. says Our Lord the King has ordained that the Will
of the Giver be observed and in the 3. chapter, Our Lord the King has
ordained, that a woman after the death of her husband shall recover by writ of
Entry.

The Statute of Quo Warranto says Our Lord the King at his Parliament of his
special grace, and for affection which he bears to his Prelates, Earls and
Barons, and others, has granted that they who have liberties by prescription
shall enjoy them.

In the Statute De finibus l^vatis, the Kings words are, We intending to
provide remedy in our Parliament have ordained, etc.

28. Edward the first, The King wills that the Chancellor, and the Justices of
the Bench shall follow him, so that he may at all time have some near unto him
that be learned in the Laws: And in the 24. chapter the words are, our Lord the
King after full conference and debate had with his Earls. Barons, and Nobles
by that consent has ord^ined.

The Stat^^e de Tallagio speaks in the Kings person no Officer of ours, no
^allage shall be taken by us, We will and (...).

1. Edward the second begins thus, Our Lord the King wills and commands.

The Statute of the 9. of the same King, says, Our Lord the King by the assent
of the Prelates, Earls, and other great States has ordained.

The Statute of Carlisle says. We have sent our command in writing firmly to be
observed.

1. Edward^ 3. begins thus, King Edward the third, At the request of the
Comminalty, by their Petition before him, and his Council in Parliament has
granted, etc. And in the 5. chapter. The King wills that no man be charged to
arm himself otherwise then he was wont.

5. Edward the third, Our Lord the King at the request of his people, has
establ^sh^d these things which he wills to be kept.

9. Of the same King there is this title, Our Lord the King by the assent, and
advice of his Council being there, has ordained, etc. In the 10 year of the
same King it is said. Because our Lord the King has received by the complaints
of the Earls, Barons, also at the showing of the Knights of the Shires, and the
Commons bytheir Petition, in his Parliament, etc. has ordained by the assent,
and at the request of the said Knights and Commons, etc. But very remarkable is
that of 22 of Edward the third, where it is said, The King makes the laws by
the assent of Peers and Commons, and not the Peers and Commons.

The Statute of ^ Ric. ^. has this beginning, Richard the second by the assent
of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, and Barons, and at the instance and special
request of the Commons has Ordained.

As for the Parliaments in Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, Henry the sixth
Edward the fourth* and Richard the thirds Reign. most of them do all agree in
this one title, Our Lord the King by the advice and assent of his Lords, and at
the special instance and request of the Commons, Has Ordained.

The Statutes in Henry the seventh days, do for the most part agree both in the
Titles and Bodies of the Acts in these words, The King by the assent of the
Lords spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons (...) Parliament assembled, has
Ordained.

But very remarkable it is, That the House of Commons was never Petitioned unto
till Henry the sevenths reign, and (...) was about the middle thereof; which
Petition is inserted among the Statutes, but though the Petition be directed to
the House of Commons in point of Title, yet the Prayer of the Petition is
turned to the King, and not to the Commons. The Petition begins thus, To the
right Worshipful Commons in this present Parliament assembled, shows to your
discreet wisdoms the Wardens of the Fellowship of the Craft of Upholsters
within London, etc But the conclusion is, Therefore it may please the Kings
Highness by the advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and his Common i^^
Parliament, etc.

Thus it appears that in our forefathers days it was punctually expressed in
all laws that the Statutes and Ordinances were made by the King: And withal,
it is visible by what degrees the styles and titles of Acts of Parliament have
been varied, and to whose advantage. The higher we look the more absolute we
find the power of Kings in ordainin^ laws, nor do we meet with at first so much
as the assent or advice of the Lords mentioned. Nay, if one cast hi^ eye upon
many Statutes of those that be of most antiquity, they will appear to be no
other things but the Kings pleasure, to whom the punishments of most offenses
were left: The punitive part which is the chiefest vigor of the Law we find
committed by the Statutes themselves to the Kings mere will and pleasure, as if
there were no other law at all, witness these precedents.

3. Edward the first, the ninth Chapter says, That Sheriffs, Coronets and
Bailiffs for concealing of Felonies shall make grierous fines at the Kings
pleasure.

Such as shall be found culpable of ravishing of women shall fine at the Kings
pleasure.

The penalty for detaining a Prisoner that is mainpernable is a fine at the
Kings pleasure.

Offenders in Parks or Ponds, shall make fines at the Kings pleasure.

Committers of Champarty, and Extortioners are to be punished at the Kings
pleasure.

Purveyors not paying for what they take shall be grievously punished at the
Kings pleasure.

The King shall punish grievously the Sheriff, and him who maintains quarrels.

Taker away of Nuns from Religious houses to be fined at the Kings Will.

If a Goldsmith be attainted, for not assaying, touching and working vessels of
Gold, he shall be punished at the Kings pleasure.

There is a notable saying declared in the 8. year of Henry the fourth, viz.
potestas princip^s non est inclusa legibus, the Power of the Prince is not
curbed by law.

In the 2. year of Henry the fifth, there was a Law made, wherein there is a
clause, that it is the Kings Regality to grant or deny such Petitions as he
please.

6. Henry the sixth, an Ordinance was made to indu^e as long as it should
please the King.

Now for further proof, that the legislative power is in the King, or Supr^am
Magistrate, it is to be observed, that as Sir Edward Cook says. All Acts of
Parliament in former times, were in form of Petitions; how, if the Petitions
were from Parliament, and the answer from the King, it is easy to judge who
makes the Acts: Moreover Sir John Gla^vil affirms, that in former times the way
of Petitioning the King, was this: The Lords, and Speaker either by words or
writing preferred their Petition to the King, (which was afterward called a
bill) which Petition being received by the King, he received part, and part he
put out, and part he ratified, and as it came from him it was drawn to a law.

Furthermore it appears that Ordimances, Provisions and Proclamations made
heretofore out of Parliament have been always acknowledged for Laws, and
Statutes.

The Statute called the Statute of Ireland, dated at Westminster, 9. Feb. 14.
Hen. the third, was nothing else but a Letter of the Kings (...) Gerard son of
Maurice Justicer of Ireland

It Is hard to distinguish among the old Statutes what Laws were made by Kings
in Parliament, what out of Parliament, when Kings called the Peers only to
Parliament, (and of those as many and whom they pleased) it was no easy matter
to put a difference 'twixt a Proclamation and a Statute; or 'twixt the Kings
Privy Counsel, and his Common Counsel of the Kingdom.

In the Statute of Westminster it is said, These are the Acts of King Edward the
first, made at his first Parliament by his Council, etc.

The Statute of Burnel has these words, the King for himself, and by his
Council, has ordained and established.

When Magna Charta was confirmed, there are found these two provisions in
articules super chartas.

First, nevertheless the King and his Council do not intend by reason of this
Statute to diminish the Regal right.

The second, notwithstanding all these things before mentioned, or any part of
them, both the King and his Council, and all they who are present, will, and
intend that the right and Prerogative of his Crown shall be saved to him in all
things.

The Statute of Escheators has this title, At the Parliament of our Sovereign
Lord the King, by his Council it was agreed, and also by the King himself
commanded.

The Statute made at York, 9 Edward the third, goes thus, The King by the
advice of his Council has ordained.

Now touching the Kings Council, I mean his Privy Council, it has been always
of great authority, and extremely useful in the public government of the
Commonwealth, and all Kings have acted most by it. King Edward the first,
finding that Bogo de Clare was discharged of an accusation brought against him
in Parliament, yet he commanded him nevertheless to appear before him, and his
Privy Council, ad faciendu^ and recipiendu^ quod per Regem, and ejus Concilium
faciendum, and so proceeded to a re-examination of the whole business.

Edward the third in the Star Chamber, which was the ancient Council Table of
the Kings, upon the complaint of Elizabeth Audley commanded James Audley to
appear before him and his Council, where a controversy was determined between
them touching land contained in her jointure.

Henry the fifth, in a suit before him and his Council for the titles of the
Manors of Serre, and Saint Laurence in the I Will of Thanet in Kent, sent order
for the profits to be sequestered till the right were tried.

Henry, the sixth, commanded the Justices of the Bench to stay the arraignment
of one Varney in London, till they had commandment from Him, and his Council.

Edward the fourth, and his Privy Council heard, and determined the cause, of
the Master, and poor brethren of St. Leonards in York, complaining that Sir
Hugh Hastings and others, withdrew from them a great ^art of their living,
which consisted chiefly upon the having of a thrave of corn upon every plowland
within the Counties of York, Cumberland, etc.

Henry the seventh, and his Privy Council commanded that: Margery and Florence
Becket should su^ no further in the cause against Alice Radley, widow for lands
in Woolwich and Plumstead in Kent.

In Henry the thirds time, an order or provision was made by the Kings Council,
and it was pleaded at the common Law in ba^ to a Writ of dower.

We find also that it has been very usual for the Judges before they would
resolve or give judgments in some cases to consu^^ with the Kings Privy
Council.

In the case of Adam Brabson who was assaulted in the presence of the Justices
of Assise at Westminster, the Judges would not proceed without the advice of
the Kings Privy Council.

Green and Thorp were sent by the Judges to the Kings Privy Council to demand
of them whether by the Statute of Edward the third, a word may be amended in a
Writ.

In the 39. of Edward the third, in the case of Sir Thomas Ogthred, who brought
a formedon against a poor man and his wife, the Judges said, Sue to the Kings
Council, and as they will have us to do, we will do, and no otherwise.

Thus we find that the Court-Council did guide and check the Judges oftentimes,
yet the Judges have guided the great Common Council, or high court of
Parliament.


Polyander. I find that you have studied the point of King and Parliament, to
very good purpose, by these choice instances you have produced; but I find that
though the Parliament has been held the Great Council of the Kingdom, yet the
ordinary way of government was by the King or Sovereign Magistrate, and his
Council of State: for the great Council (without disparagement) may be called
the production of the Privy Council, witness the words of the Writ of Summons.
But since you have proceeded so far, I desire to know, whether by an implicit
faith we are to obey what the Parliament determines; or whether it may err or
no, and what are those privileges it has.


Philanglus. I shall do my endeavor to satisfy you in all; touching the
first, no doubt but we are to acquiesce in what a true Parliament ordains, for
it is generally binding, and requires an universal obedience, because it bears
the stamp of Royal Authority, and of the Supreme Magistrate; who is the head of
the Parliament, who is to consult with his Judges, and Privy Council must be
satisfied in conscience of the justness, of such bills that he is to pass for
Laws, because afterward he is to protect them, and his soul lies by oath at the
stake for the defense and Safeguard of them; he is also to consult with his
learned and Privy Council whether they trench upon his Royal Prerogative, and
then his answer is, you know it, le Roy s' avisera, the King will consider of
it, which though in civil terms, is equivolent to a flat denial.

Touching the second point, Sir Edward Coke tells us that Parlements have been
utterly deceived, and that in cases of greatest moment, specially in the
interpretation of Laws, and in that point the twelve Judges, who are called the
Sages and Oracles of the Law, are to be believed before the Parliament, whose
office is more to make new Laws, then to expound the old; Parliament^ being
composed of men may err; Mr. Pryn, as I alleged before, tells us how many
usurpers they have preferred before the rightful Heirs; How often did Henry the
eight make Parliaments the panders of his lust; in whose time there are three
acts observable.

1. That Proclamations should be equivalent to laws.

2. That Queen Elizabeth was illegitimat.

3. That the King in his will might name whom he pleased to be his successor:
Besides in less then four years, Religion was changed twelve times in his
reign by Parliament.


Polyander. Touching the last Act of naming a successor, I have seen a
manuscript which makes mention that Henry the eight some 2. years before his
death summoned a Parliament, wherein he intimated unto them, that one of the
main designs of convoking that Parliament, was, that they should declare a
successor to the Crown; But the Parliament with much modesty answered, that
touching that point, it belonged to his Majesty to consider of it, and consult
with his learned and Privy Council about it; And whomsoever his Majesty would
please to nominat in his last Will, they would confirm and ratify; Whereupon
old Harry made a formal Will, which was enrolled in the Chancery, wherein
(remembering the perfidious carriage of James the fourth, his brother in law) he
declared the issue of his eldest sister, the Queen of Scotts, being forreners,
incapable to inherit, and the issue of Charles Brandon, after the progeny of
his own body, to succeed next: This Will continued in the Chancery all Edward
the sixts time, till Queen Mary, who about the midst of her reign did cancel
it. But now Sir, be pleased to pardon this Parenthesis, and resume the thread
of your former discourse, in displaying what are the privileges of Parliament
which were so much insisted upon, and cried up in the late long Parliament,
till they swelled so high, that they swallowed up and devoured the Prerogative.


Philanglus. If we will give credit to Sir Ed. Coke, who was a great Champion
of the House of Commons, and no friend to Prerogative (which he was used to
call that Great Monster) the privilege of freedom from Arrests is the only
privilege of Parliament. He cannot or at least, he does not so much as name
any other in his Section of the privilege of Parliament; neither is this
privilege so unquestionable and clear as some do imagine, as diverse examples
may be produced in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, who was so great a darling of
the Commons: In the 39. of her reign, Sir Ed. Hobby, and Mr. Brograve Attorney
of the Duchy were sent by the House to the Lord Keeper, to require his
Lordship to revoke two writs of Subpoena's which were served upon Mr. Tho.
K^^vet a Member of the House; the Lord Keeper demanded of them whether they
were appointed by any advised consultation of the House to deliver this message
unto him with the word require; they answered, yes; he replied as he thought
reverently and honorably of the House, and of their liberties and privileges,
so to revoke the said Subpoenas in that sort was to restrain her Majesty in her
greatest power which is in the public administration of Justice in the place
wherein he serves her, Therefore he concluded, that as they had required him to
revoke his Writ, so he did require farther deliberation.

18 Eliz. report was made by the Attorney of the Duchy upon the Committee for
the delivering of one Mr. Halls man, that the Committee found no precedent for
setting at large by the Mace any person in arrest but only by Writ, and that
by diverse precedents of records perused by the said Committee it appeared that
every Knight, Citizen or Burgess, which does desire privilege, has used in
that case to take a corporal oath before the Lord Chancellor or Keeper for the
time being. that the party for whom such writ is prayed came up with him, and
was his servant at the time of the arrest made; Thereupon Mr. Hall. was
directed by the house to repair to the Lord Keeper, and make oath, and then to
take a warrant for a writ of privilege for his servant.

270 Eliz. Richard Coke, a Parliament member, being served with a subpoena of
Chancery: The Lord Keeper boldly answered, that he thought the House had (...)
such privilege against subpoenas, as they pretended: Neither could he allow of
any precedents of the House used in that behalf, unless the House of Commons
could also prove the same to have been likewise allowed, and ratified by
precedents in the high Court of Chancery.

Now, the Original writ for Election; which is the foundation of the whole
business, makes mention of no such privilege, and it is a rule that to vary from
the meaning of the Writ makes a nullity of the cause, and the proceedings
thereupon: For where a Commissioner exercises more power then is warranted by
his Commission, the act is not only invalid but punishable.

Now the end and scope of privileges of Parliament, is not to give power to do
any public act not warranted by the writ, but they are intended as helps only
to enable the members toward the performance of their duties, and so are
subservient to the power comprised in the Writ; For instance, the freedom from
Arrests does not give any power at all to the House of Commons to do any
extraordinary act thereby, but the Members are made the more capable to attend
the public service by being free from the trouble of arrests; so that this
privilege gives no further power at all, but only helps to the execution of
the power derived from the Royal writ; Nor can the Freeholders by their
Elections give any such privilege of exemption from arrests, but it is the mere
gift, and grace of the Sovereign Prince, yet in point of treson, felony or
breach of the Kings peace this privilege extends not; Now, privileges are
things contrary to law, or at least they serve as a dispensation against law,
intended originally for the better expediting of the Kings business, or some
publik service.

Nor could the House of Commons punish any for breach of this their privilege
till they had conferred with the Lords, and till the punishment had been
referred by them to the Commons; there is a notable example hereof in the 33.
of Henry the eight, George Ferrers the Kings servant and Burgess of Plymouth
going to Parliament, was arrested by process out of the Kings Bench for debt;
which being signified to Sir Thomas Moyl then Speaker, the Sargeant that
attended the House was sent to the Counter to demand Ferres, the Officers of
the Counter refuse to deliver him, an^ giving the Sergeant ill language a
scu^^^ happened; the Sheriff of London being sent for, took part with the
Counte^^ and so the Sergeant returned without the prisoner; This being related
to the House of Commons, they would sit no longer without their Member, and
desiring a conference with the Lords, Sir Thomas A^dly then Chancellor, and
the rest judged the contempt to be very great, and referred (...) punishment
thereof to the House of Commons it self.

Concerning liberty or freedom of speech which is held another privilege of
Parliament; There is a speech of Sir Thom^^ Moors upon record, who being chosen
Speaker, 14. Henry the eight, He first disabled himself, and then petitioned
the King in the behalf of the House, that if i^ communication and reasoning any
ma^^ should speak more largely then of duty be ought to do, all such offenses
should be pardoned, which was granted and entre^ upon record. In which petition
it is observable, that liberty or freedom of speech is not a power for men to
speak wha^ they will or please in Parliament, It is ^ privilege only not to
be punished, but pardoned for the offense of speaking more largely then in duty
they ought to do; which in a right construction must be understood of rash,
unadvised, ignorant, or negligent escapes, and slips in speech, not for
wilful, malicious, much less for treasonable speeches: And then the Kings
pardon was desired to be upon record that it might be pleaded at Bar to all
actions.

There is a speech upon record in Queen Elizabeth's time, wherein the Commons
were warned not to meddle with the Queens Person, the State, or
Church Government.


Polyander. I have heard of diverse traverses that happened in the reign of that
popular and long lived Queen, which trenched as much, if not more upon the
privileges of Parliament, and the liberties of the people, then any that
happened in the reign of the two last Kings.


Philanglus. It is very true, and I will give you some instances drawn from
good authentic records: 23. Elizabeth, Mr. Paul Wentworth moved in the House
for a public fast, and for a Sermon every morning at seven a clock before the
House sat: The House hereupon was divided, 100 were against it, and 150 for
it, and so an order passed accordingly; The Queen being told hereof sent a
message to the House by her Vice-chamberlain; That her Highness had great
admir^^tion of the rashness of the House in commit^ing such an apparent
contempt of her express command, as to put in execution such an innovation
without her privity or pleasure fist known. Thereupon Mr. Vice-chamberlain
moved the House to make an humble submission to her Majes^y, acknowledging the
said offense and contempt, and to crave remission for the same, with^^full,
purpose to forbear the committing of the like hereafter: So by the suffrage of
the whole House, Mr. Vice-chamberlain carried their submission to the Queen
accordingly.

35 Elizabeth, Mr. Peter Wentworth, and Sir Henry Bromley delivered a Petition
to the Lord Keeper desiring the Lords of the Upper House to be suppliants with
them of the Lower House unto her Majesty for entayling the succession of the
Crown, whereof a Bill was ready drawn. The Queen was highly displeased
herewith, and charged her Council to call the parties before them, so Sir
Thomas Henage was sent to fetch them; so they were first commanded to forbear
going to the House, and not to go out of their several lodgings; afterward they
were called before the Lord Tresurer, Lord Buckhurst, and Sir Thomas Henage:
Wentworth was committed to the Tower, and Bromeley to the Fleet, together with
Mr. Stevens, as also Mr. Welsh Knight for Worcestershire.

The Queen sent a notable check to the House of Commons 28. of her reign for
chosing and returning Knights of the Shire for Norfolk, a thing impertinent for
the House to deal withal, and belonging only to the Office and charge of her
Chancellor from whom the Writs issue and are returned.

In one Parliament, when Mr. Coke, afterward Sir Edward Coke, was Speaker, the
Queen sent a Messenger or Sargeant at Arms into the House of Commons, and took
out Mr. Morris, and committed him to Prison, with diverse others, for some
speeches spoken in the House; Thereupon Mr. Wroth moved the House that they
would be humble suitors to her Majesty, that she would be pleased to enlarge
those members of the House that were restrained, which was done accordingly;
and answer was sent by her Privy Council, That her Majesty had committed them
for causes best known to her self, and to press her Highuesse with this suit
would but hinder the whole good they sought: That the House must not call the
Queen to an account for what she does of her Royal Authority: That the causes
for which they are restrained may be high and dangerous: That her Majesty
likes no such questions, neither does it become the House to search into
matters of that nature.

The Commons were told 39. Elizabeth, that their privilege was yea and no: And
that her Majesty's pleasure was, that if the Speaker perceived any idle heads,
which would not stick to hazard their own estates, but meddle with reforming
the Church, and trans forming the Commonweal by exhibiting Bills to that
purpose, the Speaker should not receive them till they were viewed and
considered by those who are sitter to consider of such things, and can better
judge of them: Moreover, the Queen rejected 48. Bills which had passed both
Houses, in that Parliament.

The House of Commons by their Speaker 39. Elizabeth, complained of some
Monopolies, whereupon the Lord Keeper made answer in her Majesty's name, That
her Highness hoped her dutiful and loving Subjects would not take away her
Prerogative, which is the chiefest flower in her Garland, the principal and
h^ad Pearl in her Crown and Diadem, but that they will rather leave that to her
own disposition.

Sergeant Heal said 43. Elizabeth. publicly in Parliament, that he marvelled
the House stood either at the granting of a subsidy or time of payment,
considering that all we have is her Majesty's, and she may lawfully at her
pleasure take it from us, in regard she had as much right to all our lands and
goods, as to any revenew of the Crown, and he said he could prove it by
precedents in the reign of Henry the third, King John, and King Steven. This
speech agrees with that which Sir Edward Coke has in his Institutes, where he
says positively. That the first Kings* of this Realm had all the Lands of
England in Demesne, and the great Manors and Royalties they reserved to
themselves, and enfeoffed the Barons of the remnant for the common defense of
the Kingdom,

There was a remarkable passage happened in the reign of Henry the fourth; The
House of Commons Petitioned the King that they might have advice, and
communication with certain Lords about matte^^ of business in Parliament for
the common good of the Kingdom, which prayer, as the record has it. Our Lord
the King graciously granted, but with this protestation. That he did it not of
duty, nor of custom, but of his special grace. So our Lord the King charged the
Clerk of the Parliament, that this Protestation should be entered upon record in
the Parliament roll. This the King made known to them by the Lord Say, and his
Secretary: who told them that Our Lord the King neither of due, nor custom
ought to grant any Lords to enter into communication with them of matters
t^uching the Parliament, but by his special grace at this time he granted their
request in this par^icular: And the said Steward and Secretary brought the King
word back from the Commons, That they knew well they could not have any such
Lords to commune with them of any business of Parliament without special
grace, and command from the King himself.


Polyander. But it is not the privilege of Parliament to examine misdemeanors
of Juridical Courts, and Officers of State according to Lex Repetundarum?


Philanglus. This cannot be called properly a privilege, for there is not the
meanest subject, but has liberty on just cause to question any Court or
Officer, if he suffer by them; yet it has been esteemed a great favor from
the Prince to permit such examinations; for we read that when the Lords were
displeased with the greatness of Piers Gaveston, it is said, that in the next
Parliament, The whole Assembly obtained leave of the King to draw Articles of
their grievances, which they did, two whereof were; That all strangers should
be banished the Kingdom (whereof Gaveston was one.) The second was, that
businesses of State should be treated by the Clergy and Nobles.


Polyander. Though the cognizance and debatings of great affairs of State,
belong to the high Court of Parliament, yet I have read that oftentimes, the
Lords have transmitted such businesses to the Kings Privy Council.


Philanglus. It Is a great truth, and many instances might be produced for proof
thereof; among others, when one Mortimer, who styled himself Captain Mendall
(otherwise called Jack Cade) came with the rabble of the vulgar, with a
Petition to the lower House, the Commons sent it up to the Lords, and the Lords
transmitted it to the Kings Privy Council to consider of.


Polyander. But the granting of Subsidies is a peculiar privilege of the House
of Commons.


Philanglus. I think not, for it is an unquestionable truth, that Subsidies
were raised, and paid before ever the Commons were called to sit in Parliament:
The great and long Subsidy of Dane-ghelt was without any gift of the Commons,
or of any Parliament at all as can be proved* Henry the third imposed a
Subsidy of two Marks in Silver upon every Knight Fee only by the advice of his
Council. The words of the King when he passes the Bill of Subsidy are
observable, which are these: Le roy remercie ses loyaux Subjects, accept lour
benevolence, and aussy ainu^ le ve^lt, The King thanks his loyal Subjects,
accepts of their good will, and also will have it; which last words make the
Act of Subsidy a Law to bind every man to to the payment of it; In so much that
the Parliament cannot impose a penny upon the Subject without the King, nor can
the Freeholders whom they serve, invest any such power in them.


Polyander. I find by the substance of your discourse, that not only all
power and grace, but all Parliamentary privileges flow from the concession of
the Sovereign Prince, and chief Magistrate.


Philanglus. Yes, without controversy you know (as a Gentleman wittily
observes) it is an axiom in Philosophy, quod dat formami. That which gives the
form, gives the consequence of the form; The King by his Writ gives the very
essence, and form to the Parliament, being the production of his breath,
therefore privileges which are but consequences of the form must necessarily
proceed from him.

In the 21. of King James, a Declaration was sent from New Market to the
Parliament, wherein he asserts; That most privileges of Parliament grew from
precedents, which she wrather a Toleration that an Inheritance, therefor he
could not allow of the style they us^d to him, c^lling it their ancient and
undoubted Rights and Inheritance, but could rather have wished they had said,
their privileges were derived from the ^race and Permission of his Anc^stors
and Himself. Thereupon he concludes. that He cannot with patience endure his
Subjects to use such Antimonarchical words concerning their Liberty, except
they had subjoyned, they were gran^ed unto them by the grace, and favor of his
Progenitors; yes he promises to be careful of whatsoever privileges they
enjoy by long custom, and incontrolled lawful precedents.

At the presentment of the Speaker of the House of Commons to the King upon the
first day of Parliament, the Speaker in the name and behoof of the Commons
humbly craves, that his Majesty would be pleased graciously to grant them their
accustomed liberties and privileges, which petition of theirs is a fair
recognition of the primitive grace and favor of the Sovereign Prince in
bestowing of Privil^dge, and is a shrewd argument against any other title. For
our Antecessors would not have been so ceremonious, nor so full o^ complement,
as to beg that of grace, which they might have claimed de jure by right: And
the renewing of this Petition at the beginning of every Parliament, argues the
grant to be but temporary.


Polyander. This was not the doctrine it seems of the late long Parliament
whose privileges flew so high that they ^retopped the ^rerogative; for they
drew the reins of all rule and reason into their hands, and left the Governor
in chief neither of them; And if he chanced to send them any advice or
admonition 'twas presently cried up to be breach of p^iviled^e, breach of
privilege.

But Sir, by the seque^ of our former discourse, I find that the High Co^rt or
Common Council of this Kingdom was composed at first of Prelates, and Peers;
that Parl. is but a modern word, and came in after the Norman Conquest: I find
also that the Commons came to be made ^ House, and that Magna Charta and Charta
de foresta, were not free Spontaneou^ grants, but that they were in a manner
extorted from Kings in times of necessity and confusion; I find also that the
Primitive and ordinary way of Government was the one supreme Magistrate alone
and his Council of State, and when he pleased, by the Common Council; But now
Sir, I pray be pleased to acquit your self of the promise you did me the
favor to make, of acquainting me with the proceedings of the late long
Parliament.


Philanglus. To do that, I will deduce matters from the beginning, and to find
them our must look North ward, for there the cloud of all our ensuing
confusions began to condense first.

You know Sir, the Scots Nation were ever used to have their King personally
resident among them, and though King James by reason of his Age, Bounty, and
long breeding there, with other advantages, drew such extraordinary respects
from them that they continued in a good conformity all his reign, yet after his
death they were often overheard to mutter at the remoteness and absence of
their King* and that they should now become a kind of Province truckling under
England, by reason of such a distance from the Royal Court: Moreover some of
their Nobles and Gentry found not at the English Court, nor at the late Kings
Coronation in Edinburgh, that countenance, familiarity, benefit and honors
which they expected: And it is too well known who He was that having got some
Wealth in the Swedish Wars, and being denied to be Lorded, took a pet, and went
hence discontented to his own Country. These discontented parties tampered with
the Mercenary preach-men up and down Scotland to obtrude and hold out to the
people what Doctrines were put into their mouths by their Patrons so that the
Pulpits every where ^ung of nothing but of invectives against certain
obliquities and solaecisms, and I cannot tell what in government, and many
glances they had upon the English Church. Yet all this while there was not
matter enough for an insurrection, nor to dispose the peoples hearts to a
mutiny, until by the Policy of the said discontented party, the English
Liturgy was sent thither. This, by the incitement of those fiery Pulpiteers,
was cried up to be the greatest Idol that possibly could be brought into their
Kirk; insomuch that when it was first offered to be read, the women and baser
sort of mechanics threw stools at the Bishops head in the Kirk, and were ready
to tear them in pieces: And here began the first storm.

The King having notice hereof sent a Proclamation, signifying, that whereas he
had recommended that Book of Common Prayer to be practiced among them, whereby
be himself served God Almighty twice a day, he did it only out of a design to
establish an uniformity of public Divine Service in all his Dominions,
specially in that his native Country. But since it had produced such dangerous
effects, he was contented to revoke it absolutely; it never being his purpose
to press the practice of thesaid book upon the conscience of any, for he did
only commend, not peremptorily command the use of it. Therefore, he exhorted
and required that every one unto whom it had given any scandal* should return
to his former obedience, and serve God as he was wont, offering therewith a
general pardon, and to pass an Act of Amnestia for the abolition of all
offense passed.


Polyander. And would not this suffice? In natural motions we find that the
cause being taken away, the effect cease, and will not this rule hold in
civil Actions.


Philanglus. It seems this would not serve the turn, but there was a further
reach in it, and to take the advantage of fishing in these troubled waters: You
know the Scots since their single Lion came to quarter with our three, were
much heightened in their spirits, more respected, employed and trusted abroad,
more elevated in their resolutions and aims, they grew rich, for you have heard
of a Silver Mine that reached from Westminster to Edenbrough: And I believe you
have not forgot B^ccolinies balance, wherein Lorenzo de Medici was appointed
by the Oracle at Delphos to weigh all the States of Christendom, and throwing
England into the Scales to counterpoise France, you know how much he made her
to weigh less by the addition of Scotland.


Polyander. I believe we had been better without this addition, for the union
'twixt Scotland and England may be said to be a mixture of Vinegar with Oil.


Philanglus. To resume my discourse, the former Proclamation, though it
breathed nothing but grace, would not suffice the Scots, but having an inch
given them, they would take an Ell, and nothing would serve their turn but an
utter extirpation of Episcopacy, for by trampling the Miter under their feet,
they hoped to have some of the Birds Plumes being plucked to feather their own
Nests, and they brought their work about: Good Lord, what a deal of dirt was
thrown into the Bishops faces by every rural petty Clerk? what infamous Ballads
were sung up and down? what a thick Cloud of Epidemical hatred hung suddenly
over them, so far that a Dog with a white neck was called Bishop amongst them.

The chiefest contrivers of this uproar, finding their designs to fadge so
well, and perceiving the Country to be so eagerly bent against Bishops (and
what Artifices and suggestious were used to render them so odious, is
incredible.) But finding withal the King unwilling to alter the Government his
Father had left him, and to which he had been sworn at his Coronation: They put
themselves in Arms, and raised Forces to beat down the Miter with the Sword, if
the Scepter would not do it. To the English frontires they marched with a
numerous Army, pretending they came as Petioners, but they brought their
Petition upon the pikes point. Hereupon the King raised a Counter Army, and
marched as far as Barwick, but some of the great ones about him grew cold in
the Action; so a pacification was shuffled up, and I think it was the most
dishonorable that ever England made.


Polyander. I could have wished two things, that either the King had then given
them battle, having the flower of his Nobility and Gentry about him, who
understood came with all promptitude and cheerfulness to the service, or else
that after the pacification he had with a royal freedom, and a commanding
confidence gone amongst them in person to hansel their new Parliament house at
Edinburgh, for in all probability this course might have averted those showrs
and Cataracts of miseries which fell upon him afterward, but I pray Sir
proceed.


Philanglus. Hereupon a Parliament was summoned in England, a Parliament do I
call it? it was rather an Embrio of a Parliament, a kind of Ephemeran thing. In
this short sitting the King declared to both Houses the indignities he had
received from his Scots Subjects, and therefore he proposed a supply to be made
of twelve Subsidies to suppress that rebellion, and in lieu thereof, he was
willing to forbear, and utterly to abolish the Ship Money, which he had reason
to think legal, being advised thereunto by Noy his Attorney General, who was
cried up to be so great a Clerk in the Law, yet he would not rest there, but he
advised further with his learned Council of the Sergeants at Law and others who
concurred in opinion with No; Nor would he rest there, but he had the
approbation of all the Judges si^gly, and afterward of the major part of all
the twelve upon a leasurely debate; this he thought sufficient to induce his
conscience to hold the things legal: It was proved that the moneys levied that
way were employed to the right use and no other, viz. to the garding of the
narrow Seas, and to preserve the right of his dominion in them (being the
fairest flower of his Crown) which was not only discoursed of abroad, but the
French Cardinal was over heard to question his right that way. And touching the
danger that hung over England he alleged how could England but be in apparent
danger considering how all her Neighbors about her were in actual hostility,
which made huge Fleets of men of War, both French, Dunkerkers, Ha^burgers, and
Hollanders, to appear ever and anon in her channel and hard before her Royal
Chambers. He declared further, that not one penny of that public contribution
came to his private Coffers, or was given to any favorite, but he added much of
his own treasure for the maintenance of a Royal Fleet abroad every Summer; yet
he was ready to pass any Bill for the abolishing of the said Ship Money, and
redressing of any grievance besides, provided his Parliament would enable him
to suppress and chastse the Scot. Some say the House was inclinable to comply
with the King, but as the ill spirit would have it, that Parliament was
suddenly broke up, and it had been better for him that they who gave him that
counsel had been then in Arabia, or beyond the Line, in their way to
Madagascar, yet those men were of high request in the Long Parliament
afterward being.

The King reduced to such streights, and resenting still the insolence of the
Scot, proposed the business to his Privy Council, who suddenly made a
considerable sum for his supply, whereunto diverse of his domestic serv^n^s did
contribute; Among others who were active herein, the Earl of Strafford
bestirred himself notably, who having got a Parliament to be called in
Ireland, went over, and with incredible celerity raised 8000. men, and procured
money of the Parliament there to maintain them. An Army was also levied here
which marched to the North, and there fed upon the Kings pay a whole Summer.

The Scot was not idle all this while, but having punctual intelligence of
every thing that passed at Court as far as what was debated in the Cabinet
Council, or spoken of in the Bedchamber (where of the six grooms, five were
Scots) which was a great advantage unto him. He armed also, and preferring to
make England the Stage of the War rather then his own Country, and to invade
rather then to be invaded, he got ore the Tweed, where he found the passage
open, and, as it were, made for him all the way, till he come to the River of
Tine: And though there was a considerable English army of horse and foot at
Newcastle, yet they never offered to face the Scot all the while. At Newburg
there was indeed a small skirmish, but the English foot would not fight; so
Newcastle Gates flew open to the Scot without any resistance at all, where it is
thought he had more friends then foes, for all Presbyterians were his
confederates.

The King being advanced as far as York, summoned all his Nobles to appear, and
advise with in this Exigence, Commissioners were appointed on both sides who
met at Rippon, and how the hearts and courage of some English Barons did boil
within their breasts to be brought to so disadvantagious Treaty with the Scot,
you may well imagine: So the Treaty began, which the Scot, would not conform
himself unto, unless he were first made Rectus in Cur^a, and the Proclamation
wherein he was called Traitor revoked, alleging how dishonorable it would be
for his Majesty to treat with Rebels. This Treaty was then adjourned to London
where the late long Parliament was summoned.


Polyander. Truly Sir, I must tell you, that to my knowledge those unhappy
traverses with the Scots made the English suffer much abroad in point of
National repute; But in this last expedition of the Scot, England may be said
to have been bought and sold, considering what a party he had here in Court and
country, specially in the City of London. Therefore his coming in then may be
called rather as Invitation then an Invasion.


Philanglus. The Scot having thus got quietly into a Town he never took, and
nested himself in Newcastle, Our late long long Parliament began at
Westminster: Being convened, the King told them that he was resolved to cast
himself and his affairs wholly upon the affection and d^lity of his people,
whereof they were the Representatives; Therefore he wished them to go roundly
on to close up the Ruptures that were made by that unfortunate War, and that
the two Armies one English, the other foreign, which were gnawing the very
bowels of the Kingdom might be both dismissed: Touching grievances of al
natures he was ready to redress them, concerning the Shipmony he was willing to
pass a law for the utter abolition of it, and to canc^l all the enrollments,
therefore he wished them not to spend much time about that: For Monopolies he
desired to have a List of them, and he would damn them all in one Proclamation:
Touching ill Counselors either in White Hall or Westminster Hall, either in
Church or State, he was resolved to protect none: Therefore he desired that
all jealousies and misunderstandings might vanish, and so concluded with this
caution, That they would be careful how they shook and d^^jointed the frame of
an old settled Government too much, in regard 'twas like a Watch, which being
put asunder, can never be made up again if the least pin be left out.

Thus at the beginning of the Parliament there were great hopes of Fair weather
after that cold Northern storm and that we should be rid of the Scot, but that
was least intended till some designs were brought about: The Earl of Strafford,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Judges, and diverse other are clapped up, and
the Lord Keeper Finch took a timely flight the other side of the Sea: And in lieu
of these, the Bishop of Lincoln is enlarged, Bastw^ck, Burton, and Pryn, who
were strong Presbyterians, were brought into London with a kind of Hosanna.


Polyander. It is possible that the lenity of the King should be such as to
yield to all this?


Philanglus. Yes, and to comply further with them, he took as it were into his
bosom, I mean he admitted to his Privy Council, such Parliament Lords who were
held the greatest Zealots among them: The Lord Say was made Master of the Court
of Wards, the Earl of Essex Lord Chamberlain. Moreover to give a further
evidence how firmly he was rooted in his Religion, and how much he desired the
strengthening of it abroad, the Treaty of marriage went on 'twixt his eldest
daughter and the Prince of Orange; Hereunto may be added as a special Argument
of compliance, the passing of the Bill for a Triennial Parliament, and lastly
he was brought to pass the Act of Continuance, which proved so fatal unto him.


Polyander. Touching the Triennial Parliament, I heard of a Prophetic mistake
that came from a Lady of honor, who sending news that time to the Country, did
write, that the King had passed a Bill for a Tyrannical Parliament, whereas she
should have said Triennial; And touching the Act of Continuance or perpetual
Parliament, I heard a tale of Archy the fool, who being asked whether the King
did well in passing that Bill, answered, that he knew not whether the King was
the greater Fool to grant it, or they the greater knaves to ask it. But the
saying of the late Earl of Dorset is remarkable who saluted the King the next
morning with the style of fellow Subject, in regard that by that grant he had
transferred both Crown, Sword and Scepter to the Parliament, for now we may
say, that England has four hundred and odd Kings in her: But it is observed,
that Princes of a hard destiny do follow the worst Councils; But Sir, in lieu
of these monstrous Acts of Grace and trust, what did the Parliament all this
while for the King.


Philanglus. They promised, specially upon the passing of the last Act, that
they would make him the most glorious, the best beloved, and richest King that
ever reigned in England, which promise they voted, and confirmed with the
deepest protests and asseverations that could be. Add hereunto, that the Earl
of Strafford was passed over unto them, who after a long costly trial was
condemned to the Scaffold, and so made a Sacrifice to the Scot (and them) who
stayed chiefly for his head.


Polyander. Touching the Earl of Strafford, it is true he was full of ability,
courage and Elocution, yet I heard his wisdom questioned beyond Sea in diverse
things. First, that having a charge ready against his chiefest Accusers, yet he
suffered them to take the start of him, and have priority of suit, which if he
had got, he had thereby made them parties, and so incapable to proceed against
him; Secondly, that during the time of his trial, he applied not himself with
that compliance to his Jury as well as to his Judges, for he was observed to
comply only with the Lords, and slight the House of Commons, Lastly, that
knowing he had both Parliament and Scot his enemies, as also the Irish, he
would not go aside a while, and get beyond Sea (which he might have easily done
from York) in lieu of coming up to London.


Philanglus. I believe his death was resolved upon before his coming from
York, if not by ordinary way of justice, yet by way of public expedience,
which appears, in regard the proceedings against him, was by a clause in the
Act not to be produced for a leading case, for example to future ages, and
other inferior Courts. Good Lord, how the rabble of the City thirsted after his
death! who were connived at, and countenanced by the Parliament it self to
strut up and down both before White Hall and, Westminster Hall, where they
cried out, that if the Common Law failed, Club Law should knock him down: nay,
their insolency was permitted to swell so high, that they demanded the names of
those Lords who would not doom Strafford to death.


Polyander. Is it possible that the grave and solemn high Court of Parliament
should permit such popular insolences to be committed before their faces.


Philanglus. Yes, and notwithstanding that the Lords did often solicit the
House of Commons to take a course for suppressing them yet 'twas not hearkened
unto; nay when the King had commanded a double guard of Constables and
Watchmen (which is the usual way by law) to attend at Westminster Hall, for
suppression of such disorders, the Commons cried out, that it was a breach of
the privileges of the House and a trenching upon their liberties; so they took
afterward a band of Soldiers to guard them of their own election, which was
never known before.


Polyander. Me thinks that the Earl of Strafford being gone, fair weather
should have followed, he was the cause of the tempest being thus thrown over
board.


Philanglus. It Is true, the Scots were dismissed a little after, having Fiddlers
fare, Meat, Drink, and Money for eleven Months together in England, with
Straffords head to boot. So the King prepared to go for Scotland according to
Articles, to hold a Parliament there; This filled the house of Commons with odd
kind of jealousy, therefore they cast about how to prevent the journey: so
they did beat their brains night and day about it, so far that they sat upon
Sunday in debate, but with another proviso, that it should not be made a
Precident for future ages, as the other Caveat was for their proceedings
against the Earl of Strafford. Well, the King went to his Scots Parliament,
where he filled every blank, for they did but ask and have. He granted them
what possibly they could propone in point of governing, both for Kirk and
State, many received new honors, they made havoc, and divided all the Bishops
Lands amongst them; for all which unparalled Concessions and Acts of grace,
as an argument of gratitude, they caused an Act (though already in force) to be
published and revived. That it should be detestable, and damnable treason in
the highest degree that could be for any of the Scots Nation conjunctly or
singly to levy Arms, or any Military forces upon any pretext whatsoever,
without the Kings royal Commission; but how the Scot observed this solemn Act
afterward the World knows too well.

During the Kings being in Scotland, that formidable hideous Rebellion in
Ireland broke out; which the Irish impute to the English Parl. First, in regard
that one of their accusations against Strafford was, that he used the Papists
in that Kingdom too favorably: Secondly, for the rigorous proceedings intended
by the said Parliament against the English Catholics; Thirdly, for design the
English Parliament had to bring the ^utch and the Scot to plant in Ireland, the
last of whom the Irish do hate in perfection above all other Nation; and
Lastly, the stopping of that Irish Regiment of cashiered Soldiers, which the
King promised by Royal Word and Letter to the King of Spain, who relying upon
that imploiment which was denied them by order from the English Parliament,
rather then to beg, steal, or starve, they turned Rebels.


Polyander. Indeed, I heard that Act of staying the Irish forces much censured
abroad, to the dishonor of the King of England and reproach of the Parliament,
considering ho^ the Marquis de Velada, and Malvezzi and Don Alonzo de Cardenas,
who were all three Ambassadors here for the King of Spain at that time, having
by dependence upon the sacred word, and Letter of a King, imprested money, and
provided shipping for their transport, which came to a great charge; but I pray
be pleased to proceed.


Philanglus. The King having settled Scotland, was his return to London received
with much joy, but though he was brought with a kind of Hosanna into one end of
the Town, he found a Crucifige at the other; for at Westminster there was a
Remonstrance framed, a work of many weeks, and voted in the dead of night, when
most of the moderate and well-minded members were retired to their rest; in
which remonstrance, with as much industry and artifice as could be, all the old
moats in government were exposed to public view from the first day of the
Kings inauguration to that very hour.


Polyander. How could this agree with the Protestation the House did make
formerly to the King, to make him the best beloved that ever was? I thought
that before his going to Scotland he had redressed all grievances, by those
Acts of Grace you spoke of before.


Philanglus. So he had, and he rested not there but complid further with the
house, by condescending to an Act for putting down the Star Chamber Court* the
High Commission Court, the Court of Honor, nay he was contented that his Privy
Council should be regulated, and his Forests bounded, not according to ancient
Prerogative, but late custom; nay further, he passed a Bill for the unvoting
and utter exclusion of the spiritual Lords from the Parliament for ever: Add
hereunto, that having placed two worthy Gentlemen Liev^enants of the Tower, he
removed them one after another* to content the House, and put in one of their
election: Lastly, he trusted them with his Navy Royal, and called home at their
motion, Sir I. Pennington who had then the guard of the narrow Seas.


Polyander. I never remember to have heard or read of such notable Concessions
from any King* but how came the Bishops to be so tumbled out.


Philanglus. The City rabble were still connived at to be about Westminster
Hall, where they offered some outrages to the Bishops as they went into the
House; hereupon they presented a Petition to the King and Parliament, that they
might be secured to repair thither to discharge their duties according to the
Laws of the Land: In which Petition there was a protest or Caveat that no Act
should pass, or be valid without them: This Petition, both for matter and form
was much excepted against, and cried up to be high Treason, so twelve of the
old Bishops were hurried to the Tower; but some of the knowingest Lawyers being
considered withal, whether this was Treason in the Bishops, or no* they
answered, that it might be called Adultery as much as Treason: so after many
months imprisonment, the charge of Treason being declined against them, they
were released in the morning, but cooped up again in the afternoon, then they
were restored to a conditional liberty touching their persons but to be
eternal^y excluded out of the house, which made one of them in a kind of
Prophetic way, to tell one of the Temporal^Peers* my Lord you see how we are
voted out of the House, and the next turn will be yours, which proved true.


Polyander. I remember when I was at York a Gentleman showed me a fair old
manuscript of some things passed in Henry the eighths time: and one passage
among the rest sticks in my memory, how Cardinal Wolsey being sick at
Leic^ster, the King sent Sir Jo^n Kingston to comfort him: to whom he answered.
Oh! Sir John, it is too late to receive any earthly comfort but remember my most
humble allegiance to the King, and tell him this story from a dying m^n; The
Bohemians repining at the Hierarchy of the Church, put down Bishops* but what
followed? then the Comunalty insulted over the Nobility, and afterward the
King himself was depo^^d* so the government grew a while to be merely popular,
but then it turned from a Successive to be an Elective Kingdom; This, said he,
will be the fate of Eng. unless the King bear up the reverence ^ue to the
Church, and so I pray God that his Majesty may find more mercy at the tribunal
of Heaven, then I have upon the Earth; But pray Sir be pleased to proceed.


Philanglus. The Parliament having the Navy at their disposing (which they
found to be in a good equipage, gramercy Ship money) and having chosen the Earl
of Warwick Commander in Chief, notwithstanding the King excepted against him,
They demand all the Land Soldiers and Military strength of the Kingdom to be
managed by them, and to be put in what posture, and under what Commanders they
pleased; But the King answered, that he would consider of this, and it was the
first thing that he ever denied them, yet at last he was contented to grant
them this also for a limited time; but that would not serve the turn: Hereupon
growing sensible how they inched every day more and more upon the Royal
Prero^ative He thought 'twas high time for him to look to himself: And
intending with some of his menial servants only to go to Hull to see a Magazin
of am nunition which he had bought with his own treasure, he was in a hostile
manner kept out, the Gates shut. Cannons mounted, Pistols cocked and levelled
at him, and there the Kings party said, the war first began.


Polyander. A hard destiny it was for a King to lose the love of his subjects
in that manner, and to fall a clashing with his great Council: but under
favor; that demand of the Militia was somewhat too high: for every natural
Prince, and supreme Governor has an inherent and inalienable right in the
common strength of the Country, for though the peoples love be a good Citadel,
yet there must be a concurrence of some outward visible force besides, which no
Earthly power may dispose of without his command, and for him to transmit this
power to any other, specially to any that he mistrusts, is the only way to
render him inglorious, unsafe, and despicable, both at home and abroad; you
know in the Fable when the Lion parted with his paws, and the Eagle with her
talons, how contemptible the one grew among all beasts, and the other among
birds.

The Scepter and the Crown are but bables without a sword to support them.
There Is none so simple as to think there is meant hereby an ordinary single
sword, such as every one carries at his side, no, it is the public Polemical
sword of the whole Kingdom, it is an aggregative compound sword, and it is
molded of Bellmettle, for it is made up of all the Ammunition and Arms, small
and great, of all the Military strength both by Land and Sea, of all the Forts
Castles, and tenable places within and without the whole Country: The Kings of
England have had this sword by virtue of their Royal Signory, as the Law faith,
from all times, the Prerogative has girded it to their sides, they have
employed it for repelling of foreign force, for revenging of all National
wrongs or affronts, for quelling all intestine tumults; The people were never
capable of this sword, the sundamental constitutions of this Land deny (...)
them: It Is all one to put a sword in a mad man's hand as in the peoples: Now
under favor, the Supreme Governor cannot transfer this sword to any other, for
that were to desert the protection of his people, which is point blank against
his oath and office: but I crave your pardon again that I have detained you so
long from the pursuit of your former discourse.


Philanglus. The King being so shut out of one Town (I mean Kingston upon Hull)
he might suspect that an attempt might be made to shut him in within some
other: Therefore be made a motion to the Yorkshire Gentlemen to have a guard
for the preservation of his Person in imitation of the Parliament, who had
taken a kind of choice Praetoria^ band many months before for their safeguard,
though without the Kings consent: The Northern men came cheerfully to this
service; wherewith the Parliament being not well pleased they interdicted all
trade to Newcastle.

But I must make a step back; when the King was returned from Scotland, he
retired to Hampton Court, yet upon the Lord Mayors and Cities solicitation, he
came back to White Hall, to keep his Christmas* But when the Bill against
Bishops was in agitation, which lasted above ten Months, and was twice cast out
of the House of Peers, a crew of hold sturdy mechanics, Mariners, and
Tar-pawlings came from the City, and ruffled again before White-hal and
Westminster Hall, and would have violated the Abbey of Westminster, under the
Parliaments Nose, so that for many nights, a Court of Guard was forced to be
kept in the body of that Church.

The King finding such distempers still in the Parliament, and knowing the
chiefest Authors of them who he had impeached before but could get no justice
against them in an ordinary way, though he desired the Parliament to direct him
in a course how to go on in the Empeachment in such extremity, for desperate
diseases requiring desperate cures. He took the Palsgrave with him, and making
use of the next Coach he met withal at the Court gate, he went to the House of
Commons in person to demand five Members, which he would prove to be Traitors
in the highest degree, and to be the fomenters of all these divisions,
protesting unto them upon the word of a King, that they should have as fair and
legal a Trial as ever men had; in the interim, he desired only that their
persons might be secured: The Walls of both Houses, and the very stones of
London streets did seem to ring of this high carriage of the King, and the
sound thereof far and near into the adjacent Countries, whence the Plebeans (by
incitement of some of the Members) came in whole Herds to the City, and
strutting up and down the streets, had nothing in their mouths but Privilege
of Parliament.


Polyander. Yet as I observed in your discourses before Queen Elizabeth, though
she was so popular, and such a minion of Parliaments, did the like, and far
higher things. But now that you have given a touch of the Palsegrave, I
remember a Manifesto of that Parliament, which they passed and published in
favor of his restitution, which was laughed and libelled at in Germany.


Philanglus. It Is true, the King went in state one day to the Parliament in his
behalf, where he cleared unto them the whole business, and because he doubted
that Sir Thomas Roe his Ambassador should have but sorry success in the Diet
which was then held in Germany, in regard he understood of an Amnestia to come
forth, whence the Prince Palatine was excluded, he desired the two Houses to
join with him in a public Manif^sto. The Parliament did cheerfully approve
hereof, praying that Scotland would join with them: The Manifesto consisted of
two parts, or protestations, one against all Acts whatsoever that should pass
in the Imperial Diet in the prejudice to the Palatine; the other, that the King
and Parliament of great Britain were resolved to espouse his quarrel; but this
business was little thought of afterward.

The King as I told you before, having gone to the House of Commons himself to
demand those Members, it happened none of them were there, but retired to
London for refuge, the House having had notice of the design from Marquis
Hamilton who was used to reveal unto them whatsoever was intended at Court.


Polyander. It may well be said then, that the unfortunate King had greater
Traitors within doors, then abroad; but it concerned Hamilton, with Holland,
and others to keep in with the House, because they were the chiefest
Monopolizers, specially the Earl of M. who in regard his son was so great a
Zealot in the Upper House, was permitted to keep a kind of Office to compound,
for his corruption, and briberies, whereof there were above forty proved
against him, yet he escaped without any punishment at all, or least mark of
Infamy.


Philanglus. Well Sir, the Londoners grew stark wild when they heard of this
attempt of the King, and the Countries about, specially Essex and
Buckinghamshire men being incited by Hamden (who was killed afterward upon the
same turf of earth where he called the people together) came in great swarms to
Town, and joining with the City and Suburbian rabble. They brought the five
Members the next day to the House, in a kind of Triumph, being guarded by water
as well as by land by such companions. A little after, sundry Troops of Count^y
horse came, and instead of Feathers or Ribands, they carried a paper-
Protestation in their Hats, as the Londoners had done a little before upon
their Pikes point.


Polyander. I heard much of the said Protestation, but I pray oblige me to tell
what it was.


Philanglus. It consisted of many parts, being penned, and enjoined by the
Parliament for every one to take: The first part was to maintain the true
Protestant Religion against all Popish Innovations (but no other.) The second
was to maintain the Person Prerogative, and hono^ of the Kin. The third, The
Privilege and Power o^ Parliament. And lastly, the pr^priety and liberty of
the Subject.


Polyander. Where was the King during all these popular Riots?


Philanglus. Rather then expose himself to such indignities, and there being
dark whispers of an attempt upon his Person; he retired to Hampton Court.
thence to Windsor Castle, whence having accompanied the Queen, and his eldest
Daughter to the Seaside for Holland, and having commanded the Prince to attend
him at Greenwich against his return, the Prince had been surpised, and brought
to London, had the King stayed but a quarter of an hour longer: Thence he
removed to York, where he sojourned all that Summer; and among other things he
sent for his Great Seal thither, which rid Post, and was pursued by the
Parliament, but not overtaken.

The King being settled at York, the Parliament still move him to have the
disposing of the Militia, and not to be limited to any time, which he denied,
for he was loath to be dis-arm'd, and part with his sword: Therefore he put
forth his Commissions of Array according to the old Law of England as he
alled'd, which declares it to be the undoubted Right, and Royal Signory of the
King to arm or disar^ any Subject.

The Parliament send out Counter-commands for the executing the said Militia,
so by this clashing 'twixt the Commission of Array and the Militia, the first
flash of that cruel, and cruentous civil War may be said to have broke out. A
close Committee was appointed, which was mixed of Lords and Commons, and I
cannot tell how many Rural, and subordinate Committees of mean mechanical men,
who stood higher a tip-toe in conventing Lords and Knights before them, then
the Parliament members themselves; an Admiral also was sent to sea, against
whom the King excepted.


Polyander. That was strange, considering how often the King had complied with
them that way, having at their request removed two Lievtenants of the Tower,
and taken one of their Election, having removed the Governor about his son,
and taken one of their choice, having removed Sir Thomas Glenham from Hull, and
nominated Hotham, etc.


Philanglus. The Presbyterians who had brought in the Scots Army before, and
were the activ'st men, cried out that the whole Kingdom was like to be ruined
by secret Plots and machinations; That there was a design to bring in the Pope,
and to cast the civil Government into a French frame, whereof they made the
Pulpits to ring up and down; nor did the Pulpit only help to kindle this fire,
but the Press also did contribute much thereunto, dangers, and jealousies, and
a kind of superfaetation of fears did daily increase in every corner, --
Traduntque metus n^c poscitur Author. As the Poet says.


Polyander. There be sundry sorts of fears: There are conscientious fears,
there are pannick fears, there are pusillaminous fears, and there are politic
fears: The first proceeds from guilt of conscience, which corns often to
frenzy; The second fear may be called a kind of Chymera, it is some sudden
surprizal or consternation proceeding from no grounds; Pusillaminous fear makes
a Mountain of a Molehill, it proceeds from poverty of spirit, and want of
courage, and is a Passion of abject, and degenerous minds, and is called
cowardice; Politic fear is a created forged fear, wrought in another, to
bring some design about; And as we find the Astronomers (as is said elsewhere)
do imagine such and such shapes and circles in the Heavens, as the Zodiac,
Equinoctial, C^lur^s, Tropiq^es, and others, though there be no such things
really in nature, to verify and make their conclusions good; so the Sta^ist
does often devise and invent imaginary fears to make his proceedings the more
plausible, and thereby to compass his ends. Or as the Sun uses to appear far
bigger in the morning and evening, then at noon when he is exalted to his
Meridian, and the reason the Philosophers use to give is the interposition of
the vapors and exhalations, which are in the lower Region of the air, through
which we look upon him, (as we find a piece of Silver look bigger in a Basin of
water, then elsewhere) so the Politician uses to cast strange mists of fears,
and fogs of jealousy before the simple peoples eyes, to make dangers seem
bigger. It is observed, that the Torpedo fish* when he fears to be catched,
uses to disgorge an ^nky ^lack froth, to puddle and darken the water that he
may not be seen and so avoids taking; so one trick of a Statist when he goes a
fishing after some ends of his own, is to cast out before the eyes of the
credulous vulgar strange mists, and apprehensions of fears and dangers, that
they may escape in them if need be: But I pray deal clearly with me, was there a
design to bring in the Mass again?


Philanglus. The Mass? you may say there was a plot to bring in Mahomet as
soon, to bring in the Alchoran or Talmud as soon; yet I believe there was a
pernicious plot to bring in a new Religion, but what Religion I pray? it was
not Papery but Presbytery, and with it to Usher in Buchanan and Knox and to
cast our Church and State into a Scots mould.


Polyander. I must tell you indeed that I heard the English much censured, and
undervalued abroad, for enslaving, as it were, their understandings and
judgments in point of Religion to the Scots, whom we made Christians and
Reformed Christians first, and now for us to run to them for a Religion, what a
disparagement think you is it? But you spoke before of an Empeachment of high
Treason; the King had against the five Members, for which he desired only the
benefit of the Law, I pray what was that Treason?


Philanglus. The main charge of Treason that was intended to be exhibited
against them, was the private intelligence, and combinations they held with a
foreign nation, and to have been the prime instruments of bringing in the
Scots Army, which had done so much mischief to England, and was dismissed upon
such inglorious terms, for besides the plunder they got, they had a vast sum of
treasure to be gone; which was not the usua^ (...) that our Progenitors used in
dealing with the Scot, for in former times England was (...) to pay the Scot
his Arrears (when he came to visit her borders) in another kind of metal; viz.
with good Iron and Steel, not with Gold and Silver, but she has soundly
revenged her self since, for the insolences of that hungry Nation.

But to proceed,

The Hierarchy, and English Liturgy being voted down, there was a general
liberty given to all consciences in point of Religion; The Tailor and Shoemaker
might have cut out what Religion they pleased; the Vintner and Tapster might
have broached what Religion they pleased; the Druggist and Apothecary might
have mingled her as they pleased; the Haberdasher might have put her upon what
block he pleased; The Armorer and Cutter might have furbrish'd her as they
pleased; the Dier might have put what color, the Painter what face they
pleased upon her; the Draper and Mercer might have measured her as they
pleased; the Weaver might have cast her upon what loom he pleased; the
Boat-swain and Mariner might have brought her to what deck they pleased; the
Barber might have trimmed her as he pleased; the Gardner might have lopped her
as he pleased; the Blacksmith might have forged what Religion he pleased. And
so every one according to his profession and fancy was tolerated to form what
Religion he pleased, as was observed elsewhere.


Polyander. Indeed I was told often beyond the Seas that the Liberty of the
Gospel, and the Liberty of the People, were the two things which were mainly
aimed at, but how did the war begin?


Philanglus. I told you before, that besides other causes the clashing of the
Militia, with the Commission of Array, did put all things in disarray
throughout the whole Kingdom, many Declarations came from the King, but they
were prohibited at last to be published, and the Printers punished. A little
after the Parliament voted an Army to take away ill Councillors from about the
Kings person, and the Earl of Fssex was appointed General, with whom they voted
to live and die.


Polyander. Me thinks that Lord was not so proper for the service, in regard
his Father before him lost his head upon the like occasion for offering to amove
ill Counselors from about Queen Elizabeth; but I believe he might have a
private quarrel of his own with the Court, in that his first wise was Articled,
and sentenced away from him, and married to a Scotch m^n whom he much hated, in
King James his time, who made a deep asseveration, that if any thing was amiss
in that divorce, he wished it might light upon his own Soul; but I pray be
pleased to go on.


Philanglus. The King understanding that the Parliament did thus arm, he was
told that it was not fit for him to be idle, so having levied some forces in
the North, he marched with them to Nottingham, where he set up and displaied
the Royal Standard, but the Beam thereof by a gust of wind toward the evening
was broke, which was held an ill augury.


Polyander. I heard by some of those that were then on the place that the King
had not 4000 effective fighting men, when he put up his Standard, and the
Parliament had an Army of above 15000 in a complete body, and upon their march
about Northampton, therefore I heard it censured a great oversight in the
Parliament, that they did not inorder their General, to find out the King at
Nottingham, where he might have either taken him Prisoner or forced him to fly
with his little confused Army: But I pray pursue your discourse.


Philanglus. I must again step a little back, and inform you, as that Army of
the Parliaments was a levying, these Propositions were sent to the King, with a
complemental introduction, which because they are of a very high nature, I will
particularly relate unto you, the preamble was this.

WE your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects, having nothing in our
thoughts and desires more precious, and of higher esteem, next to the honor
and immediate service of God, then the just and faithful performance of our
duty to your Majesty and this Kingdom; and being sensible of the great
distractions, and distempers, and of the iminent dangers, and calamities, which
the said distractions and distempers are like to bring upon your Majesty and
your Subjects, all which have proceeded from the subtle informations,
mischievous practices, and ill counsels of men disaffected to Gods true
Religion, your Majesty's honor and safety, and the public Peace and
Prosperity of your people. After a serious observation of the Causes of these
mischiefs: We do in all humility and sincerity, present to your Majesty our
most humble Petition and Advice, that out of your Princely wisdom for the
establishing of your own honor and safety, and gracious tenderness of the
welfare and security of your Subjects and Dominions, You will be pleased to
grant and accept these our humble desires, and Propositions, as the most
necessary effectual means through Gods blessing of removing those jealousies,
and differences which have unhappily fallen 'twixt you and your people, and for
procuring both your Majesty and them a constant course of honor, peace and
happiness.

1. That those of your Privy Council, and such great Officers and Ministers of
State, either at home or beyond the Seas, may be put from about you, and from
those Offices and Employments, excepting such as shall be approved of by
Parliament; And that the persons put into the places and employments of those
that be removed, may be approved of by Parliament; And that all Privy
Counselors shall take an Oath for the due execution of their places as shall
be agreed upon by Parliament.

2. That the great affairs of the Land may not be concluded or transacted by
the advice of private men, or by unknown, and unsworn Counselors, but that
such matters that concern the public and are proper for high Assemblies,
which is your Majesty's great and supreme Council, may be debated, resolved,
and transacted here, and no where else, and such as shall presume to do any
thing to the contrary, shall be reserved to the censure and judgment of
Parliament; And such other matters of State, as are proper for your Privy
Council, shall be debated, and concluded by such, as shall from time to time be
chosen for what place by approbation of Parliament; And that no public Act
concerning the affairs of the Land which are proper for your Privy Council may
be esteemed of any validity as proceeding from Royal Authority, unless it be
done by the advice and consent of the major part of your Council; And that your
Council be limited to a certain number, no^t exceeding twenty five, nor under
fif^^een; And if any Counselors place happen to be void in the intervalls of
Parliament, it shall not be supplied without the co^^sent of the major part of
the Council, which voice shall be confirmed at the next sitting of Parliament,
or else to be void.

3. That all the great O^ficers of State and Civil Justice, as also your
Secretaries, may be chosen with the approbation of Parliament, and in the
intervals as formerly.

4. That he or they, to whom the Government, and Education of the Royal issue
shall be committed, shall be approved by Parliament, and in the intervals as
formerly* And that all such servants which are now about them, against whom the
Parliament shall have any just exception, shall be removed.

5. That no All ^nce of any of the Royal issue, by way of marriage, shall be
concluded or treated with any foreign Prince or other Person whatsoever* at
home or abroad, without consent of Parliament, under the penalty of a
Praemunire unto such as shall conclude or treat of any such Alliance; And the
said penalty shall not be pardoned or dispensed with, but by consent of
Parliament.

6. That the Laws in force against Papists be strictly put in execution without
any toleration or dispensation to the contrary; And that some more effectual
course be enacted to disable them from making any disturbance in the State, or
^luding the Law by Trusts or otherwise.

7. That the Votes of all Papists in the upper House may be taken away as long
as they continue Papists, and that such a Bill be drawn for the education of
their Children in the reformed Religion.

8. That your Majesty will be pleased to consent, that such a Reformation be
made of the Church Government, as the Parliamsnt shall advise of: And that your
Majesty will contribute your best assistance for the raising of a sufficient
maintenance for Preaching Ministers throughout the Kingdom; And that your
Majesty will be pleased to give your consent to Laws, for the taking away of
Innovations and Superstition, and pluralities, and against scandalous Ministers.

9. That your Majesty will be pleased to rest satisfied with that course the
Parliament has appointed for ordering the Militia, until the same shall be
further settled by ^^ill; and that your Majesty will recall your Declarations,
and Proclamations against the Ordinance made by the Parliament concerning it.

10. That such Lords and Gentlemen that are Members of the House, which have
been put out of any Place or Office, may either be restored, or have
satisfaction for the same, upon the Petition of the Court, whereof he or they
are Members.

11. That all Privy Counselors and Judges take Oath, the form where^f to be
agreed upon, and settled in Parliament, for the maintenance of the Petition of
Right, of certain Statutes made by this Parliament; And that an Inquiry of all
the breaches and violations of those Laws may be given in charge by the chief
Judges, to be presented and punished according to Law.

12. That all the Judges, and all the Officers placed by approbation of
Parliament may hold their places, quam diu ^e been gesserint.

13. That the Justice of Parliament may pass upon all Delinquents, whether they
be within the Kingdom, or fled without it; And that all persons cited by either
Court, may appear and abide the censure of Parliament.

14. That the General pardon offered by your Majesty may be granted with such
exceptions as shall be advised of by the Parliament.

15. That the Forts and Castles of the Kingdom be put under the command and
custody of such as your Majesty shall appoint, with the approbation of your
great Council, and in the interval with the major part of your Privy Council,
as formerly.

16. That the extraordinary guard, and military forces now attending your
Majesty, be removed and discharged, and that for the future, that you will
raise no such Guards or extraordinary forces but according to the Law, in case
of actual Rebellion or Invasion.

17. That your Majesty will be pleased to enter in a more strict league with
the Hollanders, and other Neighbor Princes and States of the Reformed
Religion, for the defense and maintenance thereof against all designs and
attempts of the Pope and his adherents, to subvert and suppress it, whereby
your Majesty will obtain a great access of strength, and reputation, and your
Subjects much enco^raged and enabled in a Parliamentary way for your aid and
assistance in restoring the Queen of Bohemia, and her Princely issue, to those
dignities and dominions that belong to them, and relieving the other reformed
distressed Princes, who have suffered in the same cause.

18. That your Majesty will be pleased to clear by a Parliamentary Act those
Members you have empeached, in such a manner, that future Parliaments may be
secured from the consequence of ill Presi^ents.

19. That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to pass a Bill for
restrai^ing Peers made hereaf^en from sitting (...) voting in Parliament,
unless they be admitted thereunto by consent of both Houses.

And these our humble desires being granted by your Majesty, we shall forthwith
apply our selves to regulate your present Revenew in such sort as may be to
your best advantage, and likewise to settle such a^ ordinary, and constant
increase of it, as shall be sufficient to support your Royal dignity in honor
and plenty, beyond the Proportion of any former grants of the Subjects of this
Kingdom to your Majesty's Royal Predecessors; We shall likewise put the Town
of Hul into such hands that your Majesty shall appoint, with the consent, and
approbation of Parliament, and deliver up a just account of all the Magazine,
and cheerfully employ the utmost of our endeavors in the real expression and
performance of our dutiful and Loyal affections, to the preserving and
maintaining of the Royal honor, greatness, and safety of your Majesty, and
your posterity.


Polyander. How did these Propositions relish? they run in a very high strain,
though the preamble and conclusion breath a great deal of humility and
allegiance.


Philanglus. The King received these proposals with a kind of indignation,
saying; that he was worthy to be a King no longer over them, if he should stoop
so low; some alleged that the very propounding of them was Treason in the
highest degree, for they struck at the very foundation and root of all Royal
authority; therefore the condescending to them would render him a King of
clo^^s, and fit to be hooted at by all his Neighbors.


Polyander. The world was much amazed abroad that the Peers should concur in
passing such Proposals, considering how their honor must stand and fall with
the Royal Prerogative: well Si^, on.


Philanglus. You must think Sir, that one part of four of the Lords were not
there, the rest were with the King, who slighting those nineteen Propositions
(an unluckie number) it made the Pulse of the Parliament to beat higher, and to
publish to the World a new Declaration the substance whereof was,

That the Parliament has an absolute power of declaring the Law, and
wh^tsoev^r they declare is not to be questioned by ^ing, Magistrate or Subject:
That ^n P^^cedents can bound or limit their proceedings: ^at they may dispose
of any thing wher^i^ King of Subject has any rig't^forth* public good,
wherefore they may be Jud^es without Royal Assen: That none of their Members
^ught to be molested or meddled withal for treason felony, or any other crime,
unless the cause ^ brought before them to judge o^ the f^ct: That the
S^v^raign power resides in them: That l^vying of War against the command of
the King though his person be present, is no l^vying of War against the King,
but the levying of War against his politic person and Laws, that is the only
levying War against the King.


Polyander. It was not the first time that this new kind of Metaphysick was
found out to abstract the person of the King from his Office, and make him have
two capacities private and politic, for the same Metaphysick was made use of
in Edward the seconds Reign, but it was exploded, and declared by Act of
Parliament afterward to be detestable, and damnable Treason: This were to make
Sovereignty (by separating it from the person) to be a kind of Platonic Idea
hovering in the aer, to make a King a strange kind of Amphibium, to make at the
same instant a King, and no King, of the same Individuum a power which the
Casuists affirm God Almighty never assumed to himself to do any thing that
implies contradiction.


Philanglus. The Parliament or rather the Presbyteria^ Army (for the Presbyters
sat then at the Helm) increased daily, and things being at such a desperate
point, there were two choice Earls (Southampton and Dorset) sent from
Nottingham with this Pathetick Letter of the Kings to the Parliament.

WE have with unspeak^bl grief of heart, long beheld the distraction of this
our Kingdom; Our very soul is full of anguish until we may find some re^^dy to
prevent the miseries which are ready to overwhelm this whole Nation by a civil
War; And though all our endeavors t^nding to the composing of those unhappy
differences 'twixt us and our Parliament, though pursued by us with all Zeal
and Sincerity, have been hitherto without the success we hoped for, yet such
is our earnest and constant care to preserve the public peace, that we shall
not be discouraged from using any expedient, which by the blessing of the God
of mercy may lay a firm foundation of peace and happiness to all our good
Subjects: To this end, observing that many mistakes have arisen by the
Messages, Petitions, and Answers betwixt us, and our great Council, which happily
may be prevented by some other way of Treaty, wherein the matters in difference
may be clearly und^rstood, and more freely transacted, We have thought fit to
propound unto you that some sit persons may b^e by you enabled to treat with
the like number to be authorized by us, in such a manner, and with such
freedo^e of d^bate, as may best tend to that happy conclusion which ^ll good
people desire* viz. The Peace of the Kingdom, wherein as we promise in the
(...) of a King all sa^ety and ^ncouragement to them, who shall be sent unto
u^, if ye w^ll choose the place we are to meet for the TREATY, which we wholly
le^ve unto you, presuming the like care of the safety of those we shall employ
if you shall name another place,

So we assure you, and all our good Subjects, that to the best of our
understanding, nothing shall be wanting on our p^rt, which may advance the true
Reformed Religion, oppose Popery and Superstition, secure the Law of the Land,
upon which is built as well our just Prerogative, as the propriety and liberty
of the Subject, confirm all just power and privileges of Parl* and render us a
people truly happy by a true understanding 'twixt us and our great Council;
bring with you as firm a resolution to do your duty, and let our people join
with us in prayer to Almighty God for his blessing upon this work.

If this Proposition be rejected by you, w^e have done our duty so amply, that
God will absolve us from the guilt of any of that blood which shall be spilt;
And whatsoever opinion other men may h^ve of our power, we assure you that
nothing but our pious and Christian care to prevent the effusion of blood has
begot this motion in us: Our provisio^ of men, Armies, and Money being such as
may secure us from violence, till it please God ^o open the Eyes of our people.


Poly^nd^r. What impression did thi^ Letter make, for it promised much.


Philanglus. It made little or none at all, though it was all written with the
Kings own hand; for the Parliament was formerly nettled at a Declaration he had
sent, when having made ^ motion to go himself in person to suppress the Irish
Rebels (which attempt the Scots approved of, and highly applauded) but being
not liked by the English Parliament, he replied unto them, to this effect.

When we recommended the reduct^on of Ireland to you, we intended not to
exclude our Self, or not to be concernd in your Councils, but that if there
were any expedient which in our Conscience and understanding we thought
necessary for that great work* we might put it in practice; We look upon you,
as our great Council, whose advice we always have and will with great regard
and deliberation weigh and consider of, but we look upon our Self as neither
deprived of our understanding, or divested of any right we had, were there no
Parliament at all sitting; We called you together by our our own Royal Writ and
authority (without which you could not have met) to give us faithful Counsel
about our great affairs, but we resigned not hereby our interest, and freedom,
we never subjected our Self to your absolute determination; we have always
weighed your Counsel as from a body entrusted by us, and when we have dissented
from you, we have returned you the reasons which had prevailed with ou^
understanding and conscience, and with such candor, that a Prince should use
toward his Subjects, and with that affection a Father should express to his
Children; What applications have been used to rectify our understanding by
reasons, and what motives have been given by you to persuade our affections, we
leave the world to judge; Moreover, we must not forget to tell you, however a
major part may blind you in matter of opinion, We hold our self (and we are
sure the Laws and constitutions of the Kingdom has always held the same) as
free to dissent, till our reason be convinced for the general good, as if you
delivered no opinion.

When we summoned you first together, we did not intend to put the reins of all
Rule and Reason into your hands, and by a kind of blind brutish formality, and
unprincely simpleness, to assent to every thing without examining our own
Conscience and judgment which yet never pleased us more, then when they
concurred with yours, This were to bring us back to a nonage, now that we are
come long since to the perfect growth of discretion; you must not think to take
from us the Mastery and use of our innated reason, and the dictates of our own
conscience, or that we will raise a Tempest at home, within our breast, to calm
a storm abroad; In fine, we called you together, to propound, not to give Law,
to be our Counselors, not our Controllers, for Counsel degenerates from the
nature of Counsel when it is coercive. Nor shall we ever enfeeble our regal
power, or suffer it to be invaded so far as to give way, that any Ordinance or
Omnipotency of Votes, shall be able to suspend an Act, already in force without
our assent; To conclude, as we firmly resolve to make the Law the measure of
our actions, so we expect it should be also the Rule of your obedience and
deliberations, and that the result of all your Counsels be derived from it.


Polyander. This was home, and high, but what answer did the Parliament make to
the former letter from Notingham?


Philanglus. The noble Personages who carried that Letter were looked npon with
an ill aspect by the Parliament; yet an answer was returned, containing this
proposal, That the King wo^ld revoke and annul in the first place those
Proclamations, and other public instruments whereby their Adherents were
declared Traitors, under which notion 'twas neither honorable for his Majesty
to t^eat with them, nor were they capable to treat wi^h Him.


Polyander. This Doctrine I believe they had learnt of the Scot; but what did
the King reply?


Philanglus. He sent word that he was willing so to do, provided that the
Parliament would recall likewise their Votes, Orders, or Ordinances passed
against such whom they declared Delinquents for adhering to the King according
to the clear known Law of the Land, in the reign of Hen. 7. which was, that
n^ne should be molested or questioned for adhering unto, or assisting the Royal
person of the King.

This the King desired by way of reciprocal correspondence, but it being
denied, those overtures for a Treaty came to nothing; so the Parliaments Army
begin to advance, and the Kings did daily increase.

Thereupon the Lords that were about the person of the King, whereof there were
above threescore, made this public Manifesto.

WE do engage our selves not to obey any Orders or Commands whatsoever, that
are not warranted by the known Laws of the Land; We engage our selves and
fortunes to defend your Majesty's Person, Crown, and Dignity, with your just
and legal Prerogatives, against all persons and power whatsoever: We will
defend the Religion established by the Law of the Land, the lawful Liberties
of the Subjects of England, with the just privileges of your Majesty and the
Parliament: And we engage our selves further, not to obey any Rules, Order or
Ordinance whatsoever concerning any Militia, that has not the Royal Assent.

To this was subjoined another.

We whose na^es are under written, in obedience to his Majesty's desire, and
ou^ of the duty we ow to his honor, and to truth, being here on the place, and
witnesses of his Majesty's frequent and earnest Declarations and Professions of
his abhorring all designs of making war upon the Parliament; And not finding
any Councels that might reasonably beget the belief of any such design; We do
promise before God, and testify to all the World, that we are fully persuaded,
his Majesty has no such intention, but that all his endeavors tend to the
^^rm, and constant settlement of the true Religion, and the just privileges of
Parliament, the Lib^rty of the Subject, with the Laws, Peace and Prosperity of
this Kingdom.

But all this would not serve the turn, for neither Parliament nor people would
give credit to any thing that dropped from King or Peers, specially the City of
London, where the Presbyterians played their parts notably, by inciting the
people to a War for preventing the introduction of Slavery and Sup^rstition;
so, unusual voluntary collections were made both in Town and Country; the
Seamstress brought in her silver thimble, the Chambermaid her Bodkin, the Cook
his silver spoon, the Vintner his Bowl into the common Treasury of War and they
who contributed to so pious a work, were invited more then others in some
Churches to come to the Holy Communion in the very time of administration; And
observed it was that some sorts of Females were freest in those contributions,
as far as to part with their Rings and earings, as if some Golden Calf were to
be molten and set up to be idolized, which proved true for the Covenant a
little after was set up, which may be said to have been a kind of Idol, as I
shall make it appear hereafter.

Thus a fierce funestous civil War was a fomenting in the very bowels of
England, which broke out into many storms and showers of blood: The fatal Cloud
wherein this storm lay long ingendring, though when it began to condense first
it appeared but as big as a hand, yet by degrees it did spread to such a vast
expansion, that it diffused it self through the whole Region, and obscured that
fair face of Heaven which was used to shine upon this part of the Hemisphere.

The King fell to work then in good earnest, and made choice of the Earl of
Linzey for General of the Infantry, which choice was generally cried up of all;
Prince Rupert was made General of the Horse, but that election did not find
such an applause; The first encounter that Prince Rupert had with his Godfather
the Earl of Essex was near Worcester, where he defeated some of the flower of
the Parliaments horse; The King having removed from Nottingham to Derby, and so
to Strafford, his forces increased all along; but passing by Chartly the Earl
of Essex house, the Soldiers hoped to have had some plunder there, but a
strict command was given by the Kings own mouth that nothing should be touched,
not as much as a Buck, whereat their teeth (...) water* as they marched through
his Park; So he came to Shrewsbury where the Co^ kept above a month, at which
time, the Army multip^i'd exceedingly, to near upon ^o M^ men, and the Welchmen
coming so thic^ down the Mountains, did much animate the English.

From Shrewsbury the King took a reso^^tion to remove to Oxford* but after
seve^^ dai^s tiresome march, he understood the Parliaments Army were within
six mile of him, so he went out so far to find the^ out, and faced them on a
Sunday mornin^ from Edg^ Hill* as they lay in Kinton field^ where their Colors
were displayed: A sight of the Royal Army they discharge some pieces of
Ordnance in Defiance so both Parties prepared for Battle, a^^ the Sun had
declined above two hours the afternoon before the Cannons a^ Kings Infantry
could get into the bottom Being put there in a fighting posture, and having the
wind favorable, the King gave command to let fly the Cannons to begin Battle;
Thus a most furious Engagement began, which lasted about three hours, till
night parted them; and some old French and German Commanders who were there
employed in the Royal Army, reported afterward, they never saw such a manful
fight in all their lives: Prince Rupert springing ore a low hedge lind thick
with the enemies Musketeers, pursued their Horse very far, and did notable
execution upon them all the way, and had he not worried them so far, and
deserted the Infantry, or had not his German Soldiers fallen a plundring too
soon, matters might have gone better with the King.


Polyander. I heard it reported that this Battle was fought just the same day
twelve month that the Rebellion and Massacre began in Ireland.

It was so, being the 23. of October, a day fatal for blood; Now, though this
Battle of Edg-Hill may be said to be sudden, inexpected, and unpitched, yet
for position of ground 'twas fought in as indifferent and a fit place for a
battle as possibly could be lighted upon, for the Combatants had scope enough
to fight, and the Spectators, whereof there were multitudes upon the rising
adjacent grounds, might behold all as plainly as a Tragedy acted upon a Stage,
or Cock fighting in a Pit.

The Parliaments Army had the advantage of the Kings in point of Infantry who
were very good Firelocks, most of them having been trained up in London, and
so left their Wares to follow the Wars. They had also the advantage of the King
in point of Arms, for scarce three parts of four were Armed in his Army: But
for Cavalry, the Royalists had the greater advantage, for the flower of most of
the English Gentry was there, in so much that the Lifeguard of the Kings was
computed to above one hundred thousand pounds sterling of yearly Revenue.

About the evening of the day following, both parties retired from the field,
the Parliaments back toward Northampton, the Kings to their former road
toward Oxford, and in the way they took Banbury, where there was a strong
Garrison for the Parliament, which sure, as the Cavaliers gave out* the Earl of
Essex had preserved, had he been then Master of the field.

After this battle of Edgehill there happened diverse other traverses of war
'twixt King and Parliament for about four years, in which revolution of time,
there were more skirmiges and battails fought, then happened in those last
thirty years wars of Germany, or fourscore years wars 'twixt Spain and Holland.


Polyander. This shows that the English have still the same old innated valor,
that they had when they made the gray Goose wing fly through the heart of
France, which made Comines one of their greatest Authors to confe^s, that no
Nation is more greedy of battle, and more impatient of delays that way then
the English, but how was it possible for the King to subsist so long
considering the mighty advantages, the Parliament had of him?


Philanglus. There were mighty advantages indeed; For they had all the tenable
places, and Towns of strength, both by Land and Sea. They had all the Navy
Royal; They had the Tower of London with all the Ammunition and Arms of the
Crown; They had the Imposts and Customs, Poundage and Tonnage, they had the
Exchequer at their devotion, with the Revenues of King, Queen, and Prince; They
had the City of London, which may be called the great Magazin of men and money,
where there is a ready supply of all things that may feed, cloth, or make them
gay and gallant, to put them in heart and resolution.


Polyander. Then they had Sea, City and Scot on their side. But how came the
Scot to be so against the King, or to levy Arms without his Commission,
considering the late great Protestations and Oaths they had made not to do it,
by reviving the Act of Parliament to that effect* which they said they did in
recognition of those Royal recent favors, and unparalleld mighty Concessions
and Acts of grace, which he had done them by their own Confessions?


Philanglus. They were indeed mighty, or rather monstrous Acts of grace that he
had passed unto them, which did so trench upon the Royal Prerogative, and so
de^ude him of all power that it might have been said of him ever after, that
he was King of Scotland, no otherwise then he was King of France, titular only.


Polyander. How did the Scots express their thankfulness to their King and
Countryman afterward for such transcedant favors?


Philanglus. They proved the greatest Monsters of Ingratitude of any upon earth
specially the Kirk-men whom he had obliged in an extraordinary manner; For the
King being informed of the mean condition of Churchmen in that Kingdom, who by
their holy function have a care of the noblest part of man, and being told what
poor pittances or rather benevolences one^y they had* and for those also how
they depended upon the will and pleasure of the Laic By a special Commission to
that purpose, he found a way not only to augment but to ascertain those
Salaries of Church Ministers upon good firm rent; whereby they might be free
from that servile kind of Clientele and Dependency they had upon their secular
Patrons.


Polyander. Questionless this was a mighty general advantage to the Clergy of
Scotland, both in point of esteem and subsistence, but what returns did these
royal favors receive?


Philanglus. Those foolish Kirk men grew afterward his greatest enemies by
virulent seditious Preachments and Pasquils to corrupt and lessen the hearts of
the Subjects toward him nay, when he made himself a Prisoner to the Scots Army
at Newark and Newcastle those Kirk-men did so little resent his hard condition,
that they did Preach up and down against his coming to Scotland, etc. Moreover,

Whereas, The common sort of Freeholders who were bound to pay Tithes to the
Impropriation or Lords of the Erection, as they styled themselves, were used to
be much incommoded, and oftentimes damnified, because they could not take in
their Corn till the secular Lord had fetched away his Tithe, which he would
sometimes delay of purpose, to show his Passion or Power, whereby the whole
Crop for not taking the advantage of the weather, ofttimes did suffer: The King
for relief of the Country Husbandman, appointed certain Commissioners to take
this grievance into consideration, who after much pains taken in the business,
found out a legal and indifferent way to purchase those Tithes and bring the
Impropriator to take a pecuniary set valuable Rent, which was also an advantage
to Him, in regard of the certainty of it.


Polyander. It was doubtless an advantage to both parties, but how did they
carry themselves toward the King afterward?


Philanglus. Just as the Kirk-men did; But you shall hear more, when the King,
as I told you before, had in a full Parliament confirmed unto the Scot all the
privileges of Kirk and Kingdom, when he had made an oblation to them of all
the Bishops Lands, conferred many honors and offices, and done them many other
obliging Acts of Grace, and all this gratis, the English Parliaments using
always to answer their Kings favors in this kind, with a supply of Treasure,
I say in having done all this gratis, He before his departure desired them to
continue their allegiance, and live in peace, for they had not now the least
grievance to complain of, and if any difference should fall out betwixt him,
and his English Subjects which he hoped God would avert, He desired them not to
intermeddle, for whereas he might expect and demand aid of them if the case
required, yet he would not trouble the repose of that his Native Country: This
they all did not only promise to do, but they did solemnly oblige their Souls
thereunto by revival of the Act I told you of before, at the publishing whereof
one of their Grandees fell on his knees, and lifting up both his Arms, wished
they might rot to his body before death, if ever he would heave them up
hereafter, or draw sword against his gid King; yet for all this they intruded
themselves into the Kings affairs, convok'd a Parliament without his summons,
sent Commissioners to Oxford, and thrust themselves to be Vmpires: They made
besides, a strict League with the English Parliament, and at last rushed into
England again with an Army in the dead of Winter, which Army they had levied
not only without, but expressly against the Kings Commission and Countermands;
that wretch who had publicly vowed never to draw Sword again without his
Majesty's Commission, etc. coming General of the said Army: But for Martial
exploits the little credit that Army got by storming Newcastle was not
countervailable to that which they lost before Hereford, where the Welchmen
banged them to some purpose from before the Town, and made their General after
9 weeks siege to trusse up his pack and away, sending him a fat Sow with a
Litter of Piggs after her, and a blew Bonnet upon her head for his Breakfast. I
must inform you farther, that the King being reduced to much extremity in
Oxford, by cross successes and Councils, he got away in a Serving-mans
disguise to the Scots Army near Newark as his last refuge, which plot was
managed by the subtilety of the French Agent then residing here: A man would
have thought that Nation would have deemed it an eternal honor to have their
own King and Country man to throw himself thus into their Arms, and repose so
singular a confidence in them upon such an exigent; But they corresponded not
with him as he expacted; For though at first when the English Parliament
solicited their Dear Brethren for a delivery of the Kings Person unto them,
their note was then, that if any stranger Prince had put himself so upon them,
they could not with honor deliver him up, much less their own native King, yet
they made a sacrifice of him afterward for a sum of money; Whereupon
Bellieure the French Ambassador being convoyed by a troop of Scots horse to
such a stand, in lieu of larges to the said Troopers he drew out half a Crown
piece, and asked them how many pence that was, they answered thirty pence, he
replied, for so much did Judas betray his Master, and so hurld them the half
Crown.


Polyander. But afterward the Scots carried themselves bravely by sending a
gay Army under D. Hamilton to assist the King.


Polyander. Touching that Presbyterian Army, the bottom of its design is not
known to this day, and I was told, that when the King heard of it, and that
Himilton was in the head of it, he should say; Then I expect but little good to
be done for me.


Polyander. Certainly the routing of that Army, was a glorious exploit of the
Lord Protector that now is, his forces not amounting to the third part of the
Scots.


Philanglus. It was certainly a very heroik Achivement, as also was the battle
of Dunbar, where the Scots had greater advantages far of him: which two
exploits deserve to be engraven in large Letters of Gold in the Temple of
immortality, and transmitted to after ages; For hereby he did more then Roman
Emperors, or after them* the Saxon, Danish, Norman, and English Kings could
ever do, to conquer that craggy Country, and make England Scot-free ever
hereafter.

But before I have done with this unlucky Nation; I will give you a touch of
those visible Judgments which have fallen upon them so thick one upon the neck
of another in few years more then fell upon the Jews in forty; First there
happened the greatest plague in Edinburgh, that ever was in that Country, for
in less then a twelvemonth, the Town was peopled with new faces, the
Pestilence having swept away almost all the old: There have been above 2000
Witches arraigned and executed there within these few years: After the routing
of D. Hamilton, and the battle of Dunbar, with that at Worcest^r, many
thousands of that Nation have been bought and sold in quality of slaves to be
banished, and sent over to foreign Plantations, what numbers of them were
starved, and buried before they were dead; And what is now become of their
hundred and ten Kings, and their Crown? which I heard them brag, was more
weighty, as having more Gold in it then the English? and for their Government
they are reduced to be as pure a subordinate providence, and subject to the
will of the Conqueror as ever Country was.


Polyander. I must tell you also that they have lost much of their repute
abroad; but if I were worthy to be heard by the Lord Protector, I would make a
motion that his Highness would take in at least, all the Land 'twixt Barwick
and Edinburgh into the English Pale, and impose a new name upon it for an
Eternal mark of Conquest, and for enlargeing the Skirts of England.

But Sir, it is time for you now under favor to return to London, and know
what the Paraliment does.


Philanglus. There are all Artifices used to make the King odious, and both the
Press and the Pulpit join in the work; new distinctions are coined, that though
he was Gods ^nynted, yet he was man's appointed; That he had the Commanding but
not the Disposing power; That he was set to Rule, but not to over^rule us: That
he was King by humane choice, not by Divine Charter; That he was not King by
the Grace of God, but by the suffrage of the people; That he had no implicit
trust or peculiar property in any thing, that populus ^st potior Rege, that
Grex Lege, Lex Rege potentior; That the King is, singulis major, but universis
minor. Lastly, that he was but a Creature, and production of the Parliament^
etc.

Moreover all Artifices are used to raise money: The first way that the
Parliament used (after a Royal Subsidy of 400000 l.) was to poll us, then they
went on to clip and shave us, and had they continued longer, they had fallen a
fl^ying of us: They lighted on no less then twenty several ways to get money
above board, whatsoever they got below. Polemoney, and the Royal Subsidy were
the first two. 3. Free Loans and Contributions upon the public Faith, which
swelled to an incredible sum, 4. The Irish Adventures for sale of Lands. the
first and second time. 5. The general Collection for relief of the distressed
Protestants in Ireland, to which use the Hollanders sent over in money and Corn,
near upon 50000 l. and the E^glish Collections came to near four times so much,
so that in all, both Collections amounted to above 200000 l. sterling, and yet
not ten thousand pound, not the twentieth part was employed to the right use.
5. They grew so hungry for money, that they imposed the weekly meal. 6. The
City Loan after the rate of five Subsidies. 7. A particular Assessement for
bringing in our dear Brethren, the Scots. 8. The five and twentieth part. 9.
The weekly Assessment for the Lord Generals Army. 10. The weekly Assessement
for Sir Tho. Fairfax Army. 11. The weekly Assessement for the Scots Army. 12.
The weekly Assessement for the British Army in Ireland. 13. The weekly
Assessement for the Lord of Manchesters Army. 14. The Kings, Queens, and
Princes Revenues. 15. Sequestrations and plunder by Committee. 16. Compositions
with Delinquents, and fines, which came to sums passed all understanding 17.
That ^utch Devil the Excise. 18. Fortification money. 19. Bishops Deans and
Chapters Lands.

To this may be added the Ship Sancta Clara, valued in money and Merchandise at
800^0 l. sterling, which was detained at Southampton for reparation of those
damages that some English Merchants had received by the Spaniard, as it was
declared in the House, but not a farthing thereof was employed to that use,
notwithstanding that many with expense of time and coin did solicit for the
same; and lastly, the Household stuff of the King, Queen, Prince and others;
whereof some small proportion was allotted for payment of the Arrears of the
Kings poor Servants; but they were to advance two in the pound be fore-hand
before they could be admitted to any Divident, and it is incredible what juggling
there was used in that business, for some received nothing thereby but loss
upon loss: Nay they took away moneys given to repair Churches, and in some
places robbed the very Lazaretto.


Polyander. Sure, these vast sums must amount to a huge mass of money, money
enough to have pourchas'd half a dozen Kingdoms instead of purging one.
Touching that Du^ch Devil you speak of, the Excise, I remember Sir Dudley
Carleton when he was Secretary of State did but name it in one Parliament, and
it was such a Bugbear abominable word, that he was called to the Bar, and
hardly escaped going to the Tower, though he made use of it to no ill sense;
But was there no account given of these publik Erogations and taxes?


Philanglus. An account was often voted and promised, but never performed; for
then they should have discovered how much their own memberships had swallowed
for their private interest of the public Tresure, by free gifts among
themselves, and the perquisites of gainful offices.


Polyander. But we heard beyond Sea, that they had passed a solemn Ordinance
of (...) o^ self-abnegation, called the self-de^ying Ordinance, whereby they
made themselves incapable of Offices, and other things of gain.


Philanglus. It Is true there was such an Ordinance, and 'twas thought it passed
principally to remove Essex from the Generalship, whom they began to suspect,
but nothing was afterward less observed.


Polyander. I heard you speak of money's borrowed upon the public Faith, I
pray how were those reimboursed?


Philanglus. It was the first^time that public Faith did ever set up for
herself, and she quickly grew to be a Bankrupt; And never was there such double
dealing used by any public Assembly; For when the Lenders upon that public
Faith came to demand their mony's, They could not have them, unless they
doubled the first sum, together with the interest they had received, and then
they should have the valu in Church or Crown Lands, but if they doubled not
both interest and principal, they should not be capable to have any Lands
allowed for their mony's; Diverse to my knowledge have ruined themselves hereby,
and though they clamor'd, and spoak high language at the Parliaments door, and
were promised satisfaction, yet they could not get penny to this day.


Poliander. I heard this cried up abroad to be the arrand'st Cheat that ever
was done by a great Counsel, and one of the foulest blemishes that England cold
receave, by making her forefeit her faith in that manner.


Fides publica,
Fides Punica.
I heard likewise of diverse Interlopers, that for half a crown in the pound
were used to buy the public Faith Bills, as others drive on a trade to buy
the Soldiers Debenters.

But whereas we have spoke a little of that Dutch Devil the Excise, we heard
abroad of a Scotch Devil also, though of an other nature, that was risen up
amongst you, which was the Covenant; I pray how was he conjured up?

Philanglus. That Covenant was conjured up by the Presbyterian party, and, may
be called a worse Devil than the Excise for the one tyrannized over the Purss,
the other ore the Conscience; But what an unmanly and dishonorable thing was it
for the English Nation to bind their souls for conserving the Religion of
another foren people inferior to them* for conserving the Doctrine, Discipline,
and Government of that Church which not one En^lish m^n in a thousand did
understand, and yet every one must take the holy Covenant by a blind implicit
Faith? But now that we have fallen upon the Covenant which may be said to be an
Engine ^org'd in Hell for battry of the Conscience, I will tell you of an odd
passage that happend about that time; There was one Ma^ter Heron a Printer, who
being sent for by the Lady Tilbury, she told him that now that there is a
National Covenant come forth, which every one must taste, she had a Sermon in
a fair manuscript of that great light of the Church Master Brightman which
treats of univers^l Coven^n^s, how far they are agreeable to Scripture, and
consonant to the Word of God, and it had bin preached before the House of
Commons thirty years before, therefore it would be now very seasonable to print
and publish it; The Printer giving her Ladyship many thanks, received the
Sermon, (which she avouched upon her honor to be a true Copy) and undertook
the business, so he went to him who was appointed by the Synod to license for
the Press pieces of that nature, to get an Imprematur, but the Syododcall man
having kept the Sermon above three days by him, the Printer went for his
Sermon and found it formally licensed for the Press, but most pitifully
falsified, interlin^d and adulterated in many places; For whereas the opinion
of Brightman throughout the whole Sermon, was, That a N^tionall and General
Covenant was agreeable to the Word of God, Provided, the King did give his
Royal assent thereunto, without which it was both detestabl^ and d^mnable; The
holy Synodicall man had expunged the word King every where, and foisted in the
room of it, sometimes the word Parliament, sometimes the Trustees of the Common
wealth; The Printer having perused the interlinations told him, that were he to
get 1000 l. by printing that Sermon, he would not be so arrand a Knave as to
wrong the Dead so much, by making him speak what he never meant, nay things
qu^te contrary to his meaning; I saw the said Sermon, and the manner how it was
so basely sophisticated.


Polyander. There was another Oath consisting all of Negatives, called the Oath
of Abjuration, which I also heard of, that came out about the same time, which
extended to take away the liberty of the very thought, it did not only re^^h
the outward man, but it ransacked all the Cells of his brain, with the intern
Ideas and cogitations of his mind.


Philanglus. Truly, under favor, and correction, I humbly speak it, there is a
kind of inhumanity, and (...) in that Oath; for all Laws are made, and all
Magistrates are instituted to restrain the outward man, and regulat his
Actions, as they refer to the public; for it matters not what private crochets
we have in our single selfs, so we be in comfort and tune with our Companions;
The Law considers us as we have reference one to another, and to the body
politic, therefore it neither uses to limit our private spendings, nor ties us
to any course of diet or P^ysick, because our single fortunes, and health,
though they mightily concern our selves, yet they are but of little importance
to the public; And as every one enjoyes this liberty in relation to his body,
and goods, so our souls ought to be allowed a proportionable share of that
freedom, so that it give no scandal to the public.

Our thoughts, as long as we keep them within doors, cannot any way offend
therefore the Law has provided no punishment for them; The intention of
Murder is taken no notice of by the Law, if the design of mischief stay at the
imagination, and proceeds no further to any outward attempt, The Law referrs
that to the great Tribunal of God who is the only Kardiognostic, the sole
searcher of the heart; If a Law were justifiable against erroneous Thoughts in
points of Religion, with an Oath of Abjuration to make the suspected accuse
himself, why (as a Gentleman does rationally infer) should there not an Oath
be also provided against thoughts of Treson, Adul^ery and Murder? and so bring
every one to swear whether he be guilty or no of such crimes. Now, touching
this Presbyterian Oath of Abjuration, it is not contented with a modest, and
simple denial, that one believes there are no such and such things, but he
must swear positively and point blank there are no such things at all; Now,
though I am not of the same opinion with Copernicus that the Earth moves, and
the Sun stands still, yet I w^ld be loath to swear either the one or the other.


Polyander. I observe that this Oath has a double edg, for either it must
wron^ o^e's Conscience, or ruin his fortunes; besides he is condemned without
either Accuser or Witness, the party himself must be both against himself, and
what can be more repugnant to nature?


Philanglus. It is not only opposite to the Law of Nature, but the Common Law of
England does so abhor that any should accuse and condemn himself, that there
were extraordinary provisions made against it by our Progenitors, Therefore if
any had bin cited in the Spiritual Court to accuse himself pro salute animae,
a Prohibition lay at the Common Law to stop and supersede their proceedings:
All which is humbly left to the consideration of the present Government.


Polyander. I infer out of this, that if the Presbyterian had established
himself he had proved the ugliest tyrant that ever was on Gods Earth, if you
relate to Soul, Body, or goods, in lieu of 26 Bishops, we should have had nine
thousand and odd Pop^s, who would have delivered us over t^ Satan ever and
anon, and puzzeled us with their Parochial, Congregational, and National
Classes. But I cannot wonder enough that the House of Commons should so busy
themselves so much, and undertake to frame, and impose new Oaths, when by the
Law of the Land they had^ or ^ower as much as to administer an old Oath to the
meanest Subject; And touching that C^vena^t, what could be more opposite unto
their former Oath? for therein they offered their Souls to preserve that
Religion which was established by the Laws of ^ngland, and in the Covenant they
bind themselves, to conserve that which was established by the Laws of
Scotland, and to that purpose they may be said to offer to God for their
security to Sa^an; Moreover, those Demogogs or popular Dagons, though they were
so forward to constrain all other of their fellow Subjects to take and swallow
up any Oaths, yet two parts of three among themselves did not take them, as I
have been often told.

But Sir, now that you have been pleased to inform me of their carriage in
Spiritual things, how did they comport themselves in Civil matters, after
they had monopolized unto themselves all power by the Act of Continuance?


Phil^nglus. First I must tell you, that touching that monstrous Act, the
soundest Lawyers of the Kingdom were of opinion, that it was of no validity,
that it was void in it self, in regard that what grants or concessions soever
the King makes, the Law presupposes, they are always made with these
Proviso's, Sa^vo j^re Regio, salvo jure Coronae; now it was impossible that any
grant could possibly trench more upon the Right of the King or Crown, as that
extravagant Act of Continuance, therefore it was n^l in its own nature at the
first; nay, as some affirmed, the very Proposal of it was Treson in a high
degree.

But having hooked the power thus into their hands, they strained it up to the
highest pitch that could be; They made themselves Landlords of all the three
Kingdoms, it was a common thing to take any man, house over his head, and make
use of it for their service; They meddled with every thing, so far, that scarce
a Churchwarden or Vestry-man could be made without them, they would have a
hand in making common Counsel men, and Constables, with other petty Officers.


Polyander. Me thinks that was somewhat derogatory to the supremacy of their
power, for great Counsels should not descend to every petty object, but with
their high authority they should enlarge their souls to consider of Universals.


Philanglus. I could produce many Instances how they undervalued themselves
this way, but let this one suffice. It happened one day that a company of
ramping wenches, who went under the name of Mayds, or Holy Sisters, came with a
Remonstrance to show their affections to the House, and they were headed by
Mrs. Ann Stagg* who was to deliver the Remonstrance; hereupon a choice member
was voted to go to Mrs. Ann Staggs lodging, to thank her and the r^st of the
maidens for their good affections to the Parliament, etc.

But to be more serious with you, touching civil matters, whereof you gave a
touch before, there was nothing so Common in those times as a ch^rg^ without an
Accuser, a sentence without a Ju^ge* and cond^mnation without hearing: How many
were outed of their freeholds, liberty and livelihoods before any examination,
much le^se conviction? how many appeals were made from solemn tribunalls of
Justice to inferior Committes? how common a thing was it to make an order of
theirs to control and suspend the very fundamental Laws of the Land?


Polyander. But this was in the brunt of the War, which the King did
necessitate them unto, as he acknowledged in the Treaty at the Isle of Wight.


Philanglus. It Is true he did so, but he did it upon two weighty
considerations, and as it had reference to two e^ds, first to smoothen things
thereby, and pave the way to a happy peace: Secondly, that it might conduce to
the further security of the two Houses of Parliament with their Adherents:
Besides he did it when the Razor was as it were at his throat, when there was
an Army of above 30000 effect if Horse and foot, that were in ^otion against
him; Then, this Acknowledgment was made, with these two proviso's and
reservations; First* that it should be of no virtue and validity at all till the
whole Treaty were totally consummated; Secondly, that he might when he pleased
enlarge, and clear the truth hereof with the reservedness of his meaning by
public Declaration; Moreover, That Grant or Acknowledgment was but a
preambular proposition it was not of the Essence of the Treaty it self; Now, as
the Philosophers and Schoolmen tell us, there is no valid proof can be drawn
out of Proems, Introductions, or Corollaries in any Science, but out of the
positive Assertions, and body of the Text, which is only argument-proof, so in
the Constitutions and Laws of England, as also in all civil accusations and
charges, fore-running Prefaces (which commonly weak causes most want) are not
pleadable. And though they use to be first in place, like Gentlemen Ushers, yet
are they last in dignity, and should also be so in framings; Therefore there was
too much have used by the Parliament to draw that Hyp^thetic Provisional
concession to the form of an Act, so suddenly before the Treaty it self was
fully concluded.


Polyander. But who was the first Aggressor of that ugly War, the King or the
Parliament?


Philanglus. I will not presume to determine that, only I will inform you, that
the Parliament took the first Military guard; they first interdicted trade: They
countenanced all tumultuous Riots, gave way to Club-law, and They kept the King
by force out of Hull, issued Commissions for Horse, brought in foren force, and
had a complete Army in motion, a good while before the Royal Standard was set
up.


Polyander. I remember a witty Motto that the last French Cardinal caused to be
engraven upon the brich of some new Canons which were cast in the Arsenall at
Paris, it was -- KATIO ULTIMA REGUM.
Viz. That the Canon was the last reason of Kings.


But whether this Motto may fit Subjects, I will not now dispute.

But sure the King was ill advised so to rush into a War, considering what
infinite advantages the Houses had of him, for as you said before, they had
the Sea, the Scot, and the City on their side; and the King had no Confederate
at all at home or abroad; I am sure he had no friend abroad that one might say
was a true friend unto him, unless it was the Prince of Ora^^e* in regard he
had disobliged all other Princes: For you know, as soon as he came to the
Crown, he rushed into a War with the King of Spain, and in lieu of making him
his Brother in ^aw ^e made him his foe, which stuck still in his stomach; as
also th^^ he had given so fair a reception to the Ambassadors of Don Juan de
Braganza now King of Portug^ll. A little after he broke with the Fr^nch King,
Notwithstanding that he had his Sister every night in his Arms; The Holland^rs
gave out that he had appeard more for the S^aniard than Them, in that great
fight with Do^ Anton^o d'Oqu^nd^; and that he suffered his own ships and others
to convey the King of Spains money to Dunkerke. He was engaged to his Onc^e the
K. of De^mark in great old s^m^, whereof there was little care taken to give
satisfaction; the Iri^h cried out, They had bin oppressed; The Swed observed
that he was more for the House of Austria, than for Gustavus Adolphus; And at
home I have been told that the Irish cried out he had bin oppressed; And the
Scot whom he had obliged most of any by such Mountains of favors, with diverse
of his own Creatures, and domestic bosom servants whom he had engaged most,
started aside from him like a broken bow, so that all things did co-operat and
conspired as it were to make him a hard-Fated Prince, and to usher in a
Revolution.


Philanglus. Yet I heard that all Princes were very sensible of his fall.


Polyander. It Is true, they did must resent it at first, yet they were affected
rather with ^stonishment then sorrow; And touching the Roman Catholic Princes
they did afterward rejoice at it, considering what a blemish the manner of his
death brought upon the Reformed Religion; but Sir I pray be pleased to proceed.


Philanglus. The Sophies, or Gran signo'rs of the Commonwealth, whereof we
spoke before, scrued up their authority every day higher and higher, They
declare, that an Ornance of Parliament without the Royal assent is equivalent
to an Act; They declare; that not only the consultative, ministerial, and
directive power is in them, but also the Judicatory, Despotical, and
Legislative highest power is inherent in the Walls of their two Houses; That
their power is also Arbitrary, Vbiquitary and incontrolable; That they are not
subject to Dissolution or Time, being the eternal and irrevocable Trustees of
the Commonwealth, with such Rodomontado's* which made one to think that a
Mid-summer Moon had got betwixt them, and therefore thought this Anagram a very
fit one to be set upon the door of the House, with the distic annexed,
Parliamentum,
Lar Amentium.
Front rogas isto P. cur Anagrammate non sit,

In promptu causa est, Principem abesse scias.


Polyander. They who have pryed into the true humor of a Portuguez, have
observed, that He uses to act more according to what he thinks himself to be,
then what he really is, It seems that these Parliamenteers were possessed and
puffed up with the same humor; But if the supreme power were in an Assembly,
when that Assembly is risen, I wonder what is become of the power, sure it must
rest in the air, or sticking to the Walls of the Chamber where they breathed.
Now Sir, touching long Parliaments, I am of opinion, it is the greatest and
generallest grievance that can be possibly to the English people, by reason
that besides other irregularities, it stops the ordinary course of Law, in
regard of the privilege they have, not to be subject to arrest with others to
whom they give protection, now not one in four of that long Parliament men, but
owed money, and what use Sir Peter T* and others made of that privilege, to
the detriment of a thousand poor Creditors, is too well known: And were such
men, think you, fit to keep the Kingdoms Purse in their Pockets so long? but
having got the Great Seal, as well as the Sword into their hands, what signal
Acts of Justice did they do?


Philanglus. It Is true they had got the Seal and Sword, which the Law of
England does appropriate to the chiefest Magistrate, the one should be girt
only to his side, and the other hang at his Girdle; And it was told them to
their faces by the knowingest Members in the House, that to cut a broad Seal
of England was the highest reason that possibly could be attempted, without the
assent of the Governor in chief. Now Sir touching any signal Act of Justice
they ever did, I am to seek to this day; but for horrid acts and passages of in
justice, I think there could be produced a thousand clear, and yet crying
examples (which would make a greater volume then the Book of Martyrs.) I mean
Acts that were done before the wars begun, and after it was ended, which takes
away the specious color of necessity wherewith they varnished all their
excesses and actions.

I will instance only in two (for this was intended for a short discourse, not
for a story) viz. The business of the Lord Craven, and Sir John Stawel: the
first a personage who is a great ornament to this Nation by his gallant
comportments beyond the Seas, the other one of the considerablest Knights in
the whole Country.

Touching the Lord Craven, he went with consent of Parliament to his charge in
the Low Countries, not only before the War, but before any coffeehouse
happened at all 'twixt King and Parliament, and being atten^ing his said
military charge at Breda when the King of Scots came thither, and the Queen of
Bohemia being also there, he could not avoid seeing them sometimes; nor was
there any Order or Act of Parliament to prohibit any body from doing so; but
for intermedling with any affairs of State, or mixing with the Scots Council,
he never did it; At that time there happened to be in Breda, many cashiered
English Officers, and among them one Faulkner, who having a Petition drawn, and
written all with his own hand, the pourport whereof only was, that the King
would releeve their necessities; they desired the intercession of my Lord
Craven herein* but he with a civil Complement declined the business, for he was
not fit to do them service, because, as he said, he was neither Courtier nor
Servant to the King. Hereupon Faulkner being offended, both with King and
Craven, in a passion said (as 'twas proved) This it is to follwo a thing called
King, dam me, I Will to England and do all the mischief I can; Being come to
London he forged another Petition, wherein there were scandalous words against
the Parliament, viz. That they were barbarous inhumane villains. Then going
with a Confident of the Parliaments who fed him with Money to go on in his
design, He made an Affidavit upon Oath, that the forementioned Officers at
Breda showed this very Petition to the Lord Craven, who read it, and delivered
it to the King, (both which was damnably false) As soon as this Deposition was
reported to the House, they presently voted a Confiscation of all the Lord
Cravens Estate; He being then near upon a thousand miles off in Germany, and no
soul appearing for him, nor could any on his behalf procure a Copy of
Faulkners deposition: Craven having notice hereof, he sent a most humble
Petition to the Parliament, declaring his innocence, which Petition was sent in
the Dutch Ambassadors Packet, who delivered it accordingly; but it was denied
to be read in the House, because there was none present, who could testify
they did see the Lord Craven subscribe it; He sent afterward another Petition,
but it was seven Months before it could be read in the House; In the mean time
his estate had been sequestered, his woods cut down, and other spoils done; His
Agents here to invalidate the Affidavit of Faulkner indicted him of Perjury,
which was clearly proved in open Court, and the original Petition was produced,
which was written by Faulkner himself, wherein there was not one syllable that
spoke of the Parliament; There was legal proof also made that Craven had
nothing to do with that Petition; This Indictment of perjury being found
against Faulkner by the grand Jury, the Parliament was informed therewith, yet
neretheless a Bill passed for sale of the Lord Cravens Estate, and Surveyors
sent accordingly to the Country; Faulkner being thus convicted of Perjury, it
was proved also in Court what a nefarious Atheistical, and most wicked fellow
he was both in his words and actions, how he had nothing more common in his
mouth, then dam me, blood and wounds, and buggering of his Soul to Hell: It was
proved that at Petersfield he drank a health to the Devil, and that he should
say our Savior was a Bastard, and but a Carpenters son, carrying a basket of
tools after his Father; The Parliament was acquainted with all this, and diverse
earnest and sedulous applications that possibly could be made, were used, but
nothing would prevail.

The Lord Craven finding the House so inexorable and obdurate, rather then so
fair an Estate should be canconiz'd and squandred into so many hands, he
proposed by way of humble Petition, that the House would punish him by way of
pecuniary mulct, and there were two able Knights attending the Door ready to
undertake the payment thereof, which motion the Lord General, now Lord
Protect^r, did most nobly advance: yet all would not do, but the Surveys of the
Estate being returned, the Bill of Sale was completed, and some of the Members
of the House stepped in with the first to buy the flour of his Lands, to the
value of 6000 l. per annum, as appears by the contracts made at Drury House in
their own names: That goodly house at Causam near Redding being in excellent
repair, was bought by some, who for greedy lucre and gain utterly defaced it,
they pulled down the Wainscot, Stair-cases, Lead, Iron, and all other materials
about the House, which had cost above 20000 l. yet they gave the Commonwealth,
but little above 1500 l in moneys for it, the price of Debentets therein also
included.


Polyander. Truly Sir, it was one of the hardest pieces of injustice I ever
heard of, that such a Princely Estate (for I heard by diverse, that had the Lord
Craven enjoyed it to this day, it would have amounted to above 20000 l. per
annum) a Revenue that I know some Sovereign Princes come short of; I say it was
a sad thing, that by the single testimony of one man, and he such a perjured
notorious villain as it was apparently proved, such an Estate should be
destroyed.


Philanglus. A sad thing indeed, but besides those pregnant proofs which were
produced and made good in open Court, that abominable wretch, being lately
upon his death bed in the Kings Bench, confessed all under his hand and what
monstrous wrong he had done the Lord Craven.

But I will proceed now to the other Instance I promised you.

The unlucky War 'twixt King and Parliament being begun about the Commission of
Array, the City of Exceter was beleaguered by Sir T. Fairfax, which at last
rendered her self upon Article; it chanced Sir Jo. S^awel was then in the Town;
A full agreement being made, the Capitulations signed and sealed, and the place
yielded, Sir John came to London in due time to reap the benefit of the
Articles which were solemnly confirmed and ratified by both Houses of
Parliament: Now, two of those Articles were that no Oath, Covenant,
Protestation or Subscription should be imposed upon any person comprised within
those Articles, but only such as should bind them from bearing Arms for the
future against the Parliament.

2. That all persons comprised in those Articles, having made such a
subscription* should be admitted to a moderate Composition, which was not to
exceed two years value of any man's real estate, etc.

Sir John Stawel having subscribed accordingly, and brought a Copy of his
Subscription, as also a fair Certificate from Sir Tho. Fairfax that he was
comprised in Exon Articles, made his address to. Goldsmiths Hall, and
producing the said Certificate and Subscription, He Petitioned that he might
be admitted to compound according to Article; The Commissioners answered, that
he was not capable of Composition unless he would take the Covenant, and
Negative Oath, whereunto he modestly repl^'d, that there was no Article for
that, but rather e contrario; whereupon he was not only barred of his
Composition, but he was sent Prisoner to Ely house; Afterward by the sole
order of the House of Commons, he was committed to Newgate for high Treason, in
levying War against the Parliament, where he continued almost four years, in
which time, he was several times i^dited of Treason, and twice arraigned at the
K. Bench Bar for his life; Then was he removed from Newgate to the Tower and
kept close Prisoner, whence he was several times convented before the High
Court of Justice, which had been newly erected who after many days trial would
neither sentence him, nor acquit him, but only certified their proceedings to
the Parliament.

Now Sir, you must know, that presently upon the taking of Exceter, his whole
estate was sequestered, and continuing so above 7 years, he being not allowed a
penny to put bread in his mouth, he visibly lost above 30000 l. which he humbly
prayed might satisfy for his Composition, which would not have amounted to the
sixth part so much according to Article; He was not only denied that, but a
nigrum Theta a black Bill was voted for selling away his whole Estate: A little
after, an Act being passed, and Commissioners appointed for the relief of
Prisoners upon Articles in time of War, Sir John made his addresses unto them,
and after above ten months debate of the business, the whole Court (consisting
of eight Commissioners) delivered their opinions clearly, that Sir John Stawel
was within the Articles of Exon, that he had not broken any of those Articles
ever since, but exactly observed and performed them, that consequently He was
not only to have his person unmolested, and his whole Estate restored him, but
to have satisfaction for the great losses he had received while his Estate lay
under Sequestration, etc.

This clear and positive Judgment being pronounced solemnly by the Court of
Articles, and the Demurres which the Trustees appointed to sell forfeited
Estates, and the Pourchasers of Sir John Staw^ls Lands had made, being ov^r
ruled, yet the Parliament resumed the business, reversed, the sentence of that
Court they themselves had Authorized, and Voted that the Pourchasers should
quietly enjoy and occupy according to their several Contracts, what they had
bought of Sir John Stawels Estate.


P^lyander. Good Lord, what a world of hardships did that noble Knight undergo,
as to be so tossed from Prison to Prison, from Bar to Bar* yet to be found
guilty no where, but to be pronounced R^ctus i^curia, nevertheless, to have a
sentence of Civil death pronounced against him, viz the loss of so fair and
noble an Estate as any in the west of England, by the mischievous practice of a
Member of the House, who, as I heard professed most friendship unto him! But
was there no more care to observe Articles of War which is held a sacred thing
among Pagans and Infidels? The T^rk and Tartar, in this point will keep faith
with the Sword as well as with the Cimiter, with the Hat as well as with the
Turban or Shash.


Philanglus. Herein a difference may be said to have been 'twixt Generals, for
the Presbyterian Generals did not much care how their Articles were broke or
kept; but his Highness who is now Lord Protector, was very careful for the
observation of what Articles he made, and clash'd about it more then once with
the Parliament.


Polyander. Truly Sir, you have related many horrid things, which might make
the Word Parliament merit the same fate that befell Tyrant, Sophister, and
others, which were good in their first institution, but afterward came to be
odious and reproachful, and will continue so to the worlds end. But it is much
that the Parliament which should be the great Physician of the Common wealth
should become such a Mountebank, that in lieu of making up the ruptures 'twixt
King and people, and closing the leaks in the great Vessel of the State* they
should cause more, that like Banbury Tinkers in lieu of stopping one hole they
should make two.

There is a saying, that Infaeliciter agrotat c^^ plus-mali venit a medico,
quam a morbo; That Patient is in a sad case, who receives more hurt from the
Physician then from the Disease; more mischief from the remedy then from the
malady; it is better for one to endure a little headache, then to have his pate
broken.


Philanglus. There breaths not a soul Inter quatuor maria, betwixt Englands
four Seas, who has a more venerable opinion of Parliaments then I, having had
the honor to have been a good while a small part thereof; They were used to be
the bulwark of our liberties, the main banks and boundaries which kept us from
slavery, from the inundation of Arbitrary Rule, and unbounded Will-Government;
This high superintendent Court at its first Constitution was used to be
compared to the Macrocosm the Great World it self; The Sovereign Magistrate was
compared to the Sun, the Nobles to the fixed Stars, the Judges and other
Officers who went with Messages 'twixt both Houses, to the Planets, the Clergy
to the Element of Fire, the Commons to the solid Mass of Earth; And as the
Heavenly bodies when three of them meet in Conjunction, use to produce some
admirable effects in the Great world, so when the three States did use to
convene and assemble in one solemn Junta, some notable and extraordinary things
were used to be brought forth tending to the welfare of the whole Kingdom.

Now, there were three essential properties that belonged to Parliament, viz.
fairness of Election, fullness of Members, and freedom of Speech: It Is too well
known how little of all three were found in the late long Parliament, specially
the last, to wit, liberty of speech. For none was permitted to speak, unless he
spoke still to the sense of the House, to the sense of the House, which was a
pure restraint; what a deal of time was spent in bandying of answers in
Remonstrances, in Replies, Rejoynders, and descanting upon words? so that the
first 16. months were spent merely in chopping Logic with the King, and
nothing at all done; For fullness of Members, they were purged at last very low,
so that there was scarce the tenth part of what they should have been in
number. The King offered to give them a little purge of five or six Drams, but
it was furiously cast away, because there was too much Basilicon in it. Then
there was a purge of eleven drams given them, wherein there was some unguentum
Armarium that cures a far off, which made some of them to fly to other side of
the Sea, where one Member, as soon as he put foot on shore, fell sick of the
Plague, and so was buried no better then in the Town ditch, because he had
first infected the place; At last they had a good sound purge, as big as a
drench administered them, which purged away above a hundred Members at once; yet
all this would not do, for some Members were grown so corrupt and putrid, that
nothing could cure the House but an utter Dissolution, according to the old
saying, -- Immedicabile vulnus Ense recidendum --

Which great Dissolution was made without one tear, or drop of blood, as the
Portugal Ambassador sent word to Lisbon;, for England had been long weary of
her Physicians, who had they continued longer, might have made Her say as
Alexander the Great did on his death bed, Perii Turba Medicorum, I die of too
many Physicians.


Polyander. Touching fulness of Members I heard it censured by some Critics
beyond the Seas, for a Solaecism in the English Government, that they are so
many, but specially that the Burgesses should exceed the Knights; you know Trop
gran n^mbre est incombre, Too great a number Ushers in nothing but Confusion
encombrances, and noise, which oftentimes was so extremely loud and
obstreperous among them, that as I was told they were heard at Lambeth, there
could not be a greater among the O^ster women at Billings-Gate. Now Sir, there
may be Tyranny in One, in a Few, and in many; In one, as in the Great Turk (and
indeed all the Eastern Emperors) who with his breath alone, without any legal
process, can take any ones life away, and is sole Propriator of the whole
Country, insomuch that the best man in Turkey cannot leave one foot of land as
an inheritance to his Son, but it reverts to the Grand Signior.

Secondly, There may be Tyranny in few, as in the thirty men of Athens, or in
some Privy Council of State.

Lastly, there may be Tyranny in many, as in some general great Convention or
popular Assembly, and this is the worst of all, it being a rule, that Plebs est
pessimus Tyrannus.


Philanglus. The late long Parliament degenerated to such a one, whereof
thousands of instances might be produced; Let this one serve at present; The
Army had occasion to make their address to the House, upon a business of a just
and general concernment; But the Grandees of the House answered, That if they
should read those demands, they might chance to find them of that nature, as
they could not with justice deny them, nor with honor grant them, etc. But
herein they showed themselves but poor Politicians; for you know it is a true
Rule. Ar^^a renenti, Omnia dat qui usta negat. And was it not time then for the
Army to think of dismissing their Memberships? But the truth is, that if you go
to the right rule of Parliament, they had dissolved themselves I cannot tell
how often before; for besides that the Original Writ from whence they derived
their power was void by the Kings death, how often did they rise up in
confusion, without adjourning the House? How often did they sit without a
Speaker, he being fled to the Army? How many hundred ways did they break their
own Privileges? What things did they do which they voted should not serve for
Presidents hereafter? As Strafford's death, and sitting on Sunday, etc. How
many Bills were resumed, being twice* ejected out of the House of Peers? as
those against Bishops, and touching the Militia, etc. yet were they taken into
debate again the same Session, which is point blank against the very
fundadamentals of Parliament: How many thousand Petitions (some whereof were
recommended by the Lords) lay mouldring in corners, and were never so much as
read in the House? And was it not high time think you to quell this Monster? or
rather, to pull down this Idol? Truly this great prudential act of shutting up
that House, and the barring up of that cold Postern door in the North, may well
take place among those many mighty things his Highness has done.


Polyander. They are mighty things indeed, and they are mavelous in our eyes;
Nor do these Isles only, but every corner of the habitable Earth ring thereof:
nay the Sea swells high with the breath of them. England may be said to be
heretofore like an animal that knew not her own strength; she is now better
acquainted with her self; for in point of Power and Treasure, she did never
appear so high both at home and abroad, as you said before: This makes France
to cringe unto her so much; This makes Spain to offer her peace with Indian
Patacons upon any terms: This makes the Hollander to dash his Colors, and vail
his Bonnet so low unto her; This makes the Italian Princes, and all other
States that have any thing to do with the Sea, to court her so much; Though the
Emperor and the Mediterranean Princes of Germany, whom she cannot reach from
her Gun-rooms care not much for her.

Now Sir among those many Heroic and difficult exploits of diverse kinds which
his Highness has performed there is one Act (humbly under favor) may well
become the greatness of his spirit; It is, to reach a timely hand for
preserving the stutely Temple of Paul's from tumbling down, and from being
buried in her own rubbish; a Temple which has above a thousand years tugged
with the fury of the Elements, and the iron teeth of Time; the goodliest pile
of stones in the world, take all dimensions together.

It Is also the greatest and most visible ornament of this Renowned City, who
would look bald, and as it were crest-fall'n without her; a Temple that has
this singularity above all others, as to be founded upon Faith, having a
spacious Church of that Name underneath to serve and support her. I remember it
was observed how in that disastrous expedition to the Isle of The, the great
stones which were designed to repair Paul's, were carried away to make Ballast
for Ships* and for other warlike uses in that service, which made some
judicious Critiques of those times ^o foretell the unlucky and inglorious return
we made thence. Some giddy heady Puritan in reading this, will presently shoot
his bolt, and cry out, that I have a Pope in my belly, but you know my
Intellectuals better.


Philanglus. I know well Sir, your principles are otherwise; but I concur with
you in opinion, that it would be a very glorious thing to atchieve such a work,
and one months Tax or two would do it; or if his Highness would give way* that
a general contribution might be made to that purpose; Other vast sums are
daily spent, but little or nothing appears of them afterward in point of
effect; Those moneys that would be employed in this, will leave something behind
them, viz. a glorious visible monument to all posterity, which will make after
ages to bless these times.


Polyander. Such a Monument would suit well with the grandeur of his Highness,
whom all Nations cry up for the Hero of the times, and a special instrument
designed for great actions, He would gain the applause of millions of souls
hereby, both at home and abroad where I have heard diverse, who are far from
thinking any inherent holiness to odge in stones or inanimate things, I say, I
have heard diverse of the Reformed Churches sadly complain, that Paul's in the
case it is, is the ruthfull'st spectacle upon earth; But now Sir, I take leave
to give you serious thanks for the elaborate Relation you have been pleased to
make me of the proceedings of that long Parliament, which in lieu of redressing
grievances, became it self at last the greatest grievance. As also of the
practice and modesty of Parliaments in former times, who declined high affairs
of State, specially foreign, much more to arrogate to themselves the Supreme
Power; for Sovereignty may be said to be an indivisible way, derived and d^r^ed
from the Divine Majesty it self, it cannot be divided among a multitude; we
never read that the people were called gods, or the lord's anointed, or nursing
f^thers, nor do ^e read of any Aristocracies or Democraci^s at all in the holy
Scriptures. Therefore I ascribe to his judgment* who holds, That the firmest
and most c^mp^ndious way of Government is, when the supremacy resides in one
person, whom the people ought to trust by an indispensable necessity for their
own advantage, in steering the great Vessel of the Commonwealth, with the
advice of a select Council: And herein a State may be compared to a Gally,
wherein some are to observe the Compass, others to furl the S^yls, others to
handle the Ropes, others to rug at the Oar, others to be ready ^n Arms, but
there is but one Pilot to sit at the Helm. It is requisite also that this
single Person should be attended with a visible standing veteran Army, to be
paid well, and punished well if there be cause, to awe as well as to secure
the people, It being the greatest soloecism that can be in Government, to
depend merely upon the affections of the people, for there is not such a
wavering windy thing, not such an humoursome and cross-grained animal in the
world as the common people; And what Authors soever, either Greek or Latin,
have pretended to policy, affirm so much. There be diverse modern Writers that
busy their brains to prescribe rules of Government, but they involve the
Reader in Vniversals, or rather bring him to a labyrinth of distinctions,
whereby they make the Art of Mast^ring man to be more difficult, and distracted
then it is in it self.


Philanglus. SIR, Touching the account you speak of, that I have endeavored to
render of the traverses that happened for matter of fact* during the Reign of
the long Parliament, I have given you but cursory short touches; There would be
subject enough for so many Tomes as would make a Library, if one should relate
all; But for inferences and conclusions in point of Judgment which may be
drawn out of what has been said already, I leave that to be done in the close
of every ones private Conscience.


GLoria Honorque Deo saeCLorVM In saeCVLa sVnto. A Chronogram of the present
Year, and that will last till 1920.
An Advertisement.
LEt the discerning Reader be pleased to know, that whereas in the foregoing
Con^er^nce: there are some free touches at diverse things happened in the late
long Parliam^nt. What is ^poken that way, is spoken with this restrictive Rule
of the Logician: Non de singulis generum, sed d^ generibus singulorum: It is
well known, there sat there as prudential and well tempered men, as England
affords, whose chiefest aim was the common good. The former Discourse is far
from meaning such Noble Patriots, but only Those, who having tasted the
sweetness of Authority, thought to immortalize that Session, and make
themselves perpetual Dictators.

FINIS.

