A Seasonable Address To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT, Concerning the Succession,
The fears of Popery, and Arbitrary Government.
By a true Protestant and a hearty Lover of his Country.
IT was the Egyptians practice, before Physic was reduced into Art or
Profession, to carry forth into the Roads and Highways, the Diseased, and
enquire of all passengers concerning the Causes and Remedies of their
distempers; out of whose prescriptions, their Friends selected, and applied
what they judged most proper.

What was then done for the Natural, is now as necessary for the Body politic
of this Country, sick almost unto death, of Fears and Jealousies; the plots and
devices of the wicked and ambitious; exposed to all Travelers, among whom good
Nature and Self-preservation have at length, after two years silent compassion,
prevailed upon me to give my opinion of the Causes and Cures of our Evils;
which I will offer without fear or favor of Party or Faction, of Court or
City; enquiring how far our apprehensions of Popery and Arbitrary Government,
that have so long discomposed us at home, and made us contemptible abroad, are
just and reasonable.

Though I confess it is said, There never was smoke without some fire; yet at
first sight it seems hard to believe that sober men should ever attempt
innovations, seldom or never advantageous, always hurtful, because necessarily
attended with the sad effects of Civil War; a calamity that has so lately
proved fatal to the Kingdom in general, to the Prince and to the Subject.
Whence it may be reasonably presumed, when our passion is over, and we have
fully considered the rise, progress and event of the Last Rebellion, we shall
grow calm and wise, permit the King to enjoy his own Prerogatives, and content
our selves with our just Rights and privileges. 'Twill be time enough (when
these are invaded, if Religion even then will allow it,) to oppose, or stand
upon our defense; to offer at it sooner is madness and folly, Rebellion and
Impiety.

For the better coming to our point, it is necessary we take a review of the
times preceding Forty One, when from the end of King James's Reign, the people
were, as now, full of murmurings, repinings and distrusts against the
Government. At last the smothered Embers burst forth into a Flame; and after
ten years Violence, War and Confusion, and near as many more of Usurpation and
Tyranny, the Commonwealth was so far from being bettered, by any of the many
changes and expedients, that the recalling our King from his unjust Exile was
found, and unanimously agreed, the only way to prevent its utter Ruin. Our
Gracious Sovereign, merciful beyond example, pardons his Rebellious Subjects,
the Murderers of his Royal Father, and the Usurpers of his own Crown and
Dignity; loads, even among them, with Offices and Honor, such as seemed
penitent, and were capable. He then proceeds, first to the resettlement of the
Religion of the Church of England, like Virtue seated in the middle, and
equally endangered by the two extremes of Popery and Presbytery; and after, to
that of the State in peace and quiet, which we enjoyed to the envy of our
Neighbors. This happiness occasioned a War with Holland, France and Denmark,
to their great Loss, and the Renown of England, ending in a League of
friendship and amity, for the general good of Europe. Not long after, the King
was advised to grant a toleration for the ease of tender Consciences, and the
advancement of Traffic and Manufacture. This was pressed with arguments, That
the want of it occasioned Venner's Insurrection; the Plot in 1662, for which
several suffered at Tyburn; that in 1663. begun in Ireland, and carried on in
England, for which in 1664. diverse were executed in Yorkshire, as were others
after in London, April 1666, who confessed at Tyburn a Design of subverting the
Government, seizing the Tower, and firing of London the September following;
and withal, declaring there were those behind of their party, that would still
effect that design, which as to that part was too evident. This is notorious
from the historical account published in 8^. and confirmed by the Gazette; and
therefore I cannot but wonder at the Commons Vote of last January the 10th.
That it is the opinion of this House, that the City of London was burnt in the
year 1666 by the papists, designing thereby to introduce arbitrary Power and
Popery into this Kingdom. It would be a great satisfaction to the World to
publish the grounds of this opinion, because that otherwise that otherwise
considering they did not pursue it, nor any reason assigned what should have
hindered, it will hardly gain more credit, than the philosophers paradox, that
Snow was black. I have read of some, who never wanted opinions, could they but
find arguments to make them probable, for which their being at a loss made them
ridiculous with the sober part of mankind.

The King consents, and at the same time declares a War against Holland, whose
insolence and injustice in point of Trade and Honor was become insupportable.
Soon after the Parliament conveen'd, and apprehending the Indulgence might in
time prove destructive to the established Religion, prayed it might be revoked;
the King Contrary to the then Ministers advice, answered their desires.
Hereupon they grow peevish, and thenceforeward vow and study all the methods of
Revenge and Confusion, tho with the hazard of the public. Ever since we have
been continually alarmed with Libels against the Government; at last a
discovery is made of a Popish contrivance, sisted as far as possible by the
King in Council, and after earnestly recommended to the Parliaments further
consideration. This is pursued, but some men laying hold on this, design to
drive it on to further purposes, and under pretense of defending the Kings
Person and expelling Popery, set up Presbytery, and pull down the Monarchy. But
there being too strict a bond of mutual love and loyalty between the King and
that Parliament, means are now used, upon a great Ministers being impeached, to
have it dissolved: An Act that answered not his expectations. A new one is
called, and exceeding the bounds of prudence and moderation, quickly sent home.
A third is summoned, and the King having to this, as to the former, over and
over pressed the impartial examination of the Plot, the trial of the Lords, and
the care of the established Religion, wherein by all just and lawful ways he
often declared he would not follow, but heartily go along with them. But alas!
they intended no such thing. The Plot must be kept on foot, else they would be
defeated. The King perceiving they still neglected the good of the public,
breaks them, and summonds a fourth at Oxford; where I wish they may be
inspired, with softness and prudence, answerable to the designs of the Place,
and the needs of the Kingdom.

After this short account, is it possible to believe these, who insinuate, the
King himself is in the Plot, is a Papist, and intends arbitrary Government? Oh!
ridiculous nonsensical fancy. If the Plot be against his Person and Government,
and contrived by Papists, and among them (as Bedlow has sworn) none in England
but have received the Sacrament upon it, and he be of the number, he must join
with others to cut his own throat, stab, shoot, or poison himself. But here is
some mystery in this pretty Invention; Charles Stewart conspires against the
King; this imitating the Long Parliament in his Fathers time, who fought for
the King for his politic capacity, against himself, his Natural, his Person.
But if he were a Papist, would he have passed into Laws every Bill tendered him
by both Houses, as well before, as since this Plot, in their disfavour? And yet
we know one of the godly party was lately fined 500 l. for saying, The Duke of
York was a Papist, and the King little better; a saying no longer minced nor
whispered, but now loudly and plainly spoken every day. Could he have been
wrought to change of Religion, in time of his banishment, he had not withstood,
the offers of foreign Princes, and the solicitations of a fond Mother, to
reinstate him in his own Dominions with absolute arbitrary power. But he was
too much a Christian, and too good a King, not to prefer continuance in exile,
to the designs of enslaving his Subjects, either in their souls, or in their
bodies. Must he now, in an Age desirous of rest and quiet, be upbraided with
such purposes, that had resolved against them in the heat of his youth, the
great spur of ambition? Now when to compass this wicked and ridiculous project
is as impossible, as before it was the contrary; when after his restoration,
besides foreign assistance, offered at any rate, and to any purpose, he had an
obsequious General, a victorious Fleet and Army, and a Parliament, whose zeal
and devotion seemed in nothing to be bounded but by the limits of his own
pleasure; when to the immense treasure he was possessed of, bestowed among his
people with equal bounty as it was given, he might have added vastly by the
confiscations of more than half the Estates and Wealth of the Three Kingdoms.
But instead of this, he often pressed his Parliament to expedit the Act of
Oblivion, disbanded his Army, and enlarged the Fleet, by making one Squadron of
more value than all three in the time of Queen Eliz. disabl'd, in all his
Dominions, without exception, all Papists, from bearing any office Civil or
Military. Has he not passed the Bill, excluding for ever all Popish Lords out
of the House, to which his Father could never be persuaded? Has he not likewise
curtayl'd the Royal power by two other Acts, that of the Habeas Corpus, and
against Quartering of Soldiers? Three Statutes, for which he might have had as
many Millions, had he insisted on a bargain, or known how to distinguish
between his own private Interest, and that of the Subject, or the truckling way
of Bartring, when the good of his people was concerned. Why did he, but for the
sake of the Protestant Religion. Refuse the Elder Daughter of the Crown to the
Dauphin of France, and marry her to the Prince of Orange? And this without
putting his Parliament to the charge of a Portion, or a much greater Sum, which
they would have gladly given, had he made the proposition. And no other could
be the motives of recalling his Troops from France, raising an Army for the
defense of the Netherlands, at the expense of above 200000 l. more than was
given, and his prohibiting Trade with that Crown. These things put a stop to
the progress of that victorious King's Arms occasioned his quitting Messina,
and clapping up a general peace, when he was just at the point of his proposed
Conquests. If our Prince intended an arbitrary Government, why, besides his
former neglecting the opportunity, would he disable himself for the future by
parting with one of the greatest instruments for that purpose, the Court of
Wards and Liveries, Tenures in Capute and Knight Service, Purveyance, etc. And
what did he receive for this excess of bounty for the chiefest and most useful
flower of the Crown, but a trifle, a feather, half the Excise not above a
fourth of the others yearly value. And after all this, Knaves invent, and Fools
believe, he is now setting up for Tyrrany and Popery, when his years are past
the heat of ambition, his Coffers empty, France disobliged, and his own people
alarmed; and bent against it with all imaginable resolutions of oppositions.
Can any man imagine, that a person, who disarms himself, intends to fight.

Besides, What one Illegal Arbitrary Act has he done in his twenty years Reign?
Whom has he desrauded of an Ox or an Ass, of Lease or Possession? where has he
in any one instance invaded Magna Charta, our Rights, Properties or Liberties?
What Bill tendered by Parliament for the security of our Lives or Fortunes, has
he rejected? He passed all without exception. As for the Bill for intrusting
the Parliament with the Militia for a limited time, reason then and experience
since, has proved it was a needless encroachment on the Royal prerogative,
without the least prospect of public good; and to have parted with that power
but for a moment, was for so long to unking and divest himself of a power he
could not be certain would be ever restored. As he has freely passed all Laws,
has he not as cheerfully offered to enact any thing that was agreeable to
Justice and Reason for our further security in Religion, Liberty and property?

From these considerations, nothing will appear more vain and idle than our
Fears and Jealousies, our Factious and Seditious reflections on the Government.
I will not say without great caution, but we may run into those very things we
so much dread, and would avoid, Popery and French Government, or (which is
equally destructive of our Birthrights and Happiness) Presbytery and a
Commonwealth. This will be no groundless surmise, if we look back, and observe
that the Leav'n against the established Constitution both in Church and State
has sowr'd almost the whole lump; the poison of Presbytery, formerly known by
the name of Puritanism, hatched at Frankford and Geneva, grown to a head in
Scotland with the Reformation, has infected the generality of the Kingdom, the
common Traders and Dwellers in Cities and Corporation the unthinking and
illiterate part of the Gentry, with hatred against Monarchy and the Church of
England. This was certainly the invention of Rome to overthrow us, by thus
sowing Divisions they well foresaw our Kingdom and Church in it self divided
could not long stand. All the Antimonarchical Principles are the same in both,
the one as well as the other deny Supremacy in the King, the Jesuit will have
the Pope, and the Presbyter Jesus his Head. King-killing and Deposing Doctrine
is disowned by all honest Papists, as the Author even of Plato Redivivus does
confess, tho two or three Jesuits have privately asserted the opinion as
problematical, for which themselves and writings were censured and condemned as
false and damnable; But it is justified, both by Books and Practice of the whole
Presbyterian party; it is so plain and fresh in our memories, I need not
instance in the Authors. St. Peter's Chair is not more Infallible than that of
an Assembly of Presbyters in a National Classis or Synod. Men of these
Antichristian Principles stirred up the Late Rebellion, and being active and
diligent, drew in many unwary honest men beyond the power of retreating. Did
not the Faction here tamper in Scotland, where the promoters of the Covenant,
that Godly instrument, applied to the Crown of France for protection, as
appears by the Letter found with the Lord Lowden, therefore sent to the Tower?

But what was the issue of this Contrivance, but Confusion and Misery through
the three Kingdoms, the Presbyterian party overpowered by the Independents,
and these again by the Army; a Commonwealth set up, and soon after turned into
a perfect Tyranny, under Oliver Cromvel; after more money had been illegally
squeezed from the Subjects, by Ordinances and Loans, Sequestrations and
Decimations, Excise, and other Impositions, than was ever known before, or
since. The people weary, call home their Prince, who by an excess of mercy and
clemency, sparing to root up men of these Principles, gave way to their
infecting others with the same humor of discontent. It Is to be observed, that
the year 1535. is remarkable for the Geneva Reformation, and the spawning of
the Jesuits Order, and that our unlucky homebred Divisions were fomented, if
not first set on foot, under hand, by directions from the Court of France, as
well as from Rome, the Interest of that State, as well as of the Church,
depending on our Distractions; to which end Richlieu, that great Minister,
employed many Pensioners into Scotland, as did after his Successor Mazarine in
England. And therefore, there is nothing more inconsiderate than to think we
are not now acting, and promoting French-Designs; it is their business to
divide us, and yet so to manage the Balance, that they let neither the King
nor Parliament have the better, or ever come to a Right understanding: They can
no otherwise obtain the Western Empire, and it is directly against their
Interest, ever to suffer England to be either a perfect Monarchy, or an
absolute Commonwealth. Those that roar most against French Councils and
Measures, under-hand-bargains and agreements between both the Kings, know they
belly their own Conscience, and that the French have us in the last degree of
contempt. This the E. of D. printed in his own vindication, perhaps not
ignorant, that some of their Ministers did, in the year 1677. and 78. before
the breaking forth of the Plot, declare, That Monsieur L. had greater Interest,
and more Friends in England, than the D. of Y. That the K. had need be on his
Guard, for he was in great danger of running the same risque with his Father;
when it was likewise inquired, What Interest among the People two great Peers
had, who have since the Plot been the great Pillars of the Protestant Religion,
tho neither was ever reputed to have any, were Ministers and Advisers in 1670.
and 71. very good Friends to France and Popery, Enemies to the Triple Alliance,
and to Holland, etc. It was also said, That 300000 l. a year bestowed in
Scotland and England, among the Factious and Discontented, would better serve
the Interest of France, than any Bargain they could drive with the Ministers.
It Is too well known, that the greatest of these two Noblemen made a secret
journey into France, some weeks before the Plot after some private Transactions
here with others, among whom were Sir E. L. famed for Religion, for Morality,
Major W. and H. N. as notorious for the same perfections, and their love of
Monarchy, and hatred of a Commonwealth; nor did A. S. want his Share in the
Consultation, a stout assessor of Prerogative, witnessed by his and others
living out of this Kingdom, ever since the Kings Restoration, until they saw
some likelihood of a change, the one returning about the time the D. of B. and
the other Lords were in the Tower, and the other a few months before the
breaking forth of the Popish Conspiracy; which no sooner came before the
Parliament, than some of the great Lords of the Committee for the Examination
of the Plot kept their Consultations, and managed much of that affair at
Wallingford-House, Major W. their Secretary, where they concluded to take hold
of this opportunity, for the carrying on some long-hatched Designs of their
own. Nor is it to be forgotten, that in June before, a Letter was writ by an
eminent person of the Faction, and can be now produced, That very shortly
somewhat would be discovered, that would prevent our much longer walking in the
dark; and that one of the greatest Lords sent to an Astrologer to know, whether
he was not in a short while to be in the head of 60000 men. The methods agreed
upon in France, and pursued here, were to make a Court and Countrey-party, to
sow and disperse Jealousies between both, and widen the Gap with all possible
Devices; which resolutions some here were the sooner induced to embrace, upon
this consideertion, That they should not live to see the issue, and were
unconcerned for what should come after. But yet I am too charitable to think,
if we have any French Agents at home, they are imposed upon by their own
unwariness, and the others cunning, to act rather against, than with, their
knowledge, a part so much contrary to the Interest of England, and the Duty of
a Christian. But however it be, I am morally assured, we are doing their work;
and if we are not Knaves and Pensioners, we are Block-heads or Fools, that are
blind and besorted like men prepared for Destruction. Quos Jupiter perdere
v^lt, hos dementat. If any one talk thus, he is presently called a Papist and a
Tory; every true Son of the Church of England, and Loyal Subject, is Branded
with Nicknames, and run down by Noise and Faction; and he that opposes Popery,
if he defends not Presbytry, is but a Protestant in Masquerade; if he commends
Monarchy, and our Legal Constitutions, to the discredit of a Commonwealth, he
is a Rascal, a Villian, and a dangerous person, not considering, that we are
made Tools and Instruments for French purposes, betrayed by their Cunning and
Adresse, to forward and act with our own hands, our Slavery and Ruin. Shall we
be still blind and deaf to reason and demonstration? Can we not reflect upon
the French double-dealing in our late Civil Distractions, and remember what the
Lord Keeper Puckering tells the Parliament in Q Elizabeth's days, That the
Puritans, even at the time of the Spanish preparations for Invasion, were
urging and pressing intestine Commotions; where he largely sets forth their
being as dangerous to the Crown and Mitre as the others, and therefore that
both were to be equally suppressed, Papists and Puritans. I cannot find, that
either have since altered their Principles, and consequently cannot but wonder
why the Papists should be persecuted, and the other countenanced, even against
Law and former Statutes. It Is surely very imprudent to expect your House will
be warm by shutting a Window, and setting open the Doors. And therefore in this
I can freely agree with Plato Redivivus, that the fear of Popery is not the
cause of our present disturbances; I shall without regard to Religion, consider
the Papists and Presbyterians as two Factions in the State, like the Arminians
and L^vaste^^ party in Holland; and as such prorounce, that both are to be
suppressed, or neither, because by emp^^ing only one of the Scales, the
Balance is broken, and the Court, or Monarchical party is first weakn'd and
destroyed, and after the whole form of Government altered into that of a
Commonwealth; and I am fully convinced, if that had not been that Authors
Designs, as to an ordinary Reader is past doubt, he he would have set down this
as one of the Remedies of our present Evils. But the contrary was his purpose,
and in order to it he cunningly, to preserve the Monarchy, would set up a plain
Democracy, and for an English King, obtrude upon us a D^eg of Venice; for he
tells you at large, that the ancient Power of the King is fallen into the hands
of the Commons, and therefore to keep up the former illustrious splendour of the
Crown, he would have all its Jewels taken out, and set about the Speakers
Chair, the King made a Cipher, and divested of all Power but the Name, to keep
up the three several and distinct shares of the Government, King Lords, and
Commons. It Is an Ingenious way of arguing, but we are not yet, I hope, such
fools to have it pass, to venture at play, and not know how to distinguish
false Dice.

Oh! but says a Factious Petitioner, that takes the House of Commons
(sufficiently proved by, the learned Answer to Petyt's Book, to have had no
share in the Legislative power) to be the Parliament, all their Votes, how wild
and unreasonable soever, as we have lately as well as formerly seen in print,
to be the sense of the Nation, and have the force of Laws, and yet deny any
Authority to the Kings Proclamation: This Scribler (says he) is Popishly
affected, a French designer, a mere Tory; not considering, that there is not
less hazard in splitting upon a Rock, than upon a Sand-bank; that if I must be
a slave, and forfeitt my liberty, 'twere at least as good to do so under a
single person, as more; the tyranny of many is much more intolerable than that
of one. It Is equally destructive of my liberty, whether the King or the House
of Commons, takes away Magna Charta; I am still against arbitrary Government,
ruling according to pleasure, not the Laws and known Constitutions of the Land,
whether assumed by King or Commons; if there be any choice, the odds are
against the latter; and to speak truth, by what has passed since the Plot, any
one in his wits, would believe the King is invaded, not an invader; that his
frequent Prorogations and Dissolutions have been his legal defensive weapons,
used as much for his Subjects security, as his own honor; that arbitrary
power, is a delicious thing, and therefore aimed at by our Demagogues and
tribunes of the people; bad and to be decry'd, only while in the Sovereign.
It Is very convenient to cry Whore first. Solomon tells us, He that appears
first in his own cause, seems just, but his neighbor comes after and
proves him. If the people in an Island are alarmed, that an Invasion is
designed, and that only at one Port, and they become so foolish, as for the
guard of that, to neglect and expose all other, they do but make the easier way
for their enemies to land and overcome. Those, who are the Watchmen, the
Sentinels of our Safety, ought with Janus to have two faces, one behind and the
other before, and many eyes like Argus, there being otherwise no security
against surprise. I remember in Thucydide's that the Grecians besieging a
strong City, found no means but Stratagem to become Masters, which they thus
contrived: After they had purchased within some Pensioners, they kept the
besieged awake, and put them into great distress by continual false alarms,
and, as designed, prepared to believe nothing more was intended, than amusement
and distraction. The false Citizens within taking this advantage, affirmed,
they ought for the future to make it death to any Watchman to give the Alarm.
This decreed, notice was given to the enemy, and without the least resistance,
the besieged were taken and undone, when and where they least suspected;
whereupon this Proverb was taken up, Amyclas perdidit silentium. I wish we may
never run the same fate; the application is too easy and natural to be dwelt
upon.

And yet I cannot but take notice how the late House of Commons have assumed to
themselves a power extraordinary, and by a Vote without proof or conviction,
made eminent men and known Protestants, guilty of Popery and French designs,
made them Advisers and Counselors according to their own fancies, imprisoned
several DURING PLEASURE, seized Closets and Writings without information, and
contrary to Magna Charta; voted Acts of Parliament, made for the preservation
of the established Religion, useless, and their execution grievious to the
Subject, against the Protestant interest, and an encouragement to Popery, etc.
and among these, which is most wonderful, a Law made by the darling Queen Eliz.
who cannot well be supposed to have been a friend to Popery. If these be not
odd and arbitrary proceedings, I know not what they are, nor why that should be
tolerable or lawful for them, which is not for any, no not for our Sovereign.
Considering men are afraid the a betters of such practices are not friends to
peace and quiet, but rather factious and dangerous, willing to enslave us to
foreign Invasions, or Domestic Encroachments. Whatever may be said to the
contrary, these actings are but too good grounds for such apprehensions. The
cunningest Whores seem most devout, and inveigh very bitterly against the
lewdness they daily study and commit. Your rooking Gamesters abhor, if you
believe their shams and oaths, the use of false Dice, and the un-Gentleman-like
trick of cheating. However, none but Cullies, who want wit or years to make
observation, can be wheedl'd and drawn in by such pretenses.

Before the discovery of the Plot, our Ministers were reflected on, as
designing Popery and arbitrary Government, by many scandalous Pamphlets, and
one in particular called, An Account of the growth of Popery, etc. as if the
people were to be prepared to believe the whole Court were Popish; that while
they were alarmed against that party, they might be unprovided to defend
themselves against the other. The Presbyterian true blue, who, like Aesop's
Cat, though transformed into the beautiful shapes of our Court-Imployments and
Honors, will still be hankering after the old sport of Mousing; they will ever
be lovers of a Commonwealth, and enemies to Monarchy. This is plain from
former, as well as later, proceedings, since the discovery of the Popish Plot,
when they began to show themselves in their proper colors, when they cried not
only the Court, but the Church was Popish, and all that are for the established
Government. You cannot now be loyal, unless you be factious, nor a Protestant,
if no Presbyterian. But pray observe, none tell you this, but the spawn of
those seduced, or concerned in the late Rebellion; men turned out, or that
would get into Court-Imployments, that account themselves slighted or
disobliged; men of great Ambition, or of desperate Fortunes, who make all this
noise and clutter, to be taken off. To what purpose else, did the late House of
Commons make the Vote against the bargain or hopes of Court-preferment, but
that such a design was driving between some leading Members and Courtiers? Can
they after such a discovery pretend zeal for Religion, and the good of their
Country? For shame, let not Faction and private Interest make men forgetful of
the public, of the peace and quiet of the Nation: Let them secure our
Constitutions against the encroachments or invasions of any, whether Presbyter
or Papist: and remember that the most forward in the Long Parliament, were soon
turned out by others; and because what is Sauce for a Goose, is Sauce for a
Gander, this of course will be the fate of those, who now glory in being
Ringleaders of Faction, to thwart and oppose their Sovereign; Nay, it may
possibly be worse, the Gentlemen, the Knights of the Shires, may be kicked out
by Mechanics, by Citizens and Burgesses; for he that practices Disobedience
to his Superiors, teaches it to his Inferiors. Sir W. I. Sir F. W. Colonel
T. etc. all know were disoblidg'd, and if taken into favor, the Employments
and Honors they covet, would stand up for the Court, as much as now they do
against it. Whether the Petitioning Lords be not of the same temper, will best
appear from the story of every single person. One of them has the humor
conveyed with his Blood. His Father was a Gentleman that appeared zealous in the
long Parliament for the good of his Country, the first that brought in the
complaint of Ship Money. But soon after, when he was made a Lord and a
Courtier, he changed notes, and sung another song, no man more for the
Monarchy, in its defense he lost his life, and at his death publicly repented
his actings against the Earl of Strafford. His Son was made an Earl upon the
Kings return, sent Ambassador Abroad, and Lord Lieutenant into Ireland; to get
this Command, be dispis'd not the Courtship and assistance of Coll. T. though a
R. C. and a Creature of his R. H. to whom he made no slender professions; not
being satisfied with gaining vastly in that Station five years, he grew peevish
in hopes of being sent the second time, nay, rather than fail, he is content to
be Commissioner of the Treasury, in hopes that by the Courtship and Interest of
some Women, no matter what Religion they are of, he may come to be Lord
Treasurer: But not like to gain the White Staff, and perhaps not caring to
govern an empty Exchequer, he bent his thoughts again toward Ireland;
slighting the Treasury he is outed, and grows more discontented; and at last
turned out of Council, the next day he repeats a Speech of E. of S. his making,
and unasked, presents a piece of Council and Advice to his Sovereign,
pretending as a Peer it was his duty. I am sorry his zeal made him forget, that
Peers have no right of advising the King, but when he makes them of his
Council, or by Writ Summons 'em to Parliament. And what is very odd, he advises
just the contrary to what he and the other Noble E. had done the year before,
when Courtiers. This Noblemans Life would make a Comical History; he knows how
to put on all shapes, and in the late times, was not ignorant how to make an
Apple Tree supply the place of a Pulpit, he knew how to serve himself in all
turns and changes, and he has not failed since 1640. to have been often out and
in with the several Higher Powers. To give him his due, he is a man of
extraodinary parts, but if one of these Lords said true, when he was a
Courtier, and the other newly removed, they are all fitted and turned for
confounding and amusing, but not for extricating out of difficulties. He wants
not Wit to hold forth in the House, or in the open Air, upon occasion; nor is
he meanly Skilled in the Methods of Court-Pleasures, as well as Business. He
must have an ill memory that forgets, who advised the breaking of the
Triple-League, and making an Alliance with France, and a War with Holland,
pronouncing in the Language of the Beast Delenda est Carthago, that a Dutch
Commonwealth, was too near a Neighbor to an English Monarch; the shutting up
the Exchequer, the granting Injunctions in the case of the Bankers, and lastly,
the sourse of all of our present misfortunes, the general Indulgence: These
things being found of ill consequence, and the Ministers removed as designers
of Popery, Presbytrie, Atheism, or Irreligion, Arbitrary or French Govermnent;
must any of such Principles as soon as turned out of Court, be received into the
Country, as if these two had different Interests? Whoever say there is more
than one Commonweal in both, are Deluders, and Incendiaries, and Betrayers of
the Nation. Those that strive to divide the King and his people, are to be
looked upon as pensioners of France, and to be most severely punished. There
are that can tell Tales, what Great man since the Plot, offered a
Reconciliation with the D. and for a Restoration to his former Power and
Greatness, would be his servant to all intents and purposes. But the D. could
not be persuaded, one that had as often changed Parties, as Proteus his shapes,
and the Chamaelion his Colors, could be true to any Interest, but his own; and
therefore rejected his many Messages on this subject. Another Peer, whose Son
is in the Lower House, is the great Tribune of the people, would have had a
Dukedom added to the Garter, to make both Sing to another Tune. A fourth would
fain be a Privy Councellor in Reversion. A fifth not long since at any rate of
purchase, would have been Master of the House to the Duke: Strange! that a
Protestant Lord should think of serving a supposed Popish Prince, and after
hope, though thus mounted on Horseback, to get to Heaven. It would be tedious
to give particular accounts of all; only by the way observe, that a Young Lord
newly come to Age, owned himself to his Majesty Disobliged, because after a
Voyage to Tangier, his great Valor there shown, And spending his youth in his
Princes Service, (these were his own words to the King) another was preferred
to the Command of the Lord Plymouth's Regiment. I cannot but commend this
Noblemans Ingenuitie in owning the true Cause, and not pretending, as others,
Conscience and public good for his motives. But I am sorry he should forget,
not only the obligations of gratitude, which he is under, for his Bread and for
his Honor, but also who says, Appear not wise before the King, and give not
Counsel unasked. He has learning enough to understand the meaning of in
consilium non vocatus ne accesseris. It Is to be hoped he may repent, and with
more years his wit may be turned into wisdom.

As for the D. of M. I believe him perfectly drawn in by designing Politicians
for ends of their own, who never intended him more than as an useful Tool,
afterward to be laid aside. It Is no wonder that one of his Youth and Spirit
should be tempted with the Baits, and Allurements of a Crown, the splendour and
gaity of Power has blinded many Elder men's understandings. But that they never
had him in their thoughts, for K. appears from the Author Plato Redivivus; and
indeed if they had, they went the wrong way to work. They should not have
engaged him so far, as to deserve his being turned out of his Command as
General, a Post that would have best enabled him to seize upon, and make good
any pretense to the Crown, after the death of his Majesty. I am not apt to
believe his Grace is sorry for what is past; I am certain it were his Interest
to throw himself at the Kings Feet, and quite the Counsels of those men, who
intriguing for themselves, puff him up with false hopes, and yet sufficiently
discover, that nothing is farther from their hearts than his Exaltation, or
what is so much in their mouths, public service to the King and Country. It Is
much better for him to be content with the second place in the Kingdom, than by
pretending to the first, against all manner of Reason, and the obligations of
gratitude, forfeit all, his Fame and Honor, Life and Fortune.

The Petition being already answered, I will only observe, that His Majesty,
intending to turn them out, sent Mr. Secretary to the E. of E. for a List of
the Papist he mentioned in the Guards; But the Noble Peer had none to give, but
may be supposed to have taken the story upon hearsay from some, that had the
malice to invent it. And now must the Nation suffer themselves to be rid by any
Faction, because designing particular advantages, they guild all with the
specious pretenses of Religion and Loyalty, particular respect for the Church
of England, by opening her Doors to all Dissenters, and for the Monarchy, by
clipping the Kings power to prevent the Papists Contrivances against his
Person? Examine whether the zealous sticklers for the Protestant Religion, have
any at all; or if they have, whether it be not as far from that Established by
Law, as Popery? Whether if the King would grant all their desires, receive them
into Offices and Power, they would not stand up in justification of the Court
as fiercely as now they do the contrary? What has been before, may well be
expected again. He that considers this, and that malice never spoke well of
any, will give the Factious little credit; especially, when against reason and
sense they would impose upon us that the King himself is in the Plot, or as one
of the Members in a printed Speech tells the House, The Plot is not so much in
the Tower, as in White Hall; there it is to be searched for, and there to be
found: And all this because he will not unking himself, and put his Crown into
their hands, and against Law, his Coronation Oath, and brotherly affection,
pass the Bill of Exclusion, to the prejudice of himself and the whole Kingdom.
This is not a single or private man's opinion, but the judgment of the Supreme
Tribunal of England, the House of Lords; where upon the first reading it was
thrown out, with the odds of 63 against 31; for which reason their Lordships
are called Masquerading-Protestants, Tories, Papists, or their adherents; as if
the Lords must not be allowed the privilege the Commons take with any of their
Bills, without censure and affront. But why for their Act must His Majesty be
loyally libelled and aspersed? It had been time enough, one would have thought,
to have called him Papist, etc. had he rejected the Bill after it had passed
both Houses. Oh! then who could have doubted, but his doing more aginst the
Papists than any of his Predecessors had been promoting their Interest, that
this pardoning noman condemned, nor stopping the execution of any Law against
Recusants, was making it no Plot, and that passing the Test was letting in
Popery by wholesale. He that can believe these things, is prepared for any
thing, to say a Lobster is a Wale, or a Whale a Lobster; that the Moon is a
Green-Cheese, and the Sun a round Plate of red hot Iron; and then, I presume,
it may not be decided whether we are Fools or Madmen. Let us not thus idly and
unjustly belly our Consciences, and publish to the Nation and all the World,
that nothing can secure us against Popery, but the shaking and alteration of
the Monarchy, by the Bill of Exclusion; an Act in it self, unjust and
impolitick, both for the King and People. No man is to be punished ex
post-facto, by the Laws of this and all other Countries. Besides, why should
the Duke, more then any Fanatic of England, be outed his Birthright? The
Scripture says You must not do evil, that good may come of it; And prudence
will tell us, That this is an evil, that must be attended with greater. For the
minute that it passes, the Duke is at liberty to recover his Right by secret or
open Violence, Force Foreign or Domestic; He is declared an Enemy and Traitor;
condemned without Trial or Conviction. This piece of injustice must be defended
by an Association of an Army; this Army must be entrusted in the hands of the
King or a General, either may make himself Absolute and Arbitary; and therefore
if people are now afraid of slavery from the Government, what may then be their
apprehensions? And if they are jealous of the King, what General will they find
to entrust? Those meanly skilled in story, know that Commanders of Armies have
at pleasure subverted Commonwealths and Kingdoms: Agathocles from being
General, became Tyrant of Syracusa; Pisistratus of Athens, Sforza of Millain,
the Medici of Florence, the Casars of Rome, and not to go so far off, Cromwell
of the Three Kingdoms. Most of the Roman Emperors were dethroned by their
Generals; and therefore this cannot but make the King as unwilling as the
People, to entrust this great Power in any person. And yet without such trust
the Act of Exclusion is not worth a straw; nor with it can we be secured
against Slavery, whether the Duke conquer or be overcome. The Duke will still
find a party, at least if he out-lives the King, in the Three Kingdoms to fight
his Quarrel; and if he comes in by force; he may well use us as a conquered
Nation, break our old, and give us what Laws and Religion he pleases; Whereas
if we attempt no such thing, we shall not run the hazard of a CIVIL WAR, the
King being as likely to outlive, as to be outlived by His Brother. If he
should chance to succeed peaceably, he cannot be presumed to offer any
alteration in Religion so much against his Interest, and who never forwarded
any in his own Family, suffers his Children to continue in the Church of
England, knowing that Christianity forbids compulsion for its propagation. To
say he would be priest-ridden, is ridiculous; why he more than the French King,
who openly opposes the Popes Usurpation, and assumes to himself the cognizance
even of Church Affairs? This is but a pretense to impose upon the ignorant and
the credulous; if there be not Laws enough already, new ones may be made to
prevent any such intention. When all Offices and power are in the hands of
Anti-papists, I cannot see where can be our danger.

But this, if granted, would not be all, the Monarchy is hereby made elective,
and the possessor may as well be removed, as the successor debarred. In order
to this, is there not a History of the Succession published, showing that the
Monarchy is rather elective than hereditary? Of which here I will only say,
that the Writer is a notorious Plagiary, and steals all out of a seditious Book
writ on the same Subject by Parsons the Jesuit, under the Name of Doleman in
Queen Elizabeth's time, with design of distracting the people, and making way
for a Spanish Conquest and Inquisition; the Presbyterian Transcriber proves
himself of the same Jesuitical principles, and with equal honesty pursues the
same ends, Usurpation and Slavery. It Is not to be doubted, but that there has
been frequent interruptions of the Succession of the Crown, but no title, but
that of the Sword, was ever put in balance with proximity of blood, and he
that will oppose Fact to Right, is very unjust, and argues not upon the
principles of Morality, nor the Laws of Nations. Much such another good
Christian, is the Writer of The appeal to the City, who tells us, if we set up a
King with none or a cracked title, we shall have the better Laws; and instances
that Richard the 3d. an Usurper, a Murderer, and a Tyrant, made excellent
Statutes. But he might, had he been just, have found the Laws of that King
outdone by those of our present Sovereign, whose title none can question.

And yet it is not unreasonable to suspect a design on foot of subverting the
Monarchy, if it be considered, that the passing the Bill against the Duke, will
not alone satisfy his adversaries, who further expect, that all those now firm
to the King be removed, and their trust put into considing hands; and thus when
they had him in their own power, it would be no hard matter to act their
pleasure. The Speech disowned by the protestant Lord, and burnt by the Hangman
(a fate the Author does certainly deserve) tells us in plain English, We must
have a Change, and a King we may trust, and well affected Counselors, with
much more treasonable and seditious stuff. These things, and the frequent
mentioning the fates of Edw. 2. Rich. 2. and Hen. 6. cannot but alarm his
Majesty, and restrain him from ever complying with such persons against his
only Brother. He has so often affirmed the Bill should never pass, that he
cannot now without diminution of his own honor, as well as safety, alter his
well-grounded resolution, taken upon the sense of conscience and duty, the
present and future good of himself and people. An act that would be the highest
violation of Magna Charta, that ordains none should be put by his birthright
and inheritance, but by the Law of the Land, and legal process. And therefore I
hope, what cannot be supposed, will be granted, will no longer be insisted on,
lest the consequences prove fatal.

One thing I cannot but admire, that the Duke should be absolutely excluded on
supposition of being a papist, for otherwise he is allowed by all a Prince of
incomparable virtues and endowments, leaving no room for enjoying his right, in
case he become Protestant. Do they suppose an alteration of opinion impossible?
that is false and foolish. There are instances of men that have changed often,
and to mention no more, the Dukes Grandfather Hen. 4. twice altered his
opinion. Besides, it is unjust, and contrary to their own practice; for L. Br.
was an imprisoned Plotter, but as soon as he became a Convert, without further
process or trial, he was innocent and acquitted. We do in this exceed the
Papists in France, and condemn our Protestant Ancestors, and all others abroad,
who accused them as Antichristian and Rebellious, for opposing their lawful
King Hen. 4: on the score of Religion; for the Parisians loved his person, and
stood upon no other condition than his turning Papist, to receive him for their
Sovereign; as all the other R. C's of that Kingdom had done before. And
therefore I very much suspect we are grown weary of Monarchy; and with an
inconstancy natural to Islanders, affect a Change though for the worse. To this I
am induced by many Reasons, and not a little from a Protestant Lords Speech,
the last Sessions, That the people of Athens were so fond of good King Codrus,
that they resolved to have none after him. But to attempt this piece of folly
and wickedness, will inevitably embroyl us in a Civil War, And of that the
event is so uncertain, that we ought to dread the loss of all, by striving to
enlarge our present liberties. This madness ordinary prudence will carefully
avoid, because in all probability the King must get the better; his condition
is not like his Fathers: He has standing Troops, which the other wanted, to
Guard his Person; he has the Militia in his own hands, he has no Scotch nor
Irish Rebellion, to divide or distract his Forces; and above all, he has the
Parliament in his own power, to let them, Sit or no Sit, at his pleasure and
their good behavior. And it is happy he has this power, to secure himself from
popular jury, at this time especially, when whatever the Papists have done, we
daily see others run into Clubs and Cabals, distinguishing themselves by Green
Ribbans, by general Committees and Sub-committees, where all Transactions of
Parliament are first designed and hammered, Collections made, a Common Pursue
managed, and Agents employed in every County, to prepare and influence the
people; write and disperse false News, Libels against the Government, Addresses
made and sent into every Shire and Borough, and if the Members do not go down
to their Elections, they can Print for them such Speeches as serve their
purpose. Witness one my Lord Vaughan spoke at his election, though his Lordship
was not out of London. I have not heard before, that Sir Samuel Morlans
Speaking Trumpet could convey a voice a hundred Miles distance. But this is
nothing with our True Protestant Intelligencer, B. H. who printed an Address
from the City of Colchester, that never was seen nor presented by any of the
Inhabitants, as by an Instrument under the Town Clarks hand does plainly
appear. But though Swearing be, Lying is not, against the interest or practice
of the Godly; the presbyterian, true offspring of the Ignatian Fathers, who
out do them in the Doctrine of piae Fra^des, as well as in all other their
immoral and Antimonarhick principles.

And now considering that none that have any thing to loose, can ever get by a
Rebellion, and that there is no just pretense for one, our Liberties and
Properties not being broken or invaded, the Rich, unless they are mad, will
never begin; and yet with, or without their assistance, a Rising of Jack Cade
or Wat Tyler instigated by greater persons, will but enlarge the Regal power,
and enrich the Crown: And for these and many more reasons, I look upon the
Threats or Fears of Rebellion, as idle and vain, as our Jealousies and
Apprehensions of Popery, never possible in England, but by a Civil War, since
their numbers here are but as one to 230. and by an exact calculation in the
three Kingdoms, the whole number of Papists is but as one to 205. non-Papists,
and their wealth and possessions is not one to 300. If their power had been so
terrible, they wanted not since the Plot, provocations to make us feel, as well
as hear on it. But these noises are like Armies in disguise at Knights-bridge,
and Regiments of Horse hid in Cellars under ground, and blowing up the Thames
to drown London; artifices formerly used to draw in the easy and the
credulous. But it is to be presumed, the same trick will not pass twice upon us
in one and the same Age, while the bleeding wounds of the last are still so
fresh in our memories. To remedy and compose our present madness and
distractions, and prevent future evils, must, without doubt be the hearty
endeavor of all honest men, who expect this will be a healing Parliament, that
will make up all our breaches, and unite our divisions, by the methods of
prudence and discretion; weighing the true causes, and applying fit remedles,
without regard to faction or interest, heat or passion; reflecting how
unreasonable it is, to suspect in the King or his Ministers any design of
introducing Popery and arbitrary Government; a malicious and idle invention,
set on foot with purpose, to inflame the Kingdom, by men who were outed, or
desirous of Court-Imployments, disobliged persons, or French Pensioners; That
the Bill of Exclusion is not like to pass, either the Lords House or the King,
because in it self unjust, impolitick and dangerous, not only to the Prince,
but to the Subject: That all other legal ways for preventing Popery and
Presbytery, are to be taken by those, who design the preservation of the
established Monarchy and Religion: That this is already, or may with ease be
secured against the attempts or power of any Popish Successor: That our fears
in this point are groundless, and best founded upon accidents, that may never
happen: That it is the highest imprudence to run into real, present, to avoid
possible, future evils: That innovations of this sort would be against the
Princes interest, who having not a 4th. part of the Revenue, necessary for the
support of the Crown, must be under a necessity of complying with his people in
Parliament; and that his temper, practice and Declarations, secure us against
impositions of this nature; That it be considered, whether the unquiet
apprehensions from the Plot, may not be laid, by a speedy and impartial trial
and execution of all the accused and convicted, and the Kings after granting a
general pardon, with such exceptions as have been usual. The doing this will
beget a right understanding between the King and his people, defeat the
contrivances of our adversaries, restore us to peace and quiet at home, and
rescue us from contempt and danger abroad, and make the Name of Parliament as
famous and renowned, as some Libellers endeavor to make it base and odious.
How this is to be compassed, you your selves are deservedly made the Judges,
and therefore I will not like the foolish Orator, teach Hannibal the Art of
War. -- Fiat Justitia, ruat Coelum.

FINIS.
EDINBVRGH, Reprinted, Anno DOM. 1681.


