THE SCHOOL OF Recreation: OR A GUIDE To the Most Ingenious Exercises OF
Hunting. Riding. Racing. Fireworks. Military Discipline. The Science of
Defense. Hawking. Tennis. Bowling. Ringing. Singing. Cock-Fighting. Fowling.
Angling.


By R. H.

London, Printed for H. Rhodes, at the Star, the Corner of Bride Lane,
Fleet Street. 1696.

The School of Recreation.
hawking scene fowling scene cock fighting scene angling scene recreational
scene recreational scene

Printed for Henry Rodes near Bride lane in Fleet street.

The PREFACE TO THE READER.
REader, in this small Book you will find such Variety of Recreations, that
nothing of the nature ever appeared so like Accomplished in any one Volume, of
what Largeness soever: For besides my own Experience in these acceptable and
delightful Particulars, reduced under proper Heads, easy to be understood, and
put in practice; I have taken the Opinions of those whose Ingenuity has led
them to these Exercises in Particular or General, and are approved for the
Performance of them in the exactest manner, whose judicious Approbations the
more emboldened me to a Publication of them: In which you will not only find
Pleasure, and keep up a Healthful Constitution in moderately pursuing them, but
in most or all of them find considerable Profit and Advantage, when you can
spare leisure Hours from your Devotions, or to unbend your Cares after the
tiresome Drudgery of weighty Temporal Matters; Not that I think it is proper so
eagerly to pursue them, as if you made them rather a Business than a
Recreation; for though in themselves they are harmless, yet a continual or
insatiate Prosecution of any Thing, not only lessens the Pleasure, but may
render it hurtful, if not to your self, yet in giving Offense to others, who
will be apt to reflect upon such as seem to dote upon them, and wholly neglect
their other Affairs.

We find the Taste of Honey is delicious and desirable, yet Nature
over-burthened with too great a Quantity, Surfeits, and begets a loathing of
it. Wherefore to Conclude, I commend them as they are, viz. Suitable
Recreations for the Gentry of England, and others, wherein to please and
delight themselves. And so not doubting this Work will be accepted, as it was
well meant to serve my Countrymen, I take leave to subscribe my self, Kind
Reader,

Your most humble and obliging Servant, R. H.

OF HUNTING.
HUNTING, being a Recreation that challenges the sublime Epithets of Royal,
Artificial, Manly, and Warlike, for its Stateliness, Cunning, and Indurance,
claims above all other Sports the Precedence; and therefore I was induced to
place it at the Head to usher in the rest.

But to come to the Purpose: The young Hunter, as yet raw in the true Knowledge
of this Royal Sport, with what is merely necessary and useful, without amusing
him with superfluous Observations for his Instruction: I shall therefore
observe throughout this Treatise this Method: 1. The several Chases or Games
which fall under the First Denomination, Hunting. 2. The genuine of Infallible
Rules whereby we are to direct our selves, for the obtaining the true Pleasure
in prosecuting the same, and the desired Effects of it.

Know than; the Beasts of Venery or Forest, are, viz. The Heart, Hind, Hare.

As likewise the Wild Beasts, or Beasts of Chase are, viz. the Buck, Do, Fox,
Marten, Roe.

The Beasts of Warren, are, viz. Hares, Coneys, Roes.

Note, The Heart and Hind before spoken of, though they are of one kind, yet,
because their Seasons are several, are esteemed distinct Beasts; and in the
Heart is included the Stag, and all red Deer of Antlier.

And because I reckon it the most necessary part of the Hunter to understand
the Names, Degrees, Ages, and Seasons of the aforesaid different Beasts of
Forest or Venery, Chase, and Warren, I therefore, present him with these
following

Beasts of Forest, etc.
The Heart, the first year is called a Hind-Calf, 2 A Knobber, 3 A Brock, 4 A
Staggard, 5 A Stag, 6 A Heart.

The Hind the first Year a Calf, 2 A Hearse, 3 A Hind.

The Hare, the first Year a Leveret, 2 A Hare, 3 A great Hare.

Beasts of Chase.
The Buck, The first Year is called a Fawn, 2 A Pricket, 3 A Sorrel, 4 A Sore,
5 A Buck of the first Head, 6 A Great Buck.

The Do, the first Year a Fawn, 2 A Teg, 3 A Do.

The Fox, the first Year a Cub, 2 a Fox.

The Marten, the first Year A Cub, 2 A Marten.

The Roe the first Year A Kid, 2 A Gyrl, 3 A Hemuse, 4 A Roe-Buck of the first
Head, 5 A Fair Roe-Buck.

As for the Beasts of Warren, the Hare being spoken of before, little or
nothing is to be said. The Coney is first A Rabbet, and then an Old Coney.

Thus much for their Names, Degrees, and Ages: Now let us next observe their
proper Seasons for Hunting.

The Heart or Buck, begins fifteen days after Mid-summer-Day, and lasts
till Holy-Rood-Day.

The Fox, from Christmas, and lasts till the Annunciation of the Blessed
Virgin Mary.

The Hind or ^^e, from Holy-Rood-Day, till Candlemas.

The Roe-Buck, from Easter, till Michaelmas.

The Roe, from Michaelmas, till Candlemas.

The Hare, from Michaelmas, to the end of February.

Thus much I thought fit to speak briefly of the proper Names, Degrees, Ages,
and Seasons of the several Chases which we Hunt: But having almost forgot some,
I shall insert here, as intending to speak somewhat of them, and they are the
Badger, Otter, and Wild Goat.

As for the Terms of Art appropriated to Hunting. And now I bring you to the
second thing I proposed, viz. the Rules and Measures we are to learn and
observe in the aforementioned Sports or Chases; and in this we must begin with
the Pursuers or Conquerors of these Chases, namely.

Of Hounds.
There are several kinds of Hounds, endued with Qualities suitable to the
Country where they are bred; and therefore consult his Country, and you will
soon understand his Nature and Use: As for instance, the Western Countries of
England, and Wood-land, Mountainous Countries, as also Cheshire, and
Lancashire, breed the slow-Hound; a large great Dog, tall and heavy.
Worcestershire, Bedfordshire, and many other well mixed Soyls, where the
Champaign and Covert are equally large, produce the Middle sized Dog, of a more
nimble Composure than the forementioned, and fitter for Chase. Yorkshire,
Cumberland, Northumberland, and the North parts, breed the Light, Nimble, swift
slender Dog. And our open Champaigns train up excellent Greyhounds, hugely
admired for his Swiftness, Strength, and Sagacity. And lastly, the little
Beagle bred in all Countries, is of exceeding Cunning, and curious Scent in
Hunting.

For the Choice of Hounds we are to rely much on their Colors, and accordingly
make our Election. The Best and most Beautiful of all for a general Kennel, is,
the White Hound, with Black Ears, and a black spot at the setting on of the
Tail, and is ever found to be both of good Scent, and good Condition, and will
Hunt any Chase, but especially the Hare, Stag, Buck Roe, or Otter, not sticking
at Woods or Waters. The next is the Black, the blacktann'd, or all Liver-hew'd,
or the milk White Hound, which is the true Talbot, is best for the string, or
line, as delighting in Blood; the Largest is the comliest and best. The
Grizled, usually shag-hair'd, are the best Verminers; and so fittest for the
Fox, Badger, or other hot Scents; a couple of which let not your Kennel be
without, as being exceeding good cunning Finders.

For the Shape of your Hound, you must consult the Climate of his Breed, and
the natural Composition of his Body; but by these following Characters you may
know a good Hound. If you like a large, heavy, true Talbot like Hound, see

His Head be round and thick. Nose short and uprising. Nostrils wide and large.
Ears large and down-hanging. Upper-lip-Flews lower than his Nether Chaps. Back
strong and rising. Fillets thick and great. Thighs and Huckle-bones round. Hams
straight. Tail long and rush grown. The Hair of his Belly hard and stiff. Legs
big and lean. Foot like a Fox's, well clawed and round. Sole dry and hard. All
these show an able Hound.

If you would choose a swift light Hound, the Yorkshire one in the generality
will please you; for that (as these have) the ought to have a slenderer Head,
longer Nose, shallower Ears and Flews, broad Back, gaunt Belly, small Tail,
long Joints, round Foot; and in fine of a Gray-Hound-like Make.

Thus much to direct the choice of Hounds; now something ought to be spoken of
the Composition of Kennels, wherein I must appeal to the Affection of the
Gentleman, the Lover of this Sport, and let him tell me the Reasons that
induced him take pleasure in Hounds, whether it be he fancies Cunning in
Hunting? Or Sweetness, Loudness, or Deepness of Cry? Or for the Training his
Horses? Or for the Exercise of his Body only?

If for Cunning Hunting; breed your Dogs from the slowest and largest of the
forementioned Northern Hounds, and the swiftest and slenderest of the West
Country, of both Kinds, approved to be not given to lie off, or look for
Advantages, but staunch, fair, even running, and of perfect fine Scent. These
will make a Horse gallop fast, and not run; being middle-siz'd; not too swift
as to outrun, or too slow as to lose the Scent; are the best for the true Art
and Use of Hunting.

If for Sweetness of Cry; compound your Kennel of some large Dogs, of deep
solemn Mouths, and swift in spending, as the Base in the Consort; then twice so
many roaring, loud ringing Mouths, as the Counter-Tenor: And lastly, some
hollow plain sweet Mouths, as the Mean: So shall your Cry be perfect. Observe
that this Composition be of the swiftest and largest deep Mouthed Dog, the
slowest and middle-siz'd, and the shortest Legged slender Dog. For these run
even together.

If for Loudness of Mouth, choose the Loud clanging (redoubling as it were)
Mouth, and to this put the roaring, spending, and Whining Mouth, which will be
loud, smart, and pleasant: Such are for the most part your Shropshire, and
Worcestershire Dogs.

If (lastly) for deegness of cry, the largest dogs having the greatest Mouths,
and deepest flews, are the best; such are your West-Country, Cheshire, and
Lancashire Dogs.

But if you have your Kennel for Training Horses only; then compound your
Kennel of the lightest, nimblest, and swiftest Dogs, such as your Northern
Hounds are. For the strong and violent Exercises of their Horses, through the
Natural Velocity of their Hounds, in the North parts, have rendered them famous
for Truth and Swiftness above all other parts of England.

Lastly, If for the Maintenance of your Health, by preventing Infirmities and
Grossness of Humors, you compose your Kennel; consult first your own Ability
for this Exercise; and if you think you are able to foot it away, then the
Biggest and slowest Dogs you can get are best. But if you would pad it away
through an Unability of footing it, than choose the slowest or middle-siz'd
Hounds, of good Mouths and Noses, for loud Cry, and ready Scent.

Thus far for the Composing a Kennel: I come now to the Kennel it self, of
which I need say little, as indeed unnecessary, leaving that to the Discretion
of the Huntsman; only I would have him observe, that it be built some pretty
way distant from the Dwelling House, in a warm dry Place, free from Vermin,
and near some Pond or River of fresh Water; and so placed, that the Morning Sun
may shine upon it. Be sure to keep it clean, and let them not want fresh Straw
every day. Feed them early in the Morning at Sunrising, and at Sunset in the
Evening. As for the Meat, I leave to the ingenious Huntsman to get when they
come from Hunting; after you have fed them well, let them to their Kennel, and
wash their Feet with Beer and Butter, or some such thing, and pick and search
their Cleys, for Thorns, Stubs, or the like: If it is in Winter, let a Fire be
made, and let them beak and stretch themselves for an hour or so at the fire,
and suffer them to lick, pick, and trim themselves; hereby to prevent the
Diseases incident to them, upon sudden Cooling, as the Mange, Itch, Fevers, etc.

But before I treat of the keeping your Hounds in Health by curing their
Diseases, I must speak a Word or two of the way to Breed good Whelps, viz.
Having a Hound and a Bratch of that general Goodness in Size, Voice, Speed,
Scent, and Proportion you like, put them together to engender in January,
February, or March, as the properest Months for Hounds, Bitches, and Bratches
to be Limed in; because of not losing time to enter them. When you put them
together, observe, as near as you can, if the Moon be in Aquarius or Gemini;
because the Whelps will then never run Mad, and the Litter will be double as
many Dogs, as Bitch-Whelps. When your Bitch is near her Whelping, separate her
from the other Hounds, and make her a Kennel particularly by her self; and see
her Kennell'd every Night, that she might be acquainted and delighted with it,
and so not seek out unwholsom Places; for if you remove the Whelps after they
are Whelp'd, the Bitch will carry them up and down till she come to their first
Place of Littering; and that is very dangerous. Suffer not your Whelps to Suck
above two Months, and then Wean them.

When your Whelps are brought up, enter them not into Hunting till they are at
least a Year and half old: That is, if whelpt in March, enter them September
come Twelve Month; if in April, in October come Twelve Months after, etc.

When you would enter them, bring them abroad, with the most Staunch and best
Hunting Hounds; (all babbling and flying Curs being left at home:) and a Hare
being the best entering Chase, get a Hare ready before, and putting her from
her Form, view which way she takes, and then lay on your Hounds, giving them
all the Advantages may be; if she is caught, do not suffer them to break her,
but immediately taking her, strip off her Skin, and cutting her to pieces, give
every part to your young Whelps; and that will beget in them a Delight in
Hunting.

Diseases incident to Dogs, and their Cures.
For Sick Dogs. Take Sheeps-heads, Wool and all, hack, and bruise them into
pieces, make Pottage of it with Oatmeal, and Pennyroyal, and give it warm.

Lice and Fleas. Boil four or five handfuls of Rue, or Herb of Grace, in a
Gallon of running Water, till a Pottle be consumed, strain it, and put two
Ounces of Staves-acre poudered, and bathe them with it warm.

Itch. Take Oil of Flower-de-Lys, Powder of Brimstone, and dried
Elicampane-Roots, of each a like quantity, and Bay Salt powdered; mix these
Powders with the Oil, and warm it, anoint, scratch, and make it bleed, it will
do well.

Tetter. Take Black Ink, Juice of Mint and Vinegar, of each alike, mix them
altogether with Powder of Brimstone to a Salve, and anoint it.

Worms. Give your Hound Brimstone and new Milk, it will kill them.

Gauling. May Butter, yellow Wax, and unslackt Lime, made to a Salve, and
Anoint therewith, is a present Remedy.

Mange. Take two Handfuls of Wild-Cresses, of Elicampane, of the Leaves and
Roots of Roerb and Sorrel, the like quantity, and two Pound of the Roots of
Frodels, Boil them all well in Lie and Vinegar, strain it, and put therein two
Pound of Gray Soap, and after it is melted, rub your Hound with it four or five
days together.

For any Ear Disease. Mix Verjuice and Chervile Water together, and drop into
his Ears a spoonful or two, Morning and Evening.

Sore Eyes. Chew a Leaf or two of Ground Ivy, and spit the Juice into his Eyes.

Surbaiting. Wash his Feet with Beer and Butter, and bind young red Nettles
beaten to a Salve to his Soles.

Biting by Snake, Adder, etc. Beat the Herb Calaminth with Turpentine, and
yellow Wax to a Salve, and apply it. To expel the inward Poison, give the said
Herb in Milk.

Biting by a Mad Dog. Wash the place with Seawater; or strong Brine, will Cure
him. The quantity of a Hazel-Nut of Mithridate, dissolved in Sweet Wine, will
prevent inward Infection.

Madness. Lastly, If your Hound be Mad, which you will soon find by his
separating himself from the rest, throwing his Head into the Wind, foaming and
slavering at Mouth, snatching at every thing he meets, red fiery Eyes, stinking
filthy Breath; then to Knock him in the Head, is a present Remedy, and you will
prevent infinite Dangers.

And now I proceed to give some brief Instructions for Hunting the several
Chases, viz. the Time when? and the Manner how?

Having your Kennel of Hounds in good order and plight, lead them forth, and to
your Game; only take this Caution; do not forget to have in your Pack a couple
of Hounds, called Hunters in the Highways, that will Scent upon hard Ground,
where we cannot perceive Pricks or Impressions; and let a couple of Old stench
Hounds accompany you, by whose sure Scent, the too great Swiftness of the young
and unexperienced Ones may be restrained and regulated.

Of Heart or Stag-Hunting.
To understand the Age of this our Game, it is known by several Marks, amongst
which this is the most authentic: That if you take his view in the ground, and
perceive he has a large Foot, a thick Heel, a deep Print, open Cleft and long
space, then be assured he is Old; as the Contrary concludes him Young.

To find him? Examine the following Annual, or Monthly.

November, in Heaths among Furs, Shrubs, and Whines.

December, in Forests among thick and strong Woods.

January, in Corners of the Forests, Cornfieldsd, Wheat, Rye, etc.

February and March, amongst Young and thick Bushes.

April and May, in Coppices and Springs.

June and July, in Out-Woods and Purlieus nearest the Cornfieldsd.

September and October, after the first showers of Rain, they leave their
Thickets, and go to Rut, during which time there is no certain place to find
them in.

When you have found him in any of these places, be careful to go up the Wind;
and the best time to find him is before Sunrising, when he goes to feed; then
watch him to his Leir, and having lodged him, go and prepare; if he is not
forced, he will not badge till Evening. Approaching his Lodging, cast off your
Finders, who having Hunted him a Ring or two, cast in the rest; and being in
full Cry and maine Chase, Comfort and Cheer them with Horn and Voice. Be sure
to take notice of him by some Mark, and if your Dogs make Default, rate them
off and bring them to the Default back, and make them cast about till they have
undertaken the first Deer; then cheer them to the utmost, and so continue till
they have either set up or slain him. It is the Nature of a Stag, to seek for
one of his kind, when he is Imbost or weary, and beating him up, ly down in his
place; therefore have a watchful eye unto Change. As likewise by taking Soil
(i. e. Water) he will swim a River just in the middle down the Stream, covering
himself all over, but his Nose, keeping the middle, least by touching any
Boughs he leave a Scent for the Hounds; And by his Crossings and Doublings he
will endeavor to baffle his Persuers: In these Cases have regard to your Old
Hounds, as I said before. When he is Imbost or weary, may be known thus: By his
Creeping into holes, and often lying down, or by his running stiff, high and
lumpering, slavering and foaming at Mouth, shining and blackness of his Hair,
and much Sweat; and thus much for Stag or Heart Hunting. As for the Buck I shall
not speak any thing, for he that can Hunt a Stag well, cannot fail Hunting a
Buck well. As likewise for the Roe Hunting, I refer you to what is spoken of
the Heart or Stag.

Of Hare Hunting.
As for the Time, the most proper to begin this Game, note; That about the
middle of September is best, and to end toward the latter end of February,
when surcease, and destroy not the young early Brood of Leverets; and this
Season is most agreeable likewise to the nature of Hounds; moist and cool. Now
for the Place where to find her, you must examine and observe the Seasons of
the Year; for in Summer or Spring time, you shall find them in Cornfieldsd and
open places, not sitting in Bushes, for fear of Snakes, Adders, etc. In Winter
they love Tuffs of Thorns and Brambles, near Houses: In these places you must
regard the Oldness or Newness of her Form or Seat, to prevent Labor in Vain:
If it be plain and smooth within, and the Pad before it flat and worn, and the
Prickles so new and perceptible, that the Earth seems black, and fresh broken,
then assure your self the Form is new, and from thence you may Hunt and recover
the Hare; if the contrary, it is old, and if your Hounds call upon it, rate
them off. When the Hare is started and on Foot, step in where you saw her pass,
and hollow in your Hounds till they have undertaken it, then go on with full
Cry. Above all, be sure to observe her first Doubling, which must be your
direction for all that day; for all her other after Doublings, will be like
that. When she is thus reduced to the slights and shifts she makes by Doublings
and Windings, give your Dogs Time and Place enough to cast about your Rings,
for unwinding the same; and observe her leaps and skips before she squat, and
beat curiously all likely places of Harbor: She is soon your Prey now.

Of Coney-Catching.
Their Seasons are always, and the way of taking them thus: Set Pursenets on
their Holes, and put in a Ferret close muzzled, and she will boult them out
into the Nets: Or blow on a sudden the Drone of a Bag-Pipe into the Burrows,
and they will boult out: Or for want of either of these two, take Powder of
Orpiment and Brimstone, and boult them out with the Smother: But pray use this
last seldom, unless you would destroy your Warren. But for this sport Hays are
to be preferred above all.

Of Fox-Hunting.
January, February, and March, are the best Seasons for Hunting the Fox above
Ground, the Scent being then strong, and the coldest Weather for the Hounds,
and best finding his Earthing. Cast off your sure Finders first, and as the
Drag mends, more; but not too many at once, because of the Variety of Chaces in
Woods and Coverts. The Night before the Day of Hunting, when the Fox goes to
prey at Midnight, find his Earths, and stop them with Black-Thorns and Earth.
To find him draw your Hounds about Groves, Thickets, and Bushes near Villages;
Pigs and Poultry inviting him to such Places to Lurk in. They make their Earths
in hard Clay, stony Grounds, and amongst Roots of Trees; and have but one Hole
straight and long. He is usually taken with Hounds, Greyhounds, Terriers, Nets
and Gins.

Of Badger Hunting.
This Creature has several Names, as Gray, Brock, Boreson, or Bauson; and is
hunted thus. First go seek the Earths and Burrows where he lies, and in a
clear Moonshine Night, stop all the Holes but one or two, and in these fasten
Sacks with drawing Strings; and being thus set, cast off your Hounds, and beat
all the Groves, Hedges, and Tuffs within a mile or two about, and being alarmed
by the Dogs they will repair to their Burrows and Kennels, and running into the
Bags, are taken.

Of the Martern or wild Cat.
These two Chases are usually hunted in England, and are as great Infesters of
Warrens, as the two last mentioned Vermin, but are not purposely to be sought
after; unless the Huntsman see their place of Prey, and can go to it; and if
the Hound chance to cross them, sport may be had. But no Rule can be prescribed
how to find or hunt them.

Of the Otter.
This Creature uses to lie near Rivers in his Lodging, which he cunningly and
artificially builds with Boughs, Twigs and Sticks. A great Devourer of Fish. It
is a very sagacious and exquisitely Smelling Creature, and much Cunning and
Craft is required to hunt him But to take him, observe this in short. Being
provided with Otter-Spears to watch his Vents, and good Otter-Hounds, beat both
sides of the River's Banks, and you will soon find if there is any. If you find
him, and perceive where he swims under Water, get to stand before him when he
Vents, (i. e. takes breath) and endeavor to strike him with the Spear: If you
miss him, follow him with your Hound, and if they are good for Otter, they will
certainly beat every Tree root, Bul-rush Bed, or Osier-Bed, so that he cannot
escape you.

Of the wild Goat.
The Wild-Goat is as big and as fleshy as a Heart, but not so long-legg'd. The
best time for hunting them is, at All-hallontide; and having observed the
Advantages of the Coasts, Rocks, and Places where the Goats lie, set Nets and
Toils toward the Rivers and Bottoms; for it is not to be imagined, the Dogs can
follow them down every place of the Mountains. Stand some on the tops of the
Rocks, and as occasion offers throw down Stones; and place your Relays at the
small Brooks or Waters, where the Goat comes down; but let them not tarry till
the Hounds come in, that were cast off.

Thus much for Hunting.

Of RIDING.
HERE we must first examine the Ends and Design of our proposing this Art to
our selves, and accordingly lay down as briefly as may be the necessary Rules
and Lessons are to be observed and learnt; and I take these to be the usual
Perfections we aim at, To ride well the great Horse, for the Wars or Service,
and the Horse for Pleasure; of both which as concisely as I can, in their order.

We must begin with Taming, a young Colt. After you have kept him at home some
time, and made him so Familiar with you, as to suffer Combing, Currying,
Handling, and Stroaking any part, it is high time then to offer him the Saddle,
which you must lay in the Manger first, that by its smell, he may not be afraid
of it, or the Styrrups Noise. Then gently saddling him (after his dressing)
take a sweet Watering Trench, anointed with Honey and Salt, and place it in his
Mouth so, that it may hang directly over his Tush; then lead him abroad in your
hand, and Water him; and after he has stood an hour rein'd take off his Bridle
and Saddle, and let him feed till Evening; then do as in the Morning; dress and
Cloth him, having Cherisht, by the Voice delivered smoothly and gently; or by
the Hand by gently stroaking and clapping him on the neck, or Buttock; or
lastly by the Rod, by rubbing it on his Withers or Main.

On the next day as before; and after that, put him on a strong Musrole, or
sharp Cavezan, and Martingale; which is the best guide to a Horse for setting
his head in due place, forming the Rein, and appearing Graceful and Comely; it
Corrects the yerking out his Head, or Nose, and prevents his running away with
his Rider. Observe therefore to place it right, that it be not buckled
straight, but loose, and so low, that it rest on the tender Grizsle of his
Nose, to make him the more sensible of his fault, and Correction; and so as you
see you win his Head, bring him straighter by degrees; let him but gently feel
it, till his Head be brought to its true perfection.

Having observed this well, lead him forth into some soft or new Plowed Land,
trot him about in your hand a good while: Then offer to Mount; if he refuse to
suffer you, trot him again; then putting your foot into the Styrrop, mount half
way; if he takes it impatient, correct him, and about again; if not, cherish
him, and place your self a moment in the Saddle, dismount, cherish, and feed
him with Grass, or Bread: All things being well, remount, even in the Saddle,
keeping your Rod from his Eye; then let one lead him by the Chaff-Halter, and
ever and a-non make him stand, and cherish him, till he will of his own accord
go forward; then come home, alight gently, dress and feed him well. This Course
in few days will bring him to Trot, by following some other Horseman, stop
him now and then gently, and forward; not forgetting seasonable Cherishings and
Corrections, by Voice, Bridle, Rod, Spurs.

Being thus brought to some certainty of Rein, and Trotting forth-right, then
to the treading forth of the large Rings. And here first examine your Horses
Nature, before you choose your Ground, for, if his Nature be dull and
sloathful, yet strong, then New-Plow'd-Field is best; if Active, Quick, and
Fiery, then Sandy-ground is to be preferred; in the most proper of which mark
out a large Ring, of a Hundred paces circumference. Walk about it on the right
seven or eight times, then by a little straightning your right Rein, and laying
your left leg calf to his side, make a half Circle within the Ring upon your
right down to its Center; then by straightning a little your left Rein, and
laying your right Leg Calf to his side, make a half Circle to your left hand,
from the Center to the outmost Verge, and these you see contrary turned make a
Roman S. Now to your first large Compass, walk him about on your left hand, as
often as before on the right, and change to your right within your Ring; then
Trot him first on the right hand, then on the left, as long as you judge fit,
and as often Mornings and Evenings, as the Nature of your Horse shall require.
In the same manner you may make him to Gallop the same Rings, though you must
not enter it all at once, but by degrees, first a Quarter, then a Half-quarter;
and the Lightness and Cheerfulness of your Body, not the Spur, must induce him
to it.

The next Lesson is to Stop Fair, Comely, and without Danger, First see that
the Ground be hard and firm, then having cherisht your Horse, bring him to a
swift Trot, about Fifty Paces, and then straightly and suddenly draw in your
Bridle hand; then ease a little your hand to make him give backward, and in so
doing, give him liberty and cherish him; then drawing in your Bridle hand, make
him retire, and go back; if he strike, ease your hand: if he refuse, let some
by-stander put him back, that he may learn your intention and thus he may learn
these two Lessons at once.

To Advance before, when he stops, is thus taught: When you stop your Horse,
without easing your hand, lay close and hard to his sides both Calves of your
Legs, and shaking your Rod cry, Up, Up; which he will understand by frequent
Repetition, and Practice: This is a Graceful, and Comely Motion, makes a Horse
Agile, and Nimble, and ready to turn; and therefore be careful in it: That he
take up his Legs Even together, and bending to his Body; not too high, for fear
of his coming over; not sprawling, or pawing; or for his own pleasure; in these
faults correct him with Spur and Rod.

To Yerk out behind is the next Lesson, thus learnt, Presently upon your making
him stop give him a good brisk jerk near his Flank, which will make him soon
understand you. When he does it, cherish him; and see he does it comely, for to
yerk out his hinder Legs, till his Forelegs be above Ground, is not graceful;
or one Leg yerk't farther out than the other; or one Leg out while the other is
on the Ground; in this case a single Spur on the faulty side, is best. But to
help him in Yerking, staying his Mouth on the Bridle, striking your Rod under
his Belly, or touching him on the Rump with it.

To Turn readily on both hands, thus: Bring his large Rings narrower, and
therein gently walk him, till acquainted. Then carry your Bridle-hand steady
and straight, the outmost rather straighter than the inmost Rein, to look from,
rather than to the Ring; trot him thus about, on one side and the other
sucessively, as aforesaid. After some time stop, and make him advance twice or
more, and retire in an even Line; then stop and cherish him. To it again, after
the same manner, making him lap his outmost Leg above a foot over his Inner.
And thus the Terra a Terra, Incavalere and Chambletta, are all taught together.
Perfect your Horse in the large Ring, and the straight Ring is easily learnt.

Your Horse being brought thus far to perfection, with the Musrole and Trench,
now let a gentle Cavezan take their place; with a smooth Cannon-Bit in his
Mouth, and a plain watering Chain, Cheek large, and the Kirble thick, round and
big, loosely hanging on his nether Lip; and thus mount him, and perfect your
Horse with the Bit in all the aforesaid Lessons, as you did with the Snaffle;
which indeed is the easier to be done of the two.

To teach your Horse To go a side, as a necessary Motion for shunning a blow
from an Enemy, is thus: Draw up your Bridle hand somewhat straight, and if you
would have him go on the Right, lay your left Rein close to his Ncek, and your
left Calf likewise close to his side (as in the Incavalere before) making him
lap his left Leg over his Right; then turning your Rod backward jerking him on
the left hinder Thigh gently, make him to bring to the right side his Hinder
parts, and stand as at first in an even direct Line: Then make him remove his
Fore parts more, that he may stand as it were Cross over the even Line, and
then bring his hinder parts after, and stand in an even Line, again. And thus
you must do, if you would have him go on the Left hand, using your Corrections
and Cherishings on the right. Use it, and you may be sure of Perfection.

For the Carreere, only take this: Let it not extend in length above six score
yards, give your Horse warning before you start him by the Bridle hand, and
running full speed, stop him suddenly, firm and close on his Buttock.

For the Horse of Pleasure, these following Lessons are to be learnt. As first
to Bound aloft, to do which: Trot him some sixteen yards, then stop, and make
him twice advance; then straighten your Bridle-hand; then clap briskly both
your Spurs even together to him, and he will rise, though it may at first amaze
him; if he does it, cherish him, and repeat it often every day, till perfect.

Next to Corvet and Capriole are Motions of the same nature, and in short are
thus taught. Hollow the ground between two joining Walls a Horses length, by
the side of which put a strong smooth Post of the same length from the Wall,
and fasten at the Wall an Iron Ring over against the Post: Thus done, ride into
the hollow place, and fasten one of the Cavezan Reins to the Post, and the
other to the Ring; then cherish him, and by the help of the Calves of your
Legs, make him advance two or three times; then pause, and Cherish him; make
him advance again a dozen times more, and then rest; double your Advancings,
and repeat them till it becomes habitual to him, to keep his Ground certain,
advance of an equal hight before and behind, and observe a due Time with the
motions of your Legs. The Inequality of his advancing his hinder Legs, is helped
by a Jerk on the Fillets by some body behind him with a Rod.

Of RACING.
A Racer must have the Finest Cleanest Shape possible, and above all, Nimble,
Quick, and Fiery, apt to Fly with the least Motion; nor is a long Bodied
contemptible, it assuring Speed, though it signifies Weakness too. The Arabian,
Barbary, or his Bastard, are esteemed the best for this Use, these excelling
Jennets, though they are good too.

Having furnished your self with a Horse thus qualified, you are to observe his
right and due Ordering, before your designed Racing. Bartholomew-tide is the
most proper time to take him from Grass; the day before being Dry, Fair, and
Pleasant: That Night let him stand conveniently, to empty his Body; the next
day Stable him, and feed him with Wheat-straw that day, and no longer; lest you
exceeding that time, it straighten his Guts, heat his Liver, and hurt his
Blood; for want of Straw, Riding him Morning and Evening to Water, Airing, or
other moderate Exercises will serve. Then feed him with good old sweet Hay, and
according to the Season, and Temperature of his Body clothe him; for a Smooth
Coat shows Cloth enough, and a Rough Coat want of it. Observe likewise where
you Water, your Race-Horse, that it be a Running Water, or clear Spring, far
distant (a Mile or more) from the Stable, adjoining to some Level; where after
he has once well drank Gallop him, and so Water and Scope him till that he
refuse to drink more, for that time; then Walk him gently Home (being an Hour
on your way, or more) clothe, and stop him round with soft Whisps, and let him
stand an Hour upon his Bridle, and after feed him with sweet sound Oats,
thoroughly dried either with Age, Kilne, or Sun; if he be low of flesh, or bad
Stomacht, add a third part of clean Old Beans, or two parts of Oats, or Wash
his Oats in strong Beer or Ale.

For Dressing take these Rules. Dress your Horse twice a day, before you Water
him, both Morning, and Evening, thus: Curry him after he is unclothed, from
his Ear-tips to his Tail, and his whole Body entirely (save his Legs under the
Knees, and Cambrels) with an Iron-Comb; then Dust him, and Rub him with a Brush
of Bristles over again; Dust him again, and wetting your hand in clean Water,
rub off all the loose Hairs, and so rub him dry as at first; then with a fine
Hair Cloth rub him all over; and lastly, with a fine Linen Cloth; and then
pick his Eyes, Nostrils, Sheath, Cods, Tuel, and Feet clean.

The best Food for your Racer, is good, sweet, well dried, sunned, and beaten
Oats: Or else Bread made of one part Beans, and two parts Wheat (i. e.) two
Bushels of Wheat, to one of Beans, ground together: Boult through a fine Range
half a Bushel of fine Meal, and bake that into two or three Loaves by it self,
and with water and good store of Barm, knead up, and bake the rest in great
Loaves, having sifted it through a Meal-sieve: (But to your finer, you would do
well to put the whites of Twenty or thirty Eggs, and with the Barm a little
Ale, it is no matter how little water:) With the Courser feed him on his Resting
days, on his Laboring days with the finer.

The best time for feeding your Runner on his Resting days is, after his
Watering in the Morning, at One a Clock at Noon, after his watering in the
Evening, and at nine or ten a Clock at nights: On his Days of Labor, two Hours
after he is thoroughly Cold outwardly and inwardly, as before.

As for the Proportion of Meat, I shall not confine your Love to a Quantity,
only give him a little at once, as long as his Appetite is Good: When he begins
to fumble and play with his Meat, hold your hand, shut up your Sack,

As for his Exercise it ought to be thrice a Week, as his bodily Condition
requires; if he be foul, moderate Exercise will break his Grease; if clean,
then as you judge best, taking heed of breaking his Mettle, or discouraging
him, or laming his Limbs. Before you air him, to add to his Wind, it is
requisite to give him a raw Egg broken in his Mouth: if your Horse be very fat,
air him before Sun rising and after Sunset; if lean, deprive him not of the
least strength and Comfort of the Sun you can devise. To make him Sweat
sometimes by coursing him in his Clothes is necessary, if moderate; but without
his Clothes, let it be sharp and swift. See that he be empty before you course
him; and it is wholesome to wash his Tongue and Nostrils with Vinegar, or piss
in his Mouth, before you back him. And after his Exercise, cool him before you
come home, house, litter and rub him well and dry; then cloth him, and give
him after every Course a Scouring thus prepared.

For scouring a Race-Horse,
Take 20 Raisins of the Sun stoned, 10 Figs slit in the midst, boil them till
they be thick in a Pottle of fair Water, mix it with Powder of Annis-seeds,
Lycoras, and Sugar Candy, till it come to a stiff Paste, make them into round
Balls, roll them in Butter, and give him three or four of them the next morning
after his Course, and ride him an hour after, and then set him up Warm. Or this
may be preferred, being both a Purge and a Restorative, a Cleanser and a
Comforter, thus prepared.

Take three Ounces of Annis-seeds, six Drams of Cummin-seeds, one Dram and half
of Carthamus, one Ounce and two Drams of Fennngreek-seed, one Ounce and half of
Brimstone; Beat all these to a fine Powder, and searse them; then take a Pint
and two Ounces of Sallet-Oyl, a Pint and half of Honey, and a Pottle of
White Wind; then with a sufficient Quantity of fine white Meal, knead and work
all well into a stiff Paste; keep it in a clean Cloth, for use. When occasion
requires, dissolve a Ball of it in a Pail of Water, and after Exercise give it
him to drink in the Dark, that he may not see the Color, and refuse it: If he
does refuse, let Fasting force him to be of another mind.

To conclude, these Instructions, I will give you 'em in short before you run,
and then away as fast as you can.

Course not your Horse hard four or five days before your Match, lest you make
his Limbs sore, and abate his Speed.

Muzzle him not (except a foul Feeder) above two or three Nights before the
Race, and the Night before his bloody Courses.

Give him sharp, as well as gentle, Courses on the Race he is to run.

Shoe him a day before you run him.

Let him be empty on the Match Day.

Saddle him in the Stable, and fix to him the Girths and Panel with
Shoe-makers Wax.

Lead him with all Gentleness to his Course, and let him smell other Horses
Dung to provoke him to stale, etc.

And Lastly, being come to the starting place, rub him well, uncloath him; then
take his Back, and the Word given, with all Gentleness and Quietness possible,
start and away; And God speed you well.

School of Recreation. How to make Artificial Fireworks of all sorts, for
Pleasure, etc.
OF Artificial Fireworks for Recreation, there are three general sorts, viz.
Those that ascend or mount in the Air. Those that consume on the Earth: And
such as burn on the Water. And these are again divided into three Particulars,
viz. For the Air, the Sky-Rocket, the flying Saucisson, and Balloon: For the
Earth, the Ground-Rocket, the fiery Lances, and the Saucissons descendent. For
the Water-Globes or Balls, double Rockets, and single Rockets; and of these in
their particular Orders, to make them, and such other Matters, as may occur
relating to Fireworks.

But before I enter particularly on them, it will not be amiss to give the
Unlearned Instructions for making his Moulds for Rockets, etc.

This Mould must be of a substantial piece of Wood, well seasoned, and not
subject to split or warp; and first the Caliber or Bore of it, being an Inch in
Diameter; the Mould must be six Inches long, and Breech an Inch and half; the
Broach that enters into the Choking part, three Inches and a half long, and in
Thickness a quarter of an Inch. The Rowler on which you wrap the Paper or Paste
board, being three quarters of an Inch Diameter, and the Rammer somewhat less,
that it may easily pass and re-pass, made hollow to receive the Broach; for the
Cartoush Coffin must be filled with the Materials, the Broach being in.

If the Bore be two Inches Diameter, the Rocket must be twelve Inches in
Length: If an Inch and a half in Bore, then nine Inches Long, and so
proportionably to any other Diameter. The Cartoush or Case must be either
strong Paper or fine Paste-board, choked within an Inch a quarter of the Top,
rolled on the Rowler with a thin Paste, to keep the Doublings the higher
together, that it may have the greater force and higher flight. Having thus far
considered your Mould and Cartoush or Case, I proceed to the Composition and
filling part, etc.

A Sky-Rocket, how to make it, etc.

In the Composition of your filling Materials be very cautious that you exceed
not the just Proportion, for which I shall give Directions to be a Standard in
this case, viz. Having beat a Pound of Powder very fine, and sifted it through
a Lawn Sieve that no whole Corns remain in it; do the like by two Ounces of
Charcole; then sift them together, so that they may mix well, which done, fill
a small Rocket with this Mixture, and if it break in Mounting before it come to
the supposed height, or burns out too fierce, then is there too much Powder,
and more fine sifted Charcole must be added; but if there be too much Charcole
in the Composition, then upon trial it will not ascend, or very little.

Observe in charging your Rocker, at every quarter of an ounce of Ingredients
or thereabouts, you ram it down very hard, forcing your Rammer with a wooden
Mallet, or some weighty piece of Wood, but no Iron or Stone, for fear any
Sparkles of Fire fly out and take your Combustible Matter; so fill it by
degrees: If you design neither to place Stars, Quills, or small Rockets on its
Head, you may put in about an Inch and a half of dry Powder for the Bounce, but
if you are to place the forementioned things on the Head of a great Rocket,
you must close down the Paper or Paste-board very hard, and prick two or three
holes with a Bodkin, that it may give fire to them when it Expires, placing a
large Cartoush or Paste-board on the head of the Rocket, into which you must
put the Stars or small Rockets, Paper-Serpents, or Quill-Serpents; of which I
shall speak more hereafter.

Note further, That if you would have your Rocket sparkle much, you must put
some grossly bruised Salt peter into the Composition; but then it must not lie
long before it be let off, for fear it give and damp the Powder. If you would
have it leave a blue Stream, as it ascends, put fine beaten and sifted Sulphur
into it, but of neither of these more than a third part of Charcole; and in
this manner greater and lesser Rockets are made, but the lesser must have more
Powder and less Charcole than the greater, by a fifth part in six.

Golden Rain, and Golden Hair.
For Golden Rain, or streams of Fire, that will, when at height, descend in the
Air like Rain: Take large Goose-Quills, take only the hollow Quill as long as
may be, fill it with beaten Powder and Charcole; as for the Air Rocket only add
a little Powder of Sulphur. Being hard filled to a quarter of an Inch, stop
that with wet Powder, called Wildfire; place as many as you think convenient
on the Head of a great Rocket, pasted on in a Roll of Paper, so that it may not
fall off till the Rocket bursts, there being a little dry Powder in it to force
the end when the stream of fire ceases, at which time they taking, will appear
like a shower of Fire of a golden Color, spreading themselves in the Air, and
then tending directly downwards. This is to be considered when you stand
directly, or something near under them; but if you are at some distance, then
they will appear to you like the Blazing Tail of a Comet or Golden Hair.

Silver Stars, How to make them.
To make Stars that will expand in Flame, and appear like natural Stars in the
Firmament for a time: Take half a Pound of Saltpeter, the like quantity of
Brimstone, finely beaten together, sifted and mingled with a quarter of a Pound
of Gunpowder so ordered: Then wrap up the Composition in Linen Rags or fine
Paper, to the quantity of a Walnut, bind them with small Thread, and prick
holes in the Rag or Paper with a Bodkin, and place six or ten of them on the
Head of a great Rocket, as you did the Quills, and when the Rocket expires,
they take fire and spread into a Flame, hovering in the Air like Stars, and
descend leisurely till the matter is spent that gives them light.

Red fiery Colored Stars, How to make them.
Take in this Case half a Pound of Powder, and double the quantity of
Saltpeter; as much fine flower of Brimstone as Powder, wet them with fair
Water and Oil of Petrolum till they will stick together like Pellets; then make
them up somewhat less than the former, and roll them in sifted dry Powder, then
let them harden, by drying in the Sun or Air, and place them on a great Rocket,
as you did the other Stars, and you will perceive them when the Rocket is at
the height, fall, like Bodies or Globes of Fire, in the manner as if real Stars
were shooting or falling from the Sky, for by reason of their wetness or
density they cannot expand into Flame, which occasions them by the pressure of
their weight to descend with greater Impetuosity till they waste and vanish
into Air, etc.

Another sort of Stars that give great Reports in the Air, as if Armies were
fighting.
Here you must observe to place six, seven, or eight small Rockets on the Head
of a great one, filled only with dry Powder, but indifferently rammed, and on
the ends of them holes being pricked through, place any of the sorts of Stars,
or a mixture, as your fancy leads you; and when the small Rockets go off like
Thunder in the Air, the Stars will take fire, so that the Noise will seem to
the Spectators as if it proceeded from them, because they will be seen on fire
before the Sound of the Reports can be heard.

To make Paste-board Mortars for Balloons.
These stately Prospects of Fire are to be carried into the Air by the force of
Powder, by the help of Mortars; and therefore the making of the Mortars are in
the first place to be considered.

Take a Rowler of Wood, about 12 Inches Diameter, and three Foot and a half in
Length, wet strong Paste-board, and roll upon it as close as may be, glewing
the Paste-board between each Rolling; then being about five Inches thick, bind
over it strong pitched Rope, though indifferent small: Then choke the Breech of
it, which must be beyond the length of the Rowler, with a strong Cord; pitch or
glue it over that the Powder may not force its vent that way, and so when the
Mortar is well dried, draw out the Rowler, and make it as even as can be; bore
a Touchhole two Inches from the Breech, that it may enter into the hollow of
the Mortar, and set it by for use.

To make Balloons, the rarity of Fireworks.
Take strong Paper, or Paste-board, roll it on a 12 Inch Rowler, near as thick
as it is long, then with a strong small Cord choke it at one end only, leaving a
Port-fire, which is a place to put in a Quill of Wildfire, that will last till
being shot out of the Mortar it comes to its height; then next to that put on
an Ounce and a half of loose Powder, and place in it as many small Rockets and
Stars as it will hold; so choke up the other end quite. You may also put into
it little quills of Wildfire, then being closed up, only a Port-fire
remaining, which made of a Quill of Wildfire, as is said, or Stopple, to make
which in the close of this Head I shall Instruct you, Charge the Mortar, being
set Sloaping upwards with half a Pound of corn Powder, and it will by giving
fire at the priming holes, send the Balloon up into the Air a prodigeous
height, and when it comes to the dry Powder, that will break the Balloon; and
then the Stars and Rockets in it taking fire, will scatter abroad in various
curious Figures delightful to the Spectators; and as they are Cunningly placed,
they will represent Crowns, Ciphers, Characters, Dates of the Year, etc.

The Airy or flying Saucisson, How to make it.
This curious Fire-work must be made in the Composition matter for filling
mostly of corned Powder, putting before it when you fill the Cartoush or Case
as much fine sifted Powder and Charcole as composed for the Rocket, will carry
it to its height; leave a hole for the Port-fire in the choking as big as a
Goose-Quill will enter filling it with Dust-Powder and Charcole, and so close
up the open end, by turning in the Paper or Paste-board corner-wise, either
glewing or waxing it down.

Paste-board Guns to cast the Saucissons into the Air, How to make them.
To make these kind of Guns, Take a Rowler, some what less than for the
Balloon, Rowel on it your Paste-board, and cord it over with strong Packthread,
making their Touch-holes at the bottom, because they must be placed upright on
a Plank or Board in a Row fixed into the Plank or Board in holes cut
proportionable to them, and lashed fast to Staples above and beneath with
strong Cords, and being charged with a quarter of a Pound of Powder, fire by
Match or otherways given to the Touchhole underneath the Plank, when the
Saucisson is lightly put in with the Neck or Port-fire downward, so that it may
touch the Powder; and this will serve for Use a considerable time.

Saucissons for the Earth or Water, To make them.
Make your Cartoushes or Cases about 9 Inches long, and an Inch in the Diameter
of the Calliber, by Rolling Paper or thin Paste-board on a wooden Rowler;
choke the ends only, leaving at one end a passage to thrust in a Goose-Quill
filled with Dust-Powder and Charcole well mixed, at a Port-fire, Glue them
over, or use small Cord glued or pitched to strengthen the Case that it burst
not unseasonably by the force of the Composition, with which you must fill them
when you have choked; only at the Port-fire end, the Composition being about 2
Inches, the same as the former, the rest corned Powder, having primed and fixed
them on a Plank in a Row about a foot distance, lay a train of Stouple, and
they will fire gradually, flying about on the Earth or the Water, according as
you place them, giving reports like a Volley of Muskets.

This Stouple is useful for Trains; and Port-fire is no more than Cotton-wool
well dressed in water and Gunpowder dried in the Sun, or in a clean Swept warm
Oven, that it may come somewhat near Tinder, but more swift and fiercer in its
fire when it has Taken.

Fire-Boxes, To make them.
Take a great Cartoush or Case made, as for the Balloon, crowd it full of small
Rockets or Serpents, with the choked part downward, prime them with Stouple or
Wildfire; fix it firm on a Pole, make a priming Hole in the side toward the
lower end, and run in a Quill of fine beaten Powder, and they will fly out (the
upper end being left open) one by one as swift as may, or if you scatter loose
Powder they will fly out several together with a prodigeous Noise, and
breaking, imitating a deal of Thunder.

Firey Lances, How to make them.
These are usually for running on the Water making there a very pleasant
Pass-time: Their cartoush or Cases are made like the small Rocket, with thin
Paste-board glued and rolled up on a wooden Rowler about 9 Inches long: If you
would have it carry a long fiery Tail on the Water, the Composition must be 2
Ounces of Charcole, half a Pound of Brimstone, half a Pound of Powder; and half
a Pound of Saltpeter, or proportionable for so many as you make, bruised
finely and Sifted; but if you would have it burn bright like a Torch, put only
four Ounces of Powder to the forenamed quantity of Brimstone and Saltpeter,
without any Charcole-dust, tying to each Line a Rod in the same nature as to
the Sky-Rocket; but not of that largness; and they will float about a long
time, making a strange show in a dark Night, their ends being so placed on a
frame when you give fire, that they may leap out of them selves one, two, or
three, at a time, or as you design them, by putting more or less Stouple for
Port-fires; scatter a very small quantity of loose Powder underneath.

To make the appearance of Trees and Fountains of Fire.
This is done by placing many little Rockets on the Head of a great one, by
passing their slender Rods through its large Cartoush; and if they take fire
whilst the Rocket is vigorously Ascending, they will spring up like Branches or
fiery Trees; but if they go off just as the Rocket is spent, and Descending,
they will appear like a Fountain of Fire.

Girondels or Fire-wheels, How to make them.
Take a Wheel of light Wood, like the circle of a Spinning-wheel, on which the
Band is placed; tie small Rockets round it in the nature of a Band, so fast
that they cannot fly off; and so Head to Tail, that the first fired when it
bursts may give fire to the next, whose force will carry the Wheel (which must
be placed on a strong Pin in the Axeltree) round so fast that although but one
Rocket go off at a time, it will seem all on fire, and so continue whilst all
are gradually Spent; and this especially at the Angles of great Fireworks are
very Ornamental.

Ground-Rockets, and the best way of Making Serpents.
The Mould of the Ground-Rocket may be made in all particulars like that for
the Sky-Rocket, but less in Length and Circumference, six, seven, or eight
Inches being a warrantable Length; roll on the Cartoush or Case to a moderate
thickness; choke it at one end, fill it, the Broach being in as the Sky-rocket;
with this composition.

Put but an ounce of Charcole to a Pound of Powder, and about half an Ounce of
Saltpeter; beat, mingle and sift them finely; put in about a quarter of an
ounce between every Raming till it is full with in an Inch with corned Powder,
Lightly Raming it, leaving only so much room as may choke it at that end,
cutting then off what hangs over, and leaving it with a picked end; being thus
finished, prime it with a little wet Powder, and lay it a drying till you
dispose of it for your pass-time.

The Serpent is a kind of a small Rocket; To make them therefore well, make a
Case of strong white Paper, about six Inches and a half, the Rowler being about
the thickness of a small Arrow, it must have a Head and a Broach
proportionable, being Rolled up hard, past the Edg that turns over; choke it
with a strong Pack-thread, and fill it with a Composition of six ounces of
Powder to one of Charcole, both beaten finely, sifted and well mingled; put in
a little and little at time in, and every time you put any in, Ram it down hard
till within an Inch full; then put in corned Powder, press it down gently, and
with the end of your Rammer force down the end that stands a littte above; so
that it may cover the Powder, and then Seal it down with Wax; prime with
Dust-Powder, and a little Flower of Brimstone, and with your Match having a
good Coal on it, give fire as you see occasion.

Fiery Globes or Comets, to make them.
Take half a Pound of Powder, two onces of Brimstone, an ounce of Saltpeter,
bruize these Grossly, and wet them; Aqua-Vitae and Oil of Petrolum, that they
may be molded like a Paste, that so they may be made up into Balls, as big as
ordinary Wash-Balls; then dry them very hard, and wrap them up in Cerecloaths
made or Brimstone, Rosin, and Turpentine, in which make a little whole, and
prime with Wildfire: Put the Ball then into a Sling, and the Wildfire being
Touched, throw it up as high as you can into the Air, and when the body of the
Ball fires, it will appear to the Beholders like a fiery Globe, with a Stream
or Blaze, like as if a Comet or Blazing Star were Ascending or Descending,
according to its height op Declination,

To try the goodness of Powder, that you may know its strength.
Observe whether it be well dried and corned, which you have taken notice of,
and approved; lay a few Corns scattered on a sheet of white Paper, and fire
them; when if they leave a black and sooty mark behind them, with a noisome
smell, and sindg the Paper, then is that Powder gross and earthy, and will fail
your Expectation, if you use it in your Fireworks: But if in the sprinkling
and firing there appear few or no marks, or those of a clear bluish Color,
then it is airy and light, well made, full of fire, and fit for Service; half a
Pound of it having more strength than a Pound of the other.

And thus Reader, have I given you an Insight into the making Fireworks, etc.
Such as are very pleasing, and now used on occasions in all Christian
Countries, in making which, by a little practice you may soon be perfect.

St. George and the Dragon fighting, etc. Also Mermaids, Whales, etc.
Form your Figures of Paste-board, Strengthened with Wicker, small Sticks
within pasted to the Board to keep it hollow, tight, and bearing out; and place
a hollow Trunk in the Body for a large Line to pass through, and likewise for a
smaller to draw them too, and from each other, that they may the better seem in
Combats, which must be fastened at the Dragons Breast, and let one end of the
Cord be tied, which must pass through the Body of St. George, turning about a
Pully at the other end, and fastening it to his Back, and tie another at his
Breast, which must pass through the Body of the Dragon, or a Trunk at his Back;
and so returning about a Pully at that end, it must be drawn straight, and
fastened to the Dragons Tail; so that as you turn that Wheel, they will run
furiously at each other, and as you please you may make them retreat and meet
again, Soaping the Line to make them slip the easier; at the Dragons Tail, in
his Mouth and Eyes you must fix Serpents, or small Rockets, which being fired
at their setting out, will cause a dreadful sight in a dark Night.

Thus a Mermaid, or a Whale, may be made to float on the Water, but then the
Figure must be fixed on a convenient piece of Board, with two fire Wheels fixed
on an Axle, run through the poised part of the Body, by the force of which it
moves in a swift Line in the Water; the Wheels must have little Rockets or
Serpents tied round them, as the Girondel before mentioned.

A Fire-Drake on a Line.
Having made the Figure of Paste-board to the proper Form of a Dragon with
Paste-board and Wicker, as has been taught before, make a hollow Trunk through
the Body of it for a great Line to pass through, and fasten small Lines to draw
it too and from you at the breast and Tail of the Drake; put into the Eyes,
Mouth and Tail of it Rockets so fixed, that they cannot fly out, as you may put
Wildfire Rolled up hard and long in Paper: Then fire that in the Eyes and
Mouth first, and draw it with Pullies from one end of the Line to the other;
then that in the Tail, and draw it back, and it will seem as retreating from
danger, with fire coming out of the Belly of it.

A Burning Castle and Dragon on the Water.
Make the Dragon of Paste-board and Wicker, as before; The bottom of the Castle
of Light Wood, and the work of Paste-board with Paper, Turrets and Battlements
of a foot height, in the Portal of the Castle fasten a Line that it may come
level with the Water, and therefore some part of the Castle must be under
Water; this Line must be fastened to the other side of the Water, or in the
Water, if it be broad, and admit not the former on a Pole or Stake knocked
down, and pass in a hollow Trunk through the Belly of a Dragon, that being in
the Castle, may upon fireing the Rockets, placed advantageously in the Tail,
Eyes and Mouth, come out of the Castle and move on the Line; to meet which, you
may at the other end of the Line, in the same manner, prepare a Neptune in a
Chariot, or riding on a Seahorse, with a burning Trident, or a Whale with a
Rocket or Wildfire in his Mouth; which if it ly low, by spouting out, will
make the Water fly about, as if it spouted Fire and Water out of its Mouth;
then by a Train fire, some little Paste-board Guns in the Castle, which if the
Composition of the Train be made of Wildfire, or Stouple, will go off by
degrees, and coming to a Train of Brimstone, Rosin and Powder, make the whole
frame expire in a terrible blaze.

A Wheel of Fireworks to run backwards and forwards on the Ground.
Procure a pair of Wheels, being of Light Wood, like that of a Spinning Wheel,
fasten them on an Axel-tree, and place Rockets round them, as bands are
fastened round a Wheel, and so primed at Tail and Head, that when one Expires
the other may take fire, half of them placed with their Heads and Tails the
contrary way to the first: So that when the first are spent, and the Wheels
have run on plain Ground a great way, the other firing will turn them again,
and bring them to the place where they first set out.

A Fire that will burn in the Water, or Water-ball.
Sow up a Case of Canvas, like that of a Football, but lesser, pitch or glue
it over: Then take one Pound of Powder, eight ounces of Roch-alom, four ounces
of live Sulphur, two ounces of Camphire, Linseed-oyl, and that of Retrolum,
each an Ounce and half, an ounce of Oil of Spike, with two ounces of
Colophonium bruised and well mixed together, and stuff the Ball hard with it,
with a Stick pitch or glue it over again, binding it with Marline on Pitch, on
that leave two Vents or Port-fires, set it on fire, trundle it on the Water,
and it will burn under it.

The exactest Military Discipline for the Exercise of Foot and Horse, as in Use
at this day, at Home and Abroad, in all the Words of Command, etc.
TO be well disciplined and trained up in Military Affairs, has been the study
and pride of all Warlike Nations, whereby they have acquired to themselves Fame
and Riches, by being able to defend themselves against Invaders, and gain
Conquests Abroad; but above all other, for many hundred Years past the English
have excelled in this, being much helped by their natural Courage. But since I
only at this time intended to write to the Learner, to train him up in his
Exercise, by which means his own Industry and Experience may lead him forth to
greater matters. I shall not enumerate the many brave Men, who from mean
Conditions have raised themselves by Arms, to the highest pitch of Honor and
Preferment; but show our Youth what they are to do and observe in their first
Training, as to the Words of Command, to order their Arms in their various
Postures with Dexterity. And first of Foot Exercise, I shall speak of the Pike,
because it is the most Ancient, to Train which, many, who are now great
Commanders, have taken it as an Honor.

The Exercise of the Pike, by word of Command, etc.
1. Pikes take: Advance your Pikes. To do this, as the first thing required,
move in a direct Line with your Pike upward, with your Left Hand near your
Side, your Right Hand almost as high as you can reach, keeping your Left by a
Depression, as low as you can, your Fingers being strait out; and so raise the
Pike till the Butt-end come to your Hand, then place it between your Breast and
Shoulder, keeping the Butt-end close, that it may be the more steady and
upright. 2. To the Front. To do this, put your Left Hand on your Pike, even
with the Top of your Shoulder, keeping your Fingers strait, and bring your Pike
right before you with a swift Motion; drawing your Right-heel into your
Left-instep, and so keep the Pike strait. 3. Charge. Here you must fall back
with your Right-leg, placing the Heel of your Left-foot against the middle of
your Right, and bring down your Pike with a quick Motion, support it with your
Left-Elbow, and charge Breast high; and upon yielding your Body forward, bend
your Left-knee to fix your self firmer, holding the Butt end of your Pike in
the Palm of your Right Hand, your Left-Toe pointing in a Line with the Spear of
the Pike, your Feet set at a moderate distance: Then bring it down somewhat
beneath your Breast, be cautious of clattering, and when it is charged, close
it to your Breast. 4. To the Right four times. Here turn your Left-toe to the
Right, then make your Left-heel come up to your Right-instep with a sudden
Motion, Recovering your Pike strait before you, and having turned, fall back
with your Right-leg, and Charge as before. 5. To the Right about. Now by
turning your Left-toe, bring it to the Right about, bringing up your
Right-heel; your Pike being recovered, Charge with much swiftness. 6. As you
were. To do this, by turning to the Left about, bring up your Left-toe; so
bringing your Pike recovered, observe that your Left hand be never higher than
your Mouth, your Feet placed in order, and when turned, you must fall back with
your Right-leg and Charge, bringing your Pike strait up without any clattering.
7. To the Left four times. 8. To the Left about. 9. As you were. 10. Advance
your Pike. These must be done, as has been showed in the Right, only making
your Observation of Eight Left Motions, etc. And the better to do this, bring
your Right-heel to your Left-instep; your Pike being before you, fall out with
your Right-foot, and so bring your Pike to your Right-Thigh. 11. Shoulder your
Pike. Here extend your Fingers on the Left Hand, and lay it on the Pike level
with your Shoulder; make your Right-heel come up even with your Left-instep,
your Pike right before you, fall back with your Right-leg, and as far as may be
put back your Right-arm, keeping your Pike about half a Foot from your Side,
your Eye fixed on the Spear directly to the Rear, your Pike sloped: Then
forsake it with your Left Hand, and bring in your Right-leg, laying your Pike
on your Right-Shoulder, closing your Elbow to your Body, the Butt of your Pike
being about half a Foot from the Ground, in the middle of the distance. 12.
Charge to the Front. In doing this, fall back with your Right-leg, keeping as
much as may be your Arm back, and the Spear exactly to the Rear, sloaping the
Pike to the same height as Shouldering; then bring with your Left Hand the
Butt-end backwards, turning the Head with your Right; so quit it with that
Hand, then taking hold on the Butt-end, Charge Breast high, keeping the Palm of
your Hand open against the Butt-end, your Left-Elbow under the Pike, and your
Left-toe in Line with the Spear; and when you Charge it must be directly
forward, your Left-heel being just against the middle of your Right. 13.
Shoulder as you were. Here raise your Pike with both Hands, so quit it with the
Right, and with the Left turn the Head backwards, the Spear even with the Rear;
so with your Right Hand seize it again as high as you can reach with little
straining, and stand with it from your Body aslope; bring up your Right-leg,
and then forsake your Pike with your Left Hand, and lay it on your Shoulder,
ever keeping the Spear in a direct Point to the Rear, not crossing your
Fellows. 14. Charge to the Right. In this Case fall back with you Right-Arm and
Leg, the Spear being kept in the Rear sloping at the height of Shouldering;
then turn your Left-Toe to the Right, suffering the Right to fall behind the
Left-foot; so that the middle of your Right-foot may be over against your
Left-heel; then bring up your Pike in this Action, and turn backwards the
Butt-end by your Right-side; then pressing it in your Right-palm, Charge. 15.
Shoulder as you were. Make your Left-toe come to the Left, and the middle of
your Right-foot come also against your Left-heel, with your Pike up; and then
turn the Head to the Right, (that is) directly to the Rear, doing it at one
Motion: So take hold of your Pike with your Right Hand, and keep it sloped with
both Hands a little distance from your Body; as in Shouldering, at what time
bring up your Right-leg, and lay your Pike on your Shoulder. 16. Charge to the
Right about. In this Case give back with your Hand and Leg, then stand with
your Pike a little distant from your Side, and turning your Left-toe to the
Right about, bring the Butt-end of your Pike to the Right-side, falling back
with your Right-leg and Charge, keeping the Spear all the while to the Rear a
Shouldering height; and when you are to Face to the Right about, level your
Pike and Charge. 17. As you were. In this, turn your Left-toe to the Left
about, advancing your Right-foot a moderate Step, that the middle of it may
stand against your Left-heel; then with your Left Hand bring the Butt-end by
your Left-side, taking notice the Spear be exactly with the Rear a Shouldering
height; then lay on your Right Hand as high as you can easily reach, and stand
with it in Form; after which, bring up your Right-leg, and Shoulder. 18. Charge
to the Left. Here fall back with your Left-arm and Leg, as in the former
Chargings: Turn the Left-toe and the Butt-end of your Pike with your Left Hand
to the Right, after which, bring up your Left-leg, and Charge. 19. As you were.
Raise the Spear with both your Hands, turn the Left-toe to the Right, and so
fall back with your Left-leg and Arm, keeping your Pike from your Side, the
Spear to the Rear; then bring up your Left-leg, and Shoulder. 20. Charge to the
Left about. Here fall with your Arm and Leg back, bringing the Pike over your
Head with both your Hands, the Spear directly to the Rear at a Shouldering
height: Turn your Left-toe to the Left about, then bring up your Right-toe,
that the middle may come with your Left-heel, and Charge. 21. Port. Observe
here, as in Charging in the Front; being wary that you sink not the Spear of
your Pike, rest it between the Thumb and Forefinger, keeping your Elbow close
to your side. 22. Comport. As far as may be bring your Left Hand backward, at
the same time stretching out the Right, make thereupon a step forward with the
Right-foot, grasping fast the Pike as high as you can reach with the
Right Hand, not tossing the Spear too high; then forsake it with your
Left Hand, and bring back your Right-leg even with your Left; then close it to
your Side, keeping the Spear the height of your Head. 23. Charge to the Front.
Here extend your Right-arm, advancing at the same time your Right-leg, drawing
back your Left Hand as far as may be; and bringing your Pike forward, give a
step back with your Right-leg, and take hold of the Butt with your Right Hand;
then Charge; and in all Chargings observe it be done Breast high. 24. Fire.
Herein face to the Right about, suffering the Spear of your Pike to fall behind
you; after which, quit your Right Hand from the Butt-end, without any motion of
the Left, and be cautious not to strike upon the Spear. 25. Charge as you were.
Here turn to the Left about, place the Butt-end in the Palm of your Right Hand,
and Charge, the Spear being kept an even height 26. Advance your Pike. In this
Exercise bring your Right-heel to your Left-Instep, your Pike directly before
you to the Recovery; and so fall out with your Right-foot that it may come even
with your Left, and so bring the Pike to your Right-thigh. 27. Order your
Pikes. Raise your Left Hand, so that it may come even with the upper part of
your Shoulder, place it on your Pike, stretching out your Fingers; then sinking
your Left Hand, raise your Right; and then raise the Pike, that when the
Butt-end your Right Hand may be against your Eye; keep the Pike near your Head
by clapping the Butt-end to the Latchet of your Shoe; and here all the
Butt-ends of as many as are exercised must fall to the Ground at one and the
same time. 28. Pikes to your Inside Order. Place the Butt-end on the Inside
your Right-foot to the middle, not moving your Foot, but only your Pike. 29.
Lay down your Pikes. As many as exercise in this case, must step altogether
with their Right-legs; stoop together with a very Quick Motion, and Lay their
Pikes down very strait with their Right-hands. 30. Quit your Pikes. Fall back
with your Left-leg, bringing it even with your Right: Then quit your Pike
absolutely, and rise up with a quick Motion. 31. Handle your Pikes. Here you
must step forward in a quick Motion with your Left-leg, and then as many as
exercise must stoop together, and extend their Right-hands as far as they can
reach, and then grasp the Pike. 32. Order your Pikes. With your Right Hand
raise the Pike, and step back with your Left Leg, with a swift Motion, clapping
the Butt-end of the Pike to facilitate the raising of it on the Inside of your
Right-foot about the middle. 33. Pikes to your outsiide Order. In this Exercise
place the Butt-end of your Pike on the outside of your Foot, not moving your
Foot, but the Pike. 34. Advance your Pike. This must be done, as the
foregoing; and thus much for the Exercise of the Pike in particular by it
self, till I come to speak of its Exercise conjunctly with the Musket, in the
general Exercising a Company or Battalion.
The words of Command in the Exercise of the Musket, and how they are to be
Observed and Performed.
WHen you enter on this Exercise, be sure to keep your Footing-firm, your Feet
at a moderate distance; that at all Times, and on all Occasions, you may retain
your full Strength. Observe moreover to keep the Right-heel firm, and set the
Right foot steady, and then attend to the Words of Command, which you are
summoned to do by this Expression of the Commander, viz. Musketeers, have a
Care of the Exercise, and carry your Arms well. After which, the proper Words
of Command follow in their Order.

1. Lay your Right Hand on your Musket. Here the Lock being uppermost, turn the
Barrel toward you, and extending your Fingers, lay our Right Hand directly
behind the Lock; so close the Butt end to your Shoulder, suffering the Musket
to be in all parts of an equal height. 2. Poise your Musket. In doing this, you
must hold it with a hard Grasp, facing to the Right, and turning with a quick
Motion on your Left-heel, your Musket kept directly before you the height of
it, between your Shoulders; your Right-elbow on your Side, keeping your feet at
a moderate distance, that when you turn about, your Left-toe may stand to the
Front, and your Right-toe as you Face to the Left; let your Left-heel be
against the middle of your Right-foot; and by such means you will be in a
resting posture. 3. Rest your Musket. Here slide your Musket down to your
Left Hand, bearing your Arm as low as possible without stooping, and so receive
your Musket where the Scowrer enters into the Stock, touching with your hand no
part of the Barrel, keeping it about half a Foot from your side sloping, your
Right Hand, with your Fingers, extended being behind the Lock. 4. Cock your
Musket. Place the Right-Thumb and your Finger behind the Trigger, so clap your
Musket against your Thigh, and Cock; keeping it that it slip not your Thumb,
now removed steady on the Head of the Cock. 5. Guard your Musket. Bring it with
a very swift Motion strait before you, to recover your Left Hand even with your
mouth, about half a foot distance from it, not suffering your Musket to sink,
nor stooping your Body, observing in bringing up the Musket before, which is a
recovering, that the Right-heel be brought to the Left-Instep, your Musket
being perpendicular. 6. Present. Here fall back with your Right-leg, that the
middle of the Right foot may be against the Left-heel; cause the Butt-end to
rise to your Shoulder, fixings it firm, and keep your Right elbow even with the
height of the Piece, being in a readiness with the fourth Finger of your
Right Hand to pull the Trigger, bowing the Left-knee keeping the Right firm and
steady, and so level your Musket Breast high. 7. Fire. Keep here an exact
Motion in drawing the Trigger, every one drawing at once, so that the whole
Fire of a Company or Battalion may be as of one report: Keep your Body steady,
and your Musket hard against your Shoulder after you have fired, till the next
Word of Command is given, viz. 8. Recover your Arms. Here let the Butt-end sink
in both your Hands, and bringing it strait before you, keep your right Hand
under the Cock and the Left even with your Mouth. 9. Half bend your Musket.
Fall back with your Right-leg, and let the Musket at once rest, placing the
Right-thumb upon the Cock, and the Fingers of that hand behind the Trigger;
then closing it to your Thigh, half bend the Cock, and keep it rested with your
Fingers extended. 10. Clean the Pan. Do this with the ball of your Thumb,
pressed into the Pan, keeping your Fingers of the Right Hand behind the Lock.
11. Handle your Primer. Take the little end between your Finger and Thumb,
turning the other end to the back of your Hand, your Arm bearing backwards. 12.
Prime. Level your Piece, and strike your bruised Powder into the Pan half full,
or some what more, keeping your Left-toe to the Front. 13. Shut your Pan. This
do by using your two first Fingers, casting back your Primer and bringing up
your Rightheel to your Left-instep, your Musket strait up before you, as in the
recovery, with the Barrel toward you; do it with a quick Motion with the Thumb
of your Right Hand on the top of the Steel, Levelling your Left with your
Mouth. 14. Blow off the loose Corns. Bring your Mouth within four Inches of the
Pan, give a strong Blast without declining your Head, casting out your Arm, and
suffering the Musket to sink from its former Posture. 15. Cast about and
Charge. Advance your right Leg, turn the Barrel of your Musket downwards, bring
it to your Left-side a little backward, with your Left Hand, not touching the
Barrel with your Fingers; place the Toes of your Right foot to the Front and
the Rightheel against the middle of the Left-foot, ballancing your Musket in
the Left hand, the Muzzle to the proper Front, in an equal height, half a Foot
from you, joining your Right Hand to the Muzzle, your Thumb extended to the
side of the Barrel. 16. Handle your Charger. Gripe fast your Bandilier or
Charger, hold it even with the Muzzle of the Musket underneath, about an Inch
distant. 17. Open your Charger with your Teeth. In this Case, bring it up to
your Mouth without declining your Head, then being your Charger within an Inch
of your Muzzle, about an Inch from it, covering your Chargers Mouth with the
ball of your Thumb. 18. Charge with Powder. Put the Powder into the Barrel with
a quick Motion, and put the Charger underneath as before. 19. Draw forth your
Scowrer. In this let fall your Charger, and upon turning your Hand, draw forth
your Scowrer at three Motions, holding it Level the height of your Forehead,
with an extended Arm, as if you designed to dart it. 20. Shorten it to an Inch.
Turn the great end of your Scowrer toward you, sinking it till within an Inch
of your Hand, rest it some what below your Right-breast, bearing forward a
little. 21. Charge with Bullet. Take the Bullet out of your Mouth with your
Right Hand, put it into the Barrel with a swift Motion, holding the big end of
your Scowrer near the Muzzle of your Musket. 22. Ram down Powder and Ball.
Grasp full with your Thumb and Forefinger from the Muzzle, your Thumb on the
Top of the Scowrer reserving a handful in your Hand. 23. Withdraw your Scowrer.
Your Hand, Thumb and Forefinger turned toward the Muzzle, clear your Scowrer
at three Motions, and hold it up even with your Forehead, extending your Arm as
if you were about to dart it. 24. Shorten it to an Handful. Turn the Butt-end
of your Scowrer toward you; sink it till within an Inch of the End, letting it
rest against your Body a little below your Right-breast, the Scowrer sloping.
25. Return your Scowrer. Put it up in its proper place; grasp the Muzzle of
your Musket with your Right Hand, extending your Thumb upon the Scowrer, keep
it half a foot distant from your Side. 26. Poise your Musket. Here before you
bring up your Musket with your Left Hand, Grasp it under the Cock with your
Right, falling with your Right-leg to your Left: Keep it Poised against your
Nose, and when faced to the Front, let your Right-elbow rest upon your Body.
27. Shoulder your Musket. In this do as has been taught in the like case
before. 28. Order your Musket. Sink a little your Right Hand, and take hold on
the Stock on the top of the Scowrer with your Left Hand, then suffer that Hand
to sink, and take hold on the Muzzle with the Right Hand, letting the Butt-end
easily sink near the Ground; then let it after a little Pause come down: As
many as Exercise grounding them together, then close to the Right-foot, and
place the Butt-end about the middle of it, your Right Hand an Inch below the
Muzzle, the Lock being outward. 29. Lay down your Musket. Turning it with the
Back upwards, step forwards with your Left-leg, so with your Right Hand place
it on the Ground, that it may lie with the rest in a strait Line; This some
call grounding a Musket. 30. Quit your Musket. Here stand upright with a quick
Motion, rising with a falling back of your Left-leg to your Right. 31. Handle
your Musket. With your Left-leg step forward, and lay your Right Hand on the
Muzzle. 32. Order your Musket. Raise the Muzzle, and fall back with your
Left-leg to your Right, turning the Lock outward by the middle of your Foot.


And thus much for the Exercise of the Musket by it self, which may be much
advantageous to young Trainers, who have occasion to be called or sent out upon
Duty in the City or Country and Country Militia of the Trained Bands, or for
any other who is desirous to be knowing in, and entering upon Military Affairs,
from whence I shall proceed to the brief Exercise of the Pike and Musket,
jointly, as they are Exercised in Companies, Battalions, etc.

The Exercise of Pike and Musket jointly.
We now supposing the Muskets shouldred and the Pikes advanced; the Word next
is,

1. Musketeers, make ready.
Hereupon you must perform all the Postures and Motions together, till you
stand Cocked and guarded with your Musket before you; and for the better
Security your Thumb on the Cock; whereupon the Pikes are to be recovered before
the Pike-men: The Butt-ends in the Palms of their Hands, and the Spear upright
on their Left hands to the height of their Mouths, when the Commander gives the
Word

Charge.
Then the Muskets and Pikes must be brought at once, by turning the Left-toe
that way the Charge is made, and the Left-heel against the middle of the
Right-foot in every Charge, charging directly forward; not at the first
Charging, closing the Pikes to your Breasts; but in bringing down the Pike,
charge a little way distant, and when they are brought down, then close them.

The Charge is, To the Right four times; then to the Right about, and so, As
you were.

Then to the Left Charge four times; then to the Left about, and so, As you
were.

Furthermore the Pike-men must turn as the Musketeers, bearing up their
Right-heels to their Left-insteps, their Arms being extended as they turn; so
that they bring their Muskets straight before them, carrying their Left-hands
as high as their Mouths, bearing back their Arms; and when they Face, fall back
with their Right-legs, not bringing down their Arms till the word Charge is
given; and then it must be done with a decent quick Motion, not suffering the
Pikes to clatter.

After this, the Words of Command are, viz.

Recover your Arms. Half bend your Muskets. Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your
Muskets.
This Exercise is to be observed, as is before laid down in the Exercise of the
Musket. The Musketeers upon this, being at Shoulder; and the Pikes that stood
recovered falling out with their Right-legs, whereupon the Pikes are brought to
their Thighs in their Advance. Then the next is.

Poise your Muskets.
Upon this, the Pike-men with their Left hands must grasp their Pikes over
against their Shoulders, after which the Words are, Order your Arms. Pikes, to
your inside Order. Lay down your Arms. Quit your Arms. To the Right about.
March.


You must observe these, as directed in the Exercise, only over and above, when
you are clear of your Arms; you must disperse, and upon the beat of Drum, close
hastily together with a Huzza, your Swords unsheathed, with their Points
upwards. Then further observe the Words of Command, viz.

Return your Swords. Handle your Arms. Order your Arms. Pikes, to your outside
Order. Advance.
In ordering your Arms, observe you make a little stop before you let the
Butt-ends come to the Ground; so that each one may bear you company, and they
may fall together at once; and after they are laid down, and quitted, you must
stand up together so suddenly, as all your Risings may appear as it were but
one Motion.

When you March from your Arms, step Front and Rear at once, with the Left-feet
Marching but a little distance.

Then lay your Right Hand on your Sword, taking hold of your Scabbard with your
Left; and then drawing, hold your Swords upright before you; after you have
held them there a while, bring them down at one Motion, and when by Command
your Swords are returned, stand upright to your Arms, facing to your proper
Front; and if any thing is to be further known, consider the Exercise of the
Pike and Musket distinctly, and you will be informed to your Satisfaction.

Of the Match-Lock.
These Locks were formerly in more use than Firelocks, and at this day they
are sometimes mixed among them; wherefore I shall speak some what relating to
the Words of Command, that seem to differ from the Fire-lock viz.

1. Lay down your Match. 2. Handle your Match. 3. Blow your Match, 4. Cock and
try your Match. 5. Return your Match.
All these chiefly consist in keeping your Match in order, with a good hard and
well lighted Coal, fastening it on Command, advantageous in your Skrew, blowing
the Coal, and so by pulling the Trigger, trying your Pan with false Flashes,
laying it down at Command, and by the same order taking it up again; shortning
it to the Pan, that it may give true Fire, and upon firing, to return it, and
recover the Coal, if it be shattered by the force of the Powder. You must
observe also to keep your Match dry, that on occasion you may not be
disappointed.

And this in brief is all materially relating to the Match-Lock; the other
Postures of the Musket are all ready described, being sufficient to direct the
Exercise; yet seeing many lay much stress on the Beat of Drum, Take that a long
with you, as it relates to Exercise, and so I shall take Leave of the Foot, and
make a visit to the Horse.

Exercise by Beat of Drum, relating to the Foot.
There are usually observed in this, six Points, which are called Points of
War, and are said to be semi-vocal; because by them the Soldiers understand
what is to be done, and can distinguish their Duty and Exercise; and of these
in their order.

1. The Call. This is to Summon the Soldiers together to their Arms, or upon
any other occasion, as to hear Proclamation, or receive Directions, etc. from
the Officers, and are not without leave to Ramble, especially in time of War,
beyond the hearing of it, under great Penalties.

2. The Troop. When the Soldiers hear this, they must Advance their Pikes,
Shoulder their Muskets, and close their Ranks and Files to order, following
their Leaders or Commanders to the place of Rendezvous, Quarters, or elsewhere.

3. The March. When you hear this, you must betake you to your open Orders in
Ranks, Shoulder both Musket and Pike; and so as the Drum beats, you March
slower or quicker.

4. The Preparative. Is to warn you to close your proportionable or due
distance, when you are to prepare for Battle or Skirmish; and to see every
thing be in order that may turn to advantage.

5. The Battle. This is by some called the Charge, or Signal to Charge the
Enemy, and is beat in the beginning of the Fight to animate the Soldiers
Courage.

6. The Retreat. This is beat when being overpowered, it is thought covenient
to draw off and save a total Rout, or sometimes when an Enemy you suppose
stronger than your self advances toward you to engage, but by Retreating you
avoid him.

There are two more things on the Drum, somewhat to our purpose, viz.

1. The Tatto or Tapto. This is used in a Rounds and Garrisons, to give notice
to the Soldiers and Inhabitants when they ought to repair to their Quarters and
Houses.

2. Revalley. Is to let them know when it is time to rise in the Morning, and
attend on their Duty also. In Garrisons, to let the People know when its safe to
go abroad, the out Scouts being Relieved.

The Exercise of Horse in Troops or Squadrons, etc.
The Exercise of the Horse is various from that of the Foot, and therefore that
I may not be wanting in what is necessary to the young Soldier in their
Exercising in the County Troops, or those that may enter the present Service
Abroad, I shall endeavor to give the Words of Command proper with their
Explanation.

And first, when a Troop or Squadron is drawn out to Exercise, I suppose their
Carbines and Pistols laden, and the Corporals passing through the Ranks to see
they are all ready, upon which, observe the chief Officer Commands Silence, and
gives the following Words of Command, viz.

1. Lay your Right Hands on your Swords. 2. Draw your Swords. 3. Put your
Swords in your Bridle-hand. 4. Lay your Hands on your Pistols. 5. Hold up your
Hands. Give Fire.

When you have fired, let not your Pistol-hand sink till the next Word of
Command, viz.

6. Return your Pistols.

And this you must observe in Firing to the Left and Right; Then,

7. Lay your Hands on your Carbines. 8. Advance your Carbines. 9. Cock your
Carbines. Fire. 10. Let fall your Carbines. 11. Take your Swords from your
Bridle-hands.
These must be done with a swift and exact Motion, all as near as may be doing
it at one and the same time.

If a Squadron of Horse is to Wheel to the Right, the Right-hand-man must not
close to the Left, as has in ancient times been; for that many times disorders
the Rank; but you must keep your Ground, suffering the Left to come about
whilst you only turn your Horses Heads, observing your Left-hand-man.

To close the File. The Right Wing file stand.
1. Close your files. 2. To the Right. 3. To the Left as you were. 4. To the
Left wing, and stand. 5. To the Left by Files close the Squadron. 6. To the
Right as you were. 7. The Right and Left Wing Files stand. 8. By half Ranks,
close Files to the Right and Left.
And by closing Files you may cleave or divide the Squadron.

The Order of closing Ranks.
1. File-leader stand. Or open on the Front, 2. By Ranks close the Squadron to
the Front. Or the first distances. 3. On the Front as you were. And so be
cautious in observing each Motion.
How doubling Ranks must be Ordered.
1. By half Files to the Right, double your Ranks to the Front. 2.
File-leaders, advance your Ranks, File-leaders, take your Ground.
And in this manner Command likewise to the Left, the Order being one and the
same in the Words of Command. [Again,] 3. The first half Files stand. 4. By
half File-leaders on the Left-wing, double your Rank to the Front.
Now to reduce this, take the following Method; 1. Right-wing half Ranks,
advance your Ranks. 2. Half File-leader take your Ground. 3. The first half
File stand. 4. By half File-leaders on the Right and Left-wings, double your
Ranks to the Front, Carocoling to the Right and Left. Then the last half File
stand, and the first half File by Carocol in the Right and Left on the wings;
then double yur Ranks to the Rear.


Here observe the first File must open the half Rank to the Right and Left, the
first half File by Carocol. Then

To the Right and Left double your Ranks to the Rear.

Here observe the last half File must open the half Rank to the Right and Left.

As for the word Carocol, it signifies no more when you Wheel by it, than that
it is made by the depth of the Flank of the Squadron, by which Order not the
Files, but the Ranks make the Motion.

There is an other Word which some may not well understand at the first setting
out, which is called Controversion; and this in Wheeling is performed by the
Front of the Squadron, so that whilst the Rank makes the Motion, the File
remains.

Instructions for Wheeling, with the proper words of Command.
When the Word is given, viz. To the Right by Conversion, understand that you
must close your Right-leg to the Horse, your Knee touching that of your
Right-hand-mans, and in like manner observe in the Word of Command to the Left;
as when it is said, Close to the Left, then must the Leg be Closed.

By half Ranks and Conversion, divide the Squadron into two Troops.

If you would reduce the Squadron, the Word of Command is.

By Controversion: The Squadron into one Troop, else the Left-wing advance by
Conversion.

When you Wheel by Carocol, observe the Word of Command as follows,

The Right-wing to the Left by Carocol, Face about to the Rear: Or it may be
done by half Ranks in this manner,

By Quarter Ranks, and by Carocol, divide the Squadron into three Troops.

Then if you would reduce them, order Quarter Ranks and Troops into Squadrons.

If the Volt, Face or facing about be required, observe thus,

Face about to the Right: Face to the Right by Controversion; Face about by
Carocol to the Right: Face about to the Left by half Files: Fac about to the
Right and Left.

And thus much may serve for Wheeling.

The manner of Filing off.
In this case observe, To File by Ranks on the Right-wing, from the Squadron,

File off by Ranks, on the Left-wing, from the Squadron on the Right,

File off by three Files from the Squadron, the Left-wing: And this is found
the most Expedient way, though some have used to File off by Ranks.

In Hay, what Order is to be considered in drawing up.
Do this, by half Ranks to the Right: To the Right and Left drawing in Hay: To
the Front. And if it requires to be reduced again, then proceed by Carocol, viz.

To the Right and Left as you were.

By half Ranks, and by Carocol to the Right and Left.

Then draw up in Hay to the Rear.

In Reduction the Command is;

To the Front as you were.

By half Ranks to the Right and Left, and draw up in Hay.

Reduction by Carocol.

To the Right draw up in Hay.

Reduction by Carocol.

To the Left as you were.

Of doublings.
Doublings are very useful, especially in strengthening any Party, that needs
Succor in the Battle; and is to be noted under these general Heads.

1. Doubling of length, Front and Rear.

2. Doubling of Depth, both Flanks.

But all the particular, they are numbered six, that is to say, first of Ranks,
when every Rank double into the odd, and if it so fall out, that the odd Ranks
are to double, then must the Body Face to the Rear, without any Word of Command
expected.

3. Half Files. Here they are held to double when the Rear is doubled into the
Front.

4. Bringers up. Here they are held to double when the Rear is doubled into the
Front.

5. In doubling the Rear observe it done, when the half Files double the Rear.

6. Here take notice that doubling of half Ranks must be by one Rank doubling
the other.

The Noble Science of Defense, in all its Useful Particulars, for Defending and
Offending, with the Rapier or final Sword; after the exactest Method now in Use.
THis Science, if well understood, as to the fining and using it, is not only a
noble Exercise, but of great importance to the saving our lives on emergent
Occasions, if it extend not to Vainglory and Presumption, by too much relying
on our Skill, to carry us into quarrels, which we may reasonably, and without
loss of Honor or Reputation avoid. Wherefore I have thought it convenient to
lay down such Rules as may enable the learner to proceed in the Practice.

The first thing to be considered in this Case, is, the Sword it self,
understanding only in this the small Sword or Rapier, which is divided into two
Parts, viz. The Hilt and the Blade.

The Hilt is again divided into three Parts, viz. the Pommel or Ball at the far
end, sometimes Round and sometimes Oval in Shape. This keeps the Hilt fast, by
being well riveted, and by its poise makes the Sword well mounted, or light
before the Hand. The next is that part on which you grasp your Hand, commonly
called the Handle: and then the Shell, which is that part of the Hilt next the
Blade, to preserve your Hand (if you are any thing weary in managing it) from a
Thrust or Blow.

The Blade is divided into two Parts only. The first next to the Hilt, being
termed the strong Part or Fort. The other, which is the extreme, is termed the
Feeble, or they are otherways termed the Prime, and the Second. The strong Fort
or Prime of the Blade, is measured from the Shell to the middle of the Blade,
and being the strongest, is made use of in Parying, or to put by Thrusts or
Blows. The Feeble, weak or second part, is accounted from the Middle to the
Point, and is properly made use of in Offending or giving Thrusts or Blows; and
thus much may serve for the Description of the Sword: Now I proceed to the
Explaination of the Terms, fit to be known by a Practitioner.

A Guard.
This is a proper Posture you must place your self in, for the better defending
your self from the Thrusts or Blows of those you Fence with, or defend your
self from.

To Parie.
Observe that this is to put by a Blow or Thrust, that it may not touch you,
but be cast off without hurt or danger.

Quart.
Here you must hold the Nails of your Swordhand upwards, with a steady Arm; and
then it is said to be held in quart.

Terce.
This is the contrary to the former, for the Nails of your Hand must be held
downwards; and then the Sword is held in Terce.

Within the Sword.
This is that part of your Body, (which having your Right-side toward your
Adversary) is between your Sword and Left-breast.

Within the Sword.
This is the part of the Body, that (when you hold your Sword toward your
Left-side) is above it the breadth of your Body.

The Approach or Advance.
This is done, when being out of your Adversaries reach, or at a pretty
distance from him; you make your Approach or Advance toward him.

To Retire or Retreat.
This is when you are within your Adversaries reach, that you get out of it by
stepping or Jumping backwards; which you must observe to do on a strait Line.

Measure.
This is only a distance between you and your Adversary, which must be
cautiously and exactly observed when he is Thrusting at you; so that you may be
without his measure or reach, and that taking the Advantage of this, it may be
so, that when you Thrust your Thrusts may be home.

To break Measure.
Observe here, just as your Adversary is Thrusting at you, at his full Elonge,
he may come short of you, because you are, or escape out of his Measure, or
reach, and so break his Measure, of which I shall say somewhat more hereafter.

To Elonge.
This is to Streach forward your Right Arm and Leg, and keep a close Left-foot;
and this you do when you give in a Thrust, and when you do it, you are said to
make an Elonge.

Respost.
This is when you give in a Thrust before you recover your Body, receiving a
Thrust after your Adversary has Paried your Sword. Then is it said to be a
Thrust on the Respost or back of the Parade, which is the surest and safest you
can give.

Feinting or Falsifying.
This is a dodging or deceiving your Adversary, making him believe you give
back in earnest, and make an offer to Thrust in one place when you really
design to do it in another.

Beating.
This is no other than striking the Feeble of your Adversaries Sword with the
Edg and Fort of yours, either with your Right Hand only, or the help of your
Left, joined to the Blade, about a foot from the Hilt; and so you will cause
the Beat to have the greater Spring or Force.

Battery.
The difference from Beating in this, is only Striking with the Edg of the
Feeble, upon the Edg of the Feeble of your Adversaries Sword, though Beating
secures his Sword a great deal better than Battery.

Binding.
This method is taken to secure your Adversaries Sword, with eight or ten
Inches of yours, upon five or six Inches of his.

Caveating or Disengaging.
Here you must, if you can, slip your Adversaries Sword, when you perceive him
about to bind or secure yours.

To take Time.
In taking Time, you must observe never to Thrust, but when you see a fair
Opportunity, or otherwise it is the Thrusting at your Adversary when he is
making the Feint, or the slipping of him, when you perceive him about to Bind
or Bear your Sword.

Counter Temps.
This is when you Thrust without a good Opportunity, or when you Thrust, at the
same time your Adversary does the like.

Quarting on the strait Line.
This is done by carrying your Head and Shoulders very much back from your
Adversaries Sword, and are giving in a Thrust within it, and that each of you
at that time receive a Thrust.

Quarting of the strait Line, called de Quarting.
Here you must Observe to throw in your Left-foot, and Body backwards off the
strait Line, toward your Adversary, keeping your Right-foot firm.

Volting.
This is a leaping by your Adversaries Left-side quite out of his reach or
measure, which on many emergent occasions is very proper.

These Terms a Practitioner must be knowing in before he proceeds to the other
Lessons, or Adventures on sharp, especially in earnest; from whence I proceed
to the next thing materially to be considered, which is the

Holding of the Sword.
In doing this according to Art, and to the most advantage, Hold your Thumb on
the broad side of the Handle, and your Fingers quite round it; hold it in this
manner firm and fast; so that your Adversary, with the least sudden beat or
twist, may not force it out of your hand, which the hazard in holding it
loosely may occasion to your damage.

Of keeping a Guard.
The Guards are in general but two; The one in Quart and the other in Terce;
but again the Quart Guard is subdivided into two, viz. The Quart with the
strait Point, and the Quart with the Point sloaping near to the Ground.

The Terce is so likewise divided, that is, the Terce with the Point higher
than the Hilt, and the Terce with the Point lower than the Hilt. There is yet
another Guard, that requires you to hold your Sword with both your Hands; and
of these in their order.

Of the Quart Guard, with the strait Point.
You have two ways with this Guard to defend your self, either by Parying or
using Contraries to what your Adversary plays, as I shall more fully show you
when I come to discourse of the five Parades; however here observe in the
strait Guard, which is most in use, to keep a thin Body, which is done by
showing your Right-side to your Adversary, managing your feet in a strait Line
from him; so that for your Right he cannot see your Left-leg, yet set them not
too wide, for that will make your Elong the shorter; nor too close, for that
will hinder the firmness of standing; and let the Point of your Right foot be
turned somewhat outward from the strait Line, but the broad side of your Left
must look toward your Adversary. You are also to sink with your Thighs your
Left-knee, a little more bent than your Right, which may be done by your
leaning somewhat back on your Left-thigh; when you present your Sword, you must
hold it with your Nails upwards, as has been directed in Quart. The Hilt of
your Sword must be as high as your Right-pap, keeping your Arm a little bent,
for the better and easier pursuing your Adversary; or for the quicker giving in
a Thrust: The Point must be toward your Adversaries Right-side, two or three
Inches lower than the Hilt, your Left Hand held up as high as your Left-ear,
about half a Foot from it, the Palm directly against your Adversaries Face,
your Fingers pointing as it were toward him.

The Quart-guard, with the sloping Point.
In this Guard you must stand much straiter than in the former, the Point of
your Sword sloping within half a Foot of the Ground, your Hilt as low as your
Wast, your Arm bended, and the Nails of your Sword-hand between Terce and
Quart; Here you are also to make use of your Left Hand, and therefore the more
readily to do it, you must advance your Left-Shoulder almost as far forward as
your Right, keeping your Belly in as much as may be; so that it stand well, and
your Breast out, your Left Hand as high as the side of your Head, though about
half a Foot from it. This is a very open Guard, yet to those that know not how
to pursue it, it is much Surprising. And you may pursue this;

First, by raising up or gathering your Adversaries Sword.

Secondly, by striking at his Sword, and making half Thrusts at the Body, by
which he will be doubtful when you intend to give in your Thrust, and finding
an Opportunity give it home; and ever when you pursue this Guard, let your
Left Hand be in a readiness to Parie your Opponents Thrust, if he Thrust just
as you are Thrusting, which is the main defense on this Guard.

Thirdly you may give a stroke at his Left Hand; after you give a beat at his
Sword, and see if by so doing, you can force him to betake himself to another
Gaurd.

Fourthly, You may Volt, and in your so doing, give him the Thrust which being
clearly done, will mainly surprise him.

The-Terce-guard, with the Point higher than the Hilt.
In this you must hold the Nails of your Sword-hand downwards, as in Terce, and
your Hand lower than in the Quart-Guard with a strait Point, presenting the
Point of your Sword toward your Adversaries Left-shoulder; if he be a tall
Man; but if Short, then to his Left-eye, keeping your Arm somewhat bent, for
the better persuing: Lean therefore a little forward with your Body, and make
use of your Left Hand for a Parade, holding it somewhat lower than in the
former Guard. The rest of your Body being kept, as in the Quart-Guard, with the
strait Point.

This Guard may be pursued either with Striking, Binding, Volting, or Passing,
for a Feint on this Guard will signify little or nothing if your Adversary
understand it; for as in no Guard, he is to answer Feints, least of all in
this, the Right defense being to secure your self without your Sword, which is
done by presenting your Sword to the Left-shoulder of your Adversary, or as
said, his Eye, so that your Body be quite covered without your Sword.

The Terce-Guard, with the Point lower than the Hilt.
Here you must in this bow your Head, holding up your Arm high, so that if you
come to give a Thrust, your Head may be, as it were, under it, your Nails being
in Quart till you make your Thrust, and then change them into Terce; your Feet
must be kept at their due distance, and not as at a full Elong; your Sword must
be presented toward your Adversaries Left-side, and you must make use of your
Left Hand for the Parade, and it is to be pursued and defended, as the forgoing
Terce-Guard, only in defending it, you must not make so much use of your
Left Hand, but more of your Sword.

The Guard of Both Hands.
This is a Guard, that I find not any proper Name for, though it is sometimes
used as very necessary, how ever, as to the holding your Sword in this Guard,
keep your Body exactly in the Posture of the Quart-Guard with the strait Point;
but join your Left Hand to your Sword, about eight or ten Inches from the Hilt,
the Blade being held between your foremost Finger and Thumb, secure your self
within your Sword, as soon as you present it, viz. Present the Point toward
your Adversaries Right-thigh, with your Point sloping toward the Ground a
little; for to pursue this Guard, you must, endeavor to take a way your
Adversaries Left Hand by striking at it, and immediately after the stroke,
proffer a Thrust at his Body, that he may be doubtful when you really intend to
give in your Thrust; and indeed the pursuit is much like that of the
Quart-Guard, with the sloping Point, and thus much for the Five sorts of Guards.

Of the several Parades.
The Parades are generaly Two, but are subdivided as the Guard, and those two
are the Parade in Quart, and the Parade in Terce, which are as is said, divided
again into the Parade in Quart, with the Point a little higher than the Hilt.
The Parade in Quart, with the Point sloping toward your Adversaries
Right-thigh, and as though without it.

2. The Parade in Terce, with the Point a little higher than the Hilt, and the
Parade in Terce, with the Point sloping toward your Adversaries Thigh on the
Left-side.

There is yet an other Parade of some use, and used by many Fencing Masters,
which may be properly termed a Counter-Caveating Parade; by reason what ever
Lesson your Adversary makes use of, or upon what side so ever he Thrusts, if
you make use of this Parade, as you ought, you will undoubtedly meet with his
Sword, and the easier cross his purpose, than by any of the former; and of
these I shall give proper Directions,

1. The Quart Parade, or the Parade within the Sword, is so called, because in
putting by the Thrust, you do it on the inside your Sword, or on that side the
Nails of your Hand are next.

2. The next is called the Terce Parade, or the Parade without the Sword; for
here, contrary to the former, you put by the Thrust upon that side which is
without the Sword, and as the other is termed the Quart, for as much as it is
within your Sword, or on that side your Nails look to; so this is called Terce
because it is without your Sword, or on that side the back of your Hand is to.
Observe a little more, viz. when you are to hold your Hand or Nails in Terce,
that you hold your Nails quite downward; And now to Parie these Five several
ways.

you must do the first Parade in Quart, with the Point somewhat higher than the
Hilt, viz. When you are standing to your Guard, if your Adversary offers to
give a home Thrust on that side his Sword lies, which I presume to be within
your Sword, without disengaging and is the Simplest and plainest Thrust that
can be given with the small Sword; yet frequently it surprises a Man, I say,
when so it is, that when you perceive your Adversary offer to give a home
Thrust, which observe by keeping your Eye steady on the Hilt of his Sword; you
must then immediately turn your Wrist with so small a Motion of the Arm, that it
can scarcely be perceived, to your Left-side; and by that means you may put by
his Sword, with the Fort of yours upon the Left-side, keeping the Point of your
Sword after the Parade toward his Right-shoulder; you may in putting by your
Adversaries Sword use a little beat or Spring toward the Ground, by which you
will more certainly disappoint him, immediately bringing your Sword to its
right posture again, and by this way of Parying you may have the luck to Spring
or Beat your Adversaries Sword out of his Hand.

The second Parade in Quart is with the Point sloping toward your Adversaries
Right-thigh, and as though without it, in this manner;

When you perceive your Adversary is thrusting with your Sword, turn the Nails
of your Sword-hand in Quart, with a full stretched Arm, and your Hand as high
as your Face, and when you do this, slope your Point to the lowness of your
Adversaries Thigh; and by that means, with the Fort of your Sword, on the
Feeble of his, put by his Thrust, always observing to Parie with the Fort of
your Sword, and not the Feeble, lest your Adversary having the stronger Arm,
force upon you the Thrust in spite of all you can do.

The first Parade in Terce, or without the Sword, the Point a little higher
than the Hilt, must be thus managed, viz. Perceiving your Adversary giving in
the Thrust without your Sword; take notice immediately to turn your Wrist with
some small motion of the Arm, as in the first Parie in Quart, till your Nails
be in Terce, and so Parie his Thrust, Remembering in this to keep the Point of
your Sword, after you have Paried him toward your Adversaries Left-shoulder,
as in the first Parade in Quart, you are to keep it toward his Right.

This Parade is most effectually done with a Spring, to put by the Sword or
gain an advantage of disarming your Adversary.

The second Parade in Terce, is called that within the Sword bearing a sloping
Point toward your Adversaries Thigh, and as though within it. This observe to
do when you perceive your Adversary giving in his Thrust without, or below your
Sword, as it were at your Arm-pit, immediately letting the Point of your Sword
sink as low as his Thigh, turning your Nails quite round to your Right-side,
until they are from you, keeping your Hand as high as your Head, and so put by
the Thrust on your Right-side; and when you are Parading, let your Head be
close as if it were under your Arm; and this preserves your Face from your
Adversaries scattering or Counter-Temps Thrusts.

Thus having shown you the Defensive part, I shall now proceed to the
Offensive, or how you may offend your Adversary when necessity requires it; but
before I directly enter upon it, let me speak some thing of the
Counter-caveating Parade; though some there are who refuse to use it, yet it is
the safest of all.

The Counter caveating Parade, etc.
When you observe your Adversaries Thrust coming home within your Sword, then
immediately slope your Point, and bring it up again with a quick Motion on the
other side of your Adversaries, and Parie his Thrust without your Sword, that
he intended to give within your Sword, holding your Nails neither in Terce nor
in Quart, but so hold them as when you presented your Sword; and observe
further to do this, Parade with a Spring, and if you perceive he is about to
give in his Thrust without your Sword, instantly slope your Point, and bring it
up again with a quick Motion upon the inside of his Sword, and so Parie his
Thrust, that was to be given without your Sword, within your Sword, and if you
do this very quick you will rarely be hit with a home Thrust; and in this
Parade there is great advantage, because by it all Feints, which in other
Parades cannot be so well noted or shunned, are by this baffled and Confounded.

Lessons Offensive. 1. Of Approaching or Advancing.
Observe here; (when you are standing to your Guard, and your Adversary without
your measure, so that without Approaching you cannot reach him) that you lift
your Right-foot about a Foot forward, and presently let your Left-foot follow
close by the Ground, your Left-knee a little bowed, taking notice at the end of
every step, that your Feet be at the same equal distance as when you first
presented your Sword, or if in any thing you vary, let it be in bringing them
something nearer; and so your Elong will come as much nearer to your Adversary
as you brought your Left-foot nearer to your Right: Always then remember to
redouble this Step, or any other that is to be used on this Occasion till you
think your Adversary is within your measure. This step must be always made on
plain Ground, lest you Trip and fall, which is very dangerous; but if it be on
rugged uneven Ground, there is another suitable to it, called the Double Step,
after this manner;

In the first place throw your Left-foot before your Right, (which may be done
by raising your Body a little on your Right-foot) about a Foot, then bring your
Right-foot forward again, as far before your Left, as when you presented your
Sword; these two Motions must be done immediately after the other, or else
doing of this Step will appear ungraceful; and here you must keep a thin Body
as possible, because the throwing your Left foot before your Right, lays your
Body open, and so redouble this step, as the former, according to the distance
you are from your Adversary, till you approach within his measure.

Lesson. 2. Of Retiring.
This may be done three ways, first with the single Step, the same way you
approach with it, only whereas in approaching with the single Step you lift
your Right-foot first, here you must lift your Left-foot first, and the rest
observe, as in the Approach with the single Step.

The second is, that with the double Step, and is done the same way as in the
Advance, only in approaching you throw your Left-foot before your Right, when
in retiring you must throw your Right-foot backward behind your Left; and the
rest is done as in Advancing with the double Step.

The third is done by a sudden jump backwards on the strait Line, with both
your Feet in the Air at once, but you must lift your Right-foot first, and
after your jump is done, stand to your Guard again, unless you find occasion to
redouble your jump to be farther out of reach.

Lesson 3. Of giving in the Thrust.
To Thrust or make an Elong, observe (when you stand to your Guard, and your
Adversary be within your Measure) that your Sword be as you please, either
within or without your Adversaries Sword, and suppose within, then stretch out
your Right-arm, and Step forward with your Right-foot as far as may be, keeping
the Point strait forwards, and let the Motion of your Arm begin a thought
before you move your Foot, so that the Thrust may be given home before your
Adversary can hear your Foot touch the Ground; and when you are at your full
stretch, keep your Left Hand stretched, and ever observe to keep a close
Left-foot, which must be done by keeping your Left-heel and broad side of your
Foot close to the Ground, without any drawing it after you, for keeping a close
Foot is one of the chiefest things to be observed in this Science. When you
give in your Thrust throw your Left Hand behind you, or so place it on your
Left-side, that your Sword and both your Arms may make a strait Line from your
Adversary. This must be when you design not to make use of your Left Hand for a
Parade, but if you do, then in the very time of giving in your Thrust, throw
your Left-arm forward as far as you can, without putting the rest of your Body
into disorder, turning the Palm from you, by turning your Thumb down, and your
little Fingers up, and so Parie your Adversaries Thrust, if you find he will
Thrust, upon the same time you make your Thrust, always remembering when you
Thrust within the Sword, to do it with your Nails in Quart or upwards, and
Quart well your Hand and Shoulder; but when a Thrust is made without the Sword,
then give it in with your Nails in Terce or downwards, and keep your Hilt much
lower than your Point, and your Head as clear as may be from you Adversaries
Sword.

Take notice in all Lessons in which you do not first secure or bind your
Adversaries Sword, that you are to Thrust close by the Feeble of his Sword,
with the Fort of yours. But there is a difference when you first secure your
Adversaries Sword, for after your securing or binding, you quit his Sword, and
give a strait home Thrust, without touching it, after it is bound.

In these Rules there is great advantage; as in the Quarting of your Hand, when
you Thrust within, the Sword, preserves them from your Adversaries
Counter-Temps Thrusts in the Face; so likewise does your Thrusting close by the
Feeble of the Sword, and keeping your Hilt lower than the Point, when you
Thrust without the Sword, as also the holding of your Head to the contrary side
your Adversaries Sword is on, preserve you from Counter-Temps, ever observing
as a general Rule; to keep your Head on the contrary side of your Adversaries
Sword, on what side soever you Thrust, for this will frequently preserve your
Face from being hit.

Lesson 4. Of Caveating or Disengaging.
In this case, when your Sword is presented within your Adversaries Sword, and
you would have it without (keeping your Nails in Quart) slope your Point so low
that you may bring it up under the outside of his. This must be done with the
Wrist, and not any Motion of the Arm, because when you Disengage, if the Arm
move, your Body would be too much discovered; so that your Adversary would have
an advantage to give in his Thrust, which he could not do if only your Wrist
moved, and this must be done with a sudden Motion; and by this you may learn to
slip your Adversaries Sword at pleasure.

Lesson 5. Feinting or Falsifying.
Of these, there are several kinds, and the first I treat on is the Ordinary
single Feint; When you are on your Guard, and within your Adversaries Sword,
disengage and make your Feint without, which you must do with a beat of your
Right-foot against the Ground, just as you disengage, and your Sword on the
outside of your Adversaries, and immediately after, if you perceive him answer
your Feint, and offer to Parie, disengage again, and give him the Thrust within
the Sword.

Lesson 6. The Double Fient.
There is a difference between this and the single Feint; for in the single one
you must make two Motions, viz. With the first you make your Feint, and with
the next you give in your Thrust, unless you make your Feint on that side your
Sword lies, which may be done without disengaging, and is the simplest of all
others in all single Feints, it must be given in upon the side your Sword was
before you made your Feint; But in the double Feint you are to make three
Motions, and the Thrust (unless when you make your first Motion on that side
your Sword was presented) is given in on the other side, and not on the side
the Sword was just before you began to make your Feint; and to play this, there
are two ways, viz. When you are within Measure, you must play it one way, and
without Measure another way.

As to the first, your Sword being presented within your Adversaries Sword,
then disengage and make your first Motion without his Sword, so stand a Thought
on it to try whether he will answer you, by offering to proceed to the Parade;
if he do not answer, it is useless, but if he do, then presently make your
second Motion within his Sword, and your third Motion without it, by giving the
Thrust; both these Motion must be done with admirable quickness; at every
Motion give a beat with your Foot, and disengage; turning your Nails in Quart.

If you are without distance, make a Motion to see if he will answer your
Feint, and if he do begin again, make your first Motion, as within distance,
approaching at the same time, and so your second and third.

There is a contrary to these, that is to be observed when your Adversary makes
use of them against you, Then you must make use either of the Counter-caveating
Parade, or keep your Sword Point immovable toward his Face that opposes you,
your Arm as much stretched out as possible; and when you do so you must recover
your Body, by drawing your Right-foot close to your Left, stand as it were on
Tip-toe, and if for all this your Adversary give a home Thrust, then you must
Counter-temps him in the Face, and Parie his Thrust with your Left Hand; or if
you perceive him make variety of Feints, then upon every one of them make a
half Thrust, which will oblige him to betake himself to the Parade, and so when
you please you may take the pursuit, or when he makes variety of Feints, give a
plain home Thrust, as smart as may be, and endeavor to defend your self from
Counter-temps with your Left Hand, and to prevent them, it is always in this
Case best when you give a Thrust, to use your Left Hand.

Lesson 7. The single Feint at the Head.
Being within distance you may present your Sword within or without your
Opponents Sword, making a Feint or Motion at his Face, if your Sword be
presented without, by a little stretching out your Right-Arm, your Nails in
Quart, and when you make the Motion, give a little beat with your Right-foot,
and if the Feint be answered, then immediately give in your Thrust at his
Arm-pit, your Head under your Sword-arm, your Left Hand held before you, with
the Palm of it looking toward your Right-side, and that part of your Arm, from
the Points of your Fingers to your Elbow, must stand in a manner-strait
upwards, which posture you must ever observe when you give in this Thrust,
because in doing it, it defends you from the Thrust of your Adversary, if it be
above, and without your Sword; and you may at the same time make a Motion at
his Face.

Lesson 8. Of the double Feint at the Head.
Being within distance, make your first Motion or Feint, as before, at the
Face, your second Motion low without your Adversaries Sword, toward his belly;
and with the third, give a Thrust without, and above his Sword, your Nails in
Quart, marking every motion with your Head, Hands and Feet; and when you make
your second Motion, hold your Hand as in the single Feint, and when you give in
your Thrust above Sword, you must Quart your Head well, because you must give
it in with your Nails in Quart; and by this means your Body will be kept secure
within your Sword, when in Terce it would ly open, especially to Counter-temps.

There is a Parying the contrary, either with the Counter-caveating Parade, or
by answering every Motion, by what means you will fall to Parie your
Adversaries with the first Parade in Terce.

Lesson 9. Containing the manner of the Feint at the Head on the True Parade.
The contrary to the second Parade is this, and to do it you must make your
Motion at your Adversaries Face, and if you imagine he intends to Parie you
with the second Counter-caveating Parade, make round his Sword, as it were
going a circle about it, and so give a Thrust at his Arm-pit, and with your
Left Hand avoid Counter-temps, and being within distance, approach with your
first Motion, and in so doing you Caveat his Sword and shun his Parade, or if
your Adversary follows your Sword, you may make two or three circles till you
find a fit time to let in your Thrust.

Lesson 10. Of the Low Feint.
When you intend to proceed in this, you must have your Sword without your
Adversaries and when it is so, make directly the Second Motion of the double
Feint at the Head, and give in the Thrust above, and when you are without
distance, make your approach with the Feint, or first Motion; and make in your
Thrust with the second. And this may be Paryed, by answering every Motion, or
using the Counter-caveating Parade.

The contrary to it, is, when your Adversary is making his low Feint, to take
time, and give in the Thrust above his Sword, your Nails in Quart.

Lesson 11. Of Battery.
This is a kind of a Beat from whence it derives its name, and therefore when
you play it you must present your Sword either without or within your
Adversaries, if within, and he within your Measure, then keep your Sword half a
Foot from his, and when you intend to play, Strike a small stroke on the Edg,
and Feeble of your Sword on the Edg, and Feeble of his, and at the same Moment
give a Beat with your Foot, which will surprise your Adversary, if not well
skilled; if it does not, nor that he answers you by offering to Parie, give a
strait home Thrust at his Right-Pap, as you give in a plain Thrust within the
Sword, moving the Sword only with your Wrist, and thereby keeping your Body
close. If your Adversary offers to answer your stroke, and go to the Parade,
then your best way is to slip him, and give in a Thrust without, and above the
Sword, or when you perceive him going to Parade, then suddenly slip and make a
double Feint on the other side, and Thrust on that side you gave the Beat.

In the contrary of this Parie, with the Counter-caveating Parade, or meet his
stroke, and make a half Thrust, which will force him to the Parade; and so you
may pursue.

Lesson 12. Of Volt Coupe.
In this observe to present your Sword within your Adversaries, be being within
your Measure; then make a Feint at the Face your Nails in Quart, and upon this
give a Beat with your Foot, and carry your Hand well Quarted, and if by
offering to Parie, he answers this, and that high, then Thrust at the Belly,
your Nails in Terce, and keep your Left Hand as a Guard from Counter-temps; if
by Parying low, you are disappointed of this advantage, then after you have
made your Feint, instead of a Thrust in the Belly, slip his Parade, and give
the Thrust without, and above the Sword; and when you are within distance
approach with the first Motion: If your Sword be presented without your
Adversaries, you must first then disengage.

The contrary to this is either to Parie his Sword with the second Parade in
Quart, or to take time and give your Thrust the way he was to give it in upon
you, at the instant he makes his Motion at your Face, or you may pass without
his Thrust.

Lesson 13. Of Binding your Adversaries Sword.
This is the securest Play, and chiefest Mystery in the Art of Fencing,
wherefore to do it after you have presented your Sword, either within or
without your Adversaries, on a sudden over-lap six or seven Inches of his with
eight or ten of yours; and this is sufficient to secure it; but this must be
always done with the Edg of the Sword, whether you present it within or
without, and immediately after you have bound it, give a Thrust strait home. In
this case, always observing to keep a close Left-foot, also to give a Beat with
your Foot, and to bind with a Spring, viz. Press your Sword almost to the
Ground, but stay not with it, but immediately bring it up again and then give
the Thrust; and this prevents Counter-temps, and the best Parade against it is,
the Counter caveating Parade, and if your Adversary slips your Sword, you must
endeavor to bind him within or without the Sword again. You may also put upon
him the double or single Feint, or having bound your Sword without, you may
give in your Thrust, as in playing the single Feint at the Head.

Lesson 14. Of the Flancanade.
To do this, when you have presented within your Adversaries Sword, over-lap it
with 12 Inches of yours, within eight of his, and give in the Thrust on his
Right-flank, on the other side of the Sword, and beneath it your Nails
side-ways, throwing forward your Left Hand and turning the Palm from you to
keep off Counter-temps in the Belly, and in Thrusting let your Hilt be lower
than the Point, which secures his Sword; and note when you lap over to do it
with the flat, and not with the Edg as when you bind.

And thus much may serve for an Introduction to the learner in the Science of
Defense, and therefore for other Lessons, not here set down, I refer him to a
Master.

Of HAWKING.
Of Hawks there are two sorts.

THe Long-Winged Hawks.

Faulcon and Tiercle-gentle, Gerfaulcon and Jerkin. Saker and Sakaret. Lanner
and Lanneret. Barbary Falcon. Merlin and Jack. Hobby and Jack.
The Short-Winged Hawks.

Eagle and Iron. Goshawk and Tiercle. Sparrow-Hawk and Musket.
There are others too of inferior sort, as, Ring-Tail. Raven and Buzzard.
Forked Kite. Hen-driver, etc.


And as the Age of these Hawks is, so we name them, as The first Year a
Soarage. The second Year an Intermewer. The third Year a White Hawk. The fourth
Year a Hawk of the first Coat.


Thus much for their Names, now we come to speak of the Flights of these Hawks;
which are these, The Faulcon-Gentle, for Partridge or Mallard. Gerfaulcon, will
fly at the Herne. Saker, at the Crane or Bittern. Lanner, at the Partridge,
Pheasant or Choofe. Barbary Faulcon, at the Partridge only. Merlin and Hobby,
at the Lark, or any small Bird. Goshawk and Tiercle, at the Partridge, or Hare.
Sparrow-Hawk, at the Partridge or Blackbird.


And the Musket, at the Bush.


Your Hawk watch, and keep from Sleep, continually carrying him upon your Fist,
familiarly stroke him with a Wing or some Dead Fowl, or the like, and play with
him; Accustom to gaze, and look in his Face with a Loving, Smiling, Gentle
Countenance; and that will make him acquainted, and familiar with Men,

Having made him familiar, the next thing is to Bring him to the Lure, (which
the Faulconer makes of Feathers and Leather, much like a Fowl, which he casts
into the Air, and calls the Hawk to) which is after this manner. Set your Hawk
on the Perch, unhood him and show him some Meat within your Fist, call him by
Chirping, Whistling, or the like, till he comes, then Feed him with it; if he
comes not, let him Fast, and be sharp set: Short-winged Hawks, are properly
said to be called, not Lured. Make him bold, and acquainted with Men, Dogs, and
Horses, and let him be eager and sharp-set, before you show him the Lure,
knowing his Luring Hours; and let both sides of the Lure, be garnished with
warm and bloody Meat; let him likewise know your Voice well; so that being well
acquainted with Voice, and Lure, the Hearing of the one, or fight of the other,
makes him Obedient; which you must reward by Feeding, or punish by Fasting. But
before Luring (or any Flight) it is requisite to Bathe your Hawk in some quiet
and still shallow Brook, or for want of that in a Large Basin, shallow Tub, or
the like, lest being at liberty, you lose your Hawk, (whose Nature requires
such Bathing) and make him range. Now to make him know his Lure, is thus: Give
your Hawk to another, and having loosned in readiness his Hood-strings, and
fastened a Pullet to the Lure, go a little distance, cast it half the length of
the string about your Head, still Luring with your Voice, unhood your Hawk, and
throw it a little way from him; if he stoop and seize, let his plum the Pullet,
and feed on it upon the Lure: Then take him and Meat on your Fist, Hood him and
give him the Tiring of the Wing, or Foot of the said Pullet.

Having Manned and Lured your Hawk before you bring him to his Flight, one
thing is to be observed and done, called in the Faulconers Dialect, Enseaming,
which is to cleanse him from Fat, Grease, and Glut, know by his round Thighs,
and full Meutings; and thus you may do it: In the Morning when you feed him,
give him a bit or two of Hot-meat, and at Night very little or nothing. Then
feed him Morning and Evening with a Rook, washed twice till the Pinions be
tender; then give a Casting of Feathers as his Nature will bear; and once in
two or three days give him a Hens-neck well joynted and washed: Then a quick
Train Pigeon every Morning; and after by these and his own Exercise, he has
broken and dissolved the Grease, give him three or four Pellets of the Root of
Sallandine, as big as a Garden Pease, steept in the Sirup of Roses; and you
have done this part of your Duty.

To Enter your Hawks, for Partridge or Fowl, Lay an old Field Partridge in a
Hole, covered with something, and fasten to it a small Creance (i. e. a Fine
small long Line of strong and evenwound Packthread fastened to the Hawks Leash
when first Lured,) and uncoupling your ranging Spaniels, pluck off the Covering
of the Train Partridge and let it go, and the Hawk after it; and as soon as he
has slain it, reward him well with it. And thus to make him fly at Fowl, feed
him well with the Train of the Fowl you would have; doing afterward as above.

The Fault of Hawks differ according to their Nature and Make. Long-Winged
Hawks faults are thus helped. If he used to take stand, flying at the River, or
in Champain Fields, shun flying near Trees or Covert, or otherwise, let several
Persons have Trains, and as he offers to stand, let him that is next cast out
his Train, and he killing it reward him. And indeed you ought never to be
without some live Bird or Fowl in your Bag, as Pigeon, Duck, Mallard, etc. If
he be Froward and Coy; when he Kills, reward him not as usually, but slide some
other Meat under him and let him take his pleasure on it; giving him some
Feathers to make him scour and cast. If he be Wild, look not inward, but mind
Check, ( i. e. other Game, as Crows, etc. that fly cross him) then lure him
back, and stooping to it, reward him presently.

The faults of Short-winged Hawks thus are helped. Sometimes the Goshawk and
Sparrow-Hawks, will neither kill, nor fly the Game to Mark, but will turn Tail
to it: Then encourage your Dogs to Hunt, cast a Train Partridge before your
Hawk, make him seize it, and feed well upon it.

If a Hawk take a Tree, and will not fly at all, feed him then upon quick
Birds, and make him foot them, and in the plain Champaign Fields unhood him,
and riding up and down a while let one cast out a Field Partridge before him,
let him fly at it, and footing it, feed on it. If they be too fond of a Man,
that after a stroke or two will not fly, be seldom familiar with him, and
reward him not as he comes so improperly: Otherwise reward him well.

As for Mewing of Hawks, the best time for Long-winged Hawks is about the
middle of April, and March for the Short-winged Hawks. There are two kinds of
Mewings. 1. At the stock or stone; so called from its being low upon the
Ground, free from Noise, Vermin or ill Air. 2. At large; so called from being
in a high Room, with open Windows toward the North or North-East. The former
is accounted the best Mewing. The Faulconer, before he Mews his Hawks, see if
they have Lice, to Pepper and Scower them too. The best time to draw the Field
Hawk from the Mew, is in June, and he will be ready to fly in August; the Hawks
for the River in August, will be ready in September.

Cures for Hawks Diseases.
The Faulconer ought diligently to observe the Complexions of his Hawks
Castings and Mewtings, to judge of their Maladies, an assured sign of knowing
whether they are sick or distempered in this. Take your Hawk, turning up her
Train, if you see her Tuel or Fundament swells, or looks red; Or, if her
Eyes or Ears be of a fiery Complexion, it is an infallible sign of her being
not well and in good health; and then Scouring is necessary first; which is
done by Aloes Cicatrine, about the quantity of a Pea wrapped up in her Meat; and
this avoids Grease, and kills Worms too.

For the Cataract: Take one Scruple of washed Aloes finely beaten, and two
Scruples of Sugar Candy, mix these together, and with a Quil blow it three or
four times a day into your Hawks Eye.

Pantus or Asthma: Pour the Oil of sweet Almonds into a Chickens Gut, well
washed, and give it the Hawk: Or, scower him with Sallandine-Pellets, and Oil of
Roses, and then wash his meat in the Decoction of Coltsfoot.

Filanders or Worms: To prevent them, seeing your Hawk low and poor, give her
once a month a Clove of Garlic. To cure or kill them; take half a dozen Cloves
of Garlic boil them very tender in Milk, dry the Milk out of them; put them
into a Spoonful of the best Oil of Olives, and having steept them all Night,
give them both to your Hawk, when she has cast, in the morning: feed him not
till two hours after, and then with warm meat, and keep him warm all that day.

Lice: Mail your Hawk in some Woollen Cloth, put between his Head and Hood a
little Wool, and take a Pipe of Tobacco, put the little end in at the Tream,
blow the smoke, and the Lice that escape killing, will creep into the Cloth:
Probatum.

Formica: Take a little of the Gall of a Bull, and beating it with Aloes,
anoint the Beak of the Hawk, Morning and Evening,

Frounce: Take the Powder of Allume, reduced to a Salve with strong Wine
Vinegar, and wash her mouth with it; then take the Juice of Lolium and Raddish,
mixed with Salt, and anoint the Sore.

Apoplex: Gather the Herb Asterion, wash your Hawks meat with the Jucie thereof
when you feed him.

Wounds: Take the Juice of English Tobacco, or Mouse-ears, after you have
sticht it up with a little Lint, bathe the place.

Of BOWLING.
THe first and greatest Cunning to be observed in Bowling, is the right choosing
your Bowl, which must be suitable to the Grounds you design to run on, thus:
For close Alleys, your best choice is the Flat Bowl: 2. For open Grounds of
Advantage, the Round-byassed-bowl. 3. For Green Swarths, that are plain and
level, the Bowl that is Round as a Ball.

The next thing requires your Care is, the choosing out your Ground, and
preventing the Windings, Hangings, and many turning Advantages of the same,
whether it be in open wide places, as Bares and Bowling-greens, or in close
Bowling-alleys.

Lastly, Have your Judgment about you to observe and distinguish the Risings,
Fallings and Advantages of the Places where you Bowl: Have your Wits about you
to avoid being rookt of your Money: And have your Understanding about you, to
know your best Time and Opportunity for this Recreation; and finally a studious
Care of your Words and Passions, and then Bowl away, and you may deserve, Well
have you bowled indeed.

But methinks I cannot conclude here, without admiring how aptly a
Bowling-green is by the Divine Quarles characterized, in the following Verses,
thus, Brave Pastime, Readers, to consume that day,
Which without Pastime flies too swift away!
See how they Labor, as if Day and Night
Were both too short to serve their loose Delight?
See how their curved Bodies wreath, and skrue
Such Antic shapes as Proteus never knew:
One rapps an Oath, another deals a Curse,
He never better bowl'd, this never worse;
One rubs his itchless Elbow, shrugs and laughs,
The the other bends his Beetle-brows, and chafes;
Sometimes they whoop, sometimes the Stygian cries,
Send their black Santo's to the blushing Skies:
Thus mingling Humors in a mad Confusion
They make bad premises and worse Conclusion.


Thus much for Bowling.

Of TENNIS.
THis Recreation is of the same Date for its Antiquity of Invention with
Bowling, and for the Violence of its Exercise to be preferred before it. This
Sport indeed is of so universal an Acceptance, that Majesty it self is pleased
to design it its Recommendation, by tracking its laborious steps; and Princes
and Lords admire it too for the most proper Recreation, to suit with Innocence,
and true Nobility. Here the Body is briskly exercised more than ordinary, and
inured in Agility and Nimbleness; this renders the Limbs flexible and
mettlesom, and adapts them for the most Vigorous Enterprise.

Tennis and Baloon are Sports which are played almost with the same
Instruments; and therefore may be under one and the same Head: The first is a
Pastime, used in close or open Courts, by striking a little Round Ball to and
fro, either with the Palms of the hands (and then is called Pila palmaria in
Latin) or else a Racket, made for the purpose, round with Net or Cat-gut, with
a Handle: The other a strong and moving Sport in the open Fields with a great
Ball of a double Leather filled with Wind, and so driven to and fro with the
strength of a Man's Arm, armed in a Brace of Wood. And thus much shall suffice
to speak of the Baloon and Tennis; only let me desire you, let not this or any
other Pastime disturb your Minds; divert you from the diligent and careful
Prosecution of your own lawful Business; or invite you to throw away your Time
and Money too lavishly and idley; nor engage you in any Passion; that so you
may not offend God, dislike your Neighbor, nor incomode your Self and Family
in your Well-being and Felicity; and then you may recreate your self without
Fear: And in this Recreation observe the ensuing Morality of

The Tennis-Court.
When as the Hand at Tennis Plays,
And Men to Gaming fall,
Love is the Court, Hope is the House,
And Favor serves the Ball,
This Ball it self is due Desert,
The Line that measure shows
Is Reason, whereon Judgment looks
Where Players win and lose.
The Tutties are Deceitful Shifts,
The Stoppers, Jealousy,
Which has Sir Argus hundred Eyes,
Wherewith to watch and pry.
The Fault whereon Fifteen is lost,
Is Want of Wit and Sense,
And he that brings the Racket in
Is Double Diligence.
But now the Racket is Free Will,
Which makes the Ball rebound,
And Noble Beauty is the Choice,
And of each Game the Ground.
Then Racket strikes the Ball away,
And there is Oversight,
A Bandy ho! the People cry,
And so the Ball takes flight.
Now at the length Good-liking proves
Content to be their Gain:
Thus in the Tennis-Court, Love is
A Pleasure mixed with Pain.
Of RINGING.
WHosoever would become an accurate Master of this excellent Art and Pleasure,
and is very desirous to be esteemed an Elaborate and Ingenious Ringer, and be
enrolled amongst that Honored Society of College Youths; I must beg leave to
instruct him before he enters the Bell-free, in these ensuing short Rules,
which he must strictly observe, viz.

1. That as all Music consists in these six plain Notes, La Sol Fa Mi Re Vt;
so in Ringing, a Peal of Bells is Tuned according to these Principles of
Music: For as each Bell takes its Denomination from the Note it Sounds, by its
being flatter or deeper, as, First, or Treble, second, third, fourth, etc. as
they are in number to ten or twelve Bells, the last being called the Tenor; So
must they successively strike one after another both Fore-stroke and
Back-stroke, in a due Musical time or Equi-distance, to render their Harmony
the more Pleasant, and to make the Young Practitioner the better informed to
observe the Life of Music, and indeed of true Ringing, Time; and therefore is
called, Round-ringing.

2. As in Music, so in Ringing there are three Concords, so called from their
Melodious Harmony and Agreement, which Principally are these; Thirds, viz. 13,
24, etc. Fifths 15, 26, etc. Eights 18, 29, 310, etc. and these are the more
pleasant according to the Number of Bells they are struck on, and as they are
struck, whether seperately or mutually. From hence Changes are made, which is
only a Changing place of one Note with another, so variously, as Music may be
heard a thousand ways of Harmony; which being so obvious to common Observation,
I shall not go about to demonstrate; for that if two may be varied two ways,
surely by the Rule of Multiplication, a Man may easily learn how many times 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, or 12 Bells Notes may be varied; which will run almost ad
infinitum.

3. For the better observing the Ringing of Changes or Rounds, these three
things are to be noted.

1. The Raising true in Peal. 2. Ringing at a low Compass; and 3. Ceasing in
true Peal; all which three are the most essential Parts to render a
Practitioner Excellent.
1. For Rasing a Peal of Bells true, the modern and best Practice recommends
the swiftest and quickest possible, every one taking Assistance to raise his
Bell, as its going requires: the lesser Bells as Treble, etc. being by main
strength held down in their first Sway (or pull) to get time for the striking
of the rest of larger Compass; and so continued to be strong pulled till
Frame-high, and then may be slackned: The bigger, as Tenor, etc. must be pincht
or checked overhead, that the Notes may be hard to strike roundly and hansomely.
Observe that all the Notes strike round at one Pull: I do not mean the first;
but it is according to the Bigness and Weightiness of your Bells: However in
raising a Peal, do not let one Bell strike before the rest, or miss when the
rest do; this is contrary to the Strict Rules of true Ringing: And this is
called Round-ringing. Now if you design to raise a Peal of Bells for Changes,
you ought to raise them to a Set-pull, as the most proper for commanding the
Notes, and he who is not well skilled to manage his Bell at a Set-pull, will be
apt to drop or overturn it, be in a Wood, and fruitlessly toil and moil
himself. Therefore in practicing the Setting of a Bell, cast your Eye about the
other Bell-Ropes, during your managing your own, that you may accustom your
self to manage it according to the Change.

2. For Ringing at a low Compass, is thus observed: By keeping a due punctum or
beat of time, in the successive striking one after another of every Bell; the
best Ringer being set to the Treble, that may guide and direct the rest of the
Notes in their due Measure.

3. For Ceasing a Peal of Bells; let them fall gradually from a set Peal,
checking them only at Sally, till the low Compass renders it useless; and when
so low, that for want of Compass, they can scarce strike at Back-stroak; then
let the the Treble-Ringer stamp, as a Signal, to notify, that the next time
they come to strike at the Fore-stroke, to check them down, to hinder their
striking the Back-stroke; yet Fore-stroke continued, till brought to a neat and
graceful Chime, which may be the Finis to that Peal.

Thus much in short, for Raising, Round-ringing, and Ceasing a Peal of Bells; I
come next to lead you forth into that spacious Field of Variety of Changes, and
present you with Instructions that may be merely necessary, for the right
Understanding the several kinds of them.

Now in Ringing Changes, two of our best Senses, are to be employed, viz. The
Ear, and the Eye: The Ear, hearing when to make a Change; and the Eye directing
the Bell in making it: The Bells being the Object of the Former, and the
Bell-ropes the Object of the Latter: And to render both the Eye and Ear Useful
in Ringing Changes, these Five things are thoroughly to be Understood.

First, Endeavor to distinguish the Notes of a Peal of Bells, one from another
while Ringing.

Secondly, Learn to apprehend the places of the Notes.

Thirdly, Understand the Precedence of Notes.

Fourthly; How to make a Change in Ringing.

Fifthly, and Lastly, How to Practice the four foregoing Notions, in General.

1. To know the Notes of a Peal of Bells asunder (which is easy in
Round-Ringing) in Changes is thus: Get the skill of Tuning them with your
Voice, by imitating their Notes while Ringing. Or if you are acquainted, either
by your self or Friend, with some Singing-Master, or one who has skill in
Singing, get him to instruct you in the true Pitch of any Note, and aid your
distinguishing them; otherwise you may be puzzled in this, to know which is
Treble, which Second, etc. as in 532641, etc.

2. To know the places of the Notes, is no way better to be apprehended than
thus: The Practitioner ought to form an Idea in his Head of the place of each
Note, whether in a direct Line, or Obliquely; and representing them by a Figure
in his Mind, see (as it were) by the Eye of the Understanding each stroke of
the Bell, as the Treble, 1. Second 2. Third 3. etc. so that as the Ear is to
direct him, when to make the Change, so a right Apprehension of the Motion and
Places of the Notes, ought to be a means to guide his Ear.

3. The Precedence of Notes, is of a very obvious Demonstration; thus: In
Ringing Changes the Fore and Back-stroke, successively following one another,
are properly said to Lie behind one another, according to their places of
striking. Or in short, in 12345. the Note that leads either at Fore or
Back-stroke, is said to Lie before the rest, and the last to be behind, As the
2 is said to lie behind the 1, so it lies before the 3, as the 3 lies behind
2, so it lies before the 4. And so of as many as are Rung.

4. The manner of making a Change, is very common, and needs no particular, but
general Rule; That it is made by moving one Note into another place, Up and
Down, as Occasion requires; but usually made by two Notes standing one next the
other, as hereafter may be observed.

Lastly, In your Ringing Changes, these two things (in which consists the
practick part of this Art) are to be rightly considered, First, Readily to know
which two Bells are to make the succeeding Change. And Secondly, to consider
(if you are concerned in it) what Bell you are to follow in making it. To
understand which the more perfectly, you must imprint in your Memory, the
Method of the Changes pricked in Figures, and to be expert likewise in setting
them down diverse ways, and making any Figure a Hunt at Pleasure; and thus
without pausing or hesitating to consider the Course, you may thoroughly
understand the Methods; the Four preceding Observations being first perfectly
understood

There are two ways of Ringing Changes, viz. By Walking them, as the Artists
style it; or by Whole Pulls, or Half-pulls: Walking is, when in one Change the
Bells go round, Four, Six, or Eight times; which is a most incomparable way to
improve a Young Practitioner, by giving him time to consider, which two Bells
do make the next succeeding Change, and in making it, what Bell each is to
follow; so that by this means (by his Industry) he may be capable of Ringing at
Whole-pulls; which is, when the Bells go round in a Change at Fore and
Back-stroke; and a New Change is made every time they are pulled down at Sally:
This was an Ancient Practice, but is now laid aside, since we have learnt a
more advantageous way of hanging our Bells, that we can manage a Bell with more
ease at a Set-pull than formerly: So that Ringing at Half-Pulls is now the the
modern general Practice; that is, when one Change is made at Fore-stroke,
another at Backstroke, etc.

He that Rings the slowest Hunt, ought to notify the extreme Changes; which is,
when the Leading Bell is pulling down, that he might make the Change next
before the extreme, he ought to say, Extreme. By this means, betwixt the
Warning and the Extreme there will be one complete Change.

Of Changes, etc.
There are two kinds of Changes, viz. Plain Changes, and Cross-peals; which
Terms do denote the Nature of them; for as the first is styled Plain, so are
its methods easy; and as the second is called Cross, so are its Methods cross
and intricate: The first have a general Method, in which all the Notes (except
Three) have a direct Hunting-Course, moving gradually under each other, plainly
and uniformly: Plain are likewise termed single Changes, because there is but
one single Change made in the striking all the Notes round, either at Fore or
Back-stroke. But the Second is various, each Peal differing in its Course from
all others; and in Cross-peals as many Changes may be made as the Notes will
permit. In short, as to Plain-changes, I shall not dilate on them here, it
being so plainly understood by every one that lately have rung a Bell in peal;
all therefore I shall add is this, that any two Notes that strike next together
may make a Change, which may be done either single or double, as you list. The
single, by changing two Notes; and the double, by changing Four, i. e. Two to
make one Change and two another; which is however called One double Change, and
not two Changes; because it is made in striking the Notes of the Bells once round.

Of Cross-peals.
Or in these Cross-peals we must Observe the prime Movement, which sets the
whole Frame a going, and that is called the Hunt, which has one constant
Uniform Motion throughout the Peal, and different from that of the other Notes;
and indeed by this the whole Course of the Peal is Steered. This keeps a
continual motion through the other Notes, i. e. from leading, to strike behind,
and from thence again to Lead; which is called one complete Course.

Some Peals upon five Bells consist of single Courses, wherein are ten Changes,
and twelve Courses make the Peal. Others upon five, consist of double Courses,
wherein are twenty Changes to every Course, and six Courses in the Peal.

Upon six Bells there are likewise single and double Courses, viz. Twelve
Changes in every single Course, as in Grandsire-bob, etc. and Twenty-four
Changes in every double Course, as in College Bobs, that being the first Change
of every Course, wherein the Hunt leaves Leading: In short, judiciously observe
the first Course of any Cross-peal, and you will soon see the general Method of
the whole Peal: All Courses in Cross-Peals agreeing in these following three
Respects. First, In the Motion of the Hunt. Secondly In the motion of the rest
of the Notes: And Thirdly, In making the Changes. Which three things being well
(to omit Instance of Demonstration) and narrowly observed, will be very helpful
both in pricking and ringing Courses; the first and third for directing you in
Pricking them, and the first and second in Ringing them.

There is one Difficulty to be removed e're I can come to prick down those
Peals I design to be the Subject of the Discourse of this Epitome, and that is,
How to make the first Changes at the beginning of each Peal; I mean to make the
Second, Third, Fourth, etc. whole Hunts; and this in short is thus directed: In
any Cross-peal the whole Hunt may move either up or down at the beginning; and
the Motion of the whole Hunt, in the first Course of each of the following
Peals will direct the first Motion of any Cross-Hunt, and by Consequence of
making the first Changes in that Peal. Taking along with you this Observation.

That whenever the first Change of any Peal happens to be single, it must be
made at the backstroke, to prevent cutting Compass; and the like when a double
Change happens first in a Peal of Triples and doubles: But when it happens,
that the first Change is made at the Back-stroke, then Consequently the Bells
at the end of the Peal will come round at a Fore-stroke Change.

I shall omit speaking to any of the several Peals on four or five Bells; for
that in my opinion little Music is heard, though much Practical Observation is
made, from them; and therefore shall begin with Grandsire-bob, as having
mentioned it but just before in my general View I made of Cross-peals.

Grandsire Bob.
Bob Changes take their Name from this; viz. When the Treble leads in the
Second and Third, and the Fifth and Sixth's places, then they are called
Bob-changes. In Ringing which you are to observe these Rules, viz.

Whatsoever Bells you follow when you Hunt up, the same Bells in the same order
you must follow in Hunting down; as in the Changes here pricked, where the
Treble hunting up First follows Second, then Fourth, and then Sixth; when it
comes behind, First follows Second, in hunting down Fourth; and when hunting up
follows Sixth in the same Order: The like may be observed in Ringing any other
Bell, with this Difference betwixt the whole Hunt and the rest, viz. Every time
the Whole hunt leaves the Treble's place, and hunts up, it follows different
Bells, from what it did at its first hunting up.

In the ensuing Peal here pricked are Eighteen-score Changes, wanting one. It
may be Rung with any Hunts, and begin the Changes Triple and Double: You may
make your extreme at the first, second, or third single Bob; or the first,
second, or third time, that the half and Quarter-hunts dodg behind; the single
must be made behind in either of these.

123456 132546 516342 641253 236415 214365 135264 153624 614523 263145 241635
312546 156342 165432 621354 426153 321456 513624 bob 612345 462513 234165
531264 156423 165243 645231 243615 352145 514632 162534 654321 426351 325416
541362 615243 563412 462531 234561 453126 651423 536142 645213 243651 435216
564132 35^624 654123 426315 342561 546312 315264 561432 462135 324651 453621
435261 652431 653214 132654 136524 342516 564213 562341 -- 135642 324156 546123
526431 123564 153462 231465 451632 254613 125346 bob. 213645 415362 245163 --
135426 126354 143526 421536 152436 -- 123645 bob. 412356 154263 153246 216354
134562 143265 -- 152364 261534 315426 142356 145623 125634 625143 351246 --
bob. 126543 652413 532164 124536 154632 162453 564231 523614 125463 -- 164235
546321 256341 -- 145362 -- 453612 265431 152643 bob. 146325 435162 624513
156234 154326 bob, 341526 642153 -- -- 164352 314256 461235 165324 145236
146532 132465 416325 163542 142563 bob. 134256 143652 -- -- 164523 312465 bob.
136452 124653 146253 321645 134625 bob. 126435 142635 236154 316452 163425 --
124365 263514 361542 -- 162345 -- 625341 635124 136245 163254 123456

Thus much for the Grandsire-bob; I shall next collect what London Peals I
think most Harmonious, and agreeable, without troubling my self to go to
Oxford, or Nottingham, or Redding, to enquire after their different Methods of
Peals, as indeed needless; and my reason is this: Because I think the same
Rules for Peals that are suitable to our London Genius, may challenge likewise
an Acceptance amongst other Cities; provided their Steeples are furnished with
as many, and as good Bells, and their Belfree's with as ingenious and elaborate
Ringers as here in London

I shall begin then with Peals upon six Bells, and herein in order, measure out
the Delights on Peals from Six to Eight Bells, and setting out early, present
you with

The Morning Exercise.
Doubles and singles. The whole Hunt is the Treble, which Hunteth up into the
Second, Third, and Fourth places, lying twice in each; and then lies still in
the Sixth place, having dodged behind, and makes another, and then Hunts down
as it Hunted up, and then leads four times. Observing the manner of its
Pricking, and its Practice, may excuse any further defining it.

123456 265143 163425 125643 143256 213465 265134 -- 125634 134265 213456
265143 165243 -- 134256 231465 261534 165234 124365 -- 231456 216543 156243
124356 136524 234165 216534 156234 142365 136542 234156 126543 -- 142356 bob.
243516 126534 154326 -- 135624 243561 162543 154362 146532 135642 245316 162534
bob. 146523 -- 245361 -- 153426 bob. 132465 254631 164352 153462 145632 132456
254613 164325 -- 145623 123465 256431 bob. 152643 -- 123456 256413 163452
152634 143265 --

This will go a 120 Changes, and by making Bobs, 240, 360, 270.

A Cure for Melancholy. Doubles and Singles.
I should think it needless to explain the method of pricked Peals, and give a
large Definition of them, when their plain Demostration might be sufficient;
However, as the Old Phrase is, Because it is usual, something shall be said of
this too.

The Treble is the whole Hunt, as in the former, and leads four times, and
lies behind as many, and twice in every other place; the two Bells in the 3d.
and 4th. places continue dodging, when the Treble moves out of 4th. place,
until it comes down there again, and then the two hindmost dodge, till the
Treble displaceth them; who makes every double Change, except when it lies
behind, and then the double is on the four first, and on the four last when it
leads. Every single (except when the Treble lies there) is in the 5th. and 6th.
places; or if possessed by the Treble, then in the 3d. and 4th. places: Every
Bell (except the Treble) lies four times in the Second place: But enough; a
word is enough to the Wise. See it here Deciphered.

123456 243516 425316 145236 bob. 213465 245316 452136 145263 165423 213456
243561 452163 142536 165432 231465 245361 451236 142563 -- 231456 423561 451263
-- 143652 234165 425361 415236 156423 143625 234156 423516 415263 156432 bob.
134652 125634 152436 156423 136254 144625 125643 -- 156432 136245 -- 126534
143526 bob. -- 162345 126543 143562 165423 124365 162354 -- bob. 165432 124356
163245 154263 134526 -- 123465 163254 154236 134562 132654 123456 -- 152463 --
132645 --

This will go Six-score Changes, but by making bobs, it will go 240, 360, or
720. The Bob is a double Change at the leading of the Treble, in which the Bell
in the 4th. place lies still.

London Nightingale. Doubles and Singles.
The Whole-hunt is the Treble, who lies four times before, and as many behind,
and twice in every other place: The two hind Bells continue dodging, when the
Treble moves down out of the Fifth place, till he comes there again, the Bell
in the Fourth place lying still all the while: When the two hind Bells
aforesaid leave dodging, then the two First Bells take their dodging places,
till dispossessed again, by the return of the said Hind Bells to their dodging;
and then they Cease.

123456 234165 243561 425316 415236 213465 234156 423561 452136 415263 213456
243516 245361 452163 145236 231465 423516 425361 451236 145263 231456 243561
245316 451263 154236 154263 156324 142365 125643 143652 -- 156342 124356 152634
143625 126543 -- 124365 152643 bob. 126534 134562 -- -- 146352 162543 134526
136245 164523 146325 162534 bob. 136254 164532 -- -- 135462 163245 bob. 132465
153624 135426 163254 165423 132456 153642 -- -- 165432 123465 bob 142356 125634
-- 123456

This will go 120, and by making Bobs, 240, 360, or 720.

College Bobs.
In this Bob, when the Treble leaves the two Hind Bells, they dodge till it
comes there again, and till the Treble gives way for the dodging again of the
said two Hind Bell, the two First Bells dodge, but after Cease dodging, when
the two Hind Bells dodge.

123456 243651 421635 152364 165324 214365 426315 246153 135246 bob. 124356
462135 241635 153246 156342 213465 641253 426153 -- -- 231456 642135 462513
126543 132546 324165 461253 etc. 125634 135264 321456 416235 165432 -- --
234165 142653 bob. 164235 124365 243615 412635 156423 162453 123456 426351
146253 -- -- -- 246315 142635 143526 143652 423651 416253 bob. bob. 246351
146235 134562 134625 423615 412653 -- --

Another.
Here, every Bell, when it comes to lead, makes a dodge before, then after one
Change, it lies still; after it has made another dodge, it moves up into the
4th. place, where twice it lies still; and down again; except the Treble
happens to dodge with it in the 4th. place, then it hunts up behind. When the
Treble moves down out of the 3d. place, the two Bells in the 3d. and 4th. place
continue there, till the Treble comes up thither again, the two hind Bells
dodging in the mean time

123456 265314 132564 135426 164352 214365 625341 315246 -- -- 124356 263514
351426 153246 146532 213465 236154 534162 152364 bob. 231645 321645 351462 --
164523 326145 236145 534126 125634 -- 231654 321654 etc. 126543 146253 326154
312564 153624 -- 142635 362415 135246 bob 162453 -- 634251 315264 135642 164235
124365 364215 132546 -- -- 123456 632451 135264 153462 146325 -- 623541 312546
bob. bob.

Both these bobs will go One Hundred and Twenty Changes, and by making of bobs,
they will go, 240, 360, or 720. And thus with little Variation, there are other
bobs may be made after the same manner, and afford as Admirable Music, as
possibly can be made on Bells. I shall therefore hasten to finish this days
Work, only first present you with this one more called,

The City Delight: Doubles and Singles.
The whole Hunt is the Treble, and lies as before in the Nightingale: When the
Treble moves out of the 3d. place, the Singles are made in the 2d. and 3d.
place, till the Treble repossesses his his 3d. place, and then behind, till it
moves up again out of the 3d. place. The two hind Bells dodge, when the Treble
moves out of the 4th. place, till he returns again; the Bell in the 4th. place
lying still all the while.

123456 264351 154362 162534 143265 213465 265413 bob. 162543 143256 213456
256413 153426 126534 134265 231465 265143 153462 126543 134256 -- -- -- 231456
256143 156234 124365 135642 234165 251634 156245 124356 135624 234156 251643
165234 142365 bob. 243156 215634 165243 142356 136542 234615 215643 -- --
136524 243615 125634 164352 145623 -- 243615 125643 164325 145632 132465 246351
152634 bob. bob. 132456 264351 152643 163452 146523 123465 246531 154326 163425
146532 123456

This will go as many Changes as the last mentioned, by making Bobs. And here I
will shut up this days Peal upon Six Bells with

The Evening Delight. Doubles and Singles.
The Whole Hunt is the Treble, and lies as before specified, with this
exception only: That it dodges in the 2d. and 3d. places, every time it Hunts
up, and down. Observe when Treble goes to lead, and leaves of leading, the
Bells in the 3d. and 4th. places lie still, etc. Note the pricking this Peal.

123456 254163 164235 145326 156324 213465 245163 -- 154326 bob. 231465 241536
162453 -- 165342 213645 214536 126453 153462 156342 231645 241356 bob. 135462
-- 236154 214356 162435 153642 153624 263154 124365 126435 135642 135624 236514
142365 -- -- 153264 263514 124635 124653 136524 135264 265314 142635 142653
163524 -- 256341 -- 124563 bob. 132546 265431 146253 142563 136542 123546
256431 164235 -- 163542 132456 254613 bob. 145236 -- 123456 245163 146253
154236 165324 --

This Peal will go 120 Changes, and by making Bobs, as many as above.

Note that in all the foregoing Peals upon Six Bells, the Bobs are double
Changes, and made always at the leadings of the Whole-Hunt. He that Rings the
Half-Hunt, may best call Bob in all Peals.

I come now to the Changes upon Seven Bells, which though the seldom Practice
of them might excuse my omitting them; yet because I promised to say somewhat
of them, I shall be as good as my Word, (the Character of an Honest man) and
present you with a couple of Examples, and then proceed to Peals upon Eight:
But this I must crave leave to premise, That Variety of Changes may be pricked
upon Seven Bells, as Triples, and Doubles, Triples Doubles, and Single Doubles,
etc. and the same Methods may be pricked upon Seven, as may be upon Five, the
true difference of Proportion being observed; but to proceed.

Dodging Triples.
Triples and Doubles, and indeed all Peals upon Six, may likewise go upon Seven
Bells, thus, 1234567 2143576 4523671 3514276 2415367 5432761 3152467 4251376
4523716 1325476 4523167 5432176 1352746 5432617 5341267

Plain Triples.
1234567 2143657 6745231 3517264 2416375 7654321 3152746 4261735 7563412
1325476 4627153 5736142 6472513 5371624

In this all the Bells have a Hunting Course.

College-Triples, dodging before, and behind,
1234567 2143576 2467315 4176235 2415367 4276135 4712653 4251376 2471653
7421635 2453167 4217635 4726153 4235617 4126753 7462513 2436571 1462735 4765231
4263751 1467253

This Peal thus pricked, will go, 84 Changes, and the Treble leading, and the
Half Hunt lying next it, and a parting Change (which is a double on the four
middlemost of the Six hind Bells) being made, it will go 420, and by making
Bobs 5040.

Thus much shall suffice for Peals upon Seven Bells, I proceed to Changes upon
Eight.

Peals of Eight Bells.
Without amusing our selves with what Notes are most Musical, to lie behind, we
will come to the matter of Fact; for those Methods of Peals that are pricked on
six, may be the same upon Eight, Observing only, that Triples and Doubles upon
Six, must be Quadruples, and Triples upon Eight.

The Imperial Bob. Quadruples and Triples.
The Treble has a dodging Course, the two first, and two last Bells always
dodge, till hindered by the Treble, the two next to these, lying still one
Change, dodge the next, till the Treble hinders them too, Those in the 5th. and
6th. places dodge (the Treble being behind) and those in the 3d. and 4th.
places likewise dodge (the Treble being before) and so till hindered by the
Treble.

12345678 42361875 16847253 14283675 21436587 24368157 16482735 -- 12346578
42631875 -- 18645273 21436587 24613857 18765432 18462537 24136578 42168375 bob.
-- 42315687 24618357 17864523 16587432 24135678 42163857 -- bob. 42316587
41268357 16573824 15684732 24361578 14623875 bob. 18753624 42635187 41263857
15678342 bob. 24631578 14628375 -- 17856342 42365187 14263857 17352648 15372846
24635817 41628375 17536284 15738264 42368571 14268357 -- -- 24365817 41623875
13274586 13254768 42638571 46128357 13725468 13527486 24365871 64213875 --
12436587 42638517 46123857 12438765 12345678 24635871 64218375 12347856
42368517 46281357 -- 24638157 etc. 14826357

By this method the Peal will go 224 Changes, and by making of Bobs it will go
448, 672, 1344. The Bob is a Triple Change at the leading of the Treble,
wherein the Bell in the Fourth place lies still.

The next that comes to our Observation, and answers to what we first hinted at
in the beginning of this discourse of Peals upon Eight Bells, I mean Precedence
in Title, is the

Bob Major. Plain Quadruples and Triples.
In this all the Bells have a direct Hunting Course, until the Treble leads,
and then the six hindmost Bells dodge.

12345678 21436587 86745231 35172846 24163857 87654321 31527486 42618375
78563412 13254768 46281735 75836142 31527486 64827153 57381624 68472513
53718264

By this method this will go 112. And by making Bobs, 224, 336, or 672. The Bob
is a Triple Change, as in the foregoing Imperial is specified. By making two
Extremes, it will go 1344, and with four Extremes, 2688.

All Peals upon six Bells, wherein half the Changes are Triples, will go upon
Eight according to the method before-going, thus; If it be a Peal upon Six
consisting of 360, or 720 Changes, then there must be five Hunts in the Ringing
of it upon Eight, the Treble being the first, 2 the Second, etc.

College Bob Major. Quadruples and Triples.
There is four ways of pricking these. The first has single Dodging behind,
and is thus Peal'd.

The First.
12345678 21436587 56348271 78136524 24163578 53684721 71863542 42615387
35867412 17685324 46251378 38576142 16758342 64523187 83751624 65432817
87315642

The Second. This has Single Dodging before and behind, thus pricked.
12345678 21436587 42358671 42173865 24163578 24385761 41237856 42615387
42837516 14328765 24651378 24873156 13482756 42563187 42781365 24536817
24718356

The Third. This has double Dodging behind, thus Pricked.
12345678 21436587 63548271 78153624 24135678 65384721 71856342 42316587
56837412 17583624 43261578 58673142 15786342 34625187 85761324 36452817
87216342

The Fourth. This has double Dodging before and behind both, thus.
12345678 21436587 42638571 42167358 24135678 24368751 41263785 42316587
42637815 14627358 24361578 24367185 16423785 42635187 42631758 24365817
24613785

These may be pricked several other ways, but that I Omit here for Brevities
sake; The Dodging is without Intermission, except an hinderence comes by the
Treble; as likewise between two Bells, until Treble parts the Fray. The Bobs
are Triple Changes, as the Treble leads; in the 1st. 2d. and 6th. the Bell in
the 4th. place lies still at the Bobs, and in the 3d. 4th. and 5th. that in the
2d. place lies still.

Each of these will go 112 Changes, and by making Bobs 224, 336, or 672.

College Triples Dodging both before and behind.
This Peal is the same for Bobs, as the Bob Major, and will go as many Changes
by making Bobs, or otherwise, as any of the foregoing Four, and is thus Peal'd.

12345678 21436587 42568371 42157836 24153678 24586731 41275863 42513687
42587613 14725836 24531678 24578163 17452863 42536187 42571836 24563817
24517863

The Wild-Goose Chase Triples.
The Explanation shall follow the Peal; intending here to put an end to my
Epitome of the Art of Ringing, and therefore shall first present you with this
Pricked thus.

12345678 21536784 37625481 15327684 25163748 73265418 13572648 52613784
72356148 31752684 56231748 27531684 37125648 65327184 25713648 73215684
63572814 52173684 72351648 36758241 51237648

In this Change the 4th. Bell must first hunt up into the Sevenths place, and
then the 4 and 8 always dodge behind throughout the Peal, unless when
obstructed by the Treble. The Bell that moves up into the 6th. place, when the
Treble moves thence down, lies still there, till displaced by the Treble;
during which time the two hind Bells dodge, and the five first go a perfect
Hunting-course: And when likewise the Treble moves out the 5ths. place the
five first Bells go a Hunting-course, till it comes down there again: By this
method it will go 80 Changes, and by Bobs 160, 240, or 480. The Bob is made as
in the foregoing Changes.

And here I thought to make an end of the Art of Ringing, but Cynthius aurem
vellit, the young Practitioner, whose only Information is hereby aimed at,
plucks me by the Sleeve, and tells me in the Ear, that though Peals upon six, as
Triples and Doubles, etc. make excellent Music upon Eight Bells, 48, 68, 41,
or 18 lying behind: Or, Triples and Doubles upon the six middle Bells, the
Tenor lying behind; yet for him who is not arrived to such a perfection of
Skill, as to Ring those complete Peals, the most proper and easy for him are
Set-changes, which are founded on these Grounds.

First, Placing the Bells Fifths; thus the 4 must hunt up behind the 7, the 3
behind the 6, and the 2 behind the 5; or the one may Hunt down under the other,
as the 5 under the 2, the 6 under 3, and 7 under 4: Or if you will, first let a
Single, next a Double, and then a Triple Change be made on the middle Bells,
all coming to the same effect; for then the Changes will lie Fifths thus, 15,
26, 37, 48. In the Peal four Concords are to be regarded, The first 15, the
Second 26, the third 37, and the fourth 48.

These four Concords may go the Methods of any Changes upon four Bells; 1, 5
being taken for the Treble; 2, 6 for the Second; 3, 6 for the Third; and 4, 8
for the Fourth; and the Concords may Change places with one another, as you
list. In which this Observation is highly necessary, that the two Notes of
every Concord must constantly attend each other in their Motion; that is,
whenever one of the two Notes moves, the other must follow it.

Or Secondly, Place the Bells Thirds; thus: The 64 and 2 must hunt up, or else
the 3 5 7 down; or otherwise on the middlemost Bells let a Triple, Double or
Single Change be made, are to one effect; and then the Bells will lie Thirds
thus, 13. 57. 24. 68. Herein are four Concords observable; as in the former
Peal, viz. 13. 57. 24. 68. These Concords may go the Methods of any Changes
upon Four Bells, 1, 3 being taking for the Treble, 5, 7 for the Second; 2, 4
for the Third; and 6, 8 for the Fourth; moving in the same manner as before
showed.

By these Grounds Variety of excellent and Musical Changes are to be Rung; any
Concord may be made a Hunt, and to move up and down at the beginning.

In Ringing these Set-changes, the Note will lie sometimes Fifths, sometimes
Thirds and both, and then to Clam them, is admirable Music: Clamming is, when
each Concord strike together; which being done true the 8 will strike as but
four Bells, and make a Melodious Harmony. You may Clam two or three bouts, and
then strike as many times Open, alternatively, one Clam one Pull, and Open the
next, etc.

Vocal Music: Or, Plain and Easy Directions to Sing by Notes, wherein with a
little Help, any one who is Musically given, may be perfected in a short time.
MUSIC, especially Vocal, has been of such high Esteem in all Ages, that it is
accounted no less than a Divine Science producing such Concordance, and
Harmony, that it cheereth and rejoices the Hearts of Men, and is delightful to
every Creature. It is certainly an Addition to the joy in Heaven, where the
Saints and Angels sing* Halleluja's and Songs of Praises before the Throne of
God. St. Austin tells us, that it is the Gift of God to Men, as well as to
Angels, and a Representation and Admonition of the sweet consent and Harmony
which his Wisdom has made in the Creation and Administration of the World. But
not to Prologue on what every where so much commends it self, I shall Sum up
what in that Nature is expedient in a few Verses, and so proceed to the Subject
Matter, viz.

Nature, which is the vast Creations Soul,
That steady curious Agent in the whole,
The Art of Heaven, the Order of this Frame
Is only Music in an other Name:
And as some King Conquering what was his own
Has choice of various Titles to his Crown,
So Harmony on this Score now, that then,
Yet still is all that takes and governs Men:
Beauty is but Composure, and we find
Content is but the Concord of the Mind;
Friendship the Unison of well tuned Hearts,
Honor the Chorus of the noblest Parts.
And all the Worlds good on which we can reflect
Is Music to the Ear, or to the Intellect.
There are to make up a Musical Harmony computed seven Notes; now in the
easiest way expressed by the Seven letters of the Alphbet, viz. A. B. C. D. E.
F. G. And If it so fall out, that a Voice or Music gradually rise or fall more
than Seven Notes; The subsequent 8th, 9th, or 10th. will in the same order
proceed, bearing the like Relation each to the other, as the 1st. 2d. 3d, etc.
to which they respectively are Eights. And so that from hence every Eighth
Note, being in Nature alike, is called by the name of that to which it is an
Eighth; however above or below it; and for the better understanding the various
Musical Compositions out of these Notes, Musicians have devised and make use of
Lines and Characters, that as a Language, they may be understood and
Communicated by Book, for the Instruction of the unlearned: As in the following
Introductory Example, you will perceive;

^

^

In this example, before I come nearer to particulars in general, observe
first, that those Characters you observe at the beginning of the Lines, are
termed Cliffs or Claves, Keys to open and signify what part or pitch of Voice,
viz. the Treble, Mean, or Basse properly the Notes belong to; as likewise on
what Line or Space the Seven letters expressing the Notes is placed. And then
again, the five Lines and Spaces between them are useful, as Steps or
Gradations whereon the degrees of Sound are to be expressed, or the Notes
ascending and descending: Then Thirdly, the Characters placed on the five
Lines, express the Notes them selves, or stand for them; and their difference
in form, signify their quality, whether they be longer or shorter.

Your care must therefore be in this, and the Chapters following, to consider
well in the first place, the Gam-ut, to learn the use of the Cliffs: Next to
that, the Names of the Lines and Spaces, whereby you may readily know how to
call a Note, as it stands on any of the Lines; and Thirdly, How you should Sing
those Notes in right Tune, as well by degrees, as leaps; and last of all, to
give each Note its due Quantity of Time.

This in general, being observed, and seriously weighed; that you may take a
prospect of your task, I from it proceed to the Gam-ut, so far as I think
necessary to my present design, which is to let you understand by it the use of
the Cliffs, with the order and distances of the Notes, as the Parts in a Body
lie together.

The Gam^ut or Scale of MUSIC


The consistence of this Scale is of Eleven Lines, with the Intermediate
Spaces, and contains the places of all the Notes that are made use of
Ordinarily in Vocal Music. In the first Column you will find placed the Old
Notes, being set down, that you may see what they are. And in the Second Column
you are showed which of the Seven letters properly belongs to each Line and
Space. The Third Column contains the Cliffs, or signed Keys, domonstrating how
many degrees of Notes they are one above another, which once Circumspectly
observed and known, the other degrees of Distance are with more ease computed.
And here

Five of these Lines, with their Spaces, are usually sufficient for the
pricking down any Tune, for which reason this Scale is divided into Three Parts
or Staves, compassed in with Arched Lines; and of these the lowermost five are
proper and belonging to the Bass, and are known by this mark * on the Line of
F. usually, therefore called the F. * Fa-ut Cliff or Key; because it opens to
us the letters standing on the other Lines and Spaces, as in the ensuing
Chapter will appear. As for the upermost five Lines, they contain the highest
of the Notes, and so belong to the Treble or highest Part. -- The Key to which
is marked in this manner, * and sometimes G S. on the lower Line but one.

The middle part or Tenor, usually takes in two of the upper Treble Lines; also
two of the Bass Lines, that in the middle only being proper to it self, known
by this mark placed on it, * for the Cliff or Key, its place being properly in
the middle Line, however it is many times placed on one or other of the other
Lines; and note which ever the Cliff stands on, that Line is the place of C.
and accordingly the other Lines are to be reckoned: Sometimes likewise we find
the Bass Cliff is removed to the middle Line, and upon such removal, that Line
is F, etc. and though this manner of Shifting the Cliff is troublesome, yet
Custom and Practice having made the knowing of them necessary, you ought to be
very well understanding in the manner of them, if you would be well skilled in
Vocal or Instrumental Music.

The Names of the Lines and Spaces.
Having thus far plainly proceeded to Introduce the beginner or learner, I now
lead a step further to the Names of the Lines and Spaces, which is a thing very
Materal in the beginning of learning. For in the Gam-ut having seen how the
Notes lie together in a Body, it will be proper to know how you must take them
into parts according to the several Cliffs, which are three in number, three
beginning usually, as most common with the uppermost. And in these your first
care will be to learn the Names of the Lines and Spaces, which are opened to
you by the Cliff or Key; and these are in number Seven, expressed in the Seven
letters, A. B. C. D. E. F. G. which for a more perfect Sounds sake, and other
reasons to be given, you must pronounce or call La, B, Ce, D, Lae, Fa, G. and
this Fa must be pronounced broad, etc.

These and the like Names the Notes receive for two Reasons; the first is,
because the Voice is best sent forth in expressing some Syllable; as likewise
that this number of Notes might be known by as many distinct Names, as for
their places in the Cliffs: See the Plate following.

^

^

^

^

And it will be very necessary, that you should begin with and keep to one
Cliff at the first, as it pleases you to choose, or as either of the three best
agrees with your Voice for a high or low Pitch.

Having gone through all the Rules, and being perfect in that, then it is fit
you should proceed to the other. There is no need you should meddle or trouble
your self with the Tenor or C Cliff because it keeps no certain place; you must
observe however, before you go further, to be ready at naming the Lines and
Spaces, so readily to tell, as soon as you look on them, what letter any Line
or Space is called or named by.

As for the rest, the Cliff leads you to them, for beginning there, and
Ascending, you will find the letters lying in Order, and in descending; it is
only your naming them backwards.

The dash Lines, which you perceive above and below, are added only when the
Notes Ascend above the Staff, or descend below it.

Directions as to the Distances of one Note from another, as to Sound.
In this case, the distances are not all equal, but that in the rising and
falling of any Eight Notes, there are two lesser distances; and these are named
Semitones, or the Half Notes, which must be well observed and known, in
remarquing their places in the Staff of Lines; and the better to have them in
your Memory at all times take a rule from certain Rhimes that point at their
places, viz.

In every octave there are half Notes two.
Which do to us their proper places show;
One half Note you will find from B to Ce,
The other half one lies twixt Fa and Le.
The octave mentioned as an Eighth, and this Rule denotes the ordinary places
where you are to Sing the Half Notes, when there are no Flats or Sharps placed
or set in the Lines, viz. between B and Ce, and twixt Le and Fa; these ^ Flats
and Sharps you will find thus marked and when the Semitones, or Half Notes are
shifted, they are known by them when they are found upon the Lines.

^

^

Observe, that in these Staves or Lines, you find the Notes Gradually
Ascending, of which the Pairs marked with Arches are half a Note distant.

G. F. 1 E. 2 D. 3 C. 4 B. 5 A. 6 G.

This Marginal Figure, shows to the Eye the distance of the Seven Notes one
from another, the Letters Guiding or Directing to the Particulars, whereas you
perceive B, Ce, and La, Fa, lying near unto the rest, so must their Sounds be
nearer when you come to Tune your Voice in harmony, etc. and the better to
express with your Voice, and so observe the difference between half and whole
distances of Notes; Sing often over these six Mona-Syllables, viz. One, Two,
Three, Four, Five, Six, distinctly, as is to be observed in the Tune of Six
Bells; and when you have done it many times, Sing only One, Two, Three, Four,
and there stop, repeating three four by them selves for they are Semitones
distant in Sound, and the rest are alone, or a whole Note distant each from the
next; so that by a little Judicial Observation you will perceive the three and
four Bells to be a lesser distant in Sound, than the other.

The Figures or Number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, in the foregoing Marginal Figures,
show the several distances to the Eye of the six Notes where Le is the first, D
the Second, etc. and the third and fourth, are Ce B, distant half a Note or
Tune.

Directions for the Tuning of Notes, etc.
The properest and most easy way for Tuning your Notes rightly, must be
considered either in following the Voice of one skilled in Music, or Singing,
or some such Tuned Instrument, as is accomodated with Frets or Keys, which are
the read and only ways as yet made use of by Practitioners. That of a Master
being most common, but where none of these can be had by the party desirous to
Learn, I shall lay down the following Directions, which will very much Instruct
one that has a Musical Ear, especially such a one as has heard, and can Sing
the Notes of the Six Bells, of which, I presume, there are few, whose Genius
Leads them to the Science of Music, are Ignorant.

Let me put then, Supposing that you can Sing, One, Two, Three, Four, Five,
Six, right; then shall I by the help of these Notes, proceed to set you further
in the right, and lead you to all the rest.

Consider well then, that beginning to Sing the first Note, let it stand on
what Line or Space it will, you may Sing it with what Tune you think fit,
either high or low, (as to the pitch of your Voice) but with this caution, that
you reckon how many Notes you have above or below it, that your Voice in its
pitch may be so managed as to reach them both without Squeaking or Grumbling,
or any harsh or rough Indecency of Sound.

For applying which six Notes, observe this first Example;

Make your beginning with the first Bar, and with a high Voice Sing the Six
Notes you view on the Staff diverse times, calling them over by the Number, viz.
One, Two, Three, Four, Five, Six, as in the foregoing Section; when that is
done, Sing the same Notes by their Names, viz. La, G, Fa, Le, D, Ce, in the
Tune of six Bells.

^1 2 3 4 5 6 Bar 2

^1 2 3 4 5 6

^3 1

^2 3

^4 5

^4 5

^6

2. In the Second and third Bars, you must Sing the two first Notes of the six
by themselves, forward and backward: Repeat all six in the fourth Bar, and in
the fifth and sixth Bars, let the two last Notes be repeated, viz. D, Ce,
forward and backward, and these Notes are a whole Tone distant, and by often
repeating these Notes in the second, third fourth and fifth Bars, you will be
better capable to know and distinguish their distance from the Lesser.

^7

^7

In the Seventh Bar repeat the last three often over after all the six. First,
down, Le, D, Ce, Le, D, Ce, etc. and then proceed backwards, as Ce, D, Le, Ce,
D, Le, etc.

^8 9

^8 9

Observe in this Eighth Bar after all six often to repeat the four first, as,
La, G, Fa, Le, and when you sing them particularly, observe the two Notes Fa,
Le, by reason their distance is a Semitone; wherefore you must take notice in
the Ninth Bar to Sing them by themselves so many times as you can conveniently
fix them in your Memory, as to their distance, for in this you will find it
somewhat difficult to Sing the half Notes true in their proper places.

^10

^11 10

^11

Observe here in the tenth Bar to Sing the four first Notes in their order
downwards and upwards, and in the Eleventh Bar you must first Sing the six
Notes in their proper order: After this repeat the four last Notes, viz. Fa, Le
D, Ce, taking Notice to leave out the two first Notes, viz. La, G, continually
observing to Mark the Semitone between Fa, Le, which two Notes you must Sing by
themselves in the Twelfth Bar.

^12 13

^12 13 A Close

Take notice now further, that in the thirteenth Bar you Sing Fa, Le, D, Ce,
down and up, as you find them pricked, and observe especially the three last,
viz. Fa, Le, Fa, for this reason, viz. that it is a common close or ending of
Tunes.

Also observe, if in any place you doubt you Sing right a repeated part or the
six Notes, premised as are noted in the Eleventh and Thirteenth Bars: Let all
the six Notes be Sung over again in order, and so proceed distinctly to try at
the parts themselves.

The second Example.

^1 Bar

^2 3 1 2 3 4 5 6

^2 3

^4

^5 close

^1 2 3. 1 2 3 4 5 6

^2 3

^5 close

You having now gone over the former Examples, must proceed by the same clue of
Six Notes to descend three Gradations or Steps lower, viz. to G. which is to
the Second Note of the first six, an Octave or Eighth.

First then, in the first Bar you must begin with a high pitch in your Voice,
and so having Sung, as in the former Examples, La, G, Fa, Le, D, Ce, leave out
La, and only Sing the Five last: Then repeat only three in the Second Bar, viz.
the three last La, D, Ce, calling them now not by those names, but by that of
One, Two, Three, and though the names are altered, you must not alter the Tune
or Tone.

Having thus proceeded, observe in the third Bar to Sing the Six Notes from Le,
to G, naming them as the Bells One, Two, Three, Four, Five, Six; In such a
manner, that the three first of these be in Tune, the same with the three last
of the former Six; after, as I said, you have Sung them as the Bells, viz. One,
Two, Three, Four, Five, at least four or five times, then as often Sing them
again by their proper Names, viz. Le, D Ce, B, La, G.

Observe again, that in the fourth Bar you Sing the four first Notes, La, D,
Ce, B, about four times over; after that repeat Ce, B, by themselves taking
good notice of their distance or differences, which is a Semitone like to Fa,
Le above, etc.

Consider once more, as to this Example, as to the fifth Bar after all the six
are Sung by you, repeat the last four, viz. Ce, B, La, G, do it often over,
keeping them up in the same Tone they had in all six, by which means Ce and B
will be distant half a Note, whereupon Sing them backward, viz. G, La, B, Ce,
and at the end repeat D Ce, as you did Le Fa at the thirteenth Bar before set
down.

^

^6

^7

^8

^3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5

^8

^

Observe further now in these Six Bars, that when you have Sung all six in
order, Sing the three first Le, D, Ce, and there stop; then proceed to Sing
those three over again in the same Tune, not calling them Le, D, Ce, but Three,
Four, Five; do it several times, and so proceed to the Seventh Bar, adding two
Notes above, and Sing them on the five Bells, viz. One, Two, Three, Four, Five,
three or four times; then call them by their names, viz. G, Fa Le, D, Ce, then
proceed to the Eighth Bar, and add to the other five D, La, G, to make up an
Octave, keeping in your Mind the distances, as you Sing them in the former
Examples; and by this means you have the whole Octave or Eight Notes from G to
G, which must be practiced down and up, and when you are perfect in it, so as
to Sing your distances true with the Semitones in their right places, the
following directions will lead you through the rest of the Notes to Sing any
other Octave, beginning at any other Letter.

^9 10

Begin at Le again in the Ninth Bar, and begin the six Notes, viz. Le, D, Ce,
B, La, G, in proper order, that done, repeat the two last Notes, viz. La, G, by
themselves: so proceed to the tenth Bar, and Sing La, G, Fa, Le, D, Ce, so that
La and G, may be the same in Tune as you found them in the former Six; and if
so be your Voice will not reach Ce, at the pitch you began the first Bar, then
Sing as far as you can, or begin at Le, at the ninth Bar higher, Singing these
three last Bars distinctly from the Foregoing.

^11

In the Eleventh Bar you must Sing backward, your six last Notes, viz. Ce, D,
Le, Fa, G, La. rising from Ce, to La, so going one step backward to G, rise to
Ce, as in the foregoing fifth Bar, which is an Octave to the lower Ce. And thus
much may suffice for the Beginner to practice on, which, if well understood,
will bring him in to Sing Notes in any Tune.

Of COCK-FIGHTING.
HErein let us first observe the choice of a Cock of the Game, directed by
these four Characters following: That he be

1. Of a strong Shape, proud and upright, and for this the Middle-sized,
neither too small or too large, is best, because most matchable, strong and
nimble. His Head small like a Sparrow-Hawks; his Eye large and quick; Back
strong crook't at the setting on, and colored as the Plume of his Feathers;
the Beam of his Leg very strong, and colored as his Plume; Spurs long, rough,
and sharp, hooking inward.

2. Of a good Color, and herein the Gray, Yellow, or Red Pyle, with a black
Breast, are to be preferred; the Pyde rarely good, and the White and Dun never.
A Scarlet Head is a demonstration of Courage, but a Pale and wan of Faintness.

3. Of Courage true, which you shall observe by his proud, stately, upright
standing and walking, and his frequent Crowing in his Pen.

4. Of a sharp and ready Heel, which (in the Opinion of the best Cock-masters,)
of high Estimation; a Sharp-heel'd Cock, though somewhat false, is better (as
dispatching his business soonest) than a true Cock with a dull Heel.

For Breeding, the Best season is from the Moon's increase in February, to her
increase in March. The March Bird is best. And now first get a perfect Cock, to
a perfect Hen, as the best Breeding, and see the Hen be of an excellent
Complexion (i. e.) rightly plumed, as black, brown, speckt, gray, grissel, or
yellowish; tufted on her Crown, large bodied, well poked, and having Weapons,
are Demonstrations of Excellency and Courage. Observe further her Comportment,
if Friendly to her Chickens, and revengeful of Jnjuries from other Hens.

When the Cock and Hen-Chickins, (going till now promiscuously one with
another) begin to quarrel and peck each other, part them and separate their
Walks: And the best for a Fighting Cock, are private and undisturbed Walks, as,
Wind-mills, Water-mills, Grange-houses, Park-lodges, etc. and their
Feeding-place on soft Ground, or Boards; and have for his meet, white Corn, or
White-bread Tosts, steept in Drink, or Urine, is good, both to Scower, and Cool
them. And do not debilitate and debauch his Courage and Strength, by having too
many Hens to walk with; three Hens are enough for one Cock.

If before they be six Months Old, any of your Chickens Crow clear and loud,
and unseasonable, then to the Pot or Spit with them, they are Cowards; the true
Cock is long ere he gets his Voice, and when he has gotten it, keeps good and
judicious Time in Crowing.

Next observe your Roosting Perch, for this makes or marrs a Cock; for forming
of which, consult the best Cock-masters Feeding pens, and the Perches there,
and accordingly proportion your own; take care that the Ground underneath the
Perch be soft, for if it be rough and hard, in leaping down he will hurt his
Feet, and make them Gouty and Knotty.

For the Dieting, and Ordering of your Cock for Battle, observe these Rules.
Let your Cock be full two years Old, then in the latter end of August, take up
and Pen him, (it being now Cocking-time till the end of May) and see that he be
sound, hard feather,d, and full summed.

The first four days after Penning, Feed him with the Crumb of Old Manchet cut
into square bits, thrice a day, and with the Coldest, and Sweetest Spring Water
that can be had. And after you think by this time he is thoroughly purged of his
Corn, Worms, Gravel, and other course Feeding, take him in the Morning out of
the Pen, and let him Sparr with another Cock some time to heat and chafe their
Bodies, break Fat and Glut, and fit them for Purgation; first having covered
their Spurs with Hots of Leather, to hinder their Wounding and drawing Blood of
one another.

After they have sufficiently Sparred, that they pant again, take them up, and
remove their Hots, and prepare them for a Sweating Bout thus: Take Butter, and
Rosemary, finely chopped, and White-sugar-candy, mixed together; and give them the
quantity of a Wallnut; which will Scower, strengthen; and prolong Breath: Then
having (purposely) deep Straw Baskets, fill them half way with Straw, put in
your Cock, and cover him with Straw to the top; lay the lid close, and let him
stove till the Evening. At Five a Clock take him out, and lick his Head and
Eyes with your Tongue, then Pen him, and fill his Trough with Manchet and hot
Urine.

After this, take a Gallon of Wheat, and Oat-meal-flower, and with Ale, half a
score Whites of Eggs, and Butter, work it into a stiff Past; bake it into broad
Cakes, and when four days Old, cut it into square Bits.

The Second day after Sparring, bring your Cock into a Green-close, and show
him in your Arms a Dung-hill-cock, then run from him, and allure him thus to
follow, suffering him now and then to strike the Dung-hill-Cock, and so Chase
him up and down for half an Hour, till he pants again; and thus Heated, carry
him home, and scour him with half a Pound of Fresh-butter, beaten with the
Leaves of the Herb of Grace, Hysop, and Rosemary, to the consistence of a
Salve, and give him the quantity of a Wallnut; then Stove, and Feed him as
above. And thus for the first Fortnight, Spar or Chase him every other day.

The second Fortnight, twice a Week will be enough to Chase or Spar your Cock:
Observing that you Stove and Scour him, proportionable to his Heating.

The third and last Fortnight (for six Weeks is long enough) feed him as
before, but do not Spar him, but Chase him moderately twice, or thrice, as
before; then roll his aforesaid scouring in Brown-sugar-candy, to prevent his
being Sick; rest him four days, and then to the Pit.

Now Gentlemen, Match your Cock carefully, or what you have hitherto done, is
nothing. And here observe the Length, and Strength of Cocks. The Length is thus
known: Gripe the Cock by the Waste, and make him shoot out his Legs, and in
this Posture compare, And have your Judgment about you. The Strength is known
by this Maxim, The largest in the Garth, is the Strongest Cock. The Dimension
of the Carth, is thus known: Gripe the Cock about from the joints of your
Thumb, to the Points of your great Finger, and you will find the Disadvantage,
The weak long Cock is the quickest easier Riser, and the short strong one, the
surest Striker.

Thus being well Matched, accoutre him for the Pit. Clip his Main off close to
his Neck, from his head to his shoulders. Clip his Tail close to his Rump, the
Redder it appears the better. His wings sloping, with sharp Points; scrape
smooth, and sharpen his Spurs; leave no feathers on his Crown; then moisten his
head with Spittle.

The Battle done, search and suck your Cocks wounds, and wash them well with
hot Urine, then give him a Roll of your best Scouring, and stove him for that
Night. If he be swelled, the next morning, suck and bathe his Wounds again, and
pounce them with the Powder of the Herb Robert, through a fine Bag; give him an
handful of Bread in warm Urine, and stove him, till the swelling be down. If
he be hurt in his Eye, chew a little ground Jvy, and Spit the Juice in it;
which is good for Films, Haws, Warts, etc. Or if he has veined himself in his
sight, by narrow striking, or other cross blows, when you have found the hurt,
bind the soft Down of Hair to it, will cure it.

When you visit your wounded Cocks, a month or two after you have put them to
their Walks, if you find about their heads any swollen Bunches, hard and
blackish at one end, then there are unsound Cores undoubtedly in them;
therefore open them, and with your Thumb crush them out, suck out the
Corruption, and fill the holes with fresh Butter; and that will infallibly cure
them.

Cures for Distempers incident to the Cock or Chick of the Game.
For Lice, being most common, I begin with; proceeding from corrup Meat, and
want of Bathing, etc. Take Pepper beaten to Powder, mix it with warm Water, and
wash them with it,

For the Roup; a filthy swelling on the Rump, and very contagious to the whole
body, the staring and turning back of the Feathers is its Symptom. Pull away
the Feathers, open and thrust out the Core, and wash the Sore with Water and
Salt, or Brine.

For the Pip; visit the mouth, and examine what hinders your Cocks, Hen, or
Chicks feeding, and you will find a white thin Scale on the Tip of the Tongue,
which pull off with your Nail, and rubbing the Tongue with Salt, will cure it.

For the Flux; proceeding from eating too moist Meat, give them Pease-Bran
scalded, will stop it.

For the Stoppage of the Belly, that they cannot mute; anoint their Vents, and
give them either small bits of Bread or Corn, steeped in Urine of Man.

And now I have one Word of Advice to him that is a Lover (or would be so) of
this Royal-Sport; and then have done: Come not to the Pit without Money in your
Breeches, and a Judgment of Matches; Done and Done is Cook-Pit Law, and if you
venture beyond your Pocket, you must look well to it, or you may lose an Eye by
the Battle.

Of FOWLING.
THE Ingenious Fowler, like a Politic and sagacious Warrier, must first
furnish and store himself with those several Stratagems and Engines, as suit
with the diversities of Occasion, i. e. Time, Place, and Game; or else he
cannot expect the Conquest.

And first of Nets, which must be made of the best Pack-thread; and for taking
great Fowl, the Meshes must be large, two Inches at least from point to point,
the larger the better; (provided the Fowl creep not through;) two Fathom deep,
and six in length, is the best and most manageable Proportion; Verged with
strong Cord on each side, and extended with long Poles at each end made on
purpose. But for small Waterfowl, let your Nets be of the smallest and
strongest Pack-thread, the Meshes so big, as for the great Fowl, about two or
three foot deep: Line these on both sides with false Nets, every Mesh a foot
and half Square. For the Day-Net, it must be made of fine Pack-thread, the Mesh
an Inch square, three Fathom long, and one broad, and extended on Poles
according to its Length, as aforesaid.

Birdlime is the next, and thus made. Pill the Bark of Holly from the Tree at
Midsummer, fill a Vessel, and put to it running Water; boil it over the Fire
till the Gray and White Bark rise from the Green; take it off the Fire, drain
the Water well away, and separate the Barks; and take the Green, lay it on some
moist floor and close place, and cover it with Weeds; let it lie a fortnight,
and in that time it will rot, and turn to a Filthy slimy Substance: Then put it
into a Mortar, beat it well; take it out and wash it at some running stream,
till the Foulness is gone: Then put it in a close Earthen pot; let it stand
Four or Five days, look to its Purging, and scum it: When clean, put it into
another Earthen Pot, and keep it close for Use.

Your Setting-Dog must be Elected and Trained thus: He must be of exquisite
Scent, and love naturally to hunt Feathers. The land Spaniel is best, being of
good nimble size, and Courageous mettle, which you may know by his Breed; being
of a good Ranger, etc.

The first Lesson is, to make him Crouch and lie down close to the ground; its
done by frequent laying him on the ground and crying Lie close; upon his doing
well reward him with Bread; and on the contrary chastise him with Words, not
Blows.

Next, To creep to you with his Body and Head close upon the Ground, by saying,
Come nearer, Come nearer, or the like Words; to understand and do it, entice
him with showing him Bread, or the like: Thrusting down any rising part of his
Body or Head, and roughly threatening him; if he slight that, a good Jerk or two
with a slash of Whip-cord will reclaim his Obstinacy. Repeat his Lessons, and
encourage his well doing. And this you may exercise in the Fields as you walk,
calling him from his busy Ranging to his Duty. And then teach him to follow
you close at the heels in a Line or string, without straining.

By this time he is a Year old, now (the season fit) into the Field, and let
him range, [obediently.] If he wantonly babble or causelessly open, correct him
by biting soundly the Roots of his Ears, or Lashing. As Soon as you find he
approaches the Haunt of the Partridge, known by his Whining, and willing, but
not daring, to open, speak and bid him, Take heed: If notwithstanding this he
rush in and Spring the Partridge, or opens, and so they escape, correct him
severely. Then cast him off to another Haunt of a Covy, and if he mends his
Error, and you take any by drawing your Net over them swiftly, reward him with
the Heads, Necks, and Pinions.

As for the Water-Dog, the instructions above for the Setter will serve; only
to fetch and bring by losing a Glove, or the like; keep a Strict Subjection in
him, and Observance to your Commands.

The longest Barrel is the best Fowling Piece, Five and half, or six foot long,
with an indifferent Bore, under an Harquebuse; and shooting with the Wind, and
side-ways, or behind the Fowl, not in their Faces, is to be observed; having
your Dog in Command not to stir till you have shot.

A Stalking-Horse for shelter, to avoid being seen by the shie Fowl, is an old
Jade trained on purpose; but this being rare and troublesome, have recourse to
Art, to take Canvas stuffed and painted in the shape of a Horse grazing, and so
light that you may carry him on one hand (not too big:) Others do make them in
the shape of Ox, Cow, for Variety; and Stag, Trees, etc.

The great Fowl, or those who divide the Foot, reside by shallow Rivers sides,
Brooks and Plashes of Water; and in low and boggy places, and sedgie, Marish,
rotten Grounds. They also delight in the dry parts of drowned Fens, overgrown
with long Reeds, Rushes and Sedges; as likewise in half Fens drowned Moors,
hollow Vales or Downs, Heaths, etc. Where obscurely they may lurk under the
Shelter of Hedges, Hills, Bushes, etc.

The lesser, or Web-footed, Fowl, always haunt drowned Fens, as likewise the
main streams of Rivers not subject to Freeze, the deeper and broader, the
better; (though of these the Wild-Goose and Barnacle, if they cannot sound the
depth, and reach the Ouze, change their Residence for shallow places, and
delight in Green Winter Corn, especially if the Lands ends have Water about
them:) Small Fowl also frequent hugely little Brooks, Ponds, drowned Meadows,
Pastures, Moors, Plashes, Meres, Loughs, and Lakes, stored with unfrequented
Islands, Shrubs, etc.

How to take all manner of Fowl or Birds.
For taking the first (I mean the greater Fowl) with Nets, observe in general
this: Come two hours before their feeding hours, Morning and Evening; and
Spreading your Net on the Ground smooth and flat, stake the two lower ends
firm, and let the upper ends be extended on the long Cord; of which the further
end must be fastened to the Ground, three Fathoms from the Net, the Stake in a
direct Line with the lower Verge of the Net; the other, ten or twelve fathom
long, have in your hand at the aforsaid distance, and get some shelter of Art
or Nature, to keep you from the curious and shy Eye of the Game; having your
Net so ready that the least pull may do your work, strewn over with Grass as
it lies to hide it: A live Hern, or some other Fowl lately taken, according to
what you seek for, will be very requisite for a Stale. And you will have sport
from the Dawning, till the Sun is about an hour high; but no longer; and from
Sunset till Twilight; these being their feeding times.

For the small (Water) Fowl. Observe the Evening is best before Sun set. Stake
down your Nets on each side the River half a foot within the Water, the lower
part so plumb'd as to sink no further; the upper Slantwise shoaling against,
but not touching by two foot, the water, and the Strings which bear up this
upper side fastened to small yielding sticks pricked in the Bank, that as the
Fowl strike may ply to the Nets to entangle them. And thus lay your Nets (as
many as you please) about twelve score one from another, as the River or Brook
will afford. And doubt not your success. To expedite it however, a Gun Fired
three or four times in the Fens and Plashes, a good distance from your Nets,
will affright and Post them to your Snares; and so do at the Rivers, when you
lay in the Fens.

Winter time is the most proper for taking all manner of Small Birds, as
flocking then promiscuosly together, Larks, Lennets, Chaffinchee, Goldfinches,
Yellow-Hammers, etc. with this Bird-lime, Put to a quarter of a Pound of
Birdlime, an ounce of fresh Lard, or Capons-grease, and let it gently melt
together over the Fire, but not Boil; then take a quantitiy of Wheat-ears, as
you think your use shall require, and cut the straw about a foot long besides
the Ears, and from the Ear lime the straw six Inches; the warmer it is, the
less discernible it will be. Then to the Field adjacent, carrying a bag of
Chaff, and thresh'd Ears, scatter them twenty Yards wide, and stick the lim'd
ears (declining downwards) here, and there; Then traverse the Fields, disturb
their Haunts, and they wili repair to your Snare, and pecking at the Ears,
finding they stick to them, mount; and the Lim'd straws, lapping under their
Wings, dead their flight, they cannot be disengaged, but fall and be taken they
must. Do not go near them, till they rise of their own accord, and let not five
or six entangled lead you to Spoil your Game, and incur the loss of Five or Six
dozen.

Lime-Twigs, is another Expedient for taking of great Fowl, being Rods that are
long, small, strait, and pliable, the upper part apt to play to and fro) being
besmeared with Bird-lime warm. Thus to be used, Observe the Haunts of the Fowl,
have a Stale, (a living Fowl of the same kind you would take) and cross
pricking your Rods, one into, and another against the Wind sloping, a foot
distant one from the other; pin down you Stale, some distance from them, tying
some small string to him, to pull and make him flutter to allure the Fowl down.
If any be caught, do not run presently upon them, their fluttering will
increase your Game. A well taught Spaniel is not amiss to retake those that are
entangled, and yet flutter away. Thus likewise for the Water, consult the
Rivers depth, and let your Rods be proportionable; what is Lim'd of them being
above the Water, and a Mallard, etc. as a Stale placed here and there, as
aforesaid. You need not wait on them, but three times a day visit them, and see
your Game; if you miss any Rods (therefore know their Number) some Fowl
entangled is got away with it, into some Hole, etc. and here your Spaniel will
be serviceable to find him.

For Small-birds, a Lime-bush is best; thus, Cut down a great Bough of a Birch,
or Willow-tree, trim it clean, and Lime it handsomely, within four Fingers of
the bottom: Place this Bush so ordered, in some quick-set, or dead Hedge, in
Spring time: In Harvest, or Summer, in Groves, Bushes, Hedges, Fruit Trees,
Flax, and Hemp-Lands: In Winter, about Houses, Hovelle, Barns, Stacks, etc. A
Bird-call is here also necessary, or your own industrious skill in the Notes of
several Birds.

And because Gentlemen who have Fish Ponds, wonder they lose so many Fish, and
are apt to Censure sometimes undeservedly their Neighbors, when it is the
insatiable Hern, that is the true cause: I shall next lay down the best and
most approved way of taking the great Fish-devouring Hern, whose Haunt having
found, observe this Method to take him. Get three or four small Roaches, or
Dace, take a strong Hook, (not too rank) with Wyre to it, and draw the Wyre
just within the skin, from the side of the Gills, to the Tail of the said Fish,
and he will live four or five days, (If dead the Hern will not touch it.) Then
have a strong Line, of a dark Green-silk, twisted with Wyre, about three Yards
long, tie a round stone of a pound to it, and lay three or four such hooks, but
not too deep in the Water, out of the Herns wading; and two or three Nights
will answer your Expectation.

The several ways of taking Pheasants.
You must learn and understand the several Notes of a Natural Pheasant-Call,
and how usefully to apply them. In the Morning just before or at Sunrising,
call them to feed, and so at Sunsetting: In the Fornoon, and Afternoon, your
Note must be to Cluck them together to Brood, or to chide them for straggling,
or to notify some danger at hand.

Thus skilled in their Notes; and by the Darkness, Solitaryness, and strong
undergrowth of the place assured of their Haunts, closely lodge your self, and
softly at first call; lest being near you, a loud Note affright them; and no
Reply made, raise your Note gradually, to the highest; and if there be a
Pheasant in hearing, he will answer you, in as loud a Note. Be sure it be
Tunable. As soon as you are answered, creep nearer to it; if far off, and a
single Fowl, as you call, and approach, so will the Pheasant. Having gotten
sight of her, on the Ground, or Perch, cease calling, and with all silence
possible, spread your Net conveniently, between the Pheasant, and you, one end
of the Net fastened to the Ground, and the other end, hold by a long Line in
your hand, by which you may pull it together, if strained; then call again, and
as you see the Pheasant come under your Net, rise and show your self, and
affrighting her, she will mount, and so is taken. Thus if on the contrary you
have diverse Answers, from several Corners, of the Coppice, and you keep your
place and not stir, they will come to your Call, and then having a pair of
Nets, spread one on each side, and do as before. Your Nets, must be made of
Green or Black double-twin'd Thread, the Mesh about an inch square, between
Knot, and Knot, the whole Net about three Fathom long, and Seven foot broad,
verged with strong small Cord on each side and ends, to lie hollow and
compass-wise.

The next way of taking Pheasant-Powts, is by Driving, thus. Having found the
Haunt of an Eye of Pheasants, known by the Barrenness of the Place, Mutings and
loose Feathers, then in the little Pads and Ways, like Sheep tracks, they have
made, place your Nets (taking the Wind with you) across these Paths hollow,
loose and circularly, the nether part fixed to the Ground, and the upper side
hollow, etc. as aforesaid: Then to their Haunt, and there call them together,
if scattered; then with a Driver, an Instrument like that of Cloath-dressers,
rake gently the Bushes and Boughs about you, the Powts will run, and stop and
listen; then give another rake, and so you will drive them like sheep into your
Nets: Observe in this Secrecy, Time and Leisure, or you spoil your Sport;
Secrecy in concealing your self from being seen by them; and Time and Leisure,
by not being too hasty.

Lastly for taking Pheasants with the Lime-Bush, or Rods, order these, as I
have before prescribed; your Rods about twelve inches long, and your Bush
containing not above eight Twigs, with a pretty long Handle, sharpened to stick
in the Ground, or Bushes, Shrubs, etc. and let it be planted as near the
Pheasants pearching Branch, as may be. Place your Rods on the Ground, near the
Bush; for when some are taken below by they Rods, the will scare up the others
to get on the Bushes to seek what is become of their Fellows, and there become
your Prey themselves.

For taking Partridge.
You must first find the Partridges Haunt. Which is mostly in standing
Cornfieldsd, where they breed; as likewise in Stubble after the Corn is out,
especially Wheat-stubble till it is trodden, and then they repair to
Barley-stubble, if fresh; and the Furrows amongst the Clots, Brambles and long
Grass, are sometimes their lurking places, for Twenty and upward in a Covy. In
the Winter in up-land Meadows, in the dead Grass or Fog under Hedges, among
Mole-hills; or under the Roots of Trees, etc. Various and uncertain are their
Haunts. And though some by the Eye, by distinguishing their Color from the
Ground, others by the Ear, by hearing the Cock call earnestly the Hen, and the
Hens answering, and chattering with Joy at meeting, do find Partridge; yet the
best, easiest and safest way of finding them is (as you do the Pheasant) by the
Call or Pipe: Notes seasonable, as before prescribed, and they will come near
to you, and you may count their Numbers; and to your sport.

Surround your Covy, prepare your Nets, and pricking a stick fast in the
ground, tie the one end to it, and let your Nets fall as you walk briskly round
without stopping, and cover the Partridge; then rush in upon them to frighten
them, and as they rise they are taken.

For taking them with Bird-Lime, thus: Call first near the Haunt; if answered,
stick about your Lime-straws, across in ranks at some distance from you; then
call again, and as they approach you, they are intercepted by the Straws; and
so your Prey. This way is used most successfully in Stubble-Fields, from August
to September: And Rods in Woods, Pastures, etc. as for the Pheasant.

The most pleasant way of taking Partridge is with a Setting-Dog, who having
set them, use your Net; and by these Rules and Method, the Rails, Quales,
Moorpoots, etc. are to be taken; and are for Hawks flight too. And here I must
make an end of the most material part of Fowling.

Of FISHING.
IT has been the Method of this whole Treatise, to divide the several distinct
Heads of each Recreation into three Parts, to render the Observations and Rules
the more plain and easy, for the prosecuting the Recreation we treat of.

1. What it is we pursue.

2. Where and When to find that we would delight our selves in.

3. With what proper Mediums or Measures we may obtain the desired Effects of
our endeavors therein.

First then, What we pursue is Fish, distinguished according to their sundry
kinds by these following Names.

The Barbel, Bream, Bleak, Bulhead, or Millers-thumb; Chevin, Char, Chub, Carp;
Daoe, Dare; Ele; Flounder; Grayling, Gudgeon, Guiniad; Loach; Minnow; Pope or
Pike, Perch; Rud, Roach; Sticklebag or Bansticle, Salmon, Shad, Suant; Tench,
Torcoth, Trout, Thwait, and Vmber. All these Alphabetically thus named are the
different sorts of Fish, in taking which the Angler commonly exercises his Art,
We come next, Where to find them.

I. To know the Haunts and Resorts of Fish, in which they are to be usually
found, is the most Material thing the Angler ought to be instructed in, lest he
vainly prepare how to take them, and preposterously seek where to find that he
prepared for. To prevent which you are first to understand, That as the season
of the Year is, so Fish change their places: In Summer, some keep near the top,
others the bottom of the Waters. In Winter, all Fish in general resort to deep
Waters. But more particularly,

The Barbel, Roach, Dace, and Ruff, covet most Sandy, Gravelly Ground, the
deepest part of the River, and the shadows of Trees.

Bream, Pike, and Chub delight in a Clay, and Owzie Ground: The Bream chooses
the middle of the River, in a gentle, not too rapid Stream: The Pike prefers
still Waters, full of Fry, and absconding himself amongst Bull-rushes,
Water-docks, or under Bushes, that under these shelters he may more securely
surprise and seize his Prey: The Chub too chooses the same Ground, large Rivers
and Streams, and is rarely destitute of some Tree to cover and shade him.

Carp, Tench and Eel, frequent foul muddy still Waters. The greatest Eels lurk
under stones, or Roots; the smallest ones are found in all sorts of Rivers or
Soils: The Carp is for the deepest stillest part of Pond or River, and so is
the Tench, and both delight in green Weeds.

Perch delights in gentle Streams of a reasonable Depth, not too shallow;
close by a hollow Bank is their common Sanctuary.

Gudgeon covets Sandy, Gravelly, Gentle Streams, and smaller Rivers; not so
much abounding in Brooks. He bites best in Spring, till they spawn, and a
little after till Wasp time.

The Salmon delights in large swift Rivers, which ebb and flow; and are there
plentifully to be found: As likewise Rocky and Weedy Rivers. But in the latter
end of the Year he is to be found high up in the Country, in swift and violent
Cataracts, coming thither to spawn.

The Trout loves small swift purling Brooks or Rivers, that run upon Stones or
Gravel, and in the swiftest deepest part of them, gets behind some
Stone-block and there feeds. He delights in a Point of a River where the Water
comes Whirling like the Eddy, to catch what the Stream brings down, especially
if he has the shade of a Tree: He hugely delights to lurk under some hollow
Bank or Stone; seldom among Weeds,

Shad, Thwait, Plaice, Peel, Mullet, Suant, and Flownder, covet chiefly to be
in or near the Salt or Brackish Waters, which ebb and flow: The last, viz. the
Flownder, have been taken in fresh Rivers, as coveting Sand and Gravel, deep
gentle streams, near Banks, etc.

Lastly the Vmber affects Marly Clay Ground, clear and swift Streams, far from
the Sea; the greatest Plenty of these Fish is found in Darbyshire and
Staffordshire.

Thus much for the Haunts of Fish; I come next to know When is the most
seasonable time to catch them; which before I speak to, let him that would
become a complete Angler, take this Rule. That he observe narrowly what Pond or
River soever he Fisheth in, whether it be slimy, muddy, stony or gravelly,
whether of a swift or flow Motion; as likewise that he know the Nature of each
Fish, and what Baits are most proper for every kind: Not to let his Knowledge be
circumscribed to one or two particular Rivers, whither he is invited to Angle
and take his Observations by the Vicinity of his House; but to let his
Knowledge be general, and consequently his Sport will be so too. His Ignorance
otherwise will oblige him to be a Spectator in another River, when his
Excellency is confined to that only experienced one in or near his own Parish
or House. But to proceed,

II. To understand the best Time when to Angle in, We must first consider
Affirmatively, when most Seasonable: Or, 2. Negatively, when Unseasonable.

1. Seasonable Angling is, when the Weather is calm, serene and clear; though the
Cool cloudy Weather in Summer is to be preferred, provided the Wind blow not
too boistrously, to hinder your easy Guiding your Tools; In the hottest Months
the cooler the better.

2. When a Violent shower has disturbed the Water and mudded it, then with a
Red Worm, Angle in the Stream at the Ground.

3. A little before Fish spawn, when they repair to gravelly Fords to rub and
loosen their full Bellies; they bite freely.

4. From Sunrising till eight of the Clock in the Morning, and from four in
the Afternoon till night for Carp and Tench. In June and July, Carps show
themselves on the very rim of the Water, then Fish with a Lob-worm, as you
would with a Natural Fly. But be sure to keep out of sight.

5. In March, April, and September, and all Winter, when the Air is clear,
serene and warm. And after a shower of Rain, which has only beaten the Gnats,
and Flies into the River, without muddying. The two first mentioned Months with
May, and part of June, are most proper for the Fly; Nine in the Morning, and
Three a Clock in the Afternoon, is the best time; as likewise, when the Gnats
play much in a warm Evening.

6. In a Cloudy, and Windy day, after a Moonshine clear Night, for the
brightness of the Night (through fear) making them abstain from feeding, and
the Gloominess of the Day emboldening and rendering them (through Hunger)
sharp, and eager upon food, they bite then freely.

7. Lastly, at the opening of Milldams or Sluices, you will find Trouts, etc.
come forth seeking food, brought down by the Water. We come next to demonstrate
the time not proper, i. e.

2. Unseasonable Angling, in short is, when the Earth is parched, and scorched
with Vehement Heat, and Drought; benumbed and frozen with Cold, Frost, and
Snow; or refrigerated with Spring Hoar-Frosts; or blasted with the sharp,
bitter, nipping, North, or East Winds: Or when blustering Boreas disorders your
well guiding your Tackling; or the Sheep-shearers Washings glutted the Fish,
and anticipated your Bait; when the withdrawing of your Sport, foretells a
Storm, and advises you to some shelter; or Lastly, when the night proves Dark,
and Cloudy, you need not trouble your self the next day, it is to no purpose,
etc.

III. For providing Stocks, the best time is the Winter Solstice, when the Sap
is in the Roots of Trees, and their Leaves gone. It is improper after January,
the Sap then ascending into the Trunk, and expending it self over all the
Branches. See that your Stocks be Taper-grown, and your Tops of the best
Ground-Hazle, that can be had, smooth, slender, and strait, of an Ell long,
pliant and bendings and yet of a strength, that a reasonable jerk cannot break
it, but it will return to its first straightness; lest otherwise you endanger
your Line. Keep them two full years, before you use them; having preserved them
from Worm-eating, or Rotting, by thrice a year rubbing, and chaffing them well
with Butter (if sweet) or Linsed or Sallet-Oyl; and if Bored, Oil poured into
the Holes, and bathed four and twenty hours in it, and then thrown out again,
will exceedingly preserve them.

The line, to make it neat, handsome and strong, twist the Hair you make it of
even, having seen if the Hair be of an equal bigness; then steep your Line in
Water, to see if the Hairs shrink, if so, you must twist them over again. The
Color of the Hair is best of Sorrel, White and Gray; Sorrel for muddy boggy
Rivers, and the two last for clear Waters. Nor is the Pale watery green
contemptible, died thus: Take a pint of strong Ale, half a pound of Soot, a
little of the Juice of Walnut-Leaves and Alum; Boil these together in a Pipkin
half an hour, take it off, and when it is cold, put in your Hair. In making your
Line of Hair mix not Silk; but either all Hair, or all Silk; as likewise
distinguish the Line for the Ground Angle, and that for the Fly-rod, the last
must be stronger than the first; in that for the Artificial Fly, making the
uppermost Link twenty Hairs long, less in the next, and so less till you come
to the Fly. Lastly at each end of your Line make a Loop (called a Bout) the one
larger, to fasten to, and take it from the top of your Rod, and the other
Lesser to hang your Hook-line on.

Your Hook must be long in the shank, something Round in compass, the point
strait and even, and bending in the shank. Set on your Hook with strong small
Silk, laying your Hair on the inside of the Hook.

Your Flote challenges diverse ways of making. Some using Muscovy Duck-quills
for still Waters. Others the best sound Cork without flaws or holes, bored
through with a hot Iron, and a Quill of a fit proportion put into it; then
pared into a pyramidal Form, or in the fashion of a small Pear, to what bigness
you please, and ground smooth with a Grindstone or Pumice; this is best for
strong Streams.

In fine, To plum the Ground, get a Carbine Bullet bored through, and in a
strong twist hanged on your Hook or Rod. To sharpen your Hook, carry a little
Whetstone. To carry your several Utensils without incommoding your Tackle, have
several Partitions of Parchment. And in short the ingenious Angler will not be
unprovided of his Bob and Palmer; his Boxes of all sizes for his Hooks, Corks,
Silk, Thread, Flies, Lead, etc. His Linning and Woollen Bait-bags; His splinted
Osier light Pannier; And lastly his Landen Hook, with a Screw at the end to
screw it into the socket of a Pole, and stricken into the Fish, to draw it to
Land: To which socket, a Hook to cut up the Weeds, and another to pull out
Wood, may be fastened.

Baits are branched into three Kinds.

First, the Life-baits, which are all kind of Worms, Redworm, Maggot, Dors,
Frogs, Bobb, Brown-flies, Grasshoppers, Hornets, Wasps, Bees, Snails, small
Roaches, Bleak, Gudgeon, or Loaches.

Secondly, Artificial living Baits, of Flies of all sorts and shapes, made
about your Hooks with Silk and Feathers, at all times seasonable, especially in
blustering Weather.

Lastly, Dead Baits, Pasts of all makings, Wasps dried or undryed, clotted
Sheeps-blood, Cheese, Bramble-berries, Corn, Seed, Cherries, etc. The two first
good in May, June and July, the two next, in April; and the last in the Fall of
the Leaf.

Of Flies.
Of Natural Flies there are innumerable, and therefore it cannot be expected I
can particularize all; but some of their Names I shall nominate, viz. The
Dun-Fly, Red-Fly, May-Fly; Tawny-Fly, Moor-Fly, Shell-Fly, Flag-Fly, Vine-Fly,
Cloudy or Blackish-Fly, Canker-Flies, Bear-Flies, Caterpillars, and thousands
more, differing according to the Soils, Rivers or Plants.

Artificial Flies, are made by the Ingenious Angler, according to Art, in
shape, color and proportion like the Natural Fly, of Fur, Wool, Silk,
Feathers, etc. To delineate which I must confess my self not so accurate and
skilful a Painter, nor can any Pen-drawing illustrate their Various Colors so,
as to direct their Artificial Counterfeit; Nature will help him in this by
Observation, curiously Flourishing their several Orient and bright Colors,
after which they take their names, as before said: And therefore to furnish
your self with both Natural and Artificial Flies, repair in the Morning to the
River, and with a Rod beat the Bushes that hang over the Water, and take your
Choice.

1. Observe to Angle with the Artificial Fly in Rivers disturbed somewhat by
Rain, or in a Cloudy day, the Wind blowing gently: If the Wind be not so high,
but you may well guide your Tackle, in plain Deeps is to be found the best
Fish, and best Sport: If small Wind breeze, in swift streams is best Angling:
Be sure to keep your Fly in perpetual slow Motion; and observe that the Weather
suit the Color of your Fly, as the light Colored in a Clear day, the Darkish
in a dark, etc. As likewise according to the Waters Complexions, have your Fly
suitable.

2. Let your Line be twice as long as your Rod: Keep as far as you can from the
Waterside, the Sun on your back; In casting your Fly, let that fall first; your
Line not touching the Water.

3. Have a nimble Eye, and active quick Hand to strike presently upon the
rising of the Fish, lest finding his mistake he spew out the Hook.

4. In flow Rivers cast your Fly cross them, let it sink a little, draw it back
gently, without breaking or circling the Water; let the Fly float with the
Current, and you will not fail of excellent Sport.

5. Observe to let the Wings of your Salmon-Flies to be one behind another,
whether two or four, and they and the Tail long, and of the finest gaudiest
Colors you can choose.

Lastly, In clear Rivers a small Fly with slender Wings is best, and in muddied
Rivers a Fly of a more than ordinary large Body.

Thus much for Flies, I come next to that I called Dead-Baits, and shall begin
with the several Ways of making Pastes.

Of Pastes.
1. Beat in a Mortar the Leg of a Young Coney (Vulgarly called the Almond) or
of a Whelp or Catling, and a quantity of Virgins Wax and Sheeps suet, till they
are incorporated, and temper them with clarified Honey into Paste.

2. Sheeps-Blood, Cheese, fine Manchet and clarified Honey tempered as before.

3. Sheeps-Kidney-suit, Cheese, fine Flower, with clarified Honey tempered.

4. Cherries, Sheeps-Blood, Saffron and fine Manchet made into a Paste.

5. Beat into a Paste; the fattest Old Cheese, the strongest Rennet can be got,
fine Wheat Flour and Annis-seed Water: If for a Chub you make the Paste, put a
little rasty Bacon,

Lastly, Mutton-Kidney-suit, and Turmerick reduced to a fine Powder, the
fattest Old Cheese and strongest Rennet, wrought to a Paste, adding Turmerick,
till the Paste be of a curious Yellow; and is excellent for Chevin.

Anoint your Bait with this Confection: Take the Oil of Aspray, Coculus Indiae,
and Assa-foetida beaten, and mix with it as much Life-Honey; then dissolve them
in the Oil of Polypody, and keep it in a close Glass for your use. And that
your Paste may not wash off your Hook, beat Cotten-Wool or Flax into it.

Of keeping Baits.
The Red-Worm, must be kept in a bag of Red Cloth, with a handful of chopped
Fennel, mixed with half so much fresh, black and fertile Mould will scour and
preserve them: All other Worms, with the Leaves of Trees they are bred on,
renewing them often in a day. Only the Cad-bait, Bob and Canker, etc. must be
kept in the same things you find them.

The great White Maggots, keep them in Sheeps Tallow, or little bits of a
beasts Liver; and to scour them, hang them warm in a bag of Blanketing with
Sand.

The Frogs and Grasshoppers, in wet Moss and long Grass, frequently moistened;
and when used, the Legs of the first, and the Wings of the other must be cut
close off.

The Flies, use them as you take them. Only, the Wasps, Hornets and Humble-Bee,
must be dried in an Oven, their heads dipped in Sheeps blood, and dried again,
may be kept in a Box for use.

And now thus equipt let us walk to the Rivers side.

To begin then with the Barbel. The best time for Angling for this Fish is at
the latter end of May, June, July, and beginning of August, in his Haunts
aforementioned; and the best Bait (omiting others) is the well-scoured Lob-worm
(being of a curious cleanly Palate as well as shape) or Cheese steept an hour
or two in clarified Honey. He is a subtle Fish, extraordinary strong, and
dogged to be dealt with, and therefore be sure to have your Rod and Line strong
and long, or you may endanger to break it.

For the Breame. The most seasonable time to Angle is from St. James tide till
Bartholomew tide. He spawneth in June or beginning of July; is easily taken, as
falling on his side after one or two gentle turns, and so drawn easily to Land.
The best Bait for him (most delightful to him) is the Red-Worm (found in
Commons and Chalky Grounds after Rain) at the root of a great Dock, wrapped up in
a round Clue. He loves also Paste, Flag-Worms, Wasps, Green-Flies, Butter-Flies
and a Grass-hopper, without Legs.

Bait your Ground the Night before with gross-ground Malt, boiled and strained,
and then in the morning with the Red-Worm, bait your Hook, and plumbing your
Ground within half an Inch, Fish.

The Bleak an eager Fish, is caught with all sorts of Worms bred on Trees or
Herbs, also with Flies, Cad-bait, Bobs, Paste, Sheeps-Blood, White Snails,
Wasps, Gnats, etc. In a warm clear day the small Fly at the rim of the Water is
best; in a Cloudy day, Gentles or Cad-baits two foot un-the Water.

The Bull-head or Millers-Thumb, being Childrens recreation, I shall speak
little of them, only being serviceable for Baits, I shall only say he is easily
taken with a small Worm, being lazy and simple, and will swallow any thing; and
the Minnow, Loach, and Bansticle being of the same diet, I place here too.

The Chevin, loves all sorts of Worms, Flies, Cheese, Grain, and Black Worms,
their Bellies being slit, that the White may be seen: And very much delights
in the Pith of an Oxes back, the tough outward skin being carefully taken off,
without breaking the inward tender skin. In the Morning early angle for
Chevins, with a Snail; in the heat of the day, with some other Bait; in the
afternoon with the Fly; the great Moth, with a great Head, yellow Body, and
whitish Wings, usually found in Gardens, about the Evening: The larger the
Chevin, the sooner taken; loving his Bait larger, and variety on a Hook.

The Char is a Lancashire Fish, found in a Mere, called Winander-Mere in that
Country, the largest in England.

For the Chub, called by some a Chevin, by others a Villain. Bait your Hook
with a Grasshopper, find the hole where he lies, accompanied in a hot-day, with
twenty or more, floating almost on the very superficies of the Water; choose
which you think best, and fairest, and drop your Hook some two foot before him,
and he will bite at it greedily, and cannot break hold with his Leather Mouth;
let him play and tire, lest you break your Line. If you cannot get a
Grass-hopper, then any Worm, or Fly you will. In cold Weather, Fish for him
near the bottom, and the Humble-Bee is the best Bait. Some appropriate Baits
according to the Month, but I shall Omit that; The Chub (being best and in his
Prime in the Winter) a Paste made of Cheese, and Turpentine, is the only Bait
to take him.

The Carp is subtle, and full of Policy, will never bite in Cold Weather, but
in Hot you cannot be too Early, or too Late. In March, he seldom refuses the
Red-worm, in June the Cad bait and the three next Months the Grass-hopper:
Pastes that are sweet, of which I have spoken before, are very delightful to
Carps: And especially, if you Bait your ground two or three days before you
angle, with Pellets of course Paste, Chickens-guts, Garbage, etc. Gentles
anointed, and a Piece of Scarlet dipped in Honey, put them on the Hook, is an
approved way.

The Dace, Dare, Rudd, and Roach, being much of a kind, and feeding, I shall
put together, and are easily taken with small Worms, Bobs, Cad-baits, Flies,
sheeps-Blood, all sorts of Worms, bred on Trees or Herbs, Paste, Wasps, Gnat^s,
Lipberries, etc. The Heads of the Wasps, being dipped in Blood, is good for Dace,
and Dare; as is likewise the Ant fly.

The Eel, takes great Red-worms, Beef, Wasps, Guts of Fowl, or Fish, Menows, or
small Roaches are good Bait for Night Hooks; the Hooks being in the Mouth of
the Fish. Now because this is very delightful to most, I shall prescribe three
ways of taking them, as are most full of Pleasure. The first way is called,
Sniggling, or Broggling for Eels, thus: Take a strong Line and Hook b^^^ed with
a Lob, or Garden-Worm, and observing where Eels lurk in the day time, with a
stick forked at the Top, gently put your Bait into the Hole, and if there be
any Eels there, you will not fail of a Bite, of as large as can be had, but
pull not too hard lest you spoil all. The second is called Bobbing, which is
thus done: Take some large well scoured Lobs, and with a Needle, run some
strong twisted Silk through them, from end to end, so many as are enough to
wrap about a Board near a dozen times; tie them fast with the two ends of the
Silk to hang in so many Hanks; then fasten all to a strong Cord, and a handful
above the worms fasten a Plumbet of three quarters of a pound, and your Cord to
a strong Pole, and in muddy Waters, you may Fish, and find the Eels tug
lustily, and when you think they have swallowed them, draw up your Line, and
ashore with them. Lastly the Eel-spear made with four teeth, jagged on both
sides, stricken into the Mud, on the bottom of a River, and if you chance to
strike where they lie, you infallibly take.

There is likewise an assured way of taking Eels, thus done: Take some Bottles
of Hay, mixed with green Osiers or Willows, Bait them with Sheeps-Guts, or other
Beasts Garbage, sink them down in the middle, to the bottom of your Pond or by
the Bank sides, having fastened a Cord to the Bottles, that you may twitch them
up at your pleasure, and all the best Eels will resort to them.

The Flounder, Shad, Thwait, Suant, and Mullet, are taken with Red-Worms of all
sorts, Wasps, and Gentles.

For the Grayling, you must head your Hook upon the shank, with a slender and
narrow plate of Lead, that the Bait (a large Grass-hopper) may the more easily
come over it; and at the point put a Cad-bait, and keep the Bait in continual
motion; not forgetting to pull off the Grass-hoppers Wings.

The Gudgeon, takes the smallest Red-Worm, Wasps, Gentles, and Cadbaits. When
you Fish for him, stir up the Sand or Gravel with a Pole, which will make them
gather thither, and bite more eagerly.

The Guiniad, I shall remit speaking to, only mentioning it in course, being no
where found, but in a place called Pemble-Mere, in which place they abound, as
the River Dee does with Salmon.

The Pope, or Ruff, is excellent for a young Angler, bites greedily, and
quantities may be taken, by Baiting the Ground with fat Earth, and your Hook
with small Red-Worms.

The Pike, loves all sorts of Baits (unless the Fly) Gudgeon, Dace, Roaches
and Loaches; and young Frogs in Summer time, of which the yellowest is best.

The Perch, takes all sorts of Earthworms, especially the Lob-worm, and
Brandling, well scowred, Bobs, Oak-worms, Dors, Gentles, Cole-wort-worms,
Wasps, Cad-baits, and Menow, or a little Frog, the Hook being fastened through
the skin of his Leg, toward the upper part of it. Be sure you give the Perch
time enough to pouch his Bait, before you strike.

The Salmon, is taken best with Lob-worms, scented with the Oil of Ivy Berries
or the Oil of Polypody, of the Oak mixed with Turpentine: Or the well scowred
Garden-worm, is an excellent Bait: The Salmon bites best in May, June, and
July, at three a Clock in the Afternoon, if the Water be clear, a little Wind
stirring especially near the Sea.

The Tench, is a great lover or large Red worms first dipped in Tar. As also all
sorts of Paste, made up with strong scented Oils, or Tar, or a Paste made up of
Brown Bread, and Honey. He will bite too at a Cad-worm, Lob-worm, Flag-worm,
green Gentle, Cadbait, Marsh-worm, or soft boiled Bread-grain, etc.

The Torcoth, being before mentioned, I only let you know, that he is only
found, in the Pool Linperis in Carnarvon-shire; and leave you to the Welchmens
description, both of him and his Bait.

The Trout, is fattest, and in his prime in May, and is caught with all sorts
of Worms, especially Brandlings, commonly found in an Old Dunghill, Cow Dung,
Hogs-dung, or Tanners-bark: Also with Flies, Natural and Artificial, with young
Frogs, Menow, Marsh, Dock, or Flag-worms; all sorts of Cadbait, Dors, Bobs,
Palmers, Gentles, Wasps, Hornets, etc. and with the Caterpiller, used according
to the Rule before prescribed for the Grayling. Lastly

The Vmber, is taken as the Trout, just now mentioned; And therefore now to
your Sport: To assist your well effecting which, I have but this to add; Cast
into your Haunts where you use to Fish, once in four or five days, soft boiled
Corn (or oftener for Carp, and Tench) Also Garbage, Beasts Livers, chopped Worms,
Grains steept in Blood, to attract them to the place; and to keep them
together, throw in half a handful of Grains or ground Malt: But in a stream,
cast it above your Hook, that floating toward you you may draw the Fish
thither.

Sundry curious Baits for Fish.
These grow on the Cuccow pints, or wak-Robin, and are found in dry ditches,
overgrown with Brambles; they are about the bigness of Pease, and in July and
August, are of a lovely transparent Red, and are excellent baits for Roaches,
and Chubs; and for the first, two will serve, but for the latter, you may put
four or five at a time on the Hook.

Oat-Cakes with Cheese.
Beat these together into a Paste, the Cheese being new, and stick them
together, with a little Honey, letting the Paste Lie all Night in a wet Linen
Cloth, then fit it up in baits, and cover your Hook with it.

To keep Baits for the Pike, or Night-hooks.
For this, take a small Roach, Dace, Loach, Minnow, Smelt, small Trout, or
Perch, cutting off the Finns on the back, or small Eels well scoured in
Wheat-Bran, which will keep them better and longer, taking a way the slime and
watery substance, that causes them to rot or decay the sooner.

Fishes Eyes.
Take out the Eyes of such Fish as you catch, and put three or four of them on
a Hook, and they will prove an excellent bait for most sorts of Fish

Fat Bacon.
Cut this in little small Long ships, and especially at Snap, it is exceeding
good to take a Chub or Pike, from the latter end of August to the beginning of
April.

The Pith of the Backbone of a Sheep
Take out the Pith that runs through the Backbone, and take off the Tough
outward Skin, and leave the thin tender white Skin on, and bait with about half
an Inch of it, and it takes a Chevin to admiration.

Grain, Wheat, Malt.
Bruise either of these finely, fry them in Honey, make them up into Pasts with
Oil of Peter; and either in Winter or Summer they take Chub, Roach, Dace or
Bleak.

How to bring Fish, if any in the Pond or River, to the place you desire.
Boil clean Barley in Water till it bursts, with Licorice, and a little Mummy;
add some Honey and beat them together in a Mortar into a stiff Paste, and boil
about the quantity of a Wall-nut of this Paste with a quart of Barley till it
grows Glutenous, and then lay it for a ground bait, and the Fish will flock
about it from all parts.

To make worms for Baits come out of the Ground.
Boil an Ounce of Verdigrise in a quart of strong Vinegar, and Sprinkle a
little in places where you suspect Worms are, and they will Crawl out of the
Ground.

Another approved Bait.
Take the Fat of a Heron, Mummy, and Galbanum; of each two drams, Scent them
with a Grain of Musk, and make them up with two Ounces of Aqua-vitae, stir them
over a gentle Fire in an Earthen Vessel till they become thick, and with this
rub the Hook, and end of the Line, and the Scent of it will draw the Fish to
it; you must also have at the same time a proper Bait on your Hook for such
Fish as are in the place you Angle.

The Artificial Cod or Cad Bait.
Make the Body of yellow Beeswax, and head of black Dubin and black Silk, or
you may make the Body of yellow washed Leather, Shamey or Buff, and the head
all of black Silk, and this is an Incomparable bait for Trout, Salmon or
Smelts, and those that are natural are most Excellent baits for Trout,
Grayling, Salmons, Tench, Roach, Chub, Dace, Carp, Tench, Ruff, Bream and
Bleak; but then you must Fish with it in clear Water only.

Rules and Considerations about Baits in general.
Fish in general take all such baits freely, as nature at that season affords
in or near the places where you Angle, for being used to them they are not
afraid of any deceit, but take them as their common food. And for flies in this
case, in a Morning or Evening, when you go to Angle beat the bushes about the
Rivers or Ponds, and such Flies as you rouse there, Fish with, either Natural,
or imitate them by Art; as also see what Worms or other Insects fit for baits
stick on the Leaves, Grass, or are in the Water; and in this Observation you
cannot miss of good Sport; and when you have struck gently the backway, draw a
little, and be not too hasty to take up before the Fish has had her play and
spent her strength lest she break your Tackle. If your Fish be large, you must
use your Landing Net.

To take Fish in the Night with a Light.
This is an Admirable way to supply you with a sudden Dish, viz. Take a Glass
in the form of a Urinal very deep, put as much Clay in the bottom of it as will
sink the Mouth of it within an Inch of the Water, floating on pieces of Cork,
tied about the Neck to keep it steadily upright, then place a Candle in it, by
sticking it in the Clay-socket, anointing the out side of the Glass with Oil of
Asper. This Light will shine a great way in a still Water, so that the Fish
being amazed at so unusual a Sight, will come out of their holes about it, and
be detained with the scent of the Oil so long, that with a Hoop-net you may
take great store of them.

Flies proper for every Month.
For February, little red brow Palmer flies, the Plain Hackle, the Silver
Hackle, the Gold Hackle, the great Dun, the great blew Dun, the dark brown.

For March, the little whirling Dun, the early bright Brown, the whitish Dun,
the Thorn-tree fly, the blue Dun, the little black Gnat, the little bright
Brown.

For April, the small bright Brown, the little dark brown, the great whirling
Dun, the Violet Fly, the yellow Dun, the Horse-flesh-fly.

For May, the Dun-cout, the Green-drake, the Stone-fly, the black May fly, the
little yellow May Fly, the Gray-drake, the Camlet fly, the Turkey Fly, the
yellow Palmer, the black-flat Fly, the light-brown, the little Dun, the white
Gnat, the Peacock Fly, the Cow-Lady, the Cowturd-fly.

For June, From the first to the 24th the Green Drake and Stone Fly, the Owl
fly, the Barm fly, the purple Hackle, the purple Gold Hackle, the flesh Fly,
the little flesh Fly, the Peacock fly, the Ant fly, the brown Gnat, the little
black Gnat, the Green-Grasshopper, the Dun Grasshopper, the Brown Hackle.

For July, The Badger fly, the Orange fly, the little white Dun, the Wasp fly,
the Black Hackle, the Shell fly, the black brown Dun.

For August. The late Ant fly, the Fern fly, the white Hackle, the
Harry-long-Legs.

For September. The Cammel brown fly, the late Badger fly.

For October. The same Flies that were used in March.

The best time to Angle in.
1. If in the hot Months, cloudy Weather is best, when a small Gale stirs the
Water.

2. When the Floods have carried away the filth that sudden Showers Incumbered
the Water withal, and the River and Pond retains its usual bounds, looking of
a whitish Color.

3. When a violent Shower has troubled or muddied the River, or a little before
the Fish spawn, at what time they come into the sandy Ground to loosen their
Bellies.

4. After Rains, when the Rivers keep their bounds, yet rise and run swiftly,
for then they seek shelter in Creeks and little Rivulets running into the River.

5. Fish for Carp and Tench early, that is, before Sun rise, till Eight in the
Morning, and from four in the Afternoon till after Sun set. In March, the
beginning of April, and the latter end of September and all Winter, when there
are no great Frosts, the Fish bite in the warm of the day, the wind being
still; but in Summer Months, Morning and Evening is best,

6. Fish rise best at the Fly, after the shower has muddied or Clouded the
Waters, and Fish with Flies in generally March, April, May, and the beginning
of June, is the best for Trout; you may Angle in a clear star light Night, for
they are then roaving about for prey; he bites best in muddy water, and the
best time of Fishing for him is from 8 to 10 in the Morning, and from three
till five in the Afternoon.

7. The Salmon Fishery is best in May, June, July, and August, from three in
the Afternoon till Sun set, and in the Morning as before.

8. The Barble bites best early in the Morning, till Ten or Eleven in May,
June, July, and the beginning of August.

9. The Perch and Ruff bites best all day in cool Cloudy Weather.

10. The Carp and Tench bite early and late in the still parts of the River;
June, July, and August; as likewise do the Chevin, whose chief bait is white
Snails, and small Lamperies.

11. The Breem bites from Sun rise till nine or ten in the Morning in muddy
Water, especially the Wind blowing hard, for the most part; keeping in the
Middle of the Pond or River in May, June, July, and August.

12. Angle for the Pike in clear Water, when it is stirred by a gentle Gale in
July, August, September, and October, and then he bites best about three in the
Afternoon; but all the day in Winter, and in April, May, and the beginning of
June, early in the Morning and late at Evening.

13. The Roach and Dace bite all the day long at the Top of the Water at flies
natural, and Arteficial, also at Grass-hoppers, and all sorts of Worms, if the
Water be shady.

14. The Gudgeon bites best in April, till she has Spawned in May, or if the
Weather be cold till Wasp time, and at the end of the year all day long, near
to a gentle Stream. Observe when you Angle for her, to stir and rake the
Ground, and the Bait will be taken the better.

15. The Flounder in April bites all day, May, June, and July, especially in
swift Streams, yet he will bite, though not so freely in a still Deep.

Of Fish Ponds.
Grounds most fit and proper to be cast into a Pond, are those which are
Marshy, or Boggy, or full of Springs, unfit for Grazing, or to be put to any
profitable use besides. Of these the last. full of Springs, will yield the best
Water; that which is Marshy will feed Fish; and what is Boggy is best for a
Defense against Thieves.

First draw by small Trenches all the Springs into one place, and so drain the
rest of the Ground; then mark out the Head of your Pond, and make it the
highest part of the ground in the Eye, though it be the lowest in a Level: Cut
the Trench of your Floodgate so, that when the Water is let out, it may have a
swift fall: On each side of which Trench drive in stakes of Oak, Ash or Elm six
foot long, and six Inches square; place these in Rows near four foot distance,
as broad and wide from the Floodgate as you intend the Head of your Pond shall
go: Dig it in as big and large a Compass as the Ground will permit; throw your
Earth amongst the said stakes, and ram it down hard till you have covered the
stakes: Drive in as many new ones next the first stakes, and ram more Earth
above them, with stakes above stakes till the head-sides be of a convenient
height: Taking care, that the inside of your Banks be smooth, even, hard and
strong, that the Current of the Water, may not wear off the Earth.

Having thus dug eight foot deep, that so it may carry six foot Water, pave
the bottom and Banks of the Pond with Sods of Flot-Grass, laying them closs
together, pin them down with stakes and windings: This Grass is a great feeder
of Fish, and grows naturally under Water. Stake to the bottom of one side of
the Pond Bavens and Brush-Wood-Faggots, into which the Fish may cast their
spawn. Lay Sods upon Sods, to nourish and breed Eels.

The Pond being made, let in Water, and thus store it: Put Carp, Bream and
Tench by themselves: Pike, Perch, Eel, and Tench (the Fishes Physician) by
themselves; for Food of the greater Fishes, put store of Roach, Dace, Loach and
Menow; and Lastly to one Melter, put three Spawners, and in three Years the
increase will be great, and in five Years with difficulty be destroyed.

In 3 Years Sue your Pond; which you must continue to do, for the Roach will
increase in such abundance, that eating up the sweet food, will make other
Fish, as Carps, etc. be very lean: Therefore every Year view your Pond, and
observe if any such Fry appears, thin them.

To make Carps grow large, etc.
About April, when your Pond is low rake the sides where the Water is fallen
with an Iron rake, sow Hay-seeds there, rake it well; and at the end of Summer
you shall have store of Grass: In Winter the Water will overtop the Grass, and
being Water enough for them, the Carps will resort to the sides, and feed
briskly, and grow fat: Thus do every Summer, till you sue your Pond, and no
River Carp can surpass them

FINIS.

