Oaths no Gospel Ordinance But prohibited by CHRIST: Being in ANSWER TO A.
SMALLWOOD, D. D. TO HIS Book lately published, being a Sermon Preached at
Carlisle, 1664. wherein, he has labored to prove, Swearing lawful among
Christians; his Reasons and Arguments are weighed and answered, and the
Doctrine of Christ Vindicated against the Conceptions and Interpretations of
Men, who would make it void. By a Sufferer for Christ and his Doctrine, F. H.

Because of Oaths the Land mourns, Jer. 33. 10, 11, 12, etc. By Swearing and
lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing Adultry, they break out, and
blood touches blood; therefore shall the Land mourn, and every one that
dwells therein shall languish, Hosea 4. 2, 3. Printed in the Year 1666.

To the Reader.
READER,
TRuth never had that advantage nor countenance from the men of this world,
(though wise in their generation) (since sin entered into it) to have the
approbation of the World, neither of the powers and Potentates thereof, for it
always hated the truth, because it bore witness against the World, and the
deeds and works thereof which are evil; for Wisdom is only justified of her
Children; and Truth is justified of her Children: neither indeed does it need
any other Patron to shelter it self under, but the God of all Truth, from
whence it proceeds; neither shall I seek a shelter, neither run to any mountain
or hill for safety or protection, nor to the mighty of the Earth, as many of
latter days have done to Patronize their Labors, and to make them the more
acceptable, and to be the sooner and more readily received: But seeing the
Apostle says, Not many wise, not many rich, not many noble are chosen, but he
has chosen the weak and poor, and despised of the world, who are rich in Faith
and good works, who are heirs of the promise, and of the world to come. I choose
only to be approved to the witness of Christ's light in every man's Conscience,
and to the measure of his holy Spirit which he has placed in every man, to
that only I desire to be either approved, or by it reproved, for wholly unto
the judgment of that in every Conscience I appeal, and do commend this ensuing
Discourse, in the sight of God, and the Answer unto A. Smalwood's Book, who
has sought to make void Christ's command, for to obey the command of men, as is
manifest in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Gentlemen of Cumberland: For it seems
by his Epistle they put him on work, to Preach and Print this Sermon, whether
upon this subject or not I shall not determine, but however he says he has
obeyed their commands; though he has labored as much as in him lies to make
the command of Christ void, and the Apostles Doctrine by his Arguments which he
has raised to prove Christ's Doctrine one thing, and his intention another, and
so would blind the minds of people, only to establish the Doctrines of men, and
the Traditions of men in the Apostasy, and has put diverse Constructions upon
the plain words of the Scripture and interpretation to prove his false
Assertion that he laid down at the first, that Christ did not forbid all
swearing; I say I could have willingly have been silent rather then to be found
over and over again contending with every new opposer, of those old truths,
that have been believed and received long before the Apostasy entered in, which
has been answered (by that People I own, in judgment and conversation) long
ago; to let pass those disadvantages, we have adventered upon; our low
persecuted, imprisoned, and in a manner condemned condition, so that we may
exspect our words, how true soever, yet they are not like to gain much credit
against such an eminent man as Doctor Smallwood. Again, considering how we
expose our selves to the lash and severity of a sharp law, which some men in
their blind zeal are far more ridged and severe in their Prosecution of it then
I am apt to believe the supreme enactors of it were in their intentions when
they did inact it; all which notwithstanding are no discouragement unto me, for
as much as the internal and eternal truth of our God, which we have known,
received and believed, is very precious in our eyes, yea, far more then either
life or liberty, and estate, (which some have forfeited and lost upon Truths
account) or any external treasure, or outward enjoyment whatsoever, so that
considering how the truth lies at stake we cannot be silent, least thereby we
should appear to some men's apprehensions, as to be satisfied with what the
Doctor has said, and own his Arguments and Reasons that he has laid down for
possitive truth; I could do no less then to show our dislike of his Doctrine,
and to manifest the weakness of his Arguments about this particular of Swearing
at all, under the Gospel, though he has strained very hard to prove his
Assertion, that Oaths may lawfully he taken by Christians in some cases,
notwithstanding Christ's prohibition and command to the contrary, but of how
little effect or force his Reasons are thou will see in the ensuing Discourse,
although his Book be looked upon by some, to be sufficient force to convince
all gainsayers, and although he say he has had diverse Papers and Books of
Dissenters, who are of a contrary judgment, where he found any Reason offered
against what he has laid down for Doctrine, he has answered, though indeed he
has over-riden the most weighty matters in them, and has said little but that
has been said before by other opposers of Christ's Doctrine; though its very
like the Doctor will count this but a loose Discourse, as he has done others
of very great weight, (yea indeed of more weight and reason in them then any
thing, he has exhibited, yet to the contrary) and so count it not worth taking
notice of; but though he do not, it is not of much moment, for that end only I
have writ, to bear my testimony for Christ's Doctrine against all the false and
feigned interpretations of men, being that which I have steadfastly believed,
and is of that force and weight upon many Consciences, and so evident by the
Spirit of Christ, that they can receive nothing of man's fallen reason and
conceptions which are variable and changable to answer, or weigh down the
Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, and Primitive Christians, who walked in
the order of the Gospel, and obeyed the Commands of Christ before the Apostasy
entered in, and the power was lost, and the life and Spirit of Christ erred
from) and mingled the Ordinances of the first and second Covenant together, and
the injunctions of men among them for Doctrine, and then compelled all to
receive it, all this long time of Antichrists reign, and the false Church
visibility, wherein she has sitten as a Queen upon the Waters, which are the
Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People, which A. S. brings as a great argument
to prove Swearing in use among Christians since Christ gave out that command,
Swear not at all. The reasons the very strength of them, I have laid down as A.
S. has published them, without varying from his own words; the Answer thou may
peruse and read without prejudice, and weigh with the measure of Gods Spirit in
thy self, for unto that I appeal, which is a more certain thing then Councils,
or Nations, or Consent of multi^udes, who has the name of Christian, and walks
not in his Doctrine, neither lives his life, nor does the things he says, I am
shut up in a corner, and have not that advantage that some opposers have of
others labors as to bring Authors of diverse Ages that denied to Swear, though
not only some there were but many; but alas, they are condemned already by A.
S. and others for Phanaticks and Heteradox, and so their sayings, will seem of
less force, but however, I have not much striven, neither shall to fetch things
from far in the Apostasy, but rest in that which makes all things evident, even
the spirit of God in thy own heart and the Scriptures of Truth, which was
spoken by the Spirit, which are so clear unto many, that there needs not
multitude of words, to demonstrate this truth of the prohibition of all Oaths
among true Christians; but I shall not detain thee from the matter it self, and
the Lord give thee an understanding.

F H.

Oaths no Gospel Ordinance, but prohibited by Christ.
THere being a Book lately published by A. Smalwood. D. D. as I understand
Doctor of Divinity; first preached in a Sermon at Carlisle, I suppose before the
Judges at the Assizes then holden the 17 th. day of August, 1664. since which I
perceive many Additions, by reasons and paraphrases are added thereunto, and
printed at York: In which Discourse he has vindicated the lawfulness of
Swearing under the Gospel, and has gone about to prove it by many reasons, and
Authors; how that Christ upon that subject, Mat. 5. 34. Swear not at all, did
not intend an absolute universal prohibition of all manner of swearing under
the Gospel; which Book of his I have perused with an upright heart, and an
impartial eye, seriously, to the end I might own that which is good in it, not
as one being glued to an opinion or judgment; but what as carries demonstration
of truth with it upon my conscience and in my heart; it being a principle well
known and believed amongst us, to have our consciences void of offense toward
God, and toward Man: and seeing my self and many more are great sufferers at
this day upon this very account, which I look upon, being truly and
conscientiously grounded upon the Doctrine of Christ, and consonant to the
Primitive Christians, and seeing so large things have been written by other
hands in asserting the truth of what we have believed, which yet stands as a
witness unto the Doctrine of Christ; notwithstanding all opposition and
gainsaying, that it has had by many hands; I could have been wholly silent,
and have refered all that have been said to the judgment of the Lord, and to
that of God in every Man's conscience; but that I perceive A. Smalwood has
rendered that People which I own in judgment, and practice, to be in error, and
has greatly gain-sayed and villified all such as ever did or do deny Swearing
upon never so conscientious account; as erroneous, and as only sprung from the
Pelagian Heresy and Manacheus, and I know not who, and have rendered all with
reproach and disdain, as Phanaticks who descent from him, with disdainful, and
reproachful names, to represent us as odious as may be to the Magistrate, and
at such a time as this, when tender and conscientious people, who fear the Lord
in their hearts, (and desires to live and be at peace, and seeks it with all
Men) are sufferers, and great sufferers too; upon this very account, whereby
many are stired up to more persecution and wrath against us: and besides this
Discourse it seems is cried up, as the most exquisite that ever was, or can
be; and as unanswerable, and that we who deny to swear, would abolish all
judicable proceedings, and make them nothing; this Discourse is printed, as A.
S. in his 12. page says, to induce us to forsake so irrational an opinion, and
to convince us of our error; and it seems he himself, besides many other
exspects it must effect some great matter.

Reply. I say all these things being considered, was a strong inducement to me,
to write something in reply thereunto, though in very deed I love not
contention, neither strife about words, but seeing it is the Doctrine of
Christ, and that which has been, and is steadfastly believed by diverse faithful
Professors, and sufferers both formerly and now, however by A. Smalwood
accounted and reproached by that disdainful name of Phanaticks; a word lately
invented in the Pit of Darkness, where many of those and the like reproaches
come from; I was engaged in my heart, to hear my testimony against this said
Book, and for the truth of Christ's Doctrine; not out of obstinacy and
wilfulness, but in duty as by conscience to God and his truth; which is dearer
to me then my outward liberty or all I have to loose for it, which I and many
more at this day choose rather to suffer, then to be found violating the
commands of Christ, or deny that which I have steadfastly believed; being
persuaded thereunto by the spirit of the Lord, and evidence of the Scripture of
truth.

The subject A. Smalwood has taken to treat upon, and in the end to gainsay,
and pervert; are no less then Christ's own Doctrine, Mat. 5. 34. But I say unto
you swear not at all: who would have believed or thought that one who accounts
himself a Doctor, a Divine, and a Minister of Christ, should choose Christ's own
words to plead against Christ, and them that do abide in his Doctrine? or that
ever any should go about to prove swearing lawful from these words in Gospel
times, or that swearing is not forbiden; but what would not this Man encounter
with? or what would not he oppose? if he have but the power of this World on
his side? it is a small thing to gainsay what we say, and pervert our words,
and make them seem erroneous, and to make our intentions one thing, and our
words another; when he is so bold as to make Christ's Doctrine, his express
words Swear not at all, and his intentions contrary to his words, what do we
judge of a Man that speaks one thing, and intends another? it is fearful to think
what conclusions some will make to carry on their intended designs, but me
thinks A. S. might have been more considerate then to have taken Christ's own
Doctrine and words, to oppose Christ's intention, or to be so bold as to assert
the intention of Christ was otherwise then his words import; but rather have
chosen some other subject; but what matter makes many of subjects, for with a
consequence or two, and a little Logic, they will seem to turn things any way,
and go about to prove darkness is light, and light is darkness, and what as in
them lies make it so to appear if they take a matter in hand; and therefore the
Apostle exhorted to beware of Philosophy and vain deceit, for by this Men have
been cuning and crafty, and lie in wait to deceive the Innocent and harmless
and to lead them out of the way.

In the fourth page he says, he will clear his intention, and that there are
two sorts of Men that do violence to this Text; the one winds it up too too
high a note, as though Christ had forbidden all Swearing whatsoever. And in the
tenth page he says, this error is masked under a fair color of a more then
ordinary piety, but tends to overthrow all Judicatures, and takes away the
decision of all emergent suites and controversies; and were it granted says A.
Smallwood, we should be necessitated if not to disown the Magistrates
authority, yet to disobey their loyal command, as having a countermand from
Christ, Swear not at all, and the other sort of men are such who in despite of
this text do commonly, rashly, profanely and falsely swear.

Answ. Who does the greater violence to this Scripture? whether A. S. who in
his Doctrine he has raised from these words to be the foundation of his
Discourse, who makes Christ's plain and express words one thing, and his
intentions another: I leave to all unbyassed spirits to judge off, or they that
say, Christ intended what he spoke, and spoke what he intended, I say let all
see and consider where the violence lies, and in whom, and whether he does not
wind it up by that not, or contrary to it, to use his own words otherwise then
Christ intends it, as after will be made more evidently to appear, and we say
its not error but truth to believe Christ's words, who are truth, more then A.
S. his conjectural supposition, neither do we believe it, to be error masked,
but truth revealed, and Christ spoke and declared it, that we might believe it
and obey it: And we believe that A. S. and many more has put a mask and a vail
upon Christ's words, and would hoodwink all, and lead them blindfold after their
imaginations, and crooked paths, winding and turning this way and that way
that leads into darkness and trouble, and confusion, from the path of life: And
what does Christ's command? viz. Swear not at all; does it overthrow all Justice
and Judicatories? It is not the seat of Judgment established in Righteousness
and truth? and they that sit in Judgment ought they not to give sentence and
Judgment in Righteousness and truth, and as the causes are represented unto
them, and brought before them, and may not every truth be confirmed out of the
mouth of two or three Without an oath as under the Law in diverse Causes where
no Oath is mentioned but W^tn^sses, Deuteronomy. 19. 15.
Witnesses, and all emergent suits and controversies ended according to the
best evidence after diligent inquisition and judgment given accordingly, and
that without the needless and cumbersome formality of an Oath, Deuteronomy. 19. 6. In
case of life and death, no Oath was used we read of
which is sometime this, and sometime that, and changable, when as every true
confession and testimony is equiv^lent thereunto, in the presence of the God of
all truth, and who ever denied this? And there is no necessity so to judge that
he that fears to swear, and take an Oath, yet refuses not to g^ve true
testimony about any matter, whether it do concern the Lord or his Neighbor,
that therefore he denies the Magistrates authority, or yet disobeyes their
legal commands? so that though all Swearing should be denied, yet that which
answers the cause in hand is not denied, true testimony; and therefore the
Magistrates authority and their lawful commands may well stand and be obeyed,
and right done unto every man, and command stand also, these are but the secret
smitings and suggestions of A. Smallwood to render them odious to the
Magistrates and all people, who dissent from him in judgment: And indeed such
like Discourses and instigations from such like mouths and pens as his is, who
is accounted learned and eminent, has not a little added afflictions unto our
bonds, and they have made wide the wound, and has made the breach seem greater
then it is, and the matter more grievous then there has been any cause for, I
desire they may consider of it and repent.

And in 13. page, from this Text, Mat. 5. 34. But I say unto you Swear not at
all; he lays down this Proposition or Doctrine, viz. Our Savior did not
intend by these words, Swear not at all, an absolute, universal and limited
prohibition of all manner of swearing, and goes on to prove it by diverse
Reasons.

The first he gives is, That the Father and the Son are one in nature, power,
wisdom, immutability, and eternity, and one, in will and wisdom, therefore they
cannot give forth contrary commands, but God the Father has commanded
Swearing, in these words, Thou shall fear the Lord and swear by his Name and
serve him, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. And therefore it is not possible that God the Son
should forbid it.

Answ. Though the Father and the Son be one in nature, power and wisdom, and
immutability, and will, as in themselves, and alters not, but keeps Covenant
from age to age, and from generation to generation, there is no contrarity in
them, yet there are diversities of gifts but the same spirit, and there are
differences of administrations but the same Lord. It is granted that after sin
entered into the World, and death by sin and diffidence, and unbelief, variance
and strife, and many transgressions, for which the Law was added; and because
of which the Law was added, and the command given forth unto the Jews to swear
by the Name of God, as Jerome says upon the 5. of Mat. 3. 37. It was permitted
the Jews under the Law, as being tender and infants, (and to keep them from
Idolatry, which the rest of the Nations did run into) they might swear by the
Name of God, not that it was rightful so to do but that it was better to swear
by the Lord then by false Gods or devils: but the great Evangelical sincerity
and truth admits not of an Oath.

Secondly, For the ending of strife and variance being in the unbelief, which
was the occasion of the adding of the Law, and the cause of the command given
forth, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. with diverse more words specified by Moses and the Prophets:
And though Christ came not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it, and to destroy
that which the Law was against, (and which it took hold upon) and to finish sin
and transgression, and bring in everlasting Righteousness, and to restore to
the beginning, and we say according as we have believed and received of the
Lord, and have a cloud of Witnesses, both them that are gone before, and of
them that yet remain alive: As Christ said of Divorcement, It was not so from
the beginning; so we say, Oaths was not from the beginning, but was added after
hardness of heart and sin, and unbelief, entered into the World; but Christ who
was made under the Law and fulfilled the Law, put an end to the transgression,
sin, unbelief, variance, and strife, in whom all the promises of God are
fulfilled, he is the Righteousness of God, and who are true Christians indeed
are come out of unbelief, variance, and transgression, and does see and know
Christ to be the end of the Law, for Righteousness to them that believe, who
exhorted to do the truth, confess the truth, and speak the truth, who said,
Swear not at all by Heaven, and which after more shall be said God willing to
the Text it self: And so A. Smallwood his reason is made void, and his
impossibility made possible, that God gave forth a command, and permitted the
Jews to swear in that Covenant and Ministration, and yet Christ in the new
Covenant countermands it as in the Text, being the Minister of a better
Covenant which stood upon better promises, who leads to the beginning, and is
the restorer of all Mankind that do believe; and yet the Father and the Son are
one in will, wisdom and power. And though A. S. and others cannot understand,
or else has no mind in that Latitude as generally prohibitive of all swearing;
because he says, God did require it, no less then he did his own Worship and
service in the Moral Law; these nice distinctions of Moral, Judicial and
Ceremonial has confounded Peoples understandings, though it is still
acknowledged they did vow, and did swear in the first Covenant under the Law;
but whether he or any other making, swearing, moral, judicial or ceremonial is
not much matter, seeing that Christ the Righteousness is the sum and
substance of all, and the end of the Law for Righteousness to them that do
believe, and in him is life and Righteousness enjoyed; for the Law was given by
Moses, but the Grace, the Truth comes by Jesus Christ, who is the sum of all
types and shadows, and therefore the Apostle said, We are circumcised in him,
and baptized in him; and we do look upon an Oath under the Law to have some
type and figure in it, notwithstanding A. S. say it was none, and that Christ
is improperly called the Oath of God, no more improper then he is a Vine, a
Door, a Way, a Shepherd; For he is called Gods Covenant, Isa. 55. 3 and GOD'S
Covenant is his oath which he swear, Luke 1. 72, 73.
for all the Promises are fulfilled in Him, and are yea, and amen: And as for
the morality of it so far as it is Moral and perpetual to all under the Gospel,
is in confession of truth, and bearing witness thereunto as before the Lord, or
in his presence, and speaking the truth when there is necessity, as when any
man's person or Estate, or any part thereof is in danger, and this we have ever
owned, and do own, and have, and are ready to testify the truth before the
Lord, or in his presence as concerning any matter which concerns the Glory of
God, or the good of our Neighbor without being pinched or bound up to a
certain form of words imposed upon us, but according as necessity requires, so
amply and largely as our words may give knowledge and understanding and light
in any matter which is to be desired, but this has been denied, and has not
been received by this unbelieving generation, who seeks rather to establish the
Traditions and Customs of Men, rather then the Evangelical Doctrine of the
Gospel.

And though Doctor Smallwood will needs have it, viz. swearing, neither to be
ceremonial nor judicial, but for any proof he brings for ought I see it may be
either as well as that he calls moral, for sure I am that Oaths was used
Deutrono. 19. 16. Exodus 20. 10.
in judicial proceedings, and Ceremonies were used in the worship of God and
his service then, and by Commandment; and the service of God, and his worship,
I hope he will say is moral; yet so as under the Law, it was not without
ceremony, and it is concluded by the most learned that there was some ceremony,
or figure, or sign in that Covenant, in all the worship, and some shadows of
good things to come, (then if swearing was any part of the worship of God) as
the most do grant, and assert, and I think A. S. will hardly deny, then I argue
it had some Ceremony or shadow in it: but oh this A. S. cannot away with in
this point of swearing, but it must needs be all moral for fear he should waken
his matter that he has taken in hand to war against Christ's command; but it is
evident that swearing was used in judicial proceedings, as is manifest, Deutr.
19. 5. about killing of a Man accedentally, and the 11. verse, about murder,
and the 14. verse about Land-markes, and in the 21. life for life, eye for eye,
tooth for tooth, hand for hand, and foot for foot, about all these things and
many more, and in the 16. verse about a false witness (were to be decided and
tried by witnesses before the Judges) and judgment was to be given according to
the several commands about the aforesaid different transgressions, all which
Statutes belonged to their judicial proceedings, as this about swearing, and as
is manifest in this Chapter; and all of these commands seems to have as much
morality in them, as swearing has in the judgment of many, unto whose judgment
I leave what I say, to be weighed by the spirit of God in them.

Thirdly, The Law said many things by way of precept and commission (at least
permission from God, which would be irregularities grossly reproveable in Men's
manners in moral matters, conversations, civil transactions, and
communications, should they be used among them who profess the Gospel, the Law
said an eye for an eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot; the
Gospel says avenge not your selves, resist not evil, suffer wrong, put up,
forgive, forbear, The Law said, thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thy
enemy; But A. S. will look upon this as an addition or false interpretation to
the Law it may be, but how ever certain it is that under the Law they made war,
the Jews with Amaleck with Moab, with Ammon, and the Canaanites, and the
Aegiptians might be spoiled, but the Gospel said only love your enemies, if he
be hungry feed him, if he be thirsty give him to drink, and for any thing I can
see the aforesaid commands were as moral, and had as much morality in them as
swearing, what ever A. S. say or can say: In the 7th. Section A. S. says if
any argue that Christ abolished the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws once
commanded by God, he says he denies that assertion, for we were never under
the Judicial Law, it being solely given to the Jews for the regulating their
Commonwealth in the Land of Canaan, Deutro. 4. 14. and they were never
obligatory to us that are no Jews, nor never dwelt in Canaan, and as for the
Ceremonial it was merely temporary, and ceased at our Saviors death, and was
not abrogated, but observed by him in his life, neither can it properly be said
to be repealed.

Reply. Though I do not argue that Christ abolished the Ceremonial and Judicial
Laws once commanded, nor abrogated them: yet Bishop Gauden does, who attained,
if not to a degree of knowledge and learning, yet to a degree of promotion
above A. S. in his Book which he wrote for the information of the Quakers about
swearing, he says in his own words, Christ came to fulfill the Moral Law,
however he came in a way of fulfilling to abrogate the Ceremonial, yea and the
Politic Laws too, belonging to the Jews policy in Church and State; and
herein is the Bishop and the Doctor at odds, the Bishop said, he abrogated the
Ceremonial Law, and Judicial Law too, belonging to the Jews Policy and State:
But Doctor Smallwood says, he denies his Assertion; for says he, We were never
under the Judicial Law, and what was never imposed need not be abolished: So
then what remains for me to say but this, If Swearing was any part of the
Judicial Law, or did belong to their Political Estate, as it is the judgment of
many, but it is evident that swearing was used by the witness before Judges in
Israel in those days to try out their matters according to commandment given of
God, as is evident from 19. Deuteronomy. in the whole Chapter, and diverse other places
then by this argument A. S. has made, he has overthrown himself; for he
says, we are no Jews, nor in Canaan, and so never imposed; and what was never
imposed need no abolishing; and it is as I have said, manifest that Oaths had
relation to judicial proceedings, and to the service of God too in that
Covenant, which was shadowy, and consisted much in outward signs and figures,
but the substance is Christ. So then instead of proving swearing under the
Gospel lawful, he has by his argument proved it never enjoined unto the
Gentiles, neither indeed was it, either ever commanded or commended unto the
Gentiles who believed, or they reproved for not observing it that ever we read
of by Christ or his Apostles, or Ministers in the first and purest times of
Christianity, for to Jacob he gave his Law, and to Israel his Statutes; to
every Nation he did not so, no not to Moab, Ammon, nor the Canaanites, neither
the Gentiles; and though he seem to plead hard for swearing under the Gospel,
yet he falls short in his proof, except he took his own reasons and arguments
which diverse of them are but imaginary, and in the foundation of his discourse
he has taken such great compass, as there is not an universal, unlimited
prohibition of all manner of Swearing; but what this manner of swaring is, it
is very uncertain, sometimes he makes it this, and sometimes that, sometimes he
says it is no Oath, though in the form thereof there be not I swear, or God be
not named, or by God does not always signify an Oath; and other where he seems
to affirm it to be an Oath, but when an impartial eye has sounded and tried to
the bottom what this swearing is that brings so much glory to God, and so much
good to our Neighbor, that he so vehemently contends for that ought to be
observed as well as Gods fear and service, (it is but their own traditions and
inventions, for that under the Law will not serve (as the Lord lives) or that
he calls swearing under the Gospel will not serve, (the Lord is witness) or I
speak the truth in Christ; or this is truth in the presence of God, or the
like, none of these will serve: But though he and the Rulers do say they are
Oaths, yet when at any time we have proffered willingly to declare the truth in
this or that particular cause, or to make as ample confession in demonstration
for clearing any cause in debate, that has either conduced to the glory of
God, or the good and profit of any particular Man in the Nation among whom we
converse, and not without some attestation of God, or of his wisdom, power, and
presence, yet it would never yet he received but reckoned as insufficient,
though both the Rulers of this age, and A. S. have said it, it might be that
in private it might, but in Judicature never was received, though I do believe
the most does believe we dare not lie in ordinary communication, much less in
Judicature, yet we have been set aside as objects of wrath, as deluded
erroneous, factious, seditious, contemners of Law, obstructors of legal
proceedings, except we would lay our hand upon a Bible and kiss it, and say, I
swear, and by the Contents of the Book, and so help me God, or else fined,
imprisoned for term of life, our Lands and Goods confiscated, and we sentenced
to be banished, our Wives and Children ruinated, Husband and Wife parted,
Children and Parents separated, and such monsters of Christians have we to deal
withal in this age, and how many brought into this sad condition in England, as
little A. S. knows as cares. But for ought I know that he and such as he, in
such public discourses as this of his has blown the sparks and has kindled a
flame in the Rulers, and incensed them, and stirred them up to severity and
harshness against them who fear the Lord, and does maintain peace with all Men
as much as in them lies, and keeps their Consciences void of offense toward
God, which makes us to choose rather all this hardship then to offend the Lord,
who serve and fear his Name, and reverence it more then they who seem to honor
it, and pretends Gods honor through their swearing. But to make amends for
this, A. S. he says, the Magistrates must act by the Law, and that enjoynes
such a form of swearing and they cannot allow it.

Unto that I answer, it had been a more necessary discourse for A. S. to have
exhorted the Magistrates, if the Law had been answered in the substance, not to
be so severe in the form, and also to have told them where any Law was made
contrary to the Law of God, either in matter or form: The Consciences of
believers could not yield obedience thereunto, when it was repugnant unto the
Law of God, and not according to the form thereof, and in such cases to be
wary, and he and the rest of the Clergy to have advised with the Rulers and
Lawmakers, and to have informed them from whom they receive such great
incomes, and revenues, (for the preservation and peace of all Men) that they
need not stand so much upon the form, seeing that so many conscientious people
questioned it, so that there needed not such tying up to form, under such
great and heavy penalties, as banishment, confiscation, and perpetual
imprisonment, but have informed them so that the truth might have been found
out, and no judicial proceedings hindered, which I am sure may be without any
swearing, true testimony never being denied, when required by any Magistrate,
and let bua a penalty be upon him that gives false evidence, or speaks an
untruth about any proceedings in judicature, or otherwise called to bear
evidence in any controversy, if found out, let them suffer as them that
swears falsely, and as perjured, and the case is one, and here all scruples,
and contentions about swearing would end, and there would not be the least
obstruction in legal proceedings, or in administration of justice, and let me
tell Doctor Smallwood, and the rest of his Brethren, that if they would move
such a thing in Parliament, peradventure it would be readily received from
them, and in so doing, they would do as acceptable a piece of service, and as
well pleasing to God, and would conduce as much to the peace and tranquillity of
the Nation, as any thing that ever they will do in their age, or has been
effected many ages, and so all these heart-burnings, contentions, and evil
surmisings, and evil representing one another would cease and end, and which if
not effected, nothing can be looked for but sad suffering, and great oppression
and persecution, which will provoke the Lord to anger, and ever did against all
them that were the cause of it in ages past, but I come to his second Argument.

Second Argument. Some without any color, reason or possibility of proof, will
need have swearing a Ceremonial write, but God ranks it with his fear and
service, therefore it must needs be moral, and therefore what at all times, as
well under the Gospel as under the Law, as well amongst the Gentiles as the
Jews, tends to the glory of God, that is not a Ceremonial Ordinance, nor
forbiden by Christ, but such is swearing, and therefore it cannot be thought to
be prohibited.

Reply to this. It has been said and often asserted that all the ten words and
Commandments were moral and perpetual, as well under the Gospel as under the
Law; then I wonder what A. S. and diverse others intends to do with the fourth
Commandment, if it be moral and perpetual and to be observed, in the same
manner and with the same service, as then commanded, and the same day and time,
then he and most of them who contend most for the morality of these ten
Commandments, are great transgressors, and if he grant there was something
Ceremonial in it, and typical or figurative, which then was the seventh day,
which was given for a sign, (of the Worlds rest from its labor) and of
keeping after it an everlasting Sabbath to the Lord, by Man's cessation from his
own works, as God did from his, Isai. 58. and the last Heb. 4. which Jewish
observation of the seventh day as a Sabbath now, though never so solemnly, as
then commanded, will have no acceptance at all, no more then he, and he as
much (that is none at all) that never so solemnly swears by the name of God, in
such ceremonious ways as the Jews did of old, (or goes beyond the bare
asseveration or testimony of truth, with some attestation of Gods power and
veracity which has never been denied) which to do, we do not only think but
know it to be a superfluous Ceremony of Judaism) not to say brat of Jewish
extraction as A. S. does) now circumcised and cut off from Christians by
Christ, and what though God did, Deutro. 10. 20. rank it with his fear and
service, was there any service or worship in that Covenant, that had not some
sign and shadow in it, and was Ceremonial, and was to end in the substance,
was there not prayer, and praising, and were not these service and worship, and
had these not the Ceremony of Incense and Sacrifice, which then attended these
Services, but the substance was lifting up of the heart unto the Lord, and
making a melody in the heart, and circumcision is now that of the heart, Romans
2. which was outward before, the killing of a Lamb at the Passover was an
Ordinance in that Covenant, the substance thereof is Christ, the Passover; the
other now under the Gospel would be no more then cutting of a Dogs neck, these
were all Ordinances of God to be observed, and in their time and day, and they
that did according to the command of God, tended to the glory of God, in that
first Covenant, but in the second under the Gospel, whosoever should observe
them, in the Figure, Ceremony, and shadow should much dishonor God and his
Christ the substance, and Christ would profit him nothing, see that Ceremony of
swearing, the morality that only abides under the Gospel is testifying the
known truth from the heart, with some attestation of God to witness, who is
witness of all we do or say, and that no more then confession or denial, by
yea or nay which is no oath, is that standing substance and the moral, if A. S.
will have it called so that remains under the Gospel, which answers that
ceremonious way of swearing under the Law, which is most evident by the Apostle
Paul's rendering of that term swearing as it was spoken in way of prophecy
concerning its continuance, then Isa. 45. 23. To me every tongue shall swear
under that term confessing only under the Gospel, Romans 14. 11. Every knee
shall bow, every tongue shall confess to God, confession under the Gospel is
made equivolent with an oath under the Law, but this rendering of it A. S. does
not like, but would pervert Paul's words to have it confession, (but put to his
own addition) by oath so that his Argument is void, swearing was binding in
that ceremonious way which it was commanded under the Law, but not under the
Gospel, nor among the Christians, who are come to the substance, and to confess
and speak the truth in Christ to the glory of God acknowledging his power and
omnisciency, and his justice in discerning whether truth be spoken, and in
punishing them that speak falsely, and his wisdom in discerning the secrets of
all hearts, and A S. might as well have said that offerings and oblations and
sacrifice tends much to the glory of God under the Gospel as under the Law as
swearing, but says he swearing is a part of Gods peculiar service, that is
incommunicable to any creature, the like I say of the former, offering and
sacrifice, and incense, was incommunicable to any creature, but was due unto
God alone; yet it does not follow as well under the Gospel, as under the Law,
for that were to set up the figure and deny the substance, so this second
Argument is insufficient, and the third is somewhat related to it, which I now
come unto.

Thirdly. This third Argument is, that if Christ's purpose be utterly to abolish
all swearing as an illegitimate brat of Jewish extraction, not to be admitted
into the Christian Church, then it must be either as it is repugnant to our
duty to God, or else to our neighbor, for into that summary he has contracted
the whole Law.

Reply. We must still distinguish that which was once a duty to be performed
under the Law, because commanded, is not required as a duty under the Gospel,
and the strength of most of A. S. his Arguments, and the rest who contend for
swearing under the Gospel, are grounded upon the Mosaical Law, though this of
oaths he will needs have to be moral; it may be he would contend as much for
the morality of Tithes and Oblations, if it had been the subject of his
discourse, as for oaths, and them to be jure divino, under the Gospel, for
many such we have met with, and he might bring the same Arguments for Tithes
and Oblations, they are not repugnant unto God, but brings glory to his name;
because hereby his Ministers under the Gospel are maintained, and are enabled
thereby to preach the Gospel for the conversion of souls, which adds much to
the glory of God, and therefore cannot or are not to be prohibited, but these
only belonged to the Levitical Priesthood, and continued only to the time of
Reformation, viz. to the bringing in of a better hope and a better Covenant,
which stood upon better promises for the Priesthood being changed, there is
also of necessity a change of the Law, Hebr. 6. 12. by which Tithes was a duty,
and they robbed God that detained them, M^l. 3. 8. But this being ended and
fulfilled in Christ the everlasting high Priest, who by one offering perfected
for ever them that are sanctified, he bid not his Disciples require Tithes as a
due, or duty belonging to God, under the Gospel, but freely you have received
freely give, and what House soever ye enter into that is worthy there abide,
and eat such things as is set before you, for the Workman is worthy of his
meat, and this was far more Evangelical, and conduced more to the honor of
God, then Tithes, and the Apostles lived more by faith upon God, who provided
for them, who was employed in his service, so that I argue what was once a duty
under the Law; that was to be performed unto God, is not always a duty among
Christians, for though Oaths were commanded unto the Jews in that time of
Infancy, and as being weak, and it was permitted them, as Jerome says upon the
5th. Mat. verse. 37. to swear by the name of God to keep them from Idolatry,
seeing all other Nations were given to Idolatry, and swear by false Gods, as
Chemosh, Ashterah, and Baal, he knew their aptness to be led aside with the
customs of other Nations, and therefore they were to acknowledge him alone,
who was the living God, and no other, and to testify truth by his Name, as a
thing certain and sure, and therefore one of their oaths was, as the Lord
lives, and this among the rest was one of the precepts of the Law, which was
added because of transgression, to swear by his name, which needed not have
been added, if sin, and transgression, and unbelief had not entered in, (mark
this) and this Law of oaths pertained to that part which was in the
transgression, and variance, and strife, and that led to worship Idols, and
this continued while that nature was standing, but Christ was revealed and
given to finish sin, and transgression, and unbelief, and to do away that part
that lusted after Idols, and that led into variance, and he leads out of the
occasion of evil, and from that which was the cause of the addition of the Law
unto everlasting righteousness again, which was in the beginning before sin
entered, and they that come to believe in him are not under the Law, but under
grace, moreover the Apostle says, Romans 7. 14. The Law has power over a Man so
long as be lives, even as a Wife is bound by the Law of her Husband so long as
he lives, (and no longer) so as long as Man lives in sin, unbelief,
transgression, discord, variance, and strife, and Idolatry, the Law has power
over him to correct and reprove him, and judge him, and was to be a limit unto
that nature; but Christ leads out of the occasion of all these, for which the
Law was added to do the truth and speak the truth, and cease strife, for
which the Law was added.

Again, the Law was added as a cure and a remedy to defide Controversies, and
ill distempers, that was entered into the hearts of Men, in the unbelief, and
that is one reason which Doctor Gauden gives, why solemn swearing should and
ought to be in judicial proceedings among Christians, to take away Jealousies,
distrusts, dissimulations, frauds, unsatisfactions and insecurities; and quotes
Grotius, that swearing is necessary, not absolutely and morally, or
preceptively, but by way of consequence and remedy, as to the state of the
Jews we shall not, nor have not denied it; but as to the state of Christians
who are truly such, we say that the cause is taken away and the effect follows,
all jealousies, distrusts, dissimulations and strifes, and insecurities, and so
the remedies, to wit Oaths cease, and the necessity of them, and that was one
main thing why Oaths were permitted to end strife, and strife is a work of the
flesh, and variance and discord, and it is inconsistent with true love to our
Neighbor to hold that which answers the strife, and that part, for love
fulfills the Law, works no ill to the Neighbor, ends strife, and so puts
swearing the means to end strife, and the remedy out of place and date. But A.
S. goes on and tells us that Oaths advisedly and reverently taken upon
necessary occasions are so far from displeasing God, or hurting our Neighbor,
that on the contrary they are acceptable to the one, and advantageous to the
other, for by them Princes are secured of their Subjects Allegiance, and
Generals of their Soldiers fidelity, Leagues confirmed betwixt Nations, every
Man's just right maintained, offenders discovered, and duly punished, and
Controversies and Suits desided: and these are such great and good ends that
men cannot be in any degree of security or happiness without them.

Reply. To this I answer, that notwithstanding all the great and good ends, and
the necessity of Oaths which A. S. conceives that Men cannot subsist in any
degree of security without, yet we see by experience notwithstanding all the
reverent taking, and all the solemn taking, and the necessity that is put upon
Oaths, yet they have never answered the end purposed, for where perfidiousness
and unbelief, and distrust, and jealousies, and strifes are, (which is no where
so much) as among those that plead for swearing, yet Oaths does not, nor has
not bound them, when they had a mind to be loosed, and sees that to stand to
such obligations will not be for their profit, or present safety, many
instances might be given; what security had the Pope when all the Nobility and
Clergy in England were bound to maintain his Supremacy by Oaths? and no doubt
but they swore reverently, and it was judged both by the then Church and State
to be binding, and yet notwithstanding all the Obligation, all was broken, and
the Popes Supremacy denied, in the time of Hen. 8. and Edward 6th. in their
time all swore against the Popes Supremacy, either in Church or State, and how
much security was the Nation in when Queen Mary came to the Crown, though the
Nobles and the Bishops, and Prelates did all swear against the Supremacy, yet
behold it was brought in again, and confirmed by Oath again; and yet in the
days of Elizabeth renounced again, and of latter days what Oaths have been
exacted, first by one, and then by another, and one party contrary to another,
though every party fancyed a security for the time, but it proved of no more
effect, neither were they in any degree more secure then if there had been none
at all; for indeed that frequent swearing has made men being got into a
custom of it that it is become a light thing unto them, though otherwise they
look upon themselves as bound; Generals how have they turned one way, and
another way, and Soldiers the like; so that one may conclude indeed that Oaths
are made no more of but even to stand in force, while (that bears up head and
is exalted) that to please the present time and power they seem to be devoutly
obliged to it, but if it come under any eclipse or demunition, then they reckon
themselves no longer obliged; so that indeed their Oaths are becom'd of little
or no force at all; and for Controversies we see they begin many, and is the
cause of much dissension and discord, but ends few; for why may not all these
foresaid States and conditions be secured, and as well, and the good and great
ends accomplished, that A. S. pleads for by true evidence of every one
concerned in any of the foresaid relations, by declaring and confessing the
truth, and speaking it unto Men as necessity requires without oath, yea and all
the foresaid states have as much security, and subsist as well, if not better,
then by all this swearing, which more properly belonged to the Judaism then to
Christians, and there is no such necessity of them among Christians if any at
all, who dare not swear for fear of offending Christ, or denying his Doctrine,
and yet will not lie but speak the truth, and indeed it is the custom of
swearing, that have been used in the Nations since the Apostasy entered in,
that is more looked upon then any thing else, more then any legality,
necessity, or security, under the Gospel seeing in the Primitive times truly so
called, it was enough to say, Christianus sum, and that sort of swearing that
is imposed now has no other ground but custom, which Jer. 10. 3. is accounted
to be vain, neither has it so much as an inch of ground from the Scripture,
and therefore does not bring so much glory to God as A. S. tells on, because
whatsoever is added or superadded to whatever God commanded as to matter or
form is but Will Worship at the best, and a making whatsoever was said or
commanded, or practiced before, imperfect, and no way sufficient, but more of
this shall be said after if the Lord permit.

Fourth Argument, Had Christ intended universally to forbid all kind of Oaths
in the words, Swear not at all, then those amplifications, neither by Heaven,
nor by Earth, neither by Jerusalem, neither by the head, had been useless as
being generally included in the general prohibition, but had he meant that no
oath should be used upon any occasion, the subsequent words are so far from
giving light to the preceding that they much obscure them, but had he said no
more then swear not at all, it might have been said he disallowed all oaths,
but he descending to this or that creature may rationally imply that his
purpose was only to forbid such swearing, and not that which was formerly
enjoyed, and his conclusion is only creature swearing, or swearing by Creatures
is that he would have forbidden.

Answ. Christ knew better what he intended then A. S. who would make his words
one thing and his intention another; it is evident by the preceding Doctrine,
and by that which follows after the Text, that Christ prohibits all swearing,
which shall be further spoken on when the second part of the discourse is
spoken of; some stumble ignorantly, and some wilfully, would pervert, and turn
aside from that which they have no mind to receive, and would hold up that
which they assert true or false, and that makes all this disputing and
reasoning about the plain words of Scripture, Christ's words; But I say unto
you, Swear not at all by heaven or earth, is a general Negative of all Oaths,
even of those which before were used in the time of Moses, and by Heaven and
Earth, and Jerusalem, are more ample expressions of Christ to make the Scribes
and Pharisees understand his mind of his dislike of these Oaths by Creatures
that they frequently used, and though these and much more were included in the
general Negative, Swear not at all; yet they are not to be excluded as
superfluous, neither do they obscure the former, Swear not at all, but gives
more light to the former, to any but them that fees with A. S. his eyes, for by
Heaven, by Earth, by Jerusalem, are more ample expressions of his mind, and a
further explication of the former, Swear not at all; and though they seem to A.
S. to obscure and darken Christ's words, if he did intend all Oaths, yet they
that see with another eye then he does is that they are only more large
expressions thereby to make the Pharisees understand, who were in the unbelief,
and dull of hearing, that he did not only forbid what the Law had forbid
before, but even those Oaths that they frequently used, under those terms and
forms which the Law had not spoken of in those words, as Heaven, Earth,
Jerusalem, head and foot, and therefore he enumerates them as an amplification
of his former prohibition, and so they are to be joined, and we shall not stop
as A. S. says some does at the words swear not at all, but shall join that
which Christ has joined, viz. Heaven, Earth and Jerusalem, and to be
enumerated only and joined to the former negative, and spoken as to their
capacities in those full and large terms that they might understand his mind,
that he prohibited not only by Heaven and Earth and Jerusalem, but even any
other Oath which the Law had commanded, or the Jews permitted to swear before;
and though A. S. would have it limited, only to swearing by Creatures, which
indeed were forbidden under the Law; but Christ who taught a more Evangelical
and exact obedience then the Law, he said, It has been said of old time thou
shall not forswear thy self: But I say unto you, (who says more then the Law
has said) Swear not at all, but let your yea be yea, and nay, nay, for
whatsoever is mere comes of evil. And of this mind was BP. Usher, late of
Armaugh, who pleaded the cause of the W^ldenses, or Leonists, whose names are
famous amongst the Reformed Chu^ches, and were the most ancient and true
Protestants, if any Reformation be looked at beyond Luther, they professed it
no way lawful for a Christian to swear, and the said Bishop Usher de Succes.
Chap. 6. does esteem that place of the 5th. of Mat. Swear not at all; and that
of 5th. James to be a sufficient plea for them against the Papists, and he
pleads their cause; and this made Renerius and Jansenius so much envy the
Waldenses two Romanists, who said amongst all the Sects which are or have been,
there is not any more pernicious to the Church (meaning the Church of Rome)
then the Waldenses; and that for three Reasons, first, their Antiquity;
secondly, because of their Universality; thirdly, in that they did maintain and
hold it no way lawful for a Christian to swear on any occasion.

But it may be that A. S. will tell us that these and other were condemned in
some general or Provincial Council for Heresy, and if he do it is no great
matter, since most of these have erred, especially since all Nations have drunk
of the Whores cup of Fornication, and have erred from the faith, and have lost
the power, and then contend for a form, and bind all to receive it upon some
comination or malediction, or other, or else they were Heretics; And why who
said so? the Church has so decreed; and if these Canons and such like must be
binding, A. S. will hardly escape their censure, if he continue in the
profession of the faith he is in, though he and they seem to agree in this
particular, about swearing. But I come to his fifth Argument.

Fifth Argument, Christ never forbad any thing but what was intrinsecally evil,
as may be proved by induction, he forbids anger, abusive language, he forbids
lust, and divorce, and swearing by Creatures; and therefore what ever he forbad
was evil, and that in it self, and not merely as forbidden but swearing in
general is not, for that has not only been the practice of holy Men, but of
Angels, Dan. 12. 7. Revel. 10. 6.

Reply. Was it evil in it self under the Law if a man smote out another eye,
or tooth, or cut off his hand, or his foot, or give one a would in any part of
the body, Deuteronomy. 21. 24. Levit. 1. 24. 20. Deuteronomy. 19. 11. was it evil in it self
for the Judges in those days to give sentence, that he that had struck out his
Neighbors eye, or struck out his tooth, or cut off his hand to pronounce and
give the same judgment unto the offender that he should be so done withal, was
this eternally evil or intrinsecally evil for the party so wronged to seek
remedy? or was it not an act of justice equal and good, not only because
enjoined and commanded, but in it self just, and was it or is it an act in it
self (intrinsecally evil) if a man sued a man wrongfully at the Law, and takes
a man's coat or garment away to seek to defend himself, and preserve his coat or
cloak, if not A. S. his argument is of no moment; for even in the same Chapter,
where envy and murder, and divorce saving for fornication, and abusive
language, and all swearing is forbidden, so is that forbidden which is not
intrinsecally evil by Christ, Mat. 5. 39, 40. But I say unto you that you
resist not evil; and whosoever shall smite the one cheek turn him the other
also; and if a man sue thee at the Law, and take away thy coat, let him have
thy cloak also; and whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile go with him
twayn. And it is in the new Testament (I hope) written, Avenge not your selves.
And was it evil in it self, or morally evil to keep the seventh day of the week
as a Sabbath, or only good because commanded, or was it lawful to fight with
Amalecks, Edomites, Aegiptians, and Canaanites, because Israel was only
commanded, or because they were real enemies to God in their hearts; or as
Samuel Fisher said well in answer to Doctor Gauden, which A. S. quarrels with,
that Circumcision, Sacrifices, and Offerings, Passover, and New Moons, Fasts
and Swearing, was not evil in themselves but because forbidden; and though A.
S. give such a great Challenge to S. F. to produce one instance that any thing
was prohibited by Christ, but what was intrinsecally evil, or else his argument
is in vain, I say the aforementioned thing prove it, that something was
forbidden that was not evil eternally and intrinsecally, but because
prohibited, and again in the same Chapter, ver. 44. But I say unto you love
your enemies, bless them that curse you; though under the Law they did fight,
and might fight with the aforesaid enemies, the Canaanites, and Gentiles; but
now I say, put up, forgive, love your enemies, Peter put up thy Sword, he that
takes hold on it shall perish by it; avenge not, go not to Law one with
another, 1 Cor. 6. 7. Suffer, forbear, forgive if thy brother sin against thee
seventy times 7. times. And though A. S. say that nothing was forbidden by
Christ, or in all the new Testament but what was in it self evil, or in some
respect conducing thereunto; methinks he has given too bold a Challenge; what
will he say to all the former things mentioned? and what evil had Circumcision
in it, or the Passover, or Sacrificing, or New Moons, and the Sabbath days, or
what tendency had they to evil, but rather were good for the end they were
ordained, to be signs and types, and figures of holy things to come, like as
swearing was among the rest, what ever A. S. say or argue; and yet when the
substance of the good things was come to them that had believed, and received
him who was the sum of all; the Apostle said, Gal. 5. 2, 3. If you be
Circumcised Christ profits you nothing; after he was offered up: And Gal. 4. 9,
10, 1. You observe new Moons, and holy days and Sabbaths: And these things that
were once as really good as ever swearing was, considering the end wherefore
they were enjoined, and these things was never evil in themselves, yet the
Apostle reckoned them beggarly Rudiments, and told them they had begun in the
Spirit, and now sought to be made perfect through the flesh; and so stood in
doubt of them that his labor had been in vain, and therefore if A. S. or any
other will needs uphold swearing, because commanded to the Jews, (before the
seed Christ was revealed) I say he is Gal. 5. 34.) a debtor to the whole Law;
and is as much bound to keep it in all other points as this, or else he is a
transgressour, and is one of those that would be laying yoaks upon the
Disciples necks, unto whom they were never intended, for if the Ceremonies and
Rites and outward observations which properly did belong to the Jewish Church,
and state to observe till the fullness of time, when the partition wall should
be broken down, and the Jews and Gentiles should be one, and one shepherd and
one fold for them both (and no longer) and they were never given to the
Gentiles to observe; and therefore, for ought I can perceive many would have
the Gentile Christians, who never were under the Law, neither the Ordinances of
the first Covenant, neither ever given to them, yet they would compel the
Christians to live as do the Jews, and to observe their Ordinances; and
therefore are greatly to be blamed, Gal 2. 13, 14. Therefore we do not look
upon any swearing to be now a duty under the Gospel among true Christians,
truly such, as some swearing was once under the Law, but affirm all swearing
to be now a sin, because forbidden by the positive law of Christ under the
Gospel, who by his death ended the right of that, and many more legal rites and
Rudiments, which who so does observe now as Christians does it not without sin,
and guilt, and superstition; and therefore S. Fisher that faithful servant of
God (who suffered in bonds til death for his Testimony even in this particular)
says well, That that sort of swearing which was not sin simpliciter in its
nature under the Law, is now a sin upon the account of Christ's universal
prohibition of all swearing; who was of authority to put to an end, as he did
by his death unto the Law: And therefore that sort of service and worship which
stood in outward observations, which was a duty because commanded under the
Law, and no sin, in their own nature, neither were evil in themselves, nor in
any respect conducing thereto, as they were observed, but had some signal good
in them once, and yet who observes them now, as service of God, makes Christ of
so little effect to himself, as that he profits him nothing at all; I hope A.
S. will not deny but these things are forbidden in the new Testament, which
sometime were not evil in their own nature, but now are evil when the Substance
is come, in whom they all end; and therefore S. F. his argument is not vain but
of force: And yet let A. S. know that there were many things observed and done
not only by the Jews, but by them that believed in Christ, and thought well of
him while he was present with them, and yet did not see to the end of these
things which were shadows and signs, and good as once commanded, and had no
evil in them, but were good as commanded, and for the end for which they were
ordained, which afterward in the more full growth and knowledge in the Mystery
of Christianity they came more to be seen thorough, and that was felt in which
they all ended; and though Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill
it, and to observe the Ordinances commanded in that Covenant to fulfill that
which was written of him, Psalm. 40. 6. In the volume of the Book it is written,
I am come to do thy will O God. And further he said himself, It behooves us to
fulfill all Righteousness: and that which was commanded, but this was before he
was offered up, and was as a middle dispensation betwixt the ending of the Law
and publishing of the Gospel; yet howbeit Christ knew it, and did speak of it
at some time, that those things that had been sometime commanded, Deuteronomy. 12. 5.
and was good as they stood related to the end wherefore they were commanded,
instance the Worship at Jerusalem, and the service there, and the place where
God had promised to place his name, yet Christ said as foreknowing the end of
all, the aforesaid Worship which appertained to that Covenant, and therefore he
said to the Woman, Joh. 4. 23. but the hour comes and now is when the true
Worshipers, shall worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father seeks
such to worship him, and 24. verse. God is a spirit, and they that worship him
must worship him in spirit and truth, 2 Cor. 3. 17. From hence it is clearly
evident (for this was before he was offered up) (that then was the time) that
neither at Jerusalem, nor in the Mountain of Samaria, it shall be only said
they worship the Father, though at Jerusalem was the place, Deuteronomy. 1. 1, 2, 5.
of worship formerly, and the Jews held it then, and the worship was that which
was commanded, to wit Sacrifices, and Offerings, and many other legal Services,
which belonged to them to perform according to the command of God, and if
swearing or oaths was any part of the service of God, as in that Covenant, as
we with A. S. does grant, Deutr. 10. 20. You shall fear the Lord and serve him,
and swear by his name, then I say, that swearing amongst the rest of the
worship is included, but says Christ, neither at Jerusalem, nor this Mountain,
but they that worship shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth, so that
the time was (then) but came on more afterward to be fulfilled, that both the
place, and the worship, and service that belonged to the place, they should no
more worship the Father (with and in) but in the spirit and in the truth, and
this may be in answer to that which A. S. makes a great ado with in his Book,
how that Christ said, swear not at all, it was before his death, and therefore
they that argue, says he, that swearing was prohibited only and ended in
Christ's death, cannot plead that all Oaths was prohibited, but that command of
Christ, Mat. 5. because he spoke this in his life time, I say so did he this,
Jo. 20. 21, 22, 23. And he may as well argue that Christ destroyed the place of
worship at Jerusalem, and the Worship also, and came not to fulfill it as he
says he did, and why, but because he spoke this before he was crucified, and
so did he, swear not at all, and why may not A. S. conclude with us that this
is a commodious place to interpret and explain Christ's meaning in those words
in the 5th Mat. 23, and 24. and so the words may truly be understood thus, ye
have heard that it has been said of old time, thou shall not forswear thy
self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths, Exodus 20. 7. and Deutr. 5.
11. but the hour comes and now is, ( when I say unto you) that say more then
the Law has said, swear not at all, neither by Heaven nor by the Earth, but
let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, for whatsoever is more then these comes
of evil, and yet whatever may or can be said A. S. will need conclude that all
swearing is not forbiden, and why? because it has been the practice of holy
Men, and also an Angel, this Argument is of little force, so was it the
practice of holy Men to offer Sacrifice, and burn Incense, and as for the
swearing of the Angel, Dan. 12. and Revel. 10. 6. to prove the lawfulness of
some swearing, these has been answered, over and over, and over again, though
A. S. will take no notice of it, though I perceive he has read the Arguments
that have been used as Answers to these things, though he will not seem to take
notice, nor to reply to confute the Arguments, but rather minds his own, and to
assert what may seem to make for his purpose, as to the matter he has taken in
hand, but as for good Men's swearing, and the Angels swearing, if their example
would justify the lawfulness of swearing, yet they could not be any president
to us, who are under the Gospel of the Son that is greater then the Angels, (by
the dispensation of whom) the Law for Oaths, Tithes, Offerings, Oblations, and
other legal Rites, and Rudiments was given, which Son also, all the Angels of
God are bid to worship, for the Apostle says, Hebr. 2. 5. For unto the Angels
has he not put into subjection the World to come, but that is committed unto
the Son, under whose ministration and subjection we are, who said, Let your yea
be yea, and your nay, nay, and speak the truth, and do the truth, and bear
witness to the truth, who said, Learn of me, and these things we have learned
of him unto whom all power is committed, for he is counted Hebr. 3. 3. more
worthy of glory then Moses, though Moses was faithful in his House as a
Servant, but Christ as a Son, which is that great Prophet that Moses prophesied
of, which all is to hearken unto, with whom the Father is well pleased, being
made so much better then the Angels, Hebr. 1. 4. as he has by inheritance
obtained a more excellent name then they, verse. 5. for unto which of the Angels
said he at any time thou art my Son, this day I have begotten thee, verse. 6.
Again when he brings the first begotten into the World, he says, let all the
Angels of God worship him, of the Angels he says he makes them ministering
spirits and a flame of fire, but unto the Son he says thy Throne oh God is for
ever and ever, the Scepter of righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom, for
if the words spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression received a
just recompense of reward, how shall they escape (Hebr. 2. 3.) who do not only
neglect the command of Christ but labors to pervert, through their strength of
their own reason the ministration of the Son, who is the sum and substance of
all shadowy and typical ministrations; and therefore A. S. and all concerned
look to it who would introduce Judaism and the Mosaical observations upon the
neck of Christ's Disciples, and as Laws in his Kingdom, and whether would not
this prefer the servant before the Son, yea or nay, and his ministration before
the ministration of the Sons, though the one is not against the other, but the
one pointing at the other, and in the latter the first is fulfilled, the truth
declared, the truth spoken, the truth lived in, and the truth confessed in
every matter wherein any Christian is concerned, which is the sum and the
matter, which all oaths in their highest and greatest ordination could or can
effect.

In the 4^ th. page of his Book he says, our Savior says Amen, Amen, 24.
time in John's Gospel, which he says St. Ambrose will needs have to amount
unto an Oath; and he cites Apoc. 3. These things says the Amen, compares it
with Isa. 65. 16. where he concludes that Amen seems either to be a name or an
epethite of God, and this he says is the opinion of our Church in the Homily
against swearing, that our Savior did swear diverse times; and further says, it
cannot be denied that God himself swore, Psalm. 110. 4. The Lord has sworn and
will not repent; and so concludes that Christ forbid not all swearing: Unto
this Bp. Gauden though he strains and scrues very hard as A. S. does to make
all things to bend to their inclination will needs have ^men, or verily,
verily, to be an Oath: Doctor Gauden in his citation of Capellos out of Rabby
Johnas, says, In veritate forma jurandi apud Judeos; but he concludes
doubtfully, and says, it is only the next degree unto an oath; but A. S. thinks
he has put it out of doubt with his reason and his Authors, that verily,
verily, is an oath, which if it were true this would only prove swearing lawful
in Sermons, and not in Controversies, which is the great good end he so much
pleads for, and if this were true would serve his turn. The Magistrates
exacting Oaths he seems to prove out of the Mosaical Law, and the Priests
swearing lawfully out of Paul's Epistles and Christ's Sermons, but this his
covering is too short, and is but trifling in the weighty things of God, not
distinguishing betwixt the first Covenant and the second, and the Ordinances
thereof; for the first he has no adversary, viz. that they did swear though
never exacted under penalties, the second we conclude to be no oath, viz. Amen,
Amen, or verily, verily, which is no more then truly, truly, I say unto ye; and
if this be an oath why has it not, and why is it not accepted as such; for we
have said more then this and can do in truth which we look upon to be far from
amounting to an oath, and yet it would never be received as such, which argues
plainly that what S. F. and R. H. has said, though A. S. quarrel with it, that
surely the Magistrates in England does not believe the Priests Doctrine, for if
they did, why are so many sentenced to perpetual imprisonment, with
confiscation of all Lands and Goods to the ruinating of many poor Wives and
Children, which A. S. knows little of, and for ought I know such a discourse as
this may add affliction to their bonds, and misery to their sufferings, and yet
these have never been received; as if we say, verily, verily, or truly, truly,
or God is our witness, or we speak the truth in Gods presence; yet
notwithstanding this would never give satisfaction to any Magistrate in any
Judicature that ever we knew or heard of in England; and though he tell us of
I. Pennington, how that he gave satisfaction, and that it found acceptance with
the Court, and also to the King: We are not ignorant of what I. P. has
written, which is wholesome, just, and good, and sound, and condescendingly as a
Christian man could do, as about the premises to pacify and satisfy all whom
it concerned, that they might not proceed in such a rigorous manner against the
truly conscientious, and so in letting them know what we could do, and what we
could not do, yet notwithstanding what ever any might seem to own as sufficient
in private, we never found it in public, or in any case of concernment, but
rather they knew before hand what would ensnare us, have set the snare, and run
us into it; but notwithstanding all this that A. S. will have to be oaths, as
God is witness, and I speak the truth in Christ; and verily, verily, it will
not serve, for he says, the Law will not allow of it, for inferior Magistrates
are sworn he says to act according to Law, and the Law prescribes in what
manner, and with what formality Oaths shall be taken; and therefore the
Magistrates are not at liberty to accept thereof, because they are tied up to
the Rules of the Law, as I said before, seeing that Oaths are a matter of great
concernment unto many it had been a more necessary discourse for A. S. to have
told the Magistrates that these things in testimony which were ready to be
given had been sufficient, and that they should not so much have stood upon the
formality, seeing that which answered the substance of the Law was not denied,
though we except against the formality which is now used, and has no example
or president in the Scriptures of truth as they are used; and therefore let A.
S. tell the Rulers that the rules of the Law in this case is too strict, and
the penalty exceeds the transgression far; as for a man for not holding up his
hand, or laying it upon a Bible, and kissing it, and saying after a Clark or a
Crier, I swear, and the like needless Ceremonies, which are not without (at
least) a show of evil in them, yet for not doing and observing these
formalities, though those things which A. S. and others calls swearing, we have
condescended unto; yet it is reckoned as insufficient, though themselves say it
is an oath, yet it is not called so, nor accounted so, except the aforesaid
needless trifles be observed, and is not this a hard thing, and far from
equity, justice, and reason, that a man should be exposed to so great a penalty
as Confiscation of lands and goods, and perpetual imprisonment, for want of
observing of these trifling, groundless, needless Ceremonies and formalities,
which is not at all beseeming Christians; and whether the Law had not need to
be rectified in this case, which exposes so many to so great suffering, which
we in conscience does except against as well as Oaths, and sees that the
penalty far exceeds the crime, if it were any; but we look upon it to be none
at all, but rather a duty incumbant upon Christians to keep to yea and nay; or
that which amounts to it in all their communications both public and private,
and not to swear at all, but to abide in Christ's Doctrine and walk after the
Primitive Christians example to testify the truth and not to swear: And as for
Amen, Amen, verily, verily, is no more then truly, truly, and is no more then
an ardent, and a fervent speech from the heart of him that speaks, wherein he
would be believed, or it is truth from which and in which he speaks; and as for
comparing Amen with the 65. of Isa. and 16. where he is called the God of
Truth; this proves nothing at all, he is called the God of Truth in opposition
to false Gods, which were lies; and in opposition to the Heathenish Gods which
were not true Gods, which had eyes and saw not, etc. and could not save; he
might as well say, when wisdom, holiness, righteousness, or immortality is
named or mentioned, that therefore it is an Oath, as when truth is spoken, for
these are as much epethites of God as truly or truth; and though your Church in
a Homily against swearing, do say that Christ did often swear because he said,
Verily, we judge you have concluded upon too slender a ground: And as for Psalm.
110. The Lord has sworn and will not repent: It is not denied though the Lord
swore once, yea more then once by himself; this was in condescension to the
state of Man in weakness and unbelief; and as to the state of the Jews, Gal.
3. 19. before the seed was revealed, which was the substance of all figures,
and Gods example of swearing is no example for us now to imitate, and was in no
wise a confirming of that old legal Ceremony of Oaths, as a practice legitimate
to his Saints for ever, as A. S. would make us believe it was, for his Oath,
viz. (Gods) ended in Christ, in whom all the promises confirmed by oath, were
yea, and in him Amen, was also to end all strife between him and men, and to
put an end to all strife and Oaths also that are among Men to end strife;
Ambrose says upon that 110. Psalm. Let him then swear who cannot repent of his
Oaths; a little after the same Ambrose says, Do not imitate him in swearing
whom you cannot imitate in performing; and indeed the principal sollution he
gives is not to swear at all: And Theophilus upon the place in Controversy
whom A. S. says was not ca^telous enough, as it seems among the rest of the
Fathers that A. S. sets as judge of, he says, learn hence that under the Law
it was not evil for one to swear, but since the coming of Christ it is evil, as
is Circumcision, and in some what ever is Judaical, for it became a Child to
suck but not a man: So that it appears he amongst the rest of the Fathers did
not only declare against Oaths in general or private communication, but also
distinguishes betwixt the first Covenant and the second, and the Ordinances
thereof; and though the holy Ghost bear witness that both Angels and Men, yea
and good Men, and the Creator himself in that first Covenant did swear, so that
A. S. concludes that it is not morally evil of its own nature; In the first we
shall not much quarrel nor dispute as under the Law, but that which was obliging
then, as by command, is not always obliging, but Christ the end of the Law for
Righteousness said, Let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, for whatsoever is
more under the Gospel (then amounts to this) comes of evil; therefore there is
no necessity to put any other sense of Christ's words then his universal
prohibition of all swearing as under the Gospel, (seeing that speaking the
truth, confessing the truth, declaring the truth, and nothing but the truth in
any matter wherein any Christian is concerned either in respect of God, or a
man's neighbor, this answers the very substance of the Law, and the very end
and purpose thereof, as ever an Oath did among the Jews in the first
institution; for as much as speaking the truth acknowledges Gods Omnisciency
and presence, and power, and wisdom; secondly it does any office to any
neighbor, as in bearing witness to any truth, and again to find out any
transgressour, or transgression; and this is done, may be done, and ought to be
done by all true Christians; and therefore no necessity of that formal
Ceremonious way of swearing as under the Law, neither is there any necessity
for seeking any other sense of Christ's words and the Apostles words, Swear not
at all by Heaven or Earth, or any other, seeing all the main ends and good
ends, and good purposes is answered in the full, which the Law in the full
latitude and morality thereof did require, or for which it was given.

His sixth Argument is, That either these words, Swear not at all must be
interpreted as not to forbid any oath though taken upon just occasion, or else
Paul never knew the meaning of this text, or else contrary to his knowledge,
and that upon good deliberation he acted against it, and that in these very
writings wherein we all believe that he was infallibly assisted by the Holy
Ghost; for his Oaths says A. S. are upon record, 1 These. 2. 5. God is witness;
see Romans 1. 9. Now to call God to witness is the very substance of an oath
says A. S. and as Austin tells him, and he says he has not read of any of a
contrary opinion except some Phanaticks, which if they would yield to as much
as Paul says, God is witness of the truth of their assertions, it might be
wished out of condescension to their weakness that they might be dispensed
withal if the Law would give leave as to the external formality of an Oath.

Ans. What A. S. will call a just ^ccasion I know not, it appears to me he
would have a large compass, and a larger then the most contenders against
Christ's Doctrine that we have met with or what he will account a just occasion
I know not, though otherwise he seem to condemn sometimes needless and vain
oaths in ordinary communication, though I know some without reflection upon A.
S. who uses them too too frequently, and are not only members but Pastors so
called of the Church of England, and though he seems in his Discourse here and
there to be against customary and vain oaths, yet for all that what he calls a
just occasion upon some ground, some calls it a needful occasion when they are
called before a Magistrate and some when any business is in controversy
betwixt man and man calls it a just occasion, where sometimes I have seen a
Curate administer that which he called an oath upon a Book, what ground he had
I suspect either from Commandment, or example of Primitive Ministers, (is
certain he had none) but it may be A. S. will conclude it was upon a just
occasion, but what compass he will have for his just occasion is doubtful,
seeing he has put no termination or end to it; but for ought I can perceive
would leave liberty for every man to exact an oath upon another when he would,
and call it a just occasion, and account it a point of duty in the other to
obey even in ordinary communication. And as for St. Paul we deny thy Argument,
as that he never knew the meaning of this Text of Christ's prohibition; secondly
that in his Writings he acted contrary to his knowledge, and upon set
deliberation, for though God was his witness whom he served with his Spirit, in
the Gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my
Prayers. Also, that which A. S. calls an oath, 1 These. 2. 5. For neither at any
time used we flattering words as ye know for a cloak of covetousness, God is
witness. Though we know and infallibly believe with A. S. that he was
infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost, when he published the Gospel of Christ
among the Gentiles, and wrote both unto the Jews, and to the Gentiles, who
believed that his calling God to witness was not any oath, neither was there
any necessity or just occasion, whatever A. S. may call just occasion we
cannot, for he has left such a great compass for himself to turn in, though
here and there he seem to disallow of customary oaths and frequent oaths; yet
notwithstanding his, Discourse rather tends to an allowance of swearing
frequently and unnecessarily, for we reckon it to be a piece of ordinary
communication for a Christian Minister to write a Letter of admonition, or
exhortation, or an Epistle unto the believing hearers, and that there is no
necessity of Oaths in such a discourse; for what ever A. S. says this would
make the Apostle guilty of frequent, and unnecessary, and common swearing,
which we are far from believing; for as much as they that did believe through
the word of life declared by the spirit of God in him, neither through his
Epistles written, being assisted by the Holy Ghost they were not like to
believe him for swearing if he had sworn; but says A. S. if his words had
really been believed which he spoke and wrote, what occasion would there have
been for him to have written so to the Romans, Romans 9. 1. I say the truth in
Christ, I lie not.

The Apostle knew what occasion he had to speak these words, and the occasion
was this, that the Jews sought to be justified by the Righteousness of the Law
and by the works thereof, and would need look upon themselves as the Children
of God, because they were of the stock of Abraham according to the flesh, but
the Apostle knew and also gave them to understand that the Children of the
promise was counted for the Seed; and again, for they are not all Israel which
are of Israel, Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. And thus he spoke truth unto them, as it was
revealed by Christ, whom the Father had revealed in him, and why might he not
say, I speak the truth in Christ, seeing that Christ was in him, and he in him?
I lie not, my Conscience also bears me witness in the Holy Ghost, he might also
as well say that Paul swore by his Conscience, seeing that he took it for a
witness; away, away, with such perverting and straining of the Scripture beyond
and beside the mind of the Holy Ghost, for God is witness, and I say the truth
in Christ, they are no more then ardent and zealous, or fervent expressions, as
the spirit of God at several times did stir up in his heart both to speak and
write, for the end that they unto whom he spoke or wrote might believe; and
therefore we conclude not as A. S. would needs have it, that the Apostle spoke
these fervent words unnecessarily, for we know and see his end and purpose was
good, and therefore he spoke with fervency, and with boldness the spirit of the
Lord bearing witness in his conscience that he spoke the truth, which we are
far from believing, is either juration or abjuration, and for ought can be
perceived by A. S. disdainful spirit, all that does dissent from him in his
opinion he calls Phanaticks, and Paul shall hardly go free, nor diverse of the
ancient Fathers, as, Orgen, Chrysostom, Jerome, Theophilact, and others, who
denied not only swearing in private conversation, but to swear at all; but now
these must be called Phanaticks, who dissent from all Men but themselves, by A.
S. and such as he who sails with wind and tide, and exalts and applaudeth
that which has praise amongst men, and has not the praise of God; and so the
last of all he makes this conclusion, that so help me God, is the most certain
expression of an oath; which form of words that though he count them certain,
we find not either under the Law or under the Gospel, and I look upon it more
as a piece of flattery in A. S. because this is the form and the custom which
is now called swearing, which is in use in this Nation, and its strange to us
that they will reckon this so great a piece of peculiar service, which is
incommunicable to any Creature but only to God, when as indeed we never find it
written or commanded, either among the Jews, or commended or used amongst all
the writings of Christ and the Apostles that has relation to Christianity;
Indeed I remember that I have read that in the days when the Popes Authority
was in full power here in England, how that the Chancellor then of England
said to one of John Wickliffs followers being brought before him, in
Examination he said unto him, Lay thy hand upon the Book thou Heretic and
swear, so help me God and holy doom: An old superstitious Popish form I look
upon it to be, and has no consistance with an Oath in its true matter and
form under the law, when it was commanded; and for ought I see A. S. will
rather take part with the Church of Rome and her members, who persecuted,
rather then Wickliffe that famous Reformer, who had his Bones taken up and
burned 41. years after his Decease, and his Books, and these Articles condemned
by the Council of Constance, who also burned John Hus, and Jerome of Prague for
holding John Wickliffs Opinions, which was, that all Oaths under the Gospel be
unlawful. I say A. S. might have been more modest then with the Council of
Constance condemn them for error, seeing they were the only people in their age
and time that opposed, and suffered for opposing the Church of Rome in the
Apostasy, seeing that they are feign to own them if they look for any
Reformation before Luther to be their witnesses against the Church of Rome,
which I have heard many Protestants say that they were on their part against
the Church of Rome; and though A. S. tells us of a generation of people, quos
non persuadabis etiam si persuaveris, who as they will not be persuaded so they
will not be councelled, who will have nothing else to be the formality of an
Oath but by God; but this he says only of his own head, except he knew some
people that we know not of, for we say to swear the Lord lives as an oath, and
again, as the Lord lives is an oath, or by the Lord that lives for ever and
ever is an oath; and yet we must needs deny that Paul swore in the 1 Cor. 15.
1. when he said by your rejoicing I die daily: And we never said A. S. mistook
himself in saying that, by, as the only mark and character of an oath; and if
Austin said upon these words of Paul as A. S. tells us, per vestram gloriam
juratio est, upon Paul's words, I suspect his judgment, and therefore shall not
so much regard it: But A. S. seems not to be at unity in his book with himself
notwithstanding all his raveling out where he seems in his 41. page to dislike
of Nicholas Fullers judgment, viz. that there is no oath where God is not
interposed; and yet in the 56. page he says that the substance of an oath
consists in the attestation of God, and in the 89. page he says that Christ
answering to the high Priest, I am, and thou have said, is an oath. And in the
91. page it was enough that Christ denied not to swear, and from this he
imagines that he did swear; and when we enquire what the oath was, it amounts
but to this, thou have said I am; and where was the attestation of God here
named, or mentioned, or spoken on by Christ? was his words any more then his
own Doctrine which he taught before, Let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay:
when the high Priest said, art thou the King of the Jews? he answered I am;
and is this any more then yea, though not in the same syllables; and Mat. 26.
63. I adjure thee to tell us whether thou art the son of God or not? and he
answered, thou have said. And is this any more then yea, or I am, or it is
truth But indeed if one should traduce A. S. in his discourse and of his
definition of an Oath, it is so uncertain one shall hardly know what to pitch
upon to be his judgment, sometime it is this, and sometime it i^ that, and
sometime it is neither this nor that, sometime he says it is an oath where God
is interposed, one while an oath consists in the attestation of God, another
while it consists in saying truly, truly, and sometimes, I call God to witness
is an oath; and sometimes thou have said is an oath, sometime because God is
named in a sentence, therefore he concludes it must be an oath, otherwhiles
when he is not named it must be an oath; and thus he twines up and down,
leaving people in the dark, and leading them after his imaginations. And I
shall conclude the Answer to this reason, and neither impute ignorance nor
wickedness to the great Apostle, nor conclude that Christ's words as he says
doubtless the Apostle did, must be understood in a limited sense, and limited
only to Creatures, and not to all swearing; and why so but because the Apostle
said, God is witness; and I speak the truth in Christ, which is no
contradiction of Christ's prohibition, swear not at all.

His seventh Argument is this, If some swearing be enjoined in the third
Commandment, then all swearing is not forbidden by Christ in these words, Swear
not at all, because he came not to destroy the Law, but some swearing is their
enjoined, or else the Law written by the finger of God in Tables of Stone
cannot be vindicated from imperfection; and therefore in this negative precept
the affirmative must needs be included, thou shall reverence the Name of the
Lord and swear by it, whenever it is not vain but necessary, which is
required by a lawful Magistrate for the glory of God, and for maintaining of
peace, punishing offenders, and ending of Controversies, and all these are
necessary ends, but not attainable, at least not so well by any expedient, yet
put in practice as by interposition of oaths, so it cannot reasonably be
believed that Christ would forbid them being of such important use.

Reply. The substance of this is answered before, but however A. S. how he can
make this third Commandment, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain, to prove the continuation of swearing under the Gospel among
Christians we do not see, If Bishop Gaudens words be true (as they are) who
says, A true Christians oath is needless, his word being as firm as it, page
41. and an evil man's oath is worthy of no more credit then a liar, page 17^
Since upon that account whosoever swears by the name of God swears in vain and
to no purpose, whether he be a true man, or one deceitful, his word amounting
to as much as his oath: And why A. S. mentions the third Commandment to prove
swearing lawful under the Gospel except for the morality of it which he looks
upon Christ came not to destroy, and does he look that every letter and
syllable of all the ten Commandments is so moral in all respects unchangable
and uncaple of any annihilation by Christ's coming he much forgets himself, for
all these things contained in the first Table are not so moral or perpetual
without some ceremoniality and subjection to alteration by Christ's coming, as
he imagines if he had but remembered the fourth Commandment the next unto it,
Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, which then was the very 7th. day
of the week which God had sanctified, was but a type and sign, and shadow, and
figure, and a ceremony of the 7th. day of the worlds rest from its labor and
of the everlasting Sabbath as I said before, Heb. 4. and I might as well argue
if the 7th. day of the week was commanded in the fourth Commandment, then the
7th. day is not prohibited, neither by commandment, example, or practice of
Christ, the Apostles or Primitive Christians; and I might add this as a reason,
because Christ came not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it; and further I
might add the 7th. day was enjoined in the 4th. Commandment, (and they used to
call it as moral as the third) and therefore it ought to be so under the
Gospel, or else the Law written in 'lables of stone cannot be vindicated from
imperfection, and what would all my arguing prove, even as much as A. S. his
arguing, the continuation and necessity of oaths from the third Commandment,
and that is nothing at all; and the Law of God needs not A. S. nor any
vindication, it is perfect and endures for ever, Psalm. 19. 7. and the
Ceremonies, land types, and shadows that were joined with, and unto the
substance of the Law, does neither add nor detract from its perfection, but it
is the same in its self for ever; and though we cannot own swearing in that
ceremonious way as the Jews did use it till the seed came, unto whom the Law
and the Prophets bore witness; yet we do not make void the third Commandment,
we take not his name in vain, but reverence it, and speaks well of it, and
sanctifies it in our hearts; and as the Apostle said, Do we make void the law
through the preaching of Faith, God forbid. So do we make void the law, or the
perfection of it, by speaking the truth, and bearing witness to the truth;
though as I said we cannot own those typical ceremonious way of swearing as it
was in the first Covenant; nay it is established, and the third Commandment is
established, for he that speaks the truth and bears witness in and from the
truth, honors Gods name, and reverences it, forasmuch as he is called the God
of truth, and as we have said, being lawfully called before a Magistrate to
bear testimony in any thing wherein the glory of God, or our Neighbor is
concerned, or the decision of Controversy, seeing that true testimony is a
medium that concerns as much to that purpose now as swearing did under the
Law, therefore we have still been and are ready to answer all these necessary
ends, and as well; and this is as good and expedient to be put in practice
amongst Christians as interposition of Oaths, enjoined by God in the first
Covenant, and far more Evangelical, and therefore shall conclude with that of
Jerome, the Gospel truth admits not of an Oath.

His eighth Argument is, That Christ did never any things without some ground
of reason, but no reason can be showed why all manner of swearing should be
forbidden in a due manner, and upon a just and necessary occasion, and
therefore we may well believe that such swearing was neither here or any where
else forbidden.

Reply. We shall not much dissent or disagree about terms with A. S. that
Christ did never any thing without some ground or reason, but yet we must deny
his Conclusion, that no reason can be given why all manner of swearing should
be forbidden; first of all there was a time since man had a being in this
Creation when he was in the image of God, and stood in the Covenant of God,
when there was no Oath, neither any necessity thereof, Man being endued with
power from God, which was placed in him, so that he was in a capacity to
fulfill, obey and serve, and believe his Maker without an Oath; for unbelief or
sin had not yet entered, and this was before the fall, Genesis 1. 26, 27. Secondly,
Christ the unspeakable gift of God, who is the Mediator of the everlasting
Covenant, yea the Covenant it self, who is given for a leader to the People,
and who is made a Propitiation for sin and transgression, to end both sin,
transgression, and unbelief, which was the cause of the addition of the Law,
who leads to the beginning again, all that truly do believe, and are worthy to
be called true Christians, or by the name of Christ to have union with God
again, in that life, power, truth, righteousness and wisdom, in which the Image
of God truly consists which was before sin and transgression, and before the
Law which was added because of it, which was commanded four hundred and thirty
years after the Promise was made, Gal. 3. 17. Thirdly, After sin was entered,
and death by sin, an unbelieving part got up in all the Sons of Adam, so that
they could not believe God nor his Promises, and yet such was his love unto
Mankind, considering the state into which they were plunged for confirmation of
his Word unto man, he swore by himself this was the Lords condescension unto
their low and unbelieving estate all that time, and no way exemplary for
Christians (truly such) who are come into the Faith, and to the truth it self,
who do believe that all the Promises are fulfilled in Christ, yea, and amen,
who is the author of Faith and of eternal Salvation to them that believe, Heb.
9. 12. who prohibited that by his command, Mat. 5. 23. which sometimes was
permitted, yea and commanded, yea and added because of transgression, and for
which the law and the command for Oaths (was only added) which he did not
destroy) because he leads from under the power of that which the Law came
against (which is just and good, and holy) and the seed fulfills it, and has
unity with it, and with him who is the Judge and Lawgiver, and Savior of all
that do believe in him from sin and transgression. Fourthly, At that time when
the Law was given forth at Mount Sina, Exodus 19. 20. generally all the Nations
were given to Idolatry, and to serve and worship strange Gods, as Baal,
Ashtaroth, Chemosh, Rimphan, and many others, as the Gods of Samaria, which was
said to be according to the number of their Cities, and their Idols were called
the sin of Samaria; Amos says, They swear by the sin of Samaria, that did say,
the God O Dan lives; and the manner of Barsheba lives, even they shall fall and
never rise again, Amos 7. 14. Which was no other then the Calves which Jeroboam
set up at Dan and Bethel, which they feared, worshipped and swore by; therefore
God having chosen a peculiar people to himself to worship and serve him, and
honor him, who should not walk after the manner of the rest of the Nations who
knew not God, he commanded them to serve him, and worship him, and swear by his
Name, as Jerome says well, to keep them from Idolatry, and that they should
not swear by the Gods of the Heathen as the rest of the Nations did round
about; yet still this must be considered that this was the state of the
minority of the Jewish Church, wherein God gave them Ordinances suitable to
their state, but it does not follow, neither can it be reasonably concluded
that these Ordinances were to be perpetually binding unto all future
generations, especially when Christ the seed unto whom all the Promises are, in
whom the Law is fulfilled, and in whom the former ministrations ends, that his
Disciples and true Christians should always be bound to those things once
commanded, especially seeing Christ their Master, in whom the Father is well
pleased has prohibited this about swearing, and also did prophecy of the time
to come after his Resurrection and his scension, that those visible things
which were as a Ministration for a time, should end as to the outward exercise
and typical and figurative appearance of them, and that all these things should
be revealed within by the Spirit and felt in the power of God in all that did
believe; when the Holy Ghost should be poured forth, and the Promise of the
Father be made manifest. Fifthly, Now considering that the name of God is
believed in, and he is confessed unto, and his Christ, and that there is not
that Idolatry (especially outward) as there was in the Nations before and after
the flood especially in that which is called Christendom, though we dare not
conclude that all are Israel that are of Israel, or that all are Christians
that have the name, yet generally I say the name of God and his Christ is
acknowledged and worshipped, and not Idols and false Gods; therefore there is
not the necessity of swearing by the name of God, as there was at the time of
the giving forth of the Law, but especially among them that the Father will
reckon as truly his subjects and disciples of Christ, who are partakers of his
divine nature, here is not that necessity among them, for they through the Law
being dead to it, it has no more power over them; and therefore no reason that
they should be kept as under Tutors and Governors, seeing that the age and
ages is come, which the Apostle spoke of, Ephesians. 2. 7. wherein Christ is revealed
the hope of glory, and whom he makes free are free indeed, Joh. 8. 32, 36.

Sixthly and lastly, The command of Oaths was given for the ending of strife
and controversies among Men, Heb. 6. which has relation to the Law, and to the
state of the Jews, and their Political proceedings the Apostle brings but that
in, as an instance or an example, and it is but A. S. his groundless
supposition that it seems it was used in the Apostles time, the Apostle
speaking of an oath only as among men, and not of Saints, who as concerning
strife the occasion of swearing, and consequently concerning swearing should
not walk as men, 1 Cor. 2. 1, 2, 3. but A. S. should consider this as every one
ought that when men that has been once in strife and contention, and variance,
come once into Christ, and to be in him New Creatures, (Christians) to walk no
more as carnal, not as men, but as men of God, and as spiritual, and as true
Saints and Christians, they come both out of strife and swearing, which was
added to endstrife; and what ever A. S. may conclude, we say these and diverse
more are great and weighty Reasons wherefore Christ did prohibit all swearing,
and puts it out of use and date, and no necessity of it as among true
Christians, seeing that every true saying or testimony is equivolent with an
oath.

His ninth Argument is, That either these words swear not at all must not be
extended to a total prohibition of swearing, or else Christ thereby gave a new
moral command, but Christ gave no new moral command, for that had been contrary
to Gods express will, thou shall not add unto the word which I command; and
besides he ordained no new law in the matter of the 6th. and 7th. Commandments,
and shall we think that he who vindicated the other Commandments from the lewd
depravations of men, has abrogated this only, as though it had not been framed
by the same wisdom, and acted by the same God, and further Christ's opposition
is only against the Pharaseical misinterpretations of the Law, and if only so,
then Christ did not forbid such Oaths as was lawfully before enjoined.

Reply. What ever A. S. call a new moral command, sure I am, he commanded that
which was more exact then the Law, so that Doctor Gauden himself says, that
Christ gave many singular precepts of more eminent diligence, patience,
charity, moritification, self-denial, sincerity, and the perfection of
obedience required now under the Gospel is above what ever the Letter of the
Moseical Law seemed to exact, or by the Pharaseical interpretation were taught
by the Jews, etc. in which he speaks the truth: it was said in the 21. of
Exodus and 42. of Levit. an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; but in Mat.
5. 39. Christ commanded that which the Law had not spoken of, and not only a
further thing, but another thing, but I say unto you that ye resist not ill,
but whoever shall smite thee on the right cheek turn to him the other also,
ver. 40, 41. And if a man shall sue thee at law and take away thy coat, let him
have thy cloak also; where said the Law this, And whosoever shall compel thee
to go a mile go with him twain; where did ever the Law of Moses command this?
and though the Law said, Levit. 19. Thou shall love thy Neighbor, and hate
thine enemy; which he says was but a Pharaseical innovation, which if it be, I
query of A. S. where in the Law it is written, love thine enemy, and as was
said before, whether did not Israel fight with their enemies, and kill them,
and destroy them, and whether they had not a command so to do, yea or nay? as
in Deuteronomy 2. 24. chap. 3. 3. Numb. 21. 23, 24, 25. Josh. 10. 19. 23. And whether
this be not another thing that Christ says, ver. 44. But I say unto you love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, etc.
But it is manifest that in the second Covenant under the Gospel that a more
Evangelical and exact obedience then was expressed in the Letter of the Law,
which so far as it was typical, was only a temporary dispensation; for as I
said before the Letter of the Law of Moses permitted to be avenged on enemies,
Aegiptians, Amalckites, etc. And I hope that A. S. will not conclude that they
killed them in love to them, and they might be avenged and take an eye for an
eye, and a tooth for a tooth, whose Gospel in other points which the Law had
not said forbids and condemns rash anger, lust after women, polligum, divorce,
except for Fornication, and yet it was indulged and connived at as under the
Law, yet the Lord says by the Prophet Malachy, Mal. 2. 16. He hates putting
away; while the Letter condemned no more but actual murder, and adultery,
indulging and conniving Polligume and divorce: And though under the Law, stripe
for stripe, wound for wound was permitted; but under the Gospel resist not
evil, avenge not, forbear, forgive, for the whole Law of Moses was given by the
dispensation of Angels in the hand of that Mediator for a time; and so some
swearing and such swearing as even by God, was used in order to end strife,
where it was yet standing, yet Christ the Mediator of a better Covenant, in
whose hand the Law is now unto all Christians, he forbad not only that which
the Law allowed, and indulged, connived at and commanded in diverse things, as
is manifest in this fifth of Matthew, where he prohibits all swearing; so that
it is evident that Christ does not only reprove the false glosses, and the
abusive loose interpretations of the Law which they allowed, but even divine
indulgence dispensed with and connived at in the things before mentioned,
because of the hardness of their hearts: And let A. S. or any man living show
us wherein Christ requires a righteousness or perfection that exceeds that of
the Law, for the Law said, swear not by any Creature but only by God, and
forswear not, and if Christ said no more but swear not by any Creature, as
Heaven and Earth, and Jerusalem, where is that higher state of perfection, and
that righteousness which exceeds that of the Law, and of the Scribes and
Pharisees.

And though A. S. will not grant that he ordained a new Law in matter of the 6.
7. Commandments, no more will he grant of the fourth, which I suppose A. S.
does not keep as it was commanded under the Law where ever he will have his
dispensation I know not; so to conclude in answer to this, he did more then
reprove the erroneous tenets and vicious manners of the Jews, and their false
interpretations and glosses which they had given upon the Law, but he does
disallow also something which the law had allowed before, as is proved before,
and that he disallowed something, yea diverse things which the Law had allowed
and connived, and indulged, as diverse Polligume, killing enemies, or in seeking
revenge upon them that had done ill unto us, which the law allowed as an act of
justice, Deuteronomy. 19. 21. Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth; but this Christ
exhorted unto, Overcome evil with good, avenge not, resist not, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you:
Likewise the Law, Deuteronomy. 42. 1, 2. When a man takes a wife, and it comes to pass
she finds no favor in his eyes, because he has found some uncleanness in her,
then let him write her a bill of Divorcement, and send her out of his house,
and when she is departed out of his house she may go and be another man's wife:
But Christ says, Mat. 5. 32. who shall marry her that is divorced, commits
adultery: which is a clear prohibition of that which the Law allowed, and what
A. S. will call this, whether a new moral command, or promulgation of a new Law
I know not, but it is evident enough that some things were prohibited by
Christ, which the law commanded, or at least allowed, and therefore we conclude
from the 23. and 24. Verses of the 5th. of Matthew, that Christ did prohibit
all vain swearing and unlawful swearing, which was disallowed before under the
Law, but even all swearing which was commanded, or at least permitted under the
Law, for the reasons and ends given before, and this will stand as truth,
notwithstanding A. S. his Argument.

His tenth Argument is, That if the high Priest charged Christ to swear, and he
without exception answered upon oath, and that some years after he had said,
Swear not at all, from hence follows that when the Magistrate imposes an oath,
the person charged to swear may lawfully answer upon oath as Christ did,
notwithstanding his prohibition of swear not at all.

Reply. First that was a time when the administration of the first Covenant was
not fully ended, for Christ was not yet offered up, and so the high Priest as
being a Jew might from the Commandment or permission of the Law as being one
that sat in Moses chair might require Christ to speak upon oath, as persumeing
he had authority so to do, being he looked upon it as a work of God; and what
though it was some years after Christ had said, Swear not at all; what does A.
S. infer from this, Christ knew that the high Priest and Pharisees were about
the work of their Father the devil; and though the high Priest did say, I
adjure, which A. S. Adjure does often sign sie to charge or oblige, by bare
promise as well as Oath; for if the phrase, I adjure thee by God, be a command
to swear by God then this would make, Acts 19. 13, 13. abusurd; when the
Exorcists did adjure the evil spirit in the name of Jesus, (not to swear) but
to come out or depart out of the man.
tells us is, I command thee to swear to us; Christ answered in his own
authority, and in the power and wisdom of the Father; and if he had answered as
taking notice of the high Priests adjuring, who was about to crucify the Just,
which was not the work of God, neither was jurations or oaths, ever intended to
be instrumental in the Devils work, then I argue that if Christ had answered to
his adjureing, knowing the end was to ensnare him the Son of God, then Christ
had consented unto his evil work which were blasphemy to think or speak, and
therefore as it was prophesied of him, he was led as a Lamb to the slaughter,
sometimes he opened not his mouth, the other sometimes he did in the authority
and power of the Father which was with him, and in him, and though the high
Priest charged Christ by the living God that thou tell us whether thou be
Christ the Son of the Living God, Mat. 26. 36, 37. Jesus answered, thou have
said, and what is this the oath that Christ swear, A. S. tells us before that
an oath was, an attestation of God to the truth of what was said, but now the
words ( thou have said) barely of themselves without any attestation of God is
an oath; if the high Priest had said, art thou Peter, or art thou John that was
with Jesus of Gallilee, and Peter and John had answered, I am Peter and I am
John that was with him; what will A. S. conclude now that Peter and John has
sworn? away with such perverting and straining and screwing of the Scriptures
from their genuine sense only to uphold that which was added because of
transgression, now when sin and transgression is finished the end of Christ's
coming is witnessed to uphold that which Christ came to end, to wit sin, and
also an oath which was added because of sin and unbelief, and the hardness of
their hearts only to remain till that part was done away, and until the time
of Reformation, Heb. 9. 10. to wit the bringing in of everlasting
Righteousness, and it cannot be reasonably concluded, that because Christ
answered the high Priest, thou have said, that therefore he took notice of
commanding to swear, or at least approving of his adjuration, knowing that he
was about an evil work, and doing the work of the Devil, which must needs be
judged that Christ did neither approve of, nor consent unto, what ever A. S.
may say or think, but only in his own authority spoke the truth, and made a
good confession as he did before Pontius Pilate to the glory of the Father, who
had sent him, whose will he came to do: And Luke 22. 70. Art thou then the Son
of God? and he said unto them, ye say that I am; and Pilate was as much a
Magistrate as the high Priest, and he asked art thou the King of the Jews? and
he answered him, and said, thou say it: And Herod was as much a Magistrate
as either Pilate or the high Priest, and he questioned with him in many words,
but Christ answered nothing, so that he did not so much take notice of their
questions, or examining or charging, or adjuring as A. S. would seem to make of
it, but according to the wisdom and power of God which was in him spoke, and
answered in his own authority, without taking so much notice of them as he
would infer, he knowing what they were going about, though they had the name
and bore the title of Magistrates yet were out of the power of God (in the
persecuting nature) which is the ground and foundation of all authority which
is of God, but A. S. says Mark 14. 62. relates plainly that Christ answered, I
am; but yet neither Mark, Luke, nor John takes so much notice of the high
Priests, adjuring or makes so much for A. S. his Argument as he would have
them, Mark says only, Mar. 14. 61. the high Priest asked him and said unto
him, art thou Christ the son of the blessed, he does not say, I adjure thee, or
I charge thee to swear unto us, as A. S. would have it; but thought Mat. 26.
63. say, ( I adjure thee to tell us whether thou be Christ the Son of God?) is
not much material; for A. S. has made more matter about it then is to any
great or good purpose, but I say he was as much bound to answer Pilate or Herod
as the high Priest, and as much directly to one as to another, we see his
answers was not all alike, but I would not have A. S. nor my self neither sit
as Judges over Christ's answers, and squeeze and serve them beyond or contrary
to Christ's intention; for the sum of the matter is this, thou have said, I
am, and thou say I am King; and is Christ's answers to the high Priest and
Pilate, and nothing to Herod; and A. S. might as reasonably have concluded that
the high Priest rent his Clothes and cried blasphemy, not so much at, thou have
said or I am; as of this the next words, nevertheless I say unto you, ye shall
see the son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the Clouds
of Heaven; for then the next words are, then the high Priest rent his Clothes
and cried, blasphemy; and then A. S. goes on it was enough that Christ denied
not to swear, and the sum of all or the most that he can make when he has
twined about with many Circumstances to prove that he did swear or consented to
Caiaphas adjuring, and answered his adjuring, this is all, I am, and thou have
said; and therefore what either may be or can be said A. S. has concluded
Christ did swear; and yet Sect. the 27. he tells us that the essence of
swearing is in calling God to witness, and how or where did Christ call God to
witness? then this overturns his own argument, seeing we do not read that
Christ said any more in his answer, then as is aforesaid, I am, and thou have
said; and he says to allege that Christ swear not, because he laid not his
hand upon a Book or kissed, or lifted up his hand, is but to trifle, yet he
says that ceremony is ancient, as Chrysostom tells him that it is above 1250.
years since, if it be but to trifle, why are so many conscientious people in
bonds this day in England, under a Premunirey for these trifles, a very shame
to Christianity, for where any or all of these have been denied, though they
have answered the truth, and the whole truth, and as much as A. S. calls an
oath, yet this has been counted insufficient, and we know Justinian the
Emperor ordained the ceremony that Men should swear by the Gospel or Book, and
lay their hands thereon and kiss, or the like; and though it be so many years
since it was ordained, as A. S. says, this adds nothing to the warrantableness
thereof, but custom is proof enough to such a Ceremonious age as this, when
formalities, ceremonies, jestures and postures are more regarded then the power
of God and godliness, and we say such a ceremony about swearing are not without
the appearance of evil, for the Bible is a Creature made up of many Creatures,
and laying the hand, and kissing and adoreing it in such manner is I
know-looked upon by many to be swearing by it, and so the most takes it, and
this were unlawful, and therefore better to be whollyavoided then so many
suffer because they cannot do it, besides as I said, the evil appearance of it,
for it is not any Gospel institution, but an innovation since the Apostasy
entered in; and if God had ever judged any necessity thereof, or that it had
rendered an oath more solemn, the Law would have said something of it, and it
was never a practice among the Primitive Christians, and therefore a vain
humane tradition crept in since; which ought to be avoided; and though A. S.
say to reply that Christ swore not, (though Caiaphas adjured him is vain) for
an examinate is to answer both in matter and form according to what is
proposed, I say its A. S. his vain supposition and presumption without ground
so to judge that Christ swore, I say sometime he held his peace, that it might
be fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophet of him before that he should be
as a Lamb dumb before the shearer, as sometime he was, both to the chief
Priests and Elders, to Pilote, and to Herod, which was all in some authority,
and sometime he answered them in the wisdom of God, and sometime he spoke and
bore witness to that, and prophesied unto them, which was not at all either as
to the matter or form of the high Priests adjureing, for the very next words,
( but thou have said, nevertheless I say unto you, hereafter shall you see the
son of man sitting on the right hand of the power, and coming in the clouds of
Heaven) Mat. 26. 64. and therefore this shows A. S. his argument to be
frivilous and vain; and Mark says, the chief Priests accused him of many
things, Mark 15. 3. but he answered nothing either to their accusations, or
took notice of the high Priests adjuring to answer him in matter and form, as
A. S. would have it, neither did he look upon himself so obliged, but answered
sometime, and spoke the truth always when he spoke, and that which always
displeased and dissatisfied the Jews when he answered, and for ought can be
perceived by his arguing that every Examinate is to answer directly to every
matter and form to any that pretends power to administer an oath, or to
adjure, he goes about to establish the Popes inquisition, and create matter, as
sometime they did here in England, in the height of the Popes domination
forged matter out of their own wicked hearts to ensnare the Lambs of Christ and
then to require them to swear that they might destroy them, and accuse them out
of their own mouths, even as the high Priest sought to destroy Christ and to
ensnare him, which methinks A. S. has said too much in vindication of his
adjuring, and will needs have Christ to be of his mind, and at last concludes
that Christ swore, but its but upon his own presumption and supposition, and is
more then ever he is able to make evident from what is written: And A. S. tells
us over and over again, Swearing was a part of Gods Worship, wherein Gods
wisdom, power, and justice is acknowledged, and then incommunicable to any
Creature or false God, as is answered before, so was Circumcision then, and the
Oblations, and Burnt Sacrifice, and Offerings, and new Moons to be performed
only to the Lord, and was peculiarly to be performed unto God, and not
communicable to any Creature; and we say and prove, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. 10. 20. that
these was a part of the service and worship of God, and which as we shall grant
that an oath under the Law was commanded as well as these services, or in his
own terms an oath was equally commanded with his service as is proved above; In
this he has no adversary, but what does this prove in respect of his argument
which makes it more (then equally commanded) for he will yield that these
services were but temporary, but swearing is perpetual, and so he has given it
a priority above the rest, his argument all along has been chiefly drawn from
the Moseick Law, that it was joined equally with fear and service under the
Law, and so has striven without an adversary, but now it must needs be above
the service of God then, and yet from the same command he would only prove it,
for he has no better strength nor ground, and we may as well allege as he
does, and say consequently to this sort of service that was commanded by the
Lord as well as swearing, for God has joined them together in the text above
said, and obliges equality at all times, as well under the Gospel as under the
Law; yet then A. S. would call this absurd it it be so as it is indeed, then we
may as well conclude the other absurd, because one is standing as well as the
other, and binding as well as the other by the virtue of this command; although
he tells us that an oath in its substance; has not any type at all, so we say,
for the substance is Christ the oath of God, in whom all the promises and oaths
are fulfilled, and this is its substance but as under: the Law it was a type of
the substance, and not the substance it self, and that Circumcision, the
Passover, and the legal Offerings under the Law had as much goodness in them as
Oaths had, what ever A. S. say: and served to as good ends and purposes in that
Ministration as they were ordained, and conduced as much to the glory of God,
and were subservient to, but not against the morality of the Gospel, for the
shadows were not against the substance, nor the Ceremonials against the Morals,
though the Apostle says, the Law is not of faith, yet not against it for as
ministerial as the Ordinances of the Law was to the Gospel then, yet the Gospel
may be and now is without it.

But to conclude this Argoment A. S. were it so indeed that oaths were
ceremonial, then it follows that Christ in this text did not forbid them, for
he didnot forbid the Ceremonial Law, but observed it all his life, eating the
Passover with his Disciples the night before his death, unless some would
interpret his words (I command you that you do not swear) yet I am content for
a year or two you may swear by Heaven or Earth as you have been accustomed, but
after my Crucifixion and Resurrection swear no more, and there let these that
disallow swearing as a part of the Ceremonial Law, argue no more the
unlawfulness of swearing from these words,( swear not at all.)

Reply. Though Christ did observe the Ordinances of the Law, as being that
Ministration appointed by God until the time of Reformation and the bringing
in of a better hope, Heb. 9. It became him to fulfill all Righteousness, so was
he Cireumcised, and eat the Passover, and was Baptized, washed the Disciples
feet, which were not enjoined by the Law, (though not against it) and that
Ministration not fully ended, though he see it must end, and spoke of a further
thing, and of the time then, and also it should be ministered more afterward
after his Resurrection, Joh. 4. 20, 21, 22, 23. the time comes and now is,
neither at Jerusalem, nor this Mountain, but they that worship the Father shall
worship him in spirit and truth; so that he prophesied of the end of all those
things, and of the cessation of them, which were sometime commanded, respecting
both the place and the worship, and to them that did believe the Disciples,
unto whom it was given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, ( then was
the time) to them it was come, even (then) before Christ suffered; and therefore
A. S. his consequence is not true (that Christ did not forbid all swearing from
this text) and though he had both prophesied of a clearer Ministration, and
laid down in Doctrine a more Evangelical precept then the Law, yea and more
strict obedience, yet notwithstanding many did still hold up these things,
which the Law commanded, though they believed well of Christ, yea and after his
suffering and Resurerection, and that a long time, though that the Apostles told
them the substance was come, and that there was no more Offering for sin, nor
Oblations, neither legal observations to be minded any more, yet still many
observed them, and doubtless as to that formal swearing that was among the
Jews, and that vain swearing too many did continue in it afterward
notwithstanding Christ's command, but then not submitting, made not his command
void in it self, and there is no necessity to make such an absurd
interpretation as that he permitted them to swear for a year or two, by Heaven
and Earth, and then at his passion to swear no more, for after he gave forth
the command there was no permission, and yet afterward as I said the Apostles
declared against the shadows. and preached up the substance, and as A. S.
confesses the types ceased of themselves, but let him know that there was a
time of dying to them, and they ceased not all at once to them that had
observed the Law, neither was the Mysteries revealed all at once, but as they
grew in faith and knowledge, for the Righteousness of God is revealed from
faith to faith, and though the legal observations were observed in Christ's
time, so were they after, by many, but by right ended in the substance, and
when he was come, though many did not see it till afterward: But I come to his
11th. Argument.

Eleventh Argument, no exposition of the text or any other is to be admitted,
that puts inconsistancy betwixt the Old Testament and the New, seeing both are
inspired by the same God, who is incapable of falsehood or alteration; where
upon if we be not so atheistical as to deny, the varasity or immutability of
the most high, Tit. 1. 2. it must be granted that his word is of eternal truth,
Jam. 1. 17. his promises yea and amen, his precepts more unalterable then the
Laws of the Medes and Persians, nor did our Savior come to destroy but to
fulfill the Law, thereupon he enjoynes obedience to the commands of the
Pharisees, as sitting in Moses chair, Mat. 23. 2, 3. from all which it is
apparent that the Old Testament is so far from being contradicted, that it is
fully confirmed in the new; therefore I may well draw this conclusion that
these words (swear not at all) ought not to be interpreted as to render all
swearing unlawful, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. psalm. 63. 11. not without promise of reward,
Jer. 12. 16. and it was prophesied before by Isaiah that Christians under the
Gospel should swear, Isaiah 19. 18. and 4. and 23. and I look upon it as a
piece of Manichisme, and extremely derogatory both to the Scripture and God
himself, therefore what moral duty one man was commended in the Law, another
should be condemned in the new.

Reply. It Is true no exposition of this text or any other is to be admitted
that puts such a difference, betwixt the old and new Testaments in matter of
substance, but shall agree with Austin: the Law is the Gospel veiled, and the
Gospel is the Law revailed; and what was prophesied and typefied in the first
is fulfilled in the latter, but what shall be thought of them, that holds up
the types and figures of the first, as though they were not fulfilled, or as
though the promise were not come: and he made manifest in whom all shadows
end; and though God be unchangable in himself, and incapable of falsehood or
alteration, and I know none, who denies the varasity of his word, or the
immutability of the most high: yet notwithstanding I cannot set up the
changable Priesthood, and Covenant: and the Ordinances belonging thereunto,
against the unchangable and everlasting Priesthood and Covenant, and as has
been said before, as though that all the precepts, therein were so unalterable,
as that of necessity they must needs continue, as obligatory to generations, I
might truss up together many Scriptures, and thwack them one on the back of
another, which belongs to the Jews, and the first Covenant most properly, (till
the Seed Christ was revealed, and offered up) and I might bring in Scripture to
prove that many things was commanded by the immutable God, and by him who is
incapable of alteration, and multiply many words, as A. S. does to little
purpose, and say what was written in the Old Testament was by the inspiration
of God, and that his precepts is no more alterable then the Laws of the Medes
and Persians, and therefore they must needs still be observed by all Christians
to the worlds end, or else conclude they that do not are atheistical, and
denies Gods varasity, and makes the Law of God void; and what would all this in
arguing prove, nothing at all; the Jews will confess as much, and plead as
hard as A. S. can, who yet have not believed in him, of whom the Prophets
prophesied, neither has received him who is the substance of what Moses and
the Prophets bore witness, and in whom the Law is fulfilled, and the Promises
made good, and confirmed with, and in whom all the shadows ends, and the veil
done away, and all the worship and precepts belonging thereunto: who has
manifested and revealed the Father in all that believe, who is the new and
living way, whose worship is not now in the Letter, nor in the shadows, nor
types, nor in any outward observations, but in spirit and truth is he
worshipped, for he seeks such to worship him; for the great promise of reward
was to, as ever was to swearing; yet when they resisted him whom the Father had
sent, all their observances though never so strict did not avail; but their
Circumcision became Uncircumcision, and their worship and service became
profaneness, when they despised the substance by whom grace and truth came to
all the children of promise: and we grant with A. S. that he came not to
destroy the Law but to fulfill it, and to end both sin and transgression, and
the Law which was added because of it, and to bring in everlasting
Righteousness, and it to rule in the hearts of all that believe; and against
such there is no Law; and though Christ enjoined the Disciples, Mat, 23. to
observe what the Scribes and Pharisees bad them who sat in Moses Chair and read
the Law, and performed those services in part, commanded; that was the time
before he was offered up, and the Ministration of that Covenant was not fully
ended; yet I hope A. S. with us will grant that they were not to heed them or
to obey them in their vain Traditions and false glosses, and interpretations
and evil manners which he cried woe against, Mat. 23. 13, 14. neither after his
Resurrection did he enjoyne them to hear the Pharisees, neither to observe the
Legal Ordinances of the first Priesthood, but they declared against them and
their practice, which continued in the observation of those things which did
not make perfect as pertaining to the Conscience, Heb. 8. 9. Heb. 9. 9. and for
all these texts he alleges out of the Old Testament, Mat. 6. 13. Psalm. 63. 11.
Jer. 12. 16. unto these it has been answered that this proves nothing that
Christians under the second Covenant should swear as they did in the first, for
these Precepts were only to keep them from Idolatry, for Jer. 12. 16. If you
will diligently learn the ways of my people to swear by my name (the Lord
lives) as they taught my people to swear by (Baal) then shall they be builded
in the midst of the people: And the 6. of Deuteronomy. 13 14. is to the same effect,
You shall fear the Lord and serve him, and swear by my name: And Verse the 14.
Ye shall not go after other Gods. All these only prove that the Nations went
after other Gods and swear by them, and served them, and Israel too prone to
follow their manners did so also, and therefore he gave them these Precepts to
serve him, and fear him, and acknowledge him, to keep them from Idolatry, as
has been said; in the state of their Minority and weakness, and that before
the seed was revealed; and that which A. S. calls a prophecy by Isa. 19. 18.
of Christians swearing under the Gospel, its no such thing but a prophecy of
Aegipt, his joining to the Jews, and owning their worship, and their God, and
acknowledge him; and do sacrifice and oblation, yea and vow a vow unto the Lord
and perform it, ver. 21. Which clearly has relation to the Law and the
Worship of the Jews, and not to the Gospel; so that A. S. might have as well
said it was a promise how Christians under the Gospel should offer sacrifice
and oblations as under the Law, as well as swear. But the Doctor has traversed
many paths which are crooked, winding, and turning, to gather something
together, and has fetched it far to prove swearing under the Gospel, but all
his proof falls short of his matter by much: And that of Isaiah the 5. 23. is
a prophecy of Isreal's return out of the Captivity of Babylon, in the days of
Cyrus, whom the Lord called his anointed, and shepherd, Isa. 44. 28. 45. who
made a Decree for all Israel to go out of Assyria to Jerusalem and build their
City, and their Temple and Worship their God according as he had commanded; as
may be seen at large in the Book of Ezra, and Nebemiah, and this was fulfilled
(then) when they builded the City and the Temple in those days, (long before
Christ was manifest in the flesh) and then did Israel return, and every knee
did bow, and every tongue did swear by the Lord, which before the Captivity had
not bowed, nor served, nor acknowledged his Name, but Idols which provoked the
Lord, and therefore gave he them into the hand of the Babylonians for seventy
years till they were humbled, and then brought them back according to Jeremiah,
Isaiah, Haggai, and Zachariah's Prophesies, for this was fulfilled; then is
spoken by Isaiah in this Prophecy, Isaiah 5. ver. 23, 24, 25. (without
contradiction to Christ's command) and his command entrencheth not upon this
prophecy, neither does this make the Gospel thwart the Law, beyond all terms
of reconciliation, as A. S. vainly suggests in his margent, for this prophecy
was fulfilled long before Christ gave forth this command, swear not at all:
Moreover, if this prophecy have any relation to the state of the Christian
Church (as A. S. supposes, upon what ground I know not, saving his own
affirmation) then we shall consider and see how it is fulfilled under the
Gospel, and what the Gospel allows of in this particular; the Apostle Paul a
Minister of the Gospel, not of the Letter, as he says himself, which some
interprets to be the Law, cites this prophecy of Isa. 45. 23. compare it with
Romans the 14. ve. 11. for it is written (where? in Isaiah before cited,) As I
live says the Lord every knee shall bow unto me, and every tongue shall
confess to God; and in Philippians the 2. v. 10, 11. that at the Name of Jesus
whom the Father has sent, whom all is to obey, unto whom all power is given in
Heaven and Earth; the Apostle citing again the very words of the Prophet says
unto him (viz.) Jesus, every knee shall bow; and ver. the 11. and that every
tongue shall confess to the glory of God the Father; so that it cannot be
reasonably thought or judged that if God had required swearing by his name
among Christians as among the Jews that the Apostle thus should alter the
words as to put confessing instead of swearing, seeing he says he used always
plainness of speech, for this had not been plainness, and we have better reason
to believe the Apostle, unto whom the Gospel was committed whom the son was
revealed in, who declared the whole Council of God, and yet never either
commanded or exhorted any to swear, or reproved them for not swearing by the
name of God (as the Jews did) in all his writings that are extant, I say we
have better ground to believe him and his rendering of the words of the Prophet
to be according to the mind of Christ, where he puts in confession to the
Christians (which before was swearing to the Jews) as being acquainted with
the command of Christ, Mat. 5. 23. Swear not at all:) and what ever A. S. look,
upon it as to be Heresy, and derogatory both to the Scriptures and God
himself, it is not much matter of Man's judgment, he might as well accuse
Christ and the Apostle, the one forbidding to swear, and the other for
deminishing from the Scripture, and altering the Prophets words; and though it
seems strange to A. S. yet it is not to us that some Men was commanded in the
Old Testament for observing some things, yea many things, which is condemned in
the New, and yet God is not dishonored, neither the Scripture broken; if we
see the end of every command, and the time for which it served, and the service
for which it served, as this about Oaths, has been sufficiently declared
before, to keep the Jews from Idolatry, to end strife among them where it was;
(but among true Christians, indeed) strife is ended and peace is come, and they
seek it with all Men; and that is done away (for which the Law was added) to
wit sin and transgression, diffidence and unbelief, and strife, and no
necessity of them among them; and all the morality that does remain is
confession, or saying, or testimony in true words in any matter is that which
is equivolent with an oath, and is that which is the most conform to Christ
and the Apostles Doctrine, under the Gospel: but I come to his last Argument.

Twelfth and last Argument, The consent of the Christian world; the practice of
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Councils, Bishops, and people of all sorts, confirm
this truth that Christ notwithstanding these words, ( Swear not at all) had
never forbidden swearing as altogether unlawful; It Is true, some of the Fathers
in their Homilies, and to the People inveighed much against swearing, as though
it had been altogether unlawful, but it was only against Customary Oaths;
Chrysostom in his Homily to the People of Antioch preached so much against
Swearing that the People was offended, he told them he would never leave that
Sermon till they would leave that profane custom of Swearing; but the Fathers
were less cautelous, but with great vehemence enveigh'd against common swearing
in ordinary discourse; but not at all intending to take away necessary Oaths;
but Origin in his first Book against Colsus, God is witness of my Conscience;
and Athanatius yet vehemently declaimed against profane swearing, yet in his
Apology to the Emperor Constantius, he swear again and again, the Lord is
witness, and his Christ is witness: All which clearly shows they did not
disallow the voluntary taking an oath, much less in Judical proceedings, and
the Reformed Churches, and the Church of England, and the whole Catholic
Church in all times and places approved this Doctrine, that all swearing is not
unlawful; so that it follows that the Church in all Ages was so ignorant as not
to understand Christ's meaning, or so wicked as to teach and practice quite
contrary, or else Christ never meant to forbid all kind of swearing, (to assert
the former) were to profess all that went before either dunces or devils.

Reply. What ever A. S. conclude and think he has not such a consent among
Christians, as he makes a great flourish of; it is manifest by what has been
said, Christ prohibited it amongst his Disciples, Swear not at all; and
likewise James the Apostle agrees in the same Doctrine, and the rest of the
Apostles, also all the Primitive Christians were esteemed so strict, exact, and
cautious of their asserting, or promising, that there was no need of an Oath
among them, they kept up the sanctity, credit of their profession, yea among
unbelievers, that it was security enough in all cases to say, Christianus sum,
I am a Christian, as Justin Martyr asserts; and if they were urged any further
to any oath, for matter or manner they repeated this as the only satisfaction
they could give, there needed no more then the veracity of their bare record;
and thus much Bishop Gauden confesses, and also in the 36. page of his Book he
says, the ground or foundation for swearing now is the wickedness and unbelief
of men; but Christians (truly such) are brought out of evil and wickedness,
unbelief and distrust, and there is no necessity among them either public or
private to swear at all: Polibus observes in the better, and simpler ages of
the World, Oaths were seldom used in Judicatures, but after unbelief and lying
increased, Oaths increased, as a only remedy to cure and restrain those evils:
(but let it not be said that those are Christians) that names Christ's name and
departs not from iniquity, and since the perilous times came on that the
Apostles spoke, that Men would not abide sound Doctrine but be lovers of
themselves, that should have a form of godliness and deny the power thereof;
such went out of the truth, and went into the world, and the world went after
them, and the false Church began to rise to dignity, and have the name of
Christian, though she consented not to the wholesome Doctrine of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, swear not at all, but perverted this, as she has done
many other Doctrines, and beguiled the Kings of the Earth, and held out her
golden cup of Fornication, and made Emperors, Kings, and Princes drunk with
her Fornication, Rev. 17. 18. Councils, Bishops and People are in their
Judgments, and by tradition one age after another have holden that lawful which
Christ did not prohibit; but what does all this prove, for it is manifest that
most of the ancient Fathers of the Church, as Origin, Chrysostom, Theophilact,
Hillary, Athanasius, Jerome, Theodoret, Laurentius, and others in their Sermons
and Homilies to the People, vehemently and frequently enveighed against all
swearing without any Limitation, without any reserve amongst Christians
swearing as to private Conversation, yet they did not disallow the voluntary
taking an oath, much less in Judicature he says; but those are but terms of his
own shufling in, and what he speaks only of his own head, by mingling his own
words with theirs, for his own ends, for there is no such distinction made by
them, as he makes, as lawful swearing and profane swearing, and voluntary
swearing, and swearing in Judicature; and it is to be desired that A. S. had but
produced their testimonies, and have cited only their own words without adding
to them, that they would have made much against him, for it is plain their
judgment and witness was against all swearing what ever. But A. S. tell us,
Chrysostom in his Homily to the People of Antioch preached so much against
that profane custom of swearing, that the People were offended, and he told
them that he would never leave that Sermon till they did leave swearing; It
were to be desired that more in this age who pretends to be Christian Ministers
would follow his example, for the like I believe has not been in any age; Oh
what customary, vain, rash, profane, ungodly oaths (in their acceptance) take
Gods holy Name upon every trivial occasion in vain in their mouths, and daily
inventing new oaths and execrations, even daring God to confound them and damn
them; yea it grieves my heart to think, and the spirit of the Lord in me, to
consider what sounded in my ears not long since, which I mention with
detestation and abhorrency, that some when they had sworn even all the
customary oaths, and all the new invented oaths, did profer 10. shill. to any
that could invent ten new oaths, even glorying in sin, and making a mock at it;
and indeed it is fearful to hear, how without any reverence unto God, or dread
of his Majesty, oaths (these late years) are broke out like a land-flood over
all the banks, and no where so much to be found, nor no where so common as
among them that reckons themselves conformable men, (loyal) and members of the
Church of England, which is one crying sin that draws down the judgment of God
upon this Land, and what credit can be given to such Men in Judicature, shall
we not say as St. Austin says, It disposes men to false swearing and gross
perjury, nor can indeed much credit be given any more then to a Liar to any man
that swears never so solemnly, and in Judicature, who is a common swearer: But
instead of beating down that for which the Land mournes, Jer. 23. 10. many are
even propagators of it, and pleaders for it, and glories in it, and its become
almost the only mark of a conformable man: Oh what a sad time are we fallen
into, and what a sad state that they that depart from this great iniquity are
become a prey; I say it had been more time for A. S. to have used his utmost
endeavors this way, rather then to have opposed Christ's Doctrine, and added
affliction to the bonds of conscientious sufferers, who dare neither swear nor
lie.

But not to digress A. S. he would make the Fathers as he does with Christ and
the Apostles, he would make all dance after his Pipe, and make them all of his
mind, and construe and interpret all their words to his end though never
intended, and therefore he says they were not cautelous enough, and so does
with them as he does with Christ, he makes their words one thing, and their
intentions another; though says he, Origin in his 25. Tract upon Math. says
that Christ did forbid all swearing, yet he himself swears in his Book against
Celsus, for he said, God is witness of my conscience; and Athanatius though he
declaimed against swearing, yet in his Apology to Constantious he swears again
and again, and why he wrote as the Apostle did (the Lord is witness) and Christ
is witness, and these must needs be oaths, and voluntary oaths; it is not
probable that they should use voluntary oaths when they declaimed against all
Oaths; and therefore Origin says, It behooves not a man who lives according to
the Gospel to swear at all: And Jerome, the Gospel truth admits not of an Oath:
Likewise Chrysostom who was Bishop of Constantinople (in Commendations of whom
much is said in the Ecclesiastical Histories, Acts and Monuments, vol. 21. fol.
70. too) blames them greatly who brings forth a Book to swear upon, charging
the Clerks that in no wise they constrain any body to swear, whether they
think a man swear true or false, saying it is a sin to swear well. So that not
only swearing upon a Book was reprehended, but even all swearing, such as A. S.
calls lawful: Theophilact upon the place in controversy, Learn hence that
under the Law it was no evil for men to swear, but since the coming of Christ
it is evil, as Circumcision, and in some what ever is Jewdeical: to omit
Wickliffe, John Hus and Jerome of Prague, who were faithful Men and righteous
in their Generation, which the Reformed Churches is beholding to for their
Testimony in other weighty things against the Church of Rome, though A. S. will
not own them in this, but rather takes part with them who burned his Bones 41.
years after his decease, and burnt his Books and these Articles condemned by
the Council of Constance, who also burned John Hus, and Jerome of Prague, who
maintained his Articles, that all Oaths be made for any contract or evil
bargain betwixt man and man be unlawful under the Gospel; and Walter Bevite
whose testimony with many others was, that as the perfection of the Old
Testament was not to forswear themselves, so the perfection of Christ was not
to swear at all, because they are so commanded of Christ, whose commandment in
no case must be broken: the Testimony of many worthy Men and godly sufferers at
this time is suitable to many of the Fathers before mentioned; But this A. S.
calls error; who said so? the Church of Rome, and the Council of Constance,
with whom A. S. joins rather then the sufferers of Christ, and they who hold
it an error not to swear at all, and yet no error to break it when they have a
mind, and dispense with it as the Papists does to this very day, And these
Fathers of the Church doubtless were the best of Men in that declining age, and
were neither dunces nor devils, but understood by the signification of Gods
spirit in them the Doctrine of Christ, (and that which was consentaneous
thereunto) was witnessed by diverse in after ages before mentioned, which A. S.
would condemn as Heretics, and why the Church of Rome had called them so, and
them that sat at the stern, who always called themselves Orthodox, and others
Heterodox that did not sing to the same tune in swearing, and every thing else,
when they had once got up into a pompious lordly dominion over Men's faith: but
what does this prove? nothing at all; and what does this prove which A. S.
inserts in his Marginal notes? that the Ministers who are inferior in Hungary,
and Transylvania, swear Canonical obedience to their Bishops, or the Church of
England, or the Confessions of Helvetia, Basil, or others whom he calls
reformed: what of all this? what does this prove from the Scripture of truth,
or as to the convincement of them who hold it unlawful to swear under the
Gospel, because Christ has prohibited it by his Doctrine, what is all that A.
S. has said in his Arguments to dissenters satisfaction? who know hundreds of
things wherein as much as they fall out and fight even to blood with each other
about their fancied formalities, they all agree in against the light and power
of godliness, and against the very appearance of the Image of him in his
holiness, who is the substantial truth it self, we say what is all this to
some, that dissents from A. S. his judgment, and others he calls reformed whose
faith stands higher then the wisdom and thoughts of Men who cannot consent so
as to lead their faith and reason captive after them to try this or any other
truth, seeing it is the gift of God, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives
understanding, and though the Church of Rome and you agree in this, though you
damn one another in other matters what is this to us? it shows only they
erred from the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and you in this and many
other things are not separated from them; and thy conclusion which thou accords
with is false, that though God in the Old Testament commanded it, yet it does
not follow that Christ in the new did not forbid it, (neither that Christ and
his Apostles practiced it) who were under another Covenant, and for ought can
be perceived by A. S. by that he calls voluntary swearing which he has no
ground for, though in other places he seem to condemn vain swearing and
customary oaths, yet in this he looks not like himself, but seems to tolerate
a kind of oaths we find no mention made of in the New Testament, and yet we
shall not conclude as A. S. says, that all were so ignorant as not to
understand Christ's mind, nor so wicked as to teach the quite contrary to his
mind; for it is manifest many have been of the mind of Christ in former ages
and latter, though we shall never strive to bring in all the world, or the
heathen, or Nations, that became as waters after the publication of the Gospel,
nor that Rabble which he calls the Christian world, which has wondered after
the Beast, Rev. 13. 4. and yet there has been still some Testimony borne
through ages unto the Doctrine of Christ, and Christ's Doctrine stands in force
and in that latitude that he intended it, notwithstanding A. S. his Reasons and
Arguments, and many more as to forbid all oaths in the second Covenant to his
Disciples (truly such) in these words, swear not at all: Many instances might
be brought of particular Bishops might be instanced, as Otha Bishop of
Bambergences in Germany, and Bosilius of Chalcedon, who refused to swear; and
though A. S. cannot trace it beyond Pelagius or Manacheus, yet we know that
both Christ and the Apostles confirms it, and also the Essarus among the Jews
did refuse to swear at all, even in Judicature; for Josephus a Jew says of
them, whatsoever they say is as firm as an oath, and to swear among them was
counted a thing superfluous: Likewise St. Basil commends Chinas a famous Greek
that he suffered a fine of three Talents rather then he would save it by
swearing, to the loss of his honor; and shall Christians (truly such) with
whom truth abides, and in whom it dwells, come short of that exactness that
was among some of the Jews, and the best and the virtuousest of them called
Heathen; shall not this kind of Christianity which is professed in this day,
who is in unbelief, frauds, infirmities, contentions, be condemned by these?
shall not this circumcision become uncircumcision? and shall not they that fear
to swear and deny all oaths be set above this, whose yea is yea, and nay, nay,
in all their communication, according unto Christ's Doctrine? shall not this
inherit the promise? and is not this more Gospel like, to say speak, testify,
and do the truth, rather then to go back to Judaism, or into contention,
strife, emulation and distrusts that the Swearers are in? (falsely reputed
Christians) and yet abides not in his Doctrine? But having done with A. S. his
negative part, I come to his affirmative part which is no other then has been
answered over and over again, yet he thinks he has said more in clearing of it
then others has said, that Christ only forbad swearing by Creatures, and that
indeed is the sum of his affirmative discourse, and the Pharisees
interpretation. And he brings the judgments of diverse Expositers upon this
text, first promisary oaths are here principally forbidden; 2ly. others think
that Christ only here forbad such oaths as then was used in common discourse;
3ly. others say that profane, false and rash, and vain Oaths are generally
here prohibited; 4ly. many understand that by these words of Christ, all
swearing by Creatures is forbidden, but not that by God himself; and last of
all A. S. gives his thoughts, which are as follows.

That Christ did not forbid what the Law had commanded, but only the
Pharesaical corrupt glosses thereon, and the irreligious practices of the
misinformed Jews; and cites Origin and Chrysostom, who says upon this place
they were accustomed to swear by Heaven, and by Creatures; and further A. S.
says, the Pharisees taught them to affirm what ever they had promised,
swearing by God; they under a spacious pretention that they would not take
God's name in vain upon a slight occasion, fell to swear by Creatures, which
Grotius shows out Philo Judeos, which the Pharisees did not disallow, the
easier thereby to delude such credulous people as believed those oaths which
themselves neither thought obligatory, nor meant to keep, and it is certain the
Scribes and Pharisees taught the people that to swear by several Creatures, as
by the Temple and Altar was not binding; Christ reproves them as blind guides
upon that account, Mat. 23. 16. and further they taught it was perjury indeed
to break an Oath if a man had sworn by God, but not if he had only sworn by
Creatures: In exposition of which Christ forbids all swearing by Creatures, and
teaches contrary to the Jews Rabbis that such oaths ought not to be taken,
yet being taken are binding in respect of Creatures relation to the Creator,
and Christ reckons them among sinful oaths, and teaches them to use only bare
affirmations or denials in their communication, and this is the very sum of
his judgment; and the words of Christ is only to be limited to this sense and
no further, this is not to swear at all by Creatures in their mutual converse
and communications; and this he has repeated over and over in his Book, and
this is the furtherest latitude that he will allow unto Christ's prohibition,
swear not at all; and this interpretation before mentioned he looks upon to be
the genuine meaning thereof; and is the judgment of Doctor Gauden also, who
has contended as hard for some swearing as A. S. has; and I perceive that A.
S. has read the answer to Bishop Gauden, published by that precious servant of
the Lord Samuel Fisher, who finished his Life in bonds for the Gospel truth
against all swearing, whose answer stands firm, and his demonstrative
arguments of force, and is yet unanswered, though A. S. has a little here and
there carped at, and has bitten at the h^el, but has not made void at all his
answer, which will live as a living testimony in generations to come, as
consonant unto Christ's Doctrine, wherein he prohibites all oaths under the
Gospel.

Reply. Though there be some truth in the different Authors which is alleged,
and also in A S. his words, that swearing by Creatures, as heaven, and earth,
Jerusalem, and vain oaths, is forbidden, and customary oaths, and the corrupt
glosses of the Pharisees, and the false interpretations, yet all this comes
short of Christ's mind, and of the true genuine sense of the words and the
scope of Christ's Sermon as is manifest in the Chapter, and in his Testament,
and all he has said will not help him to carry on that work he has
undertaken, ( viz.) the Justification of any, or the lawfulness of any
swearing, or the defense of that limited sense, he would put upon the universal
terms in the 2. texts wherein Christ and the Apostle forbids all swearing: And
though A. S. often tells us Christ did not forbid what the Law had commanded,
neither gave any new possitive Law before his death; he sure has forgot
himself much; what will become of the two great Ordinances still upheld, as
Baptism, and breaking of Bread? and whether was this a new Institution of
Christ, or was it an Institution in the Law? and if it was an Institution of
Christ (as the Church of England does hold) and not of the Law, nor of Moses,
(as indeed it was not (then A. S. his argument is fallen to the ground, that he
gave no new commandment, neither instituted any new ordinance? and then what is
become of these two great Mysteries as they have been called? but he has
ravelled out and spun out his thread so long, that he often runs off his legs;
and though A. S. do often urge that he came not to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it: and therefore has said falsely that Christ swear before the High
Priest after he had given forth this Commandment, swear not at all, which if it
had been true it had been no more president for Christians then eating the
Passover; and though he sometimes urge that such oaths as were commanded under
the Law are not forbidden by that text, Mat. 5. 38. because it was spoken
sometime before his death, and the Ministration of the first Covenant was not
ended till his death; and therefore he concludes that all oaths would not be
forbidden by Christ in this text, for says he Christ did not forbid what the
Law commanded; but though this prohibition was given out before his death, yet
with reference to the Gospel times after his death: It is evident by the texts
before it and behind it, ( viz.) of divorce and of deportment toward injurious
ones and enemies, so in this of oaths Christ prohibites and condemns not only
those gross abuses of those things that they had a dispensation for under the
Law, and that by divine indulgency, which abuses crept in by the Pharisaical
false glosses, too much loosing the meaning of Gods Law by Moses by their
depraved examples or popular customs; but Christ condemned and prohibited
those very things, which in regard of the hardness of their hearts, distrust
and wicked cruelties, God himself in that very Letter of the Law indulged them
in, and gave them both a dispensation, and a precept for, in the Law; for the
Law said of old time, before the false gloss of the Scribes and Pharisees came
in some things; so as it was not said from the beginning, when Man was in
innocence, and was mercyful as his Heavenly Father was mercyful, and the Law
said, Deuteronomy. 24. 12. whosoever shall put away his wife let him give her a bill
of divorcement, and then she may go and be another man's wife, but I say who so
putting away his wife causes her to commit adultery; and whosoever shall marry
her that is divorced commits adultery, Mat. 5. 32. So that not only the
corrupt glosses and irregular practices of the misinformed Jews is forbidden;
but even that which the Law not only permitted and allowed, and dispensed with,
but commanded, is forbidden; (and another thing enjoined) and in cause of
injury as he has done, so shall it be done unto him: ye have heard it has
been said an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, this was the Law, Exo.
21. 44. Levit. 24. 20. Dent. 19. 20. and this was commanded: But Christ says,
I say unto you that ye resist not evil, whosoever shall smite thee on the one
cheek turn the other also, and if a man sue thee at law and take away thy coat,
let him have thy cloak also, and whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile go
with him twain, Mat. 5. 39, 40, 41. So here is not only a further thing, but
even another thing commanded by Christ. Further, the Law said, Exodus 20. 14.
thou shall not commit adultery; but Christ the wisdom of God says, Mat. 5. 28.
whosoever looks upon a Woman and lusts after her has committed adultery
with her in his heart, again ye have heard that it has been said that thou
love thy neighbor and hate thy enemy, though A. S. say that is not found in
the Law, but a corrupt gloss of the Pharisees; I say that is found which
amounts to as much, as has been showed: for the Jews that was of the Law,
might and did spoil their enemies, the Gentiles and Canaanites, Egiptians and
Amalekites, and had a command so to do, and kill them, and root them out, and
yet to help his enemies Ox or Ass under a burden, if he were belonging to a
Jew that personally hated him, and not an Amalekite one of the cursed race; but
this is a ridle to many; But I say unto you love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully
use you and persecute you, Mat. 5. 44. and the Apostle exhorted, give no
offense to Jew or Greek, so that his Doctrine went beyond the Law, put up, pass
by, forgive, forbeat; again you have heard it has been said of old time
(where) Exodus 20. 7. Deuteronomy. 5. 11. Numb. 30. 2. Mat. 5. 33. thou shall not
forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths, but I say unto
you Swear not at all, neither by Heaven for it is Gods Throne, nor by the Earth
for it is his Footstool, neither by Jerusalem for it is the City of the great
King, neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou cannot make one hair
white or black, but let your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay, for
whatsoever is more then these comes of evil: Its most evident that Christ
prohibits somewhat more here then was forbiden under the Law, yea what ever
Oaths were lawful under the Law, therefore it must be all swearing at all, or
else none at all: either all such swearing as was used lawfully, and allowed as
a Type for a time, in the Law, Oaths made lawfully and acceptably to God, or
else nothing more at all then what was forbiden in the Law: for all false
swearing and forswearing, and all swearing by Creatures, or breaking of solemn
Oaths, made as unto God, was forbiden in and by the Law: therefore swearing it
self is forbiden or nothing, but says A. S. the grand objection falls of it
self, which is either all kind of swearing is forbiden, or else Christ forbids
nothing, which was not forbiden before, which is utterly improbable says he;
and he grants that God had formerly prohibited all false and vain Oaths, and
all swearing by Creatures says he, which I grant to be true, then how is the
grand objection fallen, for is not Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, the head
Creatures: and this is the most that A. S. and diverse others affirms, that it
is only Oaths by Creatures, such as before mentioned that Christ only
prohibits, and vain Oaths, and swearing by Creatures: A. S. says Christ
reckons among sinful Oaths; then if so, as they are indeed, had not the Law
forbiden this before; in general terms wherein all Creatures are included?
therefore the reason stands still in force, and the objection; that either
Christ forbad all swearing, or else he forbids nothing but what the Law had
forbiden before: Its manifest it stands still in force, for Christ forbad even
those Oaths the Law required, and all vain swearing and swearing by Creatures,
and all swearing whatsoever, Mat. 5. Ye have heard it has been said by them of
old time, not of late by the Scribes and Pharisees, only putting their false
glosses on the Law, as A S intimates Pareus and others, in his Annotations, and
hence conjectures, that by them of old time is only meant, the Scribes and
Pharisees, and not Moses and the Law, and of old time must be meant (a good
while ago) or not very long, as Commentators understand it, less then (twenty
years) and thus he twists and twines to make the true sense of Christ's words
void: its evident by them of old time, is Moses time, the place before cited,
Numb. 30. 2. is the place Christ alludes to, you have heard it said thou shall
not forswear thy self: so says the Law in forty places, but perform unto the
Lord thine Oaths; But I say unto you swear not at all; no not by any oath at
all, note the opposition in the particle [but] which is between the old lawful
legal swearing, and no swearing at all, not between no swearing, and such
profane swearing, as was unlawful under the Law: the whole sum is this, the
Law said break no oaths, but I say take none; for if Christ intend no more in
these phrases ( swear not at all) not by any oath then thus, swear not vainly,
profanely, ordinary, or by Creatures in your communication, forswear not your
selves, what forbids he more then the Law forbad? for Heaven and Earth,
Jerusalem A. S. says, Christ reckons among sinful oaths; and these are
Creatures, and swearing by Creatures was forbidden by the Law, I grant quoth A.
S. then this reason stands still good, he either forbad all oaths, or he forbad
no more then the Law forbad; and though it be granted that the Jews swore by
the Creatures, as the Temple, Altar, Jerusalem, and therefore Christ prohibits
them, and reproves them for these things, and likewise all swearing whatsoever;
what does A. S. gain by this? for it is evident in diverse passages of his Sermon
in the 5th. Chap. of Mat. that he teaches a righteousness which exceeds that of
the Law, as I have showed before, which he came to fulfill and not to destroy,
by taking away the ceremony of Swearing, and establishing the substance in its
stead, which is speaking the truth, as in the sight of God in uprightness of
heart, yea we say again what says he more to his Disciples else? then the
Scribes and Pharisees to theirs? they said, swear not falsely, profanely, but
by God, only swear not falsely: For Bishop Gauden cites for his Author Drusius,
among the Jews all thing in Judicials were confirmed by the Religion of an
oath, wherein the name of God was interposed, therefore Christ says more unto
his Disciples in express terms, swear no oath at all, otherwise how would their
Righteousness exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, which except it did,
they could in no case enter into the Kingdom of God; the perfection and
Righteousness of the Law therefore in this point of Swearing was not
forswearing: the perfection and Righteousness of the Gospel, in the same is not
swearing at all, so though the Gospel be not against the Law, yet the Gospel
exceeds the Law in every point; the Law said kill not, the Gospel be not angry;
the Law commit not adultery, the Gospel, look not on a woman, lust not; so in
all the prohibitions of Christ; the Commandments of Christ went beyond the
Law, also in this of swearing: yet it did not if now there be any swearing at
all among Christians and Disciples of Christ, yet we shall also with A. S.
agree that Christ not only forbad all swearing (even that commanded by the Law,
sometime lawful) but he also forbids and reproves, and condemns swearing by
Creatures, and vain swearing in all communication, and their perverting of the
Law, and too much loosing it by traditions, and making it void by their false
glosses, and counts them blind guides which said to swear by the Temple, by the
Altar, by Heaven, was nothing, he pronounced a woe against them, and concluded
they were bound to keep those oaths, though they ought not to have sworn them:
for as much as he that swears by the lesser swears also by the greater; as he
that swears by Heaven swears by the throne of God, and him that sits thereon;
Mat. 23. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. We confess with A. S. this was but a
sinful profane creature swearing, an irregular form of swearing; by the name
of God the Jews indulged themselves in: but what does A. S. gain by this? it is
evident enough that solemn oaths by God himself, as those familiar oaths by
Creatures, in which they tacitly swear by God are forbidden by Christ, but I
say unto you swear not at all.

But A. S. tells us as Grotius tells him out of Philo Judeos, that the
Pharisees taught them to perform what ever they had promised swearing by God,
they under a spacious pretense that they would not take God's name in vain upon
slight occasions fell to swear by Creatures, which the Pharisees did not
disallow to cheat people withal, which they themselves neither thought
obligatory, nor meant to keep: The name Elohim and Jehovah they might possibly
scruple at, but that name Adonai they often, as superstitiously, repeat in their
much babbling as they superstitiously decline mentioning of the other, but that
in serious cases of concern of justice and equity, and in judicature in matter
of debate, or ending of controversies, that they should wave and forbear
swearing by the name of God, when their Scriptures was so express for it, and
that they should choose that way of swearing, there is no reason at all to
believe it, seeing Drusius says, among the Jews all things in judicature were
confirmed by oath, wherein the name of God was interposed as above mentioned.
2ly. That they should wave swearing by the name of God in matters of
concernment, which they all believed were binding, and should swear by
Creatures in order to the giving satisfaction to one another, and security of
each other, and by such oaths as they judged not to be obligatory, and never
meant to keep them, seeing A. S. says it was in pretense of reverence to God,
they swear not by God but by Creatures, to cheat and never meant to keep, they
knowing this that he that so swear by Creatures meant not to keep but to cheat
and not perform; such oaths were not very probably used in Judicature among
them, neither in serious cases, for such oaths instead of giving satisfaction
and putting an end unto jealousies and distrusts would have sure created them
more then before; for as much as he that so swears believes himself not to be
bound thereby, then if he had not sworn at all, and he unto whom he swears also
knows the same that such oaths (as A. S. tells on that they did swear) is not
binding, neither can any more credit be given to them then to a liar, because
in this sort of swearing there was no security; it is not probable I say, that
they should choose this in Judicature or any serious case of Controversy: And
if it be that Swearing that Christ only prohibits by Heaven, Earth, and
Creatures, which the Pharisees indulged them in, wherein (as to the point of
swearing) does he prescribe a Righteousness and perfection above or beyond
Moses his servant whom he was to exceed; for God by Moses in the Law it self
had universally forbidden all other oaths, either in general terms, or sometime
more particularly; but still all false oaths, vain oaths, and oaths by
Creatures are included, save only solemn swearing by his own Name that there
was no more swearing left for Christ to forbid his Disciples, but swearing by
God himself, which the Law allowed of.

Besides moreover, the opposition then which lies intimated in that particle
[But] being not between false swearing and profane swearing, and swearing by
Creatures as A. S. would have it, but between forswearing then, and no swearing
now, show Christ's intent to be to prohibit all swearing; for it is indeed as if
he had thus said, God under the Law commanded you to swear by his Name, and
when you had sworn in truth by him to perform the oaths ye made by him, whether
to him or any other; but I say now God allows you not to swear at all, nor by
heaven, earth, or any other, no not those oaths which ye did, and might make of
old unto the Lord your God in things lawful; but no oath by a Creature did God
account as an oath made to him, provided ye performed it when ye had done any
more then he counted their, solemn Fastings to be to him, Zachariah 7. 5.

Again, Christ's own expressions in the affirmative part shows his meaning in
the negative to be a prohibition of all swearing as well as any, but let your
Communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, so the Negative of his words swear not at
all, must be understood in such an universal exclusive latitude as admits of no
oaths whatsoever among his Disciples; and as has been said that particle [But]
which stands between those two prohibitions of Moses saying, forswear not but
perform to God thine oaths; and of Christ saying [But] I say unto you swear
not at all, does manifest it that Christ forbids all swearing as much as any;
even such swearing as was not indulged to them by the Pharisees only but by
Moses and God himself, who by his servant dispensed with them in, and
instituted even their swearing by God's own name, who never indulged or
dispensed with any of that Creature swearing as A. S. speaks of, but threatened
woes to it under the Law; and by the Law again, if it be said Christ only
prohibited all such voluntary oaths, which they swear to perform to the Lord
by any Creature as heaven, earth, in their Communication and mutual converse,
as A. S. says, but not solemn oaths by God in Courts or before Magistrates, and
not between man and man, and matter of deliberation as some other say, and have
interpreted the words, let not your whole Conversation be interwoven with oaths.

Reply. Christ does indeed forbid all such voluntary oaths as was used by the
Jews and Pharisees, and all swearing by any thing besides God or below God,
also all swearing in common Communication, and ordinary Conversation where yea
and nay should serve, yea and that which is called solemn and by some sacred
and lawful even by God, even all swearing, by God commonly, frequently, or
generally, which is now in Courts and imposed by Justices, Magistrates, than
which, nothing almost is more ordinary frequent and common; if our
communication and conversation should be without swearing, and our mutual
converse one with another among Men should be without oaths of any kind
whatsoever; is not this exclusive of swearing in Courts and before Magistrates
as well as other men, whether in Courts and Consistories as well as other
places, where Men have their conversation and their mutual converse with each
other, as ordinarily and commonly as elsewhere, which being considered I have
with other often mused why some Men have been so inconsiderate as to interpret
Christ's words and prohibition as exelusive, of Men's swearing in their ordinary
converse in Courts, where oaths are as ordinary, frequent and common, as in any
places whatsoever, especially that some men plead so much for oaths in Courts
and before Magistrates only; (as though they were sacred and solemn there and
no where else, and holy, and lawful only there) and yet can bring no better
proof under the Gospel for them, nor of their right to impose them upon
Christians more then others? among the many false instances they bring of Paul,
swearing frequently to the Churches in his Letters; and such pitiful proof as
A. S. offers of Christ being charged by the High Priest as he says to swear,
though he swore, for I deny that; ( I adjure thee,) proves not that Christ
swore, it being not his but another charge upon him; and it is silly to think
that Christ who said, swear not at all, no not by heaven, for it is God's
throne, which who so swears by, Mat. 18. swears by God that sits thereon; that
he should swear by the Living God, he was the Christ, at the command or charge
of the High Priest, who was his inferior, (though he had been a better Priest
then he was) as being but the type of himself; but indeed there was no such
matter as A. S. and others have affirmed, for when the high Priest barely asked
him only whether he was the Christ or not? he answered I am: Besides the Law
was not in the shadow of it fully ended, although Christ had instituted diverse
things among his Disciples which was not in the Law, and yet not against it,
but all these instances that many opposers with A. S. has brought of the
Apostles and Christ swearing, are but shrouds and shelters they make for
themselves, because they have a mind to obey the commands of Men rather then
Christ's Doctrine, for avoiding of persecution and suffering, and therefore
would make all things they take in hand look like their own Image: But having
discoursed of this before I come to A. S. his last part of his Discourse, and
his interpretation upon Mat. 5. and James 5.

In his 41. Section he says, If any still urges the universality of the
expression, ( swear not at all,) and that of Jam. 5. 12 (above all things my
brethren, swear not neither by heaven, nor by earth, neither any other oath) to
the first he says, its plain that they that thus argue break off our Saviors
sentence in the middle, and suffers him not to come to his period, for he says
not, swear not at all, there fixing a point, but swear not at all, neither by
heaven, nor by earth, etc. and for that of James must of necessity be
understood, with restriction; quotes Austin upon the Text, it cannot be that
swearing is worse then forswearing, theft, adultery, murder, these are heinous
crimes, nulla autem culpa est verum jurare; but if no sin to swear the truth,
why then above all things swear not; not that swearing is so great an offense
as many others, but least we contract a habit thereof, then probably by rash
oaths we shall offend God by false swearing, which is no more then in an
especial manner, forbear forswearing, and any other oath must be restrained in
a limited sense, for there is not meant any oaths what ever, but such as the
Apostle speaks of, neither by heaven, by earth, nor any other oath, that is any
oath taken by other creatures, for so must they be understood, unless we
interpret his words to make them contradict Gods, and set the servant in a
manifest oppositon to his Master.

Reply. We who are of a contrary judgment to A. S. do still urge the
universality of the Text, Mat. 5. 33, 34, etc. and we shall not break off the
sentence of Christ in the middle; swear not at all etc. but shall render it as
it is, neither was it ever intended otherwise, but for brevities sake, because
the innumeration of Heaven and Earth, etc. are only inclusive in the
prohibition, and we shall speak on, and what Christ has joined we shall not
separate: but read the words as they are, Ye have heard it has been said of
old time, thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord
thine Oaths, but I say unto you swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is
Gods Throne; neither by the Earth, it is his Footstool; neither by Jerusalem,
for it is the City of the great King; neither shall thou swear by thy head,
because thou cannot make one hair white or black: But let your communication be
yea, yea, nay, nay, whatsoever is more then those comes of evil; James 5. and
12. But above all things my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by
Earth, neither by any other Oath; but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay,
least you fall into condemnation: In which two Texts we say (in the
affirmative) all manner of swearing is forbiden, for the truth of which many
reasons have been and may be given.

First, Because all manner of swearing is here expressly instanced in these two
disjunctive clauses, which are expressly conclusive, and consequently ( because
spoken by way of prohibiton) exclusive, exceptive of all swearing, that can be
thought on, swear not, swear not at all, says the Texts, yea that none may
imagine, as A. S. would make Men do, that this general Rule admits of any
exception: but all know the prohibition is so strickt, as to allow, of no
permission in the point to swear, by any thing but God, he adds neither by
Heaven, neither by Earth, neither by Jerusalem, neither by thy head; and these
are only more ample expressions, of that prohibition, and are not exclusive or
disjunctive, from the prohibition, but conclusive of the prohibition of all
swearing whatever.

But least any should think he forbids only, and no more then extravagant Oaths
of such as swear by Creatures, as Earth, Jerusalem the head, and such like,
when as whosoever swore lawfully under the Law, was to swear by none but God
himself. but that there be no root at all for any reasoning, for swearing
against the flat prohibition of it: James 5. he concludes and shuts up all in
these universal terms, and excludes all Oaths, and all possible pretense of
plea, at all; also for any swearing, adding neither by any other oath, what
words more plain words can be uttered, or can be more expressly exclusive, both
of all kinds or sorts of swearing, and of all sorts of particular Oaths of
every kind, and by Heaven, and by Earth, and Jerusalem, are so far from
signifying, that those Oaths by Creatures are only the Oaths that Christ
prohibits, that they are but only innumerations and amplifications; of the
former part of the prohibition, swear not at all: which we grant were spoken to
reprove the Pharisees, and the Jews practice about their vain swearing.

And why must those words (of James 5.) needs be understood with restriction,
(above all things, swear not neither by Heaven, neither by Earth, etc.) why St.
Austin scruples at the first words, Quare ante omnia Jurare est quam furari,
etc. quam adulterare, etc. quam hominem accidere, it cannot be that swearing is
worse, and forswearing, then adultery, theft, murder, we do not say it is, but
if it be not; or that be not, the reason why he says, above all things swear
not, because swearing is a sin above all sins, can no other reason then that be
rendered? yes, yet we shall agree with Austin, and A. S. too; if their judgment
be one thus far, that it was not sin to swear the truth when called unto it
under the Law: why then above all things swear not, not that swearing is so
great an offense as Murder or Adultery, but least we contract a habit thereof;
and then possibly by rash Oaths we should offend God, which is no more says
he, then in especial manner forbearswearing, and any other Oath, says A. S.
must be restrained in a limited sense, for there is not meant any Oath
whatever, but such as the Apostle speaks of, by Heaven, by Earth, etc. though
there be some truth in what is said; yet its too short to answer the Apostles
end and scope, and the reason falls short that is rendered; but the man reason
is, (they were Jews unto whom he wrote, the twelve Tribes scattered) whom we
deny not, but were run into that custom of vain swearing by Creatures, as
Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, head and Temple, etc. but that is not all, though we
grant it is some reason; but they being Jews, who might under the Law swear
serious or solemn Oaths, and were not so fully informed of the end of the Law
in Christ: under which among them some Oaths were lawful; they were apt to
think, they did as well in swearing, so now as they did before; so though
Adultery and Murder may be as bad and worse then Swearing; yet the Law being
so expressly against them, which yet in its time allowed some kind of swearing
in some Cases (it was more hard to bring them of from some Ceremonious services
of the Law that were once lawful, as is evident long after Christ's ascension,
the Apostles had much to do with them about the Rites of the Law, as
Circumcision, and times; and days, and new Moons, etc. then from such sins as
were known and hated by them, and held accursed, by the very letter of the Law;
and therefore he says) above all things my brethren swear not; that they might
not only take hold of all vain swearing, and swearing by Creatures, that was
ever unlawful; but if that they might know that now to be unlawful which in
former times was accounted lawful for them: And so its ordinary to say to Men,
above all things take heed of that to which they have been long accustomed, and
with which (through heedlesness of the unlawfulness of the thing,) they are apt
most easily to be overtaken.

Again, It is by Solomon, who spoke by the eternal wisdom of God, and in it
to fear an Oath is made the character of a righteous Man that sacrifices
acceptably to God (to swear at all) is more the character of a wicked and
uncleave sinner, Eccles. 9. 1. 2. for how he it Men shall once return, and
discern, the happiness of him that serves God, from his woe who serves him not,
yet he is one event to the righteous and the wicked, to the good and to the
clean, and to the unclean to him that sacrifices and him that sacrifices not,
as is the good so is the sinner, as he that swears so be that fears an oath,
and so as above all things swear not, is to be taken not only of those oaths
which were ever unlawful by heaven and earth, but even of those that sometime
were lawful under the Law, in the type which now when the substance the oath of
God is come, and the Covenant of Light given to all Nations, Isa. 5. 5. Luke 1.
72, 73. who ends all, not only vain oaths, but all oaths, and is the substance
of all, even to the subsequent, neither by any other oath is not only to be
taken of such oaths neither by heaven, neither by earth, which were ever
unlawful; but even of those sometime lawful, even all swearing and all oaths;
and the servant is not in opposition to his Master, but knew the mind of his
master Christ, and therefore taught like Doctrine and the same: but what ever
Christ or James had said A. S. would make them, if he could to mean as he
means, to set their plain express words against their mind: But so much has
been said by many others who fear the Lord and an oath too, and so many
demonstrative and weighty things have been offered to the Consciences and
public view of all, which A. S. I perceive has seen some of them, though he
come not so much as near as to answer them, but only asserts his own, being a
work it seems he was put upon by others to plead for swearing; so that
something he must say on that behalf, and draw that way, and to make all things
look toward that end, and to concur together (to justify them) and the
lawfulness of oaths under the Gospel, and their work who persecutes the
servants of Christ for abiding in his Doctrine, who speaks the truth and dare
not lie nor swear at all; I say I shall be the more brief because I know many
things is extant by others, and of weight which has not yet been answered, nor
is by A. S. though here and there a little in his Annotations he carps sometime
upon small ground, although he has asserted nothing but that which has been
answered over and over again: But I draw on to his last refuge and plea, his
answer to both the Texts Conjunction.

That these Propositions; says A. S. (how universally soever expressed) ought not
in equity to be extended beyond the intention of the Apostles, but be limited
according to the subject matter, swear not at all (says Christ) neither by
heaven, nor by earth, etc. that is, I universally forbid you all those oaths
which you were wont to use frequently to wicked purposes; and further he says
all vain and false oaths by God, even by the acknowledgement of the Pharisees
were sufficiently forbidden before, so there was no need either for Christ or
James to speak of them again, other places of Scripture must of necessity be
thus interpreted, 1 Cor. 10. 23. Matthew 15. Luke 2. 1. Mat. 12. Luke 8. 47.
how universally soever exposed must be restrained according to the mind of the
speaker, and so must these words swear not at all.

Reply. It Is freely granted that these two Texts ought not to be extended
beyond the intention of the speakers, but be limited according to the subject
matter, as for general terms and universal prohibitions, admitting of exception
they do so, we grant now and then they do, and of restrictions, but when they
do these exceptions and restrictions are usually in one place or other of the
same Testament, where they are made, or at least most manifestly amplified by
him that gave out these general prohibitions, and so are most of these generals
and restrictions that A. S. has instanced, 1 Cor. 10. 23. all things are
lawful for me, to eat that which was sold at the shambles was lawful, but that
which was sacrificed to Idols, v. 12. there he mentions the restriction himself,
and so Luke 1. 3. It seemed good to me also, having perfect understanding of
all things from the very first, the subject matter whereof he writes and the
things are expressed, and the exceptions, in the 2. Chapter, and in Mat. 12. 31.
All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto Men, but the blasphemy
against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven, there in the same Verse Christ
makes the exception and restriction, and Exodus 20. 10. Thou shall do no manner
of work, its abundantly expressed else where in the Law; where the Priests
service on every Sabbath are appointed them, and the exception of dressing what
every one was to eat, and was expressed, and the exception of doing good, and
of works of mercy, in saving the life of Man or beast was to take place ever
against the Typical Sabbath (I will have mercy and not sacrifice) and that of
Luke 8. 47. and the Woman that was healed by touching the border of Christ's
garment, she declared unto him before all the people; what says A. S. before
all the people of the World, or before all the people of the Land? no there is
none so ignorant as to understand it, for Mark. 5. 21. manifest the exception
before all the people, only that were with him nigh unto the Sea; when he
returned from the Country of the Gadarens, or before all the people of his own
City that came out to meet him, Mat. 9. 3. Mat. 8. 34. many more I might add to
what A. S. has instanced, that Christ uttered many truths in general terms
which must admit of exception, Luke 13. 10. all the sinners Christ spoke to
about him, in the general terms, ye shall perish, but this was not without
exception of such as should repent; but that exception was not without
expression, viz. except ye repent, again he said unto his hearers, ye cannot
enter the Kingdom of God; that was not without exceptions, nor these exceptions
without expressions, viz. except ye be converted; yea in the verses immediately
before, this universal prohibition swear not at all, Mat. 5. 30, 31. Christ
says 'twas said of old, if any put away his wife let him give her a bill of
divorce; but I say whosoever shall put away his wife causes her to commit
adultery: But this admits of an exception, and that exception is thus expressed,
viz. saving for the cause of Fornication; but though all this be granted, even
these and many more universal terms admits of exceptions and restriction, yet
we cannot grant that these two texts admits of any such exceptions of
restrictions as A. S. would interpret them. My reason is this, because in this
general term and universal prohibition, swear not at all, it cannot in equity
be taken and limited in that sense which A. S. puts upon it, not with that
restriction, for that sense would make it short of the subject matter where all
swearing is forbidden as well as any, because swear not at all by heaven,
earth, etc.

Because there is not only no expression made any where (after) of any such
exception or restriction, but a fuller amplification of it, by such particulars
as is enumerated, and are more particularly exclusive of all kinds of oaths,
and of all oaths of any kind, not only of those that they used to wicked
purposes, but even those they solemnly used sometime to good purposes before
the seed Christ was revealed, and the Apostle James 5. 12. neither by heaven,
neither by earth, neither by any other oath; which is a re-inforcement and
redoubling of the said universal prohibition; whereas if Christ had intended
any exception here, he might as easily have expressed, and would as assuredly as
he did imediatly above, in the cause of divorce, by ( except in the cause of
fornication,) and have so said, swear not at all, except it be solemn and
sacred Oaths, and by the Lord to good purposes in Courts where ye are called
to swear before a Magistrate; so James if he had intended as A. S. will needs
in force yet without any ground, a limitation and restriction, above all things
my brethren swear not, neither by heaven, neither by earth, neither by any
other oath, except ye swear solemnly by God to good purposes, in Courts, or
before Magistrates; but as I said instead of excepting any exception, he adds
that which more strangthens and clears beyond all exception, the universality
of his prohibition; and if all vain oaths by God were forbidden before, and all
swearing by Creatures, so that there was no need either for Christ or James to
speak of them again, as A. S. says; then this is still matter for the argument
on our part, that some oaths were prohibited by Christ and James which were not
prohibited before, and of which there was necessity for them to speak, as there
was indeed, not only about those Oaths and other things which the Law before
had prohibited, but even of those things that it had allowed and indulged,
because of the hardness of their hearts, so we say there was a necessity of
Christ and James not only to mention those things again which the Law had
spoken of before, and disallowed which we have instanced before, and is
manifest in that Chap. 5. which the Pharisees had perverted and loosened by
their false glosses and traditions; but even those things which were permitted,
indulged and commanded under the Law, and suffered to be, because of the
hardness of their hearts, and strifes, unbeliefes, insecurities; and therefore
Christ teaches and informs his Disciples, as it was in the beginning before
those things entered, and in this cause about oaths amongst the rest prohibites
all swearing without limitation, not only that which was once forbidden, but
even that which was once permitted and commanded, and indulged; and therefore
it has been said of old time thou shall not forswear thy self under the Law,
(where in) Numb. 30. 2. Deuteronomy. 23. 21. But I say unto you, swear not at all,
neither by heaven, nor earth, nor Jerusalem, no thy head, which is manifestly
an exclusive prohibition of all oaths, without exception or restriction, or
limitation, and still will stand good (not withstanding all A. S. and others
opposing) among his Disciples and true Christians, in whose hearts he has put
it to speak the truth, and confess in any cause wherein they are concerned to
the glory of God the Father, and to keep the commands of his Christ, and to
glory him by abiding in his Doctrine, swear not at all.

And then A. S. concludes here the grand Objection falls of it self which is
either all kinds of swearing is forbidden, or else Christ notwithstanding his
words, ( but I say unto you) forbad nothing which was forbidden before, which
is utterly improbable, and the reason is says he, because God formerly had
forbidden all false and vain oaths, and all swearing by Creatures, all which I
grant to be true says he; but the Pharisees had taught the people otherwise by
their wicked glosses, that made the Commandment of small effect by their
Tradition, and the practice of that Nation was widely distant from the
Commandment, both which were necessarily to be reformed, which our Savior did
in these words, But I say unto you swear not at all.

Reply. Who ever denied but that the Pharisees were blind guides, and that they
labored to make void the Law, and made the commands of God of small effect by
their Traditions; or that the practice of that Nation was not widely distant
from the Commandment, and that they swear by false Gods sometime, and vainly
by the true God, and took his Name in vain; and swear also by Heaven and Earth,
and Jerusalem, like as many do now; all this we grant, that they were out of
the way both in oaths and other things; also that Christ reproved in the fifth
of Matthew, and elsewhere, which Christ reformed and reproved their Doctrine
and manners: I say again how is the grand Objection fallen by this that either
all kind of swearing is forbidden here by Christ, or else Christ forbad nothing
which was not forbidden before, which is utterly improbable says A. S. but it
is more probable then any thing that A. S. has yet offered; for if only by
Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, Head, Temple and Altar, by that which Christ forbad
that the Pharisees taught the people they might swear by; these were forbidden
before inclusive in false swearing or swearing by Creatures though not
expressed, or enumerated nominally, yet included among the sinful and vain
oaths under the Law, and so were forbidden before, and faith A. S. I grant that
all vain oaths and perjury, and all swearing by Creatures were formerly
forbidden, and if so as indeed they were, what more did he forbid then was
forbidden, if the words must only be understood of those sinful and vain oaths
by Creatures above mentioned, that the Pharisees indulged the people in, and
taught as A. S. would only limit his prohibition and exception I shall leave to
the Conscience of every enlightened man to judge, and say that in these words
it has been said of old time thou shall not forswear, but pay thy vows unto
the Lord; but I say (who am come to restore man again into that estate he fell
from by transgression, and to redeem him that believes out of strife and
contention, and Idolatry, to have fellowship with the Father) Swear not at all,
neither by heaven nor earth, nor any other oath, that as has been said before
here is a prohibition of all vain oaths and false oaths, and perjury, and all
oaths by Creatures, and all the vain traditions of Scribes and Pharisees about
oaths, and somewhat more, even a prohibition of those Oaths to his Disciples,
which the Law allowed after sin had entered, for which cause the Law was added,
and Oaths added, but Christ ends it, (not by destroying it) but by fulfilling
it, and has set up that which is more Evangelical, truth it self, in which
there is no shadow of change, and it is binding upon the souls of all true
Christians, and that by which they are bound one to another, and every word,
promise, or testimony that go out of their hearts and mouths, they by it are
bound to keep, least they fall into condemnation, but their yea is yea, and nay
is nay; and whatsoever is more then this comes of evil, and therefore they do
not, cannot, nor dare not go beyond this or that which does but* amount to as
much, and there needs no more among true Christians.

Now as to them, who are in the contention and strife and unbelief and oaths,
works of the flesh, as variance, discord, whom the Law has power over and is
against, as long as they live in such estate, its granted that the Law was
added because of these transgressions, and is against such; and how far
swearing can be binding among evil, contentious, unconscionable Men, that make
no conscience of any thing, who cannot believe one another, nor give credit to
one another without swearing, experience has manifested whether they judge one
another to be believed better by swearing then without swearing, that's little
to us, neither shall we meddle in contentious matters, nor have to do with
striving Men, as little as possible: but rather suffer wrong, then wrong our
consciences by swearing, which we are persuaded by Christ we ought not to right
our selves, as hitherto we have done and have peace, blessed be God in our
hearts, however, we could rejoice and be glad to see all Men be at peace, and
agree, and its our desire to live in that love, and we shall seek it with Men,
and to be at peace as much as in us lies, even in that love that works no evil,
nor thinks no evil, but believes all things, and bears all things, and so
carries beyond strife and oaths, but if they will not be without Oaths in
Courts and Judicatures, we are clear in the matter, if they exact upon us, and
do as they have done, to the undoing, and ruining of many in this World, we
must be content, knowing it better to suffer wrong, then do it, and shall
acquiesce and rest in the will of God, till he plead our cause, and open the
hearts of Men to see through the Clouds of error and ignorance that is over
their consciences.

Yet how ever this I must needs say, this frequent, common, profane swearing,
that has exalted its Horn, more of late years, is one of the crying sins of
England, that Gods anger is against, and will draw down his judgment, and
kindle the indignation which hangs over this Nation, not only, because of those
that command Men to swear, contrary to Christ's command: (and that for to
establish cruelty and injustice) but also that swore falsely and vainly, and
that against their knowledge, for their own profit, and the disadvantages of
others; to accomplish their wicked, malicious and revengeful designs, against
the innocent, who dare not swear at all, and thereby are made a pray to the
teeth of Wolves, and to the wills of corrupt Men, who take occasion (as it
were) to plow long Furrows upon the backs of the poor and needy, for which
things sake the wrath of God will be poured out upon the head of the wicked,
and the Nation shall be on heaps, and the wise Men shall be turned backwards,
and their Table shall be a snare, and the curse shall be upon the rebellious,
and they shall fall and be broken, and rise no more: and this may justly befall
this Nation, because of Oaths, and because of Oppression.

And oh much pitied Nation, it may be said of thee truly as the Prophet Hosea
4. 2, 3. (Because of swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and
whoring, they break out, and blood touches blood, therefore shall the Land
mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall be cut off) Oh what sad times do
we behold, nothing but extremes of evil are presented to our eyes and ears,
some do little but swear ordinarily, commonly and vainly, in all kind of
communication and conversation, not only in their usual outer sourses in
Courts, with Judges and Magistrates, but in their ho^ly discourses also with
other Men, in Cities, Towns, Princes, and great Men's Courts, and places,
Universities, Colleges, almost all Houses, at least all Talvernes and
Alehouses, and in the open Streets and Assemblies, almost every where, are
full of dreadful Oaths, and Men's discourses interwoven with execrable and
direful Oaths, even as it were daring God to confound them and damn them, and
such like, and though there be diverse Laws against swearing vainly and
forswearing, yet these are not looked at, but how should we exspect that they
should look at the execution of the Laws of Men which are good, who heeds not
the Law of God; and are so buzzed now a days, with over-executing those
intangling Laws that are extant for Oaths, and forswearing, to entrap and
ensnare poor innocent men, who dare not swear at all, but keep the Commands of
Christ; so that there is no leisure lost to look after those most wholesome and
profitable Laws of both God and the King, which are against vain Oaths, and
forswearing, which the Land abounds with, the like has not been in any age,
which is a sad presage of the Judgment of God to be at hand.

And last of all, A. S. he says has done, and he fears it is more and time to
have done with the Exposition of those words, and so comes to application, and
so he speaks to all in general; who at that time or any other may be legally
called to take their oaths, which you have heard vindicated to be lawful,
notwithstanding the seeming opposition of these words, Swear not at all; but
those must be understood of necessary Oaths, and your Righteousness is to
exceed the Scribes and Pharisees, but they condemned perjury in the verse
immediately before mytext, and your warrant for swearing is in Jer. 4. 2. which
thence appears not only lawful but in some cases necessary.

Reply. It Is more then time indeed to have done, to pervert Christ's plain
Doctrine with his imaginary Exposition, and what he counts (legally called)
seeing Christ prohibited it is not of much force, neither will A. S.
Vindication stand against the real opposition of Christ's words, Swear not at
all; but his seeming Vindication (will in the day of the Lord when the secrets
of all hearts shall be manifest by Jesus Christ, when the book of Conscience
shall be opened) will be found to be in real opposition unto Christ, and his
reward will be according to his works, who has by his work strengthened the
hand of evil doers and persecutors, to the adding affliction to affliction upon
the Righteous; and if the words must be understood of necessary Oaths, then
there is none necessary among Christ's true Disciples, who commanded, let your
yea be yea, or your nay, nay, for whatsoever is more comes of evil, and whether
the Scribes and Pharisees condemned a perjury or not, we are sure the Law did,
which Christ's words has reference to, It has been said of old time thou shall
not forswear thy self; and if the Righteousness of Christ's Disciples be to
exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and they condemned
perjury, and all false swearing by God, and the Law condemned all false oaths,
and vain oaths, and Oaths by Creatures, as A. S. has granted; then the
Righteousness of the Disciples is to be another, then the Righteousness (of the
Law) which condemned all perjury and vain Oaths; then what is it, but not to
swear at all any Oath? but speak the truth, and confess it to the glory of God
in yea and nay; and this is that which exceeds the Scribes and Pharisees, and
is only lawful and necessary under the Gospel; and as for Jer. 4. 2. this is
pitiful proof and warrant for Christians to swear under the Gospel, for that
was only spoken to Israel or Juda, who were under the first Covenant, and yet
were revolted from the ordinances thereof, and were back-sliders, as is to be
seen, Jer. 3. 22. and has not reference to the second Covenant: But I shall
come toward an end as well as A. S. and conclude and refer all ( what both he
and I has said) to the judgment of the Lord, and the measure of Gods holy
Spirit in all Men's Consciences, to be received or denied by that as he and his
witness bears evidence, so shall the matter stand eternally.

Yet I cannot but mind the Reader, though A. S. has had, as appears, certain
Books of the Dissenters, in which are weighty things, about this particular of
swearing; which he has not answered at all, as to their Arguments, only carped
here and there at a word, which is not of great moment; but though he may plead
some reason, that it was not possible, to answer all things in so short a
Discourse, as a Sermon, wherein he was limited as to time, yet since he had, I
perceive, by his Annotations, time enough to have answered them, having their
Books extant by him, but has not, in the most weighty Considerations,
therefore I refer the Reader to them, for his further satisfaction, viz. to the
Answer of Bishop Gauden, by that faithful Servant of God, Sam, Fisher, where
this point is largely discussed, likewise his Antedote against Swearing, in
Answer to Henry Den, and Jeremiah Ives, likewise a Book published by Isaac
Pennington, Titled, The great Question concerning the Lawfulness or
unlawfulness of Swearing under the Gospel stated, and considered of; wherein
are weighty things declared in short; 1st. what an Oath is; 2d. the ground and
occasion of an Oath; 3d. the causes wherein an Oath was to be used; 4ly. the
end of an Oath; 5ly the suitableness of its nature to the end aimed at by it;
6ly* the persons to whom the use of an Oath was proper and lawful.

Wherein also is clearly showen the state of man kind from the Creation,
comprised in four heads or particulars: (First, The State of Innocence) ( when
there was no Oath) Secondly, An estate of Captivity, wherein an Oath was proper
and lawful: Thirdly, The estate of shadowy Redemption, wherein it was lawful
also: Fourthly, An estate of true and perfect Redemption, wherein, its neither
needful nor lawful, seeing its prohibited by Christ, all which A. S. has
passed over, and has not answered.

Likewise a Book published by John Crook, Titled, The Case of Swearing (at all)
discussed with; and several objections answered: These things A. S. has not
answered, I only instance them, for the Readers further satisfaction, if
unsatisfied in what has been said already; all which great and weighty things,
are worthy of the serious consideration of all.

Likewise a Book, Titled, ( Swearing denied in the new Covenant) by Morgan
Watkins.

When all that has been said, is duly considered and weighed in the Righteous
balance of Gods holy Spirit, they will not think it strange that some denies
to swear at all, but rather wonder that such a veil of darkness should be so
long over the minds and hearts of them that believe not, notwithstanding so
clear evidence from Christ and his Apostles, or the example of the Primitive
Christians or holy Martyrs, who spoke the truth, but denied to swear at all;
but that custom and tradition is often more minded then the very truth it self.

Oh that the Rulers of this Nation would once consider and weigh what they are
doing, and how many and great the suffering of a conscientious people that
fears the Lord in their hearts are, who dare not disobey the commands of
Christ, least they fall into condemnation, and come under the rebuke of the
Lord in their hearts, who has power alone to kill and to make alive, but
rather chooses to suffer the loss of all, and undergo the manifold sufferings
that some malicious Spirits causes to be inflicted upon them; when indeed
there is no cause at all; while profane persons swears, and forswears, and
takes Gods holy Name in vain, and makes little conscience of any thing, but
sometime for, and sometime against, whatsoever seems countenanced or
discountenanced by the Magistrates; so that neither the King nor Kingdom is in
any more security notwithstanding all such swearing, how solemn soever they
seem in swearing, neither any more credit to be given in Judicature, then there
is to be given to him that is a common Swearer in his private occasions, or
common communication; and oh how does the Land abound in this, in so much that
he that is not a curser or a swearer is looked upon as a Phanaticke, or some
disobedient person, or unconformable man, which ought especially to be eyed for
a dangerous person: Oh that the Heads and Rulers of the People would but
consider how near the Judgment of God is, and how ready to break forth upon the
Nation, and not without cause, even great evils are begun, Pestilence and Sword
already threatened, and Gods arrows flying abroad to wound and to destroy them
that continue in hardness of heart and rebellion against God, and will not
suffer him to rule and reign in the Consciences and Kingdoms of Men, but vain
men would set up their Thresh-hold with his, and not only so, but against his,
and great is the wickedness and the sins of this Nation upon many accounts,
which the Lord will bring a scourge upon, especially that grievous sin of
Persecution, that Cain-like way, which the Generations has chosen to add as
they ignorantly suppose unto their Church, and so builds up their Zion with
cruelty, and their Church by iniquity: Oh this is loathsome in the sight of
God; had Zimri peace who slew his Master? had Israel peace when she slew the
Prophets? had the Jews peace when they had Crucified Christ? had the Romans
peace when they persecuted the first Christians? had Cain peace when he had
slain his brother? If nay, let not England expect peace, when they are
persecuting them that are members of Christ's Church, so that this grievous sin
(if England had no more) were enough to bring the dreadful Judgment of God upon
the whole Land, and undoubtedly will, if not repented of; but now it must not
be counted so; and why? because there are some Statutes and Laws which they
obey not, and so it is for disobedience; consider, did not all the former
pretend one Law or other, did not all that ever suffered, even the best of men
and the best of Christians suffer as disobedient, and as offenders against some
Law or other, (and as evil doers) in the account of them, that inflicted
punishments upon them; if so, as it is certain they did, may not England be
deceived, while that they are thinking they do God and the King service to root
out and destroy some, under the notion of Heresy, and some under the notion of
disobedience, and factious, may they not be persecuting Christ in his members,
or destroying the peaceable members of their Native Country; the Lord open all
their eyes and do away the darkness and the veil of ignorance that is over
many hearts, that they may turn to the Lord and submit unto his eternal and
unchangable power, that so they may escape the day of the Lord which is at
hand, and the Judgment of God that is ready to break forth as an overflowing
scourge to cut off and sweep away in his displeasure even all them that would
not have Christ to rule in their hearts, neither have his Laws fulfilled nor
obeyed, which he writes in the hearts of all true Believers, unto whom all
must bow and be subject, because the Father has committed all power into his
hand, and his glory he will not give to another; no, to none but him whom he
has given for a Convenant of Light and life, to be King, Lawgiver, Savior,
and Judge of his People, and to be the head of the body, his Church, whom he
redeemes out of the world to himself, to glorify him, who is the only
Potentate and King of Immortal Glory, God blessed for ever and ever, Amen.

THE END.
Faults Escaped the Press.
PAge 8. line 3. for waken read weaken. p. 41. l 9. for Polligume r. Polygamie.
l. 14. for Polligume r. Polygamie. p. 42. l. 6. for Polligume r. Polygamie. p.
42 l. 37. for persuming r. presuming. p, 45. l. 30. for Jestures r. Gestures.
p. 50. l. 4. for revailed r. revealed. p. 55. l. 27. for are r. err. p. 57. l.
38. for evil r. civil. l. 39 for beuite r. brute. p. 59. l. 32. for Essarus r.
Esseans. p. 63. l. 1. for putting r. puts.


