ONE Warning more UNTO ENGLAND Before she give up the Ghost, and be Buried in
the Pit of Darkness.

To awaken the Inhabitants thereof out of their deep Sleep, to see themselves
what Misery is coming upon them through their Degeneration and horrible
Ingratitude, that the People therein may be left without excuse in the day of
the Lord.

By him that pities thee in this languishing state. F. H.

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1660.

OH England! Is thy dry Land all become Sea? Is not thy Mountains from whence
thou have looked for help, cast all into the Waters, and floats up and down,
and is driven up and down, and carried about with every Tempest, insomuch that
hardly any dry Land appears any where in thee, but all like raging Waves, and
like boisterous Floods which has no bounds, but over-flows all the Banks,
which fills all with slime, and mire, and dirt: Oh Nation, whither art thou
posting! and after what do thou so hastily pursue? Have thou chosen Madness
for thy Crown, and Folly for thy Diadem? Have thou fixed thy eye upon the Land
of Darkness, that thou so hastily runs? Art thou become benumbed, and
altogether past feeling? Has not the Lord intended good unto thee, but thou
rejects it? Did not the Lord break off the bonds from thy neck, and take the
burdens from off thy shoulders, that thou might have been a Free People, that
thy People might have been a free People, that thou might have served the Lord
God in truth and Righteousness, and might have been established by his Free
Spirit, that Righteousness might have run down the Land as a stream, and Equity
as a river, that Violence might have been done away, and the heavy Yoke
removed, that so the Nation might have rejoiced in Gods saving health, which he
was about to shower down as a mighty Rain, that the Land might have been
refreshed, and that the People thereof might have rested under the Almighty
shadow of the Lord, that every one might have eat the fruit of his labors with
joy, and have been satisfied therewith, and every Precept of man have been
taken off the Conscience; and that yoke which has limited the Lord would the
Lord have broken, that so his People might have rejoiced in him, and in his
saving health. But Oh Nation, how art thou betrayed! the treacherous dealers
has dealt treacherously with thee, and have robbed thee of thy Glory, and of
thy Crown; and no art thou like to be Crowned with Infamy and Reproach, and to
be as a hissing-stock, as a Proverb and a byword to all the Nations, who will
rejoice in thy Calamity, and be glad at thy destruction; and because the love
and Mercy of God was manifest in thee more then to any Nation of late besides,
therefore the Nations were angry at thee; but now seeing thy base ingratitude
and unthankfulness, for all the kindness of the Lord unto thee, which thou have
wonderfully abused, which has been a cause which has provoked the Lord
against thee, because thou have chosen the way of death rather then life, and
chosen darkness rather then light; and therefore art thou hurled and tossed in
all this Sea of Confusion; and what will the Nations say who are round about
thee, Is not this the Nation from whence light did shine forth, that's now
filled with darkness? Is not this the Nation which was strong and mighty,
that is now become feeble? Is not this the Nation, the fame of whose
Righteousness was spread far, that is now filled with Violence and Cruelty? Is
not this the Nation, which made the Nations and Isles about it to tremble,
whose hands is become so weak that they cannot help themselves? Is not this the
Nation whose sound and fame for liberty as men in the Nation, and as Christians
without being imposed upon, which the Lord was bringing to a perfect freedom,
who now are putting the yoke of Bondage upon the Inhabitants necks, and laying
heavy burdens upon the necks of the Righteous, and are imposing things upon
the Consciences of his People, whom God would have set free? Oh this causes
the Name of the Lord which has appeared in thee, to be dishonored, and the
noble acts which the Lord has done in thee to be vilified: Oh England, what
shall I compare thee unto, thy state is sad! Oh what might I do to make thee
sensible thereof! thou art as a Ship in the midst of the raging Sea, whose Mast
is lost, whose Tacklings is broken, and the Men all dead, and nothing left but
a bare Hull ready to be blown with every gust of Wind upon every Rock, and art
like wholly to be Split, never more to be builded up: It may truly be said of
thee as it was once of Israel, when they had revolted from the Lord God, and
followed after the imaginations of their own hearts; the head is sick, and the
whole heart is faint, and every member which should move in the body is become
feeble and benumbed; thy breach is great, who can heal thee? or who can bind
thee up? What is there no Balm in England? is there no Physician there to heal
the breaches and wounds of this People? What, not one wise man among all her
Rulers, are they all like wild Bulls in a Net, fit to be taken and destroyed?
not one Interpreter amongst all her Prophets which can discover the Disease;
not one Physician that can apply a healing Medicine to these grievous Wounds!
What not one leaf of the Tree of life amongst you all, by which the Nations are
healed? not a healing Spirit amongst ten thousands of England; Oh sad and
deplorable is thy state, for all is out of order, and it may truly be said of
her Rulers, of her Priests, and her Prophets, and of her People, as it was said
of Israel when they had forsaken the Lord, and blindness happened to them
through their unbelief, A People laden with sin and iniquity, they are all gone
out of the way, there is not one that does good, no not one, a seed of
evildoers, a treacherous Generation, a false-hearted people, who eats up
iniquity as men eat bread, and drink it up as Oxen Water: Oh Nation consider,
thou art upon thy languishing bed, and thy eyes is almost closed, and thy ears
stoped, and thy understanding besotted, all thy Vitals is decaying, the
Characters and Symptoms of death is upon thee, the form of thy Countinance is
changed, the flower of thy Beauty is passing away; old Age and decrepedness is
coming upon thee, all thy Joints are growing feeble; what will thou do now in a
day of Adversity? Whether will thou go in the day of Calamity which is
approaching, the Grave is opened to receive thee, and thy Enemies stands ready
to bury thee in silence, that thee and all thy Glory may be trampled upon, nnd
that thy memorial may die and rot, and thy Renown be shut up in the pit of
Oblivion; the Fellers stands ready to cut thee down as an abominable branch,
and to cast thee into the fire to consume thee, and to make a final end of
thee, and to destroy all thy pleasant things: the Lord is grieved for thee, and
the Spirits of his People is made sad, for they feel the weight of iniquity,
and the load of transgression which will sink the Nation if it be not turned
from; but the Lord will ease him of his Enemies, and avenge him of his
Adversaries, and will sweep away the refuge of lies and the lovers of them into
the pit of destruction; and the day hastens when they that exalt themselves
high even upon pinacles, shall be brought low, and many hills has God made one
with the plain, and many more yet shall be made a plain, that the Glory of the
Lord, and his Interest may be exalted.

Oh England, Consider thy former days, and call to mind the years past, and
consider in what state thou wast twenty years ago, and what complaints filled
every corner of the land by reason of the heavy yoaks which was laid upon the
People, by reason of many wicked Laws which was made by men of corrupt minds,
in the years of the former Kings, not only upon the Estates of men, but also
upon their Persons and Consciences, and the Cry of many innocent people was
great, and reached through the Clouds; for Princes, and Kings, and Nobles was
grown to that height in Arrogance, and Pride, and Usurpation, so that they
claimed all Power as to be in themselves, and the Courtiers being in the same
nature with them, and climbing up the stairs of Ambition till they attained to
the seat of Violence, cried up the King above all Law, and whom he would kill
might be killed, and whom he would save might be saved; so that neither Life,
Person, or Estate of any man could be exempted: so that by the Oppression of
the former Kings, and also later, even the last, was very great, and was soared
up so high, without all limit or bounds, as though all People in the Nation had
been made as for their Vassals and Slaves, which thing was very grievous to the
Lord, and also to the people of the Nation; and they came to see that that
Power and Authority was but usurped, or taken on without any just Title or
Right as from God, or from the free People of this Nation; and likewise what
deceit was used in the Execution of all Laws, that if any man was wronged, and
did Appeal unto any Law for Redress, their Remedy proved worse then the
Disease; so that the Cry of the Oppression on every hand was very great.

Again, What Innovations and Impositions was made upon tender Consciences by
those Apostate Bishops, which the very Land groaned with the burden thereof,
who were but a stem sprung from that corrupt Root of Rome; and most of their
Worship, Cannons and Constitutions they had from thence; and what intrusion and
Popish-stuff was ushered in daily upon the People in this Nation, which they
groaned under, and compelling and forcing about the Superstitious Rites and
Ceremonies, and foolish Fopperies which they brought in as Religious Matters;
and what lazy Droans they upheld, Reading a piece of the old Masse-Book in
English, and calling it Divine Service, and judged them Heretics who opposed
all this mudy dark stuff, which the people was vexed with, and their Souls
grieved, and the Lord grieved and vexed, insomuch that the Lord heard the Cry of
the Oppressed, and did appear in his power and strength in many people to bear
Witness against the aforesaid Evils which was growing upon the Nation, which
tended to bondage and thraidom, both as concerning men's Persons and Estates,
and also their Consciences; which bondage they were weary of, which yoaks the
Lord brake, and gave a total overthrow both of the one, and of the other; and
many upright in heart did rejoice, and with unwearied pains did Travel through a
Sea of Troubles, not minding the present difficulty, but rather eying the end,
Freedom and Liberty; and many precious men ventered their lives, and lost their
Blood, and consumed their Estates, and offered willingly of their Substance in
the time of need, that they might accomplish the aforesaid end, Liberty and
Freedom as men, according to the equal just Law of God, and Freedom as
Christians, without being imposed upon either by Men or Laws, which was a Prize
which the Lord did intend should be put into the Nations hand, as a recompense
for their former Sufferings, in which all the upright would have been
satisfied; and therefore they who have been Obstructors and Hinderers of this
thing, has the greater sin and load upon their backs, which has sunk many of
them.

But alas, when the Obstructions was taken out of the way, and the Common Enemy
suppressed with their whole Strength, Covetousness did get up, and Pride in the
hearts of the Rulers, and them in Authority, in the hearts of the Souldery,
especially the Officers of the Army, most of which God had raised from a mean
Estate to great Dignity; You forgot the Lord, and did divide the spoil amongst
you, and so became full and fat, and then kicked against the Lord, and
neglected his Service to pursue that which God had put into your hands; but
getting into Places of Honor, became as bad, if not worse, then many that was
cast out before you, and then labored to set up your own Interests and not the
Interest of the Nation, and to set up a Form of Religion, and another deceitful
Image, and not the Interest of Christ Jesus, for he could have no room among
you: It grieves my heart, and vexes the Spirit of the Lord God in me, to
consider what tenderness, and fervency, and love there was in former years to
the appearance of Gods truth, life and light; and now its become the chief
Object of your scorn, and the whole bent is to turn Christ's Interest out of the
Nation, and to destroy the Sheep of his pasture whom he has Redeemed with his
most precious Blood, to lay your sins before you, and your transgressions in
your sight, that you may see what you have done.

Oh people of England! Was it only a Form of Government, or such and such a
Government in Name that ye pursued after? or was it not the Thing it self,
Freedom it self, Liberty it self, Righteousness itself, that the heavy Yoke
might be done away, which as to any of the last I do not say but they might
have done it, if they had stood in Gods fear, and in his Counsel, for it is not
this or that Title, or Form of Government, which is only Essential to the
well-being of a People or a Nation; you have had trial of many Names, and what
do you enjoy yet that which you looked for? Oh nay, you are defrauded, you are
cheated, you are robbed and spoiled of that which the Lord God did intend you
by treacherous and false-hearted men, whose words has been smoother then Oil,
and their hearts full of rottenness, and through fair pretenses of Liberty and
Freedom, and Sanctity and Holiness, People have been led up and down like
Horses, and tossed up and down like a Tenis-ball.

Or was it a Form of Religion which might be set up by this or that Party, that
tender People did seek after, so as to be bound to this or that Form by an
outward Law, by compelling and forcing? Was it not Reformation according to the
Scriptures which was spoken of, and intended by the upright-hearted? and behold
how have we been Cheated here! Was this the Liberty of Conscience that was
pursued after, to set up Popish Tithes, which no true Christian can Pay for
Conscience sake; Or to set up a Company of Men to be Teachers to learn seven
Years the Art of Speaking, to borrow their words from Homer or Aristotle, and
Heathen Authors; or to rake up a company of Errors decreed at Cha'cedon, Niece,
Latren or Trent, for Articles of Faith, or to get words from Astrologers and
Southsayers, and mingle this with the Scripture, and call them The Gospel, and
to have set Wages by a Law given unto them, and to have Traditions of Men
brought in for the Ordinances of God; such as the Baptizing of Infants, which
Glaudius Espencius, a Popish Bishop confessed that this was to be believed by
Tradition, for it could not be proved by Scripture, that such a Company I say
as these should be forced upon the Nation as Godly Ministers, and their
invented Worship to be acknowledged as Divine, and to maintain the old
Masse-Houses, and Pay Clerks Wages which the Scriptures makes no mention of,
and all this must go in the Nane of Pure Reformation according to Scripture;
and to gather Money from house to house to buy bread and wine, and then a
Priest to patter a few words over it, and then say its Consecrated, and call it
a Sacrament; and that Priests should have Money for Marrying of People, and for
Baptizing of Infants, or for Burials, or to pay for the Ground in which the
Dead is buried; this was reprehended and Condemned by the Council of Trent in
the height of Popery in the year, 1547. and many such bad Impositions is daily
holden up, and they that holds them up must be accounted as Godly Ministers;
and many more things of this Nature are continued, which is so far against the
Consciences of many whom God has enlightened, so that they are a great
offense: Oh this is quite contrary to that which was intended, and that which
is the worst of all, many of these things are forced upon the People by a Law.

And now Oh Heads of the Nation, how do you think to be believed, or who can
trust you any more? Obligations, Covenants, Oaths and Promises all broken and
falsified; and as soon as the Common Enemy was subdued and brought under, when
you had time to have prosecuted the aforesaid things Declared for, purchased at
a dear rate, through much expense, and bloodshed, and suffering, you let most
of all their corrupt Laws stand, many of which is good for nothing but fire;
and it became as hard (if not harder) to obtain any Right by Appealing to the
Law, or Judges thereof, then it was before; and the vast Lands and Revenues of
your Enemies you divided amongst you, and sold it at inconsiderable Values, and
giving great and large sums to a company of Dreamers and blind Watchmen, and so
wasted that which might have well maintained an Army in the Nation for many
years, as though the work and the lives of many precious men, and the shedding
of the blood of thousands had been only to purchase Wages for the greedy
Priests and Hirelings who can never have enough, and so all the precious
Treasure which became a booty and a prey for you, is exhausted and gone, and
greater Pressures upon people then was before, and now the Nation more in
poverty and need then ever, and the people more in thral'd in bondage then
ever; And Queen Mary's Act for guarding Jesuits and the Mass, stands yet in
your Law Books, as though it were a heavenly Oracle, and yet you cry out of
Popery; and so when your hearts was not right with the Lord, he set you one
against another, and you came to be divided amongst your selves, and set up and
pull down, and Ordain and Repeal, and so brittle and changable, that none did
lean upon you but he was hurt by you; and yet every Party crying like Absalom,
Oh that I were a Judge in the Gate, how righteously would I do! And so every
Party have stolen away the hearts of people after them for a while, and at last
betrayed them; and thus every one has been seeking his own Interest, and not
the Lords, till the Lord has left you, and the line of Confusion is stretched
forth over you, and you bring forth the stones of Emptiness; And every Party
when he is got up into the Seat of Government, seeks Vengeance on him that has
Opposed him, and blows the sparks which sets all of a flame, and only for
Self, and Honor, and Exaltation, and Interest; and thus have you led People up
and down like Animals till they are weary; and says, It was better with us in
Egypt, though in hard servitude, then to have Yoaks multiplied upon us, and
cannot see when they will cease: Oh how unstable are you in your minds, and
runs like a swift stream till you be lost and know not how to return; And
Flattery and Deceit, that must go under the name of Civility; and one while
calling this his Highness, and the other his Excellency, and the next Month
proclaim him Tyrant and Traitor; And so if the wills of a Party be but crossed
or opposed, though honored a Week before for good Service, and Applauded, and
in a moment then proclaim him Traitor, and so betrays one another, and are
treacherous one to another, and in rage would eat up one another: Are you like
to help the Nation, and Decree one Week, and throw down next Week, and so runs
to and fro like drunken men; and how are you like to do any thing that is good?
The Lord has tried most sorts of men, especially the great Ones, and the Heads
of the People, and they are become just all dross, and little or no Virtue is
found in them at all; and so is the Nation like to be established in Freedom,
while Policy, Craft, and Treachery, and Wrath are the chiefest Instruments in
the Work? but the day of many is past, wherein they might have done good to the
Nation, and to the people of the Lord therein; but their Sun is gone down, and
their day is done, and night come upon them.

And Oh People! Will nothing satisfy you but Egypt again, that you run so fast
that way, that you have forgotten all Gods wondrous Works in this Land? Will
nothing but the Iron Furnice satisfy you, and the heavy yoke of Bondage,
which in former years you complained of? Are you grown altogether insensible of
the things that belongs unto your peace, that you lust after that which will
destroy you, and inthrall you for ever? You have had many Warnings from the
Lord, and your State has been clearly declared unto you, but have lost all
Fervency and Zeal, you are become dry, dead, careless, and secure, and now
would be content to make a Covenant with Death, and shake hands with Deceit
upon any terms, if so be that your Wills were satisfied; and the heart of
unbelief being got up in you, and a departing from the living God, you seek
Peace and Settlement in another thing where you are never like to be
established: What stands your Hopes upon the sandy Foundation of unstable men?
Have you not sufficiently yet tried all that, that it has proved as a broken
Reed, and as a Bubble which passes away? Oh is it not high time to look upon
the Lord, and to eye him; have not men of high Degree proved a lie, and men of
a low Degree proved vanity? Have you not looked long enough for Salvation from
the Mountains of the Earth, and are they not all melted and hurled into the
Sea? Are they like to Deliver you, who cannot Deliver themselves? Are they like
to settle you, who are unsettled themselves? Are they like to bring Peace unto
you, who knows not the way thereof? Are they like to put an End to Wars and
Strife, who are in the Variance, Strife, and War against the Spirit of the Lord
in themselves, and against one another? Every one striving that his heady-Mind
may be satisfied: Is that it which is like to make the Nation Free, when that
which tends to true Freedom is counted by them Bondage? Has not this and the
other Party promised great Things, and have they not all labored in vain, and
spent their strength for naught? And is not the Nation farther off from
Establishment in Righteousness, then it was sixteen years ago? And is not more
Hypocrisy and Deceit abounding and increasing, who uses good words for a Cloak
of malitiousness, and fair speeches to deceive the hearts of the Simple? And
has not many been deceived here? And are they not all become broken Bows in
which there is no strength? Oh what brittleness, giddiness, and madness, and
instability among the People, just carried about as a Tempest, blown up and
down with every Wind? And Oh how does People feed upon Wind, and the Aerie
breath of Corrupt men, which vanishes away as smoke, which has wrought no
Deliverance at all, but rather led farther and farther into slavery? Oh what is
your Spirits so heightened in? And what is it in which you so greatly rejoice?
Is it not in that which the Lord God has blasted, blown upon, and its
withered? Your Rejoicing is not good, and it stirs up the wrong part in People,
to rejoice in vanity, and to take pleasure in folly: What have you made
Captains, and are turning back again into Egypt? Do you love Pharoahs Power so
well, and the wise men's Counsels so well, and were it not just with the Lord to
let you go back into perpetual Slavery, and choose your delusion, seeing you
make your necks as an Iron Sinew, and are so stout-hearted against the Lord, if
you never attain unto that which God intended unto you, blame not the Lord; for
you have made your selves unworthy thereof, by neglecting the Counsel of the
Almighty, and dispising them with whom the Counsel of the Lord is; and
therefore its just to bring one Bramble after another to Rule over you, and one
Bryar after another to scratch, and rend, and tear you; many has born your
burden long, and have been pressed with your transgressions, and the Souls of the
Righteous have been vexed from year to year to see you despise the loving
kindness of the Lord, and the tender Offers of Mercy; but the burden at last
must come upon your own shoulders, which will bow you down; and then shall you
see the Lord would have healed you, but you would not; the Lord would have
healed your breaches, but you would not because the way did not suit with your
peevish, pettish, crooked minds, and therefore you are like to be bowed down
under that which you have Chosen, as Asses under a burden; and you will suffer
your Eyes to be put out by the uncircumcised, and has given your strength to
the Beast, and now must you grind as Sampson at a Mill; and they that exercise
Rule over you, will make sport with you. Be awakned out of your deep sleep, and
shake the Spirit of Slumber off you, that so you may come to see the State that
you have plunged your selves into, and the little Inch of Time which is yet
left you, prize it, and wait to feel the Witness of God arise in you above that
rashness and wilfulness which does so easily beset you; and eye the Lord God,
and look for Salvation from him, for else neither Person, Family, nor Nation is
like to be Established; Have you not run far enough? Are you not yet weary?
Have you obtained any thing by looking after men but breach upon breach, and
one vexation after another, the line of Confusion being stretched out over all,
and stones of emptiness brought forth, which is never like to do good, or to be
a good Foundation to build upon; for Salvation must be brought to a Nation by a
People that is saved by the Lord, who has the eternal God for their Rock and
Refuge, who has the Lord for their God and King; for they know how to Rule in
Righteousness, who have denied themselves, and all self-Interests: Take but a
view of your Leaders, and see in what they have denied themselves, or their own
Interest; and that Person or Man can never be for the general Good of all
People, neither for the Common Freedom of the Nation who seeks himself; and
they that know not the Judgment of the Lord against evil in themselves, is
never like to Judge Righteously among the People, but will turn it backward,
and let Equity fall in the Streets, and the Poor and the Needy suffer, and will
let the yoke of Bondage lie upon their Necks whom God has made Free, and count
the Proud happy, and they that work wickedness they will set them up: Oh the
Lord is grieved, and his Spirit is vexed this diverse years at these things, and
therefore has he poured Contempt upon the Mighty, and is bringing a
Consumption upon all the Honorable of the Earth, and will make them all as
burned Mountains; and while your eyes are upon them for help, your expectations
shall be frustrated, and your Hope shall be as the giving up of the Ghost: And
this is the Word of Truth unto you all, which shall not pass away unfulfilled.

And thou false and treacherous Ministry of this Nation, who only has the
power of the carnal Sword to hold thee up, and were made and Constituted to be
a Ministry by a Carnal Commandment of man, you have been the Chief
Incendiaries of much of these Comotions, Stirs, Uproars and Broils, War and
Strife; how have you twined, and turned, and wheeled about like Weather-Cocks,
and flattered every Horn of the Beast which exalted it self, though but for a
little season, and like as your Forefathers did in former years, so have you
done in the later years, flattered and set up every thing and Image, which
though there was nothing in it at all, no life nor breath, you have cried it up
for the higher Power while it stood and would work your drudgery and satisfy
your Interest; and if it went not on as you would have it, then you have cried
it down, and them that you counted the higher Power, and have said, It has
been by Gods appointment; the next Week, Usurpers and Traitors, and
countinancers of Error and Blasphemy, and has kindled a fire among People, and
set them up in a rage one against another; and when your Deceit was like to go
down, then cried Religion was despised, and the Gospel was like to fall and to
be extinguished: Come, let us Reason together a little; Is Reading Old Writers
(whom you call Heathen) seven years, and other later Popish Writers, and
Aristotle's Philosophy, any part of the Gospel? and to frame up a Speech about
Religion, out of your old Comentaries which have been made in the night of
Ignorance, and to mix Scripture with them, is this the Gospel? and to get a
Patent from a Protector, a Parliament, or a Committee to Preach at such a
place, is this like Gospel? may be a Great Seal at it, and then stay whether
the People would have you or no, and force Maintenance from them, and plead
your Letters Patent for your lawful Call, like an Indulgence from the Pope, and
to claim all the tithes of a Parish, and all Oblations, Obventions, Mortuaries;
Is this like the Gospel, or like the best Reformed Churches which you talk on
in that you call your Covenant, and to set up the old Masshouses, baptized
Bells, Hour-glasses, Clerks to say Amen, Churchwardens, is this like the
Reformed Churches? and to gather Money from House to House to buy Bread and
Wine, and then mut^er a few words over it, and give it to People on the midday
like a Dinner, and call this the Lords Supper, or a Sacrament; and to Baptize
Infants, and get Money for Registering a Name, and call this an Ordinance of
God; is this like the Reformed Churches in the Primitive times? and to take
Money for Marrying of People, is this Gospel like, to Preach over the dead, and
observe other Ceremonies like the Popes Exequies, is this like the best
reformed Churches? Nay, which of all the reformed Churches (so called) who are
broken off from Popery in something, have not denied Tithes? Is there any
Ministers among all the Protestants in Europe, but they have wholly
relinquished Tithes as to be no Gospel maintenance, as Germany and the Easteren
Countries, France, Geneva and Switserland, and many others, yet these
treacherous Priests of England boast of the Purity of Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline beyond all, and these must go under the name of Godly learned
Ministry, if this be godly, what is ungodly? If this be learned, what is
ignorance? and to stay at a Village 20. or 30. years if there be gain enough,
if this be laboriousnesse, what is idleness? and what havoc and spoil have you
made within this 20. years in this Land, more then the corrupted Bishops did
before? Oh, what havoc have you made, and spoil of men's Estates in this Nation
within these few years, which was called years of liberty, if the Chronicles
were searched amongst all the Protestants in Europe, the like parallel could not
be found, neither has there been the like wickedness acted; many dyed in Prison
for denying your insatiable desires; and because you demand things contrary to
the best reformed Churches, which you say you press after, you must deny all
the things before mentioned, before any judicious man will believe; and
therefore it is in vain for you to cover your selves with a cloak of
hypocrisy, for God has opened an eye in thousands, that you will never be
able to blind, though you stir up smoke, and dirt, and dust, and fogs, and
mists of ignorance that darkens the Air, yet they will see through it, and by
the breath of his mouth in whom they have believed, it will all be scattered,
but however it is just with the Lord to let loose upon your backs the old
Prelates and Bishops to be tormenters of you, and make you drudges and slaves
as you were formerly, and it is just with the Lord to let the Dragons power
over you all again, and to bring a scourge upon you, and the people who have
hearkened to your lies and deceit, that the helper and they that are helped
may fall together, that the blind and they that have chosen the blind for a
leader, may both fall into the Ditch together, into the Pit that they may never
rise again.

Yet know this Oh Nation, and the Inhabitants therein, there is a People in
thee which is precious, and so accounted of the Lord, that has not joined to
your backsliding, but have kept their Integrity and their first Love, neither
have they joined to your Brittlnesse, and Instability; neither have they sought
themselves, but the good of the Nation, and all the People therein; and though
they have had many provocations as from the Cruel and merciless Cruelty of
self-seeking men, yet they have born and suffered, knowing vengeance belongs
unto the Lord, who in his day will recompense sury upon his Adversaries, and
scatters them as the Wind scatters Clouds, and so are in peace and quietness
under the shadow of him who has brought them forth with a mighty hand and
outstretched arm, notwithstanding all Opposition; which has been very great,
even by all Parties and Interests hitherto, and little or no regard has been
had to this People; but they have been as for a prey and for a spoil unto all,
and unreasonable men have plowed long furrows upon their backs, and they have
had no helper in the Earth: But on the contrary, every one has lent his hand
to bow them down, and tread upon them as Ashes under the soals of their feet,
and yet no evil to lay to their Charge, but false surmises and receiving the
false Representations of Corrupt men, whose hearts have gain said any
appearance of good that ever appeared, if it crossed their ignorant corrupt
mind; What has this People come to harm thee Oh Nation, that thou make them
thy Butt to shoot at, and they are become the Object of your scorn and
dirision? What have they Plotted or Contrived Rebellion? Have they gone out
upon their Enemies and sought Vengeance against them as every Party has done
else besides, except its become a crime to speak the Truth, and bear witness
against the Hypocrisy and Deceit of treacherous men, and to lay their
iniquities before them, that they may see and be ashamed, and turn from their
evil which has provoked the Lord to Anger; and because of their rejection of
Gods Counsel, they cannot be Established: And for the sake of this Remnant, he
will confound and overthrow on the right hand, and on the left, all that rise
up against them, though they should never open their mouths as to plead their
Innocence; yet the Lord will, and condemn them that rise up against them, and
plead the Cry of the Oppressed that Cry unto him day and night. which the Lord
has heard and considered, and is come down, and has begun his Work though man
does not see it, and has poured forth a Spirit of Confusion upon them who has
illwill to the Lambs of Christ's Fold; and who shall act any thing further, as
to think to root out the heritage of God, their Counsel shall be turned
back-ward, and their Enterprise Cursed; For God he has determined to lay the
rop-stone with shouting, and that which he is building he will finish; and of a
truth this is the Family which he has Chosen, which his love is unto, and his
power amongst, and their Adversaries will God rebuke for their sake. Therefore
Oh Nation Consider and take this One Warning more, that thou proceed not
further to thy hurt, and repent when it is too late.

THE END.

