A Rough Draught OF A NEW MODEL AT SEA.

LONDON, Printed for A. Banks. 1694.

A Rough Draught OF A NEW MODEL AT SEA.
I Will make no other Introduction to the following Discourse, than that the
Importance of our being strong at Sea, was ever very great, so in our present
Circumstances it is grown to be much greater; because, as formerly, our Force
in Shipping contributed greatly to our Trade and Safety. So now it is become
indispensibly necessary to our very being.

It may be said now to England, Martha, Martha, thou art busy about many
things, but one thing is necessary to the Question, What shall we do to be
saved in this World? There is no other answer, but this, Look to your Mote.

The first Article of an English-man's Political Creed, must be, That he
believes in the Sea, etc. without that, there needs no General Council to
pronounce him incapable of Salvation here.

We are in an Island, confined to it by God Almighty, not as a Penalty, but a
Grace, and one of the greatest that can be given to Mankind. Happy Confinement,
that has made us Free, Rich, and Quiet; a fair Portion in this World, and very
well worth the preserving; a Figure that ever has been envied, and could never
be imitated by our Neighbors. Our Situation has made Greatness abroad by
Land Conquests unnatural things to us. It is true, we have made Excursions, and
Glorious ones too, which make our Names great in History, but they did not last.

Admit the English to be Giants in Courage, yet they must not hope to succeed
in making War against Heaven, which seems to have enjoined them to acquiesce
in being happy within their own Circle. It is no Paradox to say that England
has its Root in the Sea, and a deep one too; from whence it sends its
Branches into both the Indies. We may say further in our present Case, That if
Allegiance is due to Protection, ours to the Sea is due from that Rule, since
by that, and by that alone, we are to be protected; and if we have of late
suffered Usurpation of other Methods contrary to the Homage we owe to that
which must preserve us. It is time now to restore the Sea to its Right; and as
there is no Repentance effectual without amendment, so there is not a moment to
be lost in the going about it.

It is not pretended to launch into such a voluminous Treatise, as to set down
every thing to which so comprehensive a Subject might lead me; for as the Sea
has little less variety in it than the Land; so the Naval Force of England
extends its self into a great many Branches, each of which are important
enough to require a discourse apart, and peculiarly applied to it. But there
must be a preference to some consideration above others, when the weight of
them is so visibly Superior that it cannot be contested. It is there first that
the Foundations are to be laid of our Naval Economy; amongst these there is
one Article which in its own nature must be allowed to be the Cornerstone of
the Building, viz.

The Choice of Officers, with the Discipline and Encouragement belonging to
them. Upon this Head only I shall then take the liberty to venture my opinion
into the World, with a real submission to those who may offer any thing better
for the advantage of the public.

The first Question then will be, out of what sort of Men the Officers of the
Fleet are to be chosen; and this immediately leads us to the present
Controversy between the Gentlemen and the Tarpaulins.

The usual Objection on both sides, are too general to be relied upon.
Partiality and common Prejudices direct most Men's Opinions, without entering
into the particular reasons which ought to be the ground of it: There is so
much ease in aquiescing in Generals, that the Ignorance of those who cannot
distinguish, and the Largeness of those who will not, makes Men very apt to
decline the trouble of stricter Enquiries, which they think too great a Price
for being in the right, let it be never so valuable.

This makes them judge in the Lump, and either let their Opinions swim along
with the Stream of the World, or give them up wholly to be directed by success:
The effect of this is that they change their Minds upon every present
uneasiness, wanting a steady Foundation, upon which their judgment should be
formed. This is a pearching upon the Twiggs of things, and not going to the
Root: But sure the Matter in question deserves to be examined in another
manner, since so much depends upon it.

To state the thing impartially, it must be owned that it seems to lie
fairest for the Tarpaulin: It gives an Impression, that must have so much
weight as to make a Man's Opinion lean very much on that side, it carries so
much Authority with it, it seems to be so unquestionable that those are
fittest to command at Sea, who have not only made it their Calling, but their
Element; that there must naturally be a prejudice to any thing that can be said
against it: There must therefore be some reason very extraordinary to support
the argument on the other side, or else the Gentlemen could never enter the
Lists against such a violent Objection, which seems not to be resisted. I
will introduce my Argument with an assertion, which as I take to be true almost
in all Cases, so it is necessary to be explained and enforced in this. The
assertion is, That there is hardly a single Proposition to be made, which is
not deceitful, and the tying our Reason too close to it, may in many cases be
destructive. Circumstances must come in, and are to be made a part of the
matter of which we are to judge; positive Decisions are always dangerous, more
especially in Politics. A Man who will be Master of an Argument, must do like
a skilful General, who sends Scouts on all sides to see whether there may not
be an Enemy. So he must look round to see what Objections can be made, and not
go on in a straight Line, which is the ready way to lead him into a mistake.

Before then that we conclude what sort of Men are fittest to command at Sea, a
Principle is to be laid down, that there is a differing Consideration to be had
of such a subject matter as is in it self distinct and independent, and of such
a one, as being a Limb of a Body, or a Wheel of a Frame, there is a necessity
of suiting it to the rest, and preserving the harmony of the whole: A Man must
not in that case restrain himself to the separate Consideration of that single
part, but must take care it may fall in and agree with the shape of the whole
Creature of which it is a Member. According to this Proposition, which I take
to be indisputable, it will not, I hope, appear an Affectation or an
extravagant Fit of unseasonable Politics, if, before I enter into the
particular state of the present Question, I say something of the Government of
England, and make that the groundwork of what sort of Men are most proper to
be made use of to command at Sea.

The Forms of Government to which England must be subjected, are either
Absolute Monarchy, a Commonwealth, or a Mixed Monarchy, as it is now; with
those natural Alterations that the exigency of Affairs may from time to time
suggest. As to absolute Monarchy, I will not allow my self to be transported
into such Invectives as are generally made against it; neither am I ready to
enter into the aggravating-stile of calling every thing Slavery, that
restrains Men in any part of their Freedom; One may discern in this, as in
most other things, the good and the bad of it: We see by too near an Instance,
what France does by it; it does not only struggle with the rest of Christendom,
but is in a fair way of giving Law to it.

This is owing in great measure to a Despotick and undivided Power; the
uncontrollable Authority of the directive Counsels makes every thing move
without Disorder of Opposition, which must give an advantage that is plain
enough of it self, without being proved by the melancholy Experience we have of
it at this time.

I see and admire this; yet I consider at the same time, that all things of
this kind are Comparative; that as on one side, without Government Men cannot
enjoy what belongs to them in particular, nor can a Nation secure or preserve
it self in general; so on the other side, the end of Government being, that
Mankind should live in some competent state of Freedom, it is very unnatural to
have the end destroyed by the means that were originally made use of to attain
it. In this respect something is to be ventured rather than submit to such a
precarious state of Life as would make it a burden to a reasonable Creature;
and therefore after I have owned the advantages in some kind of an unlimitted
Government, yet whilst they are attended with so many other discouraging
Circumstances, I cannot think but they may be bought too dear; and if it should
be so, that it is not possible for a State to be Great and Glorious, except the
Subjects are wretchedly miserable. I am ashamed to own my low-spirited frailty,
in preferring such a Model of Government as may agree with the reasonable
enjoyment of a Free People, before such a one by which Empire is to be extended
at such an unnatural price. Besides, whatever Men's opinions may be one way or
another, in the general Question, there is an Argument in our Case that
shuts the Door to any Answer to it, (viz.) We cannot subsist under a
Despotick Power, our very Being would be destroyed by it; for we are to
consider, we are a very little spot in the Map of the World, and make a great
Figure only by Trade, which is the Creature of Liberty; one destroyed, the
other falls to the ground by a natural consequence, that will not admit a
dispute. If we should be measured by our Acres, we are poor inconsiderable
People; we are exalted above our Natural bounds, by our good Laws, and our
excellent Constitution. By this we are not only happy at home, but considerable
abroad: Our Situation, our Humor, our Trade, do all concur to strengthen this
Argument. So that all other Reasons must give place to such a one as makes it
out, That there is no mean between being a Free Nation, and no Nation.

We are no more a People, nor England can no longer keep its name from the
Moment, that our Liberty are extinguished; the vital strength that should
support us, being withdrawn. We should then be no more than the Carcass of a
Nation, with no other security than that of Contempt, and to subsist upon no
other Tenure, than that we should be below the giving temptation to our
stronger Neighbors to devour us. In my judgment therefore, there is such a
short decision to be made upon this Subject, that in relation to England, an
Absolute Monarchy is an unreasonable thing to be wished, as I hope it will be
impossible ever to be obtained.

It must be considered in the next place, Whether England likely is to be
turned into a Commonwealth. It is hard at any time to determine what will be
the shape of the next Revolution, much more at this time would it be
inexcuseably arrogant to undertake it. Who can foresee whether it will be from
without or from within, or from both? Whether with or without the Concurrence
of the People? Whether regularly produced or violently imposed? I shall not
therefore Magisterially declare it impossible that a Commonwealth should be
settled here; but I may give my humble opinion, that according to all
appearances, it is very improbable.

I will first lay it down for a Principle, That it is not a sound way of
arguing to say, That if it can be made out, that the Form of a Commonwealth
will best suit with the Interest of the Nation, it must for that reason of
necessity prevail.

I will not deny but that Interest will not lie, is a right Maxim, wherever
it is sure to be understood; else one had as good affirm, That no Man in
particular, nor Mankind in general, can ever be mistaken. A Nation is a great
while before they can see, and generally they must feel first before their
Sight is quite cleared: This makes it so long before they can see their
Interest, that for the most part it is too late for them to pursue it: If Men
must be supposed always to follow their true Interest, it must be meant of a
new Manufactory of Mankind by God Almighty; there must be some new Clay, the
old Stuff never yet made any such infallible Creature.

This being premised, it is to be inquired, Whether instead of inclination or a
leaning toward a Commonwealth, there is not in England a general dislike to it;
if this be so, as I take it to be, by a very great disparity in numbers, it
will be in vain to dispute the Reason whilst Humor is against it, allowing the
weight that is due to the Argument which may be alleged for it; yet if the
Herd is against it, the going about to convince them would have no other effect
than to show, That nothing can be more impertinent than good Reasons, when they
are misplaced or ill-timed.

I must observe that there must be some previous Dispositions in all great
Changes to facilitate and to make way for them; and I think it not at all
abused to affirm, that such resolutions are seldom made at all, except by the
general preparations of Men's Minds, they are half made before it is plainly
visible that Men go about them.

Though it seems to me, that the Argument alone makes all others unnecessary,
yet I must take notice, that besides what has been said upon this Subject,
there are certain Preliminaries to the first building a Commonwealth; some
materials absolutely necessary for the carrying on such a Fabric, which are at
present wanting amongst us, I mean Virtue, Morality, Diligence, Religion, or at
least Hypocrisy. Now this Age is so plain dealing, as not to dissemble so far
as to an outward pretense of Qualities which seem at present so unfashionable,
and under so much Discountenance.

From hence we may draw a plain and natural Inference, That a Commonwealth is
not fit for us, because we are not fit for a Commonwealth.

This being granted, the Supposition of this form of Government of England,
with all its Consequences to the present Question, must be excluded, and
absolute Monarchy having been so too by the reasons at once alleged, it will
without further Examination fall to a Mixed Government, as we now are: I will
not say that there is never to be any alteration; the constitution of the
several Parts that concur to make up the frame of the present Government, may
be altered in many things, in some for the better, and in others perhaps for
the worse, according as Circumstances shall arise to induce a Change; and as
Passion and Interest shall have more or less Influence upon the public
Councils: but still if it remains in the whole so far a Mixed Monarchy, that
there shall be a restraint upon the Prince, as to the exercise of a Despotick
Power, it is enough to make it a groundwork for the present Question. It
appears then, that a bounded Monarchy is that kind of Government which will
most probably prevail and continue in England; from whence it must follow (as
has been hinted before) that every considerable part ought to be so composed,
as the better to conduce to the preserving the harmony of the whole
Constitution. The Navy is of so great importance, that it would be disparaged
by calling it less than the Life and Soul of Government.

Therefore to apply the Argument to the Subject we are upon, in case the
Officers should be all Tarpaulins, it would either be in reality, or at least
it would be thought too great a tendency to a Commonwealth; such a part of the
Constitution being Democratically disposed, may be suspected to endeavor to
bring it into that shape; and where the influence must be so strong, the
supposition will be the more justifiable: In short, if the Maritim Force, which
is the only thing that can defend us, should be wholly directed by the lower
sort of Men, with an entire exclusion of the Nobility and Gentry, it will not
be easy to answer the Arguments supported by so great a Probability, that such
a Scheme would not only lean toward a Democracy, but directly lead us into it.

Let us now examine the contrary Proposition, viz. That all Officers should be
Gentlemen.

Here the Objection lies so fair of its introducing an Arbitrary Government,
that it is as little to be answered in that respect, as the former is in the
other. Gentlemen in a general definition will be suspected to lie more than
other Men under the temptations of being made Instruments of unlimitted Power;
their Relations, their way of Living, their taste of the Entertainments of the
Court, inspire an Ambition that generally draws their inclinations toward it,
besides the gratifying of their Interests. Men of Quality are often taken with
the Ornaments of Government; the Splendour dazleth them so, as that their
Judgments are surprised by it; and there will be always some, that have so
little remorse for invading other Men's Liberties, that it makes them less
sollicitous to preserve their own.

These things throw them naturally into such a Dependence as might give a
dangerous Bias: if they alone were in Command at Sea, it would make that great
Wheel turn by an irregular Motion; and instead of being the chief means of
preserving the whole Frame, might come to be the chief Instruments to
discompose and dissolve it.

The two former exclusive Propositions being necessarily to be excluded in this
Question, there remains no other Expedient; neither can any other Conclusion
be drawn from the Argument as it has been stated, than that there must be a
mixture in the Navy of Gentlemen and Tarpaulins, as there is in the
Constitution of the Government, of Power and Liberty. This mixture is not to be
so rigorously defined, as to set down the exact Proportion there is to be of
each; the greater or less number must be directed by Circumstances, of which
the Government is to judge, and which makes it improper to set such Bounds, as
that upon no occasion it shall on either side be lessened or enlarged. It is
possible the Men of Wapping may think they are injured by giving them any
Partners in the Dominion of the Sea; they may take it unkindly to be Jostled in
their own Element by Men of such a different Education, that they may be said
to be of another Species; they will be apt to think it an Usurpation upon them;
and notwithstanding the Instances that are against them, and which give a kind
of Prescription on the other side, they will not easily acquiesce in what they
conceive to be a hardship to them.

But I shall in a good measure reconcile my self to them by what follows; (
viz.) The Gentlemen shall not be capable of bearing Office at Sea, except they
be Tarpaulins too; that is to say, except they are so trained up by a continued
habit of living at Sea, that they may have a right to be admitted free Denizons
of Wapping. Upon this depends the whole matter, and indeed here lies the
difficulty; because the Gentlemen brought up under the connivance of a looser
Discipline, and of an easier Admittance, will take it heavily to be reduced
within the Fetters of such a new Model; and I conclude they will be extremely
averse to that, which they will call an Unreasonable Yoke upon them, that their
Original Consent is never to be expected. But if it appears to be convenient,
and which is more, that it is necessary for the preservation of the whole, that
it should be so, the Government must be called in Aid to suppress these first
boylings of Discontent; the Rules must be imposed with such Authority, and the
Execution of them must be so well supported, that by degrees their Impatience
will be subdued, and they will concur in an Establishment, to which they will
every day be more reconciled.

They will find it will take away the Objections which are now thrown upon
them, of setting up (...) Masters without having ever been Apprentices; or at
least, without having served out their time.

Mankind naturally swells against Favor and Partiality; their belief of
their own Merit makes Men object them to a prosperous Competitor, even when
there is no pretense for it; but where there is the least handle offered, to be
sure it will be taken. So in this Case, when a Gentleman is preferred at Sea,
the Tarpaulin is very apt to impute it to Friend or Favor: But if that
Gentleman has before his preferrment passed through all the Steps, which ought
to lead to it; that he smells as much of Pitch and Tarr as those that were
swadled in a Sail-cloth; his having a Scutcheon will be so far from doing him
harm, that it will set him upon the advantage Ground: It will draw a real
respect to his Quality when so supported, and give him an Influence and an
Authority infinitely superior to that which the mere Seamen can ever pretend to.

When a Gentleman has learned how to Obey, he will grow very much fitter to
Command; his own Memory will advise him not to exact unreasonable things; and
for smaller faults, not to inflict too rigorous punishments: He will better
resist the Temptations of Authority (which are great) when he reflecteth how
much he has at other times wished it might be gently exercised, when he was
liable to the rigor of it.

When the undistinguisht discipline of a Ship has tamed the young Mastership,
which is apt to arise from a Gentleman's Birth and Education, he then grows
proud in the right place, and valueth himself first upon knowing his Duty, and
then upon doing it.

In plain English, Men of Quality in their several Degrees, must either restore
themselves to a better opinion both for Morality and Diligence, or else Quality
it self will be in danger of being extinguished.

The Original Gentleman is almost lost in Strictness, when Posterity does not
still further adorn by their Virtue: The Scutcheon their Ancestors first got
for them by their Merit, they deserve the penalty of being deprived of it.

To expect that Quality alone should waft Men up into Places and Employments,
is as unreasonable, as to think that a Ship, because it is Carved and Gilded,
should be fit to go to Sea without Sails or Tackling. But when a Gentleman
makes no other use of his Quality, than to incite him the more to do his Duty,
it will give such a true and settled Superiority, as must destroy all
Competition from those that are below him.

It is time now to go to the Probationary Qualifications of an Officer at Sea;
and I have some to offer, which I have digested in my thoughts, I hope
Impartially, that they may not be Speculative Notions, but things easy and
practicable, if the directing Powers will give due countenance and
encouragement to the execution of them: But whilst I am going about to set them
down, though this little Essay was made to no other end, than to introduce them,
I am, upon better recollection, induced to put a restraint upon my self, and
rather retract the Promise I made at the beginning, than by advising the
particular Methods, by which I conceive the good end that is aimed at may be
obtained, to incurr the imputation of the thing of the World, of which I would
least be guilty, which is, of anticipating by my private opinion, the Judgment
of the Parliament, or seeming out of my slender stock of Reason, to dictate to
the Supreme Wisdom of the Nation. They will, no doubt, consider the present
Establishments for the Discipline at Sea, which are many of them very good, and
if well executed, might go a great way in the present Question. But I will not
say they are so perfect, but that others may be added to make them more
effectual, and that some more Supplemental Expedients may be necessary to
complete what is yet defective; and whenever the Parliament shall think fit to
take this Matter into their Consideration, I am sure they will not want for
their direction the Auxiliary Reasons of any Man without doors, much less of
one whose Thoughts are so entirely and unaffectedly resigned to whatever they
shall determine in this or any thing else relating to the Public.

FINIS.

