A TREATISE OF Romances AND THEIR ORIGINAL.

By Monsieur HUET.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed by R. Battersby, for S. Heyrick, at Grays Inn Gate in Holborn.
1672.

Licensed, October 21. 1671.

Roger L'Estrange.

THE Translator TO THE READER.
AS our Manners and People are refined, Romances also hold pace with us, and by
the same degrees arrive to perfection. Giants, Dragons, and Enchanted Castles,
which made so much noise in Romances of former times, are now no longer heard
of. The Composers do now consult Nature, and endeavor to exhibit her true and
lively Portraict in all their works, and so linck Instruction with Delight,
that while the Reader gapes for this, he swallows both; they cajole and
surprise him into Virtue, and make him good when he never dreams on it. But it
is not my Province to plead for Romances, be they good or bad, since they are
now so much in vogue in the World, and make so considerable a part of the
politer Learning: it is presumed the Ingenious have a Curiosity, and desire a
more perfect account of them, then possibly hitherto they have met withal.

The generality are so much in the dark about these matters, they neither know
whence they spring, nor how they got the name of Romances. The two Italian
Authors, cited in this Treatise, were it should seem diligent enough in their
researches: yet you will find what pitiful conjectures they were forced upon,
and how wide they shoot from the mark, while one would derive it from (...),
the other from Rheyms.

You will find in our Author, besid^s his great learning and acquaintance with
Antiquity, a critical wit and correct Judgment; many instances whereof are
displayed as he traverses Egypt, Phoenicia, Arabia, Persia, Syria, and the
Indies, in pursuance of his design: for our Author is not content with Suidas,
and Photius, and what other Magazines of Learning and Monuments are found in
Europe; but he ransacks the East, and makes the Oriental Libraries contributary.

After our Author has taken survey of these people, and considered their Wit,
Inclination and Genius, and critizised upon their Writings and Romances, he
descendes in course to the famous Bishop of Tricca, Heliodorus; whom he avows
to have excelled all whoever went before him; and among other things takes
notice of the singular Modesty, observed religiously throughout his Work,
though others say too superstitiously. For I find the Critics are not well
pleased that he should make Theagenes give the fair Chariclea a box o'th'Ear,
once when she would have kissed him: that have Lovers to do, say they, with his
Episcopal virtues? the toyings and little freedoms of Lovers and the reverence
of Bishops suit but ill together; a Vestal Chastity is none of the
accomplishments of an Hero, whose Love is above these scrupulous formalities
which clog his Noble emotions and agreeable transports. They conclude that he
had better have burnt his Book ten times over, then have made his Hero so
absurdly guilty, and left so vile an aspersion on his Name.

After Heliodorus Romances degenerated, and yielded to that common fate which
shortly after fell upon good Letters; and of Natural, Exact and Probable,
became Wild, Grotesque and Chymerical; and so continued till of late days
Monsieur d'Urfee took Pen^^ Hand, and presented the World with his Astrea;
which our Author avers to be the most perfect piece that ever was Writ in its
kind. For all this, he escapes the Critics no better then Heliodorus: what
notion, say they, had he of bien-seance, when he makes his Heroine Astrea one
of the three Shepheardesses, who are discovered all naked to Celadon? was this
confistent with her honor? or had not she otherwise sufficient wherewith to
complete her Conquest.

And Silvander, say they, is made a philisopher to good purpose; brought from
the famous School of the Massilians to turn Shepherd, and in this habit and
condition to read Philosophical Lectures, and deliver such profound notions, as
might turn the Brain, and confound all the Shepherds in Christendom: And is
allowed the opportunity to discover his Talent, and talk wisely, but once in
all his life time, and that is when nobody hears him.

Our Author next takes notice of Mademoiselle de Scudery, to whom the World is
obliged for the Illustrious Bassa, Grand Cyrus, and Clelia; the worth of all
which pieces the Reader cannot be ignorant of; I shall therefore only present
the Reader with some cavils or exceptions, which are made against some
particulars in them. Some object that her so Illustrious Bassa is no very good
Christian, and that it was no part of an Heroic virtue to dissemble his
Religion. His Horns should have been concealed and not his Religion whereas
they are made most shamefully notorious: to make the Hero a Cuckold (say they)
is such on enormity, as but too much bewrays the sex of the Author. She very
franckly gives him a Wife, who (make him thankful) was no Novice, a Woman of
experience, andone who after three Months abode in the Seraglio gave him to
judge whether she had needed any of his instructions.

They say likewise, that whoever had taught this Author her Geography, had
cheated her extremely. The Fleet of this Bassa departed from the Port at
Constantinople, and at or about the end of three Weeks after were seen
Caracaoling in the Caspian Sea; 'twas merrily Sailed, in about three weeks time
four hundred Leagues by Land; what mortal Ships could do the like in these
days? She had consulted some Cambridge Burgess to make the Highways Navigable.

The Grand Cyrus too, say they, is as injuriously dealt withal. For all his
Toil, Travail, and Fatigue, all his Trophies and Conquests, which he Sacrifices
to Mandane; he is like to have but a sorry bargain of her, she having been
stolen away four times ere she came to his hands. The Grand Cyrus must be so
credulous as believe she escapes pure and untouched from all these Ravishers;
or else this mighty Hero must be content with their leavings. Grant she were
Chaste, these were too unconscionable proofs of her virtue; for once
peradventure she might come off clear, but relapses are always mortal in these
cases. Her Honor might defend her the first assault, but the second bears down
all, is not to be resisted by a Fort already shaken, or by so frayl materials
as Flesh and Blood.

Neither (say they) has this Author been more favorable to her own Sex. Clelia
has as much cause to complain of hard usage, in assigning her such a paultry
Gallant as Aronces. Never a younger Brother of Normandy could leave a meaner
Idea of his person and virtue, then the Hero of this Romance. Suppose one who
has neither Page nor Equipage; one in a greasy Buff^ Doublet, who changes his
Crabat but once in eight days, whose fortune has no establ^shment, who spunges
upon his friends, dining to day with one, next day with another, and climbes up
three Stories h^gh to Bed at Night; This is the Portraict of Aronces. And
because forsooth he was Son to Porsenna, King of the Hetrurians, (whose whole
incomes scarce amounted to ten thousand pounds per annum and who at one whistle
could call all his Subjects together) ^lelia must be made his Conquest. If (say
they) it cost an Author ought to rig out his Hero in good Clothes and handsome
Equipage, to Lodge him in a sumptuous Palace, and provide him a plentiful
Table, it then might be presumed that none would tick with him for so much; but
considering that all this expense is only imagination, it is strange that any
should be such a niggard of it, and deny so small a matter to an Hero; unless
it were done on purpose to disparage Clelia, and with these indignities destroy
the quality and reputation of an Heroine, which she so well had merited.

Whereas our Author gives a hint of the Runick Characters, I might give account
here of the famous Edda, which contains the wonderful atchievments of Woden,
and his Wife Frigga, (whose names we still retain in our Wednesday and Friday)
with the rest of our Gothish Ancestors: a Book which for antiquity might
contend with Homer, and as fabulous as the best.

And whereas in the controversy betwixt the Greeks and the Arabians concerning
Aesop our Author seems to give the balance to the Greeks, I might easily turn
the scales with the advantage to the Orientals.

And whereas he compute what time Rimes first obtained in Europe; I might
examine whether or no Nero, who was a better Poet then Emperor, had any
knowledge of them, and made then his diversion; and likewise whether they or
the Measures and Cadences of the Greeks and Latins have the advantage, some
affirming that Rhyme is trivial and childish, others asserting that Rhyme is more
agreeable, more sweet, and more natural then the other; and though the other
came first into the World, yet nature (like most Mothers) rather gives her
blessing to the Cadet, then to the First born. The general approbation of all
Nations, and the Hebrews themselves using Rhyme in whatever Poesies they make at
this day, all concur to the strengthening of this opinion.

But I have already too long detained thee from what will give thee greater
satisfaction; shall therefore only entreat that thou may not impeach our
Author for making Melkin and Thaliessin English: seeing that Foreiners think
themselves not bound to take notice when this Isle was called Albion, when
Britain, when England; besides that, writing in French, if he had called them
Britains, they might have passed with some for French Britains, and thereby our
Nation have lost the honor of having given Birth to the first Romances in
Europe.

MONSIEUR HUET TO MONSIEUR de Segrais.
SIR,
YOur curiosity stands with reason, and the desire to know the Original of
Romances is proper for you, who so perfectly understand the Art to make them;
but the doubt is, whether it be so proper for me to undertake your satisfaction.

I have not Books, and my head at present is filled with matters of altogether
another nature: And I know well how cumbersome and difficult this research is;
it is neither in Provence nor Spain (as many believe) that we may hope to find
the first beginnings of this agreeable Amusement; we must in quest thereof
travel remotest Countries, and in the most latent Paths of Antiquity. However I
will comply with your desire; for as our ancient and strict friendship gives
you right to demand me all things, so it takes from me the liberty to deny you
any thing.

Heretofore under the name of Romance were comprehended not only those which
were writ in Prose, but those also which were writ in Verse. Giraldi and Pigna
his Disciples in their Treatises De Romanzi scarce take notice of any others,
and give the Boyardos and Arioste for Models. But at this day the contrary
usage has prevailed, and they which now are properly called Romances, are
Fictions of Love-Adventures, writ in Prose with Art, for the delight and
Instruction of the Readers.

I say Fictions, to distinguish them from true Histories; I add, of
Love-Adventures, for that Love ought to be the principal subject of a Romance.
They must be writ it Prose, to be conformable to the Mode of the times. They
must be writ with Art, and under certain rules; otherwise they will only be a
confused mass without order or beauty.

The chief end of a Romance, or (at least) that which ought so to be, and which
the Composer ought to propose to himself, is the Instruction of the Reader, to
whom he must always present Virtue crowned, and Vice punished. But as the
spirit of man naturally hates to be taught, and self-love does spurn against
Instructions, it is to be deceived by the blandishments of pleasure, and the
severity of Precepts to be sweetn'd by the agreement of Examples; and thus our
own faults may be amended while we condemn them in others.

Thus the diversion of the Reader, which a good Romancer seems chiefly to
design, is but subordinate to his principal end, which is the Instruction of
the mind, and correction of manners: And Romances are more or less regular,
according as they are more or less remote from this definition and end.

It Is only of these I pretend to entertain you, and I presume your curiosity
reaches no further.

I shall not therefore treat here of Romances in Verse, much less of Epick
Poems; which besides that they are in Verse have moreover different essentials,
which distinguish them from Romances, though otherwise there is a very great
relation; and following the maxim of Aristotle (who teaches that a Poet is
more a Poet by the Fictions he invents then by the Verse which he composes)
Makers of Romances may be rancked among the Poets. Petronius tells us that
Poems are to move in a great circumference, by the Ministry of the Gods, and
expressions free and hardy, so that they may be taken rather for Oracles,
thrown from a spirit full of fury, then for a faithful and exact Narration.

Romances are more simple, are not so lofty, nor have those Figures in the
invention and expression.

Poems have more of the mavelous, though always bounded within probability.
Romances have more of the probable, though sometimes they incline to the
mavelous.

Poems are more regular and more correct in the contrivance, and receive less
of matter of Events and Episodes.

Romances are capable of more, because being not so elevate and full of
Figures, they do not so much stretch the wit, and so suffer it to be furnished
with a greater number of different Ideas.

In fine, Poems have for their subject some Military on Politic action, and
treat not of Love but upon occasion.

Romances on the contrary have Love for their principal Theme, and meddle not
with War or Politics but by accident; I speak of regular Romances: for the
most part of the old French, Spanish, and Italian Romances have much more of
the Soldier then the Gallant in them.

This made Giraldi believe that the name of Romance came from a Greek word,
which signifies Force and Valor, because these Books were made to set forth
and vaunt the valor and prowess of the Palladines; but Giraldi was mistaken in
this, as you shall see afterward.

Neither are these Histories comprehended here, which are observed to contain
many falsehoods, such as that of Herodotus, who (by the way) is not so guilty
as many think. The Navigation of Hanno; the Life of Apollonius, writ by
Philostratus, and many others.

These works are true in the mane, and false in some parts; Romances on the
contrary are true in some particulars, and false in the gross; those contain
truth mingled with some falsehood, these are falsehoods with some intermixture
of truth. I would say that truth has the greater stroke, in Histories, but that
falsehood is predominant in the Romance, insomuch that these may indeed be
altogether false, both in the parts and in the whole.

Aristotle teaches us that Tragedy, the argument whereof is known and taken
from History, is the most perfect, because it is nearer verisimility then that
whose argument is new and mere invention; nevertheless he condemns not the
later, his reason is for that notwithstanding the argument be drawn from
History, yet the greater number of the Spectators are ignorant of it, and it is
new in respect of them, and fails not however to give diversion to all the
World. The same may be said of Romances, with this distinction always, that a
total Fiction of the argument is more allowable in Romances, where the Actors
are but of indifferent Fortune, as in the Comic Romances, then in the Heroic
Romances, where Princes and Conquerours are the Actors, and where the
adventures are Memorable and Illustrious, because it is in no wise probable that
the great Transactions and Events lay hid to the World, and neglected by
Historians and probability which is not always found in History, is essential
to a Romance.

I exclude also from the number of Romances certain Histories which in the
gross and in the detayl are mere invention, but invented only for default of
truth: such are the imaginary Originals of most Nations, especially of the most
Barbarous; of which sort are those Histories so grossly forged by the Monk
Annius Viterbensis, which have merited the indignation or contempt of all the
Learned.

I put the same difference between Romances and these kind of works, as
betwixt those who by an innocent artifice disguise and go in Masquerade to
divert themselves, while they give diversion to others. And Rogues who taking
the name, and perso^^^ing such as are dead or absent, possess themselves of
their goods by favor of some resemblance.

Lastly, I exclude Fables also from my Subject, for a Romance is the Fiction of
things, which may but never have happened. Fables are Fictions of things, which
never have nor ever can happen.

After having agreed what works properly deserve the name of Romances, I assert
that their invention is due to the Orientals, I mean to the Egyptians,
Arabians, Persians and Syririans. You will avow the same without doubt, when I
have shown that most of the great Romancers of Antiquity sprung from these
people. Clearcus, who made Books of Love, was of Cilicia a Province near Syria.
Iamblicus, who writ the Adventures of Rhodanes and Sinonis, was born of Syrian
Parents, and educated at Babylon. Heliodoras, Author of the Romance of
Theogenes and Chariclea, was of Emeses a Town of Phoenicia. Lucian, who writ
the Metamorphosis of Lucius into an Ass, was of Samosata, chief City of
Comagena, a Province of Syria. Achilles Tatius, who taught us the Amors of
Clitophon and Lencippe, was of Alexandria in Egypt. The Fabulous History of
Barlaam and Josaphat was composed by St. John of Damas Metropolis of Syria.
Damascius, who made four Books of Fictions, not only incredible, as he Intitles
them, but gross and far remote from all probability, was also (as Photius
assures us) of Damas. The three Xenophons Romancers, which Suidas speaks of,
one was of Antioch in Syria, and another of them of Cyprus, an Isle near that
Country; so that this Country deserves rather to be called the Country of
Fables then Greece, whither they were only Transplanted; but withal they
found the Soil there so good and agreeable, that they have admirably well taken
Root.

It Is also hardly credible how all these People have a Genius singularly
disposed and addicted to Poetry, Invention and Fiction; all their discourse is
Figures; they never express themselves but in Allegories; their Theology and
Philosophy, but principally their Politics and Morals, are all couched under
Fables and Paraboles.

By the Hieroglyphics of the Egyptians we may see to what point that Nation
was Mysterious, every thing with them was expressed by Images, all in disguise;
their Religion was vayled; they never made discovery of it to the Profane, but
under the Masque of Fables, and they never ^ook off this Masque, but for such
as they judged worthy to be imitated in their Mysteries. Herodotus says that
the Greeks had from them their Mythologick Theology, and he tells some
stories, which he learned of the Egyptian Priests, the which (for all he is so
credulous and fabulous himself) he relates only as Tales; which Tales failed
not to be agreeable, and tickle the curious wit of the Greeks, a people (as
Heleodorus testifies) desirous to learn, and lovers of Novelty.

And it was without doubt from these Priests that Pythagoras and Plato in their
Voyages to Egypt learned to transform their Philosophy, and to hide it under
the shadow of Mysteries and Disguisements.

For the Arabians consult their Books, you will find nothing but Metaphores,
drawn by the head and shoulders, similitudes and fictions. Their Alcoran is of
this sort, Mahumet says he made it so to the end it might be learned with less
difficulty and no^ so easily be forgotten. They have translated Esops Fables
into their Tongue, and some among them have composed the like. That Locman, so
renowned throughout all the East, is no other but Aesop; his Fables, which the
Arabians have amassed together into a huge Volum, got him so great esteem among
them, that the Alcoran vaunteth his Wisdom in one Chapter, which is therefore
Entitled by the name of Locman. The lives of their Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles, are all fabulous. Nothing relishes so deliciously with them as
Poesy, which with them is the ordinary study of their best Wits. This
inclination of theirs is not new, it possessed them before Mahumet, and they
have Poems of those times. Aerpennius affirms, that all the World beside put
together have not had so many Poets as single Arabia. They reckon sixty which
are among them as it were Princes of Poesy, and which have great Troops of
Poets under them. The best have treated of Love in their Eclogues, and some of
their Books on this Subject have passed into the West. Many of their Caliphs
have not thought Poesy unworthy of their application. Abdalla (one amongst
them) signalized himself upon this occasion, and made a Book of Similitudes, as
Elmacin reports.

It Is from the Arabians (in my opinion) that we receive the art of Riming; and
I see much of probability that the Leonine Verses have been made after their
example; for it does not at all appear that rimes had course in Europe, before
the entrance of Taric and Muza into Spain; whereas great quantity might be
observed in the following Ages; though otherwise I could easily make it appear,
that Verses in Rhyme were not altogether unknown to the Ancient Romans.

The Persians have not at all yielded to the Arabians in the art of Lying
agreeably; for notwithstanding Lies were otherwise most odious to them in
conversation, and they forbid their Children nothing with so great severity;
nevertheless in their Books and Commerce of letters, these pleased them
infinitely if Fictions are to be called Lies. To be convinced of this one shall
only read the fabulous Adventures of their Lawgiver Zoroaster. Strabo says
that the Masters among them give their Disciples Moral Precepts, wrapped up in
Fictions: he tells us in another place that much credit is not to be given to
the Ancient Histories of the Persians, Medes, and Syrians, by reason of the
inclination their Writers had to relate untruths for these, seeing that they
who made profession of writing Fables were in esteem, were persuaded that
people would take pleasure to read Fables and forged Relations, written after
the manner of Histories. The Fables of Aesop are so much to their gust, that
they appropriate the Author: he is the same Locman of the Alcoran, whom I
mentioned before, who is so renowned among all the people of the Levant, that
they will needs rob Phrygia of the honor of his birth, and attribute it to
themselves; for the Arabians say he was of the Race of the Hebrews, and the
Persians say he was an Arabian Negro, and lived in the Town of Casuvin, which
was the Arsacia of the Ancients. Others on the contrary seeing that his life
writ by Mirkond has much resemblance with that of Aesop, which Maximus Planudes
has left us; and having observed that as Angels give Wisdom to Locman in
Mirkond, so Mercury bestows the Fable upon Aesop in Philostratus. They are
persuaded that the Greeks have stolen Locman from the Orientals, and made
thereof their Aesop; but I must not here discuss this controversy. I shall
only put you in mind by the way to remember what is said by strabo; that the
Histories of the people of the East are stuffed with Lies, and are in no wise
faithful or exact; and that it is most probable they have been Fabulous in
speaking of the Author and Original of Fables, as well as in all the rest; and
that the Greeks are more diligent, and of better credit, both in their
Chronology and History; and that the conformity of Mirkonds Locman with the
Aesop of Planudes and Philostratus, does no more prove that Aesop is Locman,
then it proves that Locman is Aesop. The Persians have surnamed Locman the
Sage, for that Aesop was in effect ranckt among the number of the Sages. They
say he was profoundly knowing in Medicine, that he found out admirable Secrets,
and among the rest that of reviving the Dead.

They have so well glossed, paraphrased, and augmented his Fables, that they
(as the Arabians) have made thereof a very great Volum, a Copy whereof is to be
seen in the Vatican; his Reputation has reatched even unto Egypt and into
Nubia, where his Name and Wisdom are in great veneration. The Modern Turks have
no less esteem for him, and believe with Mirkond that he lived in David's time,
wherein (if in truth it be Aesop, and that we may believe the Greek
Chronology) they are mistaken but about the matter of 450 years, which for the
Turks is very well computed, for they rarely hit so near in their computation.
This would accord better with Hesiod, who was Contemporary of Solomon, and to
whom is due (according to the report of Quintilian) the glory of the first
invention of Fables, which is attributed to Aesop.

There are no Poets that equal the Persians in the license they give themselves
to Lie: in the lives of their Saints, and about the Original of their Religion,
and in their Histories, they have so disfigured those, the truth whereof we
know by the relations of the Greeks and Romans, that they are not to be known
again; and even degenerating from that laudable aversion they heretofore had
against those who served themselves with a lie for their interests, they now
account it an honor. They are passionately in love with Poesy; it is the
diversion both of the Princes and People, and the principal at a Begale were
wanting, if no Poetry were there. Their works of Galantry, and Love-stories
have been famous, and discover the Romancing Genius of this Nation.

The Indians also (Neighbors of the Persians) had like them a strong
inclination to fabulous inventions. Sandaber the Indian composed a Book of
Paraboles, which was Translated by the Hebrews, and which at this day is to be
found in the Libraries of the curious. Father Poussin the Jesuit has joined to
his Pachymeron, which he lately Printed at Rome, a Dialogue between Absalom
King of the Indies and a Gymnosophist, upon diverse questions of Morality,
wherein this Philosopher never expresses himself but by Paraboles and Fables,
after the manner of Aesop. The Preface imports that this Book was made by the
wisest and most knowing Men of the Nation, and that it was carefully kept in
the Treasury of the Charters of the Realm; that Perzoez, Physician of Chosroez
King of Persia, Translated it out of Indian into Persian; some other from
Persian into Arabian, and Simeon Sethi from Arabian into Greek. This Book is so
little different from the Apologues, which bear the name of the Indian Pilpay,
and which were seen in French some few years since, that there is no doubt but
that it was either the Original or the Copy; for it is said that this Pilpay was
a Brachman who had share in the grand affairs of State and Government of the
Indies under King Dabchelin, that he comprises all his Politics and Morals
within this Book, which was preserved by the Kings of the Indies as a Treasure
of Wisdom and Learning: that the reputation of this Book being carried so far
as to Nonchirevon King of Persia; he procured a Copy thereof by the means of
his Physician, who Translated it into Persian, that Calife Abuiafar Almanzor
caused it to be Translated from Persian into Arabian, and another out of
Arabian into Persian; and that after all these Persian translations, a new one
was made different from all the former, and from this came the French
translation. Certainly whoever shall read the History of the pretended
Patriarchs of the Indians Erammon and Bremaw, of their Posterity and
Propagation, shall need no other proof of the love this people have for Fables.
I therefore readily believe that when Horace gave the Epithete of Fabulous to
the River Hydappes, which has its Source in Persia, and finishes its course in
the Indies; his thought and meaning was that it begins and end its course among
people very much addicted to Fiction and Disguisements.

These Fictions and Paraboles which you have seen make up the Profane learning
of the Nations before mentioned, have in Syria been Sanctified; the Sacred
Authors complying with the humor of the Jews, made use thereof to express the
inspirations they received from Heaven. The Holy Scripture is altogether
Mysterious, Allegorical, and Aenigmatical. The Talmudists believed that the
Book of Job is no other but a parable of the Hebrews invention: this Book, that
of Davia, the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the Canticles, and all other Holy Songs,
are Poetical works abounding with Figures, which would seem bold and violent in
our Writings; and which are ordinary in those of that Nation. The Book of
Proverbs is otherwise called the Paraboles; because Proverbs of this sort,
according to the definition of Quintilian, are only short Fictions, or Parables
expressed in little.

The Book of Canticles is a kind of Dramatick Poem, where the passionat
sentiments of the Bridegroom and Spouse are expressed after a manner so tender
and touching, that we should be charmed thereby; if these expressions and
figures had some little more of conformity with our Genius, or that we could
divest our selves of that unjust preoccupation, which makes us dislike all that
is any little remote from our usage, in which we condemn our selves without
perceiving it; since that our lightness never permits us to persevere long in
the same customs.

Our Savior himself scarce ever gave any precepts to the Jews, but under the
veil of Paraboles. The Talmud contains a Million of Fables, every one more
impertinent then other: many of the Rabbis have afterward explained,
reconciled, and amassed them together in their particular works; and besides
this have composed several Poesies, Proverbs, and Apologues.

The Cypriots and Cilicians have invented certain Fables, which did bear the
name of these People; and the habit which the Cilicians in particular had of
Lying, has been noted by one of the Ancientest Proverbs, which has been current
in Greece.

Lastly, Fables have been in such vogue all over these Countries, that amongst
the Assyrians and Arabians (according to the testimony of Lucian) there were
certain persons, whose sole profession was to explain Fables; and these men
lived so regularly, that they lived far longer then other People.

But it is not sufficient to have discovered the Source of Romances; we must
see by what Channels they have been conveyed to, and spread over Greece and
Italy: and whether they have passed from thence to us, or that we have them
from elsewhere. The Ionians, a people of Asia Minor, being raised to a great
Power, and having acquired vast Riches, were plunged in Luxury and
Voluptuousness, inseparable companions of plenty.

Cyrus having subdued them, by the taking of Craesus, and all Asia Minor being
with them fallen under the power of the Persians, they received their manners
with their Laws; and mixing their Debauches with those their own inclination
had before carried them to; they became the most Voluptuous people in the
World: they refined upon the pleasures of the Table, they made the addition of
Flowers and Perfumes, they found out new Ornaments for their Houses; the finest
Wools, and the fairest Tapistries of the World came from them; they were
Authors of the Lascivious Dance called the Ionick; and they became so
remarkable for effeminateness, that it past into a Proverb: but amongst these
Milesians furpassed all in the science of pleasures, and were most ingenious in
their delicacies: these were the first who taught the Persians the Art of
making Romances, and traveled therein so happily, that the Milesian Fables,
that is to say their Romances, full of Lovestories and dissolute Relations,
were in the highest reputation: it is very likely that Romances were innocent,
till they fell into their hands; and only contained singular and memorable
adventures: that these first corrupted them, and stuffed them with lascivions
narrations and affairs of love. Time has consumed all these works; it has
indeed preserved the name of Aristides, the most famous of their Romancers, who
writ several Books of those called Milesian Fables. I find that one Dionisins a
Milesian, who lived under the first Darius, writ fabulous Histories, but not
being certain whether this was not only a compilation of Ancient Fables, and
not seeing sufficient foundation, to believe that these were of those, properly
called Milesian Fables, I do not number him amongst the makers of Romances.

The Ionians who came from Attica and Peloponnesus, mindful of their original,
maintained a great correspondence with the Greeks. They sent their children
reciprocally for breeding, and that they might be acquainted with each others
manners; by this so frequent commerce, Greece, which of it self had inclination
enough for Fables, learned readily of the Ionians the art of composing
Romances, and did cultivate it with success; but to avoid confusion, I shall
essay, according to the order of time to give account of those Greek Writers,
who have been famous in this art.

I find none before Alexander the Great, which persuaded me that the Romantic
Science made no considerable progress among the Greeks, before they had it from
the Persians themselves when they subdued them, and run it to its Source.
Clearcus of Soli, a Town of Cilicia, who lived in Alexanders time, and was with
him a Disciple of Aristotle's, is the first I find to have writ Books of Love;
though I do not well know whether these were not a Collection only of several
Love-passages, drawn from History or vulgar Fable, like that which Parthenius
afterward made under Augustus, which is yet extant. That which causes this
suspicion, is a little story cited by Atheneus out of him, wherein are reckoned
several tokens of love and esteem, which Gyges King of Lydia gave to a
Courtesan his Mistress.

Antonius Diogenes according to the conjecture of Photius lived some little
time after Alexander, and in imitation of Homers Odysseis, and the hazardous
Voyages of Ulisses, made a true Romance of the Voyages and Amors of Dinias and
Dercyllis. This Romance, though very faulty in many things, and filled with
fooleries and relations improbable, and scarce excusable even in a Poet, may
notwithstanding be called regular. Photius has an abstract thereof in his
Bibliotheca, and says he believes it to be the source of that which Lucian,
Lucius, Iamblicus, Achilles Tatius, Heliodorus, and Damascius have writ in this
kind; however, he adds in the same place, that Antonius Diogenes makes mention
of one Antiphanes more ancient then himself, who (he says) writ a Book of
wonderful Histories, like his; so that he may as well be thought to have given
the Idaea and matter to these Romances which he names, as Antonius Diogenes. I
suppose he must be understood to speak of Antiphanes the Comic Poet, who, the
Geographer Stephanus and others say, made a Book of incredible relations and
ridiculous. He was of Berge a Town of Thrace, but it is not known of what
Country Antonius Diogenes was.

I cannot tell precisely in what time Aristides of Miletus lived, whom I spoke
of before; what we may be confident of is, that he lieved before the Wars of
Marius and Sylla, for Sisenna a Roman Historian of that time translated his
Milesian Fables: this work was full of obscenities, and thereby gave great
delight and entertainment to the Romans, so that the Surenas^ or Lieutenant
General of the Parthian Estate, who defeated the Roman Army under Crassus his
Command, having found these among the Baggage of Roscius, took occasion
thereupon before the Senate of Seleucia, to insult over and rail at the
weakness and effeminate disposition of the Romans, who even during the War
could not be without such like diversions.

Lucius of Pairas, Lucian of Samosata, and Iamblicus were all well nigh
contemporaries, and lived under Antoninus and Marcus Aurelius, the first of
these is not to be accounted among Romancers, for he only made a collection of
Metamorphoses, and the Magical Transforming of Men into Beasts, and of Beasts
into Men, dealing bona fide, and believing every thing that he writ. But Lucian
more wise and cunning then he, relates some part of his History to mock and
make sport therewith, according to his custom, in the Book which he Entitled
Lucius his Ass, to intimate that that Fiction was taken from him. This in
effect is an Abbridgement of the two first Books of Lucius his Metamorphoses,
and this fragment lets us see that Photius had reason to complain of the
smuttiness so frequent in him. This so ingenious and renowned Ass, whose
History these Authors writ, was much akin to another of like worth and merit,
whereof elsewhere the same Photius speaks after Damascius; This Ass (says he)
was the Chattel of a certain Grammarian named Ammonius, and was endued with
such a gentle spirit, and 2o born to be polite and capable of fine things, that
it would gladly even leave Meat and Drink, to hear Verses repeated, and would
be sensibly touched and taken with the graces and beauties of the Poetry. The
Brancaleon is doubtless a Copy of this Ass of Lucians, or of that of Apuleus;
this is an Italian Fiction very divertising and full of Wit. Lucian besides his
Lucius made two Books of wild and ridiculous Histories, and which he declared
to be such, protesting withal that those things never have, nor ever can come
to pass; some seeing these Books joined to that wherein he gives directions for
the writing a History well, have been persuaded that he intended this for an
example of what he had taught, but he declares at the entrance of the Book,
that he had not any further design in it, save only to mock at so many Poets,
Historians, and even Philosophers themselves, who with impunity delivered
Fables for truths, and writ such false relations of Foreign Countries, as
Ctesias and Iambulus had done. If then it be true, as Photius assures us, that
the Romance of Antonius Diogenes has been the Source of these two Books of
Lucian; it is to be understood that Lucian took occasion from this Romance, as
also from the Fabulous Histories of Ciesias and Iambulus, to write his, and
thereby make their vanity and impertinence appear.

About the same time Iamblious published his Babylonicks, for so he called his
Romance, in which he far excelled all those who went before, for if one may
judge of it by the abridgement, which Photius has left us, his design
comprehends but one action, dressed with all convenient Ornaments, accornpanied
with Episodes arising from the principal matter; Verisimility is observed most
exactly, the Adventures are mixed with a World of Variety and without
confusion, Art only is wanting in the contrivance of his Plot; he has grossly
followed the order of time, and has not at his first Launching plundged the
Reader, as he might have done, into the middle of his subject after the example
Homer gives us in his Odyssis. Time has been favorable to this Piece, and it
is to be seen in the Library of the Escurial.

Heliodorus has surpassed him in the disposition of his Subject, as in all the
rest. Hitherto the World had never seen any thing better designed, and more
complete among Romances, then the Adventures of Theagenes and Chariclea,
nothing can be more chaste then their Loves. Whereby may appear (besides the
Christian Religion, whereof the Author made profession) that his own nature had
given him such an air of Virtue, as shines throughout all his work; in which
not only Iamblicus, but even almost all the rest are much his Inferiors;
besides his Merit advanced him to the Dignity of an Episcopal Sea, he was
Bishop of Tricca a City of Thessalie; and Socrates reports that he introduced
within that Province the custom of deposing such of the Clergy, as abstained
not from those Women they had Espoused before they were ordained Priests. All
which makes me much suspect what Nicophorus a credulous Writer of little
judgment or fidelity relates, that a Provincial Synod understanding what
danger the reading of this Romance, which was authorized by the dignity of its
Author, made the young people fall into; and having proposed to him this
alternative, either to consent that his Book should be burned, or else to
resign his Bishopric, he made choice of the latter; for the rest I cannot but
exceedingly wonder that a Learned Man of these times should doubt whether this
was the Book of Heliodorus Bishop of Tricca or no, after so evident Testimony
of Socrates, Photius, and Nicephorua. Some have been of opinion that he lived
about the end of the twelft Age, confounding him with Heliodorus the Arabian,
whose life Philostratus has writ among those of the other Sophists. But it is
known that he was contemporary of Arcadius and Honoriu^; we also see that in
the Catalogue which Photius made of the Romancers, who he believed had imitated
Antonius Diogenes, where he names them according to the order of time, he has
placed Helioderus after Iamblicus, and before Damascius, who lived in the time
of the Emperous Justinian.

By this account Achilles Tatius, who made a regular Romance of the Amors of
Clitophon and Leucippe, should have preceded, for I find nothing else whereon
to ground my conjecture of his Age, others think him more recent by his style,
but however he is not in any wise to be compared with Heliodorus, neither in
the regularity of his manners, nor in the variety of events, nor in the
Artifice in unravelling his Plots; his style (in my mind) is to be preferred to
that of Heliodorus, he is more simple and natural, but Heliodorus more forced:
finally, some say that he was a Christian and Bishop too; it is strange that the
obscenity of his Book should be so easily forgot, and more then this that the
Emperor Leon surnamed the Philosopher, has commended the Modesty thereof in an
Epigram, which is yet extant, and not only permitted, but counseled the
reading of it from one end to the other; to those who profess the love of
Chastity.

Possibly I place here too rashly that Athenagoras, under whose name there goes
a Romance, the Title whereof is, of true and perfect Love; this Book has not
appeared abroad but only in French of Fumee's translation, who tells us in the
Preface that he had the Greek Origina from Mr. du Lamane, Prothonotary of Mr.
the Cardinal d'Armagnac, and that he never saw it elsewhere. I almost dare add,
that never any person saw it since, for his name was never mentioned (that I
know of) in the Catalogues of any Libraries; and if at this day it have any
being, it is certainly buried among the dust, in the Closet of 2ome Illitenate
person, who possesses this Treasure and knows not of it; or else it is in the
hands of the envious, who might gratify the public therewith but will not;
the Translator says further, that he believes this to be the Production of
that famous Athenagoras, who writ the Apology for Christian Religion, in the
manner of a Legation, addressed to the Emperors Marcus Aurelius and Commodus,
and a Treatise of the Resurrection. The chief ground of his opinion is the
style which he finds conformable to that of his works, and whereof he might
well enough judge, having the Originals in his power. And finally he takes this
for a true History, not understanding the art of Romances. For my part though I
cannot pronounce thereof with certainty, not having seen the Greek Original,
nevertheless by reading the Translation I shall not stick to affirm that he
does not without some reason attribute it to Athenagoras Author of the Apology,
the reasons are, that the Apologist was a Christian, and this speaks of
Divinity, after a manner which is inconsistent with any but a Christian, as
when he makes the Priests of Hammon say, That there is but one God, and that
every Nation desirous to represent his essence to the simple, had invented
diverse Images, all which expressed but the same thing; that their true
signification being lost with the times, the Vulgar believed that there were so
many Gods as they saw Images, and idolatry sprung from thence, that Bacchus
when he built the Temple of Hammon, placed in it no other Image save only that
of God, because as there is but one Heaven, which contains but one World, so in
this World there is but one God, who is communicated in Spirit. He makes thus
much and more be said by certain Egyptian Merchants, to wit, that the Gods of
the Fable denoted the different actions of this Sovereign, and one only
Divinity, who is without beginning and without end, and whom he calls obscure
and dark, for that he is Invisible and Incomprehensible. Moreover the
discourses of the Priests and Merchants upon the Divine Essence, very much
resemble those of Athenagor as in his Legation; the Apologist was a Priest of
Athens, this was on Athenean Philosopher, both seem Men of sense and great
learning, and well read in Antiquity.

But on the other side many things may make us suspect, not only that this is
not Athenagoras the Christian, but also that the Book it self is a mere forgery.

Photius giving an exact account of those who had been makers of Romances
before his time, takes no notice of him at all; no body ever saw a Copy of this
Romance in any Library, and that which the Translator made use of never
appeared since. Besides he represents the Habitation, Life, and Conduct of the
Priests and Religious of Hammon, so very like the Convents and the Government
of our Monks and Religious, that it ill accords with what History informs us of
the time when the Monastic life began, and when it arrived to perfection.

What among so much obscurity seems to me most probable is, that this is an
ancient work, but later then the Apology.

For I find such a profound knowledge both in things, of Nature and of Art, so
great acquaintance with the Annals of times past, so many curious remarks not
taken from the Ancient Authors, which are left us, but which relate to and
explain them, so much of the Greek Phrase, which one may discover through the
translation, and over all a certain Character of Antiquity, which cannot be
counterfeited; so that I cannot be persuaded that it is any production of
Fumee's, whose Learning was but indifferent, or that the most able and
ingenious person in those days could devise any thing like it; if Photius have
not mentioned him. How many other great and famous Authors have escaped his
cognizance, or his diligence? and if in our days only one Copy was found,
which peradventure is since lost, how many other excellent works have undergone
the same destiny? if this gives you not satisfaction, but you will oblige me to
push further my conjectures, and essay to find out precisely the time he lived
in, I have nothing to support my opinion, save one passage in the Preface of
his Romance, where he complains of the fatal blow, which his Country Athens
was about to receive in the universal desolation of Greece, which cannot be
understood, but of the Scythians irruption into Greece, which happened under
the Empire of Gallienus, or else of that of Alaric King of the Goths, which
fell out in the times of Arcadius and Honorius, for Athens was not sacked since
Sylla's time, till the Invasion of the Scythians, which was about 350. years
after, and that of the Goths was about 700 years after, but I see more reason
to apply the words of the Author to the Conquest of Alaric, then to that of the
Scythians, for that the Scythians were readily chaced from Athens ere they had
done much mischief, but the Goths treated them more rudely, and left there the
sad marquis of their barbarous cruelty. Synesius who lived at that time, speaks
of them in the same terms with our Author, and with him regrets to see
learning, and the liberal sciences wract by the Barbarians, in the very place
of their Birth and Seat of their Empire; but howsoever, this work of
Athenagoras is invented with wit, conducted with Art, Sententious, and full of
excellent moral Precepts, the events agreeing with verisimility, the Episodes
drawn from the subject, the Characters clear and distinct, Decorum observed
exactly all throughout, nothing low, nothing forced, or like the Pedant style
of the Sophists.

The argument is double, that which made one of the great Beauties of the
ancient Comedy, for besides the Adventures of Theogenes and Charidea; he
relates likewise those of Pherecydes and Melangenia, whereby may appear the
mistake of Giraldi, who believed that the multiplying of actions was the
invention of the Italians; the Greeks and our old French have practiced this
before the Italians, the Greeks with dependence and subordination to one
principal action following the rules of an Heroic Poem, as Athenagoras has
done, and Heliodorus too, though not so accurately, but our old French have
multiplied them without any order, connection, or art; these are them whom the
Italians have imitated, taking from them their Romances and their faults
together; and this is an error in Giraldi worse then the former, that he would
endeavor to commend this fault, and make thereof a virtue, if it be true,
which himself acknowledges that a Romance should resemble a perfect Body, and
consist of many different parts and proprotions, all under one head; it follows
then that the principal action which is as it were, the head of a Romance
should only be one, and illustrious above the rest; and that the subordinate
actions, which are as it were members, ought to have relation to this head,
yield to it in dignity and beauty, adorn, sustain and attend it with
dependence; otherwise it would be a Body with many Heads, monstrous and
deformed. The example of Ovid alleged in his favor, and that of other Cyclick
Poets, which he might also cite, does not justify him in the least, for the
Metamorphoses of the ancient Fable, which Ovid proposed to himself to amass
into one Poem, and those of the Cyclick Poets consisting all of actions, which
have no dependence on or relation to one another, and being all well nigh of
equal beauty and eminence, it was altogether as impossible to make thereof one
regular Body, as to build one complete Structure with Sand only. The applause
which the faulty Romances of his Nation have received, and which he relles so
much upon, does yet justify him less, one must not judge of a piece by the
number, but by the sufficiency of the approbators; every one assume to
themselves the license to judge and censure Poesy and Romance; the sumptuous
Palaces and the common Streets are made Tribunals, where the merits of greatest
works is Soveraignly decided. There every one shoots his bolt, and presumes
boldly to set the value of an Epick Poem upon the reading of a comparison or a
description: and one Verse somewhat harsh, such as the place and matter
sometimes requires, may there ruin the reputation of all, one happy thought or
tender sentiment makes there the fortune of a Romance, and one expression a
little forced, or one superannuated word destroys it; but they who compose them
will in no wise submit to these decisions, but like the Comedian in Horace, who
being hissed from the Stage by the people, contented himself with the
approbation of the Chevalliers. These are content that they please the nicest
and most able Judges, who have other kind of Laws to judge by; and these Laws
are known to so very few, that as I often have said before, a good Judge is as
rarely to be met withal as a good Romancer, or a good Poet: and that in the
small number of those who understand and can judge of Prose, hardly one can be
found who understands Poesy, or who is sensible and apprehends that Poesy and
Prose are things altogether different. These Critics, whose Sentence is the
certain rule to value Poems and Romances by, did avow to Giraldi, that the
Italian Romances have many very pretty things in them, and deserve many other
commendations, but not that of regularity, contrivance, nor justess of design.
I return to the Romance of Athenagoras, where the discovery of the plot, though
without machine, is less happy then the rest; it goes not of smartly enough, it
presents it self before the passion and impatience of the Reader be
sufficiently warmed, and is made with too much repetition; but his greatest
fault is the unseasonable ostentation, wherewith he displays his skill in
Architecture, what he writes thereof might be admirable elsewhere, but is
vicious, and out of of its place where he puts it. Ne do anco il Poeta, says
Giraldi, nel descrivere le Fabrichu, volersi mostrare in guisa Architettore,
che descrivendo troppo minutamente le cose a tale art appartinenti, lasci
quello che conviene al Poeta; alla quase cosa egli do soura ogni cosa mirare,
se cerca loda oltre che queste descrittioni di cose mechaniche recano con loro
vilta, and sono ^ontane, and dall uso, and dal grande dell Heroico. A Poet
ought not in describing a Fabric to show himself an Architect; for in
describing too minutely the particulars appertaining to such an art, he leaves
what is properly a Poets work, which it concerns him principally to look to, if
he expect commendation; besides, that such mechanic descriptions debase the
work, are too mean and far below, the grandeur and magnificence of an Heroic
Poem.

He has taken many things from Heliodorus, or Heliodorus from him; for as I
believe them contemporaries, I know not to whether is due the glory of the
invention. The names and characters of Theogenes and Charidea resemble those of
Theagenes and Chariclea. Theogenes and Charidea see and fall in love with each
other at a Feast of Minerva; as Theagenes and Chariclea at a Feast of Apollo.
Athenagoras makes one Harondates Governor of the lower Egypt. Heliodorus makes
Oroondates Governor of Egypt. Athenagoras feigns Theogenes ready to be
Sacrificed by the Scythians. Heliodorus makes Theagenes ready to be Sacrificed
by the Aethiopians, and Athenagoras like Heliodorus has divided his work into
ten Books.

I shall not put among the number of Romances the Books of Paradoxes of
Damascius, the Heathen Philosopher, who lived under Justinian; for
notwithstonding Photius says, that he imitated Antonius Diogenes, the model of
most Greek Romancers, it is to be understood that he writ like him Histories
Fabulous and Incredible, but not Romantic, nor after the manner of Romances;
he relating only the apparitions of Specter, and Goblins, and Events above
Nature, either too lightly believed, or invented with little address, and
becoming the Atheism and impiety of the Author.

Two years after Damascius was the History of Barlaam and Josephat composed by
St. John Damascenus. Many ancient Manuscripts father it on John the Sinaite,
who lived in the time of Theodosius, but without reason as Billius makes it
appear; because the disputes against the Iconoclasts, which are inserted in
this work, were not then moved, nor were till long time after by the Emperor
Leon Isanricus; under whom lived St. John Damascenus. It Is a Romance, but a
Spiritual one; it treats of Love, but it is the love of God; and there one may
find much blood spilt, but it is the blood of Martyrs: it is writ in the fashion
of a History, not according to the rules of Romance, and notwithstanding that
the verisimility is there exactly enough observed. It bears with it so many
marks of Fiction, that it is not to be read but with some little discernment to
discover it. In the rest one may perceive the fabulous Genius of the Authors
Nation, by the great number of Paraboles, Comparisons and Similutudes, which
are there in abundance.

The Romance of Theodorus Prodromus, and that which some attribute to
Eustathius Bishop of Thessalonica, who flourished under the Empire of of Manuel
Comines, about the middle of the twelfth Age, are much what of the same nature:
the first contains the Amors of Dosicles and Rhodanthe, the other, those of
Asmenas and Ismene. Monsieur Gaulmen has made both of them public together
with his translation and notes. Seeing he says nothing of Eustathius in the
Preface of the Book which bears his Name, I will interpret his silence in his
favor; and believe that being a Learned Man, he fell not into the error of
those who are persuaded that the famous Comentator upon Homer was capable of
making such a miserable work as that is. Moreoversome Manuscripts name the
Author Eumathius, and not Eustathius; however the matter be, nothing is more
frigid, nothing more flat, nothing more tedeous, no decorum, no verisimility,
no conduct; it is the work of some School Boy, or some wretched Pedagogue, who
deserved to be a School Boy all the days of his life. Theodorus Prodromus is
not much better, however he has something more of art though it be but little,
he never extricates himself unless it be by machines, and he understands not
how to make the Actors preserve decorum, and the uniformity of their
Characters. His work is rather a Poem then a Romance, for it is writ in Verse,
and this makes his style (which is too licentious and full of Figures) more
pardonable; nevertheless seeing his Verses are Iambicks, which are like Prose
and which may be called measured Prose, I exclude him not from this last. Some
say he was a Russian by Nation a Priest, a Poet, a Philosopher, and a Physician.

I give well nigh the same judgment of Longus the Sophist his Pastorals, as of
the two former Romances; for notwithstanding that most of the Learned of late
times have commended them for their elegance, and agreement joined with a
simplicity proper for the Subject; nevertheless I find nothing in all this but
a simplicity, which runs sometimes even to childishness and foolery. There is
nothing in it, either of invention or conduct. He begins grossly with the Birth
of his Shepherds, and ends with their Marriage; he never cleares up his
Adventures but by Machines, improper and ill contrived; so obscene for the
rest, that one must be somewhat a Cynick to read him without blushing. His
style, which has been so much cried up, is such as may be deserves less: it is
the style of a Sophist, such as he was, like that of Eustathius and Theodorus
Prodromus; which partakes of the Orator and the Historian, and which is proper
neither to the one nor to the other; full of Metaphors, Antitheses, and
sparkling Figures, which dazzle and surprise the simple, and tickle the Ear,
without satisfying the mind; in leju of engaging the Reader by the novelty of
the events, by the arangement and variety of matter, and by a clear and close
Narration, which withal has its cadence, goes off roundly, and which always
advances within the subject. He assays (as most of other Sophists) to
entertain him with descriptions by the by; he leads him out of the way, and
while he lets him see so much of the Country which he did not look for, he
spends and consumes his attention, and the impatience he had to arrive at the
end he sought for and proposed to himself. I translated this Romance with
delight in my Childhood, and it is that age only which it can please: I shall
not tell you in what time he lived; none of the Ancients have made mention of
him, and he bears no token which may give place for conjectures, unless perhaps
it be the purity of his style, which makes me judge him more ancient then the
two former.

For the three Xenophons Romancers, whereof Suidas speaks, I can say no more of
them then he has done: one of them was of Antioch, an other of Ephesus, the
third of Cyprus. All three writ Love stories: the first gave his Book the name
of Babylonicks, as Iamblicus: the second Entitled his the Ephesia^ks, and
relates the Amors of Habr^comas and Anthea: and the third named his the
Cypriacks, where he recounts the Amors of Cinyras, Myrrha, and Adonis.

I ought not to forget Parthenius of Nicaea, from whom we have a collection of
love Histories, which he Dedicates to the Poet Cornelius Gallus of Augustus his
time. Many of them are drawn from the ancient Fable, and all from ancient
Authors which he cites. Some of them seem Romantic, and to have been taken
from Milesian Fables; as that of Erippe and Zanthus in the 8th. Chapter, that
of Policrites and Deognete in the 9th. Chapter, that of Lucone and Cyonippe in
the 10th. Chapter, and that of Neaere and Hypsicreon, and of Promedon in the
18th. Chapter, for besides that these Adventures are attributed to Milesian
persons, it does not at all appear that they have been taken either from the
Fable or ancient History. The same may be said of the Amors of Cannus and
Biblis, children of the Founder of Miletus, which he reports in the 11th.
Chapter, are a Fiction of the Countries, which has made it famous, and has been
consecrated in the Antique Mythology. This however I offer only as a slight
conjecture.

In this account which I make, I distinguish the regular Romances from those
which are not. I call regular those which are according to the rules of an
Heroic Poem. The Greeks who have so happily improved most of Arts and
Sciences, that one may account them the Inventors, have also cultivated the art
of making Romances, and from rude and wild as it was among the Orientals, they
have given it a better shape, adjusting it to the rules of the Epopee, and
joining in one complete body the diverse parts, which without order or harmony
composed the Romances of former times. Of all the Greek Romancers which I have
named, they who have observed these rules are only Antonius, Diogenes, Lucian,
Athenagoras, Iamblicus, Heliodorus, Achilles Tatius, Enstathius, and Theodorus
Prodromus. I do not mention Lucius of Patras, nor Damascius, whom I have not
rancked among the makers of Romances; for St. John Damascenus and Longus, it
had been easy for them to have reduced their works under these Laws, but they
either were ignorant of them, or despised them. I know not what to say of the
three Xenophons, of whom nothing is left us: neither of Aristides, and those
who like him writ the Milesian Fables. I believe however that these later were
tied to some rules and measures, which I judge by the works made in their
imitation, which time has preserved us, as the Metamorphosis of Apuleus, which
is regular enough.

These Milesian Fables, long time before they made this Progress in Greece
which you have seen, were already passed into Italy, and were there first
received by the Sybarites, a people more Voluptuous then one can imagine. This
conformity of humor which they had with the Milesians, established among them
a reciprocal commerce of luxury and pleasure; and united them so well, that
Hero^otus assures us, he knew no people so strictly allied; they then learned
of the Milesians the art of Fictions; and Sybaritick Fables were as common in
Italy, as the Milesian Fables were in Asia; it is not easy to say what was
their model, Hesychius gives us to understand in one passage very much
corrupted, that Aesop being in Italy, his Fables there were so well approved,
that they did improve upon them, and named them Sybariticks when they were
changed, and they became a Proverb: but he discovers not wherein consisted that
alteration. Suidas believed that they were like those of Aesop; he is mistaken
in this as frequently else where. The old Comentator upon Aristophones says,
that the Sabarites made use of Beasts in their Fables, and Aesop made use of
men in his; this passage is certainly corrupted, for as it appears that Aesops
Fables employed Beasts, it follows that those of the Sybarites made use of Men:
and thus too he says in an other place in express terms; those of the
Sybarites were pleasant and provoked laughter. I find a piece of one of them in
Elian: it is a little story which he says he took from the History of the
Sybarites, that is to say, as I take it, from the Sybaritick Fables, you may
judge there of by the story it self.

A Child of Sybaris going to School along with his Schoolmaster met in the
Street one that sold Figgs, and stole from him one of them; the Schoolmaster
sharply reproving him, snatches the Fig from him, and eats it.

But these Fables were not only facetious but smutty withal. Ovid puts the
Sybaritida, which was composed some little time before him, among the number of
the most lascivious pieces. Many Learned Men believe that he intends the work
of Hemitheon the Sybarite, whereof Lucian speaks, as of a mass of smuttiness:
this appears to me without ground, for one cannot at all perceive that the
Sybaritida did any other wise agree with the Book of Hemitheon, then in this,
that both the one and the other were Books of Debauchery; and this was common
to all the Sybaritick Fables. Bbesides this the Sybaritida was made but a
little before Ovids time; whereas the Town of Sybares was absolutely ruined, by
the Crotoniates 500 years before him. It Is therefore more credible that this
Sybaritida was composed by some Roman and so called, because it was made in
imitation of the ancient Sybaritick Fables. A certain old Author, whose name I
believe you do not much value, gives us to understand that their style was curt
and Laconick; but all this does not convince us that these Fables had nothing
of the Romance in them.

This passage of Ovid makes it clear, that in his time the Romans had given
admittance to the Fables of the Sybarites amongst them: and he teaches us in
the same Book, that the famous Historian Sisenna had also translated for them
the Milesian Fables of Aristides. This Sisenna lived in Sylla's time, and was
with him of the great and Illustrious Family of the Cornelians: He was Praetor
of Sicily and Acaia; he writ the History of his Country, and was preserred
before all Historians of his Nation, who went before him.

If the Roman Republic disdeigned not the reading of these Fables then, while
it yet retained an austere Discipline and rigid manners; it is no wonder if
being fallen under the power of the Emperors, and after their example being
abandoned to luxury and pleasures, it was likewise touched with those which
Romances gave the mind. Virgil, who lived a little after the first rise of the
Empire, gives not any more agreeable diversion to the Naides, Daughters of the
River Peneus, while they were assembled together under their Fathers Waters,
then to relate the Amors of the Gods, which were the subject of the Romances
of Antiquity.

And Ovid, Virgils contemporary, makes the Daughters of Menius tell Romantic
Tales; and while their hands were busy and employed, their tongues and wit
were at liberty. The first is of the Loves of Pyramus and Thisbe; the second of
those of Mars and Venus; the third of those of Salmacis for Hermaphrodite.

By this appears the esteem Rome heretofore had for Romances, which is yet more
clear by the Romance which Petronius (one of their Consuls, and the most
polished man of his time) composed; he made it in form of a Satyr, of that kind
which Varre had invented, intermixing agreeably Prose with Verse, and the
serious with the jocose, the which he named Menippian; because Menippus before
him had treated of grave matters, in a pleasant and scoffing style.

This Satyr of Petronius fails not to be a true Romance; it contains nothing
but agreeable and ingenious Fictions, but very often too wanton and immodest.
Hiding under the bark a fine and tart raillery against the vices of Nero's
Court. Seeing what remains of it are only some fragments, which scarce have
any coherence at all one with another, or rather the collections of some
industrious person; one cannot exactly discern the form and tissue of the whole
piece, nevertheless it appears to be conducted with order. And it is probable
the incoherent parts would make up a complete body with those that are wanting.
Though Petronius seems to be a very great Critic, and of an exquisite taste in
learning, his style does not always altogether answer to the delicatness of his
judgment; something of affectation may be observed; he is somewhat too much
Painted and Studied, and degenerates from that natural and majestic simplicity
of the happy age of Augustus. So true is it that the art of speaking, which all
the World practices (and which so very few understand) is yet much easier to
understand then to practice well.

Some say that the Poet Lucan, who also lived in Nero's time, composed Saltick
Fables, that is (as some think) fables wherein are recounted the loves of
Satyrs and Nymphs. This agrees well with a Romance, and the wit of that Age,
which was Romantic confirms my suspicion. But in regard nothing is left us but
the Title, and that too does not clearly enough express the nature of the
piece, I shall say nothing thereof.

The Metamorphosis of Apuleus, so well known under the Title of the Golden Ass,
was made under the Antonins. It had the same Original with the Ass of Lucian,
being taken out of the two first Books of the Metamorphoses of Lucius of
Patras, with this difference always, that these Books were abridged by Lucian,
and augmented by Apuleus. The work of this Philosopher is regular, for
notwithstanding he seems to begin with his infancy, yet what is there said is
only by way of Preface, and to excuse the Barbarousness of his style. The true
beginning of his History is at his Voyage into Thessalia. He has given us an
Idea of the Milesian Fables in this piece, which he declares withal to be of
that sort; he has enriched it with pretty Episodes, and among others with that
of Psyche, which no person is ignorant of; and he has not at all retrencht the
smuttiness which was in the Originals which he had followed. His style is that
of a Sophist, full of affectation and violent figures, hard, barbarous, and
befitting an African.

Some hold that Clodius Albinus, one of the pretenders to the Empire, who was
vanquished and slain by the Emperor Severus, disdained not a like travail.
Julius Capitolinus reports in his life, that there were seen certain Milesian
Fables under his name, greatly esteemed, though but indifferently written; and
that Severus reproched the Senate, that they had commended him for a Learned
Man, whereas he read nothing but the Milesian Fables of Apuleus, and spent all
his Study in old Wives tales and such like trifles, which he preferred before
serious employments.

Martianus Capella has (as Petronius) given the name of Satyr to his work, for
that it is writ like his in Verse and Prose; and that the profitable and the
agreeable are there interwoven; having design to treat of all those which are
called the Liberal Arts, he therefore takes a circumference, giving them
persons; and feigning that Mercury, who has them in his Train, Espouses
Philology, that is to say, the love of good Letters, and gives her for a
Nuptial present whatever they have most fair and most precious; so that it is a
continual Allegory, which properly deserves not the name of a Romance, but
rather of a Fable: for as I have already remarqued, a Fable represents things
which never have nor ever can happen; and a Romance represents things which
may, but never have happened. The artifice of this Allegory is not very
subtle; the style is barbarism it self; so bold and so extravagant in his
figures, that they were not to be pardoned the most desperate Poet; and covered
with an obscurity so thick, that it is hardly intelligible: otherwise it is
Learned and full of Notions which are not common.

Some write that the Author was an African, if he were not he might well be
one, his manner of writing is so harsh and forced. The time wherein he lived is
not known, it only appears he was more ancient then Justinian.

Hitherto the Art of Romancing was maintained with some splendor, but it
declined afterward with Learning and the Empire, when these boisterous Nations
of the North carried every where with them their ignorance and barbarity.
Before Romances were made for delight; now were devised fabulous Histories,
because none were acquainted with the Truth. Taliessin, who is said to have
lived about the middle of the sixth Age, under that King Arthur so famous in
Romances; and Melkin who was somewhat younger, writ the History of England,
their Country, of King Arthur, and of the round Table. Balaus, who has put
them in his Catalogue, speaks of them as of Authors filled with Fables. The
same may be said of Hunibaldus Francus, who was (as some write) contemporary of
Clovis, and whose History is no other but a mass of lies grossly conceived.

In fine, Sir, we come to the famous Book of the exploits of Charlemagne, which
some ascribe very untowardly to the Archbishop Turpin, though he be later then
it by more then two hundred years. Pigna and some others have believed
ridiculously, that Romances took their name from the Town of Reims, whereof he
was Archbishop, for that his Book (as Pigna reports) was the Source from whence
the Romances of Provence chiefly issued; and that he was according to others
the principal among the makers of Romances.

However there are to be seen many Histories of Charlemagnes life full of
extravagant Fables, and like that which bears the name of Turpin. Such were the
Histories attributed to Harcon, and to Solcon Forteman; to Savard the Sage, to
Adell Adeling, and to John Son of the King of Freezland, all five Freezlanders;
and who are also said to have lived in the time of Charlemagne. Such also was
the History attributed to Occon, who according to the common opinion was
Contemporary of Otho the Great, and had Solcon before named to his great Uncle.
And such were those which contain the Atchievments of King Arthur, and the Life
of Merlin. These Histories composed for delight pleased the Readers, who were
simple and more ignorant then those who made them; they did not in those days
trouble themselves in the researches after good Memoires, and in being informed
of the truth for writing of Histories. They had the stuff in their own head,
and went no farther then their own invention. Thus Historians degenerated into
true Romancers. In this Age of ignorance the Latin Tongue too as well as truth
was despised. The Versifiers, Composers, Inventers of Tales, Jesters, and in
fine those of this Country who studied that which was there called the Gay
Science, did begin about the time of Hugh Capet to Romance it pell mell; and
over run France, giving about their Romances, and Fables composed in the Roman
Tongue; for heretofore those of Provence had more of Learning and Poesy among
them, then all France besides. This Roman Tongue was that which the Romans
introducted among the Gauls together with their Conquests; and which being
corrupted by the times with a mixture of the Gaulish Language which was before,
and then French or Tudesque which followed, 'twas neither Latin, Gaulish, nor
French, but a certain medley of all, wherein Latin however was predominant, the
which for that reason was always called the Roman, to distinguish it from the
particular and natural Language of each Country, as the French, Gaulish or
Celtique, Aquitanique, Belgique; for Caser writs that these three Languages
were different among themselves, which Strabo explains of a difference, which
only was as the diverse dialects of the same Language.

The Spaniard use the word Romance in the same signification with us, and they
call their ordinary language Romance; the Romain being then most universally
undestood, those of Provence who Studied Fictons made use thereof for their
Fictions, which from thence were called Romances. The Versifiers also travaling
about the Country, were bountifully rewarded for their labors, and nobly
entertained by Lords, whom they made visits to; some whereof would be so
transported with delight to hear them, that they sometimes would even despoil
themselves of their Robes to adorn the Versifiers therewithal. Those of
Provence were not the only persons who delighted in this agreeable exercise:
almost every Province of France had their Romancers, even to Picardy, where
were composed their Servantois, pieces treating of Love, and sometimes
Satirical: and from thence come so very many of old Romances, whereof some part
are Printed, others are rotting in Libraries, the rest consumed by the length
of time. Spain it self, which has been so fruitful in Romances, and Italy too,
have from us received the art of composing them. Mi par di poter dire che
questa sort di Poesia: These are the words of Giraldi speaking of Romances.
Habbia haunta la prima Origin, and il primo suo principio da Francesi, da' i
quali ha forse onco haveto il nome. Da Francesi pio e passata questa maniera di
peteggiare a gli Spagnuoli, and ultimamonte e stata accettata da gli Italiani.
So that I may say this sort of Poesy has had its first Original and Source
from the French, and from them peradventure took the name. From the French
afterward this kind of Poetizing passed to the Spaniards, and lastly was
entertained by the Italians.

The late Salmasius, whose memory I have in singular veneration, both for his
great Learning, and for the friendship which was contracted between us, was of
opinion that Spain having learned of the Arabians the art of making Romances,
did afterward communicate it by their example to all the rest of Europe. To
maintain this one must hold that Taliessin and Melkin both English, and
Hunnibaldus Francus, (which three are believed to have composed their Romantic
Histories about the year 550) are more recent by at least about 200 years then
can be imagined. For the revolt of Comte Julian, and entrance of the Arab^ans
into Spain, happened not till 91 of the Hegira, that is to say, the 712 year of
our Lord; and some time must be allowed for these Romances of the Arabians to
spread in Spain, and for those which (as is pretended) the Spaniards made in
their imitation to be dispersed throughout the rest of Europe. I shall not take
upon me to maintain the antiquity of these Authors, though I have some right so
to do, seeing the common and received opinion is for me. It Is certain that the
Arabians were extremely addicted (as I have made appear) to the Gay Science, I
mean to Poesy, Fables, and Fictions. This Science having continued with them
while it was rude, without having been improved and cultivated by the Greeks.
They brought it along with their Arms into Africa when they subdued it; though
besides it had always flourished among the Africans; for Arestole and after him
Priscian make mention of the Lybick Fables, and the Romances of Apateus and
Martianus Capella Asricans, whereof I before have spoken, show that it was the
wit of these people; and this conduced much to the fortifying of the victorious
Arabians in their inclination. We likewise learn out of Leo, Afer and Marmol,
that the Africain Arabians do still passionately love Romantic Poesy, and
that they sing in Verse and Prose the exploits of their Buhaluh, as among us
are celebrated those of Arthur and Lancelot; that their Morabites compose Love
Ditties, that in Fez on Mahumets Birthday the Poets have their assemblies and
public sports, and repeat their Verses before the people; and who in their
judgment had done best, is created Prince of the Poets for that year; that the
Kings of the House of the Benimerinis, who have Reigned this three hundred
years, and which our old Writers call Bellemarine, assemble on a certain day
every year the most able Judges in the City of Fez, and makes them a most
spendid Feast, after which the Poets repeat their Ver^es in honor of Mahumet;
that the King bestows on him who excels the rest a sum of Money, a Horse, a
Slave, and his own Robes, which he wore that day; and that none of the rest
return home without recompense.

Spain having received the yoke of the Arabians learned withal their manners,
and took from them the custom of singing love Verses, and celebrating the
actions of great Men after the fashion of the Bards among the Gauls; but these
Songs which they named Romances, were much different from what is called a
Romance, for they were poesies made to be Sung, and consequently very short.
Some have made a collection of many of them, some whereof are so Ancient, that
they can hardly be understood; and they have sometimes served to clear up, and
explain the Histories of Spain, and to reduce the events to order in
Chronology. Their Romances are much later, and the ancientest of them are of
nothing so old a date as our Sir Tristrams and Lancelots. For some Centuries of
years Miguel de Cervante, one of the best wits Spain has produced, made a fine
and judicious Critique in his Don Quixot; and hardly could the Curate of the
Marcha, and Maistre Nicolas the Barber, find in so vast a number six which were
worthy to be preserved; the rest are delivered over to the secular arm of the
old Wife, to be put in the fire. Those which they judged worth the keeping,
were the four Books of Amadis de Gaul, which is said to be the first Romance of
Chivalry, which was Printed in Spain, the model and best of all the other.

Palmerin of England, which some believe was composed by a King of Portugal,
and which they judge worthy to be put in a Box, like that of Darius, wherein
Alexander kept the Works of Homer. Don Beloanis, the Mirror of Chivalry:
Tirante the White, and Kyrie Eleison of Montauban, (for in the good old times
it was believed that Kyrie Eleison and Poralipomenon were the names of some
Saints) where the subtleties of Madam Pleasure-of-my-Life, with the Love and
Guyles of Widow Reposada are highly extolled. But all this is but of yesterday
in comparison of our old Romances, which in all probability were the Models and
Originals of them, as the conformity of the works and vicirity of the Nations
may persuade. He also gives his censure upon the Romances in Verse, and other
Poesies which were found in the Library of Don Quixot; but this is beside our
Subject.

If any object that as we took from the Arabians the art of Ryming, it is
credible that we had from them also the Art of Romancing: seeing that the most
part of our old Romances were in rvme, and that the custom of the French Lords,
to give their Vestments to the best Poets, and which Marm^l says was practiced
by the Kings of Fez, gives yet more ground for this suspicion. I allow that it
is not altogether impossible that the French learned time of the Arabians,
having taken from them likewise the usage of applying it to Romances. I allow
also that the love we then had for Fables, might be augmented and fortified by
their example, and that our art Romantic was (it may be) enriched by the
Commerce which the Neighborhood of Spain, and the Wars gave us with them: but
not at all that we are endebted to them for this inclination, seeing that it
possessed us long time before it was taken notice of in Spain; neither can I
more believe that the Princes of France took from the Arabian Kings that custom
of despoiling themselves of their Garments in savor of the Poets. I rather
think, that both the one and thed other touched with the excellence of the
works they heard repeated, they could not hold from exerting their liberality
immediately; and finding nothing more near or ready then their habits, they
made use of them for that occasion: as we read of some Saints, who have done
the like for the poor; and that this which often came to pass in France by
accident, is practiced every year at Fez by custom, probably was there too at
first introduced by chance only.

It is very credible that the Italians were first brought to the composing of
Romances, by the example of those in Provence, then when the Popes held their
Sea at Avignon; and even by the example of other French, then when the Normans
and Charles Comte d' Anjou (Brother to Saint Louis) a virtuous Prince, a lover
of Poesy, and a Poet himself, made War in Italy; for the Normans also would be
tampering with the Gray Science. And History reports, that they sung the deeds
of Roland before they gave that memorable Battle, which won the Crown of
England to William the Bastard. All Europe in those days was covered with
darkness and thick ignorance; but France, England, and Germany less then Italy,
which then produced but a small number of Writers, and scarce any makers of
Romances at all. Those of that Country, who had a mind to make themselves
distinguished by some tincture of knowledge, came for it to the University of
Paris; which was the mother of Sciences, and Nource of the Learned of Europe.
St. Thomas Aquinas, St. Bonaventure, the Poet Danfe, and Bocace came thither to
Study, and the President Fauchet shows that this last took most part of his
Novels from French Romances; and that Petrarch and the other Italian Poets have
pilfred the richest phansies and conceits from the Songs of Thiband King of
Navar, from Gaces Brussez, Chastelain de Corcy, and the old French Romancers.
'Twas then in my opinion, in this mixture of the two Nations, that the Italians
learned from us the Science of Romances, which by their own confession they owe
to us as well as the Science of rimes.

Thus Spain and Italy had from us an art, which was the fruit of our ignorance
and rudness, and which the politness of the Persians, Ionians, and Greeks had
produced. In effect as in necessity to preserve our lives wanting Bread, we
nourish our Bodies with herbs and roots; so when the knowledge of truth, which
is the propre and natural Food of the mind begins to fail us, we nourish it
with Lies, which are the imitation of truth; and as in plenty to satisfy our
pleasure, we often quit Bread and our ordinary Viands, for Ragousts. Thus when
our minds are acquainted with the truth, they often forsake the Study and
speculation thereof, to be diverted with the Image of Truth, which is Fiction;
for the Image and imitation according to Aristole, are often more agreeable,
then the truth it self; so that two Paths directly opposite, which are
ignorance and learning, rudeness and politness often carry Men to one and the
same end, which is the Study of Fictions, Fables, and Romances. Hence it is
that the most Barbarous Nations love Romantic inventions, as well as those
which are the most polisht. The Origines of all the Savages of America, and
particularly those of Peru, contain nothing but Fables; no otherwise then the
Origines of the Goths, which they writ heretofore in their ancient Runick
Characters upon great stones; whereof I have seen some remains in Denmark. And
if ought were left us of those Works which the Bards among the Ancient Gauls
composed to eternise the memory of their Nation, I question not at all but we
should find them inricht with abundance of Fictions.

This inclination to Fables, which is common to all Men, is not the result of
ratiocination, imitation or custom. It Is natural to them, and has its bait in
the very frame and disposition of their mind and soul; for the desire to know
and to learn is particular to man, and no less does distinguish him from other
creatures then his reason. One may find even in other creatures some sparks of
a rude and imperfect reason; but the coveting of knowledge was never observed,
save in Man only.

This proceeds (according to my sense) from that, that the faculties of our
Soul being of too vast an extent, and of a capacity too large to be filled by
the present objects; the Soul does ransack and search in what is past, and what
is to come, in truth and in fictions, in imaginary spaces and in impossibility,
for wherewith to exercise and employ it. Brutes find in the objects which
present themselves to their sense wherewith to satisfy the powers of their
Soul, and are not concerned further; so that one sees not in them this restless
desire which agitates incessantly the mind of Men, and carries it to the
research of new knowledge; to proportion (if possible) the object to the
faculty, and find there a pleasure resembling, that we enjoy in appeasing a
violent hunger, or quenching a long thirst. It Is this Plato would express by
the Fable of the Marriage of Porus and Penia, that is to say, Riches and
Poverty, whereof he says, is born pleasure, the object is signified by Riches,
which are not riches but in the usage, and otherwise remain unfruitful, and in
no wise beget pleasure. The faculty is intended by Poverty, which is sterile,
and always attended with inquietude, while it is separated from Riches; but
when it is joined thereunto, pleasure is the issue of this union. All this we
meet withal exactly in our soul; Poverty, that is to say, ignorance is natural
to it, and it sighs continually after Science, which is its riches; which when
it is possessed of, this enjoyment is followed by pleasure; but this pleasure
is not always equal, it often costeth it much pains and traval; as when the
soul applies it self to difficult speculations, and occult Sciences, the matter
whereof is not present to our senses, and where the imagination which acts with
facility has a less part then the understanding whose operations are more
laborious; and for that labor is naturally ircksome to us; the soulis not
carried to hard and spinous learning; unless in prospect of the fruits, or in
hopes of a remote pleasure, or else by necessity; but the knowledge which
attracts the soul and delights it most, is that which is acquired without pain,
and where the imagination (in a manner) alone does act, and on matters like
those, which fall ordinarily under our sense; and especially if this knowledge
excites our passions, which are the great movers in all the actions of our
life. Such are these Romances; there is required no great contention or torment
of the mind to comprehend them. No long reasonings to be made, nor the memory
over-burth-end, nothing is required but the fancy; imagine only and it is
enough. They move not our passions, save only to appease them; they stir not
our fear or compassion, but to make us see out of danger or misery those we
feared or complained for; they touch not our tenderness, but to let us see them
happy we had a love and tenderness for. Finally, all of our passions find
themselves there agreeably provoked and calmed. It Is therefore that they who
act more by passion then by reason, and travail more with their imagination
then their understanding, are most taken therewith; though these other are so
too, but after another manner. These are touched with the beauties of Art, and
that which proceeds from the intellect; but the former such as are children and
the simple, are sensible only of that which strikes their imagination, and
stirs their passions, and they love fictions in themselves, without looking
further. Now Fictions being nothing but narrations, true in appearance and
false in effect; the minds of the simple, who discern only the bark, are
pleased with this show of truth, and very well satisfied. But these who
penetrate further, and see into the solid, are easily disgested with this
falsity, so that the first love the falsehood, because it is concealed under an
appearance of truth; these others are distasted with this Image of truth, by
reason of the real falsehood, which is couched under it; if this falsehood be
not otherwise ingenious, mysterious, and instructive, and buoys it self up by
the excellence of the invention and art. And S. Augustine says somewhere, that
these falsities which are significative, and couch a hidden meaning, are not
lies, but the Figures of truth, which the most Sage and Holy persons, and our
Savior himself have made use on upon occasion.

Since then it is true that lies ordinarily flow from ignorance, and the
grossness of our intellectuals, and that this inundation of the Barbarians, who
issued from the North, spread over all Europe, and plunged it in so profound an
ignorance, as it could not clear it self from, till after two Ages or
thereabouts, is it not then very probable that this ignorance caused the same
effect in Europe, which it always had produced every where besides; and is it
not in vain to seek for that in chance, which we find in nature? there is then
no reason to contend, but that French, Gorman, and English Romances, and all
the Fables of the North are of the Countrey's growth, born upon the place, and
not imported from elsewhere; that they never had other Original then the
Histories stuff with falsities, and made in obscure and ignorant times, when
there was neither industry nor curiosity to discover the truth of things, nor
art for discribing it: that these Histories mixed with true and false, having
been well received by the rude and half-barbarous people; the Historians
thereupon took the boldness to present them such as were purely forged, which
are the Romances. It Is also a common opinion that the name of Romance has been
heretofore given to Histories, and was applied afterward to Fictions; which is
an irrefragable testimony, that the one has come from the others Ramanzi, says
Pigna, secondo la commune opinione in Francese detti erano gliannali, and
percio le Guerre di part in part notate sotto questo nome uscivano, poscia
alcuni dalla verita partendosi, quantunque favoleggiassero, cosi apunto
chiamorono li scritti loro. Romances according to the common opinion in France
were the Annals; and for that the History of the War published part after part
had that Name, some afterward who neglected the truth, howsoever Fabulous they
were, gave their writings also the same Title.

Strabo in a passage I have already alleged, says that the Histories of the
Persians, Medes, and Syrians have not deserved much credit; for that those who
writ them, seeing that the Inventers of Fables were in great esteem, believed
they might be so too, by writing of Fables in the form of Histories, that is to
say, Romances: whence one may conclude that Romances, according to all
appearances and likelihood have among us had the same Original, which they had
heretofore among these people.

But to return to the Troubadours or Trouverres [so were called these Poets] of
Provence, who were the Princes of Romancery in France, about the end of the
tenth Age, their mystery was so generally approved of, that all the Provinces
of France, as I have said, had also their Trouverres. They produced in the
eleventh Age a matchless multitude of Romances, both in Prose and Verse, many
whereof maugre the envy of time, are preserved even to our days. Of this number
were the Romances of Garin le Loheran, of Tristram, of Lancelot du Lake, of
Bertain, of St. Greal, of Merlyn, of Arthur, of Perceval, of Perceforest, and
of most part of those 127 Poets, who lived before the year 1300. of whom the
President Fauchet has given his censure. I shall not undertake to make you a
Catalogue of them, nor examine whether the Amadis de Gaul be Originally from
Spain, Flanders, or France, and whether the Romance of Tiel Ulespiegel be a
Translation from the German, nor in what language the Romance of the seven wise
Men of Greece was first written, or that of Dolopathos; which some say was
taken from the parables of Sandaban the Indian: some say likewise that it is to
be found in Greek in some Libraries; which has furnished the matter of an
Italian Book called Erastus, and of many of Bocace his Novels, as the same
Fauchet has remarked: which was writ in Latin by John, Mon^k, of the Abbeyde
Hauteselue whereof anci^nt Copies are to be seen; and Translated into French by
the Clerk Hebert, about the end of the twelfth Age, and into High Dutch about
^00 years after; and after an hundred years more, from High Dutch into Latin
again by a Learned person, who changed the Names thereof, and was ignorant that
the Dutch had come from the Latin. It will suffice that I tell you all these
works, to which ignorance has given Birth, did bear along with them the marks
of their Original, and were no other then a fardle of Fictions grossly huddled
together without head or foot, and infinitely short of that Sovereign degree of
Art and Elegance, whereunto the French Nation has afterward brought Romances.
It Is truly a subject of wonder, that having yielded to others the Bays for
Epick Poesy and History, we have carried these to so high a pitch, that the
best of their Romances do not equal the very meanest of ours.

We owe I believe this advantage to the refinement and politness of our
Galantry; which proceeds (in my opinion) from the great liberty in which the
Men in France live with the Women: these are in a manner recluses in Italy and
Spain, and are separated from Men by so many obstacles, that they are scarce to
be seen, and not to be spoken with at all. Wherefore Men have there neglected
the art of cajoling them agreeably, because the occasions for it are so rare.
All the study and business there is to surmount the difficulties of access; and
this being effected, they make use of the time without amusing themselves with
forms. But in France the Dames go at large upon their Parole; and being under
no custody, but that of their own heart, make thereof a Fort more strong and
sure then all the Keys and Grates, and all the vigilance of the Douegnaes. The
Men hereby are obliged to lay a formal Siege to this Fort, and employ so much
industry and and address to reduce it, that they have made thereof an art,
which scarce is known to other people. It Is this art which distinguishes the
French from other Romances, and which renders the reading of them so delicious,
that they have caused the more profitable reading to be neglected. The Dames
were the first taken with this bayt: These made Romances their whole study, and
have so despiced that of the ancient Fable and History, that they now no longer
understand those works, from which they formerly received their chiefest
accomplishment; that they may not blush at this ignorance, which they so often
find themselves guilty of, they perceive that they had better disapprove what
they are ignorant of, then take the pains to learn it. The men have imitated
them, in complaisance, and have condemned what they condemned, and called
Pedantry that which made an essential part of politess, even in Malherbe's
time. The Poets and other French Writers who succeeded, have been constrained
to submit to this judgment; and many among them seeing that the knowledge of
antiquity was of no advantage to them, have ceased to study what they durst no
longer practice. Thus a good cause has produced a very ill effect, and the
beauty of our Romances has drawn on the contempt of good Letters, and
consequently ignorance.

Not that I pretend for all this to condemn the reading of them. The best
things in the World are attended always with their inconveniences. Romances may
have much worse too then ignorance. I know what they are accused for: they
drain our devotion, they inspire as with irregular passions, and corrupt our
manners. All this may be, and sometimes does happen. But what cannot evil and
untoward minds make a bad use on? weak souls are even contageous to themselves
and make poison of every thing: Histories must be forbidden, which relates so
many pernicious examples; and the Fable, for there crimes are authorized even
by the example of the Gods. A Marble Statue which made the public Devotion
among the Heathens, caused the passion, brutality and the despair of a certain
young man. Cherea in Torence fortifies himself in a criminal dissign, at the
sight of a Picture of Jupiters, which may be, drew the respect of all other
spectatours, Little regard was had to the sobriety of manners in most part of
the Greek and old French Romances, by reason of the vice of the times, wherein
they were composed. Even the Astrea and some others which have sollewed, are
yet somewhat licentious: but the Modern Romances (I speak of the good ones) are
so far from this fault, that one shall find not one expression, not one word
which may shock chaste ears, nor one single action, which may give offense to
Modesty.

If any object, that love is there treated of after a fashion so delicate and
so insinuating, that the bait of this dangerours passion, enters glibly in
young hearts.

I answer, that it is so far from being dangerous, that it is even in some sort
necessary, that the young persons of the World should be acquainted with this
passion, that they may stop their ears to that which is criminal, and be better
enabled to deal with its artifices; and know their conduct in that which has an
honest and sacred end; which is so true that experience lets us see, that such
as are least acquainted with Love, are most obnoxious to it; and the most
ignorant are the soonest Duped. Add hereto that nothing so much refines and
polishes the wit, nor conduces so much to the fashioning, and making it fit and
proper for the World, as the reading of good Romances. These are the dumb
Tutors, which succeed to those of the College, and which teach to speak and to
live by a Method more instructive, and much more persuasive then theirs, and
of which may be said, what Horace affirms of Homers Iliades, that they teach
morality more effectually, and much better then the most able Philosophers.

Monsieur d Urfee was the first who retrived them from Barbarity, and brought
them to rules, in his incomparable Astrea; the most ingenious and most polite
work, which ever appeared in this kind, and which has Eclipsed the glory which
Greece, Italy, and Spain had acquired. Nevertheless he has not discouraged
those who come after him to undertake what he had enterprised; and has not so
wholly engrossed the public admiration; but that some yet is left for the many
excellent Romances, which have appeared in France since his. None can without
astonishment look upon those which a Maid, as illustrious by her Modesty, as by
here merit, has published under a borrowed Name, depriving her self so
generously of that glory which was her due, and notseeking for a reward but in
her virtue: as if while she travailed thus for the honor of our Nation, she
would spare that shame to our sex. But at the length, time has done her that
Justice which she denied herself, and has informed us that the Illustrious
Bassa, Grand Cyrus, and Clalia are the Works of Madam de Scudery; to the end
that hereafter the art of making Romances, which might defend it self against
scrupulous censours, not only by the commendations which the Patriarch Pholius
gives it, but likewise by the great examples of those who applied themselves,
thereto, might also justify it self by hers; and which after having been
cultivated by Philosophers, as Apuleus and Athengoras, by Roman Pretors, as
Sisenna; by Consuls as Petronius, by pretendors to the Empire as Clodius
Albinus, by Priests as Theodorus Prodromus, by Bishops as Heliodorus and
Achilles Tatius, by Popes as Pius Secundus, who writ the Loves of Euryalus and
Lucretia, by Saints as John Dam^scenus; it had moreover the advantage to have
been exercised by a wise and virtuous Maid.

For your part, Sir, since it is true, as I have demonstrated, and Plutarch
assures us, that one of the greatest charms of a man's soul is the tissue of a
Fable well invented and well related; what success then may not you presume
upon from Zayde, where the Adventures are so new and touching, and the
Narration so just and so polite. I could wish for the concern I have for that
great Prince, whom Heaven has placed over us; that we had the History of his
wonderful Reign writ in a style so Noble, and with as much accuratness and
discernment. The Virtue which does conduct his actions is so Heroic, and the
Fortune which attends them so surprising, that Posterity would doubt wheter it
were History or Romance.

FINIS.

