THE REAL CAUSE OF THE NATIONS Bondage and Slavery, here Demonstrated, And the
Way of their Freedom, from their sore and hard bondage Asserted. Presented
unto the PARLIAMENT Of the Commonwealth of England, Who have a Power and
Opportunity put into their hands to do good (and to fulfill the expected ends of
many) if they improve it. From one that has seen the Corruption which
bondageth the whole Creation, and that waits for the Redemption of the Creature
from under it, RICHARD HUBBERTHORN.

I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the
beginning, afterward thou shall be called the City of Righteousness, the
faithful City,

Isai. 1. 26. (Not before.) When this is fulfilled in England, it shall be
truly called a free Nation, or Commonwealth, ( Not before)

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

THere has been a time when the prudent has kept silence, but now Wisdom has
opened her mouth, and will be justified of all her Children, for the Lord is
reviving the Spirit that has been imprisoned, and taking the yoke from off the
disciples necks, and is going on in the Name of his power, to make his creature
a free creature, and his people a free people, and the Nation that serves him,
and obeys his Law, a free Nation; and the thundrings of his power is gone
forth, and his Light is risen to discover and destroy that which has deceived
the Nations, and to give a discerning unto all, of their freedom from their
bondage, and in what it stands; and that is to be cast out which gendreth to
the bondage of Soul, Spirit or Conscience, in any exercise of worship, or
obedience unto God, which springs from the measure of his own life, which must
not be hindered, nor quenched by any Law, Power or Pretense whatsoever.
Therefore from the free Spirit of Life and Liberty in Christ Jesus, this is
Proclaimed to the whole Nation, and the Nations round about, to take off their
bondage, and to take away their reproach, which has lain upon them for want of
the Life of Christ, which is now risen to do its own work, and perfect its own
praise, and to deliver its own seed wheresoever it has been in Captivity, the
power of life must deliver it, from all that which causes shame and reproach,
which is the iniquity and transgression of the life of Christ, which is the
Original Cause of bondage to every Nation, which the Lord has promised to take
away in one day, Zac. 3. 9. And his work and power shall be known by its fruit,
Which is to take away their sin, Esa. 27. 9. One great yoke of bondage which is
upon the subjects and seed of God in this Nation, and others, is, that
ministry, which is not free, neither will Minister without money, and the
people is not free to hear them, yet a yoke of bondage is laid upon them, to
pay them; and this iniquity is established by a Law; so here is neither free
preaching, nor free hearing, unto which the free Spirit raised up in this
Nation, declares thus;

That every one that will Minister, must do it freely, and as of the Ability
which God gives him, and as the Oracle of God, and that no profession of
people may maintain another Minister; but that there may be a free Preaching,
and a free Hearing among all People, that so it may be a free Nation, and they
that will have Teachers according to their own lusts and judgments, they to
maintain them; and that there may never any such iniquity be established by a
Law, as for one sort of people to maintain another Minister, for this has
caused heart-burnings, envy and strife, insomuch that little Justice could be
done for the Nation, by reason of the cry of complainers and oppressors, as at
every Parliament, every high Court, every Assizes, and Sessions, and petty
Courts, there has some (pretended Minister or other been presenting Addresses,
Petitions or Complaints, and so has stopped the Just and Lawful proceedings of
the affairs of the Nation; which interruption may easily be prevented, and the
Courts of Justice freed from such brawling and unceaseable complaints, which
has been more interruption to Justice, then any thing in the Nation besides,
and has more hindered the peoples deliverance from being a free people, and a
free Nation, then any thing in the Nation besides; so let every form and
profession of Religion maintain their own Minister, and maintain their own
Poor, which are crying at their Meeting House doors, and in the streets, in the
Name of their God, for some relief, that so there may not be a beggar in
England; for herein the Christians in name, are become even a reproach among
the Heathens, to see their own flesh stand naked and uncovered in the streets,
and Steeple-house doors, and at their doors, and they turn their ears from the
Poor, and forgets God, and looses the bowels of Compassion, and are not
merciful, as the Father which is in Heaven is merciful; and so walks not
according to the Scriptures, but is a disgrace to Religion, and even a reproach
among the Heathen; so let no more the cry of the Priests, nor of the poor be
heard in our land; the one crying for Laws, to persecute and receive money of
those, who they preach not unto, which receives no teaching from them; which
cry is intolerable, to be heard or suffered in a free Commonwealth; And the
other for want of the creatures of God, when as others spend the creatures of
God upon their lusts excessively, and so the Creation is out of order; but
those that are come into the Gospel Ministration, and to be taught of the Lord,
and have received Christ Jesus the Lord, and walk in him; it is not so amongst
us, for the creatures of God are not spent upon the lust, nor destroyed;
neither is there a beggar amongst us, who are truly of us, in the obedience of
truth; so that we do not desire that any people or profession in the Nation
should maintain our poor, for they are our own flesh, without respect of
persons; for if any of us have of this Worlds good, and see our Brother stand
in need, and shuts up the bowels of compassion from him, the love of God does
not dwell in us; neither does any other maintain those that Minister unto us
the Word and Doctrine; so we according to the royal Law of Liberty, desire to
do unto others, as we would have them do unto us; and thus to be a free people
and a free Nation. So every form and profession will enjoy their own Minister,
till they come to know Him, unto whom the gatherings of the people must be,
viz. Christ; so that neither Parliament, Assizes, Sessions nor Courts will have
any thing to do in matters of Religion, but to keep the peace of the Nation;
And then he that has the Word of God, may speak his Word faithfully and
freely, without interruption; so that the Gospel of God may have its free
course, and be glorified. And that great oppression of Tithes (which lies heavy
upon the whole Nation) which God raised up his Spirit in the Army once to
testify against, may be taken away, that what was then pretended may be now
fulfilled, and the people eased of their oppressions which they have long felt
the burden of, and groaned under, that so (as a free people) they may be
delivered from that bondage, and the Law may be disannulled by which that
bondage is imposed upon them. So this will beget love in the nation, and all
persecution, cruelty and bitterness will cease, and every one may freely and
quietly enjoy the fruit of his own labor; then with much freedom and
cheerfulness, will every one Minister of his substance unto all necessary uses,
knowing that the earth and the fullness of it is the Lords; and when this
universal love and free Spirit is begotten among people, then will
Righteousness establish the Nation; and that will be brought forth, which many
sincere hearts and tender Consciences has waited for, several years; and many
have been even almost weary and faint, in their minds, in waiting for that,
which they once had a lively sight of, and hopes to enjoy, in the Lords Promise
of Liberty and Freedom opened in their understandings ten years since, insomuch
that some have been ready to tempt God, and say, that he was slack concerning
his Promise; and some, for want of long patience, has left off expecting that
which they once believed and hoped for; but God is reviving the hopes of the
contrite ones, and in them that had said, there was no hope in them, is he
renewing strength, to believe that God will give Judges as at the first, and
Counselors as at the beginning; the Judges at the first, were not to Judge for
gifts, nor for rewards; nor the Priests was not to preach for hire, nor the
Prophets were not to Divine for money, but the Judges did Minister Justice
freely between man and man; and the Priests did Minister the Law freely, which
was added upon all transgression; so in those days here were no Priests that
troubled the Courts, Judges, nor Counselors, with Addresses, Petitions, or
Complaints for maintenance; no suing at the Law, no Imprisoning men's persons
for wages, nor no spoiling of men's goods, and there was not such delays in
executeing judgment upon transgressors as is now, for the Judges sat in the
gate, and executed judgment speedily upon the offender, and cleansed the land
of evil doers, and so every one was to wait on his Ministry, which he had
received from the Lord, and are to do so now, if they do it unto the Lord; he
that judges for God, is not to respect any man's person in judgment, and he
that has the word of the Kingdom is to Minister it freely, and then the people
will Minister their carnal things, freely, to every one that has need; so
that, whereas even from the Priest to the people, al has been given to
covetousness, strife and debate; every one now will be given to love and
freeness one to another; for he that has spiritual things, will Minister them
freely, and he that has carnal things, will Minister them freely, and so will
all come from under the execution of the Law, and from all strife and
contention.

Another great oppression, wherein iniquity is upheld by a Law, is in the
Ministration of the Law between man and man, it not being done freely, so not,
as in the beginning.

HE that does Minister the Law, let him do it freely for the Lord, and for
righteousness sake; and let him be as one of the Judges in the beginning, and
as one of the counselors, whose eyes were not blinded with gifts and rewards;
and so it will come to be a free nation, and then every man will not seek his
own, but every one another good, and then will pure love spring up to one
another, and one will seek to preserve and save another, and not devour and
destroy one another about earthly things as now they do; so Christ's spirit will
be found among all sorts of people, Ministers of the Law, Ministers of the
Gospel, and subjects of the nation, which were to save men's lives, not to
destroy them; and then the Scriptures which cannot be broken will be fulfilled,
and peace will be extended as a river, and righteousness as a mighty stream.

For it is this spirit which I have mentioned, in Lawyer and Priests (which
did) not Minister freely, but for covetous ends has made merchandise of
peoples souls and estates, that has broken the peace of this Nation, as many
has had a deep experience, even when the Army was in its first purity and zeal
for God and his truth, that spirit did creep into their councels and corrupted
them, and did creep into Parliaments, and corrupted them, and when there was
any appearance of a Monarchy, or government, arising in that Nation, that
spirit crept into every high Court, and corrupted it, so that whole Nations are
corrupted with that spirit, so that till that spirit be purged out, there is
not like to be a free Nation, or a free people, for it was that spirit which
brought Israel into bondage, which was once a free Nation, and not in bondage
to any man, while the Judges judged freely, and the Priest preached freely, and
the Prophets prophesied freely without money, or without price; then was Israel
a free Nation, and a free people, and the glory of all Nations; but when the
Judges judged for gifts and rewards, and the Priests preached for hire, and
the Prophets divined for money; then they became as corrupt as the Nations of
the Gentiles round about them, and then they came into bondage and captivity,
and then profainnesse went forth from the Priests into all the earth, as it
does from those in England which are in the same state; now see that sin and
covetousness is a reproach to any people, as Solomon says, Prove. 14. 23. and
it is that which brings them into bondage from being a free people; now if none
may Minister the Law, but those that do it freely, as unto the Lord, and as his
Ministers, then that covetous, self-seeking spirit will be purged out in
Judges, Counselors, Lawyers, Attorneys, and Solicitors, which would devour the
creation, to spend upon their own lusts, that seeks for great places, to enrich
themselves and destroy others, so that equity, Law and Justice is lost, and the
free Ministration of it in this Nation; so that in many cases, a man had better
suffer himself to be defrauded, then to seek to the Law for Justice, the
administration of it is become so corrupt, and the law is so perverted by them,
that a man is not suffered to plead his own cause, but is forced to hire a
Lawyer, or an Attorney; and men are not suffered to bear a true and faithful
witness, nor to have the truth and justness of their cause confirmed by the
mouth of two or three witnesses, without swearing, and so people is still kept
in bondage by deceit and oppression from having the liberty of their pure
consciences; and so neither Law, Judges, nor Counselors are now as at the
beginning, nor such as ought to be in a free Commonwealth.

Now whereas in your late proceedings, it is ordered and granted, that every
one shall have their free liberty; first as an English man; secondly, as a
Christian, which liberty hitherto we have not enjoyed; for as English men, we
have not had our just liberty in the Nation; first, as concerning the Law;
secondly, as concerning the Worship of God; for in this our own nation, and in
our own Counties, where we have been well known (and also just and true, and of
good report, and no evil justly laid to our charge) have we been shamefully
abused, whipped, stoned, prisoned, and both our bodies and goods spoiled,
accounted as vagrants, and not permitted, as English men, to have the liberty
of the Law, because we, as Christians, could not transgress the commandment of
Christ, which says swear not at all; so that if we may have our liberty as
English men, then not to be persecuted in our own country as vagrants, where
we are known to be no such persons; and from hence let a true t^^^^mony, in yea
or nay, be taken in our law without an oath, (...) he that can take liberty to
swear, and so to break Christ's c^^mand, will take liberty to lie also. And
secondly, if we (...) enjoy our liberty as Christians; then we are not to be
force^ (...) a law to maintain the Antichristian ministers, nor to be for to
swear contrary to Christ's command; and also that act, (...) Law, is to be
abolished, which is to persecute any for trave^ on the first day of the week,
yea, when many of that day (...) but traveled to the worship of God, has been
imprisoned, some their horses taken from them, and never yet had them ag^ and
this is contrary to the Christians liberty, for the Chr^^^^ans, and the
disciples of Christ, in the primative time, tra^led upon that day, and Christ
himself traveled upon that (...) as you may read in Luke 24. 15. where two of
the Disciples ^veled from Jerusalem to a village called Emaus, (and (...) being
risen from the dead traveled with them) which was (...) Jerusalem about 60
furlongs, and that same day they trave^ back again from Emaus to Jerusalem,
verse 33. which in (...) is about 15 miles, and if they had traveled other 15
miles (...) it was but the Christians liberty, and no law to the contr^^^ so
let that be repealed, which binds and limits us from (...) the Christians
liberty, and from walking as they walked.

And let not any magistrate be encouraged by you to any cruelty or persecution,
from his will, upon any for the ^ercise of their consciences in the fear of
God, in obedie^ to his will; for the day of your trial is come, and the (...)
which will make all things manifest, and every work of (...) sort it is.

An opportunity has been put into the hands of many, to(...) for God who had
no heart to improve it, but has impro^ their own interest for their own
ambition, and God has (...) them as a reproach, and a byword among the
people, (...) have sought their own, and not another good, and have bused the
power put into their hands; therefore you that (...) not yet lost your day, nor
time, redeem it, least the Lord (...) you by also, as not fit to do his work,
as he has done (...)

THE END.

