THE ANTIPATHY BETWIXT FLESH and SPIRIT IN ANSWER TO SEVERAL ACCUSATIONS
Against the People called QUAKERS.

By Richard Hubberthorne.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle near the West end
of Paul's. 1656.

The distance between Flesh and Spirit, etc.
THis is the word of the Lord to all people, as I am moved of the Lord to clear
the scandals and false accusations cast upon the righteous seed; and as the
seed of God in all generations has suffered reproaches from the world, so now
the same seed, where it is brought forth, suffers by this generation of evil
doers, and is afflicted and tormented, and shamefully accused now in England,
whom you call Quakers: and you say we deny all the Ordinances of Christ; and
you say we do not honor the Magistrates; nor are subject unto authority, but
are disturbers and breakers of the peace, which is false.

The first Accusation. You say, we deny Repentance.

Answ. And this is false, for Repentance is the gift of God, and this gift we
have received, and his free Grace, which teaches us to deny all ungodliness
and worldly lusts, Tit. 2. 12. And by Repentance have forsaken sin, as it was
discovered to us by the light of Christ, which he has enlightened us withal,
and so the mercies of God we have found according to his promise, and are sent
of the Lord to preach Repentance to all people, who would have all men come to
repentance, and to the acknowledgement of the truth, that they might be saved.
2 Timothy 2. 25. And with the word of the Lord, as they are moved of the Lord, do
many go now with this Doctrine into your Streets, into your Markets, into your
Synagogues, and into your Cities, to call you to repentance, before the wrath
of the Lord come upon you: and both sons and daughters now are sent to preach
this doctrine amongst you from the Lord, and for obeying the Lord herein, are
they reviled by you, and persecuted, and falsely accused, and this is left for a
testimony against you from the Lord, and shall bear witness against you.

The second Accusation is, That we deny baptism.

Answ. The baptism of Christ we own, which all the Saints were baptized into,
which was, by one Spirit into one body, as in 1 Cor. 12. 13. and by this
baptism we do witness the washing away of sin, not only the washing away the
filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God: But
sprinkling of Infants we deny, which there is no Scripture for. And all you who
from your imiginations do imitate John's baptism, and so go into the water, and
say, You are believers, and have right to the Ordinances of Christ, but you to
be believers we deny, who are not yet come to Repentance, and your
water baptism, which is but an imitation from the Letter; for the Lord never
sent you forth, nor commanded you neither to preach nor baptize, as they did
whom you go about to imitate, who are not yet come to repentance, nor to the
first Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, not to own the light of Christ in
your consciences, which should exercise them, and lead you to wait upon God,
and lead you to repentance, and the faith of believers you know not, for the
mystery of faith is held in a pure conscience. 1 Timothy 3. 9. which you cannot
witness, which hates the Light of Christ, which should exercise your
consciences, and so your minds and consciences is defiled, and with that mind
you talk of faith, and of the Ordinances of Christ, and of water baptism, which
serves unto us for a figure, as the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 3. 21. And Jesus
Christ was baptized by John by water, that he might fulfill all righteousness,
Mat. 3. 15. And John was a Prophet, and Christ is the end of the Prophets; and
John's baptism was but a figure, for he said, He did but baptize with water, but
Christ is the end of all figures, types, and shadows, and did fulfill them, for
he fulfilled all Righteousness, and John's Ministry, and John's Baptism, and he
that fulfilled all Righteousness, the same baptizeth, which John did bear
witness unto, and all men came unto him, John 3. 16. but he baptized none with
waeer: but this is a mystery to thy dark mind, which knows not the baptism of
Christ, nor John's Doctrine, nor Jesus Christ the true light, which enlightneth
every one that comes into the world, which John bare witness unto, Ioh. 1. 9.
but goes to hold up the types and figures which Christ came to fulfill, and so
denyest Christ to be come in the Flesh to fulfill all Righteousness, and so
thou art an Antichrist, who holds up the figures which Christ came to fulfill,
and so thou denies the Scriptures and Christ, who said, he came to fulfill all
Righteousness; and the Saints baptism thou art ignorant of, which is, by one
Spirit into one Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. And Paul who was a Minister of Christ, and
preached the Gospel, did bring many into this baptism, and he was not sent to
baptize with water, but to preach the Gospel; and all the Churches which he
preached unto, came to witness Christ's Baptism with the Holy Ghost and with
Fire, by one Spirit into one Body, and was baptized into Christ who was the
Head of the Body, Romans 6. 3. and by this baptism we are thus washed from all
filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; but your imitated baptism of Water we deny,
who live in your filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, whose minds and Consciences
are defiled; but the baptism of Christ we own, which purifies our Consciences
from dead works, and keeps our minds undefiled by the washing of regeneration,
and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5.

The third Accusation is, That we deny the Sacrament, which is an Ordinance of
Christ.

Answ. For the word Sacrament, there is no such Scripture which speaks of a
Sacrament, therefore we do deny you and your Sacrament, and your bread and
wine, which is carnal, and feeds the carnal which must die, and your
Communion is in that which is carnal in the creatures; and Drunkards, and
Swearers have fellowship together with you in those things; and all Liars,
Covetous ones, Profane and Idolatrous ones eats of the bread, and drinks of
the cup, and sits at the Table, which is the Table of devils, and this is your
Sacrament, which stands without in carnal bread and wine, and feeds the carnal,
which oppresses and murders the seed of God within you; and you say, Christ
has left that as an Ordinance for you to practice: which is false, which we
deny; but the Supper of the Lord we own, The Cup of blessing which we bless, is
it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? and the bread which we break, is
it not the Communion of the body of Christ? for we being many are one bread,
for we are all partakers of that one bread, 1 Cor. 10 16, 17, 21, 22. And this
is the bread which came down from heaven, he that eats thereof shall never
dye; and this bread we all eat of, and this cup we all drink of, and this is
that which is practiced and commanded in the Church of Christ, and so we sit at
the Table or Christ, and cannot sit nor have fellowship with the Table of
Devils: and they who sit at your Table and your Sacrament, and eats of your
bread, and drink of your wine, they die, for it is not the bread of life; and
you who eats and drinks it, does not di^cern the Lords body, for it is
spiritual, and your Sacrament is carnal, And so you eat and drink damnation to
yourselves, not discerning the Lords body, feeding the carnal with the carnal,
and so we deny your Sacrament to be any Ordinance of Christ, or the Supper of
Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 29.

The fourth Accusation is, That we deny the resurrection of the body.

Answ. And that is false, For at the sound of the last trumpet the dead shall be
raised, they that have done good shall arise to the resurrection of life, they
that have done evil, to the resurrection of condemnation. And we preach Christ
risen from the dead, and if the dead rise not, then is our preaching vain, and
your faith is also in vain, and you are yet in you sins, who knows not this
resurrection, Christ risen from the dead in you, 1 Cor. 15. 14, 15, 16, 17. But
some man will say, How are the dead raised? and with what bodies do they come?
1 Cor. 15. 35. Thou fool, that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body
that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain,
but God gives it a body as pleases him, and to everyseed his own body. There
is also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial; and the glory of the
celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another; there is one
glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon, and another glory of the
Stars, for one Star differs from another Star in glory. So also is the
resurrection of the dead, it is sown in corruption, it is raised in
incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power, it is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15. 35, 36, 37, 38. Now this I say unto you all, That
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither does corruption
inherit incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. 50, 51, 52. But this is to you all a mystery,
who are in the first nature, whose understandings are not enlightened by the
light of Christ, who lives in your sorms, notions, and professions of these
things in the letter, feeding your carnal minds with the Letter, which is
death and kills, and so your minds are drawn from the Light of Christ within
you, into outward observances of meats and drinks, bread and wine, diverse
washings and carnal Ordinances, which were figures of the time then present,
Heb. 9. 9, 10. and you deny. Jesus Christ the substance, who is the true light
that enlightneth everyone that comes into the world. Now to the light in you
all I speak, which Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal, and if you love
this light it will lead you out of all your carnal Ordinances and worthips, and
diverse washings, which stands in the first covenant, which was before Christ,
and is done away in Christ the second covenant, and it will lead you to worship
God in the spirit, and into the doctrine of Christ, to yea and nay in all your
communications: but all you who are got up high in forms and profession, you
are not yet come to yea and nay, but are out of the doctrine of Christ, and
walks contrary to the light of Christ in your consciences, which light shall be
your condemnation that hates it, John 3. 19, 20. though you be got up high in
your forms, and notions, and words of the Saints conditions, who spoke in the
light and from the life: And you who have the form, but not the life, shall be
condemned by the life; and you who hate the light, shall be condemned with the
light and life which gave forth the Scriptures.

The fifth Accusation is, That we do not honor Magistrates, nor are subject
unto Authority, but are disturbers and breakers of the peace.

Answ. Justice we own, and righteousness; and all who love the light of Christ
which he has enlightened them withal, it will lead them to act justice. And
all Magistrates, I charge you in the presence of the living God to act
according to that which is pure of God in the conscience. And all Magistrates
who act according to that of God in the conscience, are honored by those who
fear the Lord, and walk in obedience to that in the conscience: and these who
act justice according to that in the conscience, they do not bear the sword in
vain, for that in the conscience is according to the Law of God, and all you
Magistrates, who are set over the people to do justice, and execute the Law
upon offenders, this is the word of the Lord to you, to mind the light of
Christ in your consciences, and it will cause you to act according to the place
of a Magistrate; but if you suffer swearers, and drunkards, or liars, or
oppressors, or fal^e weights, or strikers, or quarrellers, or fighters, and do
not punish them, or whoremongers, or idolatrous, or idle persons without a
calling; and thou that passes by these things, and does not act justice
according to the Law, then thou acts not according to that light in the
conscience, and thou bears the sword in vain, and that in the conscience will
take hold upon thee, and condemn thee, and will execute the righteous Law of
God upon thee who refuses to act according to that in the conscience: but
those whom you call Quakers, act according to that in the conscience, and they
are no fighters, no str^kers, no drunkards, no swearers, no oppressors, no
whoremongers, no idolaters, no fornicato^s, no liars, no scorners, no revilers,
no false accusers, not proud, not high-minded, not thieves, not murderers, for
they give Obedience to that in the conscience, which crucifies them to all
these things, and so the Law cannot take hold upon them, and from the Lord do
they declare against all these things where they are yet standing, which the
Law of God takes hold upon. And you who are called Magistrates and Justices, as
you pass through the Streets, in the Cities, and in the Markets, you may hear
men swear and lie, and be drunk in the Al^houses, and you pass by them: and
when any of the Servants of the Lord, who are sent of the Lord into the Markets
or Cities, and declare the Word of the Lord against drunkards, and swearers,
and liars, who are cheating one another, and cozening one another, and bid them
repent, and declare to them the just judgment of God which is to fall upon
them, and all such whom thou who art a Magistrate has neglected to act justice
upon, and to punish according to the Law, then they who are drunkards fall a
fighting and striking, and hales them to thee who art a Magistrate, which
should punish the drunkards and swearers, fighters and strikers, and thou
say, they have distu^bed the people, and broken the peace, when they have
declared the Word of the Lord against Sin and Ungodliness, and all the
unrighteousness of men, which thou should have punished by the Law; and thou
art called a Justice of peace, and this is thy peace which is kept with
drunkards, and swearers, and strikers, and fighters, and is disturbed by the
word of the Lord declared from the mouth of the Lord by his Servants against
all these things, who are not guilty of any of those things, and here thou art
no Minister of God; but an encourager of evil doers, and discourager of those
that do well, which declares justice from God against those whom thou should
act justice upon; and when they are brought before thoe, then thou would have
them to honor thee, who art a vile person, and no Minister of God, and no
Honor belongs unto thee; but he who Ministers Justice from that which is pure
of God in the Conscience, is worthy of double Honor; and because they will not
honor thee who acts no Justice but according to thy corrupt will, and is not
obedient to that of God in the conscience, thou sends them to prison, or out of
the City, or out of the Markets, or stocks them, or whips them; and if a
drunkard, or swearer will put off his hat to thee, and bow to thee, and call
thee Master, thou do not imprison such a one, nor punish him neither with
stocks, nor whips, nor counts him any breaker of the peace; and here they who
break the peace, and act contrary to the Law of God, are spared, and are at
liberty; and they who keep the peace and do violence to no man, they are
punished by those who should act Justice in the Land. And here iniquity is set
in the place of Justice, and is at liberty, and truth is imprisoned by the
Rulers of the Nation.

And to all Rulers I speak from the Lord to that in your consciences, minding
it will let you see who it is that is not subject to Authority, whether they
that are drunk, or they who declare against drunkenness, whether they that
swear, or they who declare against swearing, and deny to swear at all; whether
they that fight and strike and beat one another or they who never lift up a
hand against any man, but declare the word of the Lord against such things.

And them whom you call quakers are no drunkards, nor no swearers; for Jesus
Christ says, Swear not at all, but let your yea be yea, and your nay be nay;
and so they abide in the doctrine of Christ, and keep the peace of God, and are
justified in the sight of God, and are no breakers of the peace, but are
subject unto Authority, and for conscience sake cannot break the Commands of
Christ, nor do any wrong nor violence unto any man and the peace; for they are
no fighters nor strikers, Romans 13. 45. but they are smitten and stricken, and
^lley give their backs to the smiter, and hide not their face from shame and
spitting, as the same seed Christ did, who passed before, Isa. 50. 6. who
preached repentance, and spoke in Cities, Markets, and Villages, and by the
Seacoasts, and then all the City was on an uproare, as it is now, and their
peace was broken, and they were disturbed, and they smote him on the face, and
buffetted him, and imprisoned him, left if he should be let alone, all men
should believe on him. And you are the same generation now, for any who are
sent of the Lord now, to preach repentance, to turn you from your iniquities,
that your minds might be turned to the Light of Christ within you, which will
check you for sin and evil, then your Cities are on an uproare against them,
to persecute them, and so you fill up the measures of your fathers iniquity.

A word from the Lord to all you who are called before the Magistrate to be a
Jury, who swear before the Magistrates to see the Law put in execution, and
that you will execute the Law upon drunkards and swearers, and that you will
see that the poor, the fatherless, and widows be relieved, and not see them
want, and this you swear before the Magistrates, That you will see it performed,
and that none be idle, nor wander abroad without a calling; and some of you
that swear to punish drunkards, are drunkards, and have fellowship with
drunkards; and you that swear to punish swearers, are swearers; and here out of
your own mouth you are condemned, and by the light of Christ you are judged,
who are swearers, you are out of the commands of Christ, who says, Swear not
at all. And you see the poor, the fatherless, and widows in want, and you do
not relieve them; and you see idle persons without any calling, and you do not
set them on work; but they live in idleness, devouring the creation; and herein
you do not perform your vows, nor execuse the Law which you profess, and so
acts contrary to the light of Christ in your consciences.

Now to the light of Christ in you all I speak, and charge you in the presence
of the living God, to take heed unto it, and it will let you see wherein you
have transgressed the pure Law of God, and suffered sin to reign unpunished,
and it will bring the condemnation upon you, who have acted contrary to it, and
taking heed to the light, it will lead you out of all those things which the
Law of God takes hold upon, and will add the Law upon every transgression, and
all you that act contrary to the light of Christ in the conscience, it will be
your condemnation, and you are they who deny the Ordinances of Christ, which
walks not according to the light of Christ, which he has enlightened you
withal; and you are they who are not subject to Authority, who are not
obedient to the light of Christ in the conscience, and you are the disturbers
and breakers of the peace, whose minds are not guided by the light of Christ;
and this light will let you see, giving heed unto it, who are out of the
commands of Christ, and is not subject unto authority, nor obedient to the
light of Christ in the conscience.

And here I have cleared my conscience to you all from the Lord, to the light
of Christ in your consciences I speak, which will eternally witness me to have
spoken the truth unto you all, who have falsely accused the innocent,

As I was moved of the Lord, who is a servant unto you from the Lord, in love
to all your souls to set up righteousness in the Land. RICHARD HUBBERTHORNE.

FINIS.

