A VISITATION OF Love, Peace, and Good Will, from the Spirit of the Lord. SENT
Unto the whole Flock of God, now in this their day of Trial and hour of
Temptation, for the Refreshing, Strengthening, Comforting, and Building of them
up in their most Precious Holy, Faith, that they may be Encouraged to hold fast
the Profession thereof through all Trials and Sufferings, unto the End, That
the Crown Immortal they may come to Receive. Being two Epistles; Tho one from
F. H. And the other from A. P.

Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer, For behold the Devil shall
cast some of you into prison that you may be tried, etc. Be thou faithful unto
death, and I will give thee a Crown of life,

Rev. 2. 10. London, Printed in the Year 1664.

A Visitation of Love, Peace, and Goodwill from the Spirit of the Lord; Sent
unto the whole Flock of God, now in this their day of Trial, and hour of
Temptation, etc.
DEar Friends and Brethren, who have been called to believe by the Holy Calling
of the Lord unto Sanctification and Holiness, that ye might inherit the
Promises of God, and and that your souls might live in the land of the living,
and partake of his goodness; that you might admire him, and praise his name for
ever: And seeing the Lord out of his rich Love and Mercy has visited you, who
sometime sat in the Region of the shadow of death, and were cast out of his
presence in the time of Unbelief, seeing he has caused his Miraculous Light to
shine upon you, in his gracious Visitation of you; and has given you to
believe in his name, prise his love unto you: and let not his gracious Benefits
slip out of your minds, least your hearts be filled with other things that
will corrupt your hearts, and make you an unmeet habitation for the Lord to
dwell in and among. Dear friends hear my Brotherly Admonition and Exhortation,
for the Lord moved in my heart to write unto you, and in the bowels of his kind
and tender Love, and motion of his Heavenly Spirit, to stir up your pure Minds
and Consciences unto stedfastnes in the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so
much the more that you all be watchful, seeing the times be perilous, for now
the Adversary goes about Roaring and Ravening, on the right hand and on the
left, to destroy and devour that which God has brought forth-in-you, that so
he might re-gain you too under his power and government; and that ye might
revolt from the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, that stands in Power and
Righteousness, which is come and has been of a truth manifest in great glory,
and this is an hour the power of darkness is let loose to try the faith of them
that dwell upon the earth, and he is let loose for a season (Blessed are they
that hide themselves under the shadow of the Almighty, and under the wings of
Christ Jesus, who is given for a Redeemer, a Savior, and a preserver of men)
that the wicked one touch them not; and now the Devil Rages because he knows
his Kingdom is but short, and but for a small time is like to stand in many,
because a stronger then he that rules in the world, is come, and has began to
dispossess the strong man, and bind him, and cast him out; and now he Rages and
stirs up all the temptations within and without, and all his Instruments to
join with him, to make war for him, that he might not Rule who is the Heir of
all things, and given for a Leader, and to be the Head of the Body his Church,
in which alone he has right to Rule, because the Lord of the whole earth, ye
of Heaven and earth, has put all power into his hands, to bind and to loose,
to bring out of Captivity, and to lead Captivity Captive, that life and
Immortality might again inhabit in the sons of men, that truth and
Righteousness might sway, that mercy and love might sit on the Throne, that his
salvation might take hold on the ends of the earth, and his power made known
from Sea to Sea, that all that wait for him, and love his appearance now when
he is made manifest, might rejoice in his goodness and life, and may be made
glad as Zebulon and Nepthaly beyond Jordan, in the days of old, upon whom
sprang up a mavelous light, that the whole earth might be filled with his
praise and glory, that has been filled with darkness, violence, and cruelty,
in the time of the Devil and Antichrists Reign, which has been long and great
in the earth: So that the hearts of the sons of men have been corrupted, and
they are gone backward from the Lord, and have been degenerated into a strange
nature, and has brought forth evil and corrupt fruit, like that of Sodom; and
they that do evil are not at all ashamed, neither do they blush, but are become
Impudent, through the long custom of evil, and hard and Impenetrable, upon whom
the hammer of the Lord must come, and his indignation be poured forth: But you
whom God has called out of this estate into a state of Redemption and purity,
by his Son the light of the world, who has Illuminated the eyes of your minds,
Consciences and Understandings, that you might bear witness unto him that is
true, a testimony against the world that lies in wickedness, and pleads for it,
and lives in it, as though it were the way to felicity, hold fast your liberty,
hold fast your faith, hold fast your hope, hold fast your testimony, let none
take your Crown, and so much the more, as you are compassed with temptations,
and the times be perrillous so much the more, you had all need to keep near the
Lord, for now Father would betray the Son, and the Son the Father: the Mother
her daughter, and the daughter her Mother, and Brother, and Kinsfolks betray
one another, and them that exercise authority would bertray who are not in the
power of God, and through flattery and threats and fair promises, and frowns,
and gifts, and rewards, and ease, and liberty, and the glory of the world, and
what not to lead your hearts away from the Lord, and then glory over you, and
rejoice that your feet should slip and you fall into the mire and dirt, and
gross abominations, and pollutions of the world, that lies in wickedness,
dearly beloved never heed none of these things, let not the Philisti^^^ your
eyes, nor damm up your wells, for then they would make you grind like Samson
and you might perish in the drought for lack of moisture, and then your days
would be miserable, and your years full of sorrow, for the Lord will perform
his promise, and keep Covenant with them, that keep covenant with him, but if
you forsake him in your hearts, in what is made manifest, then he will forsake
you, and then you are left to the mercy of your adversary which will be cruel.
Therefore heed not the pride, of Moab nor the reviling of the children of
Ammon, for they are uncircumcised in heart, and the moath shall eat them up as
a garment: oh if any draw back from following of the lamb, through suffering
they will be smitten, and the Lord will have no pleasure in them, and what will
Amaleck say, when Israel turns their backs in the day of Battle, but where is
their God, in whom they trusted, and he that brought them forth was not able to
deliver them to the end, oh that such things may never be spoken of now in
Gath, or Ashkelon as in the days of old, lest the Sons of the Philistines
triumph, and the Daughters thereof rejoice in their wickedness, and this would
make the hearts of Israel of God to mourn, this is the day of the Lambs war
indeed in (...) age, and a day of battle, though his weapons and his followers
be not Carnal but Spiritual, and there is none that goes to war does entangle
himself that has a purpose to hold out, and is resolved to continue with him
in his sufferings, but will shake off these things that incumber, last he
should not obtain the victory, and come short of the promise, and the victory,
and crown, which all that endure hardship unto the end shall receive; oh dear
friends look above all visible things, and stand out of them all, and loose
from them, that the enemy do not ensnare you; What is not the earth the Lords
and the fullness thereof? and has he not given the utmost part of the Earth for
a possession unto his Son? What was not Abraham our Father blessed, when he was
faithful and obeyed the voice of the Lord, and went out of his own Country he
knew not whether? was not the Lord with him whether ever he went, and his
blessing upon him where he sojourned in a strange land; did not God entreat him
kindly in Mesopotamia, and among the Hittites, and was not he loved and feared
among his enemies, was not John the boloved and faithful Disciple of Christ
banished into Patmos for the testimony that he held? was not Shadrach, M^sech
and Abednigo Children of the Captivity, cast into the furnace, and Daniel too
among the Lions, for the testimony they held against the common worship of
Nations commanded by a Law; did Christ endure the death of the Cross and the
contradiction of sinners, and condemned by the most? did not the believing
Hebrews who were banished, wander in sheep skins and goat skins, in holes,
dens, and caves of the Earth for the hope they held, and the Country they
looked for? did not Moses through faith forsake Pharaohs Court and became a
Companion of poor brick-makers in captivity, a cloud of witnesses might be
brought, even of them who died in the faith and yet were not made partakers of
the promises, who many of them saw not what you have seen, nor hear those
things that you have heard, nor enjoyed that which God has made many partakers
of; and have we not a great cloud of witnesses in this our own Age, some who
have not loved their lives unto the death for the testimony they received,
believed, and held fast to the end unto death; has not many died in prison
with hard usage, has not some been hanged and died a shameful death, and
finished their course with Joy and Peace, have not many endured great, hard,
and long Imprisonment for years, and are they yet weary; nay, have not many
suffered great spoil of their Goods, and have not they a reward seven fold into
their bosom. Oh let the consideration of these things dwell upon your hearts,
and provoke you unto suffering, and long-suffering with joyfulness, that in the
midst of all Tribulations as it abounds you may feel according to the promise
of God your joy much more abound to carry you above it; indeed now is the time
come, and he that will (...) manifest himself to be on the Lords side must
suffer, and he that will no but turn back into the broad way, and run with the
heard of swine in o the sea of common pollution must perish there, and indeed
there is no place for halting, if God be God follow him, and if Baal be he go
after him; and therefore let none draw you aside from that you are persuaded of
in your consciences by the Spirit of the Lord, neither to join with that you
know he disalows, and in the obedience you will have peace and joy; look not at
them that draws back, for they go to perdition, but rather after them that
continues faithful, that shall receive honor, and glory, immortality and
everlasting life, in the fresh heavenly power of God meet together and worship
him as at other times, though the decree be gone forth and the more because you
have been therein refreshed, and comforted, and edified; and let none persuade
you from that innocent du^y in worshipping God in his Spirit, and assembling
your selves together for the strengthening of one another, for this is the will
of God and acceptable in his sight as many of you well know; watch and pray
least you fall into temptation, and into the snare of the wicked one, the God
of heaven and earth establish all your hearts that you may glorify God in your
Generation, and be a sweet and an odorious smell unto him in bonds or liberty,
in life or death is the prayer of him who has besought the Lord, and is
determined so to do on all your behalf, till the Lord by his power tread satan
under your feet, that you may triumph and rejoice and sing over all in heavenly
rejoicing and praises unto God, and the Lamb that lives for ever, and for
evermore Amen.

From Applebye Goal the place of my Rest where my days and hours are pleasant
unto me the 4th. of the 5th. Month. 64. Your dear Brother in the Patience and
Suffering of Christ, who abounds in perfect love to all the faithful flock of
Christ every where. Francis Howgill.

A SALUTATION OF Dear and tender love, springing and arising from the fountain
of light and life revealed from God, unto all the dear children of God, who
love and believe in the true light.
DEar and well beloved friends you whom God in mercy and tender love has
visited with the dayspring from on high opening your understandings: and
letting you see the deceits of the subtle serpent, and the empty dead forms
and inventions of men, which have been set up in the night of darkness and
Apostasy, which have been over people of all sorts in that part of the world
called Christendom, since the days of the Apostles of Christ and not only so,
but by the virtue of the same light shining in your hearts, he has revealed
and manifested the great and deep things concerning his kingdom, and the beauty
and glorious excellency of his house, and of those things pertaining unto life
and peace, the sight whereof has kindled and inflamed the hearts of many with
holy desires after the full enjoyment of that glory, life, and peace, which in
the light is set before them, and true breathings and strong cries has passed
through many to him, who has power to dispose of this kingdom, crying Lord
what shall we do that we may be heirs of thy kingdom, and the Lord has
hearkened and heard the cries of such as have drawn near unto him in nakedness
and humility of heart, and by his light has showed them those things which are
evil, which they ought to refrain; and also those things which are pure and
good, which they ought to embrace, and as many as in the light have received
him to them he has given power, not only to resist the evil in all its
appearances, but also to embrace and obey the good in its appearing within.
Thus the Lord begun his work even his great work of Reformation in us, making a
separation between the precious and the vile, laying the axe unto the very root
of the evil tree, and by it cut down sin and iniquity within: which all
profession without could never do, and as you and we did sensibly feel and know
the Lords power revealed within, making a separation, there the same power did
lead and draw us to a separation without from sin and all sinful persons, so
that we could not partake, (nor join) with them in any bad thing, nor go with
them to the same excess of Riot, and foolish vain pleasure, which wicked men
that know not God delight in, and as we were drawn out of the worlds wicked
ways, into holiness and Righteousness, to follow Christ our Savior in the way
that he walked in, oh then how did the enemy rage, and appear as a flood to
swallow us up, and stirred up his instruments to Scoff, Scorn, Revile, Stone,
Beat, and persecute us, and through a great fight of afflictions we passed,
through all which the Lord led the faithful and put a stop to the raging sea
dividing of it, and brought his children safely through. Thus has it been with
us, in all our travells since we were called out of Egypts dark Land, the enemy
has been very busy going about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour, which is no new nor strange thing, for from the days of righteous
Abel unto this day and age wherein we now live, the righteous holy people have
suffered and been persecuted by the wicked and ungodly, as the Scriptures of
truth and other ancient ecclesiastical writings do declare, oh what cruel
mockings, stonings and many deep exercises, and great persecutions did gods
people Endure in every age and generation, through which the Lord led them, and
by his holy power revealed in them did uphold them, and preserve them, and made
all things easy unto them, so that they were Conquerors, yea more then
Conquerors through the Lord Christ that loved them. And now dear hearts its the
same hand and Arm of power that was stretched forth and revealed in them, which
preserved them, and gave them dominion and victory, that now is held forth and
revealed in us, which is able to preserve, defend and uphold us in the greatest
trials and exercises which we may meet withal or be exercised with for his
names sake And therefore am I moved and stirred up in Gods holy zeal by his own
pure Spirit, to admonish you in true brotherly love to hold fast your
profession and what ever you have received from God through the son of his
love, oh treasure it up in your hearts, that you may have abundance of durable
riches, which none can take from you, for now is a day of great trial, and the
devil rages because his time is but short, yea very short, for as sure as God
lives he shall be taken and all that join with him to uphold his kingdom of
pride and oppression, and they all shall be cast into the burning lake that
never shall be quenched there to be tormented for ever and ever, the day is
dawned wherein the Lord will accomplish and fulfill all these good things which
he has promised by his holy Prophets in former times, and in this day pride
and oppression, cruelty, and persecution shall have an end, the Lord has said
it, who is able to perform it, and the Righteous shall be delivered from all
their heavy yokes and oppressive burdens, and the Land shall be cleansed and
swept, and evildoers shall have no place, but the holy people who have
followed the Lamb of God in the Regeneration, who have given up their all into
the will of God, and have not loved their lives unto the death, they shall
inherit the kingdom, and Christ over all shall rule and Reign, and so the
kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of our God and of his Christ,
and this great work shall not be effected and brought to pass by sword, or any
weapon of War by the Arm of flesh but only and alone by the spirit and power
of the mighty God the great Jehovah who has all power in his hand, who has
power to set up and throw down at his pleasure, who is a consuming fire, and
all the proud and those that do wickedly, (though they may say well, and
profess high things) they shall be like unto the dried stubble, and shall
surely be consumed root and branch. And I know assuredly by the testimony of
God in my heart, that the Lord is able even in a moment of time to make all his
enemies his footstool, for he who has wrought mightily in our hearts by his
spirit and power, wounding and bruising the head of the serpent, and destroying
the devil and his works in us, as many can truly experience, he is the same
unto all that wait upon him, and can work the same work in every individual
person in the whole world. Therefore all you deer friends of truth, who have
been quickened by the word of life, and raised up unto a lively hope, who have
made an open confession and profession of the holy name of the Lord be
encouraged, and put on strength even the streagth of God whereby you may stand
against all the assaults of the devil, and may also be enabled to bear and
suffer all things patiently, which for the name of Christ, may be inflicted
upon you, be faithful to God in his requirings and do his will, and you shall
know more of his mind and doctrine, and as you are faithful to God in the
obedience of Righteousness, you cannot be unfaithful to man for obedience to
God, in the Light is the ground of all faithfulness unto men, and so herein we
stand approved before the Lord, and in due time shall be manifest unto the
consciences of all men, though for a time we may be reproached and branded with
foul names of heresy, error and sedition, as the holy people formerly were,
and though for a time we may suffer, let us bear it with patience without
murmuring or contriving, (or without the least desiring) the hurt of those who
persetcute us, for herein the spirit of christianity will appear, and show
forth it self in us, and the Lord in due time even as the day approaches will
wipe away all these reproaches, and scandalous terms and names which are cast
on us, and we shall appear as we are clothed in the Lambs innnocency,
meekness, and gentleness, and true sincerity of heart, let every dear babe
and Lamb of God keep their habitations of innocence, and dwell under the shadow
of the wing, the arm of the Lord and there you shall be preserved. And whereas
some term us to be a stubborn and rebellious people that is also false, for we
cannot rebel against any man, neither King nor any under him, for the ground of
rebellion is disobedience to God and rebellion against him by sinful deeds, for
whosoever rebels against the light of God in his own heart, will soon rebel
against the highest of men if he be provoked thereunto and have opertunity, and
though in words high things may be pretended, and flattering titles given unto
men, its all deceit and iniquity, and in the time of trial it will manifest it
self. But truth and the sincere lovers of it can call nothing holy, but what is
really so, neither can they give the titles of pious, sacred and good to any
man, or people, who are not really holy and good, for that were but flattery
and deceit which God did ever: (and does at this day) abhor so let none of
these things trouble you, but walk in the light as Gods dear beloved and
redeemed people for their stands our union with God and one with another, and
mind the drawings of the fathers love which will more and more draw you out of
all Carnal fading visible things where no lasting peace is, and bring you home
to the true peace and center of life, where fullness of joy is, and all
spiritual blessings to refresh you day by day, and this is the privilege of
Gods suffering people, at this day even their free access unto the throne of
grace, and free liberty to eat and drink at the Lords Table, where there is
bread of life that nourishes unto eternal life; and where there is living
water, that sweetly refreshes the thirsty souls, oh come dear hearts eat and
drink abundantly, that you may be filled and abound that so you may communicate
unto others, that may be refreshed with you, and you with them in the love of
the Lord. And dear friends as it was the saints practice in former times to
meet together in the holy name of the Lord to wait upon God, and worship him in
spirit and truth, and as it has been our practice, since we were acquainted
with the Lord to meet together likewise to wait upon God, and to declare and
speak of those great things which he has done for us, and wrought in us,
accordingly as the good spirit of God does move in any, and give utterance, so
dear friends keep your Meetings in the name of God, for you well know that we
have no other end in our Meeting but to serve God, and to turn people from the
devil, and the service of sin unto God, that they together with us may glorify
God, and serve him in the new life of righteousness, and by this way and means
many have been convinced of the evil of their ways, and also of the deadness
and emptiness of men's invented Customary forms and worships, and so have
joined and sat down with us in stillness to wait upon God in spirit, to
receive spiritual food and refreshment to their souls. And this has greatly
troubled the people, and Rulers of this Nation, and now they strive to put a
stop, and have made a law to hinder us in our Meetings, but in this case
knowing it to be our duty to God, and if neglected we should provoke the Lord
and kindle his anger against us, we choose rather to obey the Lord, though we
provoke man, and we choose rather to suffer such punishments as can be inflicted
on us by man, being assured that God will be with us and uphold us, and give us
peace in our hearts and consciences in our sufferings, which none can take from
us, which if either for fear of man, or love to this present world we should
neglect, and so provoke the Lord, we know that no man can give us peace, or
make an atonement for us; for we have known Gods terrors for sin and
disobedience, and have known his righteous judgments revealed, and we know it
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, who though he have
long patience, and waits to be gracious, yet he will not always strive with
man, but will suddenly come and render vengeance in flames of fire upon all
that knows him not, and that does not obey the Gospel; who shall be be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints; therefore
continue in his fear and love, and in true and sincere obedience of the Gospel
of peace unto the end, even until all your enemies be conquered, so shall you
be Crowned with life as you do overcome; but unless there be a Conquest over
Sin, Hell, and Death, yea and over that nature which is unwilling to suffer
there is no Crown, therefore its said be faithful unto death, and thou shall
have the Crown of life. Dear hearts mind these weighty things, and be faithful,
bold, and valiant for the truth, and great shall be your reward. These things
was I moved in the spirit of pure love to write unto you by way of Remembrance
to stir up your pure minds, that you may go on with boldness and courage in the
way of the Lord which he has called you into, with the tender of my very dear
love unto you, wishing and from my very soul desiring and heartily praying that
bowels of mercy, true love, peace and patience with all other spiritual
blessings, and all things conducing unto life and godliness from God our Father
and Jesus Christ our light, life, and leader may be increased and multiplied
amongst you, and to him alone even the God of all our mercies who is Isreal's
Keeper and Protector, and to the word of his grace in you do I commit and
commend you all resting with you in the patience of Christ.

Let this be read amongst friends in the fear of God, when in his name they are
met together.
Your Brother and Companion in tribulation waiting for the Restoration of all
things into their purity, even as it was in the beginning before transgression
was, who am a sufferer for the testimony of Jesus Alexander Parker.
in the common Goal in Newgate, London this 30th. day of the 5th. Month.
1664.
THE END.

