AN APPENDIX TO CLAVIS HOROLOGIAE: OR AN EXPLICATION OF THE PYRAMIDICAL DYAL
Set up In His Majesty's Garden at White Hall, Anno 1669.

IN WHICH Very many Sorts of DYALS are contained; by which besides the Hours of
all Kinds diversely expressed, many things also belonging to Geography,
Astrology, and Astronomy, are by the Suns Shadow made visible to the Eye.

AMONGST WHICH, Very many Dyals, especially the most Curious, are new
Inventions, hitherto divulged by none.

All these Particulars are shortly, yet clearly set forth for the common Good,

By the Reverend Father Francis Hall, otherwise Line, of the Society of Jesus,
Professor of Mathematics.

Printed at Liege, by Guillaume Street, in the Year of our Lord 1673. And
Reprinted at London, 1685.

To the Lovers of all Mathematical Learning.
Most worthy Sirs,
KNowing that the Dyals that were set up in His Majesty's Privy Garden in the
Year 1669. by that most ingenious Mathematician Father Francis Hall, alias
Line, of the Society of Jesus, and Professor of the Mathematics at Liege in
Germany, were a great Curiosity, and that which has not been performed
publicly in the World; and by reason that they have been some years
demolished, and that the Fancy of them may give great satisfaction to those
that are any ways inclinable to that Noble Art of Shadows, I have presumed to
publish the Explanation of them as it was published by the said Father Line at
Liege in Germany; and have no ways deviated from his own Explanation; but the
manner of making of each Particular I have showed in the foregoing Sheets, and
in those places I have referred to the Cuts in this following Appendix: If my
Endeavor be accepted by the young Students of this Age, I shall reap the Glory
I do expect, and shall remain their Servant to present them with something that
the Learned of some Ages thought (for those whom I honor, and shall ever) not
worthy of; in the mean time I shall rest my self contented to be thought ill of
by those whose Honesty is less than their Wit, and whose Covetousness more than
both; and shall subscribe my self a Lover of all Lovers of Art, so long as my
Name shall be called.

JOHN HOLWELL.

AN APPENDIX. A Brief Explication of the Pyramidical Dyal set up in His
Majesty's Private Garden at White Hall, July 24. 1669.
THE Dyal being placed upon a Pillar by His Majesty's Order in the Privy
Garden, it was intimated unto me by diverse Worthy Persons as a thing very
expedient, that an Explication should be published, of the Use of the several
Dyals there contained: For although to diverse of them were added a Verse or
two, explicating how the Hour, etc. was to be found by them; yet in regard many
of them were new, and not to be found in any Author; and others belonging to
Astronomy, Cosmography, etc. not so easily conceived by all, they judged very
expedient a Declaration thereof should be set forth, whereby such as came daily
to see it, might receive more satisfaction.

Hereupon, having soon after the setting up of the Dyal, left London, and being
arrived at my Lodging in the Country, I began the said Explication; and being
much desirous to add some further Ornament to the Dyal already placed, I began
the making of four Water-Dyals, to the placed at the four Corners of the
Pyramidical Dyal in a competent distance from the same.

To this Underatking I was moved, as well by the opportunity of a Fountain in
the Privy Garden so near the Dyal; as also, for that Experience had taught me,
that such Dyals as formerly I had made to show the Hour in several ways by
Water, were for their Rarity and Novelty no less pleasing to the Beholder than
the rest.

Being now very busy in these two Employments, and having toward the middle
of Winter made a considerable progress therein, I received a Letter from a
Friend at London, wherein he told me, that the Dyal, for want of a Cover (which
according to His Majesty's Gracious Order, should have been set over it in the
Winter) was much endamaged by the Snow lying long frozen upon it; and that,
unless a Cover were provided (or which we saw little hope) another or two such
tempestuous Winters would utterly deface it. Hereupon I laid aside as well the
said Explication, as these Water-Dyals, it seeming to no purpose, an
Explication should come forth of the Use of the Dyal, when it was now rendered
useless: Which Resolution being understood by some of those worthy Persons, who
before had urged for the publishing the said Explication, they judged, that
notwithstanding the Dyal it self should be rendered useless, yet the said
Explication was not to be omitted; since thereby would be given occasion to
some other skilful Mathematician (of which we have many in England) to set up
another in place thereof, both more specious and durable, and adorned with more
variety of Invention.

This Reasonsuting well with the Desire I formerly had of adorning His
Majesty's Garden with some Curiosity that might in its kind surpass what might
elsewhere be found, I resolved to take in hand again the said Explication.
Which that it may the better be performed, I will first enumerate the Parts or
Pieces of which the whole Dyal consists, and then descend to the Dyals
described on each particular Piece.

CHAP. I. Of the several Parts of this Dyal; and of the Dyals described on each
part in general.
THis Dyal standing on a Pillar or Pedestal of Stone, consists chiefly of six
Parts or Pieces, one less than another; and placed one above another in form of
a Pyramid, as you see in the Figure.

Of the First Piece.
THE first and largest of these six Pieces, or Base of the said Pyramid, is a
round Table of about forty inches in Diameter, and some eight or nine inches in
Thickness; the Edge whereof is cut into twenty equal Planes, which being made
hollow, like so many Boxes of an inch deep, are covered each of them with a
clear polished Glass, and on the inside of each Glass is described a Dyal;
whereof some of them show the Hour according to the ancient, or Jews manner of
counting the Hours; other, according to the counting used by the Babylonians;
others, according to the Italians; others according to the way of counting used
by Astronomers; and lastly, others show what Hour it is according to our usual
and ordinary way of counting the Hours used in most Parts of Europe. These
Twenty Dyals thus described on the Edge of this Table or first Piece, are all
vertical declining Dyals; whose Style or Gnomon is either a Lions Paw, or
Unicorns Horn, or such like relating to His Majesty's Arms, and painted on the
bottom of the Box, as shall be said in the next Chapter.

Moreover, upon the upper part of this Table, are placed eight reclining Dyals,
all made hollow, and covered with polished Glass like the former, but differ
chiefly in this, that they show only the usual Hour in different ways; one of
them showing the Hour by the shade of the Style falling upon the Hour Lines;
another by the shade of the Hourlines falling upon the Style; a third without
any shade either of Hourlines or Style, etc.

Upon this Piece stand also four Globes, out into several Panes; upon one of
which Globes are described several Dyals belonging to Geography: on another,
Dyals belonging to Astronomy, the other Dyals showing several things
appertaining to Astrology; as what Planet reigns every Hour, the Horoscope,
Aspects of the Sun with the Stars, etc.

There are also belonging to this Piece, and issuing out of the sides thereof
toward the East, West, North and South, four Iron Branches, supposing each of
them a Glass-Bowl, which show the Hour in four different ways, to wit, by the
four Elements, as shall hereafter be said.

Of the second Piece.
THE second Piece of the Pyramid is also a round Table, almost like the former,
but somewhat less; having only thirty inches in diameter, about the thickness
of the first, held up by four iron Supporters. The Edge or Circumference of
this Table is cut into sixteen equal Planes, all made hollow, and covered with
Glass, like those of the first Table; but they differ from them in this, that
here the Dyals are not described on the Glass Covers, but on the bottom of the
Boxes: neither do they show the Hour, but the different Rising of the more
remarkable Stars, according to the three manners of Risings observed by
Astronomers, to wit, the Cosmical Rising, the Acronical, and the Aeliacal, as
shall be declared hereafter, when we speak of the Dyals of this second Piece.
The Style to each of these Dyals is a little Star painted upon the inside of
the Glass-Cover, the better to keep it from the weather.

Out of the sides of this Piece issue also four Branches, toward the East,
West, North and South, and carry on each of them a Glass-Bowl to show the Hour,
like those of the first Piece, but in a diffeway: for one of them shows the
Hour by a Style without a Shadow: another shows it by a Shadow without a Style,
etc. whereas those of the first Table show it by the four Elements, Fire,
Water, Air and Earth, as shall be showed in their due place.

On the upper part of this Table are placed eight reclining Planes; four
whereof are covered each of them with a Plate of Looking-glass, on which the
Hour Lines, or Style of a Dyal being painted, are reflected upon the bottom
inclining Planes of the third Piece, and there show the Hour, as shall be
presently demonstrated. The other four have also Dyals upon them, which are to
be seen each of them in a Looking-Glass placed upon the said bottom inclining
Planes of the third Piece; of which we shall now speak.

Of the Third Piece.
THE Third Piece of this Pyramidical Dyal is a great hollow Globe, of about
twenty four inches in diameter; and is placed immediately without any
Supporter, upon the second piece. The Superficies of this Globe is cut into
twenty six Planes; two whereof being Octogones, serve for top and bottom. The
rest are divided into eight equal reclining Planes, eight equal inclining
Planes, and eight equal vertical or upright Planes. These Planes are all of
them made hollow like those of the first and second Piece. The Incliners are
not covered with Glass, but left open, that they may the better receive and
show the Dyals reflected, as has been said, from the second Piece.

Two of the eight upright Planes looking toward the North, have no bottoms, but
are covered only with clear Glass, as serving only for windows to look into the
Globe, and behold there the Dyals described on the Globe, which are seen as
well without the same, as within. The other six have not only each of them a
Cover of clear polished Glass, with a Dyal described thereon, like those of the
first Piece, but have also a Glass for their bottom; which Glass is thinly
painted over with white color, to the end the shade of the Hour Lines drawn
upon the Cover, may be seen as well within the Globe as without. On these
bottom-Glasses are drawn several Pictures, holding either a Scepter, or a
Troncheon, or the like, the end whereof points the Hour you look for.

Two also of the Recliners looking toward the North, have only a Glass-Cover
serving for a window to look into the Globe. The other six have double Glass,
like the former: Their Dyals are some drawn upon the Cover, others u^^n the
bottom; but all so contrived, that the Hour cannot be known (...) them, but
only by looking within the Globe.

Moreover, from the top of this Globe issue four iron Branches toward the four
parts of the world, each of them carrying a Glass-Bowl, proportionably less
than those of the first and second Piece: on which Bowl are also Dyals
described, but different from the former, showing the Hour according to the
several ways of counting the Hours. These Bowls are painted on the inside with
thick color to keep out the light, except a little place which is left clear
like a Star, for the Sunbeams to pass through and show the Hour: and the place
also where the Hour Lines are drawn, is only painted on the outside thinly with
white color, that the light of the Sun passing through, the said Star may be
seen, and show the Hour.

Of the Fourth Piece.
THE Fourth Piece standing on the aforesaid Globe, and held up by four iron
Supporters, like to those which hold up the Second Piece, but proportionably
less, is also a round Table of about twenty inches diameter, and six in
thickness. The Edge of this Table is cut into twelve equal Superficies, not
plain, as hitherto, but concave, as so many concave Semicylinders: on each of
which is described a Dyal, which shows the usual Hour by the shade of a
Flower-de-luce fixed at the top of each Semicylinder.

From the top of this Table issue forth four iron Branches, carrying each a
Glass-Bowl just like those of the first, second and third Piece, though
proportionably less. The Dyals described on these Glass-Bowls differ from those
of the Third Piece, not because they show only the usual Hour; but also because
here the Hour Lines are all left clear for the Sunbeams to pass through; that
by so passing, they may exhibit the like Dyal on the opposite side of the Bowl;
which side is for that purpose thinly painted over with white color, that the
said Hours may be seen, and show the Hour by their passing over a little Star
painted in the middle thereof.

Of the Fifth Piece.
THE Fifth Piece standing upon the ^^^rth, and held up also by four iron
Supporters, is a Globe of about twelve inches Diameter; whose superficies is
cut into fourteen Planes; eight whereof are Triangles equal and equilateral;
the other six are equal Squares. The Dyals described on these Planes, show only
the usual Hour by the shade of a Flower-de-luce fastened to the top or bottom of
each Plane.

Of the Last or Highest Piece.
THE Highest Piece or Top of the Pyramid, is a Glass Bowl of some seven inches
Diameter, standing upon a Foot of Iron placed on the middle of the Fifth Piece.
The North side of this Piece is thinly painted over with white color, that the
shade of a little golden Ball that is placed in the middle of the Bowl, may be
seen to pass over the Hour Lines, which are drawn upon the said white color,
and note the Hour. The Bowl is included between two Circles of Iron gilded,
with a Cross on the Top.

And thus much concerning the Parts of this Pyramidical Dyal in general.

To which may be added, That the first four Pieces have all their sides covered
with little Plates of black Glass, fast cemented to the said Pieces, except
those places whereon the Dyals are drawn; which being, as is said, covered also
with Plates of polished Glass, there appears almost nothing on the outside of
this Dyal but Glass; which for the greater Ornament of the Dyal, the Angels or
Corners where those little Plates of black Glass are joined together, are
gilded as almost all the Iron-work of the Pyramid, as well Supporters, as
Branches, Style, etc. are either wholly, or as much as serves for Ornament,
covered in like manner with Gold.

CHAP. II. Of the Twenty Vertical Dyals described on the Edge of the first
Piece.
BY what is said in the precedent Chapter, of the first Piece, it appears, that
besides the Dyals described on the four great Globes which stand on the said
first Piece, there are two and thirty Dyals belonging thereto, viz. twenty
vertical or upright Dyals, eight reclining Dyals, and four spherical Dyals. Of
the twenty verticals we shall now speak in this Chapter, of the eight Recliners
in the next; and of the four Spherical in the Fourth Chapter.

These Verticals being made hollow Boxes (as is said) covered with Glass, the
Hour Lines of each of them are drawn upon the Glass; and the Style (which is
either a Lions Paw, or Unicorns Horn, etc. is the ordinary way of making Sun
Dyals, the shade of the Style or Gnomon passes over the hour lines; here on the
contrary, the shade of the hour lines passes over the Style; so that whereas
before, when the Sun did not shine, you saw nothing in the bottom of the Box,
but a painted Lion or Unicorn, etc. So now as soon as the Sun shines, you may
behold there a perfect Dyal, with all its lineaments and numbers exactly
described, and just like the other drawn upon the glass-cover, as being only
the shade thereof caused by the Sunbeams passing through the said Glass; which
shady Dyal being moved by the motion of the Sun from one part of the said
bottom to another, shows by passing over the paw of the Lion; for example, the
same hour of the day which in the ordinary Dyal is showed by the shade of the
Style passing over the Hour.

These twenty Dyals thus described, are not all of the same kind, nor show the
time of the day all in the same manner, but in very different ways, according
to the different ways of numbering the hours used by several sorts of people;
some beginning to count their hours from Sunrising, others from Sunsetting;
others from Noon, others from Midnight. And again, of those who count from
Sunrising, some count always twelve hours from Sunrising till Sunsetting for
the day, and as many from Sunsetting till Sunrising for the night, whether
the days or nights be long or short: And these kind of hours are therefore
called the unequal hours, as being longer or shorter, according as the days are
now longer or shorter. Others there are, who also count from Sunrising, but
continue the number till next Sunrising; counting always from Sunrising till
Sunrising twenty four hours; according to which, it is always twenty four of
the Clock at Sunrising. Others on the contrary, count always twenty four hours
from Sunsetting till next Sun setting; so that when the Sun sets, it is always
twenty four of the clock. Others count always twenty four hours, but begin at
Noon, and end at next Noon, and with these it is always twenty four of the
Clock at Noon. Lastly, Others begin at Midnight, and count twelve hours till
Noon, and then twelve more till Midnight; and according to these it is always
twelve of the clock at Noon and at Midnight.

The first of these five ways, and which divides the space between Sunrising
and setting into twelve equal parts, making thereby the hours unequal (as is
said) that is, longer in Summer than in Winter, is the most ancient of all; and
are therefore called Horae antiquae. They were anciently used by the Jews, as
is manifest by diverse places of holy Writ: So that when in St. Matthews, chapter
27. v. 54. it is said to have been darkness (at our Saviors Passion) from the
sixth hour to the ninth, it is to be understood according to our manner of
reckoning the hours, that there was darkness from Noon till about three of the
clock after Dinner: since, according to this counting by unequal hours, it is
always at Noon six of the clock, and twelve at Sunset. And for this reason
they are called here in the Dyal Horae Antiquae sive Judaicae. They are also
called Horae Planetariae; because the ancient Astrologers supposed a new Planet
to reign in each of these unequal hours.

The Second Way of counting 24 hours from Sunrising to Sunrising, is used by
the Babylonians; and these hours are therefore called Horae Babylonicae, the
Babylonian hours.

The Third Way of counting 24 hours from Sunset to Sunset, is used chiefly by
the Italians; and therefore these hours are called Horae Italicae, the Italian
hours.

The Fourth Way of counting also 24 hours from Noon or Midday till next
Midday, is used by Astronomers in calculating the Places and Positions of the
Stars and Planets in the Heavens, etc. and are therefore called Horae
Astronomicae, Astronomical hours.

The Fifth and last Way, which counts Twelve hours from Midnight to Noon, and
as many from Noon to Midnight, is used as well in most parts of Europe, as here
in England, and is therefore styled in this Dyal the usual or vulgar way, and
the hours Horae Vulgares, the Vulgar or Usual Hours.

Now, there being (as has been said) Twenty Dyals placed on the edge of this
first Piece, there is allotted in the Dyal to each of the five sorts four
Dyals, which are so disposed, that at any time of the day you may behold the
hour represented in every of them five manner of ways. And that they may be the
better understood, I have thought it convenient to set down one of each sort,
which by their Titles are easily known.

Fig. 1.

For 1. Those Four, whose Title is, Per horas numeratas ab ortu Solis more
antiquo, sive Judaico, and have a Red Lion painted on the bottom, show by the
shady Dyal passing over the paw of the Lion what of the Clock it is said to be
at White Hall according to the Ancient, or Jews Account.

Fig. 2.

2. Those Four whose Title is, Per Horas numeratas ab ortu Solis, more
Babylonico, and have painted on their bottom a Harp with a Scepter, show by the
shady Dyal passing over the Scepter, what it is of the Clock it is at
White Hall according to the Babylonian way of counting the Hours.

Fig. 3.

3. Those Four whose Title is, Per horas numeratas ab occasu Solis, more
Italico, and have on their bottom a Flower-de-Luce, show by the like shady Dyal
passing over the top of the Flower-de-Luce what of the Clock it is there
according to the Italian Account.

Fig. 4.

4. Those Four whose Title is Per horas numeratas a Meridie, more Astronomico,
and have on their bottom a Unicorn, show by the often mentioned shady Dyal
passing over the tip of his Horn, what of the Clock it is said to be according
to the Account used by the Astronomers.

Fig. 5.

5. And Lastly, Those Four, whose Title is, Per horas numeratas a Meridie and
media nocte, more usitato, and have on the bottom a Lion painted in its natural
Color, show by the shady Dyal passing over the Lions paw what of the Clock it
is according to the usual and ordinary way of reckoning the Hours.

So that for Example, If at the beginning of July (at what time the Sun rises
at Four of the Clock, and sets at Eight) I find, by looking on the usual Dyal
that it is just eight of the Clock in the Morning, I shall find at the same
time by the Ancient and Judaical Dyal, it is just three of the Clock; by the
Babylonian, to be Four; by the Italian Twelve; and by the Astronomical to be
Twenty. And thus much for the Use of these Twenty Vertical Dyals.

Now the reason of their difference from the ordinary Dyals, which show the
Hour by the shade of the Style passing over the Hour Lines, is, that the Sun
being moved in the same manner, whether the shade of the Hour Lines be moved
over the Style, or on the contrary, the shade of the Style moved over the
hour lines, the self same effect, in order to showing the hour, must needs
follow both ways, since the hour lines are no other than the Sections which the
Plains of the hour-circles in the Heavens make with the Plains of the Dyal; in
each of which Plains the Style also is as insensibly differing from the Axis of
the World.

From whence it follows, that the aforesaid Dyals, being made according to the
ordinary way of making the like vertical declining Dyals, are to be inverted,
to the end they may show the Hour.

CHAP. III. Of the Eight Reclining Dyals standing upon the first Piece.
THE Eight reclining Dyals, being also made hollow, and covered with Glasses
like the twenty Verticals we now spoke of, show only the usual hour, but
perform it in different, or rather contrary ways one to another; for of those
four which stand upon the fourth part of the Table, one shows the hour by the
shade of the Style passing over the hour lines; another, on the contrary, shows
it by the shade of the hour lines passing over the Style. A third shows it both
ways, as well by the shade of the Style passing over the hours, as the shade of
the hours passing over the Style. The fourth shows the hour without shade
either of Style or hour lines.

In like manner, of those four which stand on the North-part of the Table; in
one you see the hour lines, but no Style; in another you see the Style, but no
hours: In a third you see neither Style nor hours, unless the Sun shine, as
shall be declared by and by. In the fourth you see both hours and style, but in
a different way from what has been hitherto practiced; for here you behold the
style in the same superficies with the hour lines; whereas in the common
practice of Dyalling, the style is always lifted above the superficies, in
which are the hour lines, to the end it may cast its shade upon them.

And thus much of these eight reclining Dyals in general; we shall now speak of
them in particular; and first of those four which stand upon the South part of
the Table.

Fig. 6.

The first of these four, whose Title is, Per umbram Styli, and shows (as is
said) the hour by the shade of the Style passing over the hour lines, has upon
the Glass-Cover painted a little Star, which serves for the Style; and on the
bottom are drawn the hour lines, over which the shade of the said Star passing,
shows the Hour.

Fig. 7.

The Second, whose Title is, Per umbram horarum, and shows the hour by the
shade of the hour passing over the style, has upon the Glass-cover painted a
Harp, whose strings are the hour lines; and on the bottom is painted a
Flower-de-luce, whose top serves for the style. So that by the shade of those
strings passing over the Flower-de-luce, the hour is known.

Fig. 8.

The Third, whose Title is, Per umbram tam styli quam horarum, and shows the
hour as well by the shade of the hours passing over the style, as by the shade
of the style passing over the hours, has upon the glasscover an Unicorn
painted, with certain little stars on his back; each of which standing for an
hour, has its number written over it* on the bottom are drawn the hour lines
of a Dyal, and by them a Scepter; so that when the Sun shines, you may behold
the Unicorns shade, being moved by the motion of the Sun, to note the hour with
the end of its Horn; and at the same time the shade of the said little Stars to
show the same hour by passing over the Scepter.

Fig. 9.

The fourth and last of these, whose Title is, Sine umbra vel styli vel
horarum, and shows the hour without shade of either style or hours, has
painted upon the glass-cover a Flower-de-luce together with a Harp, whose
strings are the hour lines, and the top of the Flower-de-luce is their style.
Now out of this Flower-de-luce you shall see when the Sun shines, another
Flower-de-luce of Light to arise, and by passing under the said strings of the
Harp, to note the hour, and by consequence, to show (as is said) the hour
without shade of style or hours.

As for the reason of the Three first, there needs to add no more than what
has been said of the Twenty Vertical Dyals. But concerning the Fourth, the
reason why the Style or Flower-de-luce lies in the same superficies with the
hour lines, is, That the said luminous Flower-de-luce arising out of the
painted Flower-de-luce, and showing the hour, is reflected from a Looking-Glass
placed upon the bottom of the Dyal.

Of the other Four Reclining Dyals which stand upon the North-part of the Table.
THE Three first of these Dyals are so contrived, that the hour cannot be
otherwise known by them, than by looking through a little Ring placed on the
Back of the Dyal; as shall be now explicated.

Fig. 10.

For in the First, whose Title is, Per horas latentes, If you look on the Face
of the Dyal, you perceive no hour lines, but only a Style, that is, a Flower
de-luce painted upon the Cover: And on the contrary, if you look on the back of
the Dyal through the said Ring, you shall see the hour lines, but no style,
unless the Sun shine; for then you shall behold the shade of the said
Flower-de-luce pass over the said hour lines, and note the hour.

Fig. 11.

In the Second, whose Title is, Per latentem Stylum, by looking on the Face of
the Dyal, you behold only the hours; that is, you see only a Crown bedecked
with Stars, each whereof stands for an hour: And on the contrary, by looking on
the Back through a little Ring, you behold only the Style, that is, a Scepter,
unless the Sun shine; for then you see also the shade of those starry hours
pass over the Scepter, and note the Hour.

Fig. 12.

In the Third, whose Title is, Per latentes tam horas quam stylum, you see
neither hours nor style by looking on the Dyal; but if you look (as before) on
the Back; you may behold the hour lines; and if the Sun shines, you may
perceive also a little Star pass over them, and show the hour.

Fig. 13.

Lastly, In the Fourth, whose Title is, Per tam stylum quam horas patentes,
there appears both style and hours; but the style is without shade, and the
hours without lines; that is, upon the Glass-cover are painted certain little
Stars, serving for the hours, and a Scepter, serving for the Style; out of
which Scepter, when the Sun shines, you may behold another Scepter of Light to
issue, and by passing under the said stars, to show the hour.

Now for the Reason why in the Three first you cannot see the hour, but by
looking through the Ring on the Back of the Dyal, it is, because their Bottoms
being Glass thinly painted over with white color, nothing can be seen by
looking on the face of the Dyal, that is drawn on the lower side of the
bottom-glass; and on the contrary, by looking on the Back, nothing can be seen
that is drawn upon the glass-cover, but only the shade thereof when the Sun
shines.

The Reason of the Fourth, is the same which was given for the Fourth of those
which stand on the South-part of the Table.

CHAP. IV. Of the Four Glass Bowls standing on the Four Branches of the First
Piece.
THese Four Bowls show also the usual Hour in four different ways; for one of
them shows the Hour by Fire, another by Water, the Third by the Air, and the
Fourth by the Earth; as we shall immediately declare.

Of the First Bowl.
Fig. 14.

THE First therefore, whose Title is, Per Ignem, and shows, as is said, the
hour by Fire, is a little Glass-Bowl filled with clear water. This Bowl has
about three inches in diameter, and is placed in the middle of another Sphere
of about six inches in diameter, consisting of several Iron Rings or Circles,
representing the hour-circles in the Heavens. The hour is here known by
applying your hand to the said hour-circles when the Sun shines; for that
Circle where you feel your hand burnt by the Sunbeams passing through the Bowl
filled with water, shall show the true hour; according to the Latin Verse
there adjoined.

Cratem tange, manufque horam tibi reddet adusta. The Reason of this Dyal is,
that the paralleled Rays of the Sun passing through the said little Bowl, are
bended by the density of the water, into a Cone or Pyramid, whose vertex
reaches a little beyond those hour-circles, and there burns the hand applied;
for so many Rays being all united into a Point, must needs make an intense
heat, which heat is so powerful in the Summertime, that it will fire a piece
of Wood applied unto it.

Of the Second Bowl.
Fig. 15.

THE Second Bowl, whose Title is, Per Aquam, shows the Hour by Water, that is,
by the Rays of the Sun passing through the water with which the Bowl is filled,
as in the precedent; which Rays, although they be bended by the density of the
water, as before, yet they burn not, being cut off at their going out of the
Bowl, by a little white color laid thin on that part where they break out;
making thereby only a round Circle of Light upon the said Color; the Center of
which Circle shows the Hour amongst the Hour-Circles there described on the
said white Color; as the Latin Verse does also explicate:

Luminis hoc Centrum qui tangit, tangit and horam. The Reason of this Dyal
(besides what we now said of the bending of the Rays, is, that these
hour-circles being no other than the Sections which the Planes of the Celestial
hour-circles crossing each other in the Center of the Bowl, make in the
superficies thereof, and the said Center of the Circle of Light made on the
Bowl, answering perpetually to the Center of the Sun, it necessarily follows,
that it shows always the true hour, as any one that knows but the first
Principles of Dyalling, will conceive.

Of the Third Bowl.
Fig. 16.

THE Third Bowl, whose Title is, Per Aerem, and shows the hour without any
style, is only filled with Air, and exhibits to the sight, when the Sun shines,
two little Pictures of the Sun, like two small Stars within the Bowl, both
which, if by moving your Eye, you bring under the same hour-circles described
on the Bowl, or at least, parallel unto it, they shall show the true hours,
according to the Latin Verse there underwritten.

Vnam det geminus Sol horam, and vera patebit. Now the reason why by those
little Pictures of the Sun seen both under the same hour-circle, or parallel to
it, you find the hour, is, that those hour-circles described on the Bowl, being
the Sections which the Planes of the Celestial Hour-Circles make in the
superficies of the Bowl, (as was said also of the second Bowl) and these two
little Suns being reflected one of them from the unequal superficies of the
Bowl, and the other from the concave, it follows by the Rules of reflection,
that those two Pictures of the Sun are both seen in the same Plane; in which is
also the Eye which sees, and the Sun which is seen. Wherefore since the Sun is
always in the Plane of the true Hour-circle, it necessarily follows that the
Eye beholds both those Pictures at the true hour; for although one reflection
cannot sufficiently determine the Eye to behold the Sun in the true
hour-circle, yet two reflections suffice.

Where is also to be noted, that these three Bowls we have now spoke of, have
this pre-eminence above all other Dyals depending on the shade of the style,
that they show the hour, when by none of the others it can be discerned; that
is, when the Sun shines so dimly that it casts no perceptible shadow.

Of the Fourth Bowl.
Fig. 17.

THE Fourth Bowl, whose Title is, Per Terram, shows what of the Clock it is in
any part of the World, which is here performed by a Geographical Description of
the whole Earth upon the inward superficies of the Bowl, together with a
Meridian-circle moveable upon the North and South Poles, and the Equinoctial
circle divided into its 24 equal hours, and fastened to the said Meridian, at
the hour of Twelve; at which place also is erected a Flower-de-luce, and at the
North Pole is fastened a Thread. The Bowl being thus prepared, and rightly
placed, if you turn the said moveable Meridian till the Flower-de-luce cast no
shade upon the Bowl, and then bringing the Thread over any part of the World
till it cross the Equinoctial-circle, you shall see the hour there noted
belonging to that part or parts of the World over which the said Thread passed;
according to the Verse there adjoined.

Vmbram toll Orbi, totumque stat Hora per Orbem. CHAP. V. Of the Four great
Globes standing on the First Piece.
Of the First Globe.
THE First therefore of these Globes, whose Title is, Horologia Geographica,
having about Thirteen inches in diameter, has its superficies cut into thirty
two Planes; whereof twenty are Triangles all equal and equilateral; the other
twelve are Pentagones, or five angled Figures, all of them likewise equal one
to another. Some of these Pentagones are made hollow like Hemispheres, others
like Cones, the rest, as also the Triangles, are left plain. The Dyals
described as well on the Pentagones, as on the Triangles, have for style, a
sharp-pointed Iron perpendicularly erected.

The Dyals described on the Pentagones, show not only the situation of the more
remarkable Countries in the World, but also what several actions are performed
in them at the same time; for example, who are now at Dinner, who at Supper,
who are rising, who sleeping, etc.

Fig. 18.

For those two whose Title is, Tempus surgendi, show by the shade of the style
in what part of the World it is time of rising, or six of the Clock in the
Morning.

Fig. 19.

Those, whose Title is, Tempus Prandendi, show in the same manner, in what part
of the World it is time of Dining or Midday.

Fig. 20.

Those, whose Title is, Tempus Coenandi, show in what Country it is
Supper-time, or six of the Clock at Night.

Fig. 21.

Those, whose Title is, Tempus Dormiendi, show where it is Midnight, or time of
sleeping.

Fig. 22.

But those two, whose Title is, Habentes Solemn supra Caput, show by the shade
of the style what People, whether by Sea or Land, have the Sun just over their
Heads at such a time as you look upon the Dyal; which is performed by inverting
that part of the Terrestrial Gobe which is included between the two Tropicks.

The Reason of which inversion is, that the shade of the style being always
cast toward the contrary part to the Sun, that is, if the Sun be East, the
shade falls toward the West, etc. it was necessary the Eastern part of the
World should here lie Westwards, and the Northern Southwards. And thus much for
the twelve Pentagones described on the Globe.

Fig. 23, and 24.

Now for the twenty equilateral Triangles; the Dyals described on them, show
only what of the clock it is in this or that particular place, according to the
usual way of counting the hours from Midnight to Noon, and from Noon to
Midnight; whereof only three Examples are here set down thus; one of these
Dyals shows what of the Clock it is at Jerusalem, another at Constantinople,
another in Jamaica, etc.

Of the Second Globe.
THE Second Globe, whose Title is, Horologium Astronomicum ostendens, etc. is
just like the former, whereof we have now spoken; that is, the superficies
thereof is cut into twelve Pentagones, and twenty Triangles; but the Dyals
described on these Pentagones and Triangles, are much different from those of
the former, as not only showing the hour of the day, but diverse other things
belonging to Astronomy, as, the Azimuth, or distance of the Sun from the South,
the Almicantarath, or height of the Sun above the Horizon, what hour he rises
and sets; and the like; of which are now to treat.

Fig. 25.

1. The Dyal, whose Title is, Azimuth Solis a Meridie, shows by the shade of
the style (which in each Dyal here also is perpendicularly erected) how many
degrees the Sun is distant from the true South, at such time as you look upon
the Dyal: The Lineaments of this Dyal are no other than the Sections which the
Plains of the vertical Circles crossing each other, on the top of the style,
make with the superficies of the Dyal.

Fig. 26.

2. The Dyal, whose Title is, Altitudo Solis supra Horizontem, shows how many
degrees the Sun is elevated above the Horizon. The Lineaments of this Dyal are
the Sections which the superficies of the Dyal makes with those cones whose
bases are parallel to the Horizon, and whose common vertex is the top of the
style, or center of the Earth.

Fig. 27.

3. The Dyal, whose Title is, Incipit Aurora, shows at what hour begins Break
of Day, that is, when first the Crepusculine Arch begins to appear. The
Lineaments by which this is here performed, are the Sections which the
superficies of the Dyal makes with the cones, whose bases are parallel to the
Equator, and whose common vertex is the top of the style, or the Earths Center.

Fig. 28.

4. The Dyal, whose Title is, Sol oritur, shows by the now named Sections of
those Cones whose bases are parallel to the Equator at what hour the Sun
rises, and by consequence when he sets.

Fig. 29, and 30.

5. The Dyal, which has for Title, In quo Signo Zodaici sit Sol, shows by the
said Sections of the superficies of the Dyal with the Cones, whose bases are
parallel to the Equator, in what part or sign of the Zodiac the Sun is; but
because the shade of the top of the style falls twice every year upon the same
Section, by reason of the Suns ascending and descending from the one Tropic to
the other: therefore to avoid confusion, there are two Dyals of the same sort,
one serving from the 10th. of December to the 10th. of June; the other from the
10th of June to the 10th. of December.

Fig. 31, 32.

6. The Dyal, whose Title is, Dies Mensis, shows by the like conical Sections
now mentioned, what day of the Month it is; at least, as near as can be
expected in so little a form. Here are likewise two Dyals of the same sort, for
the reason now mentioned. And these Dyals within this second Globe we have
hitherto spoken of, are all of them described on the Pentagones: Those which
follow, are described on the Triangles.

Fig. 33.

7. The Dyal, whose Title is, In qua part Horizontis incipiat Aurora, shows in
what part of the Horizon begins the Break of Day, that is, in what part thereof
begins first to appear the unequal part of the Crepusculine Arch; whether just
in the East, or in the North-East, or South-East, etc. and by consequence, in
what part also the Evening Twilight ends. The Lineaments of this Dyal are the
Sections which the Planes of the vertical Circles crossing each other on the
top of the style, make with the plane of the Dyal.

Fig. 34.

8. The Dyal, whose Title is, Duratio Crepusculi, shows by the now often
mentioned conical Sections of the superficies of the Dyal with the Cones, whose
bases are parallel to the Equator, how long as well the Morning as Evening
Twilight does last, that is, how many hours are from Break of Day till
Sunrising; and from Sunsetting to the end of Twilight, or till dark night.

Fig. 35.

9. The Dyal, whose Title is, In qua Coeli plaga existat Sol, shows by the
Sections of the vertical Circles, See Number. 7. in what part of the Heaven the
Sun is, whether in the East or West, South-East, or South-West, etc.

Fig. 36.

10. The Dyal, whose Title is, Amplitudo ortiva Solis, shows by the conical
Sections mentioned in number. 3. how many degrees the Sun rises wide of the true
East-point, whether toward the North, or toward the South.

Fig. 37.

11. The Dyal, whose Title is, Quot horae restent ad occasum Solis, shows by
the Sections of the Italian ( c. 2. n. 3.) hour-Circles with the superficies of
the Dyal, how many hours rest till Sunset.

Fig. 38.

12. The Dyal, whose Title is, Quota pars Diei sit elapsa; shows by the
sections of the unequal (as n. 3.) hour-circles, what part of the day, or space
from Sunrising to Sunsetting is now spent, whether the Third, or Fourth, or
Fifth, etc.

Fig. 39.

13. The Dyal, whose Title is, Declinatio Solis, shows by the conical sections
mentioned n. 3. the Suns declination, that is, how many degrees he is distant
from the Equator.

Fig. 40.

14. The Dyal, whose Title is, Qua hora Sol perveniat ad verum Orientem, shows
by the same conical sections, at what hour the Sun comes to be just East, and
by consequence, at what hour after Dinner it will be just West.

Fig. 41.

15. The Dyal, whose Title is, Refractio Solis, shows by the conical sections,
spoken of n. 2. the Suns Refraction, that is, how many minutes he appears to be
elevated above his true height, by the bending of his Rays in passing through
our thick Atmosphere.

Fig. 42.

16. The Dyal, whose Title is, Quoties umbra contineat corpus erectum, shows by
the shade of the style falling upon the aforesaid conical sections mentioned in
n. 2. how often the shadow of a Body perpendicularly erected upon a Plain
parallel to the Horizon, contains the length of the same Body.

Fig. 43.

17. The Dyal, whose Title is, Longitudo Diei, show by the shade of the style
falling upon the conical sections spoken of, n. 3. the length of the day, that
is, how many hours are between Sunrising and setting.

Fig. 44.

Lastly, The Dyal, whose Title is, Quot sint horae elapsae ab ortu Solis,
shows, by the shade of the Style falling upon the sections which are made in
the superficies of the Dyal, by the Plains of those circles which divide all
the parallels of the Suns daily motion into twenty four equal parts, according
to what was said, c. 2. n. 2. how many hours have passed since Suns-rising.

Of the Third Globe.
THE Third Globe, whose Title is, Horologium Vranographicum, is about the same
bigness with the two former; but the superficies thereof cut into twenty
Triangles, all equal and equilateral, some whereof are made hollow like Cones,
the rest left plain. The Dyals described on these Triangles, show what
situation or posture the Heavens have at any time of the day, when the Sun
shines, that is, what stars are rising, what setting, what stand just over
your head, etc. So this Globe standing immovable, performs, by the shade of
the styles belonging to these several Dyals, that in effect, which a Celestial
Globe, whereon all the fixed stars or constellations are painted, would do, if
being rightly placed, it were continually turned about, according to the Suns
daily motion: where is to be noted, that here are always two Dyals of each
sort, one serving one half year, and the other another, for the reason given in
the Fifth Dyal of the Second Globe.

Fig. 45, 46.

1. Therefore, Those two Dyals, whose Title is, Constellationes Orientes, show
by the shade of the style, what Constellation or Company of stars begin then to
arise above the Horizon, provided that you look upon the Dyal belonging to the
time of the year which you are now in, according to what was now said. The
lineaments of these Dyals are the Sections which the Plain of the Ecliptic
Circle makes with the superficies of the Dyals at such time as those several
Constellations noted upon the Dyal, begin to rise.

2. Those two, whose Title is, Constellationes Occidentes, show in like manner
what Constellation begins to set, or go under the Horizon. The Lineaments of
these two Dyals are the Sections which the Plain of the Ecliptic Circle makes
with the superficies of the Dyal at such time as this or that Constellation
begins to set.

3. Those two Dyals, whose Title is, Constellationes existentes in Meridie,
show what Constellation begins to pass the Meridian Circle, or full South,
which is here performed by the sections which the Plain of the Ecliptic Circle
makes with the superficies of the Dyal, when the several Constellations there
noted, begin to pass the Meridian Circle.

4. Those two whose Title is, Constellationes existentes in ipso Orient. show
what Constellations stand just East, whether it be in the Horizon, or elevated
above the same, which they perform by those Sections which the Plain of the
Ecliptic makes with the Plain of the Dyal, when such Constellations as are
there noted, do pass the East Circle, or first Vertical.

5. Those two, whose Title is, Constellationes existentes in ipso Occidente,
show on the contrary what Constellations stand just West, which is done by the
like Sections made by the Ecliptic, when those Constellations begin to pass
the true West.

6. Those two Dyals, whose Title is, Constellationes existentes supra Caput,
show what Constellation stands over your head; which is also done by the
aforesaid Sections made when the Constellations there noted, pass the Zenith,
or vertical Point.

Now these twelve Dyals being all made (as is said) by the Sections of the
Ecliptic with the superficies of the Dyal, it will be sufficient to give here
a Diagram of the two first.

But because these two Dyals show only what situation the stars have in the
daytime, when the stars cannot be seen, unless there should happen a total
Eclipse of the Sun, there are therefore described on the same Globe six other
Dyals, showing what situation the stars will have at 8 of the Clock at Night; a
time proper to behold them; and see the truth of the Dyal.

Fig. 47, 48.

7. Those two Dyals, whose Title is, Constellationes existentes in Orient hora
octava vespertina, shows what Constellation will stand just Eastward at Eight
of the Clock at Night; which is here performed by the Sections which the
superficies of the Dyal makes with those Cones whose bases are parallel to the
Equator, and whose common Vertex is the top of the style, or Center of the
Earth.

8. Those two, whose Title is, Constellationes existentes in Occidente hora
octava vespertina, show by the forenamed Sections, what Constellations will be
just Westward at Eight of the Clock in the Evening.

Lastly, Those two, whose Title is, Constellationes existentes in Meridie hora
octava vespertina, show by the Sections which their superficies make with their
aforesaid Cones, what Constellation at Eight of the Clock at Night will be just
South.

And these six Dyals being made by the Sections of the same Cones, it will
suffice to place here the Diagram of the two first: And thus much of the Third
Globe,

Of the Fourth Globe.
Fig. 49.

THE Fourth and last Globe, whose Title is Horologium Astronomicum, is also cut
into twenty Triangles, equal and equilateral, just like the Precedent.

The Dyals described on these Triangles, belong to Astrology, and are placed
here for those who are delighted with such conjectural Uncertainties. These
Dyals are as follow.

1. The Dyals, whose Title is, Domus Astrologica Solis, shows in which of the
twelve Astrological Houses, described according to the way of Regiomontanus,
the Sun is at the time you behold the Dyal. The Lineaments of this Dyal are the
Sections which the plains of those Circles, which crossing each other on the
North and South Points of the Horizon, divide the Equator into 12 equal parts,
beginning at the East point of the Horizon, and so descending, make with the
Plain of the Dyal.

Fig. 50, 51.

2. Those two Dyals, whose Title is, Signum horoscopans, show the Horoscopon
(as Astrologers term it) that is, which of the twelve Signs do begin to rise
above the Horizon; which is here performed by the Sections which the Plain of
the Ecliptic makes at the time they begin to rise, with the superficies of the
Dyal.

3. Those, whose Title is, Signum culminans, show by the like Sections of the
Ecliptic with the superficies of the Dyal, what Sign of the Zodiac is in the
Meridian, or full South. Wherefore these four Dyals being made by the same
sections, it suffices also to put a Diagram only of the two first.

Fig. 52.

4. Those Dyals which serve here for the several days of the week, show what
Planet reigns, according to the Opinion of ancient Astrologers, every hour of
the day: So the Dyal, whose Title is, Dominatur die Lunae, shows what Planet
reigns any time of the day on Monday.

Fig. 53.

And in the same manner, the Dyal, whose Title is, Dominatur die Martis, shows
what Planet reigns at any time on Tuesday. And so of the rest. The Lineaments
of these Dyals being all alike, to wit, the sections which the plains of the
unequal hour-circles make with the superficies of the Dyal, it will be
sufficient also to put here the Diagrams of the two first.

Fig. 54, 55.

5. Those two Dyals, whose Title is, Conjunctio Solis cum Stellis fixis, show
with which of the more remarkable fixed Stars the Sun is in conjunction, or
under the same Circle of Longitude.

Lastly, Those two, whose Title is, Varit Aspectus Solis cum Stellis fixis,
show the other Aspects of the Sun; as the Trine-Aspect, the Quadrat, etc. with
the said fixed stars. These four Dyals being made much alike, as made by the
sections which the superficies of the Dyal makes with the cones whose bases are
parallel to the Equator, and common Vertex, is the top of the style, or center
of the Earth, it will suffice to place here also the Diagram of the two first.
And thus much of the Dyals belonging to the first Piece.

CHAP. VI. Of the Dyals described on the Edge of the Second Piece.
Fig. 56, 57.

1. THose Dyals which are described on the Edge of this Table, have for Title,
Stellae Orientes Cosmice, show what Stars rose cosmically (that is to say) rose
at the same time when the Sun rose, on the day you look upon the Dyal; provided
you look upon the Dyal belonging to the time of the Year, here being two Dyals
of the same sort, one for the one half of the Year, and another for the other
half.

2. Those Dyals, whose Title is, Stellae Orientes Acronice, show what Star will
rise acronically, that is, will rise just at Sunsetting; where also Care is to
be had, that you look upon the Dyal agreeable to the time of the Year.

Lastly, Those Dyals, whose Title is, Stellae Orientes Heliace, show what Stars
rise that day Heliacally, that is, what Star, which for some time before, had,
by reason of its nearness to the Sun, lay hid, begins now to appear again, by
getting out of the Sunbeams.

Now the Lineaments of these Dyals, being all of the same sort, to wit, such
conical sections as the Plain of the Dyal makes with the Cones, whose Bases are
parallel to the Equator, and whose common Vertex is at the top of the style,
that is, at the middle of the little painted Star, which here in each Dyal
represents the Style: This, I say, being so, it will suffice here to place two
Diagrams of the first sort.

CHAP. VII. Of the Eight Reflecting Dyals placed on the Top of the Second Table.
THE Reason why these Dyals placed upon the second Table were made by reflection
of Looking-Glasses, was not so much for variety, as for necessity; for the
Table standing high, the Dyals placed on the upper part thereof, could not have
been seen, but by being reflected on the bottom or inclining Plains of the
great Globe, which stands (as is said in the first Chapter) upon this second
Table; whereas, now being reflected, they are very well seen upon the
said-bottom, together with their Titles, as follows:

Fig. 58.

1. The Dyal, whose Title is, Per horas sine stylo, has its hour lines
described, and visible on the bottom of the aforesaid Globe, but by the style,
which is a Flower-de-luce, being painted upon a Looking-Glass placed on the
Table, appears not, but only the shadow thereof appears; which being reflected
upon the said hour lines, drawn on the bottom of the Globe, shows the hour,
according to the Verse there adjoined:

En-Horas! stylus a lucenti Sole petendus. These hour lines being no other than
the sections which the Plains of the ordinary hour-circles, crossing each other
upon the top of the said Flower-de-luce, make with the Plain of the Dyal, no
more needs to be said but that it is a reflex Dyal, supposing always the Sun as
much depressed under the Horizon, as it is de facto elevated above it.

2. The Dyal, whose Title on the contary, is, Per stylum sine horis, has its
style (which is a Lions Paw) painted upon the bottom of the Globe, and
therefore easy to be seen; but the hour lines being drawn upon a Looking-Glass
placed upon the Table, appear not, only their shadow reflected upon the said
Lions Paw, show the hour, according to what the Verse there intimates;

Da mihi Phoebe horas, horamque tibi ungue notabo. This Dyal being only the
former invers'd, according to what was said of the like inversion in the second
Chapter, there needs no more to be added: As also neither is it needful to say
any more of the other, which there in the self-same manner shows the hour by
the hour lines reflected upon the end of an Unicorns Horn; according to the
Verse;

Sol mihi Luce dat horas, horam do tibi Cornu. 3. In the Dyal, whose Title is,
Sine Horis vel Stylo, appears neither hour lines nor Style, unless the Sun
shine; for then you see them both; that is, you see the shadow of both style
and hour lines reflected from the Looking-Glass, upon which the said Hour Lines
are drawn.

This Dyal differing nothing from an ordinary reclining Dyal declining, we need
say no more thereof; as neither of the other four, which also differ no
otherwise from ordinary Dyals, than that they are not to be otherwise seen than
each of them in a Looking-Glass placed on the bottom of the great Globe.
Wherefore it will suffice to place the Diagrams of the two first.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Four Dyals supported by the Four Branches of the Second
Piece.
THese Four Dyals are drawn each of them upon a Glass-Bowl of about five Inches
diameter, and show the usual hours by four different ways, viz. by a shade,
without any style, by a style without any shade, by a style and shade, and
without either style or shade.

Fig. 60.

1. The Dyal, whose Title is, Per stylum sine umbra, shows the hour by moving
the style (which here is a Flower-de-luce fixed on a moveable Equator) to and
fro till it cast no shade upon the Bowl; which being done, the hour sought for
shall stand just under the style; as the Verse there added declares:

Nulla sit umbra stylo; veram stylus indicat horam. Now the Reason, why the
style casting no shade on the Bowl, stands over the true hour, is, that these
hours lying all in the sections, which the Plains of the hour-circles make in
the superficies of the Bowl, it is necessary that then the top of the style be
in the Plain of the same hour-circle, in which at that time is also the Center
of the Sun.

Fig. 61.

2. In the Dyal, whose Title is, Per umbram sine stylo, the hour is found by
observing where the part of the Bowl enlightened by the Sun, meets with the part
not enlightened; for this meeting shows the hour, as the there adjoined Verse
explicates:

Vis horam? lucemque inter tenebras require. The Reason whereof is, That the
Sun, by reason of its immense distance enlightening without any considerable
difference, the one half of the Bowl, and the hour-points being all noted in
the Equator of the Cone or Sections which the Plain of the Equator passing
through the Center of the Bowl, makes in the superficies thereof, the said
termination of Light must needs fall upon the true hour-point, provided that
the Dyal be once rightly placed.

Fig. 62.

3. The Dyal, whose Title is, Per Stylum and Vmbram, shows the hour by the
shade of a style perpendicularly erected upon the superficies of the Bowl, and
therefore differs nothing from an ordinary Dyal described on the unequal
superficies of a Globe. There are three such Dyals placed upon this Bowl, to
the end that when the shade of the style ceases, by reason of the convexity of
the Bowl, to show the hour in one, may show it in another.

Fig. 63.

Lastly, The Dyal, whose Title is, Sine Stylo vel Vmbra, shows the Hour without
either style or shadow; for if you place your self, so as to behold your face
in the middle of the little unequal Looking-Glass which is there placed on the
South-pole of the Bowl, you shall at the same time, if the Sun shine, behold
the Picture thereof at the true Hour; according to the Verse there adjoined.

Spectanti Speculum Horam dat tibi Solis Imago. The Reason whereof is, that the
Eye, when placed, as is said, being in the Axis of the World, and by
consequence, in the Plain of all the hour-circles, and therefore in the Plain
of the true hour-circles, in which Plain also, the center of the Sun being
necessarily placed, it follows that the said Picture of the Sun appears at the
true hour, since by the Rules of Reflection, the Eye seeing, and the Point seen,
are in the same Plain with the Point of the Reflextion.

As for the Hour Lines of these four Dyals, they are no other than the
Sections, or some point of them, which the Plains of the hour-circles make in
the superficies of the Bowls; which Plains in the first, second, and fourth,
cross each other in the Center of the Bowl; but in the third, they cross one
another at the top of the Style.

CHAP. IX. Of the Dyals described on the great Globe which stands on the Second
Table.
THis Globe having Eight reclining Plains, eight inclining, and Eight upright
Plains, the Dyals described on them, are as follows; 1. Six of the Eight
upright Plains being made hollow, like those Twenty on the edge of the first
Table, are covered also with Glass, and Dyals described on them, just like
those twenty; the difference only being, that here the bottoms are also covered
with Glasses thinly painted over with white color, to the end the Dyals may be
seen as well within the Globe, as without: To which purpose, two of these
upright Plains, looking toward the North, are covered only with clear Glass,
as serving for Windows to look into the Globe. On the said Bottom-Glasses are
drawn several Pictures; as of their Majesty's, the Queen Mother, the Duke of
York, Prince Rupert, etc. In His Majesty's Picture the Hour is showed by the
shade of the Hour Lines passing over the top of the Scepter. In the Pictures of
the two Queens, it is showed by the like shade passing over the top of a
Flower; and in the other three, by passing over the end of a Troncheon, which
each of them hold in their hands; under each Picture is written a Chronograph
for the Year 1669. in which Year the Dyal was set up; and futable to the Person.

Which Chronographs, according to the Order now named, are as follows:

1. Regnet DiV CarolVs IMperetqVe BritannIs 2. FaXIt Regina Det Regi RegnoqVe
ProLem CatharIna, 3. RegIna Matter nato sIbI Carolo DIV frVatVr. 4. IaCobVs and
RegIs frater, and InsignIs BrItanniae aDMIraLIVs, 5. FILIVs SeCVnDVs RegIs
BoheMIae.
These six Vertical Dyals being all alike, it will suffice to place here the
Diagrams of the two first.

Fig. 64, 65.

As for the Dyals described on the reclining Plains of this Globe, they are in
substance like those Recliners placed upon the first Table, except that,
whereas those of the first are most of them made to show the hour by looking on
the outside of the Dyal, here no hour can be seen but by looking through the
aforesaid Windows into the Globe; which doing, you shall behold in one a Star,
in another a Flower-deluce, showing the hour, by passing over the hour lines;
in a third, you shall behold a Lion, with certain Stars on his back, each
whereof represents an hour, to pass under a Cloud, and so by successively
hiding them, to note the hour; and the like of the rest of these Recliners. As
for the reclining Plains, which are placed on the bottom of the Globe: the
Dyals belonging thereto, are already explicated in the precedent Chapter, as
made by reflection of Looking-Glasses, etc.

CHAP. X. Of the Four Glass-Bowls supported by the Four Branches of the Great
Globe.
OUT of the top of the great Globe issue (as was said in the first Chapter)
four Branches, each bearing a Glass-Bowl, like those of the first and second
Piece, but somewhat less in proportion to the Pyramid. These four Bowls are
gilded over, except where the Hour Lines are drawn, which is thinly painted
over with white color, to the end the Sunbeams passing through a little Star
left clear on the top of the Bowl, and making the like Star of Light upon the
hour lines, may be seen to note the hour.

These Dyals show the hour according to the different ways of numbering the
hours, used by several Nations, as was said in the second Chapter.

Fig. 66.

1. The Dyal, whose Title is, Per horas Italicas, shows by the said luminous
Star passing over the hour lines, what hour it is to be said according to the
Italian Account, which numbers from Sunset to Sunset 24 hours. These
hour lines are the Sections which the Plains of the Italian hour-circles
crossing each other in the middle of the said Star placed on the top of the
Bowl, make in the superficies thereof.

Fig. 67.

2. The Dyals, whose Title is, Per horas Babylonicas, shows in like manner,
what hour it is according to the Babylonians way of reckoning, who count 24
hours from Sunrising till next Sunrising, which it performs by the sections
which the Plains of the Babylonian hour-circles crossing each other in the
middle of the said Star, make in the superficies of the Bowl.

Fig. 68.

3. The Dyal, whose Title is, Per Horas Astronomicas, shows by the like Star,
the hour according to the Astronomical Account, which numbers 24 hours from
Noon till next Noon. This Dyal is made by the like sections of the usual
hour-circles crossing each other in the middle of the said Star; the Numbers
set to the hours being only different, that is, One of the Clock in the Morning
is here called Thirteen, and Two Fourteen, and Three Fifteen, etc.

Fig. 69.

Lastly, The Dyal, whose Title is, Per Horas antiquas, sive Judaicas, shows the
Hour according to the ancient way of numbering the hours, viz. counting always
12 Hours from Sunrising till the setting thereof: Wherefore the sections by
which this Dyal is made, are those which the Plains of the unequal hour-circles
make in the superficies of the Bowl; which Plains also cross each other in the
middle of the Star, or Style of the Dyal.

And thus much of the Third Piece, with the Branches belonging to it. The
Diagrams belonging to these Four Bowls are as follows:

CHAP. XI. Of the Three uppermost Pieces of the Pyramid.
THE Dyals belonging to the three lower Pieces of the Pyramid, being explicated
in the precedent Chapters, we will now in this Chapter explicate the rest, that
is to say, the Dyals appertaining to the Three highest, or uppermost parts
thereof.

Fig. 70.

The Fourth Piece therefore, consisting (it is said in the first Chapter) of
twelve concave Semi-Cylinders, and standing upon the great Globe, held up by
four Supporters, like those which hold up the second Piece, but less, has upon
each of those Semi-Cylinders a Dyal described, showing the usual hour by the
shade of a Flower-de-luce fixed at the top of a Semi-Cylinder.

Out of the top of this Piece issue four Branches, carrying each a little Glass
Bowl, showing also the usual hour by the Light of the Sun penetrating through
the hour lines (which for that purpose are left transparent, the rest of the
Bowl being gilded over) and passing over a little Star painted on the lower
part of the Bowl.

Fig. 71.

The first Piece, consisting of 8 plain Triangles, equal and equilateral, and
six equal squares, and held up also by four Supporters, has in like manner
Dyals described thereon, showing the usual hour by the shade also of a
Flower-de-luce.

Fig. 72.

The Sixth and last Piece, or top of the Pyramid, is a great Glass-Bowl
standing upon the Fifth, supported by a Foot of Iron, and encompassed with two
Iron Circles, having on the Top a Cross. This Bowl also shows the usual hour by
the shade of a little Golden Ball placed in the middle of the Glass.

The Dyals belonging to these three Pieces, showing only (as is said) the usual
hour, it will suffice to set down a Diagram for each Piece.

As for the Reason of these Dyals, they all showing only the usual hour, there
needs no more to be said than what has been already of the like, viz. that in
the Fourth and Fifth Pieces, the Plains of the Hour-circles cross each other
upon the top of the Flower-de-luce; but in the Sixth, they cross on the Center
of the little Ball placed in the middle of the great Bowl.

The Dyals of the four little Bowls supported by the Branches, are no other
than the Astronomical Dyal of the precedent Chapter, inverted, and only differ
in the Numbers set to the Hours.

And thus much concerning what in this short Tract was intended to wit, the Use
and Reasons of the Dyals described on the said Pyramid.

FINIS
Subscribers Names.
London.
Basil Firebrass. Theophilus Spurrier. Gabriel Jorden. Jeremiah Frumes. Abraham
Goulding. Joseph Wells. John Seller Hydographer to the King. Jacob Chandler,
Basket-maker. John Jewel, John Trotter. John Hull. William Gynninghame. George
Deane.
Reading.
Thomas Constable, Gent. Thomas Tilliard, Gent. Richard Smith, Gent. Charles
Cross, Gent. Oxford. Peter Nichols Gent. of Lowings in the County of Berks.
Richard Weston of Ilsley, Berks. Humphrey Marsh of Highworth. John Mitchel Esquire
of Wendover Bucks. Henry Newsted Junror, of North-Somercate, Lincolnshire.
Vriah Harris of Wislow, Huntingdonshire. Michael Cuseck Surgeon. John
Wealthdale of Enfield. Samuel Mitchel of Enfield. Jo. Adams of Waltham Abbey.
James Cheney of Edmonton. Jo. Tizack of Newcastle upon Tyne. Ambrose Galloway
of Lewis in Susfex. Tho. Posford of Woodbridge in Suffolk. Eustace Man, Gent.
of the Isle of Wight. William Smith, M. D. Robert Smith, Gent. Anthony Powis,
Gent. Samuel Watson. John Terry Samuel Smart. John Tripper. William Beeby.
William Spicer. Edward Huddesford. Thomas Chilton. John Cawdwell. John Compton.
Mark Hook. Robert Baker. Solomon Long.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Tho Howkins in George-Yard near Lombard Street.
FOur Books of Johannes Segerus Weidenfeld, Concerning the Secrets of the
Adepts, or the Use of Lully 's Spirit of Wine. in Quarto.

A Cabalistical Dialogue in Answer to the Opinion of a Learned Doctor in
Philosophy and Theology, That the World was made of nothing. By F. M.
Van-Helmont. in Quarto.

Trigonometry made easy, fitted to the meanest Capacity; it being the
Foundation of Astronomy, Surveying, Navigation, etc. in Octavo. By John Holwell.

Mellificium Mensionis, or the Marrow of Measuring, wherein a new and ready way
is showed how to measure Glazing, Painting, Plaistering, Masonry, Joyners,
Carpenters, and Brick-layers Work, in six Books; and Illustrated with Copper
Cuts: the like not heretofore Published. The Second Edition, Corrected, in
Octavo, By Venterus Mandey.

The Royal Catholic English School. Containing a Catalogue of all Words in the
Bible, beginning with one Syllable, and proceeding by degrees to eight, divided
and not divided, etc. in Octavo. By Tobias Ellis.

Dr. Everard 's Works in Octavo.

The Paradoxal Discourses of F. M. Van-Helmont, concerning the Macrocosm and
Microcosm, etc. in Octavo.

The Narrow Path of Divine Truth, described, from living Practice and
Experience of its three great steps, viz. Purgation, Illumination and Union,
according to the Testimony of the Holy Scriptures, etc. By F. M. Van Helmont,
in Twelves.

The Artless Midnight Thoughts of a Gentleman at Court. The Second Edition,
with Additions, in Twelves.

The Young Man 's Companion; or a very Useful Manual for Youth, etc. The Second
Edition with Additions. By William Mather, in Twelves.



1 Per Hor^^ (...) abort^ Solis more Antiquo sen^^^^^^

2 Per Horas Numer^tas ab (...) Solis more Babyloni^^

3 Per Horas Numeratas ab ac ca^^ Solis more Italico

4 Per Horas Numeratas a Meridi^ more Astronomico



10 Per Horas Latentes

11 Per (...) ^^^^um

12 Per Latentes Tam Horus Quam S^^lum

13 Per Tam Horas (...) Patentes



Per Ignem

Per Aquam

Per Aerem

Per Terram



5 Per Horas Numeratas a Medi^ ^octe more Vi^^^^

18 In Iamaica In Gujana In Groenlandia In Brasilia In Cananis In Lusitania In
Hispania
Tempus Surg^^^^

20 Apud Mogores In Nova Zembla In Tartaria In Arabia In Moscovia In Polonia In
Dania
Tempus Pr^ndendi

19 In Nova Albion In California In Nova Granada In No^^ Hispania In Virginia
In Nova Anglia In Marilandia In Islandia
Tempus Dormendi

23 Ierosolymis



21 In (...) In Bengala In (...) In Persia In Si^^ Arab In Arabia
Tempus C^^^^^^i

22 Habe^^s Solemsup^^^ Cap^^

23 Ierosolym^s

24 Constantinop^^^



25 Azimuth Solis ^ Mer

26 Altitude Solis

27 Sol oritu^

28 Incipit Aurora

34 Duratio Crepusculi



39 In quo Signo Zodiaci sit sol. (...)

39 In quo Signo Zodiaci sit sol. (...) Nec

31 Dies Mensis (...) Dec (...)

32 Dies Mensis (...) Dec

33 In qua Part Horizotis Aurora



35 In qua Coeli Pla gaexistat Sol.

36 Solis Amplia^^do ortiva

37 Quot Horce re^tent adoccasum Solis

38 Quom Pars Die^ sit elapsa

39 Solis Declinatio

40 Qua Hora Sol Perveniat ad Vera orientem



41 Solis Refractio

42 Quoties Vinbra Contineat Corperectum

43 Dies Longitudo

44 Quot sint Horoe ab Ortu Solis

45 Constellationes Orientes (...) Decembris ad (...) ^uny

46 Constellationes Orientes (...) Iunii ad (...) Decembris



48 Constellationes in Orient Hora 8ua Vesp. ^^ Decembris ad ^^ Iunii

47 Constellationes in Orient Hora 8ua Vespert: a ^^ Iunii ad ^^ Dece.

50 Signum Horoscopans a ^^ Decembris ad ^^ Iunii

49 Domus Astrologica Solis



51 Signum Horosco pans a ^^ Iunii ad ^^ Decembris

52 Die Lunoe Dominatur

53 Die Martis Dominatur

54 ConIunctio Solis Cum Stellis Fixis a ^^ Decembris ad ^^ Iunii

55 Conjuntio Solis Cum Stellis Fixis a ^^ Iunii ad ^^ Decembris



56 Stellce Orientes Cosmice a 10 December ad 10 Iuni

57 Stella Orientes Cosmice a 10 Iunii ad 10 December

56 Per Horas Sine S^^lo

59 Per Sus^um (...) Hor^^



60 Per Stulum Sine Vmbra

61 Per Vmbram sine Stylo

62 Per Stylum and Vmbra

63 Sine Stylo Vel Vmbra



64 Regnet DIV Caro LV s IMperetqVe BrItannI s

65 FaXIt RegIna Det RegI RegnoqVe proLeM Catha rIna



66 Per Horas It dlicus

67 Per Horas Ba bylonica

68 Per Horas Ast ronomicas

69 Per Horas An tiquas



70

71

72

73




