THE Good Old Cause Briefly demonstrated. WITH ADVERTISEMENTS TO AUTHORITY
Concerning it; To the end, All persons may see the Cause of their Bondage, and
way of deliverance.
A Cause in this Commonwealth has been much pleaded and contended about by
Words and Weapons.

Some have called it Liberty of Conscience; but the Light in the conscience
(the Light of Christ, the Lords true Witness in the soul) can no man reach; for
by it (as obedience is yielded thereto) is received the Greater and more
Marvelous Light of life, as being of it, and one with it, even Grace for Grace,
the ingrafted Word, able to save the soul; which increases with the increasing
of God, and so is changed from glory to glory by the Spirit of the Lord,
whereby he subdueth all things unto himself; and therefore (failing herein)
many men have run violently upon the Bodies and Estates of others, whereby
diverse persons have suffered Imprisonments and cruel deaths, some banishments,
some left their native Countries and outward Relations, and sought (where
peaceably) to inhabit and serve the Lord in other Lands, while the generality
of the people have been kept in blindness and bondage, ignorance and errors, by
following dumb Idols, even as they were led.

By others the said Cause has been, and is called, The Cause of God and
Religion, and so has been much contended for by a material Sword, wherein
likewise have been mistakes, some seeming to be for one Religion, Opinion, or
thing, and some for another; the one pure and undefiled Religion remaining
still the same that ever it was, but not so contended for by those that are
exercised therein; for that is the Work of God in the Light of Christ in the
conscience, in the soul, a spiritual hearing the voice of the beloved Son of
God, the true Teacher, the one High Priest, (set over the household of God) who
leads from such Acts of violence, (upon that account) to suffer freely for his
Name, and so be made perfect in him, to worship him, walk with him, and be one
with him, and obey him in all his Commands, and not yield to his Enemy in any
thing, or do to another that he would not be done unto; This only can please
God: And this Religion and spiritual Worship is not of man, nor taught by man,
but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, with the mighty Power of God, and can
neither be set up, nor pulled down by any material Sword, or outward force; for
in this, man's Wisdom, Power, Strength, or Righteousness, has no place, but is
so contrary to it, that whenever any man takes upon him herein to command,
order, direct, or defend, he mars all that ever he meddles with, as said the
Apostle, Who has known the mind of the Lord, that he should instruct him? The
Saints have (indeed) the mind of Christ, and every one gives account of himself
to God the heavenly Father, that has committed all Judgment to the Son, and
all Power in Heaven and Earth, whereby to subdue all his Enemies under his
feet; and when all things are become subject unto him, then shall the Son also
be subject to him that did put all things under him, that God may be all in all.

This Cause has of late been styled, The Good old Cause, (it is like) for that
it has met with outward interruptions; the revival of which (in an especial
manner) concerns you (much entrusted therewith, and interested therein) in the
Parliament and Army, because that by your Orders and Actings much blood has
been spilt, and treasure spent about it, which (as you hearken to, and keep in
the light of Christ, single-hearted, calm, quiet, flexible and pliable, to do
the will of God) will be seen and felt with what that calls to you for.

Consider, That the Sword Civil and Military (in your hands unexpectedly at
such a time as this) is not to be born in vain, much less to be turned against
the innocent; neither ought you to fall out about it, but to use it soberly in
the fear of the Lord, for the punishment of evildoers, and praise of them that
do well, (not to justify the wicked, nor condemn the just) to take off the
heavy burdens, to quiet men's spirits, and thereby prevent their inclinations
to seek outward help any other way; for so is the Will of God, whose Justice
you are to see (or cause) duly executed, (that the Earth continue not always
filled with violence, fraud and unquietness) whose Will you seem to desire and
pray, may be done in Earth as it is in Heaven; If therein you be in earnest,
you will manifest it in Actions of true love to him, with all your hearts,
souls, minds and strengths, and to us (your Neighbors) as to your selves, that
you may be blessed in your deed; for you may see that God will not be always
mocked with Words, give to him all your Honors, Wisdoms, Power and Strength,
that he may become your Fear, Dread and Counselor, and renew you therein day
by day, (on all occasions) as the redeemed of the Lord, the repairers of the
breaches of many generations; a people sought out, and not forsaken, such as he
may delight to honor in his service.

In the next place give me leave to say, That the occasion of the Kingdoms (or
Nations) quarrel with the late King and his Party, (when they took up Arms
against us) was (in a defensive way) for our Rights and Liberties (also called
the Privileges of Parliaments, and Liberties of the Subjects) then so expressed,
and so understood (which the King always opposed by his Negative Voice) in
order whereunto the Militia was desired (or demanded) from him (thereby to have
prevented the shedding of Blood, with the Charges and Consequences of War) and
We (the People) invited to enlist and maintain each other in Arms; upon which
Account, and for which Cause We freely brought in our Moneys, Plate, Horses,
Arms, and other Habilliments of War; and many choice spirited-men as freely
adventured their lives, with all that was (outwardly) near and dear to them,
(Liberty of Conscience (so called) and Religion seeming therein included;) and
you (now again brought together) are of them that first (eminently) appeared
for that Cause, laid the foundation of it, and brought us into the way of a
Commonwealth in order to it, and have seen much of the Lords Presence and
Power owning it in the hearts and hands of his servants, so that (though it
has been outwardly obstructed) men have not prevailed against it, (by fraud
nor force) but split themselves upon that Rock.

Wherefore take you diligent heed to that light which would lead you into, and
keep you, and guide you in the way of the Lords clearness, that you may follow
him fully (as you have said) to lay the Top-stone upon that foundation, and the
people then cry, Grace, Grace to it, and never more repent of their charge, or
loss for it, when they shall truly and indeed be settled, and surely defended in
their Rights and Liberties, in Persons and Estates, so as that the Lamb and the
Lion may lie down together, and none make each other afraid; that all persons
in all places may quietly and freely do their duties to God, and each to other
in true love, sincerity and soberness, as he by his Spirit shall respectively
direct and command, to his praise, and the Spiritual and Temporal benefit and
comfort one of another.

Said God to Pharaoh (by Moses) Let my people go, that they may serve me; and
if thou will not let them go, I will show my Power and wonders upon thee; I
will pour out my plagues upon thee and thy people. Was not this typical? And
has not this (of late) been the case in these Nations? Consider it.

It has been sufficiently known and felt, that such men have of late gotten
into Authority, that would not hear tell of our Rights and Liberties (whatever
smooth words they gave us) but made Laws to punish us for soberly using them;
and yet (even then) some would seem to say, Why have you not your Liberties,
your Civil and spiritual Concernments settled and continued unto you? May not
you be as good, as religious as you will? Are you not well? When alas we felt
the Distempers pinch us in all our parts and members; Bonds and Imprisonments
attending us every where, spoiling of our goods, and what not, And none that
pittyed us could relieve us, nor tell us how long.

Be not you so led aside by the deceitfulness of Satan's Wiles, and devices of
evil men.

In love, and for loves sake I beseech you be watchful, be faithful, be
diligent in the discharge of your respective duties to God and man, and while
you have time, p^ise it; (the night comes in which no man can work) improve
all opportunities to the right end, least that which is lame and halteth be
turned out of the Way, and then you spend your times in disputing,
contradicting and opposing each other, until the simplicity be betrayed by the
inventions and subtle craftiness of such as lie in wait to deceive, that have
men's persons in admiration for advantage; the strange Woman that flattereth
with her lip^ speaking lies through hypocrisy, to betray both you and us of
our Rights and Liberties, which to you would be very sad, and your fall more
remarkable then others before y^^ But as for those that fear the Lord, and wait
at all times upon him, they are sure of deliverance, and therefore do their
duties quietly, casting all care upon him that cares for them.

If any deceiver shall come (with his new inventions) and tell you, that though
you are not to meddle with other men's consciences, yet you must be sure to
satisfy your own consciences by taking care of the peoples souls, settling and
establishing Religion and Church Government as your chiefest business, your
greatest Work, and first to be done; thereby to prevent and suppress Heresies,
Sects, Schisms, and Factions in the Church, and that the defferring of it so
long, has been the cause of such and so many errors and divisions amongst the
people; And thus run on as fast as his tongue can belie his heart; (for did not
Sects, Schisms, Errors and Heresies begin with such false Teachers? yea, and
with them shall they end.) Then do you seriously consider, That the vain mind
of man is forward and hasty to set out it self to work for God (as Cain and
King Saul offered sacrifice in their own Wills) but without God, and therefore
against him; man being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to
establish his own righteousness, submits not to the righteousness of God, but
turns the truth of God into a lie, worshipping and serving the creature, and
forsaking the Creator, who is God over all, blessed for ever, and rich unto all
that call upon him

The Lord led his Israel of old by a Cloud, and by a Pillar of fire, and so
they moved or stood still as they were led. And afterward he gave them Laws,
Statutes, and Ordinances whereby to worship him. The Lord God never yet said to
any people, Go make your selves a Church-Worship, Discipline, or Government, or
settle for your selves a Way whereby to worship me.

The poor impotent people also waited at the pool of Bethesda for the moving of
the Water: And Christ Jesus (his peoples Lord and Lawgiver, faithful in all
his house as a Son) promised and has sent his holy Spirit the Comforter, to
lead into all truth, to take of his, and give unto us; to this one Lawgiver
(able to save and to destroy) are his servants only obedient, and he their
pattern in all patience and long-suffering, even with joyfulness.

Also consider, That the conscience and soul of man is a place for the living
God to dwell and walk in, where no Magistrate (as such) has any business.

The souls of men is a Charge too great, too high, too weighty for you to
undertake or meddlewith, and (like the former Builders of Babel) will be
confounded in it, if you so touch it; The wickedness of the wicked therein
shall come to an end; and the Lord will establish the just. Do you only settle
us in our external Rights and Liberties, establish them to us, and defend us
therein from fraud and violence of such as yet know not what spirits they are
of, but are disobedient, ignorant of the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ,
that makes free from that of sin and death; secure us in this particular, and
restrain all persons from abusing themselves and the creatures in riotous
living, by Authoriry, in the hands of such men as hate covetousness and vain
glory, that know this spiritual Law, Fear God, and eschew evil.

This is your Business and our Right, both by Birth, and dear Purchase; suffer
it not to be withheld from us by stopping your ears at the cries of the
oppressed.

Hearken unto us, that God may hearken unto you when you shall most need his
help; and trust the Lord Jesus Christ with his own work in our souls and
consciences; for they that dare take the charge of other men's souls upon them,
neither know their own souls, nor yet their duties to God or man; it is out of
your Sphere, beyond your reach, a work which neither God nor man has committed
to your Trusts; not found in all your Records (of the most Antichristian
Idolatrous Ages) only you have several Constitutions and corrupted forms
concerning Church-Governments, Worship and Discipline, which, (in the long and
dark night of Apostasy) have been ushered in by Popish Prelates and Priests,
and so craftily twisted and interwoven together with, rooted in, and depending
upon the Civil Authority, and the Civil Authority in, with, and upon them, that
many wise men think it a kind of Sacrilege, or rather madness to sever them
each from other, and that the doing thereof may break both, and drive all into
confusion; and be sure that sort of men (most concerned therein) will not fail
to tell you so, and withal tell you, that you are to maintain a
Gospel Ministry; that otherwise the people will become heathens; that they are
the men to be so maintained; that you must defend them from being reproved in
the presence of their hearers, whatsoever they say there; and much more of that
kind, if you hearken to them, and have but such a faith (as stands in their
Wisdom) to believe them, while it is evident to the children of light, and
other unbyassed men, That hereby was the rise, and this the root and foundation
of all Antichristian Tyranny; and that when man by his Wisdom and Authority
meddles, (in like manner) he only builds Babel higher and higher, until it
fall about his ears as (has been seen;) The depths of Satan's policies, and
deceits herein, are such as few men are yet aware of, but run on, and are
punished; only the children of light see him in his transformings and
likenesses, though adorned with never so curious a dress.

The Church of Christ never had, desired, nor wanted such helps from man to
support her.

It Is the Mother of Harlots and abominations, the Strumpet, the strange Woman,
Jezebel, that deceives the people with her fornications, the worldly Teachers,
State-Ministers, Antichrists Ministers, that want such Authority for a worldly
maintenance; they that receive or seek for such maintenance, (by tithes or
otherwise) are the Hirelings, the deceivers, and none of Christ's Ministers; for
Christ eever provided for his Ministers (daily bread) wherewIth they were
contented, and freely went and preached the everlasting Gospel, without help by
man's Authority, or taking careful thought what to eat or drink, or wherewith to
be clothed; And thus he imploys many of his servants in this day of his
Almighty Power, that his great Work is so upon the Wheel, that man is not able
to stop it, though he should fight never so fiercely against it: He is
inseperably in, and with his Tremblers, by his everlasting Covenant, and they
with him (in spirit and truth) worship the Father, and live the 1ife of the
Almighty, and are an heavenly Host with him; his righteousness is before them,
and the Glory of the Lord their Rereward; they cannot be idle as others that
sport themselves in the daytime, nor silent, but speak the things they have
heard and seen with their Father; and though they be persecuted, afflicted, and
tormented as sheep for the slaughter, (by the wilfulness of some, and ignorance
of others) yet is their love increased toward all men, as knowing that he is
worthy for whom they suffer such things, who nevertheless will avenge his own
Elect that cry day and night unto him; Tribulation to them that so trouble his
servants, and to them rest and peace with him, which is their life.

What sober-minded man will say we (the people) have our Rights and Liberties,
(which many of us have far adventured for) while the aforesaid Antichristian
yoke of bondage is upon our necks? We have not our Liberties in our Persons or
Estates, nor are we in any better condition then slaves, bondmen, and
bond-women; our bodies, and what else, we hold, and labor for at the wills of
other men.

Diverse of our Bodies haled to prisons, and there kept for a year, or years,
more or less, as others please.

A great part of the increase of our Lands, Stock, and Labors (Arbitrarily)
forced from us time after time, and no Law to protect us from such violence;
have not diverse of us been (outwardly and frequently) vexed and disquieted by
long and tedious suits in Law, our Goods and Cattle violently taken from us out
of the Houses we live in, and from the Plough, to the wasting of many men's
Estates, hinderance of Tillage and Trades, poverty and want, of Wives and
Children not for any thing we owe to any man, but only concerning the Worship
of our God, (whom we serve in our Spirits, in the Gospel of his Son) and (for
conscience sake toward him) dare not assist and maintain the Antichristian
Tyranny over us, or others.

So likewise when any of the servants of Christ go forth (in obedience to him)
to declare against sin and wickedness, Are they not beaten, stoned, stocked,
imprisoned, cruelly whipped, and shamefully abused? And have not some been
stifled in Cribs, nasty Dungeons, and dirty Holes of the Earth, friends not
permitted to come into some prisons to relieve or comfort them. Not to say much
of the prevalency of the aforesaid sort of men, what Acts and Ordinances they
have obtained to support themselves over us by Tithes, or otherwise; how they
do, or may take Peace from us, and alter men's conditions when, and as they
please; of their preaching up and down what they like or dislike in
Magistrates, Parliaments, Army and People; Their prevalency in removing
faithful Officers (Civil and Military) out of their Places of Trust, and
bringing into those Places such persons as they know will serve their interests
against our Liberties, whereby Justice has been turned backward: Or how (upon
the same account) many persons are unduly elected to serve in Parliaments: Or
of their striving now to hook in all interests against the Peoples Rights and
Liberties: I say not but it may concern them so to do, now the Head of their
Church (with his Negative Voice) and their Fathers the Bishops are fallen
before them; even so shall Babylon fall and never rise again; Lamentations and
Woes will be to such as pity her.

Nor shall I say much touching our Rights and Liberties in other particulars,
as how many men have been (as it were) torn from their Fathers and Mothers,
Wives, and Children, (their own flesh) to serve in foreign Wars, at the Wills
of others, (and yet liable so to be) without true knowledge of the occasion
thereof, their consciences satisfied therein, or their Wives and Children
provided for, but rather left to beg or starve in the streets. How diverse
faithful Members of the Army have been put out of their Employments, because
(for conscience sake) they could not go with their Arms to stand by, approve
of, and justify the Parish-Teachers in their way; and others put out as
illegally at the Wills of other men; How uncertain and delatory proceedings at
Law are: The peoples ignorance of the Laws under which they live, because of
the multiplicity thereof, and contradictions therein. Of some Statutes, part
repealed, and others, part continued; some before repealed, again revived, or
part revived; some limited to time, some otherwise. Laws in force to take away
men's lives for Theft, wherein no person has been put in fear or danger of
death. Courts so diverse and different in their manner of proceeding and trials.
Exactions and oppressive Tolls and Bylaws in Corporations, and peculiar
Jurisdictions, engrossing of Trades and trading therein; Corporations not
permitting such as have served the Commonwealth in their Wars, to exercise
their Trades freely there. Persons of other Nations engrossing or taking up
Trades, wherein many of the poorer sort have usually been employed, and
comfortably maintained their Wives and Children, slavish Tenures of Land held
at the will of the Lord, (so called) Oaths, or Swearing, contrary to the
Command of Christ; and several other things, (too many here to mention)
contrary to our Rights and Liberties, though nothing so grievous as those which
more especially concerns our Liberties and Freedoms in the Worship of our God,
and obedience to him at all times, and in all places. Now if there be some
persons that are so in love with slavery as to desire to continue in the said
bondage, and account it their liberty so to remain as natural to them, because
so kept from their youths up, and their Fathers before them; be pleased to
permit such to have that their Liberty (under Antichrist) until they shall be
willing to be otherwise free; but let it be by their own Act and Deed,
(otherwise that would be to them bondage) let such hire and maintain their own
Ministers out of their own purses, (as they please or can agree) provided
always that they (to be hired) be such as are not professed Enemies to the
public peace, and that they meddle not at all with matters of Civil
Government, thereby to make others unquiet; then may you permit every man
freely to enjoy the fruits of his own Land, Stock, and daily labors, without
trouble concerning that tedious and vexatious Tax, called Tithes, (so great a
scruple in many men's consciences) and thereupon find the generality of us (the
People) freely willing to part with moneys for redeeming Impropriations,
payment of Soldiers Arrears, and other public Debts; and then most freely may
you charge money on us for the payment thereof, upon so just and valuable
considerations.

It is like there are some other persons that are weary of this Bondage, and
would be released, but dare not yet say so, because they see not the way,
wanting faith in those things which speedily are to be accomplished. And it is
also like here be many wise men (after the flesh) that will not easily be
persuaded that this is the way to Peace and our Liberties. Now to such I say,
Remember what you read that Christ said, Whatsoever you would that men should
do unto you, so do you unto them, etc. Be you willing to put this into
practice, that it may appear you would learn of Christ; for it is not he that
says Lord, Lord, but he that does the will of the heavenly Father.

Is there any thing more equal and just then that all men should hire and pay
their own Ministers ( alias servants?) Would you not have that liberty, and be
so done unto?

And were this way speedily put in practice, (though but for a time) you would
see this work so great a change in men's minds and manners, as diverse will not
yet believe though it be told them, or never so plainly demonstrated to them,
but rather take offense because of some self-interests; and herein I beseech
you to take diligent heed, lest any of you should be exalted in your selves,
and think this a kind of arrogance in me, or disparagement to your Wisdoms, or
that you have not need of Monitors in these times when so great things have
been done and suffered upon this very account of Liberty, and when the Lord
Jesus Christ (with thousands of his Saints) rides on gloriously, conquering,
and to conquer, treading down all Rule, and all Authority (contrary to him)
under his feet, that which many wise men and Kings have desired to see, and yet
have not seen it; which the Martyrs in the Marian days, (under the bloody
Prelates and Priests) lifted up their hearts and hands to God for, with strong
cries (as we have cause to believe) frying in the fire; and many others in some
of your days have freely also parted with their mortal lives for, dyed in
faith, but enjoyed not these promises, God (in mercy) having provided better
things for us in these times; Times I say, wherein the worst of men are made
manifest, wherein the blade springs up, and the Tares appear; Times wherein the
Lord gives people for his people, even Nations for their lives, that Christ
Jesus may rule and reign in righteousness, and bring forth his people with joy,
his chosen with gladness. There has been times when some of you (at least)
have sought him, and would have owned him in any appearance; refuse him not now
in his embraces and tenders of love in those that have embraced him, though he
does appear in a despised people; (where none of the wise men of this world
looked for him) to whom he is become a Son and a Shield, their Righteousness,
Strength, and exceeding great Reward; -- Let it appear if your delight be in
the Saints that are on the earth, in such as excel in virtue.

In the Apostles days, and some years since, it is evident that the one, only
true, pure, and undefiled Religion, was a plain thing, (though a great mystery
of godliness) and well understood and known (by the professors thereof) to come
down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness nor shadow of
changing, who of his own will begets sons and daughters with the Word of Truth,
etc. which is his work in the conscience, in the soul, wherein the Saints
obeyed him with diligence and delight. But since men have invented forms of
words in their own wills, they have departed from the light, and lost the
substance and power of godliness, and become strangers to the life of God,
through the ignorance in them, because of the blindness of their minds, the
great things of his law seeming to them a strange thing; The true light of
Christ in the conscience, in the soul, that whereby (being ascended up on high)
he draws all men unto him, is despised and evil spoken of by such as satisfy
themselves with reports, and a sound of words without life; As for instance,
let every man consider seriously in that called Baptism, It has been often said
and repeated, That therein you make a solemn Vow, Promise, and Profession, That
you will forsake the Devil and all his works, the vain pomps and glory of the
world, with all covetous desires of the same, and the carnal desires of the
flesh, that you will not follow nor be led by them; and that you will not be
ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ crucified; But manfully fight under his
Banner against Sin, the World, and the Devil, and so continue Christ's faithful
Soldiers and Servants, to your lives end, dying unto sin, and living unto
righteousness, daily mortifying all evil and corrupt affections, following the
example of Christ, to be made like unto him, etc. and yet how most live in
their lusts, pride, filth, and all manner of abominations, (like the fool that
said in his heart, There is no God) using the true words of Christ, That unless
a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; praying also,
That God would grant that which by nature you cannot have, etc. When will you
deal truly with God and your own souls, that your own and your Teachers
hypocrisy may be (by you) clearly seen, and the great, Athiests of this age
made manifest, that can, or dare so to handle holy things without feeling?

And lastly, take this for a Maxim, that wheresoever any earthly King, Prince,
Monarch, Potentate, Power or Authority (be he, or they never so wise, learned,
or religious) shall establish any Religion, (so called) Worship, or Discipline,
or be extolled, styled, deemed, esteemed, or taken to be Head of the Church,
Defender of the Faith; or shall take upon him, or them, to give Commands or
Directions concerning the Worship and Service of God, (according to his, or
their best Wit, Skill and Cunning) that is an Usurpation upon the Prerogative
and Authority of Christ Jesus, the Head of his Body the Church, King of Saints,
and the one Lawgiver, able to save and to destroy; and such Religion and Faith
(thereby acquired) stands in the Wisdom and Authority of man, and not in the
power of God, being Antichristian, deceitful, and vain, whereby the people
become vicious and wickedly hypocritical, and that Religion and
Church Government (with the Commands, Doctrines, and Opinions so established)
serve for Political ends, silenceth the Voice of Christ in peoples souls and
consciences, and causes them to become formal, frequent and unruly talkers of
God, Christ, and the Saints conditions; (as they have read, or heard say)
contenders about words and questions, boasting themselves in things they never
saw, etc. and is dangerous to civil Society and Government, the occasion of so
great strife, contention, and bloodshed in all Nations and Ages of Antichrist,
and no certain assurance of peace or safety can be there either to Magistrate
or people; but confusion of minds, and each in continual fear of other; This
has caused so great distances between men, so much wicked State Policy on the
one hand, and Treachery against men in Authority on the other hand,
Distractions and heart-burning one against another, as also such deceit, that
men (for outward peace sake are even necessitated to teach their tongues to
flatter, lie, and dissemble each with other; and it opens a door unto any
person that gets into Authority (by means of the Teachers of such a Religion)
to put the people into discontents against others, and exalt himself to rule
alone by his own will in a tyrannical way over them, or to set the people (one
party against another) to shed each others blood by Wars about such Religion or
Religions, when that may serve to usher in some like design, upon which account
of design (for the most part) is the impressing of men for foreign Wars.

What else makes the persons called Papists, dangerous in a Commonwealth, and
to dwell among? Is it not their established Religion, Church Government, and
Discipline, whereby they esteem, extol, and (by all means) uphold the Pope as
Head of their Church, Defender of their Faith, etc? and slight, scorn, contemn,
hate, and seek to take away the lives of others (differing from them therein)
as Heretics? and have not the Prelates and Priests practices here, been of the
same, or like kind, and Presbyters also out of the same root, of a muzled,
formal, and Antichristians Religion, made, supported, and maintained by man,
and man's Authority, differing from Popery in some Opinions, Observations, and
external performances.

R. H.
The third Month 1655.
THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.


