MEMOIRS OF THE DUTCH Trade In all the STATES, KINGDOMS, and EMPIRES in the
World. SHOWING Its First Rise and prodigious Progress: After what Manner the
Dutch manage, and carry on their Trade, their Dominions and Government in the
Indies. By what Means they have made themselves Masters of all the Trade of
Europe: What Goods and Merchandise are proper for Maritime Traffic, whence
they are to be had, and what Gain and Profit they produce.
A WORK very necessary for all Merchants, and others concerned in Trade.

Done from the French now Printed at Amsterdam.

LONDON: Printed for J. Sackfield in Lincolns-Inn-Square, G. Davis under
Sergeants-Inn in Chancery Lane, and Sold by T. Warner in Pater-Noster-Rore,

THE AUTHOR's PREFACE.
SOME Persons of Honor and Distinction, whom I ought by no means to disoblige,
having engaged me to write something upon Trade, which might give them a
general Idea of it as it regards Politics: I believed nothing would better
answer that End, than to give them a true Notion of the Trade of the Dutch,
which has diffused it self over all Parts of the habitable World, and to show
that it is on Account of Trade that their Republic has such a considerable
Rank amongst the States of Europe.

This was what moved me to undertake this small Treatise; and indeed I write
the more willingly on this Subject of Commerce, because there is nothing, in my
Judgment, seems to be so little understood in France, especially by Persons in
public Employments and high Posts, either in the Courts of Judicature, the
Cabinet, or the Treasury. However, it is certain, Commerce is of so great
Importance, that I make no Difficulty to aver, that according to the present
Conduct of the several States of Europe, there are very few things in
Government which deserve more our Attention than this Article of Commerce.

To be convinced of this Truth, we have nothing else to do, but consider the
Difference there is between those Countries where Trade flourishes, and those
Countries who have none. If we will only remember, that England and Holland,
which (by Reason of their Situation) make so great a Figure in the Affairs of
Europe, regulate their principal Interest always with an Eye to their Commerce;
and this was the principal Motive which caused the last Wars; (that is, the
Security of their Trade,) we shall be entirely satisfied, that Commerce ought
to have no mean Place in modern Politics.

Besides these Considerations (which are particular ones in relation to the
present State of Europe) there are yet others more general, which ought no less
to excite all Princes and their Ministers, and all those who have any Share in
Government, to know thoroughly the Nature of Commerce, and the Maxims which are
necessary to its being well carried on and managed; since (as Bocalin very well
observes) Agriculture and Commerce are the Breasts which suckle and nourish the
State; Truths which ought to be engraven in Letters of Gold in all the
Apartments of Kings, Princes and Statesmen, to induce them to consider
Tradesmen and Merchants according to their Merits. To these I shall add, that a
great State cannot flourish, or indeed be at Peace, if it has not a great
Trade; for it is only by means of Trade it can draw to its self Riches and
Plenty, without which it can undertake nothing advantageous, either to aid and
assist its Allies, or extend its Limits. The great Gustavus Adolphus was so
well convinced of this Truth, that though War was his predominant Passion, yet he
very seriously applied himself to make Trade flourish in his Dominions, and was
used to say, That to put his Soldiers Valor to the Proof, he was often obliged
to have recourse to his Merchants. My Lord Bacon, who was one of the greatest
Politicians of his time, looked upon Merchants to be so necessary, that he
compared them in the State, to the Blood in a Man's Body, Which if it did not
flourish, says he, a Man may possibly have some of his Limbs very strong, but
he would be sure to have empty Veins and a lean Habit of Body. Qui nisi
flouruerit, potest quidem aliquos-Artus habere Robustos, sed Venas vacuas and
Habitum Corporis macrum. It may be proved from Examples almost as old as the
World, that States flourish in Proportion to Commerce; as we may gather from
what the Holy Scriptures teach us, in relation to the Tyrians and Sidonians:
But we need not run so far back into Antiquity for Examples; we need only
consider the surprising Changes which Trade has caused in our Days (if I may so
say) amongst our Neighbors.

The Power of England was once so inconsiderable, before the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, according to Cambden's Observation, that her Predecessors (nay even
her own Father) when they had a mind to put a Fleet to Sea, were obliged to
hire Ships from Hamburgh, Lubeck, Dantzick, Genoa and Venice: But after the
English, by the Care of that able Princess, applied themselves to Traffic, and
by reason of the great Protection she gave to Merchants, it flourished in
Muscovy, in all the Dominions of the Grand Seignior, upon the Coasts of Africa,
the East (or rather the West) Indies, and in almost all other Parts of the
World; that Queen soon became capable of maintaining her self a great Naval
Force, which at last became the Terror of the Ocean and the Narrow Seas, which
made that Nation go and attack, more than once, the Power of Philip the Second,
not only in the New World, but even on the very Coasts of Spain. In short, that
powerful Queen followed so well those Maxims of securing and increasing the
Commerce of all her Subjects, and their Traffic on the footing of her Naval
Force, that she laid those solid Foundations for the increase of Commerce and
Maritime Power of England, two things to which that Nation owes to this Day all
its Strength and Grandeur.

But nothing can come up to what the Dutch have done by Commerce; and it will
ever be a Subject of Astonishment and Wonder, that a handful of Merchants, that
fled into a little Country which produced scarce enough to subsist its new
Inhabitants, should beat down the exorbitant Power of the Spanish Monarchy, and
make that King sue for Peace; that they should lay the Foundation of so mighty
a Republic, which we see at present in some manner to hold the Balance between
all the other Powers of Europe; but what is most wonderful, and what ought most
to surprise us, is, that the Wars never interrupted their Trade, and that it
was in the very heat of War that they laid the Foundations of that of the
East Indies and the Coasts of Africa; and that they should trade with their
Enemies, the Spaniards, in spite of all the Precautions they took to the
contrary, which very much contributed to the Support of the War.

The States General of the United Provinces, seeing the Industry of these
Merchants was of so great Service to the Republic, protected and favored them
in every thing; and it may be truly said, that without their Assistance they
would never have been able to put so glorious an End to the War as they did. We
see by this what Advantage Commerce is to a State, when it is regulated with
Prudence, and by able Merchants, who have all Protection, and no Constraint.

But what need we go out of France for Examples, to show how important Commerce
is to a Nation: We need only consider the great Things that have been done
under the glorious Reign of our Great Monarch, and the almost infinite Sums
which have been disbursed, as well to support the War against all the Powers of
Europe for above 30 Years, as during the Peace. Could one ever have imagined
this could have been done, without that prodigious Quantity of Money, which
Trade, especially that with Spain, brought into France? For we have no Mines to
supply us. What then would have been the Consequence, had Commerce been
protected and encouraged in France as it ought to have been? I doubt not but in
such Case we might have said of France, what the Holy Scripture said of
Jerusalem, that in the Days of Solomon Gold and Silver were as common as
Stones: If England, by means of the Woollen Manufactures, and by the vent of
her Tin, Lead, and Sea-Coal, has amassed such Riches, what might one not have
believed France would have gained; which, besides her Manufactures of Wool,
Silk, Linen, Hats, Paper, and many other Things, which are eagerly sought
after by all the World, supplies other Countries with Wines, Brandies, Wheat,
Salt, Oil, and Fruits of all sorts, for immense Sums. This Abundance and great
Plenty of our Merchandise, so necessary and useful to our Neighbors, made my
Lord Bellasis say, That if God should one Day make the Turks know what they
could do at Sea, and the French how far they might extend their Commerce, all
Europe would soon fall a Conquest to those Powers.

I shall only give one Instance more, to show how nothing but Commerce can
enrich a Kingdom; let us therefore turn our Eyes to Spain, and it is certain,
that there is no Nation in the World has so little Gold and Silver as the
Spaniards, though those two Metals grow in such prodigious Quantities in their
Dominions; other Nations, notwithstanding, are better provided therewith, on
account of the great Vent their Commodities have in Spain, and the dependent
Kingdoms, which have Occasion for them; and, in short, that great Monarchy has
fallen to Decay, purely for having neglected Commerce, and establishing several
Manufactures in Dominions of so vast and large extent. It was this Negligence
which was one of the principal Springs of the Riches of France; and while
France traded with Spain, she never wanted Gold or Silver, not even during
those long and difficult Wars. Let us only look back and consider what
Condition France was in by the Pyrenean Treaty, notwithstanding a long War of
above twenty five Years, and all those she has since sustained, even to our
Days. It is much to be wished, we would open our Eyes soon enough, and take
Notice of a Matter of so much Importance, and so necessary as Commerce, and
endeavor to know how to take such Measures as may bring to a good Issue that,
on which, in some manner, depends the Happiness of all his Majesty's Subjects,
and the Grandeur of the Nation.

We Frenchmen have been reproached (and perhaps not without some reason) that
the Genius of our Nation was not proper for a foreign Commerce, being quickly
weary of all Undertakings that require a solid and continued Application. But
without deciding this Matter, I shall content my self to say, that there have
been, and yet are in France, Persons of very good Abilities and Experience,
necessary for carrying on a vast Trade: Out of several, I shall only mention
Jaques Cover, Superintendent of the Finances, or (in the Language of those
Times) Moneyer to King Charles the Seventh. This Man, who was born at Bourges,
being entirely addicted to Foreign Trade, in a time when scarce any one meddled
with it in France, got prodigious Wealth, which he employed to the best
Advantage in the Service of the King his Master, and the Support of the State.
Matthew Coucy an Historian, his Contemporary, speaks of him after this manner:
'The King (says he) had in his Kingdom a Man of mean Extraction, whose Name was
Jaques Cover, who by his Sense, Vigilance, and good Conduct, so ordered it, as
to undertake trading in Commodities of the hightest Value, which he still
continued to do, notwithstanding his being made Moneyer to King Charles, in
which Office he continued a long while in great Power and Prosperity: He had
under him many Clerks and Factors, who had the Care of these Commodities, to
distribute them through all Christian States and Kingdoms. He had at Sea a great
many large Vessels, maintained at his own Expense and Charge, which traded to
the Levant, Egypt and Barbary, to freight themselves with all sorts of rich and
fine Commodities and Merchandise, by Leave of the Sultan and Turks, paying them
some little Duty as an Acknowledgment. He caused to be brought from those
Countries, Gold and Silver Stuffs, Silks of all Sorts and Colors, Furs for Men
and Women of several Kinds; as Martins and Sables, etc. and other excellent
Curiosities, which Goods he sold by his Commissaries and Factors at the Hotel
Royalle, in all the principal Cities of the Kingdom, and in foreign Courts,
where the People, surprised with Admiration, soon bought them up at a good
Price. He had at least three or four Hundred Commissaries or Factors at his
Command, and gained himself more in one Year, than all the Merchants of the
Kingdom. He was in Possession of the Office of Superintendant of the Finances,
when King Charles undertook the Conquest of Normandy in the Year 1449; of which
Conquest this famous Merchant was the chief Cause; for he was the first that
encouraged the King to that great Undertaking, and furnished him with an Army,
by offering him several Milions, which was executed after the Manners as the
King best liked, and for which he was highly applauded and complimented by all
the Princes and Lords of the Court; and yet for all that Expense, his Wealth
was almost invaluable.'

Heaven could once have given us, and yet might have given us another Jaquez
Cover, and then we should have entertained greater Hopes than ever to bring the
Trade of France to its highest Pitch, and make our Nation the most flourishng
in the World. The Merchants of France, to accomplish this, want only an
experienced Leader; a Person of much Knowledge, one that has a great Foresight,
an enterprizing Genius, and continual Application and Perseverance; a Person of
great Credit and Power, that he may protect those who traffic under him, and
are his Commissioners, in whatever Place of the World.

It was by such Means as these, that the Dutch have carried Commerce to the
highest Degree, as may be seen in the following Memoirs, which I desire those
who will give themselves the trouble to read, would not think to be the simple
Speculation of a Man of Letters, but the true Sentiments of the most able
Merchants of Holland, whom one ought ever to look upon as the true Oracles of
Commerce; it was amongst them chiefly that I learned what I know of this rich
and important Subject; and I seriously declare, that after having seen the
Greatness of their Trade, and the considerable Influence that this famous
Republic has had for many Years past in all the Affairs of Europe, I was
entirely convinced, that Commerce is one of the principal Parts of Policy,
which made me resolved to study very seriously an Affair, to which before I
applied my self out of pure Curiosity: In short, I resolved to be instructed as
much as possible, not only in the Trade of Holland, but also in that of the
English, Portugueze and other Nations; and I was the more invited to this,
because it is very visible that we have failed very much in our Projects of
Commerce, in not well knowing and considering the Nature of that of our
Neighbors; several Voyages, that I have happily made to several Parts of
Europe, have much contributed to make me know their way of Trade, having had
the Happiness to converse with Persons of the greatest Ability where I have
been. Besides, I have spared no Pains or Cost to have good Memoirs, and the
following Treatise will be a sufficient Proof of what I say.

These various and rare Truths, which I have with much Pains and Expense
acquired the Knowledge of, gave me Courage to put them into Writing, and treat
of a Subject so little understood. If I find these Memoirs are well received, I
may be induced to make considerable Additions, and present the World with
others relating to the Commerce of other Nations.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS Contained in this BOOK.
CHAP. I. WHAT Condition the Trade of Europe was in from the Year 1000, to the
End of the last Century, that it is almost entirely managed, and carried on by
the Dutch. Page 1 CHAP. II. Of the Origin and Causes of the vast Trade of
Holland. p. 18 CHAP. III. Of the Fishery, Manufactures, and Navigation of the
United Provinces. p. 22 CHAP. IV. Of the Dutch Trade in the North, Muscovy and
Norway. p. 34 CHAP. V. Of the Baltic Trade. p. 41 SECTION I. Remarks on what
Commodities the Dutch export to the North. p. 50 CHAP. VI. Of the Trade of the
Elbe, Wezer, Rhine, and the Maese. p. 59 CHAP. VII. Of the Trade of the Spanish
Netherlands. p. 64 CHAP. VIII. Of the Trade with England. p. 67 CHAP. IX. Of
the Trade with France. p. 70 CHAP. X Of the Trade with Spain. p. 80 CHAP. XI.
Of the Trade with Portugal. p. 98 CHAP. XII. Of the Mediterranean or Streights
Trade. p. 103 SECTION II. Of the Trade of Italy. p. 113 CHAP. XIII. Of the
East India Trade. p. 116 SECTION III. Of the Means the Dutch took to establish
themselves in the Indies. p. 121 SECTION IV. Of the Dutch Trade in several
Countries in Asia. p. 134 SECTION V. Remarks on what Commodities the Dutch
bring into Europe from the East Indies. p. 152 CHAP. XIV. Of the Government of
the Company, both in Europe and Asia, its Power, Policy, and Profits. p. 173
CHAP. XV. Of the Trade of the Dutch Company in the West Indies. p. 184 A true
Report made to the States General, by Daniel Braems (Book-keeper General in
Batavia, who commanded the rich India Fleet that arrived in Holland in the Year
School.) concerning the true State of the Affairs of the East India Company, at
his departure with the said Fleet. 196 Banda. p. 197 Amboina. p. 199 Ternate.
p. 201 Macassar. p. 202 Timor. p. 204 Siam. p. 205 Japan. p. 207 China. p. 210
Tonquin. p. 211 Malacca. p. 212 Sumatra. p. 213 Padangue. p. 214 Bengal. p. 216
Coromandel. p. 217 Ceylan. p. 221 Malabar. p. 222 Surate. p. 223 Persia. p. 224
Batavia. p. 225 Bantam. p. 228

MEMOIRS OF THE DUTCH TRADE In all Parts of the WORLD.
CHAP. I. What Condition the Trade of Europe was in from the Year 1000, to the
End of the last Century, that it is almost entirely managed, and carried on by
the Dutch.
THE present Trade of this powerful Republic being formed out of that of many
Nations, it will not be improper briefly to observe the several Changes the
Trade or Commerce of Europe underwent, and on what Footing it stood, at the
time the Dutch began to form themselves into a Commonwealth.

It is about Six Hundred Years ago, that Trade, which was almost ruined by
those continual Wars that troubled Europe, began to revive and flourish under
the Italians and Germans. The former of these, after the Ruin of the Roman
Empire, went into the Levant for Spices, Druggs, Silks, and all the other
valuable Commodities those Eastern Climes produced, to dispose of, and sell
them again in all Parts of Europe. Alexandria, and some other Ports of Syria,
were the Places where this Trade was principally carried on, and which were
supplied from time to time, with all these Sorts of Commodities, by the
Asiaticks, both by Land and Sea, and by the Persians and Arabians, by means of
the Red Sea; and this was the constant Practice both of Greeks and Romans,
especially since the Reign of Ptolomy surnamed Philadelphus, as I have
elsewhere dicoursed of more at large, in my Treatise Of the Commerce of the
Ancients.

The Italians having added to their Levant Trade the Manufactures of Silk which
the People of Europe were very fond of, made such considerable Progress
therein, as to lay up immense Riches, by means of which they formed those
powerful Republics, some of which subsist to this very Day, with great
Splendor and Magnificence, the happy Effects of their ancient, and long
established Commerce.

The Italian Trade however, properly speaking, was only what remained of that
which the Romans formerly drove with Asia, but that of Germany owed its Rise
entirely to the Italians.

Toward the End of the twelfth Century, the Towns of Germany situated on the
Baltic Sea, and those great Rivers that run into it, were famous for their
trading all over the neighboring Provinces; but as this Trade was often
disturbed by Pirates, and those frequent Wars that at that time troubled the
North, they united themselves together for their mutual Defense, to secure and
protect their Commerce, from what might disturb, or annoy it for the future.
These Towns thus united, and which increased to about 72, or thereabouts, were
called Hanse Towns, from the German Word Amsee, or Ansee, which signifies upon
the Sea, and their Inhabitants called Osterlins, that is, Easterlings, Names
afterward very well known all over Europe; and these Towns for a long while
commanded all the Trade and Navigation of the North, which at that time were
almost entirely unknown to the other People of Europe, except the Italians.
These things made them so powerful, that for a long time they were the sole
Arbiters of Peace and War, all over the North. But this Trade, which was for
two Centuries successively the most flourishing that ever was, began to decay
about the Year 1500, on Account of their falling out with one another, and of
which mutual Divisions the English and Dutch made such considerable Advantage
(especially the latter) that it fell almost entirely into their Hands, and has
continued so ever since, notwithstanding all the vigorous Efforts these Hanse
Towns have made from time to time, to retrieve it. So true it is, that when
Commerce has once changed its Course, it is the most difficult thing in the
World to bring it back again.

By this one may see the State and Condiof the Trade of Europe, during the last
Age, and how it was divided between the Italians and Germans. But the
Portugueze, toward the End of the Fifteenth Century, having found out a new
Passage to the East Indies, by the Cape of Good Hope, all the Trade which the
Venetians drove to the East Indies for Spices, and other Commodities of the
East, soon fell into their Hands; so that Lisbon became the chief Magazine, or
Storehouse, for these Goods, whence the rest of all Europe might be
conveniently furnished and supplied. Soon after the Portugueze made the
Discovery of the East Indies, Cadiz and Seville were full of all the rich and
valuable Commodities the new World (or America) produced. Gold and Silver
growing more common in Europe, and Navigation every Day coming to a greater
Perfection, Trade grew more lively and flourishing, and from that time all
Nations in Europe strove to trade with the Portugueze and Spaniards, whom they
looked upon as the sole Masters of Gold and Silver.

The Commodities of the North were found of extreme Necessity to the People of
Europe, who lived toward the South; for besides Wheat and other Grain, they
had from thence other Commodities, as Materials proper for building Ships,
Navigation, and the like; and the People of the North, on the other Hand, stood
as much in need of the Commodities of the South, as Wine, Salt, Oil, etc. But
then the Voyage from the Baltic to the Mediterranean, being very long, and
full of Difficulties; (which yet have since been found not to be insuperable)
the advantageous and happy Situation of the Ports of Flanders between the North
and the South; the Manufacturies of Linen and Woollen Cloth, which flourished
in those Parts since the tenth Century, together with the free Fairs of these
Towns, tempted the Merchants both of the North and South to set up their
Storehouses, or Magazines for Goods, at Bruges, and afterward at Antwerp, by
means of which the Exchange of Goods with each other, was carried on with
greater Ease and Convenience, and Half the Expense and Trouble of the Voyage
entirely saved.

The great Trade and Manufactures of the Low Countries made Antwerp
indisputably the most considerable Town in the World for Wealth and Commerce:
But as the Trade of Amsterdam is entirely owing to the Ruin of Antwerp, it will
not be amiss to look a little farther back, the better to discover the true
Origin of the Commerce and Manufactures of the Low Countries, which were once
so famous throughout the whole World.

Caesar observes in his Commentaries, that the People of the Low Countries were
very laborious and industrious, both for Invention and Imitation. His Words
are, Est summae genus solertiae, atque ad ad omnia imitanda quae a quoquo
traduntur aptissimum. Lib. 7. These People always were, and are to this very
Day, the same as they were in Caesar's time; and it must be owned, that they
have brought the Art of Weaving to its highest Perfection, not to mention
several others for which the World is indebted to them. It is said the Flemings
were the first of the Northern People that made all Sorts of Woollen and Linen
Cloths, their Country yielding the finest Flax in the World, and England
producing the most excellent and best of Wool. Baldwin surnamed the Young,
Count of Flanders, contributed very much to the Advancement of his Subjects
Commerce, by setting up about the Year 960, free Fairs in several Towns of his
Dominions, which drew thither vast Numbers from the neighboring Provinces, who
came to furnish themselves with these Commodities, and indeed they dealt for
vast Quantities, there being no Duty, or Custom to be paid for any Goods
exported thence. This Woollen and Linen Trade, which at first began in France
and Germany, very much increased for three Centuries; during all which time
nothing was more flourishing than the Trade of Flanders.

The Successors of Baldwin having laid several Duties, or Customs, on these
free Fairs, and the Flemish Manufactures, to raise Money in order to defray the
Expenses they were at, in several Wars with France, was the real Cause that the
Woolen and Linen Cloth-Workers, whose Numbers were almost infinite, made
several cruel Insurrections in Ghent, in the Year 1301. And others of these
Workmen, who lived in the open Country, finding but little Shelter there in War
time, went away in great Numbers to Tillemont and Louvain, from whence they
dispersed afterward into several Parts of Brabant.

The Dukes of Brabant, one would have imagined, might have taken Warning by the
ill Conduct of the Flemings, which was attended with so many Inconveniences;
but on the contrary, they took the very same Measures, and in their Turn, laid
several Duties upon Manufactures, which likewise caused Insurrections in
several Places of Brabant, particularly at Louvain, where the Cloth-Workers
having killed several Magistrates, to escape unpunished, fled some of them into
England, and others into Holland. Those who got into England, gave the English
the first Insight into Cloth Making, and showed them how to work their own
Wool, to the great Detriment of the Trade of the Low Countries; for it is
certain, that to the Year 1404, and even since the English sold their Wool to
the Flemings, and took their Cloths in Payment.

Not only the Cloth-Workers of Brabant went into Holland, but a great many from
Flanders did the same, and settled chiefly at Leyden, where that Art of
Cloth-Working has continued ever since, to shine out in its full Luster.

Thus we plainly see, how laying on too high Duties was what removed good Part
of the Manufacturies of Flanders into Brabant, and from that Province into
those beyond the Maese, and into England, where they have raised the Woollen
Manufacture to the highest Degree of Perfection it can possibly admit of.

The English and Dutch being very desirous to keep to themselves these
important and valuable Manufacturies, took particular Care not to burden them
with too heavy Customs, or Taxes. We shall explain in another Place the Reason
of this their wise Policy and Conduct.

About the Year 1400, the Art of Salting, or Pickling of Herrings, was found
out by a Fleming of Pierulem, which much encouraged this Sort of Fishery, as
being of very great Advantage, and together with the Manufactures, made
Navigation flourish in that large Province, and of Consequence very much
increased their Trade and Commerce. The Towns of Sluice and Bruges were the two
chief Places where the Flemings at that Time drove on the Herring-Trade with
Foreigners. The former of which having a fine Harbor, both for Largeness of
Extent, and safe Riding, capable of containing 500 Ships, was continually full
of Ships from different Nations that traded there as well as at Bruges; for, in
Reality, Sluice is no more than the Port of Bruges, which Towns have a
Communication with each other, by means of a large Canal, Bruges is at present,
one of the largest Towns in Flanders, but has lost much of its Splendor, since
the Year 1487; for at that Time, there was scarce a Nation in Europe, how
inconsiderable soever, that had not their proper Magazine, or Storehouse, and
a Company established there for Trade; as the English, French, Scotch,
Castilian, and Portugueze, the Companies of Arragon, Catalonia, Biscay, Venice,
Florence, Genoa, Lucca, Milan, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, and all the Hanse
Towns. These last, about the Year 1262, set up in that Town their greatest
Storehouse, which gave a considerable Increase to Trade. It was to this Place
that the several Nations just now mentioned imported the Commodities of their
respective Countries, which they exchanged with each other, or for Flanders
Linen.

This mighty Trade of Bruges drew thither Workmen of all Sorts, which made it
extremely rich and famous. Nothing can give us a better Idea of the Riches of
this Town, than what History tells us of a Queen of France, who was Consort to
Philip the Fair; who coming to Bruges in the Year 1301, seeing the Women so
richly dressed, could not in a Sort of Indignation forbear speaking these Words,
I thought I had been the only Queen in this Place, but I see there are above
Six Hundred.

The immense Riches of the People of Bruges on Account of their vast Trade,
made them not only grow insolent and unjust to foreign Merchants (so that they
left the Place) but also to their Sovereign, which was the very Ruin of their
Trade, that had flourished in an extraordinary Manner to the Year 1487, when a
War broke out between the Flemings and the Archduke Maximilian their Prince,
which lasted about ten Years, and expired with the Death of the Trade of
Bruges. The People of Antwerp and Amsterdam growing uneasy to see all the Trade
of the Low Countries center in Bruges, assisted the Archduke Maximilian in
chastising that Town for their Rebellion; and in Recompense for such
Assistance, obtained from that Prince all the Privileges of Commerce formerly
enjoyed by Bruges. Thus was that Trade transferred to Antwerp and Amsterdam,
but the greatest Share fell to Antwerp; and every thing after seemed to
contribute to the Increase of its Commerce. The Italians much about that time
having caused the Use of Silk to be more common in Europe, imported great
Quantities to Antwerp. The Portugueze and Spaniards having discovered both
Indies, imported Spices, and all other the rich Commodities produced by those
vast and wealthy Climates; the English set up a Storehouse for their
Merchandise, and the Hanse Towns, who after the thirteenth Century, had settled
one of their four Magazines of Goods at Bruges, removed it to Antwerp, where
they caused to be built that stately Townhouse which remains to this Day.

The Persecutions raised in Germany on the Account of Religion, under the Reign
of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, in France under Henry the Second, and in
England under Queen Mary, forced a World of People thither, as well as Trade,
and particularly increased that of Antwerp. The vast Concourse of all the
principal trading Nations made this Town the most celebrated Storehouse, or
Magazine in all Europe, if not of the whole World. In a Word, Antwerp was then,
almost what Amsterdam is now; for about the Year 1550, it was a common thing to
see 2500 Ships in the Scheld, laden with all Sorts of Merchandise. By this it
evidently appears, that Commerce may flourish in a Monarchy, as well as in a
Free State, especially if good Management be not wanting; for never any thing
flourished more than the Manufactures and Commerce of the Low Countries, under
the Government of four Princes of the House of Burgundy, and two of the House
of Austria. I lay a long while under that old vulgar Error, that Common Wealths
were most proper for carrying on a considerable Trade; but I altered my
Opinion, after I had more narrowly examined things, and heard this Matter
discussed by some of the ablest Merchants and Politicians of England and
Holland, and after I had seriously reflected on the happy Situation and
Fruitfulness of France, the Industry of its Inhabitants, and the Nature of its
Government, I was fully convinced (and I think it would not be a hard Matter to
convince others) that Commerce may be made to flourish there, as well as in any
Republic whatever, and by that Means render that Monarchy more powerful than
ever it was yet.

It is certainly the Interest of Princes that Commerce should flourish in their
Dominions; for never were greater things performed by Sovereigns than when the
Trade of their Subjects has afforded them the Means to put them in Execution,
which may easily be proved by infinite Examples both ancient and modern.

Trade has the only attractive Quality to draw into any State, Gold and Silver,
which are the Primum Mobile of all Actions. This is so true, that Spain, in
whose Dominions these two Metals are produced in greatest Abundance, is very
often straightened for other Necessities of Life, and that purely for having
neglected Trade and Manufactures, and all the Mines of America would scarce be
sufficient to pay for all the Merchandise and Provisions that the other Nations
of Europe bring thither.

Trade (which has not any Enemy so mortal as Constraint) changed its Residence
as soon as the Spaniards began to deprive the seventeen Provinces of the Low
Countries of their Privileges. The Inquisition which was designed to be set up
by the Duke of Alva, and the Cruelty he exercised in governing those rich
Provinces, forced such infinite Numbers to leave them, that in a few Months,
above a Hundred Thousand Families retired into other Parts. After this, the
Prince of Parma having in the Year 1584, besieged Antwerp, gave a terrible Blow
to its Trade; for the Scheld during that long Siege, being continually blocked
up, the Merchants who used to come and trade in that Town, went elsewhere. In
short, the bad Politics of the King of Spain completed the Ruin of the Trade
of Antwerp, as well as of the other Towns in the Low Countries, that were under
his Jurisdiction. For the Views he had in humbling that Town whose great Riches
gave him Umbrage, made him, after its Reduction, neglect to keep the Scheld
open, intending by so doing, to lessen its Trade, in hopes that most of it
would then diffuse it self over the other Towns in the Low Countries. But his
Hopes were frustrated: for being engaged in almost continual Wars with his
Neighbors and not taking due Care to free the Seas from Rovers and Enemies, it
so fell out, that the Towns of Flanders, which used to follow the Fishery and
Sea Trade, lost both, so far were they from getting amongst them any Share of
the Trade of Antwerp. This made the whole Fishery remove to Holland, and the
Manufactures of Flanders into other Countries.

One third Part of the Workmen and Merchants, who wrought, or dealt in Silks,
Damasks, Taffeties, and Stockings, etc. went to settle in England, because none
in that Country knew at that time to work in those Manufactures. A great many
went to Leyden, and most of them that dealt in Linen, went to settle in
Harlem, not to mention those who went to Amsterdam.

It is astonishing to think, that the Merchants of Antwerp, in leaving a Place
the most convenient in the World for Trade, should make choice of one seeming
the most improper in all Europe. One would have rather thought that the
Neighborhood of England, whose Situation and Harbors are so admirably fitted
for Trade, might have invited them thither.

Those Merchants who were of the reformed Religion, would have had a greater
Inclination to settle there, than in any other Place whatsoever, in hopes not
only to live more at quiet, but also on Account of the Situation, which is very
advantageous for trading with all Europe. But they wanted to be in a Country
where Foreigners were not obliged to pay such Customs, and other Taxes, which
the native English are free from; for in England, it seems, at the time,
Foreigners and all their Posterity paid double what the Natives did; besides,
Foreigners were excluded all Companies or Societies of Trade, so that none were
allowed to work either as Partners, or Masters, unless at such Trades as the
Natives were unacquainted with, so that none went thither but such as wrought
in Serges, Damasks, Stockings, etc.

Most of these, and the like Inconveniences, they were also sure to meet with
in the Hanse Towns, which partly was the Cause that almost the whole Trade of
Antwerp came to be established in the Towns of Holland, which were free from
all those Obstacles. The Situation of these neighboring Towns, and several
other Considerations contributed very much to draw thither, especially to
Amsterdam, all this vast and profitable Trade.

After the Union of the seven Provinces, and the World saw this new Republic
defend it self with Success against Spain, under the Conduct of the Prince of
Orange, all those who hated the Spanish Government retired thither as to an
Asylum, from its Rigor and Severity.

The Persecutions which Spain renewed with too great Severity in several
Places, against those who had embraced the new Opinions, peopled the United
Provinces, with a World of excellent Artisans, who set up there several new
Manufactures, and brought those they had already, to great Perfection. The
Civil Wars that lasted so long in France, then in Germany, and last of all in
England, augmented considerably the Inhabitants of the United Provinces, and
the Wars which broke out in the Year 1634, in the Low Countries, between France
and Spain, made likewise great Numbers of Merchants and Workmen come into
Holland; for the richest Villages of Flanders, Brabant, and the Country beyond
the Maese, being ruined by Winter Quarters, the Inhabitants themselves left
them, because the most trading Towns had lost all their Commerce, and the
Carriage of Goods was liable to such imminent Dangers.

All this caused not only the Towns of Holland to grow extraordinarily
populous, but doubly increased their Trade, as having a prodigious Vent for
almost all Sorts of their Manufactures and other Commodities, during the
Continuance of that War.

But after all, nothing has increased the Inhabitants of Holland, and their
Manufactures, so much as the French Protestants, who were almost all of them
Merchants or Artisans, and came thither about twenty or thirty Years since.

To conclude, it must be acknowledge for incontestable Truth, that whenever
Trade is clogged or constrained in any Government, it will retire to others
where it may have greater Safety, and be more favorably used, which Happiness,
at that time, it could no where find so well as in Holland.

Having here clearly explained and observed the principal Motives which induced
so many Merchants and Artisans, to go in Millions to the United Provinces, let
us now consider what their Commerce is, how they carry it on, and a Country
producing nothing necessary to Trade and Navigation, is become the Center of
both: For Holland produces nothing at all necessary, except Butter, Cheese, and
Clay to make Delft Ware, or other Eastern Ware, and this is well worth the
Observation of the Reader that is any ways versed in Politics.

CHAP. II. Of the Origin and Causes of the vast Trade of Holland.
IT is certain, that some Manufactures were set up in several Places of
Holland, even while the Hanse Towns commanded all the Trade and Navigation of
Europe.

The Art of Pickling Herrings having been found out, as I before observed,
about 250 Years ago, and the Ruin of the Trade of Bruges increasing that of
Holland, though it was but then inconsiderable, in Comparison to what it was
afterward by the Destruction of that of Antwerp; the prodigious Numbers of
People that left the Low Countries, together with the vast Riches they brought
thither (not to mention those who came thither from other Countries, where
Liberty of Conscience was not permitted) were of Necessity obliged to trade by
Sea, to procure for themselves Necessaries for Life, the new Country they were
come to inhabit being but of small Extent, and not producing near what they had
an absolute Occasion for. This Barrenness of Holland was one of the principal
Causes of the great Trade we see carried on there at this time; for the great,
and incredible Numbers of People who fled thither for Security, had no other
Way to subsist, and to pay those heavy Taxes so often laid upon them, in
Defense of their Liberty against the Spaniards.

These two powerful Motives, the Preservation of Life and Liberty, caused the
Inhabitants of the United Provinces to carry their Goods to all Parts of the
World, where they had any Prospect of Gain. About the Year 1625, they traded to
the Kingdoms of the North; to Germany, Poland, Muscovy, England, to the Spanish
Low Countries, and to Portugal, under Spanish Colors, or of any other Nation
in Alliance with Philip II. But the Spaniards afterward having by their
Severities and Vexations deterred the Dutch from so much as attempting to trade
with either of these two Nations, found to their no small Loss, the fatal
Consequences of their mistaken Politics; for the Seamen and Traders, who had
by the Interruption of Trade with Spain and Portugal, lost all Manner of
Employment, were resolved not to sit still, but hazard all, rather than live
without Trading. With this Resolution they went to visit the Coasts of America
and Africa, and their adjacent Islands; at last, through almost infinite Dangers,
they penetrated into the East Indies.

By means of these several Voyages they got, at first Hand, the greatest Part
of those rich Commodities which they before used to furnish themselves with at
second Hand, at Lisbon and Seville; and their famous East India Company, which
began in the Year 1602, behaved themselves so dexterously, that they possessed
themselves of the greatest Part of the best Places the Portugueze were Masters
of in the Indies, and of almost all their Commerce too in those Parts.

The Truce of twelve Years being concluded in the Beginning of the Year 1609,
between the Spaniards and the United Provinces, the States General omitted
nothing all that time to increase their Trade where it was already established,
or to establish it where they never had established it before.

In the Year 1612, the Grand Seignior allowed the Dutch a free Trade throughout
all his Dominions. This Treaty of Alliance with the Turks, gave a free and
favorable Access to their Ships, all over the Mediterranean. About that time
the King of Morocco, and the Emperor of Japan permitted them also to trade in
all their Dominions, since which this Republic might boast of having extended
her Commerce over all Parts of the old World, except China.

The War breaking out again in the Year 1621, between Spain and the United
Provinces, their East India Company pushed on their Conquests and Commerce in
the East, with surprising Success, at the Expense of Spain and Portugal. Their
West India Company, which began in the Year 1623, notwithstanding the War,
besides those immense Sums they gained by taking of the Spanish Plate Fleets,
and those considerable Advantages they made by ruining their Men of War,
possessed themselves of Part of Brazil, and the most important Places the
Portugueze held in Guinea, and the other Countries of the Western Coast of
Africa; and could they but have kept the Conquests they made in Brazil, it is
highly probable they would have been entire Masters of it, and in a few Years
would have got into their own Hands, all the Trade of the Spaniards and
Portugueze in that Place.

The United Provinces having obtained of the Spaniards very great Advantages
for their Commerce, at the Peace of Munster, which was concluded in the Year
1648, they pushed it on with the utmost Vigor during that Calm their Republic
then enjoyed, and got together by that means, immense Riches, which put them
into a Condition to support the War which they had with England and France, in
the Year 1672. In a Word, this famous Republic has (notwithstanding the Wars)
extended her Trade over all Parts of the World, where she has, and still does
maintain it with such prudent Conduct, and considerable Authority, that she may
serve as a Model for all other trading Nations.

Before we enter into a particular Description of the Trade of the United
Provinces, in all Parts of the World, It will be very necessary to speak
somewhat of their Fishery, Manufactures, and Navigation.

CHAP. III. Of the Fishery, Manufactures, and Navigation of the United
Provinces.
IT is certain, as I have already observed, that there were some Manufactures
established in Holland, long before their Fishery, Traffic, and Navigation;
but then this was so inconsiderable a Matter, that it may be truly said, that
the Fishery gave Birth to their Traffic and Navigation, This was the Opinion
of Monsieu De Wit, and the most understanding Persons in Holland.

The Subjects of the United Provinces fish on their own Sea Coasts, Lakes, and
Rivers, and take vast Quantities of Cod, Haddock, Salmon, Soles, and other
Sorts of Fish, and how considerable that Fishery may be, and how great the
Quantities are which they carry to foreign Countries, yet it may truly be
affirmed, that it is scarce any thing in Comparison of their Herring Fishery,
which in the Provinces of Holland and Zealand employs above twenty Thousand
Men. This Fishing, which continues from Mid-summer Day to the 14th of
September, and from thence it holds to the 25th of November, is chiefly on the
Northern Coasts of England, off of Yarmouth, Wintertownness, and the River
Humber.

From the very Beginning of this Republic, the States General have always used
their utmost Endeavors to secure their Countrymen the Herring Fishery. Their
Regulations for that Purpose are wonderful, and the Orders almost innumerable.
They take great Care to throw all away that are not extremely good, and to salt
the others in time, that the Salt be good, and the Quantity sufficient; that
the Parcels be sweet and clean, and have no manner of Defect that may spoil the
Fish. In short, it must be owned, that the Dutch omit nothing that may keep up
the Value and Reputation this Commodity has acquired by passing through their
Hands.

It ought not to be thought strange, that the States General are so very
careful of their Herring Fishing, and of their good Way of curing them, since
it is a Matter of so great Importance, as to be taken Notice of in all their
Proclamations, for the Continuance of Commerce and the Fishery.

The Herring Fishery is the greatest Trade, and the best Gold Mine belonging to
the United Provinces: This enriches so many Families, and employs so many
People; this makes them build so many Ships in Holland, which they send to all
Parts laden with this Commodity. They sell vast Quantities to the neighboring
Countries, and are very often paid in ready Money; it is this which increases
their Commerce, their Privileges, and even their Revenues.

Monsieur Matteren assures us that in the Year 1601, in three Days time there
sailed out from Holland 1500 Busses to fish for Herrings. A Buss is a Vessel
built on Purpose for this Sort of Fishing, and some of them are from 50 to 60
Tuns.

Sir Walter Rawleigh says, that in the Year 1609, the Dutch employed on the
Coast of England in this Fishery, 3000 Ships, and 15000 Men; and a Dutch Author
who was employed by Messieurs De Wit, tells us, that a little while before the
Province of Holland alone sent out every Year, in time of Peace, above 1000
Busses, and 150 lesser Vessels.

It is said, that the Dutch fish and sell every Year above 300000 Tuns of Fish,
which at 200 Florins per Tun, brings in every Year 75 Millions of Livers, of
which 52 Millions turn (as they say) to the Country's Profit, and the 23 other
Millions that remain, go toward defraying the Charges of such Fishery; so that
if one considers that all the Ships employed in Fishing are built in Holland;
that all the Cordage, Sails, Nets, and Barrels, are made there, and that they
find their own Salt and Provisions for the Subsistence of this great Number of
Fishermen, one may easily comprehend, that this Employment only, maintains an
incredible Number of Men and Families, not including all those who are employed
to transport these Fish to almost all the Kingdoms and Countries of the World.

These Busses sail generally from Dort, Rotterdam, Delft, Schiedam,
Vlaerdinguen, the Brill, Maeslandshies, Enchuisen, and some other Places of
less Note.

This Art of Pickling and Barrelling Herring, as I said before, was found out
by a Heming of Bierulem, whose Name was William Buerem. He died in the Year
1347, and was buried at Bierulem.

Charles the Fifth coming to that Town, caused a Tomb to be erected to honor
the Memory of that Man who had procured so great an Advantage to his Country.

To the Fishery in general may be added that of the Whale, the Oil and Fins of
which serve for several Uses. They fish for the Whales on the Coasts of
Greenland and Spitsburg, which is but seven or eight Days Voyage with a South
Wind, a thing very frequent in Holland.

Whale Fishing is only once a Year. There sails from Amsterdam, and the
neighboring Towns, from the Maose and Wind, above 200 Ships from 200 to 250
Tuns Burden, having each 35 or 40 Men aboard to be employed in the Fishery.

The largest Whales yield about 7 or 8 Tun of Oil: This Oil thickens like
Hogs-Lard, and they use great Quantities of it in the United Provinces,
especially the poor and laboring People, to burn in Lamps, and in making green
Soap, a thing only in Use in the Low Countries, Artois and Picardy. Those that
make Shammy Leather of Bucks, Goats, Sheeps and Elks Skins, consume great
Quantities of this Oil, which is the most proper for this Son of Dressing
Leather, of any Oil whatsoever and therefore they cannot well be without it.

The Manufactures in the United Provinces employ as many People as the Fishery.
It is incredible how many get their Livelihood by both. I have before observed,
that some Manufactures were established before the Fishery but those
Manufactures were then very inconsiderable to what they were afterward. The
Herring Fishery in particular, was so advantageous to the Dutch, that the Sale
of their Fish brought into their Country, from the Places where they used to
dispose of them, several unwrought Goods, which they got finished at Home by
those vast Numbers of Workmen of all Sorts, who had fled hither from Flanders,
Brabant, France, Germany, and several other Countries, on the Account of
Persecution.

I do not pretend to give an exact Particular of all the Manufactures of the
United Provinces; it would be too prolix for the Brevity of this Treatise. I
shall only say, that it is certain, that in no Kingdom, State, or Country in
the World, they are so numerous and flourishing, as in Holland. I shall take
Notice only of some of the most considerable, and such as sell best in other
Countries.

Though there are Manufactures in several Places of the United Provinces, yet
they flourish most in the Towns of Amsterdam, Leyden, and Harlem; but
Amsterdam, for Number, far exceeds the other two.

In this last Town they make Cloths, Camlets, and all Sorts of Woollen and Hair
Stuffs; as also, all Sorts of Silks, Gold and Silver Stuffs and Ribbons, and
are the best made in this Town of any in all the Provinces.

Besides gilt Leather, they work here all other Sorts, as Morocco, Shammy, and
many other Sorts; and it may likewise be said, that Dying, which is settled in
several other Towns and Places of these Provinces, is one of the most
considerable Manufactures of this Republic.

There are also at Amsterdam several Houses for Refining Sugar, Borax,
Camphire, Cinnaber, and Sulphur; several for whitening yellow Wax, a great many
Saw-Mills for all Sorts of Woods, Powder-Mills, Snuff-Mills, Mills to polish
Marble, and Mills to draw Oil from several Sorts of Seeds. In short, one may
say of Amsterdam what Vopiscus said of Alexandria, who after he had given an
Account of its Manufactures, added, "That all its Inhabitants followed some
Trade; that the lame and the gouty were employed, and even those that had the
Gout in their Hands did not sit idle."

The Town of Leyden, without Dispute, is preferable to all others for all Sorts
of Woollen Manufactures, especially the finest Sort; as Serges, Camlets, and
the like. They tell you that these Manufactures, after the Year 1400, began to
grow in some Esteem, and the Workmen of Ipres that fled from their own Country,
settled themselves there. But be that as it will, every Body agrees they had
not then that Esteem, till after the Persecutions for Religion began, which
effectually drove great Numbers of Workmen from the Provinces of Flanders,
Hainault, and Artois, etc.

They make also good Woollen Stuffs at Harlem, but they are much inferior to
those of Leyden, which latter may undoubtedly pass for the best of Europe in
their Kind.

The Dutch have their Wool from Spain, and England, Germany, Poland, and the
Levant, that Sort of Wool called Vigogue, from Peru, and that of Coramania
from Persia.

The best Silks are made at Harlem, and this Manufacture, in its Kind, is not
inferior to the Cloth Manuufacture of Leyden. They make in this Place, coarse
flowered Velvets, Linnens, Silks, Gauzes, and in general, all Sorts of slight
Silks, of which there is a great Consumption in Germany, and all over the
North, Portugal, and other Places, where they prefer these Silks, and the Gold
and Silver Brocades made here to those of France. Besides they are 15 or 20 per
Cent cheaper.

These Manufactures, in Reality, are not so beautiful, nor so good as those of
Lions and Tours; but the Difference in the Piece makes amends for that, and
makes them go off better. And though their Workmen want a Genius for Design, and
Invention, yet they no sooner come from France, but they imitate them to
Perfection. They know how to work and finish them with all possible Dexterity
and Neatness. This added to their Cheapness, makes other Countries rather make
use of them.

Besides, the Dutch import Silks from Italy, the Levant, Persia, Bengal,
Tonquin, and China.

The Town of Delft is a Place famous for fine earthen Ware, in Imitation of
China.

Horn is for dealing in Cheese which is made in the North of Holland, as also
for large Earthen, or Stone Ware.

In Dort and some other Places, there are Houses for refining Salt; and if I
mistake not, Places for Spinning and Bleaching Thread.

Sardam, not far from Amsterdam, is certainly the only Place in the World where
all Sorts of Ships are built for the Use of Merchants, not only of the United
Provinces, but of other Countries, which causes a prodigious Consumption of
Wood, Cordage, Masts, Sails, and other Necessaries for Shipping, of which great
Numbers are daily sold to Strangers, ready built, and fit for Launching.

The Dutch have their Timber from Muscovy, Norway, the Lower Germany,
Pomerania, and the Provinces bordering on the Baltic, Most of this Timber is
brought to Sardam, which is a Village somewhat more than two Leagues long,
whose Inhabitants are all Carpenters; and they are so skilful in their
Business, that (as it is credibly reported) if they have three Months Notice
beforehand, they can every Day, for as long a time as is required, build, and
completely finish a Ship of 4 or 500 Tuns.

Though all the Linen that goes under the Name of Holland, is not made in the
United Provinces, yet I cannot but reckon it among their Manufactures, by
reason of its being bleached there. They make vast Quantities in the Provinces
of Groningen, Friseland, and Overissell, where there grows Abundance of Flax;
and I believe they make great Quantities in the Duchy of Juliers, which they
send thence in the Beginning of the Spring to Harlem, where they bleach
wonderfully well by reason of the Sea Water, which by its being purified in the
Downs, gives the Linen that beautiful White which is so much admired.

The Manufactures of Sail Cloth, which was fomerly made in Britanny, Cordage,
and Fishing Nets, employ almost an infinite Number of People.

The Dutch generally bring from Muscovy, Poland, Dantzic, Riga, and other Towns
of the North, those vast Quantities of Hemp and Flax they make use of in their
Manufactures.

Printing employs also a World of People in these Provinces, were every one
strives to excel in that Art. It is the same in Hat-making, which is as
considerable a Manufacture as that of Paper, which they have within these few
Years taken from the French. This last Manufacture of Paper, they have set up
in several Places; but what they make in Guelderland is much the best.

Navigation and Commerce have so near a Relation one to another, that it is
very difficult for one to flourish in a State without the other; in Reality, it
is impossible one should subsist without the other. For if Navigation be
supported by Trade, Trade cannot flourish without Navigation, which may, in
some Measure be said to be the very Life and Soul of Trade, since by Navigation
all Sorts of Merchandise are so easily transported to all Ports of the World,
and with so little Expense. And whatever Nation can make it self Master of
Navigation, will be so of Trade, and consequently immense Riches, and (if I may
use the Expression) even of Empires and Kingdoms.

The Dutch who know very well this important Truth, have for that End omitted
no Pains nor Expense; and it has ever been the principal Object of their Care
and Application. It must be owned, that their Fishery Manufactures, and vast
Trade have furnished them with all possible Advantages of raising their
Maritime Affairs above those of other Nations; And the Secret they have found
out of sailing, and carrying Goods much cheaper than other People, has
contributed as much. This makes other Nations willing to employ the Dutch
Ships, because it is not only less expensive, but they can have in Holland Ships
always ready to sail for all Countries, but also because of the Convoys they
send with their Merchant Ships. Besides, they are very just and faithful in
giving a good Account of all they are entrusted with. This Trust considerably
increases their Navigation, and causes them to build a vast Number of Ships,
which gives constant Employment to a prodigious Number of Seamen, who repair
thither from all Parts, and on their Arrival, are always sure of finding
Business. The Masters of Ships of Freight, in Holland, make up a considerable
Part of that State.

We come now to Discourse of the Trade of the United Provinces to several Parts
of the World; but it will not be improper first to observe, that such Foreign
Trade is principally carried on by the Merchants of the Provinces of Holland
and Zeland, etc. and that some certain Species of Commerce is peculiar to some
certain Towns.

Amsterdam makes much the greatest Figure in foreign Traffic; for besides the
Trade of both the Indies, she has likewise that of the Levant, Cadiz, Lisbon,
Muscovy, and the North, which last is peculiar to her self; some small Trade
she has with France, for Wines and Brandy, but nothing in Comparison to
Roterdam: The Situation of this last Town on the Meuse or Maese, has made her
Trade with France, England and Scotland, very considerable; she drives,
besides, a great Trade to the Levant, Spain, and the East Indies; in short,
this Town has Commerce with all Parts, the North excepted, yet much inferior to
that of Amsterdam, though her Port so advantageously situated on the Maese, as I
hinted before, is infinitely better and much more commodious.

The Trade of Dort consists in little else than that of Rhenish-Wine, (which is
there put on Shore,) and white Salt, refined in that Town. The Dutch have most
of their pickled and dried Salmon from Dort.

Delft, Horn, and Enchuisen, have each their peculiar Chamber in the East India
Company. Delft is particularly famous for its fine Earthen-ware, resembling
that of China; Horn for Cheese, which its Inhabitants transport to all Parts in
great Quantities; and some Years ago, this Commodity of Cheese, and some other
Articles, made Trade considerably flourish in Horn.

The Commerce of Enchuisen consists chiefly in Herrings, which makes that Town
very considerable, and very rich.

CHAP. IV. Of the Dutch Trade in the North, Muscovy and Norway.
I Begin with the Northern Trade, not only because it is one of the first the
Dutch applied themselves to; but also, because it is of the greatest Importance
and Necessity of any to that Republic; since from hence she has the greatest
Part of her Provisions; as Wheat and other Grain, so necessary for the
Subsistence of her People; as also, all Things necessary for their Navigation,
without which, and other Commodities of absolute Necessity, they would find it
very difficult to support themselves. Under this Article of the Northern Trade,
I comprehend that of Muscovy, Norway, and all the Ports of the Baltick-Sea;
that is, that of Sweden, Denmark, Poland, and all the Lower-Germany.

The Hanse Towns for many Years together engrossed this Trade; but Erick the
8th of that Name, King of Denmark, against whom they waged a cruel and bloody
War, having about the Year 1403, called in the Zelanders and some other Nations
to his Assistance, opened to them the South-Passage for their more commodious
carrying on their Trade to the Baltic, thinking he could have no better way to
be revenged on these Towns; since that time it is true they have often boasted
of their keeping that Sea clear of Foreigners, but to little purpose; and their
Trade (the greatest that ever was then known) declining in the Year 1500,
diminished to that Degree, that their Power came to little or nothing about the
Year 1506.

The Dutch and English applying themselves very earnestly to Navigation, and
the former having with much Honor put an end to a War, they had so long
maintained against the Spaniards, for their Liberties, by the Treaty of 1609,
all Nations, especially such as were trading People, courted their Alliance:
the Hanse Towns were the first that discovered their Inclinations, believing
that nothing would contribute more to the Preservation of the little Trade and
Credit they had left.

The Dutch, on their side, desired nothing more than such an Alliance, which
promised them great Advantage in the Northern Trade; and accordingly, on the
22d of May 1631, signed a Treaty of Confederacy with Lubeck, then Chief of the
Teutonick Hanse Towns, for a free and safe Trade to the Baltic: In the Year
following, the most considerable of the other Hanse Towns followed the Example
of Lubeck; and the Dutch made so good use of these Treaties, and several other
Advantages they got in the North, that they have almost entirely stripped all the
Hanse Towns, Hamburgh only excepted, of the little Trade there was left them,
and (if we may be allowed to say so) made themselves Sole Masters of all the
Commerce of the North.

I shall in a few Words give you an Account of their Trade to Muscovy.

The Trade that Europe drove with that vast Empire, was carried on constantly
by the way of Revel and Narva, two Towns in Livonia, situated on the extreme
Parts of the Baltic, till the Year 1653; but the English who first attempted
the North-Passage to China, discovered Archangel, one of the best Ports the
Muscovites have upon the White Sea, and the most proper and commodious for a
great Trade, being but seven or eight Leagues distant from the famous River
Duina, which runs through the greatest Part of Muscovy; and the Czar granted them
great Privileges, to engage them to settle a Trade at Archangel.

The Dutch soon followed the same Route; and, in spite of all the Obstacles the
English put in their Way, they obtained of the Czar the same Permission to
Trade to Archangel, as the English.

Every Year since that Grant, they have sent thither 36 or 40 Sail of Ships,
from 200 to 400 Tuns, which go always from Holland in two Squadrons; the first
consisting only of 5 or 6 Ships, goes off usually in the Month of June, and
returns in September; and the second, consisting of 30, or 34 Ships, fails in
July, and returns not from Archangel till the end of October: These two Fleets,
which vary sometimes as to their Number, have always a Convoy allowed them by
the City of Amsterdam, which City engrosses almost all that Trade. The
Principal Time of Traffic, is during the Fan of Archangel, which begins the
20th of August, and ends the last Day of that Month.

I shall give you here a short Account of the Principal Commodities the Dutch
import to Muscovy, and what they bring thence, viz. Silk, Linen and Woollen
Stuffs, Beaver's Skins from Canada, Paper, Small-Ware of all sorts, and
Iron-work, Cannon, and Small Arms, Gunpowder, Sulphur, Copper, (...), Tin,
Wines, Brandies, Oils, and Vinegar, Confections and dry Fruits, Saffron, Sugar,
Spices, Pepper, and Pickled Herrings of the first Season, Frankincense,
Copperas, Ceruse, or White-Lead, Indigo, and all sorts of Woods for dying Red,
Galloons and Laces of all sorts, Gold and Silver-Thread, and all sorts of
Silver Coin.

I shall before I conclude this Treatise, make some Remarks on the Commodities
sent to and exported from Muscovy.

However by this Account, one may easily see, how considerable the Dutch Trade
to Muscovy is, not only in relation to its Convoys and Returns, but also on
Account of the Number of Ships it continually maintains. One would have
imagined the English, who first enjoyed the Privileges of paying no manner of
Custom, should have made themselves entirely Masters of the Muscovite Trade;
however, it is certain, they send now adays no more than 4 or 5 Vessels
thither, while the Dutch commonly send 40, or thereabouts.

A certain English Author has taken a great deal of Pains, to let us know what
Methods the Dutch made use of to raise their Commerce with Muscovy, above that
of England: His Words are these:

The English Cloths are not valued in Russia, because they are dearer than
those of Holland, which, though they shrink after being wet, above a sixth part,
yet the Russians prefer them to our Cloths, because say they, no Cloth will
shrink but what is New. It must be owned, that we are much in the wrong in not
complying with their Humor, and restraining our selves to that Commodity only,
while the Dutch bring them thither a vast Quantity of Toys, things that sell
better there than Cloths, which begin now to be out of Fashion in that Country.

If the Dutch have entirely established in Russia the Persian and Indian Silk
Trade, I am afraid the English will find it a a very difficult Matter to
recover their Immunities and Privileges; for the Russians are now grown
cunning, having been corrupted by the Dutch, who know well how to distribute
their Money to the best Advantage, and being much richer in that Country, and
of greater Credit, and more numerous than the English, leave no Stone unturned
to ruin them, and have succeeded too well in their Project, much better than
could be imagined. By Presents they gain the Friendship and Protection of the
Nobility, and make us despicable by scandalous Pictures, and impudent
defamatory Libels.

The only way in my Opinion, to reestablish our Reputation and Commerce in that
Country, would be to permit only such Merchants to trade thither as should give
no Credit for any Merchandise, though the Russians fix a Time for Payment, and to
represent by Persons of Worth and good Understanding, the flourishing Condition
of the Dominions of the King of Great Britain.

Let us now come to the Trade of Norway.

The Riches of this Kingdom, which is in subjection to the Crown of Denmark,
consist in Masts for Ships, and other sorts of Timber, as well for
Ship-building as other Carpenter's Work, Copper, and Iron Mines, Pitch and Tar,
dried Fish, Furrs, Buck-skins, Ashes, Butter and Tallow.

These are the Chief Commodities the Norway Merchants exchange with Foreigners
for many things they want, of absolute Necessity for the Support of Life. The
Dutch who have a greater Trade to Norway than all other Nations put together,
carry usually thither Spices, Salt, Canary, Vinegar, Brandy, Cheese, Tobacco
Rolls, Drapery, and Small Wares.

Though this Kingdom is of vast Extent, yet there is but very little Consumption,
being neither Rich nor well Peopled; and it may be said, that even Money would
be entirely unknown here, was it not for what the Dutch bring along with them
to buy Timber.

But however inconsiderable the Norway Trade may seem, it employs
notwithstanding near 300 Dutch Vessels, most of which come from the Towns and
Villages of Friseland, and those about Amsterdam, they are commonly of 4 or 500
Tons Burden, and have not above 10 or 12 Hands a-piece.

Berghen, the Capital of Norway, has a good Port, and is the Place of greatest
Trade: The Dutch resort to several other Ports, as Drontheim and Copernick.

As Timber is the chief Commodity the Dutch deal for in Norway, and which they
bring in great Quantities from that Kingdom, they have concluded many Treaties
with the King of Denmark to secure that Trade, viz. the Treaty of
Christianople, signed August 13, 1645, and that of the Hague, the 12th of
February 1669.

CHAP. V. Of the Baltic Trade.
THE Trade of this Sea, which is almost 2000 Leagues in Circumference, includes
that of the Kingdoms of Sweden and Denmark; the Countries of Mecklenberg,
Pomerania, Prussia, Courland and Livonia; most of which, supply the Dutch with
a prodigious Quantity of all sorts of Grain, abundance of Copper, Iron, Steel,
Arms of all sorts, Wood and Timber, Hemp, Flax, Pitch, Tar, and several other
Commodities.

They carry a much greater Quantity of Goods from the Baltic than they bring
to it, the Consumption being very inconsiderable in those Parts, unless it be
at Dantzick, which is the common Magazine or Storehouse of Poland; the
Discount or Overplus they pay in Rixdollars, which they bring along with them.

As most of the Commodities that come from the Baltic Sea are bulky and very
heavy, that Trade employs a great Number of Ships, and the Dutch send thither
every Year 1000 or 1200.

Denmark yields but few Commodities to Strangers, and the Trade of that Kingdom
is nothing near so considerable as that of Norway; the Dutch bring a pretty
good Quantity of Wheat from the sinall Island of Laland, which is very fruitful
in all sorts of Grain, especially Wheat. About forty Years ago they used to
lade about twelve Ships with Rye from the Isle of Zeland, but the Boors now
adays scarce Sow more than what suffices for their Subsistence.

The Dutch bring also every Year vast Numbers of lean Horned Cattle from
Jutland, which they turn into the Meadows in Holland to fatten; and this is
none of the least profitable Articles in the Dutch Trade.

Denmark has no considerable Port, but that of Copenhagen, which in reality is
one of the finest in the World.

Sweden supplies the Dutch with more Commodities than Denmark, and its Trade is
much more considerable. The principal Goods they bring from this Country are
Copper, (the best in Europe) Iron, Steel, great Quantities of all sorts of Arms
made of those Metals, as Muskets, Pistols, Cannons for Ships, Bullets, Pikes,
Helmets, Breast-Plates, and Brass Wire, not to mention vast Quantities of other
Goods and Commodities, as Lead, Copper, Pitch, Tar, Masts, Planks, and Barks
made of Deal, the best in the North.

The Dutch on their Part, furnish Sweden with the same Commodities as they do
Denmark and much about the same Quantity, viz. Spices and Drugs of all sorts,
Salt, Sugar, Wines, Brandies, Linen, Silks, and Woollen Stuffs, and such other
Manufactures as those two Northern Kingdoms stand most in need of. The Dutch
may be said to be in some sort the Masters of the greatest Part of the Swedish
Trade, since they are of the Copper. The Farmers of these Mines, having always
Occasion for Money, sell this Commodity to the Merchants of Amsterdam, who
advance them whatever Sums they want: It Is just the same with their Pitch and
Tar, the same Merchants buying most of these Goods from the King's Farmers, and
making them besides very considerable Advances: This is the Reason why these
and other Swedish Goods are sold as cheap at Amsterdam as in Sweden itself.

The chief Trade this Kingdom has with Foreigners, is at Stockholm, the Capital
City, and some other Ports of the ancient Dominions of Sweden, as well as those
of its Conquests in Germany and Poland, of which I shall discourse hereafter.

Pomerania in the Year 1648, was divided by the Treaty of Osnabrugh, between
the Swedes and Brandenburghers; that Part of it which is washed by the Oder,
and the Ports of Stralsund, Wolgast and Stetin belong to the King of Sweden,
and the other Part where Colberg, a Place of great Commerce is situated,
belongs to the Elector of Brandenburg.

Pomerania abounds in great Quantities of Corn, vast Numbers of Cattle, Skins,
Leather, Wool, Timber, etc. the Isle of Rugen, which is one of its
Dependencies, produces a great deal of Wheat.

Stetin, the Capital of Pomerania, situated on the Oder, is a Place of the
greatest Trade with Strangers in that Province; that of Silesia are of the
richest and most fruitful Provinces in Germany, in Corn, Honey, Butter, Wax,
Lead, Iron, Wool, Tin, Flax, Linen and Woollen Cloths, is also carried on in
Stetin, which likewise shares great Part of the Trade of the Marquisate of
Brandenburg, the River Oder running through both Provinces.

The Dutch, among other Things, export from Pomerania all sorts of Corn, vast
Quantities of coarse Wool, Silesia Linen, Timber, Masts, and other
Commodities.

Prussia is divided into two Parts, viz. the Royal Prussia, belonging to the
Crown of Poland, and the Ducal Prussia in subjection to the Marquis of
Brandenburg, now King of Prussia, which Title was conferred on him by this
Emperor's Father, about 10 or 12 Years since. This Kingdom, or rather
Demy-Province, is very fruitful in Wheat, which is looked upon to be better
than that any in Poland; it has several very good Seaports, amongst which
Dantzick, Koningsberg, and Memel are the most considerable: The two last are in
the Ducal, and the first in the Royal Prussia, and almost all the Polish Trade
is carried on in that Port: But before I treat of this Branch of Trade, I shall
speak a few Wordsin relation to that of the Ducal Prussia, part of which is
carried on at Koningsburg, a Town situated at the Mouth of the Pregel, this
Port is much frequented by the English, as well as Dutch; the large Vessels
commonly unlade at Pil'aw (a Port, formerly a Fortress only, on the Mouth of
the Friscknaff) that they may the more easily go up to Koningsberg; besides the
Commodities of the Country, that abound here, Lithuania and Poland send to this
Place by the Way of Pregel, great Quantities of Oak for Coopers Work, abundance
of Ashes, Wheat, Leather, Furrs, Rice, Honey, Wax, Barley, Millet, and Hemp.
The Dutch bring likewise to Koningsberg, Cloths, Wines, Cheese, Salt, Tobacco,
Spices, Iron, Lead, Tin, and old Dutch Dollers.

Poland is the most fruitful Country in the World, in all sorts of Grain, good
Pasturage, Cattle, Wax, and Honey, besides Mines of Salt, Iron, Lead Copper,
Quicksilver, Vitriol, Saltpeter, and Sulphur. All the Commerce of this great
Kingdom is chiefly carried on at Dantzick, some small Part excepted, at the
other Ports of Prussia and Livonia: The Situation of Dantzick, on the Mouth of
the Vistula, is wonderfully commodious for Trade; for that River, which is one
of the most famous in Europe, from South to North, runs thorough the greatest
Part of the fertile Plains of Poland, and is almost Navigable all along its
Course, which is more than 300 Leagues. This makes Dantzick one of the chief
Towns in Europe, as well on Account of its great Trade, as its vast Extent, and
Riches: The great Magazines of Wheat in this Place, make it be taken Notice of
by all Europe; and for that Reason Dantzick is commonly called, the Granary of
the Northern Kingdoms, and the United Provinces.

Besides Dantzick, properly speaking, is a Republic governed by its own Laws,
under the Protection of the Crown of Poland: The Inhabitants have this
Privilege, that none but they can buy any Polish Corn, if once entered their
Port; but then on the other hand, they must take all what is brought at the
Price the Magistrates shall set upon it.

As the Poles are all Strangers to Trade and Navigation, and much less to
Manufactures, so are they obliged to make use of Strangers, the Dutch
especially, to supply them with what Commodities they from time to time stand
in need of. Here follows an Account of the Principal Goods they generally are
supplied with from Abroad, viz.

All sorts of Silks, great Quantities of Cloth, Woods for Dying, all sorts of
Spices, Drugs, Italian Crema Tartar, Sugar, Oil, Paper; Wines of all sorts,
French Salt and Brandies; of these Liquors, there is a great Consumption in
Prussia.

These Commodities are generally truck'd for Wheat, and other Corn, Oak and
Deal, excellent Masts, Hemp and Flax, Honey, Wax and Tallow, Steel, Iron,
Copper and Lead; Saltpetre, Salt, Pitch and Tar, yellow Amber, Bulls and Cow
Hides, Furrs, and Wool, etc.

Dantzick being the greatest Place for Trade in the North, the Dutch have ever
taken a particular Care to assist that Town in the Preservation of its
Liberties against the Attempts of the Kings of Poland and Sweden, and other
Powers.

The Duchy of Courland is a particular Sovereignty, under the Protection of
Poland; Libaw and Memel are its two Seaports, from whence, besides Wheat and
Wood, a great deal of Linseed is transported to Holland, where they use great
Quantities in making of Oil; great Quantities is likewise carried into Flanders
for Seed, the Linseed of those Countries being apt to degenerate, and become
unfit for Sowing. I have been credibly informed, that the Dutch employ in the
Trade of Courland, every Year 20 or 25 Ships.

Livonia belongs to Sweden; and is one of the most fruitful Countries in the
World for Wheat, and would be one of the richest, had not a long War swept off
such vast Numbers of its Inhabitants: Not only the greatest Commerce of this
vast Province, but good Part of that of Muscovy and Lithuania is carried on in
the Ports of Riga, Revel and Narva; it is partly by the River Narva, and partly
by their Sledges in the great Snows, that the Muscovites and Lithuanians bring
to Riga their Flax, Hemp, Wax, Pitch, Wheat and Furrs, etc.

Revel has for a long time since, been reputed one of the best Northern Towns
for Trade; its Situation and Port seem contrived for Traffic, especially that
of Muscovy, which flourished here very much, before the North Passage to
Archangel was found out.

Narva is situated on the River of that Name; this Town is well known to those
who Trade to Muscovy by the Baltic, being the direct Passage to Novogrod and
Pleskou, two Towns of the greatest Trade in that Empire, and both 40 Leagues
distant from Narva.

The little Town of Pernaw, is in like Manner situated on a River of the same
Name; People come thither to load Wheat for the Netherlands; it is Trade grows
more considerable every Day, by reason of those great Quantities of excellent
and well proportioned Masts, and other fit Timber that come thither by Water:
It is believed, if this Trade holds, it will prejudice that of Norway; for the
Dutch, that used before the Year 1680, to send five or six Ships yearly to
Pernaw, send now 50 or 60.

The chief Commodities that are exported from these four Towns of Livonia, and
especially from Riga, are great Quantities of Wheat, and other Grain; Masts
from Russia and Livonia, (the latter are the most valuable) Wood for Tuns,
Pipes and Barrels, Oak, Cordage, Deal-Boards, Hemp, Flax, Linseed, Wax, Honey,
and Tallow, etc.

And in Exchange they give old Dollar, Salt, Spices, Sugar, Tobacco, Paper,
Iron-Work and Small Wares, etc.

SECTION I. Remarks on what Commodities the Dutch export to the North, and
import from thence.
AS there are much more Goods that come from the North, than what are carried
to those Parts; so Money is absolutely necessary to discharge the overplus; and
it would be difficult, without this necessary Ingredient, to make any
advantageous Voyages to the North. Dutch Dollars go very current there, and are
much esteemed; and there is scarce any other Species seen in the North; and
were it not for the Gold and Silver these Northern People get, merely on
Account of their Trade, Money would be very scarce with them, as I observed
before.

Next to Gold and Silver, Spices are the best Commodities one can carry into
the North; these are as much valued there; as if they were things absolutely
necessary to support Life; there is a prodigious Consumption of them,
especially in Muscovy and Poland. The Consumption in Muscovy is chiefly in
Nutmegs and Pepper, which they use in their ordinary Drink, as well as in
Brandy; and I have been very well assured, that the Dutch have brought into
Muscovy, 8 or 900 Bails of Pepper and Nutmegs. Sugar, Tobacco, and Drugs, both
for the Apothecary and Dying, sell well in the North; Sea Salt is also a very
necessary Commodity in the North, of which there is almost an infinite
Consumption: They have many Years since laid aside the making of Salt
themselves, having been used to the Portugal and Spanish Salt. And as for the
French Salt, there is scarce any sold but in Prussia.

There is likewise in these Countries a prodigious Consumption of French and
Spanish Wines, Brandy, Oil and Vinegar; Paper and dried Fruits of all sorts; in
short, whatever the warm Countries produce sell well here. In Muscovy and
Poland there is also a vast Consumption of Cloth and Woollen Stuffs, and Silks
of the Dutch and English Manufactury; but these Stuffs, Silks, and Cloth, must
be of all Sorts, Qualities, and Colors; they sell great Quantities of the
coarser sort in Muscovy, as well as coarse Linen, in the other Countries of
the North; the vent of Woollen-Stuffs is not so considerable.

Almost all the Silks, Gold and Silver Brocades, they bring into the North, are
made in Holland; heretofore they used to have them from France, as well as
other Commodities necessary for the Northern Countries; that is, Wines and
Brandy, Syrups, Apples, Chestnuts, Soap, Paper, Hats, Brocades, Ribands,
Iron-Ware and Small Wares from Paris; Stuffs made at Rheims and Chalons; but
the Consumption of these Commodities of the French, was very much diminished
even before the last War, the Dutch, their near Neighbors and Enemies, having
set up in Holland most of their Manufactures; who by reason of the War between
the two Nations, resolved to seek elsewhere those necessary Provisions they
stood so much in need of at Home, and that they might continue and augment
their Northern Commerce, entirely abandoned that of France, which indeed, by
reason of almost continual Wars, was very nigh reduced to nothing.

All the Commodities exported to the North, most of which being necessary for
Provisions and Clothing, are paid for with the Commodities of the Country.
Corn ought to be reckoned the chief Article amongst the Commodities of the
North, that the Dutch deal in; and that Trade is one of the most neecessary and
considerable they can have in the Baltic; for they not only bring thence
sufficient for their own Subsistence, but send vast Quantities into France at a
prodigious Price, as well as into Italy, Spain and Portugal, nay even into
Flanders it self, in a scarce Year.

The Dutch employ commonly in this Trade only, 7 or 800 Ships, that go for
Wheat and other Grain to the Ports of the Baltick-Sea, Hamburg and Dantzick it
self, and sometimes as far as Muscovy.

The several sorts of Grain they chiefly bring thence into Holland, are,
Turkish Wheat, or Buck-Wheat, Linseed, Rice, Millet, and Hempseed; Dantzick is
the principal Port whence they chiefly have these sorts of Grain and Seed; they
export great Quantities likewise from the Ports of Livonia, Prussia, Pomerania,
Holstein, Denmark and Sweden.

Next to this the most considerable is the Wood or Timber Trade; for not only
their Shipping consume vast Quantities, but they use besides no less in making
Tuns, Pipes, Barrels, and other Cask; not including what is used in Houses,
Buildings, small Boats, Dikes, Piles, and Fortifications, both by Sea and Land.
They sell also not a little to the French and Spaniards at very high Rates; but
all this is nothing to that prodigious Quantity they use in building Ships and
other Vessels, which are continually employed either for their own Use or other
Nations. Fir or Deal they have chiefly from Norway and Sweden. The Baltic
likewise supplies them with fine Oaks and Oak-Planks for Coopers Work.
Ship-Masts, as I observed before, come from Norway, Muscovy, Riga, Nerva, Revel
and Dantzick. The Dutch bring besides great Quantities of Timber into Holland,
by the Rivers Rhine, Elbe, and Weser; so that this may be reckoned as one of
the most important and necessary Trades to their Republic. To be convinced of
this, one need only see their Magazine at Sardam.

Hemp and Flax make one of the most advantageous Articles of the Trade of the
North: It Is very easy to judge, that the Quantity that comes thence must be
prodigious, being sufficient to furnish almost all the Ports of Europe. This
Commodity of Hemp comes from Riga, Konigsberg, Nerva, Revel and Muscovy.

The Dutch deal also in vast Quantities of Wool, which they transport from all
Parts of the North, as well from Poland, Prussia, and Pomerania, as from
Denmark, Holstein, Mecklenberg, Silesia, Saxony, Brandenburg, and the other
Countries of the Lower-Germany; as likewise, in a great deal of Linen from
Silesia, which is particularly employed in the Trade to Spain and the Coast of
Africa.

They make very rich Returns in Sables and other Furs from Muscovy; thence come
likewise Skins ready dressed, or Leather, as well as from Poland, Prussia and
Denmark: That which we call Russia-Leather, which is made of the Hides of Cows
and Oxen, is dressed by the Muscovites in such a Manner, as no where else to be
imitated. This Trade is very considerable, and they vend great Quantities of
these Commodities in France, Spain and Italy.

From Muscovy comes also the fine Bever-Fur, to make Hats; this Fur is for the
most part very soft and silky; and the Muscovites have it in great Quantities
brought to them in whole Skins from Canada, and is the finest in the World;
they have an Art to Dress them so advantageously, as to make the Fur very long
and thick, and with these Skins they border and line their Clothes.

The Caviear that is brought from Muscovy, and is made of the Spawn of
Sturgeons, is a good Commodity in Italy: They pretend that there goes out every
Year from Archangel, bound directly for Leghorn and Venice, at least 3 or 4
Ships, which are above one fourth Part laden with Caviear; the rest of the
Lading is of Russia Leather.

The Wax-Trade is very advantageous to the Dutch, and which they likewise carry
on in the North, this Commodity being subject neither to spoil or waste; and
this they sell and trade with in the greatest and best Parts of Europe for
immense Sums; and the Consumption in America is no less. Therefore this
Commodity ought to be considered as one of the greatest Articles of Trade
between Holland and Spain: The Yellow Wax, which comes from the North, is
chiefly the produce of Poland and Muscovy, Countries where the Bees seem to
have chosen principally to reside.

Yellow or Fat Amber is no where found, or fished for, but in the Banks of the
Ducal Prussia, (now the Kingdom of that Name:) I have been assured from good
Hands, that the Farming only of that Fishery, brought yearly into the Elector
of Brandenburg's Coffers no less than seventy five Thousand Livres. The Brown
Amber is the Product also of that new Kingdom, and serves to Trade with even to
Guinea and the East Indies.

Ashes are a great Article in the Northern Trade, and chiefly come from
Dantzick, Konigsberg and Muscovy; but the last are esteemed the best: They deal
for vast Quantities, to make black Soap and scower Cloth.

Pitch and Tar being Things absolutely necessary for Navigation, to caulk and
otherwise fortify Ships, Boats and other Vessels, there is a vast Consumption
of these in Holland. They have the greatest Quantities from Stockholm and
Wirtzburg, but what comes from Muscovy is the dearest.

The Dutch export a great deal of Tallow from Muscovy, though it be not so good
as their own; they I kewise are furnished with it from Germany.

Iron comes chiefly from Sweden, and Steel from Dantzick.

Copper from Sweden and Norway; but that from Sweden is best, and in greater
Quantities than elsewhere.

The Dutch are supplied from the North, and especially Sweden, with several
sorts of Arms and warlike Stores; and that in such large Quantities, as not
only to furnish them sufficiently for their own Fleets and Armies, but to bring
them in besides prodigious Sums of Money, by trading with these Commodities to
almost all other Nations. I take no notice of a great many other Particulars of
the Northern Trade, being Matters of less Moment, but pass them over in
silence, as I have other things of the like Nature, in relating to the Trade of
other Countries.

It is easy to see by the Variety and great Quantity of Merchandise, that the
Trade of the North must needs be of extreme Importance to the Dutch, since it
supplies them with almost every thing that is necessary for their Subsistence
and Navigation; this makes them omit nothing to preserve it: They have
strenuously opposed the Northern Powers, when ever they have endeavored to
make themselves Masters of it (as Sweden amongst the rest has often attempted
to do) and then they have ever taken Care, by all means, to hinder too great
Imposts or Customs to be laid on such Merchandise as come from thence, or are
transported thither; and to compass this, they have more than once engaged in
long and tedious Wars.

The House of Austria well knew that the only way to sap the very Foundation of
the Republic of Holland, would be to deprive her of the Trade of the Baltic,
which made Ferdinand II. endeavor with all his Power, to make himself Lord of
that Sea. That House has since made frequent Attempts to trouble their
Commerce, but with very little Success.

I design one time or other, more fully to set forth what the Dutch have done
in relation to their Trade, either by private Negociations or open Force: But
in the mean while I shall say this in short, that one of the Fundamental Maxims
of their Government, is, by all means possible to hinder the Merchants of the
North to Trade in too great Numbers to the Southern and Western Parts of
Europe, and these on the other hand, from trading in too great Numbers to the
North.

This Republic being so advantagiously situated in the middle of both, will
always with her utmost Power endeavor that the Trade of Europe should not be
carried on but through her hands, by which means she will always have that good
Fortune of knowing the Secret, how to sell all sorts of Merchandise cheaper
than any other Country, and almost as cheap as where they were first made and
produced.

CHAP. VI. Of the Trade of the Elbe, Wezer, Rhine, and the Maese.
THE Dutch carry on good part of the German Trade by way of these Rivers; the
three last of which disembogue themselves into their Estates: This Trade is
very advantageous on account of the Provisions and Merchandise that are
conveyed to them by these ways, as by the great Consumption that is made, by
what is sent back in Return.

The Elbe takes its Source in Bohemia, and after having traversed that Kingdom,
and the Electorates of Saxony, Brandenburg and Hanover, falls into the Ocean
about 20 Leagues below Hamburgh.

It Is in this City (the most rich and flourishing in all Germany for Trade)
that the Dutch secure to themselves that of the Elbe; that is, the Trade of the
best part of the Provinces of the Lower Germany.

The Dutch carry to Hamburgh such Commodities as arise from their own
Manufactures of Silk and Wool, small Wares, Spices, Drugs, and other
Necessaries.

Hence they have their Brass Wire, White Iron (as they call it) or Tin'd Plates
made in Saxony, Corn, Timber for Shipping, and for the most part, all other
Commodities of the North.

The Dutch sometimes go up the Elbe as far as Harburgh and Madgeburgh, where
they lade great Quantities of Wood and Wine (which they buy there) and
sometimes hew down whole Forests, and take away the Wood as they have Occasion.

The People of Hamburgh, in short, have such a considerable Trade to all the
Ports of Europe, that their City has gained the Name of little Amsterdam.

The Wezer, like the Elbe, runs through a good part of the fertile Provinces o^
the Lower Germany. The City of Bremen, which is situated on this River, 15
Leagues before its falling into the Sea, is a Place of great Trade, both active
and passive; and I am very well informed it has the right of Staple. The
Provinces bordering on the Wezer, and the Rivers that fall into it all along
its vast Course, furnish Bremen with excellent Timber, of greater Esteem and
Value, and much dearer than that of Norway and the Baltic; as also Wheat,
Wool, several sorts of Metals, and Beer; that of Brunswick, called Mum, is the
best and most esteemed, a great deal of which, as well as that of Bremen, is
sent to the East Indies.

The Dutch buy these, with their Silk and Woollen Stuffs, and sometimes with
their small Wares and Wood for Dying, as Logwood, etc.

The whole Trade of the River Ems, that runs through all Westphalia, is at Emden,
a Town of vast Trade, well affected to the United Provinces. Besides the Horses
and Oxen the Dutch bring from East Friezland; Hams, Timber, Woollen, Cloth,
Linen of several sorts, (made by the Inhabitants of the Bishoprics of Munster
and Paderborn) come down the River of Ems to Emden.

The Trade of the Rhine is one of the most Important the Dutch have; for
besides, that this River is Navigable almost every where from Switzerland
(where it has its Source) to its falling into the Holland Seas; it takes along
with its Stream (which is almost 300 Leagues in length) many large Rivers, of
which the Moselle and Mein are the most considerable. The many rich and
fruitful Provinces that it washes, furnish Holland with a vast Quantity of rich
Merchandise, with which she again, supplies other Countries.

Cologne; the most considerable of all the Towns on the Rhine, and long since
celebrated for Commerce, is a Place of the principal Trade of that River, as
well as of the Moselle; it is the great Mart for Rhenish Wines, which are there
bought up for the United Provinces, where there is a prodigious Consumption of
them.

The Moselle, which runs through all Loraine and the whole Electorate of Triers,
falls into the Rhine at Coblentz, and unlades there vast Quantities of its
Wines.

There comes down to Cologne, by these two Rivers, a great deal of excellent
Oak. Besides Wine and Timber; the Dutch bring thence, Iron Cannons and Bullets,
and fond thither from Holland then own Manufactures of Silk and Woollen Stuffs,
Spices, Sugar, Cheese, Herrings, and other Necessaries: These Goods are
likewise disposed of to all the other Towns on the Rhine and Moselle; from
whence come the same sort of Merchandise in Return, as from Cologne, though not
in that abundance, or with so much convenience.

The M^ that looses itself in the Rhine near Mentz, after having traversed all
Pranconi^, (one of the finest and most fertile Countries of all Germany,) has
opened a Way for a vast Trade in Frankfort, its Capital City, where there are
two noted Fairs kept every Year; the Dutch come thither to buy Iron and Cutlers
Ware (made at Nuremberg) Copper, and great Quantities of other Merchandise; and
bring thither from their own Country, Silk, Cloth, small Wares, Ribands,
Spices, Drugs, and all sorts of Wood for dying.

In short, there is not a Town near the Rhine and the Rivers that flow into it,
but consumes a World of Goods of the growth and Manufactury of Holland, in
exchange of their own. The Dutchies of Juliers and Berghs, belonging to the
Elector Palatine, furnish Flax, Thread, and Linen, as do all the other
Countries thereabout.

By the Maese, the Dutch carry on a great Trade, particularly with the Towns of
Liege and Aix la Chapelle; the first is situated on that River, and the other
not far off, but almost all the Trade of the Meuse is at Liege, where are sold
Serges, Slate, Pit Coal, Iron and Steel Work, Bullets, Bombs, Grenades, Arms,
Lead, Brazier's Ware, made at Aix la Chapelle, (which has its Brass and Copper
from Holland and Liege.) Into this last Town the Dutch bring all sorts of
Merchandise made of Silk and Wool, Spices, and Drugs for the Surgeon and
Apothecary.

The Dutch ever had a watchful Eye to preserve the Liberties of Cologne, and
the Navigation of the Rhine: They have in like manner frequently protected the
Liberties of Hamburgh against the Attempts of the Kings of Denmark; and those
of Bremen, against the Swede; till some Reasons of State made them permit the
last to fall under the Dominion of the Crown of Sweden. In short, they have
always a particular Care not to suffer any new Customs or Imposts to be laid on
the Navigation of these five Rivers; by means of which they drive such an
advantageous Trade, and render themselves so formidable; by these means, they
have extended their Territories much beyond their usual Limits, and have been
for six Years together entire Masters of the Electorate of Cologne, and
Principality of Liege.

CHAP. VII. Of the Trade of the Spanish Netherlands.
THIS Country heretofore, the Seat or Center of a prodigious Trade, has now
very little, by the great Application and Address of the Dutch, and
particularly the People of Amsterdam, to hinder even its recovery again in
Flanders, especially at Antwerp. In the Truce made in the Year 1609, the
Spaniards would have obliged them to take off the Imposts they laid on the
Navigation of the Scheld and other Rivers during the War, which gave a great
Blow to the Trade of the Low Countries; but the States General would never
consent to it, in hopes entirely to ruin the Commerce of the Low Countries
subject to the Crown of Spain, and draw it to themselves.

When they made Peace with Spain, at the Treaty of Munster, they took all
imaginable Precautions least Commerce should be reestablished at Antwerp through
a long Peace; not doubting but the advantageous Situation of that City for
Trade, would once again revive it, if not timely obstructed: They stipulated
then that they should keep the Scheld blocked up, that all Merchandise that
went up that River should pay certain Customs at the Fort of Ryssel, and that
Ships and large Vessels should pass no further, but unlade their Goods into
Boats and small Barks, to carry them to Antwerp.

They had no Apprehension that Trade should ever flourish again at Bruges or
Ghent, since they were Masters of the Canals of Communication of Sluice and Sas
Van Ghent, to the very Sea.

I am very well satisfied the Dutch would never have consented to a Peace with
Spain, how advantageous soever it might be, had they not seen it in their Power
to hinder the re-establishment of Commerce in Flanders.

The Trade the Dutch drive in Flanders and Brabant, (both in Obedience to the
King of Spain,) is principally established at Antwerp, Ghent, Bruges, and
Mehclin: The chief Commodities they deal for in these Provinces, especially in
the Towns of Antwerp, Brussels, and Mechlin, are Thread, and Lace, which they
make with that admirable Beauty and large Quantities, as is almost incredible.

From Ghent and Bruges they fetch a vast Quantity of fine Linen of all sorts,
as well for the Table, as other uses: The first of these is famous for Serges,
the other for Sheeps Leather; Brussels and Audenarde for Tapestry, where a long
while since began those excellent Manufactures that gave Birth to those of the
Gobelins in Paris, which for many Years past has been, and now is, the most
famous Workhouse in the World.

To these Towns they send their own Manufactures of Stuffs made of Silk and
Wool, Spices, Drugs, Coffee, Tea, Chocolate, and a great Quantity of Muslins,
and Indian Stuffs of all sorts.

To this one may add, the Trade they have with Lisle, Tournay and Mons, of
which they have made themselves Masters by the Force of their Arms, and those
of the High Allies; the Trade of Lisle consists chiefly in a sort of Linen
called there Toiles Baptistes, and Baracans, or coarse Camblets.

The Dutch, in short, are Masters of all the Trade of the Low Countries, and
that with all the Liberty, Authority, and Ease imaginable, by reason of their
bordering on those Provinces, and the Advantage they have of the Rivers and
Canals that run by, and through all the Principal Towns, and wonderfully
facilitate the Carriage of all sorts of Goods from one to another, with great
Expedition and very little Expense.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Trade with England.
THE Neighborhood of these two Nations has for many Years since established a
mutual Commerce between them; but it has sometimes been interrupted: In the
Usurpation of Cromwell, the Parliament made a Law prohibiting ever Nation to
bring into England any Goods or Merchandises but what were of their own Growth
and Manufactury.

This Prohibition was principally levelled at the Dutch, whose Country produced
very little that England had Occasion for, and had not then any thing like the
Manufactures they have at this Day. But at that time, it was thought prudent
not to let those People grow too great, or rival England in Trade. However the
English, I believe, were not over severe in relation to the Importation of
Spices from Holland, the Dutch being Masters of them, and which could not be
had but through their means. The Dutch on the contrary, permitted the English to
bring into their Ports all sort of Goods, whether they were of the Growth of
England, or not.

The English bring into Holland their Woollen Cloths of their own Manufactury,
and other Stuffs, both of Wool and Silk, Tin, Lead, Vitriol, Pitcoal, Virginia
Tobacco, Barbados Sugar, and other Sugars of America.

The Woollen Manufactures that come from England into Holland, are the chief
Article of that Trade, their Stuffs sell readily; Strangers, and particularly
the Germans, come to buy them: At first, the English kept their StoreHouse for
Cloth at Middlebourg in Zealand, then at Delst, after that at Rotterdam, and
now at Dort, the Magistrates having granted them Privileges for that very
Purpose: There are certain Days when they open their Stores to every body, but
they generally open them when they have received a considerable Quantity of
Cloth, and they give Notice some time before by Circular Letters.

Lead and Tin which the English carry to Holland, next to their Cloth and
Stuffs, make the most considerable Article.

The Tade of the English with the Dutch, is carried on by the Meuse, the
Passage from England being very easy, but I believe their Goods sell best at
A^sterdam; they take from the Dutch their fine Linnens in Payment, and Canvis
for Sails, as also great Quantities of Paper, since that Republic has set up
that Manufactury, and a great Quantity of Silks of their making, especially
when the English prohibited Trade with France.

The Scotch since the Year 1612, have set up a Glass-House in Zealand, where
they make Glass much after the English Way; they bring thither great Quantities
of Coal, but not near so good as the English; several Woollen Stuffs of their
own Manufactury, and particularly Worsted Stockings; and if I am not mistaken a
great deal of Ox and Cow Hides Calves and Sheeps Leather, Dogs and Rabbits
Skins, as also Lead and Tallow.

The Irish have no Storehouses in all Holland, their greatest Trade is from
Dublin, Cork and Waverfard, whare they Transport to Holland pickled Beef in
Barrels, Butter, Tallow, Bulls and Cows Hides, Freezes, and other Woollen
Stuffs.

The absolute Necessity that the Dutch have of the English Ports on the
Channel, is one of the principal Reasons that makes them suffer that great
Inequality in the respective Liberty of the Trade between the two Nations, and
to suit themselves to the Laws the English have made, in relation thereto.

CHAP. IX. Of the Trade with France.
THE Trade the Dutch have with France since the Establishment of their
Republic. has been very considerable in respect of the Number, Quantity and
Quality of the Merchandise they bring thither, and carry thence every Year.
That which France furnishes them with, are equally necessary to them for their
own Subsistence, and their keeping up their Trade with other Nations.

The Principal Things they have from France, are Corn of all kinds, when the
Years are good, Wines of all sorts, particularly those of Grave, Champagne and
Burgundy, Honey, Saffron, large and small Chestnuts, Hazel Nuts, Turpentine,
Rozin, Crayons, Verdugrease, Soap, Wax, Cork, Carduus; to these may be added,
Silks, Taffaties, Gold and Silver Tissues, Stuffs of Amiens, Chalons and
Rheims, Paper, Parchment, Hats, Small Wares, and Iron Ware, both small and
great, and a world of other Goods which are (as they call them) the Merchandise
of Paris, as Belts, Girdles, Combs, Looking-glasses, Trinkets, Toys, Gloves,
and Head-dresses.

All these different sorts of Commodities are sent by the Dutch into all the
Provinces of the North, Germany, the Low Countries, Spain and Portugal, Italy,
the Levant, the Coasts of Africa, and even the Indies. In short to all the
Climates of the World, where these famous Merchants have carried and extended
their Traffic.

They furnish the French in Return with all sorts of Spices, Cloth, Drugs, as
well for Medicines as Painting; all sorts of Woods for Dying; all sorts of
Linen Cloth, etc. They bring from the North, Copper, Steel, Brass Wire, tin'd
Plates, or white Iron, Cannons, Muskets, and other Arms, Gunpowder, Sulphur,
Matches, Russia Leather, Furrs, Flax, Hemp, Pitch and Tar, Masts, Planks, and
other Timber for building Ships or Houses; to these may be added Herrings, and
other Salt Fish, Butter, Cheese, Tallow, and a great Quantity of other
Merchandise, to specify which, would be very difficult and tedious.

The Advantage and Benefit France has found by that Trade, and the Reasons of
State which united her to his Republic against the House of Austria, have made
her favor such Commerce in several Treaties with the States, and granted them
many Privileges; this together with the Neighborhood of the two Nations, made
the French Trade very easy to the Dutch; besides, the French being unskilled in
the Art of Navigation, the Dutch only were employed in making trading Voyages
to all Parts, this filled the French Ports continually with Dutch Vessels,
which ever were taking off their Superfluities, and the Vent of their
Commodities, especially Stuffs and other home Manufactures was very great, and
increased in proportion as the Dutch had Liberty to come into their Ports and
Harbous; this made the French Trade flourish very much, and gave a Value to
their Manufactures.

The good understanding between the two Nations began to lessen, when the
Treaty of Munster was on Foot, and as the French at that time thought they had
reason to be displeased with the Dutch, they refused to renew the ancient
Treaties of Commerce.

They let their Pirates disturb their Mediteranian Trade, which made People
believe a War would have ensued at that time between the two Nations; and the
French made them believe they would prohibit all Dutch Merchandise, at least
lay new Duties on what should come into their Ports. Monsieur Boreel, who was
then their Ambassador in France, represented boldly to that Court, that other
People would be obliged in like manner, to lay new Duties on all French Goods,
which would infallibly very much diminish their Consumption, and consequently
be of Prejudice to that Kingdom. The French pretended to be ignorant (or
perhaps were really so) of the vast Quantities of their Merchandise that went
out of their Country to Foreign Parts, and told him roundly that the thing was
not so considerable as e represented it to them, and that it was only the
Interest of his Country made him talk after that manner.

To undeceive them, that Gentleman made it appear to the Court that their
Republic expended every Year above thirty five Millions of Livres in French
Commodies.

This is the Account taken out of the Registers of their Custom-House, in the
Year 1659. and which that Ambassador gave in to the French Court.
Livres. IN Cloths, Velvets, Sattins, Gold and Silver Tissues, Taffaties of
Lions, Tons, and Paris, above six Millions. 6000000 Silk Ribbons, Silk and
Thread Laces, Buttons, tag Laces made at Paris and Roan, and the Towns
thereabouts. 2000000 Castors, Vigones, Caudebeos, or Hats of Paris and Roan.
1500000 Paris Pendulums and Watches, and such like Goods, two Millions. 2000000
Gloves from Paris, Roan, and Vendome, above. 1500000 Worsted Spun in Picardy,
above 1500000 Paper of all sorts, viz. Auvergne, Limosin, Poitou, Champagne and
Normandy. 2000000 Pins and Needles made at Paris and in Normandy, Ebony Box,
and Ivory Combs. 5000000 Small Iron and Steel Ware from Auvorgue. 5000000
Linen from Normandy, and Britany. 5000000 Chamber Furniture, as Beds, Quilts,
Canopies, Blankets, Silk Fringes. 5000000 Wines of Bourdeaux, Gascony,
Xaintonge, Orleans, Anjou, Nantz, etc. 5000000 Brandies and Vinegars 1500000
Saffron, Soap, Honey, Almonds, Olives, Capers, Prunes, etc. 2000000 Monsieur
Boreel added, that besides, this 5 or 600 Vessels, every Year came laden from
Rochelle, Marans, Brouage, the Isles of Ree and Oloron, which he did not
reckon, no more than vast Quantity of Wheat and other Corn, and Hemp which they
transported to Holland, in plentiful Years, and often amounted to six Millions.
6000000

This Representation and other Politic Reasons (which is not my Business to
meddle with) made the French change their Style, and there was no more Talk of
new Duties and Imposts. In short, after long Disputes upon the new Duty of
Freight of 50 Sols per Tun, the French in the Year 1662, signed a Treaty of
Commerce with the States General, and which was to be a lasting one. This
Treaty made both the Dutch and French Merchants hope, that a Commerce so very
useful and advantageous to the two Nations would be considerably augmented; but
their Hopes were frustrated, and they saw with Sorrow it sensibly lessened in
the Year 1667, when the French increased the Duties on Foreign Merchandise,
without having any manner of Regard to the Treaty of 1662. They had for some
Years, it seems, entertained a Notion that they could carry on a Trade after a
new unheard of Method, They pretended to sell their Goods to their Neighbors,
and buy none of theirs.

It must be allowed, a finer Project never could be invented to fill France
with Gold and Silver; I call it a fine, not pernicious Project, but it has been
found by unhappy Experience, it was altogether impracticable.

To put this Project in Execution, the first thing they did was to set up an
East India Company, as also others for the Levant and Northern Trade, in order
to furnish themselves with such Merchandise of those Countries as they should
have Occasion of, and in Return, with what might be necessary for their Use
without having recourse to Strangers.

To quit themselves entirely of Foreign Assistance, they began to set up in
France the Manufacturies of other Countries, imagining at the same time, those
other Countries could not be without French Goods and Provisions, and that they
would take off the same Quantities as usual, and by consequence would be
obliged to pay ready Money when they saw the French take no more of theirs in
Return: 'Twas on this View that in the Year 1667 the French laid new Duties on
Foreign Goods especially Manufactures, which consequently made them much dearer
than their own, and was done, with intent to make the People prefer their own
to Foreign Manufactures.

The Dutch seeing themselves attackt in the most sensible Part, so well
traversed this new Establishment of the French Companies, that at last they
fell of themselves. They forgot nothing that might ruin the Manufactures of
France, they set up for making themselves those very Goods they used to have
from France, and sold them much cheaper than the Franch could do; Reasons of
State joined to those of Trade, and the Enmity of both Parties to each other,
broke out at last into an open War, which was properly speaking a Trade War.
The Conduct of the Dutch during the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, the Triple
Alliance made afterward with England and Sweden for the Preservation of the
rest of the Spanish Low Countries, and their Gasconading Language made the King
resolve they should feel his Resentment. To humble this Republic, it was
thought nothing would go so far as the ruining their Trade, by laying still new
Duties on such Merchandise as should be brought into France, or else entirely
to prohibit it.

The States General tried all ways to engage the French to regulate their
Duties upon Entries by the Tariff made in the Year 1664. and to execute the
Treaty of Commerce of the Year 1662; but finding they could do nothing, they
began to fight the French with their own Weapons; that is, they prohibited all
French Wines and Brandies entering their Ports, and laid new Duties upon all
Goods of the French Manufactury; and the Provisions and other Merchandise that
a long time before they used continually to have from France, they then bought
and dealt for from other Parts; the French soon perceived a very great
Diminution of their Commerce: The War coming on between France and Holland in
the Year 1672, Trade on both sides was entirely prohibited. However, Monsieur
Colbert happily foreseeing, that 'twould be a very difficult Matter for France
to continue long a War (wherein probably all Europe might be engaged against
her) if no Body took off her Goods and Merchandises, gave Passports to every
one that would come and trade thither; and to this wise and sage Conduct, may
be justly attributed good part of the happy Success which afterward attended
that Kingdom.

That War ending by the Treaty of Nimeguen, which was concluded the 10th of
August 1678. the very same Day a new Treaty of Commerce was struck up, in which
it was agreed, that the French and Dutch should enjoy reciprocally the same
Liberty, in respect of Commerce and Navigation, in each other's Dominions, as
they did before the beginning of that War. In Consequence of this Treaty, the
Tariff of 1667 was entirely abolished in favor of the Dutch; and that of 1664
was set up in its stead, generally for all sorts of Goods whatsoever, that they
should bring into that Kingdom, or export thence. One would have thought that
this would have established a lasting Commerce between the two Nations.
However, in the beginning of the Year 1680, the French Provisions and other
Goods, especially Silks, bore no Price at Amsterdam; and those that traded
thither were very sensible, that oftentimes they rather lost than gained, as I
have elsewhere observed: So true is it, that Commerce once destroyed, never
again recovers it self. Those Gentlemen who had the Mangement of Affairs after
the Death of Monsieur Colbert, without having any manner of regard to this last
Treaty, set up the Tariff of 1667, and considerably augmented the Duties, in
hopes to augment the Sale of their own Manufactures. The Dutch seeing their
Commerce continually attacked in such open manner, and that they had no hopes
of re-establishing Matters on the ancient Footing, applied themselves more than
ever, with all Care and Diligence, to put themselves in that Condition, as
never more to have occasion of the French Manufactures; and they succeeded so
well in this last Article, that they set up amongst themselves those very
Manufacturies; as, the making Silks, Gold and Silver Brocades, Hats, Paper,
Ribands, and Laces, etc. And the French, since that time, have found to their
no small Detriment, a prodigious Decrease of their Trade in these several
Articles. I believe it may very truly be said, that these Trade-Quarrels were
partly the Cause of the Wars breaking out again, between France and the United
Provinces, in the Year 1690. The Declaration of this War was followed by the
most severe and longest Prohibition of Commerce that ever was known, and has
hitherto continued; and it is to be feared, will only make the Dutch know, they
can very easily let the French Provisions alone. Time will make it appear,
whether after the Peace, the Dutch will resort to the Ports of France with such
Numbers of Merchants-Ships as before; and we shall see whether they will take
off such vast Quantities of Provisions, and Goods of the French Manufacture, as
in times past; it is much to be wished they would, as well for the Benefit of
Commerce, as the Good of the State.

CHAP. X. Of the Trade with Spain.
NOtwithstanding the Revolt of the Dutch from Spain, Philip the Second
pretended he knew nothing of their Trading in his Dominions, under the Colors
of his Allies; and though he saw very well, that such Trading must inevitably
furnish them wherewith to maintain their Revolt, yet he did not think it worth
his while to deprive them of it. It was the general Opinion, that that Prince
acted after that manner, because he had occasion for the Merchandise of the
North to equip his Fleets, and which he could have no other way but by means of
the Dutch: it was believed he was likewise afraid, that if he should shut them
out of the Spanish Ports, they would, being very powerful at Sea, open
themselves a Way into the New World. However, notwithstanding this Connivance
of that Monarch, the Spaniards in time treated the Dutch Merchants, that traded
to Spain, with such Cruelty, and laid on them such heavy Duties, that they were
fore'd to leave off trading thither, as well as to Portugal, which then was
subject to Philip. The Merchants and Seamen that were employed in that Trade,
after it thus expired, took a Resolution to look out for those Goods in Asia,
Africa, and America, which they used to have from Seville and Lisbon; and this
was one of the principal Causes of the Rise of that Republic, and the Decay of
the Spanish Monarchy.

Philip the Third, having succeeded his Father, Philip the Second, in the Month
of September, 1598. seeing plainly that all Endeavors that were used to bring
the Dutch to a Peace, proved ineffectual, resolved to forbid them all manner of
Trade whatsoever with his Subjects, hoping that by taking away that which
supported them to that time in their War, they would have no mind to continue
it, when they should see themselves deprived of such Support. It was visible,
that all the Riches of Holland were the Effects of their Navigation and Trade,
and that their greatest Traffic was with Spain, whither they not only carried
the Merchandise of their own State, but Corn from Poland and other Northern
Countries, that they might in Exchange carry home vast Quantities of Gold and
Silver.

Philip the Third executed his Edict with a great deal of Severity; a very
exact Search was made all over Spain for Dutch Merchants and Sailors; some of
which were condemned to perpetual Imprisonment and the Galleys; others were
cruelly put to Death by several kinds of Tortures. This Interdiction of
Commerce was likewise pulished in the Low Countries, in the Name of the
Princess Isabella, who was at that time their Sovereign.

The States General, on the other hand, were not contented with barely
prohibiting all Commerce with Spain, they likewise forbid all other Nations
bringing into their Country any Provisions, or other Commodities whatsoever,
from Spain, declaring, that all that did so should be esteemed Spanish
Partisans, and be treated as Enemies. A Copy of this Declaration of the
States General was sent to all Princes, that they might not pretend Ignorance.

France came into the Dutch Scheme, and declared, that if after 6 Months any of
her Subjects should trade with Spain, they would, in so doing, expose
themselves to such Inconveniences, as the Crown would not concern it self to
remedy; and the other Powers likewise acquiesced to this bold Declaration.

Notwithstanding these severe Prohibitions of the Spaniards, the Dutch, as
before, traded to all the Spanish Countries, by means of Passports, the
Spaniards themselves gave them for Money, which they often wanted to carry on
their Affairs. In short, the Truce of twelve Years was concluded between Spain
and the United Provinces in the Year 1609, and by it the Freedom of Trade was
reestablished between the two Nation; and amongst other things it was agreed,
That the Traders of each Nation should pay no greater Duties, than the
Inhabitants or Allies of such Nations who paid the lowest Customs; and that the
Dutch might be secured from apprehending any thing from the Inquisition, it was
agreed, that they should enjoy the same Liberty as was stipulated to the
English some time before, in the Articles of the Treaty of Velasco, which the
Constable of Castile had made with the Crowns of Spain and England.

The War that was revived in the Year 1621, after the Expiration of that Truce,
interrupted the Trade of both Nations till the Year 1648, when they concluded a
perpetual Peace at Munster; and from that time the Trade the Dutch drove with
Spain became much more considerable than ever, by reason of those Privileges
that Crown yielded to them in that Treaty. Those great Advantages they offered
the United Provinces, was one of the principal Means they made use of to draw
the States from the French Interest, and to make a Separate Peace with them,
and which in Effect, was the saving of that Monarchy.

The Dutch Trade with Spain continued from that time till now, that is, till
the breaking out of this present War, which began in the Year 1702, on Account
of the Partition Treaty which was designed to exclude Philip V. the present
King, from succeeding Charles II. whose lawful Heir and Successor he was. It is
worth while to observe, how Reasons of State have united these two Nations, the
most averse to each other in the World, and whose hatred especially that of the
Spaniards seemed irreconciliable.

The Spaniards favored the Dutch in their Trade as much as they possibly
could, particularly since the Year 1667, in hopes to have ruined that of the
French, and they were not unsuccessful in that respect; but the Dutch Trade
never flourished so much in Spain as since the War between France and Holland,
begun in the Year 1672, to the beginning of this present War; for they not only
furnish the Spaniards with such Goods as they used to have from France, but
furnish themselves likewise from Spain with what France used to supply them
with before the several Wars of 1672, and 1690.

The Dutch traded very much to all those Places that were subject to Spain, as
Flanders and Brabant, etc. before this present War, and which she has now lost,
as well as those which the French lost some time after, that is to say, during
the three last Campaigns: But their chief Trade of all was that of Cadiz and in
the Mediterranean. It Is in that famous Port of Spain, where the Galleons are
equipt out for Peru, and the Flotilla for Mexico and New Spain, and which
return thither with their rich lading from those Empires, and bring almost all
the Gold and Silver we see in Europe; however, though the Spaniards are the
Masters of those Countries where Gold and Silver grow in such abundance, yet it
is very true that they have less of either than those Nations that Trade with
them, which shows that Mines of Gold and Silver contribute much less to the
enriching of a Country than Trade and Commerce.

What follows, is a true Account of the Goods and Merchandise the Dutch used to
carry into Spain and bring thence, before the last Rupture.

That which they imported consisted chiefly of Linen of all sorts, Woollen
Stuffs, a great Number of Silks, Gold and Silver Stuffs, Drugs, Spices, small
Iron Wares, Masts and Timber.

The Linen brought into Spain by Foreigners, ever was looked on as the most
considerable Article of that Trade, by reason of its vast Consumption both in
Spain and America; the French furnished the Spaniards a long time with this
Commodity; I believe I should not exceed the Truth, by affirming that this only
Article of the French Commerce amounted every Year to about eight Millions of
Livres.

The Linnens that the Dutch bring into Spain, are generally of the finest sort
that are made in Overissel, and about Douay and Valenciennes; they sell them in
Spain by the Name of Lawns and Cambricks; they vend likewise a certain kind of
Linen, called Perseilles and Brabant; it is very broad and coarse, and serves
the poorer sort of People, to wrap up Goods in: Besides this, they sell a World
of fine and coarse Callico stained in Holland with all sorts of Colors, which
they make Use of both in Spain and America, for Lining of Clothes: I pass by
many other sorts of Linen of less Note, which the Dutch bring into Spain in
time of Peace, as well as Table Linen, Tapes and Filletings, both white and
colored.

Their Woollen Stuffs are Drabs and Serges, Camlets of all sorts, fine and
coarse; these Stuffs are all of their own Manufactures, as well as what they
call black Anacosies.

Though this Article may appear very considerable, yet the Dutch bring into Spain
other Goods of a far greater Value; the several sorts of Silks which they bring
in vast Quantities amount to prodigious Sums. The Spaniards used formerly to
buy their Silks from the French, but since the Establishment of these sorts of
Manufactures in Holland, the French have entirely lost that rich Commerce as
well as that of Gold and Silver Brocades, which the Dutch sell much cheaper.
It Is true, these rich Stuffs at first were neither so well made, nor so
beautified as those made in France, but they are now come to that Perfection in
Holland, that there is but very little Difference. The Dutch and they only
furnish Spain with Cinnamon, Cloves and Nutmegs, and such like Spices; they
serve them likewise with Pepper, but the English share with them in that Trade.
I have been assured, that one third Part of the Cinnamon that the Dutch have
from the East Indies, is consumed in Spain and America, especially in Peru,
where their Chocolate makes a vast Consumption.

The Dutch likewise dispose of in Spain, a considerable Quantity of Drugs from
the Levant, both for the Apothecary and Painters Use.

I pass over the Article of Musk, Civet, Ambergrease, etc. which amount to no
small Sum: They carry also into Spain small Iron Ware worked at Nuremberg,
Frankfort and Liege, Steel and Copper-work from Sweden, Leather from Denmark,
and Russia Leather for Chairs and Coaches; great Quantities of Paper and Cards
which they used to have from France, White and Yellow Wax. This last Article is
so considerable, that it is believed to exceed four Millions of Livres, as well
by the Dutch Accounts as those of other Nations that Trade thither. The
Spaniards, especially those that live in the Indies, consume prodigious
Quantities, their chief Delight being to illuminate their Churches Sundays and
Holydays.

In the time of Peace the Spaniards have from Holland Planks, Masts, Cordage,
Pitch and Tar, and almost every thing that is necessary for Shipping, besides
all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions, as Herrings, Salmon, Butter, Cheese and
Corn (when there is a scarce Year, as it often happens in Spain) I must not
forget Timber for building, nor that sort of Wood they make Pipes, Barrels and
Casks of to carry their Wine and Oil in, to America. These are the principal
Commodities the Dutch bring into Spain, and which they will again undoubtedly
continue to do after the Conclusion of the approaching Peace.

One might add to these the Negro Trade, which Slaves their East India Company
furnishes the Spaniards with for America; and this makes no inconsiderable
Article in the Dutch Trade.

All these Commodities (very few excepted) are equally proper for Spain and
America; but the greatest part is sent into the New World, and Peru alone makes
a greater Consumption than all Mexico.

'It must be observed as a Matter of Importance, that only the Spaniards can
Trade to the West Indies, and that all Nations else are forbidden on Pain of
Death to trade thither, either directly or indirectly -- ' However, by means
even of the Spaniards themselves, they have found out the Secret to send to
those Parts all sorts of Merchandise on their own Account; the Method is to
find out some Spaniard of Worth and Probity, and entrust him privately to sell
your Goods in the Indies in his Name, who will certainly do it for you, and
return you faithfully your Profits.

This indirect Way of Trading to America is very frequent in Spain, and it was
scarce ever known that a Spaniard betrayed his Trust.

The Court of Madrid is not unacquainted with these Practices, but Policy makes
her connive at them. The Dutch have likewise found out the Way of Trading
thither secretly, or indeed to speak better, directly by the way of the Island
Curazao, which lies not far from the Town of Cartagena, the Merchants of that
famous Place, and those of the other Towns along the Maritime Coasts, have a
very good Understanding with the Dutch whom they furnish with the Merchandise
of the Country, and carry their Goods even a-board their Vessels while they lie
at Anchor in some convenient Place near the Coast; and in exchange receive from
them the Merchandise of Europe.

The Trade between the new World and Spain is carried on by the Galleons and
Flotilla: There are besides some few Vessels, but those are but inconsiderable.

The Galleons are designed, as I hinted before, entirely for the Commerce of
Peru, which is by far the richest, and the Flotilla for that of Mexico. The
Galleons may sail from Cadiz at any time, but the Flotilla is obliged to depart
in the Month of August, to avoid the Stormy Winds that are very rife in the
Gulf of Mexico, during the Month of September.

These two Fleets keep the same way till they come to the Islands of Antilles;
thence the Galleons continue their Course till they come to Cartagena, and at
last to Portobello, where is kept the famous Fair between the Merchants of Peru
and Spain.

The Flotilla on the contrary, takes its Course toward the North, and passing
between the Islands of Cuba and Jamaica, arrives at the Port of Vera Cruz.

In coming back, the Galleons and Flotilla must meet and anchor at the Havana,
a very famous Port in the Isle of Cuba; then they sail together through the Canal
of Bahama, and keeping still in sight of Land, direct their Course Northward as
far as the Azores, and touch at those Islands whence they fall directly down to
Cadiz.

And now I am treating of the Commerce of Spain, it will not be amiss if I give
some particular Account of that Part of it, which has relation to America.

What else the Dutch and other Nations furnish the Spaniards with, is paid for
in Money by the Merchants of America, as well as of those of Spain.

The chief Merchandise of America is Gold and Silver, Pearls, Emeralds,
Cochinele, Indigo, that which the French call Lain de Vigogne. Quinquina,
Cocoa, Vanilles, Tobacco, Leather, Wood of Campechy, and other considerable
Commodities.

The Gold and Silver come to Spain by the the Galeons and Flotilla; but the
Galleons as I said before, being designed only for Peru, bring greater
Quantities; it is chiefly from the Mountain of Potosi, in the Province of
Chereassa, that almost all the Silver comes that is seen in all the Parts of
Europe, Asia, and the Coasts of Africa; and the Spanish Pieces of Eight are no
less known and sought after in China, and all the East (except Japan, where
there are a great many Mines of Silver) than in all the Countries of Europe;
that which comes to us from New Spain, is dug out of the Mines of St. Lewis de
Zacatecas, some Leagues from Mexico, the Capital City of that Empire.

Peru, Chili, and the new Kingdom of Grenada, are the three Countries that
produce the most Gold.

These are the several Mines of these two valuable Metals, and where every Day
they make new Discoveries, which makes all the Nations of Europe so eager to
Trade with the Spaniards; in reality this Commerce is the most profitable, the
Returns being always in Gold and Silver.

Pearls, Emeralds, Quinquina, and Laines de Vigogne come with the Galleons.

For the most part they fish for Pearls, near the Terra Firma.

The Mines of Emeralds are near Santa Fe de Bagota, in New Granada.

Laines de Vigogne, come from Potosi.

Quinquina, from the Province of Quillio, which is likewise in Peru.

Cochineal, Indigo, Cocoa, Vanilles, and the Wood of Campechy, generally from
New Spain or Mexico. The Province of Guatimala affords the best Cochineal,
which they call there Meteq, and is the best and dearest of all. There is a
prodigious Quantity consumed all over Europe, in Dying Scarlet.

There is no less a Consumption of Indigo for Dying Blues; the best, if I
mistake not, comes from Guatimala.

The Wood of Campechy, which is used in Dying Blacks, comes from Jacatan; Cocoa
and Varnilles are two Fruits, with which they make Chocolate; the first comes
generally from the Island Curazao, Miracuebo, and Gayaquil, upon the Coasts of
Terra Firma, and the other from Ducapello and Mexico, on the Coasts of the
South Sea.

The Tobacco we have from Spain, comes from Vernia, Miracuebo, the Havana, and
St. Domingo; I think that which comes from the Havana is best to make Snuff of,
the other to Smoke.

Their Leather comes generally from Mexico, the Islands of St. Domingo, the
Havana, Curazao, and Buenos Aires, and is by much the best of any, and most
valuable.

Tobacco and Leather make a great Article in the Spanish Trade, and the Dutch
take off vast Quantities.

I take no Notice of Sarsaparilla, the Ro^ Contrayerva, the Balsom of Peru, and
other small Articles that come to us from the New World.

The principal Merchandise of their own Growth, that the Spaniards furnish
these Countries with, are Wool, Wines, Fruits, Oils, Soap, Salt, Soude or
Kalt, Iron and Steel.

The Spanish Wool was ever in high Esteem on Account of its Fineness and
Excellency; there is however, great Difference, the best coming from the
Provinces of Andalusia, Valentia, Castile, Arragon and Biscay.

The Dutch, when they have a free Trade with Spain, take off vast Quantities,
it being absolutely necessary in their Manufactures of Cloth. The French,
Italians, and even the English themselves lay out considerable Sums in this
Commodity; so that it may truly be said, that the Spanish Wool is the greatest
Article in their Trade on this side.

The Southern Parts of this Kingdom produce great Quantities of excellent Red
and White Wines; the chief Ports where these Wines are shipped off to Foreign
Parts, are, Alicant and Malaga, in the Mediterranean: Much more Red than White
comes from Port St. Mary, Port Real, St. Lucar, and Rosa, in the Bay of Cadiz;
but the greatest Part of the Wines that grow about that Bay, are White, and are
commonly called Xeres Wines. The Dutch lay out large Sums in these Wines, as
well as in Canaryand Brandies, since they bought none of the French. The
Spaniards, since this War, have sold much more Wine than before; for whereas
during the Peace, in the Year 1691. the Duties run only for 3000 Buts, they
have since risen to 16000.

The Dutch take off likewise abundance of Olives from the Island of Majorca, as
well as from Sevil and Malaga, besides great Quantities of Figs, Raisins,
Almonds, and other dried Fruits. I have been well informed, that there is
scarce a Year, but they lade five or six Ships with these Goods, including
Oranges, Limons and Capers.

The Soaps of Alicant and Carthagena are always esteemed the best of any. Soude
or Kalt, which is an Herb that turns to a kind of Stone, after being burnt, and
which is used in making Soap and Grass, grows in large Quantities on the Coasts
of the Kingdoms of Valencia and Murcia, and Foreigners take off a great deal
from both Places.

The Dutch were wont to lay out great Sums with the Spaniards, for Iron and
Spanish Salt; there is a world of this Salt all round about the Bay of Cadiz,
and the Island of Iva. Iron is the Product of Biscay and Navarre; and as there
is no better in Europe, so for that very Reason there is every Year a great
Consumption of this necessary Metal.

The Dutch every Year employ in the Cadiz Trade about thirty Sail of Ships,
besides those that unlade themselves at that Port, and continue their Course to
the Streights.

They tell you, that at the times of the Departure and Arrival of the Galleons,
the Number of the Dutch Vessels, that trade to Cadiz, commonly increases to 15
or 20.

The Ships that Trade to Cadiz (except those laden with Corn) go always without
Convoy, though their Artillery and Lading be very considerable, which makes other
Nations often put their Goods aboard these Vessels, as well for Safety as
Cheapness of Freight.

They pretend that the Dutch receive every Return of the Flotilla and Galleons
about five Millions for Goods sent to the Indies, and near upon as much for
those sold at Cadiz; add to this the indirect Trade to America, actually
carried on by the Way of Curazao, an Article of no little Consequence.

I have only one Word more to say, and that is in relation to the Trade the
Dutch carry on with the Northern Parts of Spain: They come into every Port, but
the Traders of Bilboa and St. Sebastian are they that deal most with the Dutch;
the Port of the former is the most considerable, being the Magazine of the
Provinces of Old Castille and Leon; this Town by its Commerce furnishes these
two Provinces with Woollen Stuffs, Silks, Lace, Ribands, Hats, Paper, Small
Wares and Iron Work, brought thither by the Dutch; who likewise bring all
things necessary for Shipping, Salt and Corn, of which they consume great
Quantities in those Places, as well as in other Provinces on the Sea Coast.

They bring much the same Goods to St. Sebastian as Bilbao, which are again
sent into Navarre, the Country of Guipuscoa, the Asturies, etc.

From all this side of the Country the Commodities to be Exported are Wool from
Arragon, Navarre, and Old Castille; excellent Iron from Guipuscoa, where the
Iron Mines chiefly are; Nuts, Chestnuts, Limons, Oranges, Anchovies from Calica.

The Trade of the Southern Parts of Spain, which are washed by the
Mediterranean Sea, is chiefly at Malaga, Cartagena, Alicant, Valentia, Almarica
and Majorca, etc. which afford all the Commodities I spoke of above; to wit,
Wines, Oils, Olives, Raisins, Figs, Almonds, Aniseeds, Salt, Soap, Soude or
Kalt, and abundance of excellent Wool.

The Foreign Commodities which are most proper for this Country are French
Linnens made in Bittany, good Quantities of Woollen and Silk Stuffs, Lace,
Hats, Small Wares of every sort, and Jewellers Work, most of which are sent
from Cadiz, the rest the Dutch bring directly to the places they design them
for.

CHAP. XI. Of the Trade with Portugal.
BEFORE Portugal and the Countries that Crown possessed in Asia, Africa, and
America came to be reunited in the Year 1580, to the Crown of Castille, under
the Reign of Philip II, the Dutch traded very much with Portugal, and with a
great deal of ease, notwithstanding the Difference of Religion and the great
Severity of the Inquisition; their greatest Trade was that of Lisbon, whence
they Exported besides the Merchandise of the Country, that of the East Indies,
Africa and Brazil, all which at that time went only through the Hands of the
Portugueze.

But after that Union, the Trade that the Dutch drove in Portugal, underwent
the same Fate as in the other Provinces of the Spanish Monarchy, that is, those
Gentlemen were deprived of all manner of Commerce whatsoever.

The Portugueze having shook off the Government of the Castilians in the Year
1640, one of the first things they did was to stop the Conquests of the Dutch,
which they were continually making of the Portugueze Territories in the East
Indies, Africa and Brazil, being Subject to the King of Spain. The new King
sent forthwith an Ambassador to the Hague, to represent to the States General
that the Portugueze, as such, never having any Difference with the United
Provinces, he earnestly wished there might be established a good Understanding
between the two Nations, which would put them in a better Condition to resist
the Spaniand, their common Enemy.

The States General finding their Account in the Offers of the Portugueze, a
Truce for ten Years was signed between them in the Year 1641, and included all
the Countries belonging to the two Nations, as well on this as the other Side
of the Line: By this Truce it was agreed that there should be a free
Navigation, and that each Party should be Master of those Places they were in
Possession of at the time of publishing such Truce; which Truce was so ill
observed by the Dutch in the Indies, that the Portugueze were in some Measure
obliged to break it in the Year 1645, by an Insurrection they made in Brazil
against the Dutch, whom they entirely drove out of that Country. This
occasioned a new War in Brazil between the two Nations, but it did not break
out in Europe till the Month of October 1646, when the States General declared
War in all its Forms against the King of Portugal, because he would not restore
to their West India Company that which his Subjects had taken from them in
1647; but this Affair was endeavored to be accomodated by the Mediation of
France and Cromwell.

The War between the Northern Crowns was the Cause that this Negotiation
lingered out till the Restoration of the King of England, who resolving to marry
the Infanta of Portugal, procured a Peace between the two Nations by his
Mediation; and a perpetual Peace was signed by them accordingly, the 16th of
August, 1661.

The Privileges the Portugueze granted to the Dutch by this Treaty, in relation
to their Commerce, gave them an Opportunity of Trading very considerably in
Portugal, particularly after the French prohibited all Foreign Sugar and
Tobacco, and the Portugueze on their side prohibted all French Manufactures:
'Twas with these two Articles chiefly that the Portugueze paid for all French
Goods; but after the French left off taking these from Portugal, the Portugueze
would deal no more in French Merchandise; this gave the Dutch an Opportunity to
furnish them with theirs, taking in payment Sugar and Tobacco, which they knew
very well how to dispose of.

The Trade of Holland is chiefly at Lisbon and Oporto, but the first is the
most considerable: As for St. Ubes where they go for Salt there is very little
or no Consumption.

The Goods they Transport to Portugal consist chiefly in great Quantities of
Manufactures of Silk, Wool and Linen, Small Wares and Iron-work, Paper, Cards,
Leather, Corn in time of scarcity (which is there very frequent.) Of all sorts
of Merchandise except Corn, there is a vast Consumption in Portugal and its
Colonies.

The Goods they bring from Portugal are those of the Country or its Colonies,
the latter consist in Sugars, Tobacco, Wood of Brazil and Fernambouc, Ox Hides,
Ginger, Pearls, Indigo, rough Diamonds, and Ambergrease, etc.

Tobacco and Sugar are the chief Commodities of Portugal, Sugar is one of their
richest Returns from Brazil, where it wonderfully abounds: The Islands of S.
Thomas, Madera, Capo Verde; and the Terceras also furnish considerable
Quantities, but I am of the Opinion not near so good, unless it be that of
Madera; they have also great Quantities of Brazil Wood, and other Woods for
Dying, Ambergrease (which comes from Melinda) Pearls and Diamonds from the East
Indies; this Merchandise is one of the greatest Articles in the Portugal Trade.

The Merchadize of Portugal itself consists in Wines (amongst which I shall
reckon those of Madera) Oils, Olives, Aniseeds, excellent Fruits, Rasins and
Figs.

It is believed that the Dutch bring every Year from Portugal ten or twelve
Ships laden with those Commodities, including Limons and Oranges, without
reckoning their dried Sweetmeats made of several sorts of admirable Fruits in
Portugal and Brazil.

It is said, that they send every Year directly into Portugal above twenty Sail
of Ships, besides other Ships that Trade in the Mediterranean, and come thence
to S. Ubes for their lading of Salt, of which they make a great Consumption in
the North, where it has been very much in Use for a long time. The Commerce of
Holland with Portugal is carried on by a Fleet of fifty Ships that are every
Year constantly employed for that End, from fifteen to thirty Guns, with which
they do good Service against the Corsairs and Pirates.

CHAP. XII. Of the Mediterranean or Streights Trade.
THE Trade of the Mediterranean Sea was heretofore the most considerable in the
World, when that of the Indies only past through Alexandria, and some other Ports
of Syria: This Commerce was chiefly carried on by the French, Italians and
Catalans; but the Venetians were the most considerable of all.

The Portugueze making themselves Masters of the Trade of Asia turned the
Current, and the Italians and the French enjoyed only the Commerce with the
Provinces and Countries on the Coast of the Mediterranean, which however was
very considerable.

And this they kept to themselves till the English and Dutch began to Traffic
with the Subjects of the Grand Signior; the former in the Year 1599, and the
latter in 1612. since that time, those two Nations have made themselves so much
Masters of that Trade, that the Italians and French have very little to do.

The Trade of Holland to the Mediterranean, is one of the most considerable
that Republic enjoys, as well on Account of the great Quantities of
Merchandise they carry thither, and vend at a high Price, as in respect of the
vast Number and Quality of those Goods they have thence in return, and of which
likewise they make a considerable Profit in the other Parts of Europe; for
which Reason the States General are very careful and jealous of a Commerce so
advantageous to their Republic. They have established a Chamber, which they
call the Chamber of Direction, composed of six Deputies and a Register; all the
substantial Merchants of Amsterdam, who have attained the Rank of Burgomasters,
have a particular regard to, and are much interested in what concerns the
Navigation and Trade of the Mediterranean.

This Chamber has Authority to see that all Orders from the States General,
touching this free Navigation, and the Trade thereon depending, be duly
observed; and this Chamber takes Notice or Cognizance of all Differences that
may arise at any time, in pursuance of such Commerce: It regulates in some
Measure, the Convoys that are necessary for Merchants Ships, and nominates
Consuls for the Seaports of the Levant, with consent of the States General.

They send every Year about 10 Ships, that sail from Holland in three or four
Squadrons, to trade in the Dominions of the Grand Seignior.

Their Vessels of Freight cannot have less than 20 or 25 Pieces of Cannon, and
60 or 70 Men each; and because these Voyages are very dangerous, by reason of
the Corsairs of Barbary; they allow them a Convoy of two Men of War of 50 or 60
Pieces of Cannon, and 160 or 170 Men.

These little Squadrons, both going and coming, touch generally at Leghorn, one
of the best and most convenient Ports in Italy; there they take in fresh
Provisions and Pieces of Eight, things absolutely necessary for an advantageous
Trading Voyage to the Levant. The Genoese who are always well provided with
this sort of Money, are the People that furnish them, though they very often
furnish themselves with it at Cadiz.

There are other Dutch Vessels that go to several Ports of Italy, Spain, and
the Coasts of Barbary, with Merchandise which they dispose of there, and then
take in other Commodities for the Levant, either on their own Account, or for
the Italians, French, etc. and thence continue their Course to the Levant. The
same Method they take in returning; that is to say, they sell in those Ports
the Commodities they bring from the Levant, and lade themselves again with such
as they judge proper for Holland, either on their own or other People's Account.

Amongst all the Ports the Grand Signior has in the Archipelago, Candia,
Cyprus, Rhodes, Greece, Asia and Egypt, those of Constantinople, Smyrna, Aleppo
and Grand Cairo, are Places of the greatest Commerce; but Smirna exceeds them
all, by reason of the Carravans of Persia, and the prodigious Number of
Christian Vessels that resort thither.

This Town, is the very Center of the Engglish and Dutch Levant Trade, and the
principal Mart of their Cloths, which are not only much admired and sought
after in the Territories of the Grand Signior, but in Persia and the greatest
Part of Asia.

The Trade of Egypt is by the way of Grand Cairo; this renowned City is not
only the general Magazine of all sorts of Merchandise, produced in that rich
and vast Kingdom, but also of what comes thither from the Coasts of the Red
Sea, the East Indies, Persia and Arabia Felix, and some Provinces of Africa:
However, notwithstanding all this, the Trade of Grand Cairo is now only a
Shadow, in Comparison of what it was before the Portugueze discovered the
East Indies.

The Trade of this Place with Europe and Asia, is carried on by the Nile;
Alexandria and Rhodes, situated on the two Entrances of that famous River, are
the two Ports where ordinarily resort the Christian Ships: Damietta, which lies
in the South-Entrance of the same River, is frequented only by the Merchants of
Africa and Turkey.

There is very little Consumption at the two former Places, which are to be
considered as Places of Staple for those who trade to Grand Cairo, which City
is about Fifty Leagues distant; and that is the Reason that the Dutch Trade in
Egypt is very inconsiderable.

Besides, the Minister the Dutch always have at the Ottoman Port, whose
principal Employment is to see the Articles of Agreement between the two
Nations put in Execution, and secure and protect the Commerce of the Republic;
they have their Consuls and their Vice-Consuls, in the chief Ports of the
Levant, who do Justice to the Dutch Merchants that live there, without any Fee,
Salary, or Perquisite.

The principal Merchandise that the Dutch carry to the Levant, are Cloths of
all sorts, Spices, Cochineal, Indigo, Drugs, Woods fit for Dying, Tin, Lead,
Iron, Steel, Cotton, Russia-Leather, and Money both Gold and Silver.

Their Clothes and other Woolen Stuffs have ever made the greatest Article of
what the People of Europe are used to send into the Levant; the Venetians and
French supplied those Countries heretofore; but the English and Dutch have long
since made themselves Masters of that considerable Trade; and it is said, that
those two Nations send thither every Year a prodigious Quantity of all sorts,
Qualities and Colors, great part of which is presently taken off by the
Caravans of Persia that come for that very Purpose to Smyrna, and thence carry
them to sell in their own Country, and Tartary.

The great Fidelity and Exactness that the English and Dutch always keep in the
Quality, Measure and Color of their Cloths, added to their cheapness, have
been the principal Reason that this Trade runs only through the hands of those
two Nations.

The Spices the Dutch bring into the Levant are Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon,
Pepper; to which I shall add Ginger and Sugar; 'twas heretofore from the Ports
of Syria they had all their Spices, but now by a very surprising Revolution of
Commerce, the Dutch, a People of the North, after a Navigation of many thousand
Leagues, which they constantly make to acquire this rich Merchandise, supply
those very Ports with Spices which heretofore used to furnish all Europe.

The Dutch bring likewise into the Levant the finest Woods and Drugs for Dying,
as Cochineel, Indigo, Gumlac, Woods of Brazil, Fernamboue, Siampan, Brazillet,
and Campechy.

All these Commodities, and many others come from Africa, except Gumlac and
Siampon, which are the Product of the Indies.

They bring likewise thither a great deal of Steel, Iron, tin'd Iron, Iron
Wire, Brass Plates, Russia Leather, Lead and Tin: But the English, whose
Country produces these two last in greatest abundance, bring into the Levant
much greater Quantities, and the vast Consumption that there is made, is none
of the least Articles of the English Trade: The Tin Men over all the East use a
great deal of it in Kitchen Furniture, which for the most part is made of no
other Metal but Copper.

Though the Money the Dutch make in Holland be nothing near of so good Alloy as
the Spanish Pieces of Eight, they go nevertheless in the Levant as well as the
other: I omit here some Commodities of lesser Consequence which the Dutch are
likewise used to bring into these Parts; all sorts of Goods are well enough
received at Grand Caico, except fine Linen and Spices.

The greatest part of the Commodities that the Dutch bring from the Ports of
the Levant, come from the Grand Signiors Dominions, the reft from those Ports
where arrive the Caravans of Persia and Armenia, the chief of which Commodities
are raw and spun Silks, twisted Goats and Camels Hair, Cotton, Callicoes,
Cordovan and other Leather, colored Camblets, Wax, Allom, Galls, Wool,
Boxwood, Tea, Coffee, Gurrants, Ultramarine, and all sorts of Drugs for the
Apothecaries Use.

The Silks that come from the Levant are for the most part the Product of
Persia, Syria, Egypt, the Islands of the Archipelago, and the Morea. But what
the Caravans bring every Year to Smyrna, far exceeds in Quantity that which
comes from the other Countries of the Levant.

These Caravans bring likewise a great deal of Goats Hair spun at Angora and
Debazar in Persia, of which they make the finest Camlets in England and Holland.

It is said that the Dutch every Year bring from the Levant about 2000 Bales of
Silk, and the like Quantity of spun Goats Hair, and the English take off almost
as much.

The Cotton that comes from the Levant grows chiefly in the Grand Signior's
Dominions in the Country about Smyrna, and in the Isle of Cyprus.

There are not such Quantities in Persia, but the Caravans bring to Smyrna
Indian Callicoes, and other Stuffs made of Cotton, as Muslins, and that which
the French call Cambresines, which are very fine, and bear a good Price.

They make in the Grand Signiors Dominions a vast Quantity of Cotton Stuffs,
both blue and white, which are very excellent, and sell well, especially the
blue, which are Dyed to that Perfection, that the Color never stirs.

The Article of Cordovan, Turkey Leather and common Leather is also very
considerable; there is a vast Consumption in Italy, France and Spain, and even
in the North itself; these Turkey Leathers are of several Colors, but most
commonly white, red, and yellow; this Commodity alone, is one of the greatest
Articles of the Dutch Trade in the Levant.

The Trade for Drugs is no less, considering the great Consumption made in all
Parts of Europe: Rhubarb and Scammony come from Tartary, and are brought by the
Caravans of Persia to Smyrna and Aleppo, together with Galbanum, Yppomenes,
Aromatic Gums, Tutia, and other Drugs.

Grand Cairo likewise furnishes several sorts of Gums and Drugs, viz.
Frankincense, Sena, Cassia, Aloes, Sal Ammoniac, and Tamarinds, Coffee, Pine
Kernels, Ostridge Feathers, and some other Commodities of Egypt; I must not
omit Mastick, which comes only from the Isle of Chio, nor Currants, of which
the English make a great Consumption, and are the Product of the Isles of Zante
and Cephalonia.

Though the Dutch were the last that came to trade in the Grand Signior's
Countries, yet have they been treated no less favorably than other Nations; on
the contrary, they and the English, who for a long while since have almost
shared all that Trade of those Parts, are the most esteemed and best treated,
having paid for many Years only 3 per Cent. while other Nations pay five. This,
together with the good Order and prudent Conduct of the English and Dutch in
that Successful Trade, has made them Masters of it, while the French carried
themselves after a different Manner.

Besides, this Trade is managed all over the Grand Signior's Dominions, with
the greatest Ease and Prosit; for the Goods that are Exported, pay no more than
three per Cent. and those that are Imported five per Cent. once for all; after
that you may transport them to any Province you please, subject to that Empire,
without being obliged to pay new Duties: For Example, a Bale of Cloth that has
paid the Custom of Entry at the Port of Smyrna, may go out for Constantinople
Custom free; and the Officers (whatever is said of the Turkish Extortion) are
not over severe, for if any one should give it in that, a less Quantity of
Goods entered the Port than really did, and the Fraud should be discovered, yet
he would be acquitted on paying the Overplus for what he had so concealed. By
this it appears, that the Turks understand better the Maxims necessary for the
flourishing of Trade, than other Nations who look upon them as a barbarous
People, that inflame and carry Matters with a high hand in relation to
Delinquents in this Kind by Confiscations, Forfeitures, and Penalties, odious
to the People, and no ways advantageous to the Prince.

SECTION II. Of the Trade of Italy.
THE Trade the Dutch have with Italy is considerably great; they carry thither
great Quantities of Indian Goods, and their own Manufactures, and bring thence
a great deal of woven and raw Silks, and other Products of that Country; they
trade chiefly to the Ports of Genoa, Leghorn, Venice, Naples, and Messina:
These five Places, if I may use the Expression, are the Staple Marts for all
Commodities that the other Ports of Italy furnish Strangers with, who on the
other hand bring thither theirs, which are afterward dispersed all over Italy.

Genoa without Contradiction, is a Place of the greatest Trade, not only
because several Manufacturies flourish there, and the Merchants of that City
trade much themselves with their own Vessels to other Countries, and especially
Spain; but also on Account of the Trade of all Lombardy with Strangers, which
must pass through the Hands of the Genoese.

Here follows an Account of the principal Goods the Dutch carry into Italy.

Pepper, Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Russia Leather, China Ware, Iron, Swedish
Copper, English Tin and Lead, Whalebone, Pitch and Tar, Masts, Planks, and
other things necessary for Navigation; Cloths, Serges, Camlets, Flanders
Thread, Stockfish, Pickled Salmon, Caviard, Musk and Civet, Wheat and other
Grain (when there is a scarce Season in Italy): All these Goods are brought
into the five Ports I just now mentioned, except Iron and Copper, which must
never come to Venice, no more than Cloths, which are there Prohibited and
Counterband, because the Natives make great Quantities themselves and very good.

The Commodities the Dutch carry out of Italy are several sorts of Silks, raw
and twisted, Woven Silks of all Kinds, as plain and wrought Velvets, Tabbies,
Sattins, Damasks, etc. Gold and Silver Brocades, Gold Thread, drawn and twisted
at Milan, Oil of Olives, Parmesan Cheese, Anchovies, Sausages, dried Fruits,
(as Raisins, Figs, and Almonds,) Lemons, and Citrons; Pastes and Confections of
all sorts, Rice, Anniseeds, Alum and Sulphur, Venetian Steel, Manna, Amber,
Turpentine, Creme Tartar, fine Lacca, Glass of all sorts, white Marble in
Squares and Tables, Paper, Soap, Essences, perfumed Gloves, Snuff, etc.

One may likewise be furnished at Leghorn, Genoa, and Venice, with all sorts of
Goods from the Levant.

Woven and Raw Silks are certainly the most considerable and important
Merchandise Strangers export out of Italy, and are really the Basis and
Foundation of the Italian Trade: These Silks which are of several sorts come
from Lombardy, and Sicily, and are chiefly made in Florence and Naples; the
plain Velvets are made at Genoa and Rheggio, the wrought ones which have Satin
Grounds and Silk Flowers, as well as those that have Gold and Silver Grounds
are made at Milan, Genoa, Venice, etc. Sattins and Damasks at Genoa, Bologna,
and Lucca; (the white Sattins made at Florence are inimitable,) Gold and Silver
Brocades at Venice and Florence: I pass by a great many other Italian
Manufactures of Silk, very profitable, which the Brevity of this Treatise will
not admit of.

It must be observed in general, that these Manufactures of Italy are the best
in Europe, which proceeds from the Beauty and Goodness of their Silk.

CHAP. XIII. Of the East India Trade.
THE India Trade is of very great Importance to the Dutch, not only on Account
of the Spices they are Masters of, (which rich Productions are equally esteemed
and sought after by the Inhabitants of the old and new World;) but also because
this Trade has given them Opportunities of conquering a vast Country of
prodigious Extent, and maintaining a strong Force at Sea, which in some Measure
makes them sole Arbiters of the Commerce and Trade of those vast Regions.

It is now above 2000 Years ago, that the East Indies and Europe traded with
each other; Ptolemy H. King of Egypt, contributed most to cultivate this
Commerce, by means of a new Road he caused to be made in his own Dominions from
Copta, a Town bordering on the Nile, to Muris, a Port on the Red Sea; by Means
of this Passage, the Carriage of all Commodities, as well those of India as
Europe, was managed with much Ease and Convenience by the mutual Assistance of
the Merchants of Egypt and Grand Cairo.

Augustus having made himself Master of Egypt, the Romans omitted nothing that
might serve to favor and increase the Indian Trade in Egypt; and whereas
before the Egyptians used only to employ in that Affair twenty Ships in the
Time of Augustus, they employed then a hundred and twenty; and this Commerce
was so very advantageous to the Egyptians, that by the Merchandise they brought
from the Indies, they got a hundred for one, or ten Thousand per Cent.

The Romans were Masters of this Trade till the Reign of the Emperor Heraclius;
afterward the Arabians engrossed it all, and they found it so Profitable and
Advantageous, that they settled themselves in the Indies, and propagated there
the Mohammedan Religion, which they professed; the Indians in most places
readily embraced it, as suiting their Humor and Inclination.

All the Merchandise of Asia continued its old Course, and came into Europe by
the Red Sea and Alexandria; as also by the Persian Gulf, and then was carried
in the Caravans belonging to the Persian Merchants, to the Ports of Syria,
which likewise were in subjection to the Souldan of Egypt.

'Twas to these several Ports the French, Italians, Catalans, and other Traders
of Europe used to resort, to buy the East India Spices and other Commodities
brought thither by the Arabians; which they again dispersed all over Europe
with prodigious Profit; but the Italians being the nearest, were those that got
the most riches, by this profitable Commerce.

The Eastern Trade continued to be carried on with Europe, by the Ports of the
Mediteranean, till about the Year 1498, when the Portugueze having sailed round
Africa, (a Thing before that time never performed by Man) came to Calicut a
Town in the Indies, toward the end of the Month of May 1498, after having
spent 88 Years time in discovering that Passage; this Action gained them
greater Honor and Reputation than the Phenicians, Carthaginians, and Greeks
ever had, who never attempted so bold a Voyage, though they were the first
Inventors of Navigation.

The Portugueze, when they arrived in the Indies, found the Arabians very
powerfully established in most Parts of that Country, and Masters of all the
Trade, and who omitted nothing to hinder these new Comers from settling there.
They not only stirred up the greatest and most powerful Kings of India against
them, but even the Souldans of Egypt, with whom, for a long time, they had very
sharp and cruel Wars; but all the Power that these confederated Princes could
make against the Portugueze, did not hinder them from accomplishing their
Designs; by their Valor and good Conduct, they made themselves Masters of the
Trade of those vast Regions of the East, by conquering an incredible Number of
the most important Places, and thoroughly fortifying those Conquests from Cape
Couran, on the Eastern Coasts of Africa to China, and by their Men of War which
were continually cruising on those vast Seas; particularly on the Coasts of
Arabia, to hinder Commerce for the future being carried on at Grand Cairo and
Alexandria, and fixing it entirely at Lisbon.

I have here inserted the Names of the principal Places that the Portugueze
possessed on the Coasts of Asia and Africa.

The Castle de las Minaes in Guinea; the Towns of St. Salvador on the Coasts of
the Kingdom of Congo, and of St. Paul de Loandes in the Kingdom of Angola, made
them Masters of all the Commerce on the Western Coasts of Africa; and the
Fortresses of Sofales, and Mozambique and Quitou of the Commerce of the Eastern
Coasts. Besides these, they had the important Places of Moscats and Ormats on
the Coasts of Arabia and Persia; on the Coasts of Cambay and Malabar besides
Goa, (the Capital of all their Territories in the East) they had Possession of
Diu, Cochin, Canar, Oranganar, and Coular. They were Masters of four good
Fortresses in the Isle of Ceylan, which secured to them the Cinnamon Trade. On
the Coast of Coromandel, St. Thomas, Nagapatan and Infanopatan, Golit in
Bengall, and Sirem in Regu. The important Haven of Malaca on the Streights of
the same Name, and Piacem in the Isle of Sumatra.

The Fortresses they had in the Isles of Tiron, Amboina, Ternate and Benda,
made them likewise Masters of the Clove and Nutmeg Trade.

In short, they possessed on the Coasts of China the celebrated and important
Town of Macar, and though they had no footing in Japan, of which they were the
first Discoverers; yet they carried on a very considerable and rich Trade with
the Japonese, a thing, at that time and since, unknown in the old World.

Their Shipping, which are continually going to, and coming from Japan, bring
thence a great deal of Silver and fine Copper; as also Gold, Silk woven and
raw, Porcelain, China Ware, Tin and Lead, from the Kingdom of Siam; Rubies and
Sapphires, from Pegu; Pearls from the Isle of Manar, and from Baherem Sugar,
Saltpeter, and rich Silks; Cotton from the Kingdom of Bengale, and the finest
painted Callicoes; Diamonds from the Coast of Coromandel; Pepper from the
Kingdom of Golconda; Cinnamon from the Coast of Malabar, and the Islands of
Sumatra and Java; Cloves and Nutmegs, from the Isle of Ceylan; from the Molucca
Islands, Indigo; from Amphion, Cotton, Silks, Lacca and Agates; from the Great
Mogul's Country, Silk woven and raw, Gold Stuffs and Carpets, Rhubarb, Sena,
and other Drugs; from Persia, Myrrh, Frankincense, Manna, Balsam of Arabia,
Gold, Ivory, Tigers Skins, Bezoar, and African Lions Skins.

SECTION III. Of the Means the Dutch took to establish themselves in the Indies.
THE Dutch for many Years furnished themselves with all these rich Commodities
I mentioned in the last Chapter at Lisbon, where they sufficiently abounded;
but the Crown of Portugal in the Year 1580, being united to that of Castille;
the Severities they some time after suffered in the Spanish Dominions under
Philip II. obliged them to abandon that Trade, and was the real Cause of
putting them on that great Undertaking of going themselves to the Indies, and
there to furnish themselves directly with those very Commodities they used
before to have from Portugal. The insuperable Difficulties of this great
Enterprise, deterred them a long while, and they knew not in the least the
Navigation of those vast Seas they were to sail over, and were as much
Strangers to the Language, Genius, and Commerce of the Indians: The Portugueze
always keeping these things very close and private from the rest of Europe. But
nothing troubled them so much as the Portugueze Men of War, and other Shipping
that were continually sailing every where on those Seas, and which they
believed they could not possibly avoid.

To surmount this Difficulty, they endeavored to open a Passage into China and
the Indies through the North, but the insuperable Obstacles they met with, by
reason of those prodigious Rocks of Ice in the White or Frozen Sea, made them
abandon that Project as too dangerous. In short, they took up a Resolution to
take the same Route as the Portugueze; and accordingly some of the most
resolute Merchants of Amsterdam and Zealand, fitted out from the Texel in the
beginning of the Month of April in the Year 1559, four Vessels laden with Goods
for the East Indies.

Notwithstanding all the Precautions, they took in this Voyage, they found many
rubs laid in their Way, especially by the Portugueze, who did all they could to
starve them; but for all that, three of these Ships, (one of which, by the
Sailor's Negligence, they were forced to abandon) arrived in Holland in the
Month of August 1561.

This proving at least a saving Voyage for those that were concerned in it,
made them hope for better Success for the future; and upon this Foundation they
began to form several Companies in Holland, to carry on the Indian Commerce.

Nothing contributed so much to their happy Success in the beginning of this
Trade, as the favorable reception they met with from several Indian Princes,
secret Enemies to the Portugueze on Account of their Pride, Tyranny, and
indiscreet Zeal of their Missionaries, which raised them a great Number of
Enemies, who for a long time only waited for an Opportunity to declare
themselves against them.

An English Gentleman (whose Integrity cannot be questioned) says, that the
Dutch Conduct was very prudent, never undertaking any thing against the
Indians; from whom they never exacted any Contributions as the Portugueze did,
but only contented themselves with establishing their own Commerce, and ruining
that of the Portugueze.

These several Dutch Companies traded separately to the Indies till the Year
1602, when the States General judged it proper to unite them, that they might
be in a better Condition to defend themselves against the Spaniards and
Portugueze, and to attack them if Occasion so required: Out of these several
Companies was formed that general East India Company, which alone for twenty
Years together, could carry on the Navigation beyond the Cape of Good Hope and
the Streights of Magellan; their Stock which was no more than about 6500000
Florins or Guilders, was so well managed by these able Merchants, that they
have entirely destroyed the great Empire and Commerce of the Portugueze in the
Indies, having possessed themselves of both, and founded on their ruin, a
State whose Power may vie with that of their Republic in Europe.

The Dutch who settled first in the Indies, contented themselves to stand on
the Defensive against the Portugueze, whenever they attacked them, but seeing
with all their Policy and Address, they could never obtain of them Permission
to trade quietly to the Indies, the General Company resolved to attack them as
briskly in their Turn, and put themselves in a Condition to repel Force by
Force.

In the beginning of the Year 1605, they seized upon the Fortress the
Portugueze had in the Island of Amboina; this was the first solid footing the
Company got in the Indies and that Island to this very Day, is one of the chief
Governments the Company has in those Parts.

This first Conquest was followed by that of the other Molucca Islands, and
consequently made them Masters of the Spices, the richest and most important
Commerce of any in the World. They had an Intention in the Year 1606, to
Possess themselves of the important Place of Malacca, but the obstinate
Resistance they found there, made them lay aside the Execution of that
Enterprise till another Opportunity.

The Spaniards finding by Experience, that it was impossible to drive the Dutch
out of the Indies by Force, offered to make Peace with them, and acknowledge
them a free People if they would abandon the India Trade. How great soever
these Offers were, they made no manner of Impression on the Dutch, who
peremptorily refused them, and rather chose to continue a long War (as it
proved to be) and which they entered into only to obtain their Liberty (which
was then offered to them on such hard Conditions,) than to abandon the East
India Trade, and they did not sign the Truce in the Year 1609, but on Condition
they should trade freely to the East Indies in all the Places they used to do
during the War.

Though the Company was obliged to continue the War in the Indies, the Spaniards
so ill observing the Truce, yet that did no ways hinder them from strenuously
carrying on their Trade even to the principal Places of the East, where before
it was unknown and unheard of; the Trade of Japan, which they settled in the
Year 1611, was of the greatest Consequence, and they knew so well afterward
how to improve it, that since the Year 1616, they are the only People in Europe
that have any thing to do in those Parts.

The Fort which King Isnagar gave them leave to build on the Coast of
Coromandel, having skreen'd them from the Resentment and Insults of the
Portugueze of St. Thomas, established firmly their Commerce there, and which is
one of the most considerable in the Indies.

In 1609, they began to build their City of Batavia on the Ruins of the small
Town of Iventra in the Isle of Java; it was fortified by a Citadel, compassed
with a Wall and eighteen Bastions, which were so strongly built that this Town
afterward held out three, Sieges against the Kings of the Isle of Java. As
soon as Batavia was finished, the General Company made it the Capital of all
their Territories in Asia, and the Center of all Commerce in those Parts; the
Dutch General makes it the Place of his Residence, living in the Citadel with
his Court and Council.

Since the Companies Trade so wonderfully increased, and in a short time became
the most considerable of all Asia, the Dutch made new Conquests; and the Kings
of the Islands, and the Coasts of Asia, struck with the Success and Grandeur of
the Company, soon came and coveted their Alliance. In Process of Time, they
erected several public and private Buildings at Batavia, of extraordinary
Beauty and Magnificence, insomuch that it is now, and has a long time since
been, the Wonder of Asia, both for its Beauty and Commerce; for there is never
a Day, but you may see Vessels entering the Ports from Bengal, Siam, Malacca,
the Molucca and Philipine Islands, China, and all other Parts of the Indies,
not including those that come from Europe.

The Truce ending in 1621, the two Parties, viz. the Portugueze and Dutch
prepared themse^ves for War, both in the old and new World. Of all the
Advantages the Dutch got in the Indies over the Portugueze, That in the Year
1640 was the greatest, for in that very Year the Company, in short, made
themselves Masters of the Town of Malacca, and by that Conquest became Masters
of the most considerable Straight in all Asia. In effect, it was one of the
most important Places the Portugueze had in the Indies; its Situation was
wonderful for the Trade of China and the Molucca Islands, and they always kept
there a strong Garrison, and a good Fleet, which struck a Terror into all the
Neighboring Islands.

On thr 1st of December, in the same Year 1640, the Portugueze shook off the
Castillian Yoke, and made the Duke of Braganza their King, who was acknowledged
as such not only by all Portugal, but by all the States that Crown possessed in
Asia, Africa and America.

As the Portugueze were not at War with the Dutch, but as Subjects to the King
of Spain, as soon as they ceased to be so, they desired an Alliance with the
Dutch, with whom, in the Year 1641. they concluded a Truce for ten Years, for
all Places belonging to each Nation, both on this and the other side the Line;
There was to be a free Navigation for both Parties every where; and each was to
remain in Possession of those Places they held in the East and West Indies, at
the time of publishing the Truce.

This Treaty was not capable to put a Stop to the Dutch Conquests; for
notwithstanding the Truce they had signed, they made themselves Masters of the
Towns of Gallo and Columbo, two of the principal Places the Dutch, or rather
the Portugueze had in the Isle of Ceylan; and this put into their Hands the
whole Cinnamon Trade, and in some sort made themselves Masters of the Streights
between the Isle of Ceylan and Cape Comorin; so that by these Means they govern
the two most powerful Passages of Asia.

The Portugueze being not able to have any Justice done them, for the
Infractions of the Truce thus made by the Dutch, resolved to do themselves
Justice, and accordinly made an Insurrection and general Revolt in Brazil,
which cost the Dutch the Loss of all they possessed in that Place, and almost
ruined their West India Company.

The War also broke out in good earnest between the two Nations in the East,
and lasted 16 Years; in which time the Dutch took from the Portugueze almost
all the Trade they had left in the East Indies.

The taking of several Castles and strong Places by the Dutch in 1661.
belonging to the Portugueze, from the Entrance of the Indian Seas as far as
Suratte, struck such a Terror into that vast Country, that the City of Goa was
afraid they must have fallen under the Government of the Dutch Company.

They got besides, a Battle near Dabuls, the Consequences of which were very
fatal to the Portugueze, for several little Kings on this side the Ganges,
following always the strongest side, left the Portugueze to put themselves
under the Protection of the Dutch, who by reducing the Town and Island of
Medaea (which was obliged to be abandoned to them) saw themselves Masters of
the Streights of Chilas.

The Expense and Trouble the Company were at during this War, did not hinder
them from taking all Methods to advance their Commerce. In the Year 1653, they
made a new Establishment at the Cape of Good Hope, for the Convenience of their
Shipping that should make the Voyages of India. There is at present a great
Town, and a Fort with 6 Bastions, that commands all the Road. The Air is very
good, plenty of all sorts of Game, and the Soil produces good Corn and Wine; so
that that this Port is of the greatest Benefit and Advantage to their Fleets
which here take in fresh Provisions.

Notwithstanding the ill Success that the Dutch Company met with in the several
Attempts they made to settle their Commerce with China, they was resolved in
the Year 1655, to make a greater than ever, by sending thither a splendid
Embassy with rich Presents for the Emperor of Tartary, who was then Master of
the Empire of China. It was believed they would have carried their Point,
notwithstanding the Stratagems of the Jesuits and Portugueze, who both paid
dear enough afterward for the ill Services they did the Dutch on that Occasion.

This same Company suffered yet a more troublesome Mortification in the Year
1661, where they were driven by Force out of the Island of Formosa, which lies
between China and Japan. This Loss was very considerable, in relation to the
great Trade they drove with both these Empires.

In the same Year 1661, the Portugueze and Dutch being both wearied by a War so
pernicious to them both, signed a Peace at the Hague by the Mediation of the
Kings of England.

By this Treaty, the Dutch quitted Brazil entirely to the Portugueze for a good
Sum of Money, and some Advantages in respect of Trade. The Jealousy afterward
between the Viceroy of Goa, and the General of Batavia grew so great, that this
Peace was not at all observed in the East Indies.

In the Year 1663, the Dutch took from them the best Places they had on the
Coasts of Malabar, viz. Coulan, Cananor, Cochin and Grandanor. Thus in less
than the space of one Year, almost 150 Leagues of the Country on the Coast of
Malabar exchanged their Governors, and from the Portugueze came under the
Dominion of the Company, which much augmented their Commerce in the Provinces
of Guzaratte, Indoston and Bengal.

The Portugueze were not the only People the Company fell out with, they had
several Wars with the Indian Kings, but that against the King of Macassar was
one of the longest and most difficult they ever knew in that Country; the
Subjects of that Prince, a hardy and warlike People, robbed and murdered not
only the Servants and Friends of the Company, but embarrass'd much their Spice
Trade; and there was good reason to believe the King himself shared part of the
Spoil: But at last the Company attacked him with so much Vigor, and such
considerable Force, that they obliged him to beg Peace on such Conditions as
the Council of Batavia thought fit to impose on him by the Treaty of 1669, by
which that King was obliged to give up, amongst other Fortresses, that of
Macassar; and thus that Powerful Nation was entirely subdued, and the Company
by that means freed from the most dangerous Enemies they ever had in the
Indies, and became absolute Masters of the Trade of the Molucca Islands, which
had been very much troubled and interrupted several Years by the Incursions and
Intelligence of the Macassarians.

After a long Series of Prosperity and Success, they sent their Troops in the
Year 1675, into the Town of St. Thomas on the Coast of Coromandel, having
assisted the King of Golconda to retake his Country from the French, who had
some Years before possessed themselves of it.

About the Year 1680, the Emperor Matarem in the Isle of Java, delivered up to
the Company the Towns of Tapara and Cheriban, both (if I mistake not) lying on
the same Coast as Batavia, for the Assistance they lent him against his two
Brothers that had rebelled against him, by which that Prince grew very powerful
in their Dependencies. In the Year 1682, we heard in Europe that they had
likewise made themselves Masters of the Town of Bantam, which submitted
themselves in the same manner as the Isle of Java. This Town is situated in the
middle of a Bay, which has a Road, one of the finest, safest and most
convenient of any in the Indies, both for coming in and going out.

Bantam was a Town of Trade, especially for Pepper, and all the Merchants of
Europe used to trade thither; but since it has fallen into the Dutch hands, no
body has Liberty to come into that Port, all the Trade being transferred to
Batavia. This Affair occasioned great Heats in Europe between the English and
Dutch; the former, not bearing to see themselves excluded one of the chiefest
Places where they had so many Years established their Indian Trade, accused the
Dutch of having by their Artifices occasioned the Bantam War, to make
themselves Masters of the Isle of Java, and thereby to engross to themselves
all the Trade of the Indies, exclusive of all the other Nations of Europe: This
Quarrel after some Years, was at last put an end to by the Treaty of....

By these Ways the Dutch have established themselves in the Indies, but chiefly
by taking away from the Portugueze almost all their Commerce, and their best
Places in that Country: They have often attempted to surprise Goa and Diu,
which are all they have now left them of any Importance, and which sooner or
later it is thought, the Dutch will accomplish.

I shall now discourse of the Way and Manner how they manage their Trade with
the Indies, but first it will not be unuseful to give an Account of the Number
of the Places, and of their chief Trade and Exchange which is chiefly managed
in these happy Climates.

SECTION IV. Of the Dutch Trade in several Countries in Asia.
THE Dutch Trade to the Indies does not barely consist in bringing Goods into
Asia from Europe, and transporting thence others in Exchange, but often in
carrying the very Commodities of Asia to be sold in other Parts of Asia itself;
that is, for Example, to carry the Commodities of the Kingdom of Siam and China
into Japan, and those of Japan into those Parts of Asia where they are most
necessary. It Is by this Circulation which they make all over the East, as well
in relation to the Commodities of Europe as Asia, that they sufficiently
provide themselves with those they send into Holland.

Here follows an Account of what this Company transports into Europe from the
Indies.

Mocca on the Red Sea, two Leagues distant from the Streights of Babelmandel,
is where the Dutch have chiefly their free Arabian Trade, which is very
profitable to them, by reason of the Spices the Arabians take from them in vast
Quantities, and have in return amongst other things, Frankincense, Myrrh, and
many other Gums, Manna, Balsam, or Balm, Aloes, Dragons Blood, (which last is
the Product of the Isle of Jo^retara, not far from Arabia) Coffee, etc. They
likewise frequent the other Ports of Arabia, as Adem, Zebit, Mascalle and
Balzora, where they drive some small Trade, either on their own Account or the
Indians, who send a considerable Quantity of their Commodities to Arabia.

The Persian Trade with Foreigners is carried on by the Port of Gameron or
Bandarabassi, which is the only considerable Port of that Empire on the Indian
Sea, being situated at the Entrance of the Persian Gulf, opposite to the Isle
of Ormutz, so famous for its Trade when subject to the Portugueze. The
principal Trade of the Dutch is in the said Town of Gameron, upon which depends
that of Ispahan, where they pay no Custom for Entry or going out in Persia,
taking every Year 6000 Bales of Silk at a certain Price. But as that Commodity
is not very gainful in Europe, they have lessened that Quantity as much as
possible; insomuch that in the Year 1664, they only took half what they used to
do.

Silk is the most considerable and plentiful Commodity that comes from Persia,
and this they work up all manner of ways, wrought and plain, in Gold and Silver
Brocades, Carpets and Hangings incomparably rich, and extremely beautiful.

They bring likewise from Persia, Cinnamon, Wool (which is wonderful fine)
Pearls and Turquois Stones, etc.

The Commodities the Company sends thither, and which they own they gain most
by, (that which they bring thence being not very profitable) are Spices, Sugar,
Aniseeds, Ginger, Indigo, Siampan Wood, Vermillion, Frankincense, Benzoin,
Quicksilver, Lead, Tin, Copper, colored Cloths, Linen from Suratte and
Coromandel, and Piasters or Pieces of Eight.

The Dutch Trade in the Great Mogul's Country, is one of the richest they have
in Persia; they bring thence great Quantities of all sorts of Silks, Indigo,
Saltpeter, Lacca, Agates, and Ginger.

All these Commodities do not only sell well in Europe, but are much esteemed
and sought for in Asia and Africa itself.

Suratte, the only Seaport in these Countries, is their Place of greatest
Trade: In this Place one may find all sorts of Commodities produced in the
Great Mogul's Dominions, sufficient to supply the other Parts of Asia, and
Africa, and even Europe itself, and which are transported thither by the
English, Dutch, Persians, Portugueze, Moors and Indians.

The Dutch Company send chiefly thither, Spices, Pepper, Copper,
Tortoise-shell, Camphire, Vermillion, Orchalmy, Tin, Benzoin, and several sorts
of colored Cloths, etc.

The Coast from Suratte to Cape Comorin, and which comprehends that of Malabar,
furnishes them chiefly with Pepper; the Company who possessed there a great
many considerable Places in the Year 1664 entered into several Treaties with
the Kings of those Cantons, whereby they engaged to sell them all their Pepper.

They bring from the Coast of Coromandel, (in which I include the Kingdom of
Golconda,) great Quantities of Cotton and Callicoe of all sorts; that which
they call Chints, (which is painted with several Colors,) is most valuable of
any that is made in the Indies, for the Colors never wear out, but last as
long as the Cloth it self.

The Kingdom of Golconda also yields Indigo, Bezoar Stones and yellow Diamonds.

The Coast of Coromandel is the most important to the Company; in the Year 1663
they brought thence as many Goods as cost two Millions and four hundred
Thousand Florins or Guiders, and which consisted chiefly in Callicoes, part of
which was sent to Holland, and the rest to Persia and Turkey.

The Dutch, to secure themselves the Commodities of the Coast of Coromandel,
carry thither Spices, Copper of Japan, Malacca Tin, and Gold Oar from Sumatra,
Quicksilver, Vermillion, Camphire, Elephants Teeth, Siampan and Sandal Wood.

The Kingdom of Bengal which belongs to the Great Mogul, is one of the largest
and most fruitful Provinces of Asia; Silk, Saltpeter, and Sugar, are produced
here in great Plenty; the Silk is looked upon to be the best in all India; the
Village of Cazambazar, and the Neighboring Villages, can furnish 32000 Bales,
100 Pound Weight each, the Dutch generally take six or 7000 Bales, and would
more, were they permitted; part they send into Europe, the rest they trade with
to Japan.

The Saltpeter Trade is very considerable, for that Commodity is here produced
in great Plenty, and there is no better in the World.

The Dutch have a Magazine or Place for Stores at Choupar, four Leagues below
Patua, where they refine Saltpeter; for if it be not refined and made
transparent, it is of little Value; and when it is refined, it is three times
dearer than before: But besides this, the Dutch bring from Bengal several sorts
of woven Silks, and other Silk works, Callicoes, Musk, and fine Rhubarb; these
two last come from the Kingdom of Boutan, lying on the North of Bengal: The
Dutch bring hither Spices, Copper, Tin, Lead, Quicksilver, Vermillion,
Elephants Teeth, Siampan and Sandal Wood, Cloth, Coral and Amber.

All these Commodities are very gainful. The Company, the better to carry on
this important Commerce, have several Storehouses in Bengal. Ongly, which is
the chief Port, has a Magazine built all of Freestone, defended by 4 Bastions,
and a Fort, with good Ditches, mounted with 12 Pieces of Cannon; and though this
Place is 30 Leagues distant from the Mouth of the River Ganges, Ships
nevertheless sail thither, by the Care they have taken to facilitate that
Navigation.

The Trade of the Kingdoms of Pegu, Siam, and the Point of Malacca, is likewise
very considerable: The first of which yields Lacca, Gold, Silver, Rubies and
Sapphires.

They bring to these Places, Spices, Pepper, Sandal-Wood, Callicoes from
Golconda and Bengal.

Siam is a large Kingdom, well peopled, and produces abundance of Rice,
Elephants Teeth, Tin, Lead, Siampan Wood, which (is a good Commodity in all
Parts of India) as well as Deer-skins, which they trade with to Japan: Here is
also a great Quantity of Gold, and the finest and most beautiful Porcelain.

The Dutch take these Goods, and in return bring to Siam, Spices, Pepper,
Amber, Red Coral, Quicksilver, Sandal Wood, Cloves, etc.

The Company, by a particular Privilege they have, exclusive of all other
Nations, bring hence Ligor Tin which they sell to several Parts of the Indies
and Europe at a good Price.

The King of Siam, as powerful as he is trades very much, and sends out
Merchant Ships to several Parts of the Indies, and even to Japan, which makes
Siam, his Capital City, very Famous for Traffic.

The Trade of the Point of Malacca is very considerable; the Company, by means
of this important Place, do what they please in the Streights of Malacca and
the neighboring Places, viz. Jor, Ligor, Jambi, Queda, Pera, Sumatra, etc. in
which there is a great vent for the rich Carpets of Bengal, and several sorts
of Callicoes of the Coast of Coromandel: They bring thither also, Pieces of
Eight; and have in return, especially at Queda, Pera and Ligor, good Quantities
of Lead and Tin, two very necessary Commodities, and very profitable in the
Company's Trade, especially at Bengal and Persia.

The chief Riches of the Kingdom of Tonquin consist in Silks, which is highly
esteemed and very beautiful, Musk, Lignum Aloes, etc. and by these the Traders
of the Country, and the Dutch, gain a great deal of Gold from China, and Silver
from Japan. The Dutch take off great Quantities of all these Commodities in
Exchange of their Spices, Quicksilver, Vermillion, Amber and Cloth, etc.

The China Trade was always looked on to be the richest of all Asia, on Account
of the Value and great Quantites of Merchandise transported thence.

The Portugueze are the only Nation of Europe that have been permitted to
settle at Macar, and trade openly in China.

In the Year 1686, they were still the only People that enjoyed that
Privilege. I have been informed, by Persons that seemed to be well versed in
these Affairs, that the English and Dutch come into certain Ports of China,
where they trade by the Authority of the Governor of the Province, neither of
them having any Interest or Access to the Emperor's Court, as the Portugueze
have.

From the very first time that the Dutch came into the Indies, they tried all
they could to establish their Commerce in China, but have ever been
unsucceessful in their Attempts.

They conceived, in the Year 1685, great Hopes to bring it to pass; there flew
about a Report, that the Emperor being in peaceful Possession of all China, in
the Design he had to make Trade flourish, was willing to permit all Foreign
Traders to come and settle in all Maritime Places in his Dominions: Upon which
the Dutch Company sent an Ambassador to that Monarch, to desire Liberty of
Commerce.

In November 1686, News came to Batavia, that the Ambassador was arrived in
China, and 'twas not doubted but he would accomplish his Designs.

Here follows an exact Account of all the Commodities that are commonly brought
from China, viz.
Woven and Raw Silks of all sorts in great Quantities. Tin, Copper, Steel,
Iron, and several sorts of Tools and Instruments of different Metals curiously
wrought. Cotton, Callicoes, and Fine Camblets. Hemp and Hempen Cloth. Great
Quantities of very fine Gold. Precious Stones, Lapis Lazuli, and delicate
Marble. Wood of Aquila, Brazil, and Ebony. Tea, Sugar, Musk, and candied
Ginger. Quicksilver, China-Roots, and Rhubarb. Pale and High-colour'd Amber.
Porcelain or China-Wine, and other Vessels of fine Earth. Cabinets, and an
infinity of other Wares finely varnished, not to be imitated elsewhere.
All these Commodities, and many others not here mentioned, are very
profitable, most of them bring Cent. per Cent. and sometimes more, by reason of
the small Price they go at in the Country.

All sorts of Necessaries for Life are very cheap in China, and the Artisans,
who are very laborious, content themselves with a very little Profit.

Here follows likewise a Catalogue of the principal Commodities fit to be
carried into China, extracted from a Memorial given me by one of the Factors of
the Dutch Company, viz.
Spices and Pepper; a great Quantity of the last. Linen of several sorts.
Cloths and fine Serges. Tammys or Tamines, of all Sorts and Colors; Red,
White, and Black are most esteemed. Elephants Teeth and Sandal Wood. Amber, and
White and Red Coral. Silver, to buy Gold.
The Inhabitants of Sokiere are the only Chinese that go out of their own
Country to trade: They go to several Parts of India, particularly to Batavia,
where a good Number of them have settled themselves.

The Chinese are born for Trade; they are Enemies to Sloth; they think nothing
painful or troublesome, when there is the least Appearance of Gain: They are
contented with a little, and what is easy to be come at: They are very hardy
and enterprizing, dextrous and industrious: They have an extraordinary subtilty
of Spirit; and you must have all your Wits about you not to be over-reached by
them in Dealing, when they have a Mind to it. It Is a common Saying with them,
That all Nations are Blind in Matters of Trade; that the Dutch, and no other,
have the Advantage of one Eye, but for them they have two.

Nothing shows more their Abilities in Trade, than their Canals and
Communications of Rivers one to another, to facilitate the Carriage of their
Provisions and other Commodities from one Province to another, and their other
Conveniences; but the great Care they take to make Provisions equally cheap in
all Places, contributes most to make Merchandise bear a moderate Price, by
consequence to have a good Vent.

Japan, a Country unknown before the Portugueze discovered it, is a Country of
large Extent, where Strangers (that are permitted to trade thither) make very
great Advantages.

While the Portugueze of Macar had this Trade, amongst other Commodities, they
carried those of China to Japan; and in that Trade was expended every Year
1500000 Livres; the clear Profits of which, in 4 or 5 Months time, amounted to
75 per Cent.

The Dutch Company began to trade there about the Year 1650; and since the Year
-- when the Portugueze were entirely driven out of that Country, the Dutch were
the only People of Europe who were permitted to trade there, which they
continue to do with great Profit, but are under this hard Constraint to live in
the Peninsula of Dizmia, near the Town of Nagasaqui, and dare not go out of
that Peninsula, without the Governor's Leave, on pain of being cut to Pieces:
The Japanese have such strict Eyes over their Conduct, that they can do nothing
but the Governor of the Town knows it, either by Spies, or Guards that are
placed at the Gates of the Quarter they inhabit; so jealous and distrustful is
that Nation, and this constraint lasts 8 Months; and the Formalities that they
are forced to observe the rest of the Year, when the Shipping arrives for their
lading, is no less troublesome than inconvenient.

The Dutch bring to Japan yearly, Silk, raw and woven, in great quantities,
Cloths, Two Hundred Thousand Deer-skins, One Hundred Thousand raw Hides, a
great deal of Hemp, Linen, Wool, Quicksilver, Cloves, Pepper, Sugar, Musk,
Camphire and Borax, Siampan and Brazil Wood, China ware, Calembac,
Elephants-Teeth and small wares (such as the Chinese used to bring thither:)
Silver and Copper, are the principal Commodities to bring thence, and though Gold
is there very plenty, yet it is prohibited to be carried out of the Kingdom.

There are no Imposts upon any Goods that come or go out of that Kingdom. I
cannot tell the Number of the Ships, the Company employs in that Commerce, but
generally some come to Batavia, and the rest to Malacca; when the Company
desired so earnestly, that they might settle their Commerce with China, it was,
because such Commerce seemed to be, not only of vast Advantage to them in
Relation to their Trade in Europe and the Indies in general, but of great
Consequence to them in respect of their Trade to Japan.

This made One of their Governours-General express himself after this Manner,
upon the Subject of the Japan Trade in a Letter to the Company.

If we could but hinder the Chinese from trading to that Country, there would
every Year above Fifty Tun of Gold, or else the Value of Five Millions to be
got by their Silks only; for the Commodities they carry thither yields 80 per
Cent. Would to God we were the only People that enjoyed the Benefit of that
happy Trade, and that the Mine of Formosa abounded with Gold. If my Hopes and
Wishes could prevail, those that are concerned in the Company, will be well
satisfied, for they will enjoy all the Profits of the Indian Trade without
sending any Money from Holland, which is all they have to desire of God in
their Prayers. I have often heard say by those who are of the Company, that
they would be too Rich, if they did not lose some of those Ships that are
employed in that Trade; for the Indian Seas are very tempestuous.

The Trade of the Isle of Ceylan is entirely in the Dutch Hands, being Masters
of all the Coasts, by reason of the strong Places they possess in those Parts:
The King of Candi holds the rest of the Island, he was never yet Conquered, nor
Awed, either by the Dutch or Portuguese.

The best Cinnamon is the principal Commodity that Island produces, there is
besides a great Quantity of Elephants Teeth, and other Goods of less
Consequence.

Sumatra is one of the most considerable Islands in the Indies, and has several
Kings, amongst whom the King of Achem makes the greatest Figure; the Dutch
notwithstanding may be said to be Masters there, by reason of the strong Place
of Malacca, which is only separated from it by a small straight; and the Forts
and Magazines they have in several Places especially toward the West, they are
likewise in Possession of a vast tract of Land: Besides they have made
themselves Masters of all the Trade of the Island, by several Treaties signed
with the Kings and the other Sovereigns; by which they are obliged to sell
their Pepper and Gold Dust to no other Nation. These are the chief Commodities
of the Country, to which may be added Camphire and Benzoin, these Four are most
proper for the Trade of the Company, who fell in the Island great Quantities of
Salt, and all Sorts of Linen.

Java is an Island governed in like Manner by several Kings, the King of
Mataria, otherwise called Emperor of Java, and the King of Bantam are the most
considerable: But the Dutch Power is so great by reason of Batavia and other
Fortresses, that I believe it may with very good reason be said, they are as
much Masters of that Island as they are of its Trade, which is entirely in
their Hands since they have had Bantam; It is certain the Company would make
vast Advantage by selling Linen and other Commodities if this Trade was not
somewhat diverted by other Nations trading hither, so that the vent of this
sort of Goods was considerably diminished in the Year 1688: They bring chiefly
Pepper from the Isle of Java and Bantam, and before the Dutch were Masters of
these Places, the Merchants of Europe used to resort hither to take in their
lading.

The Isle of Borneo is without dispute, the largest in the Indies, the
Inhabitants the most perfidious and treacherous of all the Indians, have more
than once robbed the Magazine of the Company, and cut in pieces all those that
were in it, the better to pillage them: The treachery of those People which is
natural to them, is the reason that the Company gives them leave to bring their
Diamonds and Camphire to Batavia.

The Island of Macassar is divided amongst several petty Kings, of whom the
King of Macassar is the most powerful, and one of the most dangerous Enemies
the Company has in the Indies; this Island produces great quantities of Rice,
Pepper, Sandal, and Siampan Wood. It is said that there is likewise Store of
Gold dust and Tortoize-shell, Commodities that go off well in the great Mogul's
Country and in Europe, the Company maintains a considerable Garrison in the
Fort of Macassar which is a Haven of extreme consequence for the Spice Trade.

The Island of Amboina and many others of great Resort, as Banda, Ternate, etc.
are possessed (to use the Expression) in propriety by the Company, which makes
them Masters of the rich Commodities of Cloves, Nutmegs, and Mace, which grow
no where else.

The Island of Amboina yields only Cloves, which is a Commodity that sells well
all the World over; it is but not the Isles of Ternate, Bachiam, and Machiam
etc. which are properly speaking the Molucca Islands produce this Spice as well
as Amboina, but the Company made the Trees every Year to be rooted up reserving
only those in Amboina, which Island alone is sufficient to produce more than
the whole World can consume: The People of this Island sell every Year to the
Company or their Officers, their Cloves at a low Price; and they are obliged to
take all the Crop if I may use the Word, how great soever it be; whence it
often appears that their Stock is greater than they can possibly dispose of.

Batavia always supplies the Inhabitants of this Place with Provisions for
their Subsistence, for they are very lazy, and it is impossible otherwise to
make them work in their Spiceries; the Trade here consisting only in Linen and
Cloths, is very inconsiderable.

The Isle of Banda is the only Place that produces Nutmegs and Mace, the
Company are entirely Masters of the Trade of this Island, exclusive of all
other Nations as well as that of Amboina; the Company vend here very few
Commodities, except a small Quantity of Stuffs and such like Goods; the Country
being small and ill Peopled, which makes the Company send hither likewise
Provisions from Batavia.

The Molucca Islands are Five in Number, and are called Ternate, Tidor,
Machiam, Bachiam, and Motire; they are situated on the West of the Isle of
Gillo, most of these Islands are no more than Eight or Ten Leagues in compass,
they are all of them very agreeable and pleasant, and though they have their
Kings, yet the Dutch in reality may be said to be their Masters and Sovereigns;
by reason of the Forts they have there. These Islands were heretofore very
famous and much frequented, on account of the Cloves they produced in such vast
Quantities before the Dutch caused all the Trees to be plucked up.

The Island of Ternate is the most considerable, there is a great Consumption
tn that Place of coarse Linen; the Dutch bring thence Tortoise shell which is
very good, but there is but a small Quantity: The Company pays yearly Pensions
to the King and other Lords of Ternate, as an Acknowledgment for their
consenting to the Destruction of the Clove Trees.

There are some other Islands in this Province, as Bantam, Tidor, etc. but they
are very ill cultivated and produces little necessaries of Life: The Company
trades thither as well as to those just now mentioned, in Linen, Provisions,
and Pieces of Eight from Mexico.

SECTION V. Remarks on what Commodities the Dutch bring into Europe from the
East Indies.
I Shall divide into Four Classes the several Commodities that the Dutch
Company causes to be brought into Europe from the East Indies.

The First shall contain Spices and Drugs, The Second Silks, The Third Cotton
and Callicoes, The Fourth Metals, precious and common, Porcelain or China
ware, etc.
I comprehend under the name of Spices, Cloves, Nutmegs and Cinnamon.

There are Two Sorts of Cinnamon, the fine, and common or mild Cinnamon; the
fine grows only in the Isle of Ceylan, in a small tract of Ground of about
Fourteen or Fifteen Leagues long on the Sea side, but in reality that Spot of
Ground is so very fruitful, that it is sufficient to furnish the whole World,
considering the little Consumption there is of this Spice at present.

The Dutch who are entirely Masters of all the Seacoast of Ceylan, hinder the
Multiplication of these fine Cinnamon Trees, on purpose to keep up he Price of
that rich Commodity; they tell you that they should not sell greater Quantities
were it cheaper: it would be a very difficult Matter to persuade them to let
any One share this Commerce with them, and even in that Case it would be very
chargeable and expensive.

There is no young Lover so jealous of his Mistress as the Dutch are of their
Spice Trade.

Their Fleet that returned in the Year 1687, brought into Holland 170000 weight
of Cinnamon, which was but a small Quantity in Comparison to what they brought
the Year before.

The Dutch omit no pains to destroy the Trees. They say that the chief Motives
they had in possessing themselves of Cochim, was on account of the Damage they
received by the Portugueze selling the wild Cinnamon for that of Ceylan, which
hindered the Company from setting what Price they pleased on theirs; and selling
what Quantities they otherwise might.

Though the Molucca Islands and Amboina the chief Places where Cloves grow, are
of no very large extent, yet Amboina only produces all the Cloves that are used
in all Parts of the World; for the Dutch who are Masters of these Islands by
eans of their Fortresses, have caused all the Trees to be rooted up as I said
before, except those of Amboina: And to make the King of Ternate Satisfaction
for that Loss, the Company allows every Year 12000 Crowns Pension, and about
6000 in Presents.

But then the Company is obliged to take all that the Amboiners bring them, for
which they are to allow them 8. d. a Pound.

Nutmegs and Mace grow only in the Isle of Banda, of which the Dutch are
likewise Masters, and they take great care to hinder the increase of these
Trees, and have used the same precautions to secure to themselves this rich
Commerce, as well as that of Cinnamon and Cloves.

They were not Masters of the Cloves and Nutmegs, till they had conquered the
King of Macassar, and to rid themselves of all Apprehensions for the future,
they obliged him to drive all the Portugueze out of his Country, and shut out
of his Seaports all Ships that should come from Europe except those belonging
to the Dutch Company, which has effectually made them absolute Masters of that
rich Trade: For the People of the Isle of Macassar being near Neighbors to
those of the Molucca Islands used to take under Hand vast Quantities of Cloves
and Nutmegs, and sell them to the Portugueze and English at a lower Price than
the Company, which di not a little prejudice their Commerce.

In short the Dutch have spared no Pains to secure (to themselves only) the
Spice Trade; Spices being Commodities much esteemed and sought after all over
the World and wholly possessed by the Dutch, have put them in a Condition to
dispose of all other Commodities in the Universe: In a Word the Spices are the
Basis of their great Commerce, and go as ready Money in a great many Countries.

How great soever the Quantities of Cloves brought into Europe may be, they
sell yet much more in the Indies, where the Company have fixed the Price of
Cloves to 75 Stivers a Pound, and Nutmegs after the rate of 60 Stivers when
they give them in' Payment.

An English Memorial made in the Year 1663 says that the Dutch with the Spices
that they sell in the Great- Mogul's Country, Persia, Bengal and Coromandel,
and all along the Coasts of the Red Sea both in Arabia and Egypt etc. buy the
Provisions and other Commodities of these vast Kingdoms, proper for Europe and
other Parts of the World.

To the Spices I may add, Pepper and Ginger.

Pepper grows chiefly on the Coast of Malabar, and in the Island of Sumatra and
Java, of which there are two sorts, the large and small; most part of the large
sort comes from Malabar, and is what generally is sent into Europe; the small
comes from Bantam, Achem, etc. very little of this sort comes to us, for the
Mahometans consume almost all of it.

Pepper is a Commodity that abounds very much in those Parts, and costs the
Dutch but little in the Indies: It sells so well in Persia, Arabia, China, and
Japan; that those Empires produce nothing but what may be purchased by Pepper,
which is the only Commodity that goes as ready Money, and by which they get
Cent per Cent at least.

It is very true that there is greater Consumption of Pepper in the Indies than
in Europe, and I have been assured by Persons of good Credit and Capacity, that
it is more wholesome in those hot Countries than in cold and temperate Climates.

The Indians put it whole into their Dishes or at most but bruised and never
ground as we do, and so do the Mahometans.

The English have often complained (and not without Reason) that the Dutch do
all they can to make themselves Masters of the Pepper as they now are of the
Spice Trade, and particularly in the Parliament which was held in the Year
1669, after this Manner, viz.

We are very well assured that the Dutch have long since had a Design to force
the Princes and Governors along the Coasts of Malabar, Achem, the Western
Coast of Sumatra and Java etc. and those Princes and Governors have often
reported, that they have force them not only to enter into Treaties with them
in Relation to their Pepper and other Commodities of the growth of their
Country, but in their Treaties of Peace, have tied them up to hinder all other
Nations from trading with them; and have actually made War against those who
would not accept of such Conditions, they have even blocked up their Ports and
forbid Entrance to other People: And by these Means, have taken from them all
liberty of Trade, till such Times as they have made them comply with their
Demands, which practices tend to the Ruin of the English Trade in the
East Indies. Ginger is the Root of a Tree somewhat like a Rose-Tree, growing
about Malabar, a Town in the Great- Mogul's Country, and which yields the
greatest Quantities; and supplies all foreign Parts. The Indians, English,
Dutch, and all the People of the North, use a great deal of candied Ginger to
warm the Stomach and help Digestion.

Amongst the Drugs I may reckon Indigo, Saltpetre, Sugar, Lacca, Ambergreece,
Musk, Tea, Rhubarb, Borax, Benzoin, Bezoar, etc.

Indigo is made of an Herb much resembling our Hemp, they rot the leaves in
little Ponds made for that Purpose which reduce them to a Kind of Clay, and
then a little afterward it becomes Indigo; all that which comes from the
East Indies (for there is some that comes likewise from the West Indies) is
made only in the Mogul's Country, except a small Quantity that comes from the
Kingdom of Golconda, that which is made in the Province of Agra is esteemed the
best.

It is believed the Dutch every Year bring into Europe, 50 or 60 Thousand
Weight of Indigo from Agra, good part of which is sent into Germany, and
Muscovy, where they use it as as they do in other Countries, for dying Blue.

Saltpetre as well as Indigo comes from the Mogul's Country Agra, and Pattua,
two Towns in the Kingdom of Bengal, yield the most: This is a very considerable
Article in the Dutch Trade, and from thence they bring vast Quantities and as
good as any in the World. The last Fleet that came from the Indies on the
Companies Account, brought 28170 Quintals which was all consumed in Holland in
making Gunpowder for the Republic.

There is also in the said Kingdom of Bengal much coarse Sugar, which the Dutch
buy in great Quantities to refine in Holland and sell afterward with great
Profit.

Lacca is particularly to be had in the Kingdoms of Pegu, and Azen, and in the
Province of Bengal and Guzoratte: It is a Kind of Gum which exquisite
Production is made by a Sort of Indian Ant or Pismire, much after the same
Manner as the Bees make their Honey.

There is red Lacca and black, but there is nothing the Quantity of the black
as the red Sort; out of the red, the Indians have the Secret to extract that
beautiful Scarlet Color with which they dye their Silks and Callicoes, and
they make it serve for any other Color they please; they also use it to
lacquer their fine Cabinets and other Indian Works, and to make a Kind of
Sealing-Wax. It Is a good Commodity for the Dutch, for it costs in India
generally Ten Stivers a Pound, and they sell it to us at Ten Stivers an Ounce
after they have mixed with it half the Quantity of Rozin, which makes their
Gain exorbitant.

Rhubarb is the Root of a Plant of great virtue in Physic, it grows in great
Quantities in Tartary, and particularly in the Kingdom of Bouton, as well as in
China; however the most understanding Traders agree, that which grows in the
Kingdom of Bouton is the best: I have said something of this in the Chapter of
the Levant Trade.

The finest Musk comes also from the Kingdom of Bouton, and there is no Country
in Asia where there are so many of those Animals that produce it as in that
Kingdom, which is situated between the Great- Mogul's Country and Tartary, and
little known to the People of Europe.

The Merchants of Asia go into this Kingdom to buy this Commodity, there comes
a great deal by the Way of Pattua a Town in the Kingdom of Bengal, where the
People of the Country, and the Dutch, and Portugueze generally buy it; there is
a far greater Consumption of it in Asia, and especially in Persia, Turkey, etc.
than in Europe; it grows in a little Bladder of the bigness of a small Hen's
Egg, between the Navel and the Privities of those Animals that produce this
precious Commodity.

Ambergris is only to be had in the Eastern Countries of Africa, but chiefly
on the Coast of Melinda near the Mouth of Riosena, the Portugueze Governors of
Mozambique, lay up great Quantities which they carry with them into Europe and
sell for vast Sums.

Tea grows in some Provinces of China, and is nothing but the leaves of a Tree
that grows about Twelve or Fourteen Foot High, and which they gather in the
Spring Time, taking only the Leaves about the Branches; as soon as these Leaves
are gathered, they dry them in Copper Pans over the Fire, continually shaking
them till they are dry; after that they put them in Leaden Boxes. There is a
great Quantity grows in Japan, and the Dutch furnish themselves thence with
this Commodity as well as from Cochin-China, the Japan Tea is better than that
of China and Cochin-China; the best China Tea costs at Surat but twenty pence a
pound, which the Dutch sell in Europe for twenty Crowns, and the worst Sort for
25 and 30 Livres.

The Dutch have been often accused of mixing with the Tea they bring into
Europe, the Leaves of young Sage which has a strong Taste and brisk Flavor,
and when dried in an Oven is not unlike Tea; but People may very easily be
imposed on, and I am pretty well assured that they bring a great deal of Sage
prepared after this Manner into China, where they sell it very dear.

I shall purposely omit what may be said of Borax, Camphire, Benzoin, and
Bezoar; that I may come to the Raw and Woven Silks, since these Commodities
make One of the greatest Articles in their Indian Trade: They have their Silk
chiefly from China, the Kingdoms of Tonquin, Tripara, Azem, Bengal, and Persia;
the Silks are of several Sorts.

That of China is the finest and whitest; that of Tonquin is also very good and
soft; People are of Opinion that these of Tripara and Azem are much coarser;
the Bengal Silks are rough and without any gloss or luster, for which Reason
there is not much Consumption made of them but in the Manufactures of Holland
and Hamburgh: That of Persia, which is full and large, is only good to make
coarse Laces and Galloons, Silk Thread and Twist, and there is scarce Twenty
Pound in any Bale whatsoever.

There is a Sort of Silk in China, and in the Kingdom of Azem, which is spun
upon Trees and Bushes by a Kind of Animal like a Caterpiller, but not round as
that of the Silkworm, but in a flat thread of a vast length, which, by the
blowing of the Wind, fixes it self to Shrubs and Bushes: Of this Silk they make
Stuffs somewhat coarser than what are made of the other Sort, though much
stronger.

They weave Silks of all sorts in several Countries and Provinces of Asia where
raw Silk is produced, except in the Kingdom of Txipara, which fends its raw
Silks to China.

All this Empire produces a prodigious Quantity (for l've been assured that the
Province of Chang produces as much as all the World besides) they weave Silks
here in such great Quantities, as is almost incredible

They make Silk Stuffs, Cloth of Gold and Silver, Sattins of all sorts of
Colors, Damasks and other Silks which they call in China Pelings, Gentings,
and Panfiens.

They make these Stuffs for the most Part in the Province of Canton, where they
are sold at a moderate Price; One may get Cent per Cent to sell them again if
bought at the First Hand.

I shall say nothing of their Beauty and Goodness, for they are well known to
all Europe.

The Chinese (if One may credit their Historians) have made Silk Two Thousand
and Fourscore Years before the Birth of Christ, however it is certain other
Nations knew it long after the Chinese, and it was by their Means that this
Manufacture went from China, into the Indies and Persia. Two Monks who had
traveled into that Country, at their Return to Italy, taught First the Romans
in the Time of the Emperor Justinian, the Manner of feeding and bringing up of
Silkworms, and since that Time the Italians who traded to the East, brought
this Secret into Europe.

In the Great Mogul's Country, they make likewise a great many Sorts of rich
Stusss of Silk, some all Silk, some with Gold and Silver as they do in Persia.
But enough of this Subject: I come now to speak of

Cotton and Callicoes, which are a great Article in the Dutch East India Trade.
Cotton grows in great abundance in the Great Mogul's Country, on the Coasts of
Coromandel, Bengal, and China; they make in all these Countries a prodigious
Quantity of all Sorts of Callicoes, but chiefly in the Empire of the Great-
Mogul.

The Callicoes are both White and colored, the White are generally the finest,
and have commonly a stripe of Gold or Silver running all along the Piece, and
many have those stripes at each End; sometimes they are embroidered with
Flowers. These Callicoes are very dear and bought by Persons of Destinction for
Scarves, Quilts, and Veils, Handkerchiefs, and Cravats; they sell great
Quantities in Persia and Turkey. There are some Callicoes wonderfully White and
so very finely wrought, that One can scarce see the Threads, and these are
generally kept for the Use of the Women in the Great- Mogul's Seraglio.

The fine Muslins come from the Kingdom of Bengal where they are made, the
colored Callicoes are called Chintz or Chittes, some of which are printed with
a Mould, others painted with a Pencil; and in reality, the variety of the
Design amd the fine colorings of these Clothes are wonderful.

These that are painted the finest, are made in the Kingdom of Golconda and in
the Country about Mazulipatam, that Sort which they call Basfas are only Dyed
with one Color as Red or Black, of which as well as the White there is a great
Consumption on the Coast of Melinda, and in the Emperor of the Abyssin's
Country; the Philippine Islands of Borneo, Sumatra and Java, etc.

Next to the Spices, the Callicoes and other Cotton Stuffs make one of the most
considerable Articles in the Dutch East India Trade; for besides those
surprising Quantities they bring into Europe, which may be seen by the
Catalogues or Lists os their Cargoes, the Company sells no less in the several
Countries of Asia where they Trade to.

I take no Notice of Cotton Thread brought into Europe, Cloth made of the Bark
of Trees, Persian Wool, and the fine Woollen Carpets made at Agra.

Though the People of Europe who trade to the Indies bring back neither Gold nor
Silver, but on the contrary carry both into these Countries, I shall in few
Words give an Account of the Places where these valuable Metals are to be had,
and which are so very necessary for the Dutch Company to make their Trade
flourish in the Indies.

There is a great Quantity of Gold in many Places of Asia, especially in China
and Japan; in the Kingdoms of Pegu, Siam, Azem, Tripara, and Camboya, and in
the Islands of Sumatra and Macassar: But China is the Country of all Asia where
it most abounds, not but that they have very rich Mines of Gold in Japan, but
there is none ever suffered to come out; the Emperor having prohibited it under
severe Penalties, and his Commands are rigourously observed.

As the Chinese are very fond of Silver, and have very little of it, they make
no Difficulty to give their Gold for Silver; and there is vast Profit to be
made by those who know how to manage this Exchange.

They omit no Pains to get the Piastres or Pieces of Eight of Mexico, and they
get good Quantities by the People of the Philippine Islands, who Trade to
Mexico.

Silver Mines are nothing near so numerous in Asia as those of Gold, and indeed
there seems to be but very little Silver there; since there is scarce any
Prince from the Great- Mogul's Country to Japan that coins any Money: In Truth
the riches of the Mines in the Mogul's Country are so great, that they pay for
all Goods brought thither in Gold as they do in China; and as the Dutch are the
only Nation in Europe that Trade to Japan, and their Trade to that Country is
very considerable; so they bring thence a great deal of Silver which generally
is in Pieces of the Value of our Crowns, they carry almost all that Money into
the Great Mogul's Country, where Commissioners of Money give them 3 per Cent
more than they will for our Crowns.

The Dutch bring from Japan, a sort of Red Copper which is excellent and much
better than most of what is in Europe, being softer and more malleable and
pliant, which makes it 25 per Cent dearer: The Company carry much of it to the
Coasts of Coromandel and Bengal, and dispose of it to great Advantage; that
which they bring into Europe, is sent to Aix la Chapel to be workt up there in
small and large Vessels, Copper Furnaces, etc. and good Quantities of it is
employed in the Foundery for Cannons, etc. their Indian Fleet in the Year 1694,
brought 27650 Pound Weight, and those that have come since, have brought Six
Times as much.

Tin and Lead abound very much in the Kingdom of Siam, and toward Malacca; the
Dutch have the Privilege to buy those Commodities at Ligor.

The Tin Trade is very profitable to the Dutch, and they buy it with Bengal
Carpets and Coromandel Linen, which they purchase very cheap. Tin sells very
well in other Sea Ports in the Mogul's Country, and in Persia, and Arabia: The
Dutch have often brought into Europe very great Quantities of Tin, their Fleet
in the Year 1694, brought about 28845 Pound Weight, and what they have brought
since, is Five or Six Times as much, which they sell with vast Profit, though
it is very fine and they sell it cheap.

What remains now, is that I speak a few Words about Pearls and precious
Stones, Porcelain or China Ware.

The Diamond is no where to be found but in Four Countries of Asia.

The First Place is the Kingdom of Visapore; the Second Golconda; the Third the
Kingdom of Bengal subject to the Great Molgul; and the Fourth is the Isle of
Borneo.

It is believed that the Mine of Bengal is the oldest in the World.

That of Visapore was only known about 200 Years ago.

The Mine of Golconda which is Seven Days Journey from the Capital of that
Name, has been known no more than 120 Years, yet I have been informed that it
is the richest and most frequented of any, it employing constantly above 60000
People.

The Portugueze are supposed to bring into Europe the most Diamonds of any
People; perhaps on Account of their Trade which to this Day is still carried on
in Goa the chief City of the Indies for Traffic, especially for Oriental
Pearls.

The other precious Stones of several fine Colors come likewise out of Asia,
but are only found in the Kingdom of Hava (which is in subjection to the King
of Pegu) and in the Isle of Ceylan.

The Mine of the Kingdom of Hava is in the Mountain of Capelan, about Two Days
Journey from Ciren the Residence of the King of Pegu; this Mine produces great
Quantities of Rubies, Sapphires Blue and White, Topazes, Hyacynths, and
Amethysts; of which the King keeps always the most beautiful.

They find likewise Rubies, Saphires, and Topazes, much finer and more
beautiful than those of Pegu, in a River which falls down the Mountains that
are in the middle of the Isle of Ceylan.

Turquoize Stones come from Persia, the Mine is in the Mountain of Pirouskoua
three or Four Days Journey from the City of Mescheda.

The old Rock is now kept for the Royal Family only, the Turquoize Stones of
the new Rock being nothing near so good; having not so fine and lively Color
as the old Rock.

The Mine of the fine Oriental Agates, is in the Province of Camboya.

Pearls are fished for in the Persian Gulf round the Island of Barhem,
belonging to the King of Persia; they fish for them also over against the Coast
of Arabia-Felix near the Town of Catiff, which belongs to an Arabian Prince.
The Pearls of these Two Places have a Yellowish cast; the greatest Part of
these Pearls they sell in the Indies, the other in the Provinces of Asia and
Muscovy, where they are not so difficult as in Europe, about the Shape and
Water of Pearls.

There is also a Fishery for Pearls in the Straight of the Isle of Ceylan near
the little Isle of Manar, now in Possession of the Dutch Company; they will
have it, that these are the finest in all the East for roundness and Color,
but very few of them Weigh above Three or Four Carats.

There are Pearls to be found on the Coast of Japan, of a very beautiful Water
and of a good large size, but this Fishery is much neglected, the Japonese as
well as the Chinese never troubling themselves much about Pearls o^ precious
Stones.

The Dutch Company besides these Pearls just now spoken of, send into Furope,
another sort of Pearl which they sell by the Ounce, and for which they have a
considerable vent.

Porcelain, or what we call China ware, is only made in China and Japan; but
that of China is much more valuable.

The Earth they make this last sort of China is only found and prepared near
the Town Ojenchen in the Province of Viangly, and where only they make it; for
the Waters of no other Place can give such beautiful Luster to the Colors, or
make the Work transparent: There are several sorts of China or Porcelain, some
have a White Ground, some Yellow, Red, and Blue; the Chinese carry a great Deal
of this Ware to Batavia and other Places, and dispose of great Quantities.

There are also great Quantities of China or Porcelain as well as other Goods,
brought into Europe from the Indies by the Fleet from Mexico or New Spain, and
which come thither in the Ships belonging to the Philippine Islands.

One may reckon among Porcelain or China Ware, those earthen Pots the Chinese
make their Tea in, and of which they bring great Quantities into Europe; they
make these Pots at Kiantz and Guihinig, those that are made in this latter
Place are esteemed the most (though not so beautiful as the others,) because they
give a fine Taste and Flavor to the Liquor, which the Chinese admire.

They bring also from China and Japan, Cabinets, Boxes, Fans, Trunks, and
several other Things of that Nature, of admirable Workmanship and delicately
varnished.

I come now to conclude these Remarks, and shall only add in short that of the
several Sorts of Wood that the Company causes to be brought from the Indies,
either for Joyners Work, Physic, or Dying; the principal are Aquila Wood,
Siampan, (which is the same as Brazil) Lignum Aloes, Sindal, and Rose Wood,
Ebony, Calambour, Catatour, and Cocoa; most of which sell very well even in the
Indies.

All these sorts of Goods are brought into Europe by Ships belonging to the
Company, which Sail generally from Batavia and the Isle of Ceylan, which are
likewise the Places of Rendezvous for those that come from Coromandel and
Bengal.

But the general Rendezvous of all Shipping that come from the Indies into
Europe, is almost always at the Cape of Good-Hope, whence afterward they Sail
altogether for Europe; sometimes indeed it so falls out, that the First
Squadron does not stay for the Second, especially if they have waited long for
their arrival.

They Sail generally from the Indies in the Month of December and January, and
come into Holland toward July and August, and sometimes later.

The Directors of the India Company make Sale of their Goods in Holland twice a
Year. When the Company has resolved upon a Sale, they send printed circular
Letters to every Town of the united Provinces, in which are inserted the Names
and Quantities of such Goods they Design to make Sale of and the Time and
Place, when and where such Sale is to be made: One Half is generally sold in
the Chamber at Amsterdam, the Fourth Part at Middlebourg, and a Sixth in the
several Chambers of Delft, Rotterdam, Horn, and Enchuysen; and these Goods are
sold to the highest Bidder.

The Ships that bring into Europe the Returns from the Indies, bring likewise
the Books and Memoirs concerning the Trade of the Company, with a general
Balance of the Profits, Disbursments and Losses they have had in their India
Trade.

The Company causes also in Holland a general Account to be made in the Month
of May, Copies of which they cause to be published, so that every Body knows by
that whether the Company has lost, and how much their Funds are increased, and
the Stock rises and falls accordingly.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Government of the Company both in Europe and Asia, its
Power, Policy, and Profits.
THough the Company which is composed of Threescore Shares is but One Body, and
has but One common Purse, it is nevertheless divided into Six Chambers, viz.

1. The Chamber of Amsterdam which has Half a Share. 2. The Chamber of
Middlebourg which has a Fourth. 3. The Chamber of Rotterdam. 4. The Chamber of
Delft. 5. The Chamber of Horn. 6. The Chamber of Enchuysen, which Four last
Chambers altogether have only One Quarter or Fourth Share.
In the Chamber of Amsterdam there are 24 Directors, of whom Twenty are
Citizens and Magistrates, except Five or Six Merchants, who govern almost all
what concerns Sales and Purchases, for the Company, and Provisions: These
Twenty Directors have each of them Three Thousand Guilders Pension, the other
Four have only Twelve Hundred, and are nominated by the Towns of Tergou,
Utrecht, Dort, and Leyden.

The Chamber of Middlebourg, has Thirteen Directors who have each 2500 Guilders
Pension.

To be Director, a Man must necessarily have Two Shares in the Stock, and be in
the Registers of the Company.

Every One of these Chambers nominates a certain Number of Directors which are
deputed to compose the Assembly or Court called the Seventeen.

Amsterdam names Eight. Middlebourg Four. The other Chambers, One each.
Middlebourg, the Meuse or North Holland names One alternately.
Thus the Chamber of Amsterdam having Eight Voices of the Seventeen, has only
One to gain, to carry every Thing as they please.

The general Assembly or Court of Seventeen is held only twice or thrice a Year
most commonly at Amsterdam, and sometimes at Middlebourg; this Court or
Assembly by plurality of Voices, resolves all Matters relating to Shipping,
sale of Goods, and Dividends, and names the Governor General of the Indies for
Trade.

In a Word the Assembly of Seventeen, decides generally all the Affairs of
Consequence relating to the East India Company.

This famous Company governs all the Territories the Dutch possess in the
Indies which are very considerable, as also all Commerce which is managed by a
Council of State arbitrarily chosen and whose Residence is in Batavia.

This Council is composed of a Governor General who is their President, and
has Two Voices. A Director General. Six ordinary Counselors of State. And as
many extraordinary as the Company shall think fit. The Governor is also their
Generalissimo in all Military Affairs on the other Side of the Cape of Good
Hope. He has under him a Major General. Particular Admirals And the Admirals of
each Squadron.
The Office of Governor General is only to give Orders, and is accountable to
none, they choose him every Three Years, but commonly he is continued on as long
as he lives; for 'twould cost the Company too much to have a Governor General
get an Estate under them every Three Years.

The Company allows him every Month 800 Crowns Pension, and 500 Crowns more for
his Table, besides the Entertainment of all his Family, which is a very
considerable Expense.

He has a Key to every Magazine and can take out what he will, without giving
an Account to any One.

It may be said his Authority in some sort would equal that of the late Princes
of Orange, was it not in the Company's Power to revoke it when they pleased;
for in Effect he is Stadtholder, Captain General, and High Admiral of the
Indies.

His Court is more Pompous, his Train more Magnificent than was that of those
Princes, and surpasses even some Kings in Europe. When he goes out 50 Horse
Guards go before his Coach, which is followed by a fine Company of Foot, 12
Pages walk of each side of his Coach and all very richly and Magnificently
dressed. When he gives Audience to the Ambassadors of the Indian Kings, it is with
extraordinary Pomp and Splendor.

All which serves very much to gain Admiration and Respect from the People of
Asia who are mightily taken with outward show and finery. In a Word there are
few Kings in Europe who make so splendid a Figure and Appearance as his
Governor General, especially if he be a Man of good Sense, for then it is in
his Power to govern the Council as he pleases: The World has seen an Example of
this in the Person of Monsieur Speelman; who did every Thing after his own Way,
made War and Peace when he pleased, and the Company's General that stood in awe
of him approved of every Thing he did.

The Director General who is the second Person of the Council of State in the
Indies, has every Thing in his Hands, and is answerable accordingly.

The Votes of the extraordinary Counselors are not reckoned in any Debate,
when the General and the six ordinary Counselors of State are present.

When a Counselor dies or any other Member of the Assembly, it is in the Power
of the Counselors to appoint his Successor, who must be confirmed by the
general Company; if I am not much mistaken Monsieur Champtiffe who succeeded
Monsieur Speelman, was chosen by the Council, and confirmed by the Company.

Besides these, there are Two principal Merchants whose charge is to see the
Ships lade and unlade; these are very considerable Posts, and are esteemed the
best, next being of the Council.

There are six Governors of Provinces, viz. The Governor of Coromandel. The
Governor of Amboina. The Governor of Banda. The Governor of Ternate. The
Governor of the Isle of Ceylan, and The Governor of Malacca.


I have been assured that those six Governors are all Absolute in their
respective Provinces, and that they cannot be displaced by the Council of
Batavia.

The particular Governors of all the Places from the Cape of Good Hope are
called Commanders, I don't know if the Council of Batavia has the Nomination of
them, or the Assembly of Seventeen; however I am certain that the Assembly
nominates the Governor of the Cape of Good Hope.

The General and his Council chooses all the Commissioners, Merchants and
Subaltern Officers; however, if any one is recommended by the Sharers, they
take care to provide for him very well.

Besides the Council of State, at Batavia, there is a Council of Justice who
are Supreme Judges of all Process Civil and Criminal, and have even the Power
to try the Governor General, and condemn him to Death, if found guilty of
Treason.

The Dutch Company, the better to carry on Trade in the East Indies, to secure
the Country and all Forts and Magazines or Storehouses they are in Possession
of in those Places, maintain a Hundred and Fourteen Vessels, from Thirty to
Sixty Pieces of Cannon, and above Five and Twenty Thousand Men, Officers,
Common Soldiers, and Seamen in their Pay.

The Company maintains in the Indies in all Twelve Thousand regular Troops, but
in every Place where there is a Dutch Garrison, there are always great Numbers
of the Natives capable of bearing Arms, which they always put in the Front when
they go to Battle.

I have been informed that in these different Countries, the Company have,
besides their regular Troops, above a Hundred Thousand Men able to carry Arms.

The Major General commands all the Troops under the Governor General, he is
the Second Person in the Indies.

The Company in Time of War augment their Forces both by Sea and Land, and
besides their ordinary Vessels, can equip Forty of the larger Sort; there are
many Crowned Heads in Europe who would find it very difficult to do as much.

However all the great Power that this Famous Company has in the Indies, is
nothing but the Result of the Industry of a small Number of Men, of about 60
Substantial and understanding Traders, firm and constant in their Undertakings,
and who want nothing of being so many Sovereign Princes but their Independance
on the States General: In other Respects this Famous Company is looked upon as
absolute in Holland, and in all other Places nominates all Magistrates,
Admirals, Generals, and all Governors; sends and receives Ambassadors to and
from Kings and Sovereign Princes, makes Peace and War when ever it pleases, and
by its own Authority administers Justice, institutes Officers to execute it
absolutely in its own Name; punishes and pardons Crimes, gives Rewards and
Presents worthy the Grandeur and Magnificence of Kings; establishes Colonies,
builds Forts, levies Troops, maintains Armies and great Garrisons, fits out
Fleets of Men of War, and coins Money.

It is easy to discover by this Account, that the India Trade must bring
immense Treasures to the Company; besides the Dividend the Company makes every
Year to the Sharers, it supplies those exorbitant Expenses which it is obliged
to make in the Indies and Europe, to pay all the Officers, Directors,
Commissioners, Soldiers and Seamen; in building Fortifications, buying
Ammunition for all Places, and an infinity of other Expenses, for Building,
Freighting and Victualling great Numbers of large and small Ships, for the
Maintenance and Augmentation of its maritime Forces.

The Gains of the Company, more than their Expenses and Disbursments, amount
generally to three Millions of Gold every Year, including the Returns, all
Freight paid, which comes to 15 or 16 Millions of Livres a Year, reckoning one
with the other, amounting in the whole to 50 Millions of Livres.

The immense Gains of this Company, since their Establishment, excited the
French in 1664 to undertake this Trade; but Experience has made them know, that
what is proper for the Dutch, is not always convenient for other People: In
short, this Trade that has gained them such vast Riches (being Masters of the
Spiceries) can never be of advantage to any Country or People, who must employ
ready Money in purchasing at very dear Rates, and at second Hand, such
Commodities by which they get Twenty for One, or else take from them such Goods
as are destructive to their own Manufactures.

This has actually been the Case of France; for when the King prohibited all
painted Indian Stuffs to be worn in that Kingdom, they saw in a Moment their
Manufactures of slight Woollen Stuffs recover their Credit.

The Gains of the Company would be much more considerable if they were served
in the Indies with an exact Fidelity; the Company is very well satisfied, and
has no Reason to doubt, but that the greatest part of the Officers, of all
Ranks, employed in that Service, and who have large Pensions and are well paid,
do not scruple to raise themselves great Fortunes at the Company's cost: This
is visible in those who return from the Indies, and who had any Management
there, or Authority.

But how great soever the Distance between Holland and the Indies may be, yet
is it not impossible to reform the greatest part of those Abuses the Officers
commit in the Indies; but most of them being Relations or Friends, and often
Creatures of the Directors, are generally incapable of the Employments they are
put in, which is the reason they are not over severe in passing their Account;
nay, some will have it, that the Directors themselves protect them, and often
go Sharers with them.

The Officers of the Company that are in Europe, are no less attentive to
enrich themselves; and I have been informed, that the Directors who are
employed in buying Goods, and have the Inspection of all Vessels, or their
Rigging and Provisions, or who are employed in managing any other Affair, find
always Ways and Means considerably to augment their Salary and Fortune.

But nothing so much hinders the good Economy of the Company, as choosing
Directors out of the Magistrates, when by their Establishment they were to be
all Merchants or Tradesmen, without any Employment in the Public, or more
particular Government of the State; nevertheless, when there is a Director's
Office vacant, the Magistrates are always intrieguing for the Authority and
Salary which they know are annexed to such Office.

Of the seventeen Places that the Town of Amsterdam has in disposal, there are
twelve possessed by those Gentlemen, who having otherwise Employment enough,
have not time to attend the Business of the Company, which requires a
particular Application and Attention. The other Sharers have often complained
of these Abuses, but without any Remedy.

I shall insert at the End of this Treatise, a curious Piece, which will give
great Light into the Dutch East India Trade.

It is a faithful Report of One, who commanded the Fleet from the Indies in the
Year 1688, which he made to the States General, touching the Posture of the
Company's Affairs in the Indies.

I am principally moved to make this secret and important Piece public, to
justify, in some Measure, what I have said in Relation to the Indian Trade (if
any one doubt of the Truth of it,) though the Dutch take all imaginable Care to
hide and keep secret every thing that relates to their Trade in the Indies, and
which passes with them for a Secret of State.

CHAP. XV. Of the Trade of the Dutch Company in the West Indies.
AFTER having spoken of the Trade the Dutch have in the East Indies, I shall
finish this Treatise of Commerce with what Trade the Indian Company have on the
Western Coast of America and other Places.

The Portugueze were Masters of all the Trade of these Coasts, and all the
neighboring Islands, by reason of the Forts they caused to be built there,
after they had made a Discovery of that Country, in finding out a Passage to
the East Indies.

Philip the Second, as I observed before, coming to the Crown of Portugal, and
having in some manner forbidden that State, as well as Spain, trading with the
Dutch, the greater Part of the most substantial Merchants, who saw themselves
out of Employment by this Prohibition, resolved to go and trade upon the Coasts
of Africa and America, and the neighboring Islands.

The Village of Moure, on the Golden Coast, was the first Place the Dutch had
leave to trade in; and they knew so well how to manage that Advantage, that in
a very little time that Village became a Place very considerable for Traffic;
the Africans, who agreed better with these new Traders than with the
Portugueze, flocked thither from all Parts.

The Dutch Trade at length increased so considerably all along the Coast of
Guinea, that before the Truce of the Year 1609, it employed above 20 large
Vessels, besides above 100 of smaller Burden, that were constantly employed in
the Trade of Cape Verde and the Coasts of America.

The Portugueze not being able to suffer that any one should partake of this
Trade besides themselves, forgot nothing that might exclude the Dutch, even to
put a Price upon their Heads.

They, on the other Hand, to secure themselves from these Persecutions of the
Portugueze, in the Year 1612, built, with Leave of the King of Sabon, a Fort
near the Village Moure, called Fort Nassau; and since that, their Trade went on
with great Security and Quiet.

Some small time after their East India Company was settled, having a great
deal of Money and Seamen unemploy'd, they began to talk of trading to the
West Indies; which Discourse was occasined by the Memoirs of a certain
Merchant, whose Name was John Flessinguen, presented to the States General, who
were divided in their Opinions thereupon: But those who wished for Peace,
believing that an Establishment of the Dutch in America would raise invincible
Obstacles, hindered the Execution of that Project.

The Truce of twelve Years, which they made with Spain in the Year 1609,
expiring in the Year 1621, they began to revive that Project; and the
States General having approved it, they regulated every thing that might any
wise have relation to the Establishment of the New West India Company, in hopes
that their Republic might reap no less Benefit and Advantage by this, than
they had by the East India Company; and all these Regulations were made and
resolved upon the 20th Day of June, in the same Year 1621.

This New General Company, which was set up on the Plan of that of the
East Indies, was composed of several particular Companies, that traded on the
Coasts of Africa and America.

And there were several Subjects of Spain that entered into the Company under
borrowed Names.

The Funds of this Company were 7200000 Livres, and none but the Company,
exclusive of all the rest of the Subjects of the Republic, could, during the
space of 24 Years, trade on the Coasts of Africa, from the Tropic of Cancer to
the Cape of Good Hope; and through all America, from the Streights of Magellan to
Newfoundland

All the Members of this Company were divided into five Chambers, out of which
were chosen nineteen Persons, to compose a Council to decide all Controversies
and Matters of the greatest Importance.

The Progress this New Company made was so considerable, that the
States General entertained great Hopes to make themselves Masters of all the
South Part of America. In short, after thirteen Years War, that Company saw
themselves Masters of Brazil, the Provinces of Fernambouc, Tamarica, Pariba and
Riogrande, and there settled a vast Trade, to the great Loss and Detriment of
the Spaniards and Portugueze.

It appears by the Registers of the Company, that from the Year 1623, to the
Year 1636, they had put to Sea 800 Vessels on Account of War and Trade, the
Charge and Expense of which amounted to 45000000 of Gulders, only for the
Shipping, the Rigging and other necessary Furniture and Provisions, and that
they had taken from their Enemies 545 Vessels which they valued at 60 Millions,
and the other Plunder, amounted to above 30 Millions.

That Peter Hem had taken near the Havana the Peru Fleet, aboard which he found
Seven Millions of Silver, besides other Goods, Cannon and Stores which amounted
to above Ten Millions, and that the Losses the Enemy sustained and of which the
Company could make no Advantage, came to above 35 Millions; one of their most
considerable Losses was that occasioned by Monsieur C. Hermit on the Coasts of
Peru, where he destroyed in the Port of Lima a Fleet of 30 Men of War.

In the Year 1636, the Directors of the Company judging it proper to send to
Brazil a Person of Reputation to reside there, chose the Count of Nassau to
whom they gave the same Power and Authority as to the Governor General of the
East Indies.

During the 8 Years of his Government, he added to the Conquests of the Company
those of Siara, Sirigi, and Maragan: 14 Provinces in Brazil, the Company
possessed themselves of Seven.

The Company likewise made themselves Masters of the Fort St. George de la
Minas, the Town of St. Paul de la Conde, and the Island of St. Thomas on the
Coast of Africa.

In the Year 1640 they destroyed in Four Battles successively the Enemies
Fleet, consisting of Fourscore and Thirteen Men of War, which had on Board 1200
Mariners.

You see what the Purse of these Merchants has effected in Africa and America.

The Truce which the States General in the Year 1641, concluded with the
Portugueze who had withdrawn themselves from under the Spanish Government
toward the End of the Year 1640, stopped the Porgress of the Company which in
some Measure was the cause of their Ruin; for seeing all Things in Peace, they
recalled their Governor General into Europe in the Year 1644, and remitted all
Power and Authority into the Hands of Three People, viz. the Sieur de Hamet at
Amsterdam, De Basis a Goldsmith at Harlem, and Bullestrat a Carpenter of
Middlebourg; Men whose Heads were wonderfully well turned for trading, but very
ill for Politics as the Event clearly made it appear. These good Men who
thought of nothing else but how to increase their Riches and make Commerce
flourish, sold Arms and Gunpowder to the Portugueze, on Account of those
extravagant Prices they gave, and let the Fortifications of their strongest
Places fall to ruin, neglected furnishing them with Ammunition and Arms, and
permitted the Soldiers when ever they pleased to come into Europe, on Purpose
to lessen the Expense of their Garrisons.

This ill Conduct and Negligence gave Occasion to the Portugueze to retake from
the Dutch all they had in Brazil, by renewing the War.

At last this War came to an End the Sixteenth Day of August 1661, by the
Mediation of the King of England, who was to marry the Infanta of Portugal.

By this Treaty the Dutch Company entirely quitted all their Pretensions to
Brazil for a good round Sum the Portugueze gave them, with Liberty that they
might trade as Friends on the Coasts of Brazil, in the Ports of Portugal and
their Dependencies, and on Condition that the Portugueze would regulate the
Price of Salt.

There remained at that time to the Company, only the Forts they had on the
Golden Coast and Cape Verde, for the Portugueze had retaken the Island of St.
Thomas, the Towns of St. Salvador and St. Paul, the Islands of Curazao and
Tabaco, and the new Country between Virginia and New England which was found
out after the Loss of Brazil.

The extraordinary Expense the Company were at in the last Brazil War, drained
them to that Degree, that they who before equalled the East India Company, were
reduced to such a Condition, that they could not pay Six Millions of Guilders,
or somewhat more, they had Occasion to borrow upon Interest.

The States General to preserve the Trade of the African Coasts and the Places
they there were in Possession of, in the Year 1674 formed a new Company
composed of the Old Partners or Sharers and their Creditors, the Methods they
took and concerted pleased both Parties, and this second Company having got a
Fund of about Six Millions of Guilders, kept up very well their Trade and
Commerce, and got very considerable Sums.

I shall give you here some little Idea of their Trade and wherein it chiefly
consists.

Of all the Nations in Europe, the Dutch are those who constantly have had the
greatest Trade on the Coasts of Africa, they have there two principal
Establishments, one at Cape Verde, and the other on the Golden Coast in Guiney.

In the little Island of Goree near Cape Verde, they have the Forts of Gor and
Nassau, where there is a very good Road and excellent Bay; this Port is of
great Use and Advantage to them in the Trade to Cape Verde which is very
considerable, but the Establishment on the Golden Coast is of much more
Consequence, their Trade there being now more considerable and rich.

The two strongest Forts, are Fort St George de las Minas and Fort Nassau,
which are but 4 Leagues distant from each other.

The rest are the Forts of Achem, Danubo, Acaro, Sama and Bouten.

They Trade likewise to other Countries lying along and beyond the Golden
Coast, viz.

The Kingdoms of Arden, Benin, Congo and Angola. The chief Commodities are,
Gold, Ivory, Slaves, Leather, Gums etc.
Gold is found almost every where on the Coast between Fort d' Arquin near the
White Cape (belonging still to the Dutch) and the Golden Coast. The Inhabitants
get some in their own Country, and some from the Neighboring Provinces of
Africa, but there is no Place in all the West where there are so many and such
rich Mines as on the Golden Coast, so called, by reason of the vast Quantities
of the finest Gold that is there produced, this Country being an inexhaustable
Treasury.

These are the Golden Mines which made the Nations of Europe establish
themselves in those Climates, by Means or Favor of the several Forts they have
caused there to be built, as the Portugueze who were the first discoverers, the
English, Germans, French, Swedes, Danes, and Dutch.

The Gold furnished by the Negores with, is in Ingots, Bracelets, Beads, and
other Toys, or else in Dust; their Ability to counterfeit and falsify Gold is
so great, that they know how to gild though in Dust, and frequently gild over
small Pieces of Copper; and that so curiously that it is inpossible not to be
cheated, unless you stand very much upon your Guard.

The Trade for Slaves is undoubtedly one of the most considerable that the
Merchants of Europe can make on these Coasts, their different Degrees in
goodness make the difference in their Price; those of Angola are looked upon to
be the strongest, this Trade is the more considerable and important, because
without these Slaves it is impossible all over America and the Islands to do any
thing in the Mines, or to manure the Ground, make Sugar and Tobacco.

The Dutch are the only People that deal in Negroes, the English I believe do
not concern themselves about that Part of Commerce, the French very little, and
the Portugueze buy none but for their Colonies in Brazil and their other
Dominions in the Indies.

The Spaniards are the People the Dutch furnish with these Slaves, and they
have entered into several Treaties with one another for that very Purpose to
settle the Number they ought to be furnished with, their Price and the Places
where they ought to be delivered, which generally are St. George de las Minas,
and on the Coasts of Guinea, or in the Island of Curazao, near the Town of
Cartagena in America.

The Article of Ox and Cow-hides, or Leather, is very considerable at Cape
Verde, all along that Coast to the River Gambia.

Besides these Commodities, there is likewise brought a great deal of Wax from
Cape Verde and Sierra-Lione, and other Countries on that Coast; as also
Gum-Arabick for Dying, and Ostrich Feathers.

Next to the Dutch, the English are the greatest Traders on these Coasts.

All those different sorts of Commodities that are brought to the Negroes, do
not sell indifferently alike; some are proper only for Capa Verde, others for
the Golden Coast, and others again for Arden and Angola, and the Merchants sort
them accordingly.

But it is generally said that the best Commodities, and most gainful to be
carried to those Coasts, are, Rock-Chrystal, Coral and Lace, but especially
Brandies.

All the Inhabitants of the Coast of Guinea consume great Quantities of Linen
Cloth half worn, which they think much more convenient than the Callicoes of
their own Country, as keeping the Body more cool; and the Dutch supply them
with great Quantities at very high Rates.

The Dutch Company are yet in Possession of some of the Islands; as, Curazao,
Tabaco, Buenos Aires, Doruba, and St. Martin, but in Partnership with the
French.

The two first of these are the most considerable, as having each of them a
Fort, and Curazao a good Harbor: The Trade of which Island consists in the
Commodities of the Growth of the Place, as Sugars, Wool, Ox and Cow-Hides.

The Inhabitants of Curazao trade with the Spaniards in America, as I before
observed, which makes that Island of great Importance to the Dutch.

I believe the other Dutch Colonies in America have no great Matter of
Commerce; and if I am not much deceived, the Fort of Surinam does not belong to
the Company, though I believe they would willingly buy it, but the Sharers of
Zealand would never consent to it; but be that how it will, the Dutch have been
Masters of it ever since the English delivered it up to them by the Treaty of
Breda.

This Colony is very small, the Inhabitants not daring to Manure and Till the
Ground out of Cannon-reach, for the wild Indians give them no Quarter, because
they hanged their Brother Indians; and, it must be owned, without much Reason
or Justice.

I shall end this Treatise with

A true Report made to the States General, by Daniel Braems, (Book-keeper
General in Batavia, who commanded the last Fleet that came into Europe from the
Indies,) concerning the true State of Affairs of the East India Company, at his
departure with the said Fleet, viz.
Most High and Mighty Lords,
A long and troublesome Sickness which I have labored under, has hindered me,
till now, of having the Honor of appearing before your High Mightinesses to
pay my Duty, in giving you in Writing, with a due Respect, a faithful Report of
the State and Condition the General Company of the United Provinces in the
Indies was in at the time I came from thence, which was on the 19 th Day of
November, in the Year 1686, when I left, I thank Heaven, the Affairs of that
illustrious and flourishing Company in as good a Condition as they could desire.

To represent to your High Mightnesses more particularly the vast Extent of
their Dominions, and the great Trade the India Company has in these Parts, I
shall observe that Order which an Affair of this Nature requires. It is
necessary I speak of every Place in Particular, and that I lay before your High
Mightinesses, the principal Affairs, in which, I think, consists the
Advancement and Preservation of the strong and important Provinces of the East,
which certainly are the most beautiful, the richest, and most gainful Conquests
of the whole Indies.


I shall begin first with

BANDA.
The long Possession the Company has had of this Place, I don't doubt has given
your High-Mightinesses (by several Accounts transmitted to you) a clear Idea
and Knowledge of its Situation and Extent; so that I believe it will be
needless to give those Particulars here: I shall, however, say, that it is a
Place where the Company has almost none, or very little Trade by Sale of Stuffs
and other Goods, and I believe never may have, the Country being small and
slenderly Peopled, so that the Vent here is very inconsiderable; and as to the
free Navigation, which is the only Thing that can bring any Benefit to it, it
cannot by any means be granted them, but ought to be absolutely forbidden them,
on account of the Frauds they are there daily guilty of.

This Island produces now no more what is necessary for Life, so that they are
forced to send to that Place, every Year, from Batavia, great Quantities of
Provisions and Necessaries; which, according to my Opinion, ought to be
considered as a Thing contributing most to secure the Possession of that
Island; it being certain, that if any Enemy should take it by surprise, or
otherwise, as it might please God to permit, they would soon find themselves
unprovided of all Necessaries of Life, and consequently be forced to leave it,
unless they could constantly furnish the Island with sufficient Supplies.

Any one may see by this true Account, what Advantage the Company can have in
trading to this Island; and if the Company exports some few Commodities from
some small Farms, yet all that will not near answer the Charges they are
obliged to be at, to keep up and repair the Works; and these Expenses amount
every Year to very considerable Sums.

But then if you put in Balance with these Expenses, the great Profit that the
Mace and Nutmegs which the Company transports thence to Europe, and even to
other Parts of the Indies, the Thing will have another Face, and show how
important and advantageous that Conquest is to the Company.

The last Shipping that were sent thither, according to the yearly Custom, to
carry necessary Provisions, and bring thence Spices, had a very happy and
successful Voyage, and returned, at several times, to the Harhour of Batavia,
with a reasonable Lading of Mace and Nutmegs.

The Advice we had from time to time, assured us, that the Affairs of the
Company continued to be in a very good and quiet Condition, and that the Spices
grew as well as they could wish; but then those same Advices brought an
Account, that they had several Earthquakes, which threw down and damaged many
Houses, and to which these Islands, by their mountainous Situation, lie exposed.

The nearest place to Banda, is

AMBOINA.
This Place was formerly taken from the Portugueze by our People, and we have
the Propriety of it to this Day, which makes the Company the only Masters of
the Cloves, that are every Year gathered in this Island, and which are
delivered to the Company at a certain fixed Price; and the Company are obliged
to take the whole Crop, how great soever it be; whence it often happens, that
Company is supplied with much more than they can have vent for; by which it
appears, that this Island produces more Cloves than can be sold or consumed the
whole World over; and it is for this Reason that it is now thought no longer
necessary to oblige the Indians of Amboina to plant a certain Number of young
Trees every Year, as heretofore they were want to do; and that Custom has been
laid aside for many Years.

It appears by the last Letters that came from thence, that the Company's Ships
arrived safely at that Place; and that there Peace and Tranquillity reigned,
that the Islanders indeed had received some Damage by Fires, at several times,
but that they had given Orders for the future, to prevent the like
Inconveniences.

This Island and its Fort are very much more exposed to Attacks, than Banda,
not only on Account of its Extent, but also because there are above threescore
Thousand Men, besides Piracies, and other Inconveniences, which they are almost
continually exposed to from the neighboring Islands? so that according to my
Judgment, I should think it absolutely necessary to provide very soon, and that
too with the greatest Caution, the Peace and Quiet of of this little Province,
and its Inhabitants, as one of the most important Possessions the Company has
in the Indies.

Batavia is obliged to furnish this Country with Necessaries for Subsistence of
Life, in the same manner as the Island of Banda; for the Inhabitants are so
lazy, it is almost impossible to make them plow; and as there is but a very
little Trade there for Linen, and and other Clothing, the Expenses the Company
are at to support them, amount to much more than the Gain they can make by the
Sale of such Commodities in that Island; but then the Vent they have for their
Cloves, which is very great, overpays that Charge with vast Advantage, the
Profits accruing thereby being six times more than the Expense of supporting
that Province amounts to.

The third Government of the Company in in the East Indies, is

TERNATE.
This Place must be considered no otherwise than as a Frontier Town of the
principal Government beforementioned, the Company being obliged to pay the
King, and the chief Lords of his Court, a certain Sum in Recompense for having
heretofore consented, that all the Clove Trees in their Dominions should be
plucked up.

By the last Advices from Batavia, and by the verbal Report of the Sieur Lobs,
who was Governor, we were informed, that our People lived quietly, and in good
Understanding with the Natives, and that the Conduct of the King since the
Company had so graciously restored him to his Throne, was as they could wish.

There were great Complaints made, that some Servants of the Company were much
wanting in their Fidelity, that they were very negligent, and unqualified for
their several Employments, which was very prejudicial to the Company. This is a
Distemper which has some time since infected almost all the Dominions of the
Company in the Indies, and the Consequences will be very fatal, if they do not
take proper Measures to remedy these continued Abuses; for Fidelity and
Diligence in Servants, joined with Experience, and a certain Knowledge of
Management of Affairs, are, after the Blessing of God, the principal Pillars of
this great Edifice of Trade; they ought therefore to be maintained and
encouraged, as much as possible, to bring Commerce to its utmost Height, which
cannot otherwise ever possibly be effected.

There is a great Consumption in this Government, of coarse Linen; but the
Profits arising thereby, and other Incomes, are not any ways proportioned to
the Charge the Company are at: The Returns are hardly worth mentioning. The
Tortoise Shell of this Place is as good a Commodity as can be desired, and very
profitable; but the Quantities are so very small, that the two Companies, and
their Servants do not find their Account in it; and it is much the same with

MACASSAR.
In this Place the Company has a good Fort well supplied with Ammunition, and
of great Strength, and keeps there a good Garrison, which is very necessary to
awe those hardy and warlike People, and hinder them from attacking us at
unawares, and driving us out of the Country. The Reasons that engaged the
Company to make War against the Maccassarians, was the greatness of the Kings
of that Country, their Power which increased daily, and their underhand
Workings against the Company's Interest; insomuch that they were in perpetual
Anxiety how to preserve their Possessions in those Kingdoms: And as the
frequent Murders and Robberies that Nation committed, as well on the Officers
and Servants of the Company, as their Friends and Allies, gave them more than
sufficient Provocation to take up Arms against those People; so the Company
were not backward to send a strong Power against them, and the Undertaking
proved so successful, that that Nation which was once so powerful, was
conquered, and forced to accept of Peace from the Company on such Conditions as
they would give them; and by this means the Fort was scoured, and that
Possession, together with the Change of the Government of Macassar, has put
that Nation entirely out of Condition to undertake any thing against the
Company, so that they are very easy on that Point.

If the Directors, and proper Servants of the Company, had not been negligent
in keeping the Balance of Power, which was very prudently and opportunely put
into their Hands, by the Division of Territories, and by the Establishment of
Radia Polacha, who is now become so powerful by that Negligence of the Servants
of the Company, that at present they have reason to distrust, and be afraid of
him.

In this Island there is a considerable Trade for Linen, and other Goods; and
it is certain, if the Company could engross the whole Trade of that Country,
exclusive of all other Traders (amongst which may be reckoned the Commissaries
themselves) the Gains they would then have, would be more than sufficient to
defray the Expenses they are every Year obliged to bear, and which, at present,
are more than the Profits, including the Income of the Corn the Company caused
to be sown there.

TIMOR.
We have here a Castle, but small, and of little Consequence, however, it is
well situated for the Company's Trade, which yet is not sufficient to supply
the Storehouse they have caused to be here set up: They keep it for the
Convenience of selling of Slaves notwithstanding, and on Account of the Sandal
Wood that grows here, which is a Commodity that has a good Vent, and managed
with as much Ease as Advantage, both in China, and other Parts of the Indies;
but the Company who long since obtained the Liberty of Trading in this vast
Kingdom (as it now appears) made much more Advantage of it than they do at
present.

But however, if the Profit does but balance the Expense that the Company is
at, and the Inconveniences they are continually subject to from the People of
these Islands, they have reason to be very well satisfied, and I shall say no
more, lest I may say too much.

But now to come to the Storehouses or Magazines of the North Parts of India;
and first I shall take Notice of

SIAM.
This is a Country of a large Extent, and well inhabited. Our People live in
the capital City, where there are very few Commissaries, and those most of them
employed in Writing to take care of the Trade, which consists principally in
Deer Skins brought hither from Japan to be sold, and in Tin, which the Company
causes to be bought at Ligor, having obtained that Privilege, exclusive of all
other Traders, and which afterward is sold in different Parts of the Indies,
as well as Europe, with great Ease and Advantage. The Callicoes from Coromandel
go off soon in this Kingdom, and the Company brings thither very little else.
The Reason chiefly is, the Carriage of these Callicoes into this Kingdom, which
is made by the free Trade and Communication the Moors of Coromandel have with
those of Siam, to whom they bring these Goods, and sell them very cheap to the
People of Siam, who have them by these means at the first Hand, and this makes
the Commissaries of the Company sell them at the same Price as the Moors; so
that it must not be expected we shall drive on any considerable Trade in Siam:
However, the Magazine there is of much Use and Advantage to the Company, and it
was on that Account they were resolved to give all possible Satisfaction to the
Ambassador the King of Siam sent expressly to Batavia, to determine some
Disputes, who was afterward sent back very well satisfied, in one of the
Company's Ships. In a Voyage made some Years ago according to Custom, the
Company lost one large Ship, called, The William Henry, which struck on the
North of the Isle of Bavea on a Rock, and sunk the next Day to the Bottom; but
by good Fortune, all the Cargo was saved, and brought up the River Palinbourg,
in Shalloops.

The Company's Affairs, at the time of my coming away from the Indies, were in
a very good Condition, and in that Kingdom the Walstroon had made a very good
Return in Skins, and other Goods, according to yearly Custom.

JAPAN.
Is a Country well known in the World for its Riches, and the fine Works of its
Inhabitants, wherefore I shall say nothing here but what immediately concerns
the Affairs of the Company, who only have the Liberty to trade thither,
exclusive of all other Nations.

We are in Possession of a little Island in that Country, joining to the Town
of Mangazaqui, by a Bridge of Communication; but none of our People can go into
that Town, so mistrustful and jealous is that Nation; insomuch that we are
entirely deprived of all Communication and Society with the Japonese, being
obliged to make use of Truckmen, or Brokers, who have the Privilege to act, go,
and come; which, in my Judgment, is very disagreeable, and prejudicial to the
great Trade we at present drive with that Nation, and which makes me believe,
that this Practice occasioned these Truckmen, or Interpreters, and the
Governor of Mangazaqui, to monopolize all the Trade, by taxing, (as they have
some Years past) all Goods, as they pleased, for their own Interest and Profit,
and the great Prejudice of the Company.

They took away from us all means of securing our selves from the like
Violences by our just Complaints, which the Regency of Batavia judged proper to
be laid before the Emperor, in a very respectful Letter, and which was
favorably received, and met with good Success, and we had our ancient
Liberties restored to us of selling our Effects and Commodities to the best
Bidder; but some little time after, they laid a new Tax upon as worse than the
first; that is, they limited our Trade with them to that Degree, that we should
deal with them for no more than what only would amount to a certain Sum, and
that certain Sum was fixed to three Hundred Thousannd Fails a Year, which
cannot any ways be sufficient to procure us so much Profit only, as is
absolutely necessary to defray the great Expenses, and other Charges that the
Magazin, or Bank of the Company is obliged to be at, for those large Presents
they must give for Maintenance of their Shipping, and the Officers of the
Company; besides the Dangers they must meet with in passing such a vast and
tempestuous Ocean, before they can arrive at that Kingdom, which is the
remotest of all the Indies.

Many are of Opinion, that this Limitation of Commerce was principally intented
to disgust the Chinese, who came about that time into Japan, with great Numbers
of small Vessels full of People, amongst whom were several Tartars that had a
warlike Countenance, which created in the Japonese sufficient Distrust and
Suspicion. They were afraid, that the Tartars who had been a long while before
Masters of all China, and by that means, in a Condition of undertaking great
Conquests, had formed some Design against their Country, on Account of its
happy Climate, and fine Situation; and that they had an Intention to land a
great Number of Men, under Pretense of trading with them. To prevent these
Inconvenience, without letting any one know what were their Views and Motives,
the Japanese made this hard Regulation, which they notified accordingly to the
Chinese, that they might not for the time to come, bring into Japan, a greater
Quantity of Goods than they ought, and only to the Value of the Sum regulated:
And the better to hide this real Motive of theirs from the Chinese, and that
they should not think this Prohibition was directly levelled at them, they
included us likewise, though they gave us verbal Promises, that it should only be
for a while, which we very much hope for, otherwise the Company will not be
able, without a vast Prejudice to themselves, to continue their Commerce with
the Japanese, which would be more expensive than gainful.

Some time after our Departure from Batavia, and while we lay off Bantam with
the Fleet, the Vessel that was bound for Batavia, came into the Road, and the
others have set Sail for Malacca, according to Custom. We knew that all those
Vessels had made (God be thanked) a very happy Voyage; and that the Company had
got a good Price for all the Cargoes, which, notwithstanding, would not produce
any considerable Gain, as long as that Limitation should subsist.

CHINA,
Where our Ambassador lately arrived, and set out for the Imperial Court of
Pekin, to desire that great Emperor's Leave to trade thither, few People
doubting of Success, there having been a Report spread abroad, that the
Emperor seeing himself, at that time, Lord of all China, and in quiet
Possession of those vast Territories, had a Design to make Trade flourish in
his Dominions; and to accomplish it, had permitted, not only his Subjects to
trade out of their own Country, but all foreign Merchants to come and establish
themselves in his maritime Towns, the Truth of which Time only will discover.

It is very certain, that the English drive a very considerable Trade with
China, or rather with the Islands of Macar; and had the Company this Liberty,
they would have a great many Competitors of all Nations in Trade, which would
very much lessen their Profit and Gain.

Our People have also made Voyages several Years ago, to the Islands of Macar,
where they traded in private with the Chinese, but it never came to much, while
the English and Portugueze find means to make considerable Returns; for which
Reason we made no Voyages this last Season, to those Islands, but sent our
Shipping directly to Chockzien. These Vessels were only four in Number, but
were laden with Commodities of a considerable Value to trade with, under Color
of going to bring back our Ambassador, who, at his Arrival in those Parts, knew
how to put off the Goods he brought with him, much better than the Merchants
could do at the Isle of Macar. It is certain, that the Portugueze who bought
Pepper at Batavia, to trade with in China, paid much dearer than our People
could sell it for in the very Islands.

One may see by that, and by many other Sales, that the Company is very ill
served in those Parts.

TONQUIN,
Is a Place where the Company has some Footing, but of very little Consequence,
for since as their Ministers were some Years ago recalled, Trade has but
indifferent Success in that Country, and not sufficient to answer Charges; so
that all they send thither, is but one Vessel only at present, which brings
them a certain Quantity of Musk, for which they pay ready Money.

This same Vessel goes likewise to

MALACA,
Which is a Town belonging to the Company, and was taken from the Portugueze.
This Place is very considerable, and much frequented for Traffic, and is the
Magazine of the Eastern Trade, where all Nations, who have frequented the Seas,
met heretofore. At present, its Trade is not near so considerable, not
sufficient to answer the Charge; which Inconveniency might be remedied, by
sending thither a good Director; for it is certain, that there is a good Vent
in that Town for great Quantities of Linen Cloth, of all sorts, as well as in
many other Towns, its Dependencies, or which lie round about it; as Andragieri,
and other Towns, and such Places as lie along the Rivers of Sierra, Perra, etc.
where for the most Part the Payments are made in Gold and Tin, which is a
Return very rich, necessary, and profitable for the Good and Support of the
Trade of the Company. Malaca is the Rendezvous of all the Vessels that return
from Japan every Year with their Cargoes, and which they there sort and
distribute, in order to their being sent to the other Storehouses on the Coast
of India, Coromandel, Bengal, etc.

The last Advices from Malaca tell us, that they lived there in Peace, and had
a good Understanding with the neighboring Kings and Princes. They have made
Governor of that Place Monsieur Flechier, who, in the Month of October 1619,
went thither with strict Commission, to take an exact Account of all
Misdemeanors committed by any Ministers, Officers, and Commissioners of the
Company, and punish them according to the Severity and Rigor of the Law.

Over against this Island lies the Island of

SUMATRA;
In which Place are the Storehouses of Palinbourg and Jambi, the former of
which furnishes every Year a considerable Quantity of Pepper, which they trade
with on Account of the Company, according to the Contract made with the King of
the Country. The Payment for Pepper is made in Linnens, which has powerfully
engaged the Company to preserve this Trade, as very advantageous to them, and
obliged them to assist that Prince against his Enemies, as some Years ago they
did with very good Success, which gained them such Respect with the
neighboring Powers, that though that Kingdom has been often threatened by seral
Princes round about, yet no one dared to invade it, which makes the Company
enjoy a very quiet and advantageous Trade. But as for Jambi, there is scarce
any thing to do there: A small Number of Commissaries and Servants live there,
whose Business chiefly is to hinder the ill Designs of the King of Jambi, and
the Pyracies and Robberies which are often committed on the West of the Island
of Sumatra, where the Company is in Possession of a vast Tract of Land; and the
Places of their Habitation are comprehended under, and known by the Name of
Wescoust, where there are also several Storehouses; the Capital City is

PADANGUE.
Here is a very great Trade, and a good vent for Salt and several sorts of
Linen; and the Returns consist in Gold Ore, Pepper, Camphire, Benzoin, and
other valuable Commodities, which are very proper for the Trade of the Company,
and of which they dispose vast Quantities in the Indies.

It Is a great Prejudice to the Company, to be so ill served as they have been
some Years since in this Place, insomuch that the Company was forced, in a very
little time, to send from Batavia three Superintendents, or Directors, one
after another, and recalled them to justify their Conduct.

It is certain, if Matters were but rightly managed, as the Interest of the
Company requires, those Places would become more profitable and considerable
than they are, and I may say, that if the Conduct and Economy of those, who
have the Direction of Affairs, were more regular, the exorbitant Charges, and
frequent Frauds, would not swallow up the great Profits that may be made of the
Gold Ore that is given in Payment.

I agree, that some Years since our People were very much troubled and molested
by the Natives of the Country, on Account of the English, who struggled to make
themselves Masters of the Pepper Trade, had it been possible, having to that
End stirred up several in Alliance with the Company, who therefore found
themselves obliged to take up Arms, and punish the Indians for breaking their
Alliance, which they accordingly did, and with very good Success; so that
Attempt of the English came to very little or nothing, though it was very
expensive and chargeable to the Company.

From this Trade I shall come to that of the Kingdom of

BENGAL.
This Kingdom is a Country of the Indies on the Terra Firma, and the Company
have here several Storehouses to carry on their Trade, which consists chiefly
in selling Spices, Copper, Tin, Lead, Quicksilver, and other Things, which they
sell at a great Advantage; but yet in continual Danger to be molested by the
Moors in Power, whose Avarice is so exorbitant, that it costs the Company every
Year, to keep them in Temper, vast Sums of Money in Presents, which are sent
privately to them, as the only Remedy against this dangerous Evil, since the
Company's Interest is to live in Peace, and not break with a People, from whom
they gain such considerable Advantages in Trade, which they would run the
hazard of losing, should they take up Arms to maintain the Liberties and
Privileges of Commerce; and which would not always square with the Interest of
the Company; and therefore, as long as the Moors of Bengal shall not exact more
than what is usual to give them, 'twill be better to let things rest as they
are: This Method to me seems the most secure and certain, for the Benefit and
Advantage of the Company.

By the last Advices from Bengal, before we left the Indies, we heard that the
Fleet called Strion, coming from Malacca, and which had on Board Monsieur
Nicholas St. Kayen, Councellor Extraordinary, and new Director in the Streights
of Bengal, run aground (though in pretty fair Weather) on the Shoals of Isagli,
near the Mouth of the River, and was actually lost on the Sands by the strong
Seas; the Men were saved with great Difficulty, and 200 Chests of Silver; but
the Copper, with which the Ships were laden, worth 90000 Gulders, sunk to the
Bottom, and was all lost.

Monsieur Wanrek, Lord of Midrech, Commissioner for Trade, has given very good
Orders in that Country, and reformed a great many Abuses and bad Customs, being
well acquainted with the ill Conduct of the Commissaries in their several
Employments, and has dismissed several in this Country, as well as Batavia, to
justify their Conduct; and it is certain, that the redressing these Abuses
would have been attended with many others, had not that Lord been a little
short in providing proper Persons to fill up these Vacancies.

COROMANDEL.
The Sieur Wanrek was to go in the Month of May 1695 to Commandel, to pursue
the Execution of his Commission. Coromandel is very near Bengal, and where the
Company have Affairs of highest Importance; for, besides the Town of Negapatan,
situated on the South Side of Coromandel, which our People took from the
Portugueze, the Company has in Possession the Fort of Gueldria (where the
Governor resides) and the Storehouses or Magazines of Guenapatam, Sadrespatam,
Malispatam, Pelicol, Datskorom, Beulispatam, Nagurnantie and Golconda, for the
Advancement of Trade in those several Places, which consists chiefly in
Callicoes; as also in the Sale of several Commodities our People bring into
those Parts, as Spices, Japan Copper, Tin, Gold Ore, and the like. This Trade
is extremely profitable and advantageous, but yet exposed to the Violence of
the Moors that are in Power; for the Governments of these Countries are almost
always farmed; and these Farmers being protected by the Ministry, take all
Opportunities to extort Money from the Subjects; insomuch that Foreign Dealers
can never secure themselves from being pillaged by these Farmers, who are very
covetous; and therefore to avoid being disturbed in their Traffic, are forced
to skreen themselves from these Evils by Presents, which costs the Company very
dear. But these Evils are unhappily much augmented since about four Years ago,
and arrived to that Excess, as obliged the Company to take up Arms, and seize
upon the Town of Mazulipatam, to force the King of Golconda to give them just
Satisfaction for the Violence and Injuries done the Company, which in the End
came to a very good Issue.

The Occasion of this Difference was thus: The Resident of the Company in
Golconda, which is the City where the King resides, became Security for a
certain Pagan Merchant, for the Value of a Million of Livres, without having
any Order or Power to do so, and which was done without doubt in View of some
considerable Interest and Advantage; the First Minister of the Kingdom, who was
also a Pagan of the Race of Brammer, took this Opportunity to make his Market;
imprisoned the Merchant, and seized on all his Effects, under Pretense that he
was indebted to the King in vast Sums of Money: Our People saw very well how
ill-grounded this Pretense was, and represented accordingly the Agreement made
with the Company, that no Merchant whom the Company dealt with should be
molested, either in his Person or Goods, and that the Company were not
previously satisfied their Demands they had on those Merchants; but all
signified nothing, and they were obliged to take up Arms; and Matters were
carried so far, that the King engaged himself to pay this Debt out of his own
Revenues; and thus the Company obtained by Force that Satisfaction they were
denied, and freed themselves in a little time from a long War which was very
expensive, and would have been very prejudicial to them, by interrupting their
Commerce with this Nation, the most Important, and of the greatest Consequence
of any they have in the Indies. The frequent Quibbles of the Moorish
Governors, is the Reason why the Company cannot drive a free Trade in that
Country, but are obliged to make these Trade-Contracts with some certain
Persons, and even to trust them with the greatest Part of their Commodities all
at once, because of the Liberty and Easiness with which they Sell or Truck with
the Natives of the Country, and much more advantageously than our People can
do. These Dealers enter also into Societies amongst themselves, and gain much
more than our People; and this is one of the chief Reasons that the Company
could not get these sort of Contracts with the Moorish Merchants executed, for
vending their Linnens in Siam and other Countries.

The last Advices from Coromandel, told us that our People were very uneasy at
the Approach of the Great Mogul's Army, who having made himself Master of the
Kingdom of Visapore, several Politicians, and People of good Understanding,
believed he had an Intention, in like manner, to subdue Golconda. Time will
show this, though it be much to be wished for the Good of the Company, who will
then have a free Commerce, which to them will be of the greatest Benefit and
Advantage.

CEYLAN
Is a great Island, separated from the Southside of Coromandel only by a small
Arm of the Sea: It is very Famous on the Account of the vast Quantities of
Cinnamon it produces; 'twas this Spice which tempted the Portugueze to conquer
this Island first of all, and after them the Company became Masters of it; that
is, of the lower Part, and of the Coasts round about, the Highlands continuing
still in Subjection to the King of Candi, whom neither the Portugueze, nor our
People, could ever conquer, by reason of the impassable Ways of that Part of
the Country he is Master of, and other Difficulties attending such an
Undertaking: This Prince contents himself to be always on the Defensive, in
regard of the Company, which some believe is by Reason of his great Age, which
has given the Opportunity to our People to gather their Crops of Cinnamon
without any Trouble or Impediment; but many are of Opinion (and with good
Reason) that this Happiness will not continue long, and that the Prince that
succeeds the old King, will take up Arms, and disturb the Commerce and the
Possessions of the Company in that important Island, the Truth of which time
can only discover.

The Expense of the Company is very considerable in Pensions to some Towns,
maintaining of Forts, Passages, Fortifications, Commandants, Officers,
Garrisons, and Commissaries for the Inspection of Trade, etc. This takes off a
considerable Part of the Company's Profit, which may be easily retrieved by
retrenching several Posts, useless Garrisons, and needless Officers; and no
doubt it will be done in a small time after the Arrival of Commissioner Wanrek
in that Island, who will soon discover a great many Abuses, and much ill
Management through that important Government, and bring with him necessary
Remedies for the good of the Company.

MALABAR,
Of which the Capital City is Cochin, and ought to be looked on as a Member
very troublesome to the Company; for besides the many Inconveniences, to which
they are almost continually subject, from Princes of the neighboring Islands,
the keeping of only this City and its Dependencies, costs the Company every
Year a far greater Sum than the Income and Revenue amounts to; insomuch that it
may be truly said, they keep this Port for politic Consideration only.

SURATE,
Is a very profitable Magazine for the Company, there being a great Vent for
all Sorts of Commodities, which are sold every Year with considerable Gain, and
are Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, Pepper, Copper, Tortoise Shell, Camphire, Vermilion,
Benzoin, Orchalmy, or Alchymy, Tins, and Stuffs.

They have in Return for all these Commodities, several Sorts of Callicoes,
coarse Silks, both white and painted, and other thing of like Nature, but
especially Silver Ingots to trade with in Bengal. This Country is in the
Dominions of the Great Mogul, and we are here more subject to be disturbed by
the Moorish Governors, than at Coromandel. The restless Avarice of these
Cormorants is no other way to be quieted, than by Presents, which swallow up
good Part of the Company's Profits. They build here very good Ships, which do
great Service; and it is certain, if the Company could have them built at a
reasonable Price it would be of great Use and Advantage to them, to build a
good Number, the Timber of which they make them, being very strong, and
lasting. They will hold out forty Years at least; and all the World knows,
that the Vessels that are built in Europe last but twelve, or thirteen Years,
at most; it is easy to see by this what vast Difference there would be, if the
Price was equal, or but somewhat more.

I doubt not but this may be done, and is a thing deserves well to be made an
Experiment of, at the Return of Monsieur Warnek, and during his ordinary
Residence in this Place.

PERSIA.
The Trade of the Company in this great Kingdom, is at present very peaceful
and quiet, notwithstanding the Protestations that our People have often made,
that they will not, for the time to come, take off such great Quantities of
Silk, and this Dispute is not yet quite ended. The Company have often made
Contracts with the Indian Princes, which have been very prejudicial, on Account
of the Management, and little Experience of those that were employed in such
Contracts. It would therefore be very much for the Benefit and Advantage of the
common Cause, and for the Freedom of Trade, never more to employ and authorize
such Persons in the like Negotiations, particularly, in the Courts of the
Moorish Mahometans; at least they should make use of able Men, whose long
approved Experience and Capacity might make them avoid the Deceits, and subtle
Treachery of the Moors; for it is certain, that he that thinks to make any
sudden Advantage, or surprise the eastern Mahometans in Trade, or Contracts
made with them, must rise betimes in the Morning. Time will discover what
Success this Affair of the Company will have, which is now in Debate. But this
Court having been so dilatory, it is our Part to make Advances to bring this
Matter to a Conclusion. Our Ambassadors have been detained a long while at the
Court of Persia, to adjust this Affair, and I believe they will obtain nothing
material thence; for to make a quick Dispatch of Business with those People,
you must from the very Beginning, as much as is possible, push Matters on with
the utmost Vigor, which is the only Way to gain one's Point, and there have
been many Examples of this Truth.

When Trade goes well in this Empire, the Company gains considerably, but it is
only on the Goods they themselves cause to be brought hither.

BATAVIA
Is the capital City of all the Territories and Dominions the Company has in
the East Indies, and the Place of the Governor's general Residence. This City
has been so much improved within these late Years, that at present it is very
beautiful, large, and very regularly built, and altogether the Astonishment and
Admiration of all Strangers that come into these Parts. The Number of its
Inhabitants increases considerably every Year, which makes the Suburbs of a
vast Extent, and the Country round about it is well cultivated, and abounds
very much in Rice and Sugar; so that it is to be hoped, that this City will in
a few Years make her self very considerable and famous for her prodigious Trade
and Riches, besides the Pleasure she has at present to see, that by cultivating
her Soil, she has wherewithal to furnish her Inhabitants with all Necessaries
of Life; and by that means she may hereafter stand in no Occasion of Rice,
which the Company was obliged to supply her from a-abroad, for her necessary
Provisions, which will be the saving of vast Sums for the future.

In this Town is the general Magazine for all Commodities our People bring to
the East Indies, and here they are sorted and distributed to all Places where
they shall be thought necessary, which makes the Road of Batavia always full of
Merchant Ships, out of which, upon Occasion, may be formed a very powerful
Fleet, in Case of any Irruption that should casually happen, either against the
City, or any Place about it; so that at all times they are ready to act, both
on the Offensive and Defensive.

It is certain, that in Batavia there might be a very good Trade, and very
advantageous for the Company, were it not continually weakened, and even
interrupted by other Traders, which is visible by the Diminution of the Sale of
Linnens and other Goods for some time last past, contrary to the Hopes they
entertained of a Change, which would be more advantageous than the last, to the
Trade of Batavia, on Account of the great Privileges our People had obtained
from Suzan Honnan on the Eastern Coast of Java, in acknowledgment of the
Supplies that Prince received from the Company against his Rebel Subjects, to
quell which Rebellion cost much Blood and Treasure; for it is no strange thing,
that Subjects so rebellious as they were, should do a great deal of Mischief to
the Trade of our People and the Company, because of those great Conveniences of
having such a Number of good Ports and Havens all along the Eastern Coast, and
by the vast Gain they there made, which induced them to cheat us as much as
possibly they could.

Experience has shown us, that the too great Extent of our Territories, and the
too great Number of Maritime Places we have in the East Indies, are ever
attended with immense Charges, solid and always certain Expenses at all times,
whereas the Profits they bring are casual and very uncertain; which makes me
believe, that in time the farther we go, the more clearly shall we see that the
most compact Possessions are ever the best and most profitable; and besides,
are more sure to be kept, less envied, and less subject to Revolutions and give
less Trouble and Vexation to those who govern them; particularly if their
Neighbors are warlike and perfidious: The Truth of this we have lately seen in
the Case of Monsieur Tack, Ambassador of the Company, who departed for his
Embassy attended with a good Number of Soldiers for that Purpose. No Body
doubts but Prince Honnan, whom I just now mentioned, was guilty of that
Violence, which is certainly a Piece of the greatest Perfidiousness, and the
most ungrateful Return, from a Prince who owed to the Company (under God) his
Life and Crown. This Misfortune may always serve as a Lesson to our People for
their future Conduct in like Cases. Our Troops which were sent to those Parts
to have Satisfaction for that Outrage, and to bring those Infidels to Reason,
were still at Japura, without being able to do any thing; Sourapary then Chief
having retired out of the Territories of Java, into a Country whither 'twas
impossible to follow him without Danger, it being to be feared, we should have
a long War on that side, which would be a prodigious Expense, and very
prejudicial to the Company and their Trade.

BANTAN.
The Malcontents who are dissatisfied with the Government of the present King,
attempted likewise a bold Enterprise against the Ministers of the Company
residing in this Kingdom, having a Design to Massacre them all; but this wicked
Project was discovered some small time before it was designed to be put in
Execution by a great many of those Villains; so that that Design was not only
prevented, but rooted entirely up by the Death of some of those principal
Traitors; and the King judged it proper, to prevent the like for the future, to
send the old King his Father (who was then Prisoner at Bantan, and suspected to
be acquainted with this pernicious Design.) to Batavia, to be secured in the
Castle, where he now is, and is like to be as long as he lives, unless some
unforeseen Change should happen, to which all Affairs of State, and
particularly those of the East Indies are most subject.

Most High and Mighty Lords,
THESE are the principal Things relating to the present Condtion of the Affairs
of the famous Company in the Indies: My Zeal to serve those Gentlemen, and my
Duty having obliged me to give you this faithful Account, I presume to say,
that there are many things in those Parts, one would desire should be
otherwise, which have great Occasion of being redressed.

Notwithstanding, generally speaking, Trade prospers very well there, for which
we ought to thank the Almighty, and earnestly pray him to bless and strengthen
his great Work of the Dutch Company in the East Indies, for the perpetual Good
and Prosperity of the State.

I have only this to add, that after living there thirty five Years, I have at
last obtained my being recalled from the East Indies, upon my repeated
Instances, that I may return to my dear Country, it having pleased the high
Regency of the Indies, to confer on me the Command of the Fleet of the Company,
in my Return, and with which I left the Road of Batavia the 29 th Day of
November, 1696, with six Ships, the Names of which are, as follows, viz.
Castrikan, Schelde, Oestreland, Honslaerdick, Spa^dick, and the Gilded Wane,
and came to Anchor the first of December following before Bantan, this Place
being appointed for us to wait for the Books and Papers, which could not be got
ready before we set Sail, and which came to us the 25 th Day of the same Month.
But as the Harvest of the West was then past, we were forced to struggle
against Wind and Tide in the Streights of the Sonde, with a great deal of
Danger, till the 4 th of January, 1697, when we happily passed the Streights of
Java, and Prince Island, and sailed in open Sea, continuing our Voyage without
any Inconveniency, or Stop, till we arrived at the Cape of Good Hope, where we
happily came to Anchor, the 20 th and 21 st Day of March, in the same Year
1697, with all our Vessels, and with them four other that came from the Isle of
Ceylan, viz. The Isle Schonen, Pevisland, Woorschotten, and Languervich. We
likewise found in that Road, the Alkmaar and Cressembourg, which happily
arrived from Coromandel, and waited for us a long while at the Cape: Some
little time after, we saw come into that Road, the Fleet Mesmeleheder, from
Bengal, consisting of 13 Vessels.

I can assure your High Mightinesses, that the Port of the Cape is very well
situated, and as important as necessary, both for those Ships that go to, and
those that return from the Indies: It is a sure Refuge, and a very convenient
Place for refitting and cleaning Shipping, and to furnish them with all
necessary Provisions: The Air is extremely wholesome, and here the sick recover
their Health. Here are all Sorts of good Herbs and Fruits in Abundance,
excellent Beef and Mutton, and in vast Plenty; and by the Care of the present
Governor, there is a vast Increase of both these Sorts of Cattle, and the
Earth so well manured, that this Place at present can subsist with its own
Corn, and nish its Inhabitants with necessary Provisions without any foreign
Assistance, and is in hopes in a little time to have such Quantities, as may
also supply other Places. It is great Pity that so large and fertile a Country,
situated in a very happy Climate, should be almost uninhabited, where Millions
of Souls might very conveniently subsist, as being in a Place abounding with
all Necessaries of Life, and where they might mutually assist each other.

We staid there till the 9th of April, in the same Year 1697, when we sailed
with a favorable Wind from Tafel-Bay; we accordingly passed the great Ocean,
and had the good Fortune to finish our Voyage very successfully without any
unhappy Accident at all; this was on the 17th of August, in the Year School when
we arrived in this Country with the whole Fleet, and the same Day every Vessel
came into the Port they were ordered to, with the greatest and richest Return
that ever came from the Indies into this Country; for which Blessing I shall
never cease giving Praise and Thanks to the Almighty, and beseech him that he
would increase the Honor and Glory of the Republic, and this illustrious and
powerful Company, that it would please Him to take it into his Holy Protection,
and increase its Commerce more and more in all the Climates of the habitable
World.


FINIS.

