THE VISION OF THE Lord of Hosts, Faithfully declared in his own time; and the
DECREE of the LORD GOD also Recorded, which is nigh to be fulfilled.

ALSO, A few WORDS to FRIENDS of TRUTH, whom the LORD is Trying in this Day.

And something to those that remain of that Generation of Men who improved not
their Day, but were Rebellious against the Lord, and Treacherous to his People.

With a few WORDS to the MAGISTRATES of this LAND now in Authority.

By a Handmaid of the Lord, M. H.

Printed in the Year, 1662.

The Vision of the Lord of Hosts, faithfully declared in his own time; and the
Decree of the Lord God also Recorded, which is nigh to be fulfilled, etc.
IN the year 1660, in the second month thereof, I was at the Town of Colchester
at my Friend's house, and in the evening season, I went to my Bed to take my
rest in God, where refreshment from him I did receive to my soul, and also to
my naturals, having at that time but little strength as to my natural life; And
so according to God's will, and the mind of the Lord, I gave up my self, and
lay down upon my Bed, in God's Will and Word, in which Word I was kept and
preserved.

After a little season, sweet sleep came upon me, and I was some hours in a
deep and a calm sleep, which did refresh my naturals, and I was in the Word of
the living God, which did keep me and refresh my soul, and after a season did
awake me.

And the living God did appear unto me by Vision, and showed me the dark,
horrible, and miserable estate that would come on this Land of England, and on
the People therein: he showed me a great Cloud that spread over all the Nation,
and many violent and bloody men the Lord showed me in the Cloud: And as he
showed me that the Cloud should come upon the Nation, so he showed me that it
should break upon the Nation; and the men of blood should fall in great fury
and rage upon many, and do great violence unto many.

And further, the Lord appeared unto me in Vision, and he showed me a great and
dark Wood in these Southward parts, and in the Wood were many Pits, and in the
Pits were many Beasts, which had many horns and sharp, and great jaws, and
great paws also. There was among them one great Beast, in bigness and fury
above them all. These Beasts had been long chained and fettered in the Pits and
Wood of Darkness, and they roared to be at liberty. It was showed unto me that
they would be greedy of their prey, even to the shedding of innocent blood,
which they had long thirsted for.

And when the Lord had showed me these things in the Vision of the Cloud, and
that it should spread over the Nation, and should break on the Nation, and that
the bloody men therein should fall upon many with cruelty, Then did sorrow
seize on my heart, and great grief upon my soul, and a great weight upon my
body, which caused my lips to quiver, and my belly to tremble, and a Cry ran
rhorow me, O Lord, what will thou do with this Land, or with thy People
therein, unto whom thou have so largely manifested thy Name? O Lord, will thou
hide thy Face from us, or take the light of thy Countenance from us, that has
in so large a measure shined on us? Or will thou suffer these men of violence
to bruise and destroy the bodies of them that bear thine Elect Seed? Will thou
suffer the Beasts to come out of their Pits, their Chains to be broken, and
their Fetters to be unloosed, they being so greedy of prey? Then the Cry was in
me, O Lord, slay not the Righteous with the Wicked: And a great Earthquake was
upon me, and I was in great travel in spirit, soul, and body, for the whole
Land of England, and little or no comfort had I, until I heard the Lord's
voice, who spoke unto me, and said, Fear not thou, my Daughter, none of these
things which I have showed unto thee; but believe in my Name, made known unto
thee. Then I said, O Lord, who shall stand for thee? or, who shall declare thy
Name, or speak of thy wonderful Works, or of thy large Salvation whereby thou
have wrought, and brought wonderful and great things to pass, as in the years
past? If thou suffer the Cloud to come upon all, who then shall declare of it?
Or, if thou suffer the Night of Darkness to spread over all, who then shall be
able to work? or, who shall speak of thy mighty Truth? Wherefore (there being
upon my Spirit a deep sense of the cruelty of those Beasts, which where to be
unchained, and to come out of the Pits of Darkness) I said, Arise, O Lord, and
avenge thine own Cause, suffer not thy Name to be trodden down, or rooted out of
this Land of England, in which (even above and beyond all other Lands) thou
have so largely made thy self manifest; suffer it not to be rooted out by the
Dragon and his followers. And these were my Cries unto the Lord in the hour of
deep sufferings.

And the Lord who showed me these things, he heard my Cries also, and he said,
to my great satisfaction, Keep these things in thine own breast, and seal these
words in thy own heart, and wait upon me, said the living God, until I show
thee further, and until my appointed time, that I bid thee to publish them
abroad.

And further, the Lord said to my great satisfaction, I will suffer this
Violence to come, and the Chains of the Wild-beasts to be broken, that they may
bow down a stiff-necked and a gainsaying People, against me, and against my
Name: I will harden Pharaoah's heart, that I may show my Power upon every man
and woman; and I will suffer the Violent to go on in their Violence, for the
trial of the Faith of my own People, unto whom I have made known my Kingdom,
and entrusted them with my Secrets, upon whom in the Light of my Countenance
will I shine, and they shall see the Glory of my Throne, and they shall
magnify my Name. And after the night of Apostasy, and after the Dragon's Rage,
my People shall bear a further Testimony of my great and glorious Name, and
they shall leave a more clear and heavenly Declaration upon record, than my
Servants heretofore have done, and it shall stand to Ages, and in Generations
to come, that they may see how God manifested himself unto his People in a day
of great suffering.

Blessed, Blessed are all who wait upon the living God, and hear what he says
unto them, either by Revelation, by Vision, or by Prophecy; and blessed are
they that in the Lord's time either speak or write by Revelation, by Prophecy,
or Vision. And the time is already come, wherein many Prophecies, Visions and
Revelations are already fulfilled, and are sealed up in him, who has revealed
and made known himself by Vision, as I have beforementioned; And the Eternal
God alone has sealed up many unto himself in his own Seed, which all the
aforementioned ends in. Blessed are all they that are in that estate, for the
blessed Inheritance and Crown of the Lord is assured unto them.

And now is the time of the Lord, wherein he has required me to write what he
showed me by Vision, much whereof it already come on this Land, and fulfilled
upon it, and that which is behind is nigh to be fulfilled. The Cloud has
spread over all, and violent men have done great violence, even unto God's
Worshippers; And many are arisen out of the Pits, their Chains being broken,
and their Fetters unloosed, which have held them many years; and as many as
have had their liberty have been greedy of their prey, having long thirsted for
the blood of the Saints; and many are yet to arise, whose Chains shall be
broken: And he whom the Lord showed me, the biggest amongst them and greatest
in fury, he shall arise the last out of the Pit, and will be suffered to give
one great push, and no more, which will be terrible; but the Lord will smite
him, and the Beasts that were loosed before him, and God will turn them
together into the Pit of Darkness from whence they arose, out of which they
shall never arise again against the Lord nor his Heritage.

And now all dear Friends everywhere, dwell in God, the Father of Light, that
you may all witness his Dominion, so will he nourish you all, even as the true
Woman in the Wilderness, for a time, times, and half a time. The Lord nourish
you all, and feed you all with his own living Word, that you may all see the
smoke of the Pit vanish away, and the power thereof (which has for many years
arisen against the Lord and his People) trodden down by the living God. Wait all
until the Lord's time and hour be accomplished, in which you shall see Violence
put to an end, and also see the blessed Estate that I have beforementioned. So
in the blessed Truth I bid you farewell.

And now to you who have put out the Candle of the Lord in your selves, and are
become altogether Darkness, and have given your Power wholly to the Beast and
his followers, you therefore shall feel the stroke of God's hand, which will be
dreadful to you; and under which you shall confess that the holy Prophets of
the Lord did in years past deal faithfully with you, when they prophesyed unto
you what would come upon you: Oh hearken you People, for to you I write,
through whom the Nation is become miserable, and you your selves become slaves,
and your name become a stink in the Nation, with him whom God has cut off
before you. Is not your Form of Worship and the glory thereof withered? yea,
even as the flower withers before the Sun in the Summer season, so is it
withered away, and your gallant Glory is now trampled upon by the Dragon, unto
whom you gave your Power, and the memorial thereof shall die and rot, even as
those whose name and memorial is already rotted. And hearken you who put out
the Candle of the Lord in your selves, wherewith you were once lighted; mark
what God has done to Oliver Cromwell, even for this cause, that he put out the
Candle of the Lord in himself.

And all you Magistrates of this Land who are now in Authority. Oh! you have
grieved the Lord, and highly provoked him to anger, by afflicting his Children;
and you have grieved our souls from time to time, and afflicted our bodies
also, and have the blood of many as a guilt upon you. Oh this, I tell you, will
bring the Lord's Judgment upon you unawares, even as a thief in the night, will
it break upon you when you are not aware: for, no warning will you yet receive
from the Lord's People, and you must know the stroke of God's hand with them
that proved rebellious before you, and when you feel the weight thereof, you
shall then remember this Warning.

From a Lover of Truth and Righteousness. M. H.

THE END.

