A Collection OF THE SEVERAL BOOKS AND WRITINGS OF THAT Faithful Servant of
GOD, Richard Hubberthorn, Who finished his Testimony (being a Prisoner in
NEWGATE for the Truths sake) the 17 th of the 6 th Month, 1662.

And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying, Blessed are the dead which hereafter
dye in the Lord, even so says the Spirit, that they may rest from their
labors, but their works shall follow them, Rev. 14.13. LONDON, Printed, and
are to be sold by William Warwick, 1663.

TO THE READER.
THe glory of the everlasting God, and the Light of his powerful Truth has so
far appeared, and is so effectually manifest in our day, that the veil of
darkness is removed from off the hearts of thousands, who have received the
love of the Truth as it is in Christ Jesus the everlasting Light, and the life
of the righteous and ugright in heart, who walk in the way of the Lord; and
many thick clouds of darkness and error which have darkened the minds of people
are dispersed by the arising and shining forth of the Sun of righteousness, and
the visitation of the dayspring which has dawned from on high, blessed and
praised be the name of the mighty God, who has raised up unto himself a
royal-seed to bear testimony of his Name in righteousness, against which no
weapon formed shall prosper: Albeit this seed has been largely tried and
persecuted by the seed of enmity and evildoers, and sons of Belial, who have
made it their work to seek to obstruct the work of the Lord by persecuting his
servants, and reviling his faithful witnesses, and reproaching and blaspheming
his living truth and way, even till a line of confusion is come over them, and
they have split themselves against the rock, and the stone which the builders
have rejected, which is exalted and set over them all. And now as for these
Priests and Professors who ^ave so much busied themselves in opposing and
gainsaying ^he Lord's people called, Quakers, and those righteous Prin^iples
and Doctrines held forth by them, the work of these op^osers is come to naught,
and they have apparently missed of their ends and exspectations, and they have
wearied themselves ^or very vanity, and they and their work is manifest to the
^ation, and the folly of it in a great measure; after they have ^rought forth
their cause, and produced their strong Reasons ^as they have esteemed them)
which the truth and Spirit of understanding (in it is Witnesses) has evidently
confuted, and brought to naught. And how has shame, and dishonor, and
Contempt (in the eyes of all sober, and Indifferent people) come upon many of
our oppressors, and Adversaries, the Priests and professors? who after they
have been striving and contending against our preaching up, and vindicating the
Light of Christ in every man, Joh. 1.9. Romans 1.19. and perfection, and freedom
from sin as attainable, in this life, to such as believe in Christ (who is
manifest for that end, 1 John 3.) they themselves (who have opposed, and
withstood, these truths) are turned into grosser darkness and confusion then
ever, many being turned from their pretended Reformation, Covenant, and
Directory now, to complain with the profane, that they have done those things
they ought not to have done, and left undone those things which they ought to
have done, and there is no health in them; and so now they cry, Lord have mercy
upon us miserable sinners, or miserable offenders, etc. as in their divine
service (so called) which formerly they exclaimed against, who now are turned
to it: So as it is come to pass upon them as upon the false prophets, and
hireling priests of old. Night is unto them, the Sun is gone down upon them,
and the day is become dark over them, and the seers are ashamed, and the
diviners confounded; for there is no Answer of God nor vision unto them (many
of whom have preached, and prophesied falsely against us, and of our overthrow,
til^ they are overturned themselves) Micah 3. and many tha^ have been as
em^nent Leaders, overseers, and tall Cedars amongst the outside and form all
professors of our times, ar^ fled as the hireling, (that cares for himself,
more then the flock) and their mouths are stopped, and they ready to hide
themselves; when those they account wolves, devourers, an^ superstitious
persons, comes amongst their flocks, manifestin^ that they are not true
shepherds, nor built upon the Rock Christ Jesus; for their profession will not
abide the storms, nor endu^^ the Winter; so as much of our work and
controversies (will such our Antagonists) is over; for they were the highest a^
most contentious against us, where the Truth, and power ^ God first appeared
amongst us, to gather us out from amongst them unto Christ the true shepherd;
and when they could have ^he Magistrates and powers of the earth on their side,
as to prosecute for them, and to feed them with the wages of unrighteousness,
and maintain them in Balaams way. And now the righteous testimony of the
servants of the Lord lives, and remains as upon Record against the
unrighteousness and falsehood of such; and in particular, the faithful
testimonys and true evidences given for the truth, and held forth by that
faithful servant, and follower of Christ (and brother, and Companion in the
work of the Gospel, R. Hubber^horne; Concerning whom (I hearing that some have
taken in hand to Recollect as many of his Books as they could, to be Reprinted)
it is in my heart by the spirit of the Lord, and in true love to his truth, to
signify these things in short (to be annexed unto them) for the sake of the
world, and such as knew him not; having had more conve^se with him, and
experience and knowledge of him then many others had.

1. That he was a true and faithful Instrument in the hand of the Lord in his
day for the turning many from darkness to the light, and from error to truth;
First, by informing, instructing, and admonishing people to the light of Christ
which appears, and shines in the hearts and consciences of the children of
men, and against the darkness, pollutions, falfe ways, professions and worships
of the world, etc. Secondly, by preaching and holding forth the new and living
way, the substance and end of figures, and shaddows (which many in the darkness
of apostasy have been Doting about) and the true and saving knowledge of God,
and his Son Jesus Christ within his people, to become their Wisdom,
Righteousness, sanctification and redemption; and in which they come to
experience the justification of life: according to the Witness given by the
primitive saints, Christians, and true witnesses of Christ.

2. And the gift of God bestowed upon him (the sa^d R. H.) was very precious,
honorable, and clear, and lives with us, and in our Remembrance, and hearts:
and thereby he was made a faithful Contender for the living faith (which was
once delivered unto the saints) which stands in the power of God, and works
by love, and gives the Creature victory over the world, and purifieth the
heart, and makes man obedient, and faithful unto Go^ as he lives in it till
he has fought the fight of it, and overcome his spiritual enemy, and power of
darkness which has led man from his Maker into sin and transgression; so as
the gift of God did largely show forth it self in the said servant of Christ,
by opposing and renouncing Errors, stopping the mouths of (and many times
convincing) gainsayers.

3. And though his bodily presence and his speech to some seemed weak and
contemptible, yet we can in the truth bear witness, that he was a man both of a
solid spirit, and quick understanding, and delivered weighty things in his
ministering, as were felt by such as were unprejudiced, who were impartial,
sober, and stayed in their spirits; and the innocence and uprightness of his
life and conversation so many have a certain knowledge, and can give their
testimony thereof, that I shall need to say little as to that; and he labored
for peace, unfeigned love, and unity in the Truth amongst people, witnessing
against that spirit (and those things) in any, which would either make
division, or cause offenses or stumblings in any thing contrary to the Gospel
of peace and salvation wherein the mystery of the everlasting and true
fellowship consists; and he truly preached the Cross of Christ, and true
judgment to such spirits as would live in a form and notion of Truth, out of
the life, power and true obedience; who though they may profess great matters
in words, and strain after high things in the carnal comprehension, yet are but
in the state of such as were dead, as unto whom the Gospel has in judgment
bee^ preached, that they might be judged as men in the flesh, bu^ live
according to God in the Spirit, as that follower of Christ and Minister of
righteousness R. H. has held forth, who walked in his integrity to the Lord,
and ^^tained his first love and habitation in the truth; being over all such
changeable spirits as would lead from it into any ways or things tending to be
get prejudice, division, or offenses in the minds contrary to th^^ pure love
which stands in the living unchangeable Truth. An^ this I must needs say
touching that man, that I never felt more of the presence and love of God
accompanying him, the^ I did in that time we were sufferers and conversant
togethe^ in Newgate before his decease.

And he (viz. R. H.) was taken away in a time of suffering and trial for the
testimony of a good conscience (being in the year 1662.) in which many of the
Lords people were under persecution, especially in the City of London, for the
exercise of their tender consciences in meeting together in the worship of God
(as the Saints and true Christians in the Primitive times did) and diverse
others of the innocent and faithful servants of Christ (who were sufferers upon
the same account in Newgate, London) laid down their lives for the ^estimony of
Jesus about that time as he did, being for the most ^art taken weak and sick in
prison, and (as was judged by the most part) their hard imprisonment, and deep
suffering (being crowded together in great companies the hot season, in prison
and in holes) was the occasion and beginning of their distem^er and sickness
whereon they died, before they were dischar^ed of their imprisonment; So as he
nor they did suffer, nor ^ere taken away for any evil-doing, or in wrath or
judgment, ^ut in the peace and love of God as to them-ward, having pa^iently
endured (and faithfully finished their course with joy, and fulfilled their
testimony in faithfulness) as seeing him that is invisible, having received a
crown of glory and life; those memorial lives with us, and is for ever blessed;
and ^hus the Lord has many times taken away the righteous ^^om the evil to
come, who through faith have received a ^^od report, and left an everlasting
testimony behind them.

And now blessed are all they that in faith, patience and sin^^rity do follow
the Lamb unto the end whithersoever ^e goes, ^hether it be through
tribulations, persecutions; or what suf^^rings soever; for such are they that
ke^p their habitations (...) the power and love of God, and such overcome by
the blood (...) the Lamb, and the word of their testimony, and shall reign ^ith
Christ as victorious Conquerors in his everlasting king^^m over death and
darkness, and the power of it; and such (...) abide in the love of the Truth
and Faith of Gods Elect, do (...) and witness that seed which God will exalt
over the earth, ^^^ore which he will root out and overturn his enemies that his
(...) plant may take deep root, and spread to the ends of the (...). And so all
friends who have received the love of the Truth, and the knowledge of the life
and power thereof, wherein is immortality to the faithful and obedient. Be
valiant for the Truth upon earth, and live in true love, unity and peace;
always minding and fol^owing those things which make for peace; and feel the
true and constant love and fellowship in the Gospel of peace, life and
salvation; And so blessings from on high will fill your hearts, and the glory
of the Lord will be your rereward in the everlasting inheritance of life with
the holy seed which will outlive all its enemies, and remain when the enmity
of the wicked, and the seed of it is removed and gone. So the Lord exalt his
Name and Truth, and promote his Kingdom over all that is contrary to himself,
that he alone may have the glory and pre-eminence whose right it is.

G. W.
Waltham in Essex the 27 of the 11 month, 1662.
Epist. page 4. lin. 30. for attained, read retained. page 5. lin. 16. for so
as he, read so as neither he.

Reader, this following Testimony was given forth by our dear Friend Edward
Buroughs before he finished his testimony by death for the Truths sake, which
I thought fit here to insert.
RIchard Hubberthorne was born in the North part of Lancashire, and was of very
honest Parents; his Father was a Yeoman of the Country, and had a good Report
of his Neighbors for uprightn^sse in all his dealings; and Richard was his
only Son, who was inclinable from his youth upwards to Religion and to the
best way, always minding the best things, and following the company of good
men, and was never known to be addicted to vice or malignity, nor ever
following any evil course of life from his Child hood, but f^^red the Lord, and
walked uprightly before him, and (...) faithful according to the Light and
knowledge received in all things; and his natural disposition and temper was
meek and lowly, and loved peace among men; he was brought up with his Parents
in good education, according to the custom of the Country; and in time of the
late Wars, he was disposed to go into the Army, and was in Scotland most of the
time till the Land was reduced; and he had some office in a Regiment, and did
sometime preach among his sincere and sober Companions that loved him well,
according to his knowledge and judgment at that day; and he obtained a good
Report amongst such as were lovers of Religion.

And when it pleased the Lord God everlasting to raise us up to be a People in
the North parts, (and through great Tribulations and extreme distresses within
and without, which we passed through, were we raised up of the Lord to be a
holy and chosen People) This same Person was one among the first of us whose
heart the Lord touched with the sense of his Power and Kingdom; and amongst us
he had the mighty operation of the Power of God experienced in his heart; Great
afflictions and tribulations for many weeks was he exercised in, through the
dispensation of the Grace and Spirit of Christ Jesus; he was in that state, and
while therein exercised for many days, a wonder to all that beheld him, as one
passing out of the body, as one under the deep sense of the hand of the Lord,
under the operation of his Power; thus it was with many of us, and particularly
with him; Till such time as the same Power that killed made alive, as wounded
also ^e^led, as brought down also raised up, and then being raised up in the
holy Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, he was made a Minister of the Everlasting
Gospel, to preach Repentance, Conversion, Salvation, and Remission of sins; and
accordingly went forth in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus the Savior of
m^n: kind; and was a Minister of the glad Tidings of Salvati^n, in many parts
of this Land and elsewhere; to the conversion of many Souls to God; for his
Ministry was made effectual by the Almighty Power of the Lord, to turn many
from darkness to light, from the power Satan to God; and there are thousands
who can in the Spirit of the Lord bear Testimony to the power and verity of his
Ministry, in many Countries where he traveled; for he labored much in diverse
places, and was very diligent and faithful in the work of the Lord, and
suffered imprisonment diverse times, and was hardly dealt withal, and persecuted
in Chester, Cambridge and in Norwich prisons and other places; and he was found
faithful in all his Trials among his Brethren, and always ready to do his
service in what he was called unto with a willing, mind, being truly in body,
soul and spirit given up to the service of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, a
dispensation of which was committed unto him, that he might serve the Lord in
his Generation; and though he how has finished his Testimony in this World,
yet the remembrance of him lives with us in the Spirit of Jesus, and he is
accounted among the faithful Sufferers, a Martyr for the witness of the Truth
which ever lives.

And for the space of nine years he labored and traveled in the work of the
Gospel aforesaid, in most of the Counties of this Nation, and was well known
for his faithfulness among the Churches of Christ; He was but little in stature
in his outward man, and of weak Constitution of body, and was slow of speech,
and often more ready to hear then to speak; he made little appearance in the
manhood of Excellency or Authority, but was contemptible among men, yet he was
very wise, and knew his season when to speak, and when to be silent; and when
he spoke, it was with much discretion and deliberation, in weakness of word
many times, yet reached perfectly the matter intended by him, and his speech
was with Gra^e, and in the fear of God, and had Authority in the Spirits of
men, and was of savor and sound judgment, though in weakness of the manhood
expressed; for he answered not men's Wisdom in excellent style of words, but the
witness of God in sincerity of speech; he was a Person of sound judgment in
divine Mysteries, and of good experience in the operations of the power of God,
and knew the passing through diverse conditions of the inward man, and was able
to speak to many estates of man passing under the dispensations of the Grace of
God; he could well inform the mind of a person in an afflicted and tossed state
of terror and judgment; and his Ministry was often savoury and seasonable,
and felt in the pure life, though his words were plain and homely, and no
beauty in them to man's Wisdom; and God made him and his service a blessing to
many who shall speak for him in their own Consciences; He was of a loving,
gen^le and good disposition, and acceptable was his Company to them that knew
him and were like-minded; a good Companion in all Conditions, not soon moved
into passion of either grief in Adversity, or of joy in Prosperity; nor had he
a Spirit taking offense upon light occasions against any, but watched for Good
over all, and not for Evil; He was a man of peace, and loved it, and walked
peaceably among his brethren, in honest kind familiarity; And I am persuaded in
my Soul, according to the experience I had of him for many years, he abhorred
dissension and strife among Friends, and was never the real occasion intendedly
by himself, of any difference and dissension among brethren; and what further
is Truth of him, I leave it to the just God, whose testimony is true and never
fails.

Among many others that were taken from Meetings and sent to Newgate, according
as ye have ^eard, This same Person of whom I am now treating, was in like
manner rudely and violently taken on the 22 th. day of the 4 th. Month last,
out of a Meeting in the Bull at Aldersgate, and carried before Richard Brown,
who used violence to him with his own hands, in pulling his Hat down upon his
head so that he brought his head near the ground, and then he Commirted him to
Newgate, where he remained till the Sessions, and was then indicted among the
rest, for being at an unlawful Meeting. etc. as it is said; and he being
thronged up in Prison among the rest of us, it pleased the Lord to visit him
with sickness of body, and in 10. days space (always growing weaker and weaker
in that time) he deceased and laid down his body in peace: About two days
before his departure, some of his dearest Friends went to visit him, and sat
by him a space, and spoke somewhat to him, and asked him if any thing was upon
his Spirit, he might now speak it to his Friends. His answer was, That there
was no need to dispute matters, for he knew the ground of his Salvation, and
was satisfied for ever in his peace with the Lord God, and we know (said he)
one another well, and what each of us can say about those things, and spoke no
further: And the 17 th. day of the 6th Month he departed this life, and was
gathered up to his Fathers, the Generation of the just; and though he be gone
in that bodily appearence, and his person removed from us, yet is his new-Name
written among us, and his Memory can never die, for his Spirit still lives to
praise the Lord, and the life which breathed forth through that vessel cannot
be removed away; for it is the Infinite, Immortal, Eternal Life, which dwells
in Sons and Daughters now upon the Earth; and though his outward man be put
off, yet he lives always in Spirit, for he was a Servant of the living God upon
Earth in his day.

E. B.

These few lines were sent to London from G. F. since R. H. laid down the body.
DEar Innocent Richard! as Innocent a man as lives on the Earth; whose
Innocence manifested it self, and his life is amongst us, and dead he yet
lives: Who never turned his back, but Conquered through truth, but trampled
upon all evil spirits, and went over them; who for the truth laid down his
life, and in it lives and rests:

G. F.

Dear Friends,
RIchard Hubberthornes Love was very Great to all the Flock of God, and in the
time of his health, he was a faithful Labourer in the work of the Lord, and
that you well know, and in the time of his sickness he did Express much Love to
Friends, and was greatly refreshed in them; indeed he was a Vessel filled with
a mighty Weighty Spirit, and all those who by that spirit were drawn near him,
might see, know and feel him, and many there are that have a witness saying in
them, Even so it was; indeed he was hid from many, and to them unknown, and
therefore not prized, and now the Lord has taken him into his own bosom, and
many were not worthy of him; my whole family misseth him; for in the time of
his health and sickness, he was a precious Example, and in his sickness he
minded not one person more than another, but often smileing, minded neither
life, nor death Visible, but was filled, with the Invisible. So that his mind
was redeemed out of visible things, and several times would say, The word of
the Lord, is with me, and said that Faith which has wrought my salvation, I
well know, and have grounded satisfaction in it; but Faith as touching visible
things, it was not much matter for minding of it, and said, I have more in me
then I am free to Declare: as concerning Living or dying he had not many words,
all the time of his sickness, but his mind was kept feeding in the retyredness
within, so that one might feel his strength in the still spirit which kept him
so that I do not remember that ever I heard him groan all the time of his
sickness; the seventh day in the morning, he asked for me, and when I came to
him, he said This night or to morrow night I shall depart hence; and the next
day in the morning understanding that he asked for me, I arose and went to him,
and after a while Sitting by him, he put his Arm about me, and said Do not
seek to hold me, for it is too strait for me; and out of this straitness I must
go, for I am wound into largeness, and am to be lifted up on high, far above
all; so in the Evening being the first day of the week, and the 17th of the 6
month he l^ft the Body.

This I was free to give forth, because in the time of his sickness sometimes I
kept friends from him, desireing that he might have slept, and hoping that
therein he might have been refreshed.

These words before mentioned, so near as I can remember, are his own words as
they came from him.

London the 6th M. 1662. Your Dear Friend, Sarah Blackberry.

The Table of the Books following.
A True testimony of obedience, to the heavenly Call etc. page. 1 An Answer to
R. Sherlock of Berwick, page. 7 The Mittimus answered, by which R. H. was sent
prisoner to Norwich Castle, in the year 1654 page. 37. A true testimony of the
Zeal of O^ford professors and University men who for Zeal persecute the
servants of the Living God, following the ^xample of their brethren of
Cambridge, page. 41. Two Epistles to Friends, during his imprisonment in
Norwich Castle, page. 45 Some Queryes for you to answer, who hold forth this
testimony, to the people that Christ is a Creature, page. 49 The Innocence of
the righteous seed of God, cleared from all slande^ous tongues, and false
accusers, page. 51 The distance between flesh and Spirit; etc. page. 64 The
Horn of the He Goat broken etc. page. ^3. The Light of Christ within, proved
to be sufficient to lead unto Go^, page. [1] Truth and Innocence, Clearing Its
self, and its Children; etc. page. [2] The Rebukes of a Reviler fallen upon his
own head; page. 86 The cause of stumbling removed from all that will receive
the Truth, and from before the Eyes of the wise men of London, page. 154. An
Epistle concerning the Sufferings of friends, showing the Priests wickedness
and persecutions, page. 198 A Call to the Ministry according to the Scriptures,
contrary to that Call which is of man, and by man, page. 203 The real cause of
the Nations bondage and slavery, and the way of their freedom, from their sore
and hard bondage asserted, page. 217 An Answer to a Declaration putt forth, by
the General consent of ^he people called Anabaptists in and about the City of
London. 225 A Coppie of a paper sent to the Council, in the year 1659. p. 234
A word of wisdom and Counsel to the officers, and Soldiers of the Army in
England etc. 235. An answer to the oath of Allegiance and supremacy from the
people called Quakers page, 239. Antichristian sin reproved, and the doctrine
of Christ and his apostles justified against swearing, page. 242 An Answer to a
Book called A just defense and Vindication of Gospel ministers, and Gospel
Ordinances, page. 252 Something that lately passed in discourse between the
King and R. H. page 268. R. H. His answer to John Horn, page. 273. A short
Relation of the twelve, changes of Government, that has been in England,
within these eight years, under all of which we have suffered persecution,
page. 276. An Epistle to Friends, page. 284 Another Epistle to Friends, page.
287 Reasons why no Imposition ought to be upon men's Consciences by any but the
Lord, page. 288.
REader it is desired that what faults thou find'st have escaped the Press, in
the ensuing treatise, to correct with thy Pen; where thou can not, friendly
to pass them by, for by reason of the present difficulty of having Friends
Books printed, therewith came out with those Errata's, which otherwise might
be amended.

A true Testimony of Obedience to the Heavenly Call; for which I suffer the
loss of all things, that I may be found in obedience to him who has called me.
A Servant of the Lord, and a Prisoner for the Testimony of Jesus, whom he has
called by his grace to deny the World, and am made partaker of his sufferings,
being in outward bonds (by the deceit) in Westchester, and of his free will
has given me not only to bel^eve, but to suffer for his Name sake, who has
called me out of my own Country, and from my Father's House, and to go in
obedience to his command whithersoever he shall call me: While I was young, I
girded my self, and went whither I would, and then I yielded obedien^e to my
own will, and to the will of man, and was a man-pleaser, but the Will of God I
knew not, neither was obedient to his commands; but when the Lord was pleased
to reveal his Son in me, and make known his Will unto me, to enlighten me with
his true Light which has enlightened every one that comes into the World, and
by it let me see my self to be a stranger to him, and knew him not, though I
was grown mighty in the Egyptians Wisdom, and was in love with the World, and
in the favor of men, and in a profession and words of man's wisdom exceeded
others, being in a form of godliness, but was ignorant of his Power and his
Word; but when his Power was made manifest, and his Word spoke within me, which
Word was in my heart, and was as a fire or a hammer; and this Word being made
manifest within me, and my Conscience being awakened by the Light of God, which
did convince me of sin, and did testify against all my words and actions, and
that just judgments of God were revealed from Heaven against that Nature I
lived in, and the Trumpet of the Lord was sounded within me, and the Earth did
tremble, and the Vi^ls of the wrath of the Almighty were poured down upon me,
and the powers of the Earth were terribly shaken, the foundation of Wisdom and
Earthly Knowledge was shaken, and the Judgments of God were upon the outward
man, and my flesh was wasted off my bones, and the bones smote one against
another, and I knew the Lord to be terrible, and this Word powerful, in burning
up, and hammering down the lustful nature I lived in, in pleasure and
wantonness, in pride and fullness, which the Word of the Lord was declared
against; and this Word I witness spoken from the Lord's own power within me,
which made my flesh and bones to tremble exceedingly, and did cause pain in all
my loins, and paleness of face; my comeliness was turned into corruption, and
my joy into lamentation, and I was brought to the bed of sorrows, where I cried
out in the bitterness of my spirit, and I had no ease nor rest day nor night,
for the hearing of the ear which I did hear, and the sight of mine eyes which I
did see; I heard the sound of the Trumpet, the Alarm of War within me,
terrors, woe, misery and destruction was upon me; in my trouble I cried in the
evening, Would God it were morning; and in the morning, Would God it were
evening; and the terrors of the Almighty being upon me, my acquaintance and
familiars stood a far off me, for they knew not the power of the Lord, nor the
Judgments of my God, which I do witness to be revealed and made manifest in
me; and the Lord raised up in me a love to his Word, by which all the powers of
the Earth did tremble, and the Earth it self was shaken by it; and by this Word
was I called to go and declare it, as I had received it from the Lord, to those
who lived in the same Heathenish nature, without the knowledge of God; and to
declare the Judgments of God against sin and ungodliness, as they were made
manifest in me. And by this Word was I called to forsake Father and Mother,
Lands and Living, to go in obedience to the Lord, who commanded me not to take
thought what I should eat, or what I should drink, or wherewith I should be
clothed, but cast my care upon him: And this I witness the Lord's care, and
those whom the Lord calls into his Work, and who labor in his Vinyard, need
not complain to the World for want. And for yiedling obedience to the Lord and
his commands, and not giving obedience to the corrupt Will of man, who commands
me contrary to what the Lord has commanded, do I suffer under the persecution
of those who are set in the place of Rulers and Magistrates, professing
themselves to be Ministers of the Law of England, and to act Justice according
to that Law, and do bear the Names of Major, Justices of Peace, and
Magistrates, and say they act according to the Law of the Nation, and present
Government; but they are seen to be in the generation of those who were ever
persecutors of the righteous Seed wherever it is brought forth; and the
Servants of the Lord in all ages were ever persecuted by that generation,
professing to be Ministers of Justice: But that which is acted, is cruelty,
persecution and injustice, and the righteous suffer, whom the Law was not made
for, but for the lawless and disobedient, and was added because of
transgression. The righteous Law af God was to be inflicted upon transgressors
and breakers of the Law; but the unrighteous Law of men is inflicted upon the
righteous, who walk blameless, and are proved no transgressors, but in
obedience to the Lord do witness a good conversation toward God, and toward
men, our consciences bearing us witness in the sight of God.

And those who are Rulers of the City, and Rulers of the Synagogue, under whom
I suffer imprisonment, say this is their Law, That if I will home into my own
Country, a^^ to my Father's House, and stay there, and depart this City, I may
be free upon this account, else I shall remain in prison: And this is contrary
to the command of the Lord, for he has commanded me out of my own Country,
and from my Fathers house; (but my own Country, dwelling and Fathers house,
the World knows not; that which I am called from, they know; the natural man
knows that which is natural:) And this is contrary to the Law of the Nation;
for the Law of the Nation does not confine any to stay at one place, nor to be
kept from any one City, being proved no transgressors nor breakers of the Law:
But I seek a Country and City, whose Builder and Maker is God; and truly if I
had been ^^^dful of the Country I came forth, and did love the pleasures,
delights and fleshpots of Egypt, which I am called from, I might have had
opportunity to have returned thither; but in obedience to the Lord I had rather
suffer affliction with the people of God, then enjoy the pleasures of Egypt.

And you who say I have no lawful calling, I do witness the same Word of God
the true prophets of the Lord were commanded by to declare against all sin and
ungodliness; by the same Word do I declare against it where I am commanded of
the Lord, and am called out of the same calling that they were, into the same
Work of the Lord that they were; and so I do witness the testimony of my
Brethren the prophets that went before me, who have left an example on record,
of suffering affliction, and of patience; and we count them happy who endure.

Elisha was a Plough-man, and when the Word of the Lord came to him, he left
the plough, and obeyed the Word of the Lord: And his call was lawful.

Amos was a Herdsman, and a gatherer of Sycamore fruit, and the Lord took him
as he was following the Flock, and the Lord said unto him, Go prophecy unto my
people Israel; and he obeyed the Word of the Lord, and prophesied In the Kings
Chapel, and in the Kings Court; and his calling was lawful: And I do witness
the same call, who was a Husbandman, and had a Vinyard, and gathered fruit,
till the Word of the Lord came and called me from it; and he turned my mind
within, and enlightened my understanding, and opened the Creation to me, and let
me (...) the Vinyard without was but a figure, and that I must come into his
Vineyard, to labor in his Work; and gathering fruit without, was but a figure,
for there is fruit within to be gathered: A possession wirhout, was but a
figure, there was a possession and an inheritance to be enjoyed within, and
that figures must pass away, to come to the everlasting inheritance, which is
within, which never fades away; out of time, into that which is Eternal. And
for this cause, and by this Word, did I forsake Father and Mother, Lands and
Livings, House and Vineyard, to follow Jesus Christ, and do whatsoever he
commands me. And this Call I witness to be lawful; and the Word of the Lord is
gone forth to command Sons and Daughters to prophecy in his Name, and they
have no other call, and they go as they ate commanded, as ever the true
prophets of the Lord did, if it be to the Kings Chapel, or to the Kings
Palace, or to the Synagogues, or into the Cities or Markets, to declare against
sin and iniquity, and where they see the people given to idolatry and
profaneness, their spirit being raised up by the power of the Lord, and by the
Word of the Lord do they declare against it, and they have no other Call but
the Word of the Lord, and they have a cloud of Witnesses, for all the Prophets
of the Lord spoke from this Word, and for speaking the Word of the Lord as they
were commanded, were persecuted, imprisoned, and put in dungeons, and were made
a derision daily to all that were about them, as Jeremiah was, and was smitten
and put in the stocks, Jer. 20.2. and Daniel was cast into the Lions Den for
declaring the Word of the Lord, Dan. 6.16. Amos was commanded not to prophecy
any more in the Kings Chapel, Amos 7.13. And the Apostles were imprisoned,
beaten, scourged and persecuted from City to City, and straightly commanded to
speak no more in that Name: And for declaring the Word of the Lord did all the
Prophets, Apostles and holy Men of God suffer. And the Word of the Lord is the
same now, and the persecutors the same; and those who are sent of the Lord now,
and called out of their own Country, as they were then, to declare his Word
against your sin and ungodliness which you live in, Magistrates, Priests and
people, you call them Wanderers and Vagrant persons who have no lawful calling:
What would you say by him who said, The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the
air have nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his head, Luke 9.58.
And the Jews said, This fellow we know not from whence he is, John 9.29. You
may say Paul was a wandering person, who had no certain dwelling place, 1 Cor.
4.11. and those who wandered about in sheepskins and goat skins, being
affl^ct^d and tormented, of whom the world was not worthy, they had trials of
cruel mockings, scourgings and imprisonment; they were stoned, hewn asunder,
and despightfully used, Heb. 11.36, 37. And you show your selves to be in the
same generation, mocking, scourging those whom ye are not worthy to receive.
But all you dear ones, servants of the living God, blessed are you when men
shall revile you, and speak all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake;
rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, for so
persecuted they the Prophets that were before you, Mat. 5.11, 12. You are in
the same nature and generation of those who said unto Christ, Depart out of our
coasts: And says Christ, As they have done unto me, so shall they do unto you.
And now I witness the same things to be fulfilled: Do not you say as they did,
Depart out of our City, and teach in thy own Country? And the same generation
called Paul a pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition, and the Apostles would
turn the World up-side-down; and the Jews said they had a Law, That if any
confessed he was the Son of God, he should dye; and they said Christ was a
blasphemer; and Christ was crucified, and the Apostles persecuted by them, and
all under pretense of blasphemy, heresy and sedition; and as it was then, so
it is now; for they who come to witness Jesus Christ come in the flesh, and
both sons and daughters who come to witness the promise of the Father fulfilled
in them, as he has said, I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your
sons and your daughters shall prophecy: And they who come to witness this
fulfilled, you say they are blasphemers, and not worthy to live in the
Natition; and all those who will not lie and swear, and use deceit, but yea and
nay, such a one cannot have trading in your Markets; for none can buy nor sell
who have not the mark of the Beast upon him; but he who loves and tells a
lie, has the most privilege and advantage among you: O wicked and adulterous
generation, thy woe and misery is coming upon thee, for the Lord is appearing,
who is come and coming to cleanse the Land of evildoers.

This I was moved to declare from the Spirit of my Father dwelling in mr, as a
Testimony of his Eternal Love and Power made manifest in me, and all who come
to know the Power of God which is but one, do witness me; and all who despise
the Power of the Lord, this is for a testimony against them from the Lord, by
his Servant, who is a Prisoner for the Truths sake, whose Earthly Name is

Chester the 12. day of the 12 th. Month, called February, 1653. Richard
Hubberthorn.
I came to Chester about the 29 th: of the 9 th. Month.



The end of the first Book.
A Reply to a Book set forth by the Priest of Berwick, who writes R. Sherlock,
which was an Answer to some Queries set forth to him by them whom he calls
Quakers; who writes himself Batchellor of Divinity, and a Diviner he is proved.
REader, This is the word of the Lord to thee, Take heed unto the Light Christ
has enlightened thee withal, to guide thy mind into the fear of God; to the
Light of Christ in thy conscience I speak, which if thou hearken unto it, it
will lead thee out of pride and lust, and envy, and will bring condemnation
upon that nature thou have lived and acted in, that is out of the fear of God;
and hearkening to this Light in thy conscience, it will direct thy mind to God,
and draw thy mind and affections out of earthly things, and the pollutions of
the world, by which thou art defiled; thy mind and conscience is defiled by
lust and un^leanness, lusting after earthly things, and the flesh is defiled by
that mind that wallows in the Earth: Now minding the Light in thy conscience
Christ has enlightened thee withal, thy understanding will come to be
en^ightned, to see the deceipts and the blind Guides which have led thee from
this Light in thy Conscience which should exercise it, and lead thee ^o go to
fear him, and to be taught of him, and will lead thee from the ^eachings of
man, which keeps thee in thy sins, and draws thee from this Light in thy
Conscience, which convinces thee of sin, and lets thee see sin and evil, and
all ungodliness, and will bring thee to deny it, and lead thee (...)
repentance, and so thou will come to know Jesus Christ, which gives ^epentance
and remission of sins; and then thou will deny Priest Sherlock, and all that
generation of Priests, who says in the 32. page of his Book, that Christ was a
person not capable of Faith and Repentance. And here I ^o charge him in the
presence of the living God, to be a liar; for he is ^he author and finisher of
faith, and he preached repentance, and gives repentance to his people. And he
denies the knowledge and understanding the Apostles had, and yet says he
preaches the same Gospel, page 10. And says, That external Tongues, Arts and
Sciences, gives them to understand the meaning of the Gospel, p. 11. And says,
That the spirit causes fleshly fruits, p. 22. and says, That to understand
the Doctrine of God, they must use the light of distinctions, p. 54. and says,
That Religion is the Art of Arts, p 86. And says, That Prayer in all the parts
and species thereof is a means to fetch down the holy spirit of God, p. 144.
When as the Saints said, the Spirit taught them to pray, and that they prayed
with the spirit and with understanding. Now to the Light in your consciences I
speak, which will let you see these lying Priests and blind guides, which have
deceived you so long, and kept you blind and ignorant. So all people cease from
them, and wait upon the Lord for teaching.

A lover of the Truth, and a witness against the deceit and deceivers, and a
lover of the souls of all people; and that righteousness might be established,
was I moved t^ write this. Richard Hubberthorn,

Quest. 1. WHether your Gospel be the same which the Apostles preached? And if
it be, why go you to Oxford and Cambridge, when the Apostle says, the Gospel
that he preached was not after man, neither was he taught it by man?

Pr. Thy answer is, You preach the same Gospel the Apostles preached, but do
not attain the knowledge and understanding of this Gospel by the same means.

Rep. Here let all people see what wooden stuff this is: How can you preach the
same Gospel, and have not the same kno^ledge and understanding? If it be not by
the s^^e knowledge and understanding, it is not the same Gospel; for the spirit
o^ understanding is but one, and from this Spirit of under^tanding thou have
cleared thy self.

Pr. And thou say, You ought not to depend upon any such imm^diate
Revelations from Heaven as the Apostles had.

Rep. Here again thou have cleared thy self from the Spirit th^^ gave forth the
Scriptures, who deniest immediate Revelation from Heaven: And here thou have
denied thy self to be an^ Minister of Jesus Christ; for no man knows the Son
but the Father, and he to whom he is revealed: And thou that deniest immediate
revelation, thou have denied the Son of God, and have showed that thou have not
life; for he that has not the Son of God, has not life: And therefore we deny
such Schools as Oxford and Cambridge, where the rudiments of the world are
invented: And abundance of filthy words are in the Answer to this Query, that
are not worth mentioning.

Qu. 2. Whether you can give another meaning to the Scriptures than they are?
Or whether the Apostles did give the meaning to them when they spoke them
forth, yea or nay? And if they did, what need learned men give the meaning of
them?

Pr. And in thy answer thou say, The sense and meaning of the Scripture is
involved in it.

Rep. Here thou would make people believe, Christ were in the Letter, who is
the substance that gave it forth, and was in them that spoke it forth; for the
Scripture does declare another thing of God and Christ, it does not declare God
and Christ is in the Letter; but here it is, that fools might appear blind; and
such as thou say (learned men) must give the meaning to the Scripture.

Pr. And thou say, That Christ took a Text, and that Philip took a Text.

Rep. O thou enemy and slanderer of Christ and the Apostle! Did they take Texts
to get money with them, and to lie a quarter of a year, or half a year in a
Text? Christ came to fulfill the Scripture; and the Apostle showed how Christ
fulfilled the Scripture, and came to fulfill that which the Prophet spoke. The
Scribes and Pharisees were learned men, and they could not open the Scriptures;
Peter an unlearned man, he opened the Scriptures.

Pr. And thou speak of standing up in a Pulpit of wood.

Rep. In the time of the Law when they read it, there was a Pulpit of wood to a
particular people to whom the Law was given; but Christ said, Go preach the
Gospel to every creature: And Christ cried woe against them that had the
chiefest place in the Assemblies. And here thou art one of them that would be
under the Law, and would have a Pulpit of wood, and pleadest for thy learning,
that the Scribes and Pharisees were in, which is to no purpose, who says the
kernel of the Nut is in the shell; and that comparison thou bring to make
people believe that the Life is in the S^riptures; and so the poor people are
groping in the Letter to find life there, when the life was in them that gave
it forth.

Pr. Thou speak of flying to God by prayer.

Rep. Yet thou deniest the Revelation from Heaven which the Saints were to wait
for, the Revelation of Jesus from Heaven; and this makes all you blind guides
to stumble, because you have not the life which gave forth the Scripture, which
now is made manifest to the children of God.

Qu. 3. Show me by the Scriptures who ever was made a Minister of Jesus Christ
that was called of men Master.

In thy answer to this Query, thou bring the Prophets and Priests under the
Law, called Fathers, to oppose Christ's doctrine; Thou would compare Oxford
and Cambridge to such as the Prophets and Apostles; yet thou deniest immediate
Revelation from Heaven: And here thou have cleared thy self, and Oxford and
Cambridge, from the life of the Prophets; for they had immediate revelation:
And so thou bring many names, as Pastors and Shepherds, and Ministers, and
Apostles, and Evangelists, to oppose Christ's Doctrine, who says, Be not you
called of men Master. So let all see if they be not under the delusion who say
Master is a civil honor, and so opposes Christ's Doctrine. Here thou have
showed thou do not believe; For how can you believe, that receive honor one
of another? and show that thou love it, as the Scribes and Pharisees did,
and would not part with it, and art in thy pride and vainglory, as the Scribes
and Pharisees were, who say that is a civil honor and respect which Christ
cried woe against. And herv thou have brought thy self and all thy company under
the woe, and Oxford and Cambridge in the state which Christ pronounced woe
against; and thou art judged with the same life that gave forth the Scriptures.

Qu. 4. Show me by the Scriptures where ever the Ministers of Christ took
Tithes of the people, or Augmentations.

In thy answer thou say, The Priests under the Law received Ty^hes.

Rep. There was a time that they received Tithes, and they might not neglect
them, as denying their Tithes to the first Priesthood. There was a time after
Christ, when he was sacrificed up, that he was preached the unchangeable
Priesthood, Heb. 7. then the Priesthood which received tithes, was denied;
therefore the woe is come upon thee and all thy generation, who receive tithes
according to the changeable Priesthood. Here thou have showed thy self without
judgment and the love of God, and the woe is come upon thee and all thy
generation, who receive tithes, and hold up the changeable Priesthood, and so
deny Christ come in the flesh. They that preached the Gospel, who lived on the
Gospel, denied the changeable Priesthood who received Tithes; but for shame you
Ministers of Oxford and Cambridge, stop your mouths, for they must be stopped; do
not you sue men at the Law, and imprison men for Tithes? And here you show you
do not preach the Gospel, for it will not maintain you; for them that preached
the Gospel, lived on the Gospel: There thou thief art taken, who has gotten
the Apostles words, who art for judgment.

Qu. 5. Show me by the Scriptures, and what Scripture have you which speaks of
the word Sacrament, which you tell the people of, and deceive the simple.

Pr. And in thy Answer to this Query thou art confused: First, thou say
there is no Scripture for the word Sacrament; and yet thou say Christ
commands it, and yet thou say there is not such a word in Scripture.

Rep. Here thou which addest to it, have brought thy self under the plagues and
woe. And here let all who are in the Light, see if thou art not a deceiver, who
deceives thy soul. I charge thee again, that thou know not Christ, for thou
deniest immediate revelation; so thou know not his commands, nor do not
obey them; for none know the Son, but to whom he is revealed. And here I charge
thee to be a deceiver and a deluder of the soul from the Lord. This is in reply
to the answer of the fifth Query.

Qu. 6. Show me what Scripture you have which speaks that the Apostles
sprinkled Infants.

Thou bring the Scriptures (as Christ says) Suffer little children to come
unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God; And this thou
bring to justify sprinkling Infants; for circumcision outwardly, was a type
of circumcision inwardly: So thou have not a word in the Scripture to maintain
it, but thou ramblest up and down, Acts 33. Romans 4.11. John 5.3. Jer. 1.5, 6.
Luke 1.66.08.
and perverts many Scriptures, in which there is not such a word for it: And
here I charge thee in the presence of the living God, to be a liar; for Christ
never commanded sprinkling Infants, neither is it any Ordinance of Christ,
neither is there any example among the holy men of God, that ever it was
practiced, and the plagues of God are added to thee. Let all people see if
there be any word for sprinkling Infants, and let the scriptures which thou
bring judge thee, Luke 18.15. Jer. 15.6. Luke 1.66.80. Act. 10.47. Here I
charge thee with all these scriptures to be a liar, and they shall judge the^,
which thou have brought for sprinkling of Infants; let the Reader of thy Book
examine the scriptures, and find thee a Liar, and all thy dirty stuff which
thou have gathered from them, is to be trodden under foot with the children of
the Light, who witness baptism and circumcision, and new birth born again; and
all who are here, do see thee to be blind, deaf, and a fool, and there thou
may read thy self: Let all people see thee here, who art without the life of
the scripture, who deniest immediate revelation from Heaven, which the Apostles
witnessed, and the Prophets; for without God thou art eternally, I witness it.

Qu. 7. Show me what Scripture you have to stand praying in the Synagogues
before Sermon and after? and whether the Apostles did so?

In thy answer to this query thou bring the Apostles words, (which said,
pray always) to justify standing praying in the Synagogues, and having the
chiefest place in the Assemblies, which Christ cried woe against: And here I
charge thee to be a false Prophet, who puts no difference betwixt the Apostle
and the Pharisees; though he said, the Temple which Solomon built him, it was a
house of prayer, Christ said there should not be one stone of it left upon
another; when Christ Jesus was witnessed, Stephen for witnessing him, was
stoned to death. And here thou have showed thou have no judgment, and errs,
not knowing the Scripture. And as for Christ's whipping them out of the Temple,
read thy self; to the Light in thy Conscience I speak; and so all thy praying
before thy Sermon, and after, as thou call it, in the Synagogues, in the
chiefest place of the Assemblies, the woe which Christ pronounced against thy
Fathers, has light upon the son, thou who art found in the same place, let
Matthew. 23. judge thee; the life which gave forth these words, the life of these
words is upon thee, and so all thy prayers are abomination to the Lord God, in
the state thou art in; and the praying of the Saints who were moved by the
spirit, thou have cleared thy self from; for thou deniest immediate Revelation
from Heaven, and how can thou pray and not with the spirit? And here let all
people judge and see what thy prayers are, if thou be not in the state of the
Pharisees, who deny immediate revelation, and to be one that is blind; and the
praying with the Spirit is witnessed among the Saints.

Qu. 8. Show me by the Scripture when the Apostles went into the World, and
gave the people of the World David's Psalms to be sung in meeter, the things
that you practice; answer them by the Scriptures, or the Apostles practice,
without consequence or imagination.

And in thy answer to this Query thou perverts the Scripture, as in the Acts,
as Paul and Silas sung Psalms in the prison with them of the World; they did
not go into the World to give them a psalm to sing, men that were not come to
repentance; for says David, The dead cannot praise God; and there I charge
thee to be a liar, that put no difference betwixt the Saints singing with
grace and understanding, and the World, which have gotten the form, where thou
art: The Apostle did not speak to such as were in thy condition, to be filled
with the spirit, who were not come to repentance; but he spoke to them who were
turned from the World, and such sung praises to God: But for such as thee to go
and give to the World David's psalms in a meeter, and say O Lord I am not puffed
i^ mind,
I have no scornful eye,
O you profane ones, and scornful ones! how can you sing this but lie, who
have scornful eyes? and to sing all your bones quake, and you tremble, and you
water your bed with your tears, and you lie roaring all the night and day, when
as you scorn Quakers, and hate them, and speak all manner of evil of them, how
can you speak this but lie? But David's condition and the Saints, is witnessed
among them whom the World scornfully call Quakers, which power makes all to
tremble, though you scorn it a while, and have gotten the outside, the Letter,
David's condition in a form of words, scorning his life, and the power of God
where it is made manifest: Take warning all you scoffers and scorners; what
came to be the end of all your Fathers that passed before you, but destruction?
You lofty ones, fear and tremble before the mighty God; for all your songs must
be turned into howling; but singing with the spirit we own; the grace which
has appeared to all men, teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts. And
here I charge thee again to be blind, that puts no difference betwixt the
worlds singing, and the Saints.

Qu. 9. Whether a man shall overcome the body of sin while h^ is upon the
Earth, yea or no?

Pr. And in thy answer to this ninth Query thou say, It is not possible to
subdue the body of sin altogether, while we are in this world; and thy
comparison is, A tree while there is life in it, will bring forth fruit.

Rep. Here I charge thee in the presence of the living God, to be the corrupt
tree, for by thy fruit thou art known; for a good Tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit: and here thou art proved to be tha^ corrupt tree, who confesses you do
not attain to the same knowledge and understanding the Apostles did, as thou
speak in thy Book, whose harvest is ripe, and now is reaping down.

Pr. And whereas thou say, they shall not overcome the body of sin while in
this world.

Rep. And here I charge thee again; for say the Saints, As he is, so are we in
this present world; and thou say, not; there is the lying spirit; and the
Apostles said, they had put off the body of sin, and thou say it is not
possible; and there thy spirit is found contrary to the Scripture; and the
Apostle says in Romans 6. they were made free from sin; and thou say not, it
cannot be possible; and here thy spirit is tried. Let all the children of the
light judge thee, and that thou speak, to be contrary to the Apostles words
in the Romans; and all you that cannot witness these things, that the body of
sin is not put off, wait upon God through Christ for it.

Qu. 10. Whether the curse be not upon him that preaches another Gospel then
Christ and the Apostles preached, yea or no?

Pr. And in thy answer to this Query thou speak of receiving the Gospel from
Christ and the Apostles.

Rep. In this I charge thee to be a liar, as I said to thee before, who deniest
immediate Revelation from Heaven; how can thou be a Preacher of the gospel,
and deny revelatio^? What a gros^ darkness are people in that believe thee? For
under the curse and woe thou art, that the Scripture speaks of; and he that has
received the end of his prophecy, is made from the curse; but this is without
thy understanding and knowledge: Thou confessest in thy answer to the first
query, you preach the same gospel, but do not attain the same knowledge and
understanding. Let all people see who are in the Light, if it be not the same
knowledge and understanding, it is not the same Gospel, but another, and there
the curse is upon thee.

Qu. 11. Whether any natural man can preach the Gospel, yea or no?

Pr. In thy answer to this eleventh query, thou speak of understanding, and
of studying, and of the Gospel, and of a natural man; and say he cannot
preach the Gospel; and thou say, Your understanding and knowledge is not the
same as the Apostles was.

Rep. Here let all who are in the Light, see if it be not natural then, and if
thou be not him that studies a divination of thy own brain, and instead of the
blessing, the curse of God comes upon it; for how many are there that were
Priests as you are, that now cry against you, which are come out of your
generation, and see the curse of God upon all your practices.

Pr. And thou say, The flesh which is quickened with the Spirit of Life,
brings forth some kind of fleshly fruit or other.

Rep. Here thou have showed thy self to be death indeed; does the spirit cause
fruits of the flesh? Or are the fruits of the spirit the fruits of the flesh? O
thou liar and high blasphemer! which thou say is clear from manifold texts
of Scripture; 1 Kin. 8.46. John 14.4. Prove. 20.9. John 18.10. Eccles. 7.23.
all the Scriptures will witness thee to be a liar; and these Scriptutes thou
bring to maintain the spirit of life to bring forth some kind of fleshly
fruits, and the fruits of the spirit to be the fruits of the flesh. Here all
who are in the spirit will judge thee to be a blasphemer of the holy Spirit of
God, for the Spirit brings forth no fruits of the flesh.

Pr. And thou say in thy answer to the first query, you do not go to Oxford
and Cambridge to learn the Gospel you preach, but to learn the knowledge of
Tongues and Languages, Arts and Sciences.

Rep. O for shame stop thy mouth, here thou have shamed thy self, and all your
schools, with an external means to open the Gospel: People are blind indeed
that do follow thee; but thy bottle is open, and what is within, pours out; and
the Fountain runs, and thy external stuff pours out, which has poisoned many
people, which thou say thou should open the Gospel withal: all that have
the least convincement, may see thee to be a seducer; for what is external, is
natural; and what is natural, knows not the things of God; but the Lord be
praised, thou have declared thy self abroad.

Qu. 12. Whether any Ministers of God were made Ministers by the will of man,
yea or no? Show it me by the Scripture.

Pr. And in thy answer to this Query thou say, There is (...) Minister of
God made by the will of man only, but by man in subordination.

Rep. Here thou crossest the Scripture: Paul an Apostle, not of man, nor by
man: And here the lying spirit has showed it self indeed.

Pr. And thou say, There is no such hope of any such calling as was in the
time of the Apostles.

Rep. And here thou have cast thy self and thy fellow^, and all thy study to be
without the Doctrine and Life of the Apostles* for thou concludest there is no
such calling, yet thou talkest of laying on hands; there thou and you are
making likenesses, which is forbidden, and to be confounded; and so we
conclude, and all the children of Light shall judge, that your Hope, and your
Calling, and your Ministry made by the will of man, and not only by God, to be
without God, and conarary to the Apostles.

Qu. 13. Show me by the Scripture, whether a man shall grow up to that
condition that he need no man to teach him but the Lord, or no?

Pr. We must not look for any immediate, extraordinary, miraculous teaching by
revelation from the Lord, and yet all men are taught of God too.

Rep. What confused stuff is this, and blasphemy, that comes out of thy bottle?
Thou would make God not an immediate; does not God teach immediate? Here
thou show that thou do not know the living God; for the teaching of God is
immediate in the least degree.

Pr. None aims to such a perfection of knowledge in his gifts, as not to need
teaching.

Rep. Here I charge thee to be a Liar, who speaks contrary to the Scripture;
and here I charge thee in the presence of the living God, to be a slanderer,
who speaks of being taught of the Lord Jesus Christ outwardly, by the spirit;
what confused stuff is this? and here again I charge thee to be a liar; for the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ are spirit and life; but such as thou who
look upon the outward thing, cannot receive his words, though you have the
letter of the Gospel, as they had the letter of the Law.

Quest. 14. Whether they be not Antichrists, and disobey Christ, that have the
chief places in the assembli^^, stand praying in the synagogues, which Christ
did forbid his disciples to act such things, and cried woe against those that
did act them?

In thy answer to this querie, thou ramblest up and down with many words to
justify that which Christ cried woe against, to justify the chiefest place in
the Assemblies, and to be called of men Master; and for standing praying in the
Synagogues, which Christ pronounced woe against, and so let all the people see
if thou and you be not such as are called of men Masters, and stand praying in
the Synagogues, which the woe was and is upon, Mat. 23. and there is neither
shelter nor hole for thee to hide thy self, for them that walk in the truth
will find thee out, and praised be the Lord God of heaven and earth, who has
given us a spirit of discerning, and we are able to judge you who live in
deceit; for the Apostle prophesied with the spirit of the Lord that such should
come, and we see with the same spirit you are come, and with the same spirit
you are judged.

Quest. 15. Whether they be not Antichrists and of the Devil, and no Ministers
of Christ, which do not abide in the Doctrine of Christ?

Pr. They that swerve from the Doctrine of Christ, are of the spirit of
Antichrist.

Rep. There thou art, this is thy own condition, who deniest immediate
revelation; and thou that deniest immediate revelation, deniest Christ (for
Paul said, the Son was revealed in him) and so all that thou speak is with
the lying spirit in the wicked generation; and whereas thou slanderest and
say we rail, that is false; And again thou speak of love, because the
letter declares it; but the love of God who dwells in it, to such thou art an
enemy, and as touching using plainness of speech to people, because we do not
flatter or use enticing words of men's wisdom, which thou do, so thou have
cleared thy self from the children of God, and to be in the generation of them
that swerve from the doctrine of Christ, who seek to justify that which he
cried woe against, a^ Mat. 23. And whereas thou accusest us for railing upon
people, thou art a liar; for love uses plainness of speech, and love and
charity is out of deceit; if we should flatter, we should hold it up, and
should be pleading for thy generation, who talks of God, and confesses that you
have not the same knowledge and understanding that the Apostles had. Therefore
how can you know God then? And whereas thou speak of trying the spirits, the
fruits of it is love; here with the spirit of love is thy generation tried; for
when the servants of the Lord have been moved to come into your Synagogues,
some have been stockt, and wounded, and imprisoned and hailed out of your
synagogues. And is this the fruits of your spirit?

Qu. 16. Whether they be not seducers that draw people from the anointing which
is in them, and tell them they must be taught of a man, whereas the anointing
teaches them, they need no man teach them but as the anointing teaches them,
and the promise is to him that does abide in it eternally?

Pr. Many false Prophets are gone forth.

Rep. Here thou have proved thy self to be a false Prophet, who denies
immediate revelation; for whom the Lord sent forth, he spoke to them
immediately, which thou deniest, and there thou art one of the false Prophets
which thou speak of, and knows nothing of the anointing, who deceives the
simple and ignorant; the world may wonder after such; but who are in the light,
and receive any thing immediate, will see thee in the dark, to be a deceiver;
for none in thy generation can witness, that you need no man teach you but the
anointing; for who does, are come out from your teaching and you both. And as
touching Sects, them we deny, as thou speak in thy answer to the fifteenth
Querie: therefore do we see thee, with that which is no Sect, to be coloring
and deluding people, telling them thy error is truth, who quotes and
misappliest the Scripture to maintain thy falsehood.

Pr. The flesh is quickened with the spirit of life, to bring forth some kind of
fleshly fruits, 1 King. 8.46. Joh. 14.4. Prove. 20.9. 1 John 1.8, 10 Eccles.
7.22.

Rep. Here I charge thee (to be a liar, and a blasphemer) in the presence of
the l^ving God; let all people read these Scriptures and see if there be any
such thing in them, and whether thou have not misapplied th^se scriptures, when
the spirit says, It c^ucifieth the deeds of the flesh; and walking in the
spirit, the lusts of the flesh i^ not fulfilled; and here I charge thee to be a
liar, and of the Devil, who was a liar from the beginning, and in his
generation thou art.

Qu. 17. Whether they do not bewitch the people, who withdraw them from the
spirit within, to observe the ordinances of the world, and traditions of men
without, as the Galatians were bewitched? Gal. 3.1.

Pr. I must tell you that there is not only a holy and good spirit within, and
that in too few; but there is also an evil and seducing spirit within, and that
in too many; even the spirit that does bewitch men, and draw them aside from
the doctrines and commands of the spirit of truth, and to strive by all means
to draw the people off from giving heed to seducing spirits; it is not to
observe the ordinances of the world, and traditions of men, as you pervert the
Text, but to obey the command of Gods true spirit, who foretelling of false
Prophets, and false Spirits, often in the word commands, exhorts, and
admonishes to beware of such, not to give heed to such, and not to believe
every spirit, but to try them.

Rep. Here in this answer (thy spirit is tried) which I have given to all
people to read with a single eye, that all may see what confusion here is in
it. First thou say that the seducing spirit draws from the seducing spirit,
and in the seducing spirit thou art, and from the spirit of life, with the
spirit of life thou art judged to be out of the doctrine of Christ, nor is not
guided by the holy spirit.

Qu. 18. Whether they be not seducers, which tell people these are the
ordinances of God, which God never commanded; as sprinkling Infants, telling
people of a sacrament, which there is no scripture for, and draw them from the
spirit within, to follow your imaginations and inventions?

Pr. But for sprinkling Infants, I have already given you the grounds of it out
of Scripture.

Rep. Here again I charge thee in the presence of the living God to be a liar;
the^e is not such a word in the scripture to bear it out, nor a word of a
sacrament, which there is no scripture for; let all read the scripture
throughout, and see if they can find such a word in the scripture; so let all
people judge thee to be a liar, and a seducer, and in the Devils invention,
which calls that an ordinance of God, which is invention and imagination.

Pr. We are not blind-folded to follow the dictates of the spirit within.

Rep. Here I charge thee in the presence of the Lord to be in the flesh, and to
follow the flesh; for who are led by the spirit of God, are the sons of God;
and thou that do not follow the dictates of the spirit, thou do not follow
the commands of God: and what have thou to do to talk of clearing it by the
Scripture, when there is no Scripture for it, and when the Scripture witnesses
against the works of the flesh, which thy spirit stirs up?

Que. 19. Whether you have the same spirit which was in Christ, the Apostles
and Prophets, which gave forth the scripture, seeing you act contrary to the
scriptures, and follow your own inventions and traditions, and so err from them?

Pr. Our Ministerial actions are agreeable to the Scripture.

Rep. Here I charge thee to be a liar; for in thy answer to the former Querie
thou say, you do not follow the dictates of the spirit within, and art
holding up sprinkling infants, which there is no scripture for, and so walk
contrary to the scripture, and to them that were led by the spirit, which gave
them forth.

Que. 20. Whether ever Christ and his Apostles did first baptize, and then
preach faith and repentance twenty or thirty years afterward?

Pr. Christ himself was not capable of faith and repentance.

Rep. Here I charge thee to be a liar and a slanderer, for he was capable of
faith and repentance, and the baptism which the Apostles baptized withal; what
have thou to do with it, who art holding up sprinkling infants, which there is
no example for in the scriptures, nor in all the Apostles practice? Therefore
silence flesh, for thou know nothing of the wisdom of God which the Apostle
speaks of, but art in the state of Simon Magus, who art buying and selling the
letter; worse then he: for he would have bought the spirit which the Apostles
denied; so thou art denied with the same spirit; but the Saints baptism we own,
and the believers, and the promises which is to the seed, thou have cleared thy
self from, who say Christ was not capable of faith; how could he be above it,
and not capable of it? and the life that I live, is by faith of the Son of God,
^^ith the Apostle; which thou have cleared thy self from.

Que. 21. Whether ever Christ and his Apostles received 100. or 200. pounds a
year for preaching the Gospel?

Pr. Many of the Apostles converts sold their estates, and brought it and laid
it down at the Apostles feet.

Rep. Here I challenge all the Oxford and Cambridge Teachers in England; how
many of their Converts have sold their estates, and laid it down at your feet;
but you Teachers and they are so earthly minded, you are fit to sue them at the
law, and imprison them, (as Lancaster and Kendal Goals may witness, where many
suffer now because they will not pay tithes) and so you show you preach another
Gospel; so let Christ and the Apostles judge you all to be without their
doctrine, and your converts, as thou call them, to be without the Apostles
and Christ; let their example judge you all, and so you show that you never
sowed spiritual things, but only as a custom and a cloak thou bring these
words, for the Apostle did reap carnal things, where he sowed spiritual things.

Que. 22. What scripture is there to limit God to a place, calling it a Church,
when as the Church is in God? 1 Thessalonians. 1.1.

Pr. You cry down all distinctions, as savouring of humane ^earning, whereby
the naked truth might be clearly and distinctly seen, a^ it is in it self.

Rep. Here let all people take notice, whether humane learning can open the
naked truth; Here thou would make people believe that humane learning was
before the naked truth; and again, let all people take notice, and see, if the
meeting in a steeplehouse in England be a Church, when so many has been moved
of the Lord to come into meeting places among them, and something has been
revealed to them, and they have spoken; and he that was the pretended Teacher
which was in the chiefest place in the assembly, has cried out, they disturb
me; and then they have hailed them out to the stocks, or prison, and knocked
them, or bruised them, and may be some have lain a quarter of a year in prison,
or more.

Now let all people take notice, which have a love to God, whether this be the
Church which is the pillar and ground of truth, or the cage of unclean birds
which the Scripture speaks of, when as the Scripture says, If any thing be
revealed to him that stands by, let the first hold his peace: and the Church of
God we own; but all such Churches as are fighters, and which do imprison them
who are moved of the Lord to come to speak to them, such Churches we deny.

And whereas thou slanderest us, that we cry against the Ministers, all such
Ministers are to be cried against, for they are contrary to the scripture.

Qu. 23. What scripture is there to have a Clerk say Amen, and to have groats
apiece of the World for his trade?

Pr. And for the groat he receives yearly of some persons in the world, I
conceive it is not so much for saying Amen, but he has other offices.

Rep. Here thou go about to justify the Clerk and his groat, and the custom
of saying Amen, which the Apostles practiced no such thing, neither had they
any Clerk to say Amen, which had a groat for his labor; and let all the
practice of the Apostles judge thee, who say that the Clerk has other
offices then saying Amen, that is, may be to ring the bell to gather carnal
people together to hear such a blind guide as thou art, and for laying you a
cushion that you may lie soft, or opening the book, or giving forth the Psalms,
which all this there is no example for, that the Apostles had any such thing;
but it is that you false Prophets might utter forth your folly; for to the
children of light you are discovered, and seen to be without the Doctrine of
Christ and the Apostles, and all the scripture shall judge you; and in thy
answer thou do conceive there thou have brought thy self under that state
which must be scattered; for the Lord will scatter the proud in their vain
imaginations and conceivings, and let the Prophets words judge thee.

Qu. 24. What Scripture is there, for taking money for burying the dead, or to
have ten or twelve shillings for preaching a Funeral Sermon, or to take money
for marrying man or woman?

Pr. For our pains in laboring in the word and doctrine, the Apostle gives
that general rule, the labourer is worthy of his hire. And what their wages is,
is not of our choosing; but partly the liberality of founders, and benefactors,
partly custom among all people, in all Christian Countries has settled it.

Rep. Here thou usest the Apostles words, which, as I have showed thee before,
thou art cleared from his life; O thou blind guide, whose mind is in the earth,
who art in the customs, and art one of them that does hold them up, which all
the Ministers of Christ are ashamed on thee, and all thy generation; who art
without the, life that gave forth the Scriptures, who art one of them that goes
in the way of Balaam, who durst not take the gift though he loved it; and as
for the Apostles condition, I charge thee and command thee to be silent, and
let it alone, who denies immediate revelation from heaven; therefore all that
thou speak is from the earth and below: and the word thou know not, which
was in the beginning, Joh. 1.1. when the letter was not, and therefore in it
thou can not learn; and the Christians that are baptized into Christ, are
redeemed out of Countries, where yet thou art, with thy customs and ways of
the Nation, as thou do confess, which Christ comes to redeem from: and thou
who receivest Balaams wages, art spuing forth thy venom against the righteous
seed, where it is rising.

Qu. 25. When did any that was sent of Jesus Christ to preach the Gospel, sue
men at the Law?

Pr. Many differences may arise, which cannot well be decided without suit at
Law.

Rep. In thy answer to this Querie thou do allow of going to Law, which the
Apostle did not, as in the Corinthians, and he was a Minister of Christ: and
here thou show thou art none; for thou allowest that he did not; and who are
come to the doctrine of Christ, which is yea and nay, there is no difference,
they need no going to Law, there is no contention: and many differences are in
thy generation, which is without Christ and his doctrine, which many of you
professed Ministers sue men at the Law, which the Apostle forbad; and here
openly I charge you all in the presence of the living God, to be no Minister of
Christ, but are raced from the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles: and thou
writest a Scripture in Act. 19.38. as concerning the rude multitude that was
stirred up when truth was spoken, these were they which were not brought into
the truth, and there thou art among such a company; let all the people see how
Act. 19. will justify thee for going to Law, who professes thy self to be a
Minister of Jesus Christ, which the Ministers of Christ denied: and here I
charge thee again to be a perverter of the scripture, and void of the knowledge
of Christ, and the life of the Apostles, and out of their doctrine; and do not
call this railing, which is plainness of speech, and love to thy soul.

Pr. And you rail very highly in scripture terms too, whereby you take the
garments of Gods holy Spirit, and put them upon the Devils shoulders.

Rep. Here thou do accuse us for railing speeches, and as we told thee
before, that we deny; and here thou call thy self a Devil; for of him thou
art with thy pretenses, therefore woe is thy portion: and whereas thou say we
revile and accuse the brethren, this is another of thy slanders: we bid thee
answer the queries, and thou call them scrupulous; to thee they are so: and
again thou say we misapply the scripture, that is false; and the Lord Jesus
Christ thou know not, who deniest immediate revelation; and what have thou
to do to talk of him, and as throwing the woes which the Scripture speaks of,
which is against the decei^s which thou live in, they are thy portion, thou
can not escape them. If we should not give thee thy due and portion, we
should flatter thee, and it would not be love: and why do thou talk of
understanding and bid us weigh and consider? we have considered thy way, and do
know it, and God has given us an understanding in all things.

Pr. Hebrew and Greek we do truly call the Original.

Rep: Here I charge thee that thou have no more original then Pilate thy father
had; Pilate had Hebrew and Greek, which crucified Christ, which was the
Original: and here I charge thee in the presence of the living God to be a
liar; for the word was in the beginning before any tongue was, and your Hebrew
and Greek is natural; and the natural man knows not the things of God, and the
world by wisdom knows not God. Pilate was a worldly man, and he had this
original, and the wisdom of the world; and there thou art, and there the curse
is upon thee: so here thou preachest another original then the Apostles did;
they preached Christ the fountain, and thou preachest Hebrew and Greek, that is
thy original; and thy father Pilate had that original, which crucified Christ,
and set it over him, and the scripture came not by the will of man. Therefore
it is not the knowing of it by Hebrew and Greek, but by the spirit that gave it
forth; therefore all people take warning, and cease from such deceivers, and
take heed to the light in your conscience, which is the light of Christ, to
guide your minds up to God the Father of light, and be not deceived, nor wander
not up and down after such, who know not the truth, but put Hebrew and Greek
for the original, which Pilate had, which crucified Christ Jesus, as you may
read in Luke 23. All people may see thou art brought no further yet then thy
father Pilate; so all thy prayers we deny; for there is nothing of truth born
up in thy understanding, who art led with a seducing spirit into delusions, who
say, the spirit of life stirs up the flesh to bring forth fruits; and thou
that art in the flesh, can not please God: And there thy spirit is tried to
be the spirit of error. And a great deal of such stuff thou have in thy answers
to the queries, which is not worth mentioning: And this thou have written to
publish thy self, that them that have a love to Christ, their hearts may be
turned from thee to God, to see how thou have uttered forth thy solly, though
with many fair glosses thou and such as thou art deceive the simple. But all
who are in the light, do see thee, and comprehend thee.

Something in Reply to the Epistle thou wrotest to the Lady BINDLOSSE.
TO her thou speak of the doctrine, and spirit, and the holy Ghost.

Here I charge thee to be a liar, who knows nothing of them, who deniest
immediate revelation; for thou who deniest that, deniest the Father and the
Son, as in Matthew. 11.27. Wherein go thou about to exhort others, who art in
the condition thy self, but art as Martha, that would be serving?

If she do but take heed to the light which Christ has enlightened her
withal, she will quickly see thy folly; for the light which Christ has
enlightened her withal, shall be her condemnation if she hate it; and if she
love it, it will guide her into the way of righteousness up to Christ: And
there O woman is thy teacher, and his condemnation.

And the Work which is brought forth in the North, does t^rment thee R.
Sherlock; and such as the Lord does move to exhort or to speak, such thou
slanderest, and do accuse as tempting; for thy slanders and reproaches, the
woe will turn upon thee from God, who is the Justifier of his children; and with
such Priests as thou art, the righteous seed was ever hated, as you may read
throught the Scriptures.

If she that thou call a Lady, be grounded upon thy doctrine, and be a
member with thee of thy body, let her read thy answers to the queries, and the
replies to them; to the light in her I speak, which is of Christ, which will
witness me, and let her see thee; and if her mind be guided by it, it will
condemn all her former practices of worship, and let her see thy delusions. And
again, thou art flattering the Lady, and tells her of a discourse of the
Spirit; and these are thy unsavory words, who art discoursing of the Spirit,
but deniest it; for thou that deniest immediate Revelation, denies the Spirit:
In the Corinthians the Apostle said, things were revealed to him by the spirit;
and all thy doctrines to be denied, and all that thou speak, and thou art
seen to be one of the evil beasts and slow-bellies, whose mouth must be stopped:
And what do thou tell her of growing up in the knowledge of God, and stop the
way for her to pass, who deniest immediate revelation which the Apostle
exhorted to? And the Saints were to have the loins of their minds girded up, as
in 1 Pet. 1.13. And what have thou to do to talk of Heaven or happiness, who
art a Beast in thy colors? And so this is the intent that I have written this
Reply to the Epistle which thou wrote to her thou call Lady, that she might
with the Light of Christ in her, see thy folly, for to that I speak which is
the Light of Christ, which if she hate it, it will be her eternal condemnation.

Something in Reply to thy Introduction.
Pr. NO age has brought forth more pretenders to the Spirit of God than this
wherein we live.

Rep. Let all people take notice, if thou be not he that pretends the Spirit,
who has not the same understanding and knowledge that the Apostles had; and
there thou art in the pretense, who art blind, and thy worship as thou call
it, is, thou do not know what, worse than it was at Samaria, who art in the
pride of heart: And as thou say, the Devil has sown his crop, and reapt his
harvest; and there thou art one of his servants, sowing his seed, and amongst
the delusions, as thou calst them, for that is in thy generation, which comes
out of thy own bottle, which now flows out; what is within, issues forth; this
is thy own condition, who seducest the people. The fire is kindling, and the
tares are burning, which makes you wicked ones to cry out. And so all Impostors
and Blasphemers are in thy generation, and you are ignorantly worshipping, and
your gross Idolatry which thou speak of, is your own, and thou art a
Murderer, and understandest not what thou speak of them, and God thou
know not, who deniest immediate revelation from Heaven; but only what thou
know, thou know naturally, as a bruit Beast which Jude speaks of. And a
great deal of stuff thou have in this Introduction, which is not worth
mentioning. If the Reader does but read with a single eye, he may see all thy
confused stuff which is not worth naming. And a great deal of stuff thou have
written in discourse of the Spirit, and the Holy Ghost, which thou know not
what thou speak of; and of the Trinity, which there is no Scripture for.

A Reply to an Epistle that thou wrotest to him whom thou call Sir Robert
Bindlosse.
THe Queries being sent to his house from Rich. Hubberthorn, being his desire
that they should be made public; and we do praise the Lord, that deceit is
brought to light. And thou say, Perhaps some satisfaction might be given to
those seduced, wavering souls amongst you. Truly I do believe they will, and
see your folly; that under his Name whom thou call Sir Robert Bindlosse,
under his name and patronage they may appear as a cover to veil their
imperfections.

Therefore R. B. to thee I say, Be wise, and fear the Lord, and run not on in
the broad way, with such a one who does confess in his answer to the first
query, that he does not attain the same knowledge and understanding of the
Gospel as the Apostles attained. Therefore thou R. Sherlock, thy knowledge is
brutish, and thy understanding sottish, as the Scripture says; for none knows
the Apostles condition and knowledge, but with the same understanding; and in
this thou deniest it, and thou art in another knowledge and understanding, and
art in another doctrine, and the true Gospel thou do not know, and thou art
to be held accursed, as the Scripture says, Gal. 1. And so here thou have
given satisfaction to many that stood in doubt, though to all the children of
light thou wast known, and all things shall work together for good to them that
love God, Romans 8. therefore R.B. take heed what thou sets forth under thy Name,
and Fathers; for if thou see a thief, and consent with him, thou art guilty.
And R. Sherlock, the Queries that were sent to thee, thou call them
scrupulous; and the Letter which was sent to thee, as a Libel: Why do thou
slander the innocent and simplicity? but of thy generation we look for no
other, whose mouth is full of slanders. Thou slanderer, in thy Epistle to the
Lady, thou slanderest privily, under a color, who flatters her; where thou art
telling her of love, and stirs her up to envy, as in p. 46. and incensing her,
and would stir her up against them whom thou call Quakers; so thou
might have as well have incensed her against Moses who was a Judge over all
Israel, and quaked; and David who was a King, quaked; so all that are virtuous,
will own us who deny opinions, for them we deny; and there thou art, who live
in opinions; and as thou speak of some to strike at the root of many
infections and errors which are overspread amongst you; the Lord Jesus Christ
has raised up a Light in his children, that they are striking at your root,
and laying open the deceits, and bringing forth his own Work to his own praise:
And thou say, All men do worship God and Christ with one heart, and one
mouth, and after one manner, is not only decryed, but also dismissed our
congregations; and since the pale of Ecclesiastical Discipline is pulled down,
by whose coercive Laws all men were kept within the limit of the true Faith.
Here I charge thee to be a liar: Was the true Faith, and the Worship of God,
maintained by an outward Law? Thou Traitor, have they plucked down the true
Faith and the Woship of God? or your old Ceremonies? Thou seducer, how art thou
tormented by that which has plucked down the traditions! Tremble, for the hand
and sword of the Lord is against thee, as it was against them; thou dissembler
and envious one, the Law was not made for the Church, which is the pillar and
ground of truth, which worships God in the spirit; but for such envious persons
as thou art, who have cleared thy Church and Worship here, from the true Church
and Worship of God, to the view of all honest hearts, and thou art tormented,
because the freedom is given for the liberty of tender consciences, to worship
God his own way, even in spirit and in truth, as in John 4.23, 24 And thou
say, Since under the name and privilege of liberty of conscience
licentiousness of opinion has got footing: And this thou seems to father upon
the Magistrates.

We who are in the Light of Christ Jesus, which does exercise our consciences
toward God and man, all opinion^ and licentiousness we deny; therefore thy
mouth must be stopped, O sl^nderer, which sows dissension; for since the Lord
has opened the Magistrates understanding with the Light of Christ in them, the
same light does give freedom to the light in others consciences, which works
into tenderness of conscience, and teaches to exercise a good conscience
toward God and man; and such Magistrates do not make a Law over the
consciences of men, which thou seducer and brutish fellow would have a law
upon; but the law is against such as thou art; and so thou have showed thy self
to be in the frantic state, and heresy which thou talks on, and many such
speeches as thou have in thy Epistle to Sir R. Bindloss, as thou call him.
And whereas thou speak of your church and hope, your hope will perish, and
your church, and all who are in the Light, will be ashamed of your church.

And thou art he who art of the Devil, who do promote lies and untruths,
which is of thy Father the Devil, Joh. 8.4. but God is coming with his mighty
power to chain thee up, thy Father the Devil, the old Dragon, who is the Father
of lies, and thou art one of his servants who blinds the understandings of
the people who are in the unbelief, and seeks to poison their affections with
vanities and lying slanders. And in thy conclusion thou would not have him to
perish with the blind and giddy; but if he follow such as thou art, he does
follow both, and in the ditch both will perish together.

And thou speaks to him of walking in the paths of the just and righteous; and
such thou privily slanderest, and their way hate thou, who walk in the
steps of the wicked, and with those that forget God; and thou must be cut down
with the sword of the Almighty God; To that in thy Conscience I speak, when
thou art in the terror, remember me, for that in thy conscience will condemn
thee, and witness me* And Friend, to the light in thy conscience I speak, under
whose Name this Book goes; there is thy Teacher, if thou love it, which is
the Light of Christ; if thou love it, it will teach thee as thou goes^ up and
down, and show thee the way of the just; for it is just, it will condemn thee
if thou hate it. And when the Book of Conscience is opened, thou shall witness
what I speak, that it is truth to thy soul.

Pr. And whereas thou say, You do neither pretend to any such sublime and
eminent gifts, neither do you, nor ought you to depend upon any such immediate
revelation, but do use such means and helps which God in all ages has afforded
to people, viz. by study and industry in the Schools of the Prophets. Schools
(thou say) they had at Bethel, 2 King. 1, 3, 5. And Elisha 's College was
so full, that they enlarged it, 2 King. 6.1. 1 Samuel 14, 20. and upon the Hill
of God, 2 Samuel, 10.5, 10.

Rep. Here let all these Scriptures witness against thee, that thou art no true
Prophet, no Minister of Christ, who witnessed the end of the Prophets, and were
all taught of God, which thou deniest, that deniest immediate Revelation from
heaven. And here I charge thee in the presence of the living God, to be a liar
and false Prophet, and that thou art guided by the Father of lies. Where thou
tells of Elisha's College, and say that it was so full, that it was
enlarged, and bring in that place of Scripture to color over thy lies, 2
King. 6.1. Let that Scripture be a witness against thee, that thou art^ liar,
and a perverter of the Scriptures; thou full of all subtilties, blush for shame
thou liar; is there any mention of any College there? Or is there any mention
of the Schools of the Prophets where the Word of God was studied in those
places of Scripture beforementioned, as thou say? Let them witness against
thee: All the Prophets were taught of God, and there was no studying for what
they spoke at Naioth; see if they did not receive the Spirit of Prophecy, and
spoke by immediate Revelation, which thou denies, and knows not their manner of
teaching and learning, 1 Samuel 19, 20. to the end of the chap. And the Prophecy
came not in the old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost; and the Sc^ipture is of no private
interpretation, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. Here art thou proved a liar, and a perverter
of the Scripture, wresting it to thy own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16, Now call not
Truth railing, thou dissembler and enemy of all righteousness; the Scripture
turns edge against thee, and witnesses against thy deceit and filthiness,
whereby thou seeks to strangle the truth; but thou art found out to be among
the dogs, sorcerers and liars spoken of in Scripture, and art shut out of the
Kingdom of God, and art no Minister of Christ, Rev. 22.15, 18, 19. Thou Enemy
of God, how dare thou say that the Prophets studied the Word, when no
prophecy came by the will of man, but by the will of God? and no man knows
the Father, but the Son, neither knows any man the Son but the Father, and he
to whom is revealed, Ma^th. 11.27. And here thou deniest both the Father and
the Son, and the Prophets and Apostles, that deniest immediate revelation; for
they all bear witness against thee, and such as thou art; for the Apostle said,
Hope to the end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation
of Jesus Christ: And all the true Prophets witness that which thou deniest. And
here I have proved thee a liar, a false prophet, and a deceiver, perverting the
Scriptures, and they bear witness with me. And thou full of all guile and
deceit, the word of the Lord shall rise up in judgment against thee, and such
as thou art.

Something in reply to thy Discourse of the Spirit, as thou call it.
FRiend, the Spirit of the living God thou have not, for thou deniest immediate
Revelation from Heaven, who art discoursing of the Spirit; and here thou art
made manifest but to be in the pretense of the spirit, and knows nothing that
is revealed with the spirit. For thou that deniest immediate revelation from
Heaven, deniest the spirit of the living God: The Apostle says, Eye has not
seen, ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, the
things that God has prepared for them that love him; but God has revealed
them to us by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2, 9, 10. And here thou have denied immediate
revelation from Heaven; have denied the spirit of God, and manifested thy self
to be in the natural state: Therefore I command thee, and charge thee in the
presence of the living God to be silent, and to give over receiving of the
people.

2. Thou that denies immediate revelation from Heaven, thou denies the grace
that was to be brought unto the Saints, whose minds were to be girded up; which
grace was to be brought unto them at the revelation of Jesus Chrisr: And thi^
thou have denied again, as all people may see 1 Pet. 1.13. and here thou have
denied Jesus Christ, and his grace, who deniest immediate revelation, and art
in the fashion of the world, and a blasphemer.

3. Thou that have denied immediate revelation from heaven, have denied the
Spirit to pray withal; and so all thy prayers are hyyocrisie.

4. Thou that have denied immediate revelation from heaven, have denied the Son
of God; For none knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals
him, Mat. 11.27.

5 And thou that have denied immediate and miraculous revelation from Heaven,
have not denied the Son of God only, but the Father also: And thou that ha^t
not the Son of God, have not life.

Pr. The power is originally from God, as the Fountain, but conveyed through
the Ministry of man as the conduit, p. 90.

Rep. Paul an Apostle, not of man, nor by man, but by the will of God. And here
thou art proved to be a seducet, and thy Ministry contrary to his; here thy
spirit is tried. And thou slanders them who hear the voice of God, and art
scorning them, and in a deriding way calls it a deceitful echo; but we know
that God scorns the scornful, and has them in derision.

Pr. For any man to pretend immediate calling from God, without the Ministry of
man, is a new Gospel, distinct from Christ and his Apostles, and such can be no
other then ths dictates of seducing spirits, and doctrine of devils, p. 9.

Rep. Here I take all the children of Light to record, to prove and try thy
Spirit and Gospel to be of man, and whether thy Ministry and Gospel which thou
preachest (which is of man) be of God: For Paul said, that Gospel which he
preached, was not of man. And here again thou art contrary to the Apostle, and
thy spirit is tried to be a seducing spirit, and thy Doctrine to be of the
Devil, who deniest immediate revelation.

Pr. For thou say, That which is immediately from God, and without the
Ministry of man, is the doctrine of the Devil, and of the seducing spirits.

Rep. Paul said, the Gospel that he preached, he received it not of man, but by
the revelation of Jesus Christ, and here thou art contrary to the Apostle, and
thy self in the state thou speaks of: And Paul an Apostle not of man, nor by
man, but by God the Father: Thou impudent enemy of God and blasphemer, will thou say his doctrine was of the Devil, who denied man, as Gal. 1.1. who said,
Paul an Apostle, not of man, nor by man!

Pr. Therefore there is no need of any such qualifications, for the best of us
dare not stand to such sublime and eminent gifts of the spirit, or to any
immediate and extraordinary spiritual gifts. p. 93, 94.

Rep. Here thou preachest up that which is not qualified; for we do believe
you, that you dare not stand to such eminent gifts of the spirit; for we have
tried you, and know your spirits; how can you have the same gifts, who deny the
Son of God, and immediate, miraculous revelation, and say there is no need
of any such qualifications now? therefore does all your Teachers show forth
your railing and slanders; but these things we wave, for God will give you, you
liars, your portion, who has not the same knowledge and understanding that the
Apostles had, and here thou have shamed thy mother, that is adulterated from
the Apostles life.

Pr. Our gifts are from the spirit of God, though studied for with these means
that are outward and moral, etc.

Rep. Here I charge thee to be a Liar in the presence of God; the gift of God
is a free gift; it is not studied for, nor is it gotten by moral means; and if
it were studied for, and found in outward means, then it were not a free gift;
and here thou have made it manifest, that thou know not the gift of God; for
it is not him that wills, nor him that runs, but God that shows mercy. So thou
blasphemer, for shame blush.

Pr. No man can be wise without the spirit of wisdom, nor knowing without the
spirit of knowledge; so no man can pray as he ought, without the spirit of
prayer, p. 71.

Rep. In thy answer to the first query thou say, you do not attain the same
koowledge and understanding of the Gospel as the Apostles did; then if thou
have not the same knowledge and understanding, it is all deceit; for in thy own
words thou say, you cannot not pray without the spirit, knowledge and
understanding; and thou say, you do not attain the same knowledge and
understanding the Apostles had; then thou have not the same spirit of love to
pray withal; and thou say, you cannot pray without the spirit, yet thou
goes and tells people of a Gospel, and has not the same knowledge and
understanding the Apostles had; therefore thy knowledge is brutish, Jer.
10.14. Psalm. 92.6. Psalm, ^9.8.

Pr. That we may according to the Catholic Faith, worship one God in Trinity.

Rep. For these things which thou tells people of, there is no Scripture, as
Catholic Faith, and Trinity, and of three persons.

Pr. The second kind of the holy Spirits impressions on humane souls, page 78.

Rep. There is no Scripture which speaks of humane souls; for the soul thou
knows not, who art a murderer with thy Deity stuff, who would dit up the way
from God; but praises be to the living God, who has given his sons and
daughters eyes to see thee, and all your Deity stuff which you imitate, who are
whoredomed from God; but the Saints of the most high God do sing (over it and
you) halelujah to God, who witness their souls redeemed. And there is abundance
of stuff in that Book which thou calls the discourse of the Spirit, which is
not worth mentioning, and abundance of lies and slanders; but them we pass, as
knowing the author of lies from whence they come, is for destruction.

And in page 95 thou speaks of Timothy studying for his gift. Did he study for
his gift, or for the proving of it, and dividing of the word aright? but he did
not study for it, for the gift of God is a free-gift. And in another place thou
speaks of the blessing of God being upon your studies; but I say, the curse of
God is upon your studies, who have not the same knowledge and understanding
that the Apostles had, and so preaches another gospel.

Pr. And most blasphemously to profess and boast of an equality with God, p. 66.

Rep. Thy boasting is excluded without in thy generation, and thou art excluded
from the life and mind of the Apostle, who said, Let the same mind be in you,
that was also in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.5, 6. and this thou calls blasphemy, and
so thou have showed what spirit thou art of, contrary to the Apostle.

Pr. And for our new sect of Enthusiasts, had they the spirit of God, as they
pretend, abiding in them, and speaking in them, etc.

Rep. All pretenses and sects are denied, where the Spirit of God dwells,
though with thy generation such was ever called so. And that is thy own, who
has made a discourse of the Spirit; and here thou art clearly from them that
the Spirit of God spoke in, and did abide in them; which Spirit of God did
descend into their hearts; which Spirit God has given to every one to profit
withal; and the Spirit of the Father speaks in you, says Christ, Mat.
10.20. take no thought: and in many places thou art speaking of a study, and
blessing a study; Here thou art contrary to Christ, who says, Take no thought;
and art of the Devil. And here I charge thee to be one of them that Jeremy
speaks of, who speaks a vain divination of thine own heart.

Pr. As here Angels are Spirits, and the souls of men are Spirits, but God is
not a Spirit as they are Spirits. page, 57.

Rep. This is confusion; for Christ said God is a Spirit, and they that worship
him, must worship him in spirit; and there thou art raced out to be without the
doctrine of Christ.

Pr. It Is the very ground whereupon this last upstart crew of Quakers build all
their resolutions, and strange fanatic opinions, and heresies, even that which
they call the light within us, whereunto we must only give ear. page 112.

Rep. O thou impudent! God will make the an example, thou lying spirit, Is the
Light which Christ has enlighned every one withal that comes into the world
(a strange fanatic opinion) which one he loves it, and the other he hates it;
and he that hates it, it is condemnation. Here thou art against Christ and the
Apostles; for the Apostle did exhort the Saints to take heed unto the light
within them, until the day dawn and the day star arise in their hearts. O thou
Liar! did the Prophet call the truel light a deceit of the heart; or is the
light of God a false vision? Christ Jesus which does enlighten every one that
comes into the world, which is witnessed among the Quakers; and he that walks
in the Light shall have the Light of Life, and thou that hates this light
speaks a divination of thy own brain, and a lying imagination: and with this
Light of Christ thou shall be condemned, thou blasphemer, who calls the Light
of Christ heresy and fanatic opinions; but here thou do but fill up the
measure of thy Fathers, who calls this Light which is Christ in us, Heresy, p.
113.

To all you Readers of his Book, I speak to the Light of Christ in you, which
if you love it, it will bring you to weigh and comprehend his words, and if you
walk in it, you shall have the light of life, and you that hate it, it shall be
your Condemnation, when the book of Conscience is opened, you shall witness that
I speak the truth to every one of your souls.

R. Sherlock, thou bids them beware of false Prophets; and says the trial of
the spirit is the Word of God.

Rep. By the Word of God thou art tried, who are in the conceivings.

Again, thou speak of the Highpriests and Pharisees that councelled against
Christ to put him to Death.

Rep. So do you now: where he is made manifest, shevving your selvet to be in
the same generation.

Pr. It waas this spirrit also that stirred up Demetrius the Silver-smith, with
the rest of the Crafts-men, against St. Paul and his companions, because his
Profit and gain which he got by making silver shrines for Diana was in danger
to be lost; page 116.

Rep. The same spirit now being made manifest, it cries against your
Tradesmen, and Crafts-men, and your Diana, and your two great Schools where
you learn your trade, which are puddles of darkness; and the same spirit being
stirred up to cry against your profession, it sets you in an uproar now, as in
the Synagogues we do vvitness.

Pr. And the earth opened her mouth and swallowed Corah and all his Company, a
fair warning for Lay-persons. page 86.

Rep. The judgment did not come upon Corah because they was Lay-persons, but
it was for gainsaying the truth as thou do. For many of them that gave
forth the Scripture was plain men, Paul a Ten^-m^ker and most of the Apostles
Fishermen, Moses a keeper of Sheep; thou may call these Laymen which gave
forth the Scripture, who make a trade of their words.

And here thou have shevved that thou have not the knowledge and understanding
which the Apostles had, which thou confessedst thou had not; tberefore thou
art as a bruit beast, and there I leave thee to be condemned with the light
which thou call Heresy.

The Mittimus answered by which R. H, was sent Prisoner to Norwich Castle by
Ralph Woolmer Justice of the Peace, October 9, 1654
WHereas I am committed to Prison by a Mittimus; under the pretense of the
breach of the Law in these things therein expressed and laid to my charge: As
first, Openly to declare before all the people, That he that preached, viz. Mr.
John Money was a deluder of the people.

I answer, This accusation was false, for that word was not so spoken; but to
the Light of Christ in all your consciences I speak, and declare openly to all
people, that he that acts those things which Christ declared against, is no
Minister of Christ; all who are hirelings, as Christ says, John 10. who seek
for their gain from their quarters, as Isaiah says, Isa. 56.11. who bear rule
by their means, as Jeremiah says, Jer. 5.31. and who preach for hire, as Micah
says, Mic. 3.11. and all who are called of men Master, stand praying in the
Synagogues, and have the chiefest places in the Assembly, and lay heavy
burdens upon the people, which Christ cried woe against, Matt. 23. such are no
Ministers of Christ who act such things; for they who are the Ministers of
Christ, do abide in the Doctrine of Christ; to the Light of Christ I speak,
that with it John Money may see himself to be out of the Doctrine of Christ,
holding up those things that Christ cried woe against.

Another thing charged against me, is, That the people in a great number
gathered together about me, which might have proved of evil consequence, they
being the under-sort of people.

I answer, Wherever the gospel was preached, there were gatherings together,
and uproars and tumults, as you may read in the Scriptures Acts 19. and the
same gospel works the same effects now as in did then; and those whom thou
call the undersort of people, were all quiet, and were willing to hear the
word of the Lord, and did not offer any persecution or violence; but you who
profess your selves to be Saints, have proved your selves to be the undersort
of people, as by your consequence, have made it appear by your persecution, by
taking me out of the multitude who were willing to hear the Word of Truth, and
sent me to Bridewell, and then to prison, for declaring the Word of the Lord
freely, as I have received it, and so are persecutors, and not Saints; for the
Saints were ever persecuted, but never did persecute any.

Another thing charged against me, is, That being often asked my Name and
Country, would give no account.

I answer, The Lord has called me out of my own country, and from my Fathers
House, to declare his Word as I have received it; and I was freely declaring
the Word of the Lord, when opposingly thou came and asked my Name and
Country, which when I ceased speaking, I declared it unto thee before I went
out of the yard; and so there is no ground for this accusation but enmity.

Another thing charged against me: That being brought before me, he in contempt
of Magistracy (as I apprehended) would not once move his hat off his head.

I answer, O! for shame never profess to be a Magistrate, and make such
apprehendings the ground of thy Law, as to call this contempt of Magistracy not
to put off the hat! Where was ever such a thing mentioned in all the
Scriptures, by any who were set to rule over the people, to execute the Law of
God upon offenders? When did Moses (who was a Lawgiver and a Judge over all
Israel) command any such thing of any that came before him, to put off his hat?
or ever in all his Writings make mention of such a thing as contempt of
Magistracy, or imprison any that did not? But it was the transgression of the
Law of God to respect persons; for he that respects persons, commits sin; but
by your Law, those who cannot respect persons, and so fulfill the Law of God,
you say they contemn Magistracy, and are not to subject to Authority. Oh! for
shame never make Laws upon such outward traditions; for here you go from the
life of God, and from the law of God, and from the practice of all the holy men
of God which the Scripture speaks of: When did ever Joshua or Japhat (when the
people came before them) command any such thing, or mention it, to put off
their hats, and prison them if they would not, or tell them they contemned
Magistracy? When did ever Solomon (who was in the large Wisdom) command any
such thing of the people whom he was over, to put off their hats; or imprison
them if they would not? Show me one example amongst all the Heathenish
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Dukes, Rulers, or other Officers which the Scripture
speaks of, that ever commanded any of their people to put off their hats, and
imprison them if they would not? Did ever Pharaoh King of Egypt, whom Moses and
Aaron went before, command any such thing, and imprison them if they would not?
Did ever Nebuchadnezzar or Darius command any such thing of any? Did ever Herod
command any such thing, or imprison them that would not? Did ever Agrippa or
Festus command Paul to put off his hat when he came before them? Here you
outscrip all the Heathenish Kings and Rulers that the Scripture speaks off. He
contemns Authority who is a fighter or quarreller, or drunkard, or liar, or
swearer, and they who abuse themselves with mankind, but not they who
declare the Word of the Lord to such, to lead them from all such practices; but
such you account disturbers and contemners of Authority, who stand patiently
before you, because they will not put off their hats; for it is your pride that
is disturbed, and not Justice; for the Law of Justice is without respect of
persons, and does judge thee who does respect persons.

Another thing charged against me, is, That I said I dwelt in God, and where
the Lord called me.

I answer, Let shame and terror take hold upon you both Priests and
Magistrates, who make a Law in your wills to imprison those who come to vvitness
they dwell in God, as the Saints did: Paul said, In him we live, move, and have
our being; and said he had no certain dvvelling-place; and by this Law he
would be imprisoned, and he was persecuted and reviled, and suffered it, 1
Cor. 4. and John said, He that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16. and he that keeps his commandments dwells in him, and he in him:
And hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit that he has given us,
1 John 3.24. and by this Law John should be imprisoned, because he said he
dwelled in God; and all the Prophets and Apostles did go where the Lord called
them. O blush and be ashamed before the Lord to profess Christ and Justice, and
make a Law to imprison those who are obedient to the commands of God, and
dwell in God; that ever such a thing should be acted, or once named in your
Courts or Sessions, who profess your selves Christians. The Heathens have so
much light as to see your nakedness and folly. The Law was added because of
transgression, for the lawless and disob^dient, and not for the righteous who
dwell in God, and are obedient to him.

Another thing against me, is, Because I would not enter into Recogniz^nce to
appear at the next Sessions to answer the premises, being charged in his
Highness Name to the Gaol at Norwich.

I answer, The Lord God who is above all Names and Highnesses, in his Name and
Presence do I speak, and clear my conscience before him and all the World, who
has set me free from being bound to the will of any man; for he is com^ng in
his mighty power to bring down all Powers, Names, Highnesses and Laws, under
which the seed of God suffers. This is the word of the Lord to all you who in
your wills make laws, and by them cause to suffer the servants of the living
God; but by his Law which is perfect and changes not, both you and your Laws
are to be condemned.

The Discharge.
Norf. ss.
Whereas I sent you yesterday the body of Richard Hubberthorn, late of Yelland
i^ Lancashire, by the Constables of W^mondham: Now these are to require you
forthwith upon the receipt hereof, to set at liberty the said R. Hubberthorn,
provided he be charged with nothing else but his Mittimus from me laid to his
charge; and this shall be your warrant for so doing, October. 10. 1654. To the
Keepers of the Gaol in the County of Norf. in ehe City of Norwich.

Ralph Woolme^.



I being by the same Law and Power set at liberty, by which I was committed to
prison, and under the same hand and seal by which the Keepers of the gaol were
charged to keep me, by the same command, and under the same hand and seal are
the Keepers of the gaol commanded to set me at liberty; and by the same power
which charged these things against me in the Mittimus, by the same power am I
cleared and discharged of them in this Warrant, and nothing else being laid to
my charge, I desire to know by what Law I am yet kept prisoner, or what I have
to answer the next Sessions.

This was I moved of the Lord to declare and lay open, that all people in the
Light which Jesus Christ has enlightened them vvithall, may see the changeable
Laws made in the Will of man, which is changeable, being turned from that in
tht conscience, and from the Law of God which is perfect, and changes not,
and by all such Laws as are made in the Will of man, did ever the servants of
the Lord suffer, and do now; Let all who are lightened by Christ to know the
perfect Law, judge. R.H. Prisoner in Norwich-Castle*

A true testimony of the zeal of Oxford-Professors and Vniversity-men, who for
zeal persecute the servants of the living God, following the example of their
brethren of Cambridge.
Also the lewdness of those two great Mothers discovered, who have brought
forth so many Children, and never had Husband.
From Oxford the 26 day of the fourth Month. 1654.
A Brief and true testimony to all the people of the unjust and unlawful
proceedings of those called Justices in Oxford, against two Northern women, who
in obedience to the Lord, came to Oxford upon the 20 of the fourth Month, who
several days as they were moved of the Lord, passed through the Streets,
Colleges, and Steeple Houses, declaring the word of the Lord freely. And upon
the 15 day being the first day of the week, were moved to go to a
Steeple-house, and when the Priest had done, one of the women began to speak in
answer to what was delivered, and in exhortation to the people. Then two of the
justices cried out, Take her away, carry her to prison; and they took them
away, and carried them to prison called Buckerdo where only fellons and
persons are committed for murder, and other heinous offenses, are and secured.
And on the morrow being the second day of the week, some of the Justices asked
the Major, whether there was no meeting appointed; the Major said, No, he knew
no business they had that there should be a meeting: the Justice answered,
There is two Quakers committed to prison: the Major answered, Let those
Justices that committed them, if they have any Law against them, let them act
it upon them; if not set them free: and the said Major said further, That he
had nothing to say against them; but he said, that if they wanted food, money,
or raiment, he would take care that they should be supplied. so the Major left
them and went about his public employment, and would have no more to do in the
matter, nor act any thing against them; but did rather think it convenient to
leave it to them, to act according to their wills, and he free from it himself.
But upon further consideration, and for the more satisfaction, the Major went
up where the Justices were to examine the women; and that their cruelty might
the more be made manifest, the Vice Chancellor of the University was sent for
to come up before them, and then they proceeded to examination: and the first
Question propounded, was, What her name was, and the place of her abode? and
answer was made to both; then they asked, What their business was to Oxford?
they answered, They were commanded of the Lord to come thither; they asked,
What to do? they answered, To declare against sin and ungodliness, which they
lived in; as pride, covetousness, lust, and all uncleanness, self-righteousness
and all false worship, which both Priest and people lived in, contrary to the
commands of God. Then they asked them, How they knew they were called of God?
they said, They knew the voice of God, and that they were called of God.

And this is to be observed as a true testimony of these two servants of the
Lord; that they did neither beg nor steal, neither did they wrong nor violence
to any man; they coveted no man's silver, gold, nor apparel; but because they
obeyed the word of the Lord, and did his work faithfully, speaking the word of
the Lord in boldness against the deceits of the Priests and people, in the
Streets, in the Marketplace, in the Synagogues, and in the Colleges, clearing
and discharging their consciences in the Lords work and service, freely
administering that which they had freely received from the Lord, of whom they do
receive their reward; for their reward is with them, and the presence of the
Lord God does accompany them; and for their obedience to the Lord they receive
the shame of the world, as ever the servants of the Lord did; who were mocked,
buff^tted, and shamefully used, being tied together at John's College and
pumped, and kicked and buffetted, and thrust into a pool called Giles's pool,
so that they went into a remote place to wash the dirt off their clothes.

And here both Magistrates and Scholars, and they who pretend to be Ministers
of the Gospel, are the chiefest actors in this persecution, and so do make
themselves manifest to be in the same generation of the Scribes and Pharisees,
and Hypocrites, who were ever persecutors of the righteous seed, whomever it
has brought forth: and so they fill up the measure of their fathers iniquities.

Again, as concerning the Justices being assembled, the Vice Chancellor being
the chief actor in this persecution, said, That they blasphemed the name of
God, and did abuse the Spirit of God, and dishonor the grace of Christ; and
asked the women, Whether they did read the Scriptures; they answered, Yea, they
did; then they asked them, Whether they were not to be obedient to the power of
the Magistrate; they answered, They were obedient to the power of God, and to
the power as it was of God, their souls were subject unto it for cons^ience
sake.

Well, said the Vice Chancellor, you profane the word of God, and I fear you
know not God though you so much speak of him. And then they concluded, that
there was matter enough for their commitment and punishment, and wished the
women to withdraw, consenting that a paper should be drawn up for their being
whipped out of the City. And when the paper was drawn up, it was presented to
the Major to set his hand to it; but the said Major refused, and said; He was
not willing to do it; but one of the Justices said, That it was the privil^^ge
of the City, that if any vagrant were taken within the Franchises and liberties
of the City, the paper must be drawn up, That I such a one Major, have
committed such and such persons, and then it is to be sealed with the Office
seal; but the Major answered, That he would refuse both; then others said, who
were zealous, and thought that they had done God good service, That if he would
not, it should be done by them; and it was agreed upon, that they should be
soundly whipped, and that for the present, because of the tumult, be put into
the cage. And the next morning their wills was performed, though with much
unwillingness in the executioner. Many other particulars might be mentioned of
their sufferings, afflictions, and patience under reproachings, revilings,
slanders, and false accusations cast upon them, which is the portion of the
righteous in the world, as Christ said, Blessed are you when men shall revile
you, and persecute and speak all manner of evil against you falsely for my names
sake: rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so
persecuted they the Prophets that were before you, Mat. 5.11, 12. and says
Christ, They shall put you out of the synagogues; yea, the time comes, that
whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service, and these r^^^gs
will ^hey do unto you, because they know not the Father nor me, Joh. 16.2, 3, 4.

A^^ n^w both sons and daughters of the Lord comes to witness these things
fulfilled; and you Magistrates, Priests, and people do fulfill the Scriptures
against the servants of the living God, as you have done against these.

And herein is made manifest your tyranny and persecution, the chief Priest
being the chief actor in it; yet there was many in the City, that have so much
of the light of Christ made manifest in them, as to acknowledge them to be
servants of the living God, and to own them in their sufferings, and to confess
the appearance of Christ in them before men, and in love did accompany them out
of the City, and did own them in their persecution.

And this testimony is true to testify to all people, and to all the world,
the cruelty of unreasonable men, and that the Major had no hand in any of this
cruel usage and persecution.

The names of the two women who suffered persecution for righteousness sake,
is, Elizabeth Heavens, and Elizabeth Fletcher.

R.H.

Two Letters written by R. H. during his imprisonment in Norwich Castle.
From Norwich Castle.
TO all my dear friends whom the Lord by his eternal spirit is gathering out of
the World into the covenant of Life, to be of one heart and mind, and soul.
Wait all in that which is pure and invisible, that the pure teachings of Christ
you may know every one in particular which is without form and beauty to the
visible, that nothing you may receive but that which speaks from the eternal
moving of the living God; have salt in your selves to savor with all words;
you may discern which is without life and power, and standing single in that
which is pure of God, all such deny to be your teachers which have the words of
truth, but live not in the life and power of what they say; so in the power of
the living God wait in silence of all flesh, and here comes that which has
been fed to be famisht; and that which hungers after God, comes to receive
living nurture and nourishment from God. So in the invisible comes to feed upon
the bread of life which comes from heaven, and the tender plants will come to
grow up unto eternal life, and fruit will be brought forth unto God, dwelling
in that which is invisible; and all untimely fruit will wither and fade away;
but keeping low in the light, that in it your minds may be kept, discerning
will grow as the light does arise and spring up in you; you will discern all
airy spirits, who through great swelling words would allure and draw all the
minds of those who have escaped the common pollutions of the world, through the
knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ: so all dear friends, in that which is pure
wait, and in it watch against the nature which would keep you in bondage to
corruption, and out of the glorious liberty of the sons of God, and from the
glory of the first body, and out of the order and course of nature, and out of
the Covenant where all things are blessed: now in that which has convinced you
wait, that in it you may see that which is gone out, which is for the sword,
which is for the famine; the consumption determined is to pass through the
whole earth, for the earth must be plowed up, and the ground dressed before the
Lord can reap his pleasant fruit, which grows upon his own most pure Vine which
he himself has planted. Now there are plants which the Father has not planted
within the light, is seen and discerned from the Fathers plan^s: and here is
your teacher the light, which waiting in it, you will come to discern between
the clean and unclean; and here that which is of God you will know, and that
which is contrary unto him; and here is the true discovery, and here is
watching over one another souls in the light; for in the light true judgment
is given upon the deceit where it is, for in the light it i^ seen: Now every
one which is enlightened by Christ Jesus walk up to the light which you have
received, in obedience to the Lord, that he in you all may be glorified, and
you all who are faithful may enter into his joy. So the mighty God of power be
with you true and faithful ones, babes and children of the living God, that you
be not of them that turn back, but of that which go on to the saving of the
soul, and that as faithful witnesses to God, you may stand boldly against all
gainsayers, and against all the powers of darkness, that in the mighty power
of God you may dwell, and in it triumph over the World, and all the deceits of
it.

Your servant in the Lord Richard Hubberthorn Prisoner in Norwich Castle.

To my dear Brethren and Sisters whom the Lord is gathering in^o the Covenant
of Life.
DEar brethren and sisters in my Fathers love I dearly salut^ you, in the same
love and power which is immortal, b^ which we are raised from the dead, in it
to keep pure union an^ fellowship together, and in it to see one another, and
to know on^ another, and in it freely to open to one another that which from
the secrets of God is made manifest, that ye may all drink togethe^ of the pure
water of Life which nourishes the living soul, and so one soul we come all to
witness, and one bread which the F^ther freely gives, that by it his own may
be fed, the babes and children begotten by him; that which is sincere pure and
immortal, they feed upon, and they come to know where life is in the presence
of the pure living God; and as into the knowledge of him you come to grow, out
of the worlds nature you come to be separated, you come to receive of him the
earnest of that inheritance which the obedient and faithful comes to enjoy:
walk worthy of that eternal measure which you have received, for freely it is
given unto you from the bowels of the love of God; and it is hid from the
world, for the world is not worthy of it, nor of them who in it live; so as you
all abide the pure measure which is from God, you will come to see a clear
separation and redemption from that which is mortal and fades away, and from
that which cumbers your minds, and defiles the temple of the living God; which
temple ye are, as you abide in that which is pure, which does cleanse and keep
pure, and clear the mind and understanding, and the conscience, where the
mystery comes to be opened, and all things which has been hid comes to be made
manifest in the light, in soberness and patience all wait upon the living God,
that you may know his leadings and workings in every condition, and his power
in its several workings, that you may know and discern; and his voice you may
know when it speaks, that so every voice and spirit you may try (...) now, and
judge, by that which is eternal; and he^e in your strength you will come to
witness, and your growth out of the weakness, and so no more tossed to and fro
with windy doctrines, but a leading up into the life you will daily witness,
and a passing from all works; the righteousness which is of faith you will
witness wrought and established in you, by the eternal word which is in the
heart; in which if you do abide and continue, ye need not that any man teach
you, for from it have you learned where the teacher is, and where your
condemnation is, which turns from it to the witness in you. All I speak that
these things you may see and know, and read in the light, for from the life and
love of God these proceed to nourish the some life which in measure is begotten
in you; yea verily, the bowels, the tender bowels of the love of God is opened
toward you, that nothing may be hid from you which may add to your growth in
the life of God; as you have been learned and here taught by the pure word of
life, which from the father unto your souls has reached; so go and approving
your measures to the Lord, that all your enemies may be cleared; so in the pure
life of God the fleshly lusts which war against the soul, and all the traps and
snares you may see, and subtle temptations which draws the simple out of the
way, that into the pure wisdom of God you may every one come to grow, and in
his will you may all wait for counsel from him, that nothing may lead you but
the Lord, and then in all conditions you are led by the Lord; in them you will
find his presence, his power and peace, and joy you will find in your obedience
and faithfulness, and herein your strength you will find increased, and power
to conquer and reign over that which has been too strong for you, and led you
into captivity; but if your minds go from that which is pure, then your
strength is lost, and you are weak as other men; therefore in the light dwell,
and in the innocence; then you will be able to contend, and stand for the pure
truth of God delivered unto you against all serpents and vipers, and all the
enemies of God, and wait all upon God out of your own wills, that the workings
of his mighty power you may all know, which secretly works to bring forth his
own plant, h^s seed, his elect from the ends of the earth, and from the bondage
of corruption which the creatures groan under; but the redemption and
deliverance of the creatures is to be waited for, that the glorious liberty may
be witnessed which is free from corruption; and this the daughters and sons of
the living God is to wai^ for, abiding in the word of his grace; there is
nothing hid which shall not be made manifest, nor nothing promised but shall be
fulfilled to the seed, in whom all the promises of God is Yea and Amen for ever.

Your dear brother in that which from the world is hid, Richard Hubberthorn,
Prisoner in Norwich Castle.
Written the 19. day of the second Month, 1655.
Some Queries for you to answer who hold forth this testimony to the people,
That Christ is a Crea^ure, against those that w^^ness him to be the Son of God
by which the World was made; perfect God and Man, not created but begotten
according to the Scriptures.
1. What knowledge of Christ that is without a man, and how may a man do to lay
his foundation thereon without having him revealed in spirit within? seeing
that was held forth by some of you.

2. When was that Christ created which you say must as a Creature judge the
World? and if in Mary's time, who was judge of the World till then? or did he
judge the World as God till then, and as a Creature ever since?

3. Whether was not that Christ which you call a Creature, sent out of Heaven
from the Father, and did he send a Creature to redeem the Creation, and judge
it?

4. Is there any son of man (as a Redeemer) but he that came down from Heaven,
who fills heaven and earth? and was not he in heaven when he was in the flesh
with his Disciples, and do not the Saints partake of his flesh now upon earth?

5. Whether all they which did see that body which to the world appeared in
similitude of sinful flesh, did see the shape, and hear the voice of the Son of
God, or know the Man Christ Jesus?

6. And if Christ was in that body which he appeared to the World before the
World was (as was asserted by Joshua Sprigge) and he a creature, as you say,
and the World made by a creature, whether is not this to make the word of God
of none effect?

7. Was not the person of Christ Jesus before the World was? his nature and
glory the same that is now with the Father in heaven, or in what is it changed,
and when had the man Christ Jesus his beginning, if you can declare it?

8 Did the Son of man take upon him the nature of the first Adam as he is in
the fall, when he took part of flesh and blood? or do any know his nature who
are in the fall, and is not the flesh of Christ a mystery to all mankind till
he be revealed in spirit?

9 What that eating of the flesh of the Son of Man is, seeing none can have
eternal life in them but who eat it; is the eating of it the eating of a
creature? and does not all as they eat thereof, become one flesh and spirit
with him, in his life and knowledge? and if you have eat that flesh, and drunk
that blood, how is it you have the knowledge of God (which is life eternal) yet
to seek, seeing he that eats and drinks thereof can never thirst more, but
shall have the spring of life within? or can the eating of that flesh which is
of the nature of the first Adam give life eternal?

10 How is Christ the only begotten Son of God if he be a creature, or how can
God beget a creature? and if the whole person of Christ was not the before the
earthly Adam, how was the Creation made by him? or how can he be of the nature
of fallen Adam, and not earthly and defiled? or can God dwell in that nature,
but as it is purified and brought to the beginning, seeing the fullness of the
Godhead dwelt bodily in him? and is ^he flesh of Christ heavenly or earthly,
or is he Christ without his flesh?

11 Whose obedience and righteousness, and works, is that which is not Christ's?
and how is it that Christ makes any obedience, or righteousness accepted with
the Father which is not his own, and of his own working, this being one thing
affirmed by you?

12 How is it that a man can be in the spirit of God, and in the spirit of
Satan both at one instant? and does not the obeying the one deny the other? and
are not these the two Masters that no man can serve, which you seem to affirm
the contrary?

13 Whether did God create man with any thing of the Devil in him? and if not,
whether any can witness perfect redemption, so long as the Devil has any thing
in them, seeing some of you could not receive this testimony?

Now seeing we did answer many of your queries, and you would answer none to
us, so now answer these things in writing, that it may be manifest what
testimony it is you bear of Christ Jesus; for of our testimony of Christ Jesus
we are not ashamed before men.

A lover of your souls and eternal good, R. H.

The innocence of the righteous seen of God, cleared from all slanderous
tongues and false accusers.
IN answer to a printed paper set forth by Frederick Woodall, wherein he goes
about to render the truth of God odious, and by a cloak of maliciousness to
cover those lies which he has formerly published; but in the light of God, I
do him see and comprehend, and in it he is made manifest to all the children of
light to be no Minister of Christ; and to the light of Christ in all
consciences I speak, that in it they may read these things which from the light
is declared, that so occasion may be cut off from all who seek occasion against
the truth; that so peoples minds may not be incensed against the truth of God
by his refuge of lies set forth in his paper, called Natural and Spiritual
light distinguished.

But in the light of Christ, which is but one, which is not natural but
spiritual, is he seen to be natural, and his distinction to be natural; and so
in the light the natural man with his natural doctrine and natural distinction
is denied; and Christ Jesus we do witness, who is the true light which lights
every one that comes into the world, Joh. 1.9.

I am come a light into the world that whosoever believes in me should not
abide in darkness, Joh. 12.46. and this is the condemnation of the world, that
light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather then light, because
their deeds were evil, Joh. 3.19, 20, 21.

Now all you who are enlightened by Christ Jesus and can read in the light, and
with understanding, to you there is no occasion of stumbling; but all stumbling
and the occasion of it, is in them who hates the light and calls it natural,
which light is Christ: for him a witness I am against all such who deny Christ
to be the true light, which lights every one that comes into the world; who
is of the World called Richard Hubberthorn.

NOw as in answer to thee Frederick Wodall, who has put a stumbling block
before the eyes of many, by thy lies and deceit to keep them from receiving the
pure truth of God, which the Lord is now spreading abroad and making manifest
to gather to himself his own from the mouths of all false shepherds, that Jesus
Christ the true shepherd they may come to witness, who is the true light, and
is not natural as thou woulds^ make him to be; nor that light in the conscience
is not natural, which Jesus Christ has enlightened every one withal; but all
who in it dwell shall witness against thee, and thy malicious spirit, who has
uttered forth thy bitterness and venom against those who walk in the light;
and who witness the truth of God in the life and power of it, and against all
false accusers. In the beginning of thy Epistle to the Reader thy enmity thou
utterest forth against those ^ho for the name of Christ do bear his reproach in
the world, in whom the Scripture is fulfilled, which says, they shall speak
all manner of evil of you falsely for my name sake; and thou art one of them
who art speaking evil and encouraging others to speak evil against those, whom
thou and the rest of the scorners call Quakers, and calls them a nest of
stinging Wasps, and says that they have leavened a dear brother and sister of
thine, and made them Prosylites unto them.

I answ. This accusation is returned back again upon thy own head; for the
poison of asps is found under thy tongue, and forth of the venom does proceed,
as all who has understanding may see and discern, and those whom thou call
thy dear brother and sister are made able in the light to testify against thee
and thy lie, and to witness that they are brought out of the Prosylites
condition, and out of the leaven of the false Prophets and false teachers,
which they were in so long as they followed thy doctrine; but now that doctrine
they do see which does leaven and draw peoples minds to the light of Christ
within them, and so makes Prosylites and children of the Devil; but in the
light of Christ art thou and all that uphold that doctrine, seen and denied.

In the first page of thy paper thou would make people believe that thou
make no defense against my reply to thy answers, and yet in the second page
thou reply against mine, concerning the tenth Querie, and chargest me in
reputing thee the author or father of a lie, in returning to thee again thy own
words in answer to the tenth Querie which words are these, It is intolerable
that Christ should be the Prince of Peace.

I answer, Let every one that has a desire to know whether this be so, read
thy own words in thy printed Paper in thy answer to the tenth Querie, in the
twelfth page, whether these be not thy own words; the tenth is intolerable and
the rest of thy words which are in answer to that Querie are full of confusion,
and all wdo reads them may see it; so I leave thee to be judged of all, and
condemned of all, who in the light of Christ do see thy confusion which
proceeds out of thy own mouth.

Priest. It Is a privilege we have cause to bless God for every day, viz. that
unto us are committed the Oracles of God.

Answ. Here I charge thee to prove when ever the Oracles of God was committed
unto thee, or to the Priests of England: unto the Jews they were committed
which was before Christ came in the flesh; and they who had the oracles of God
committed unto them did seek to kill and crucify the Son of God, as you the
Priests of England, who go in the way of Cain, and after the error of Balaam,
do now seek to destroy the Son of God, where he is made manifest, and the
oracles of God were never committed unto you, nor the ministration of the
Gospel; but in the steps of those you are found, who ever persecuted the
righteous seed of God, as you have made it manifest in this generation. And
again thou art bringing scriptures to prove the letter to be the word of God:
which Scriptures will witness against thee; for the Scripture says that God is
the Word, Joh. 1.1. and thou art diminishing from some, and adding to others,
and perverting the Scriptures to thy own ends; thou bringst that scripture in
Titus 2.10, 11, 12, 13. and these words thou speak from them, this is the
grace of God bringing salvation; when the Apostle says, For the grace of God
that brings salvation has appeared to all men, teaching us that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts we should live soberly, righteously and godly in
this present world: and here though thou bring this scripture in thy paper,
yet it thou can not own, that the grace of God which brings salvation to
all men, has appeared, who denies Christ to have enlightened every one that
comes into the world.

Pr. This Word for the manner of delivery unto us, is called Scripture, and we
are commanded to search it, Joh. 4.39. and laid under the promise of blessing
in that way, Psalm. 1.2.

Answ. Here thou have numbered thy self amongst those whom Christ commanded to
search the Scriptures, and amongst them shall thou be numbered, and in that
scripture thou may read thy condition and the rest of the Priests with thee,
as Joh. 5.37.38.39 40. ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen
his shape, and ye have not his word abiding in you; for whom he has sent ye
believe him not, search the scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal
life, and they are they which testify of me, and ye will not come to me that
ye might have life: now all you who are in the same condition, the same command
is unto you. But there is no promise of blessing promised unto you in that way,
no more then was to them which was so commanded, but never prove your selves
Ministers of Christ, for they were no Ministers of Christ that this was spoken
unto, nor Saints, but such as received honor one of another as you do who are
in that generation. And they were such as did not believe that which they did
profess, Moses and the Prophets; but Christ tells them plainly they did not
believe Moses nor his writings; and al you no wthat profess Christ, you cannot
believe Christ's words, who says, He is the true light which does enlighten
every one that comes into the world. Therefore out of the doctrine of Christ
you are shut, and out of the Scriptures which you do profess; for the Sons life
which witnesses the Scriptures, you deny, and are strangers unto; He that has
an ear to hear, let him hear.

Pr. Satan has from the beginning envied a people this privilege, and says,
at Christ's first coming the commandments of God was made of none effect
through tradition, Mat. 15.6. and says, at Christ's second coming the
commandments of God will be of none effect through revelation.

Answ. Here thou have uttered forth words without knowledge, but it is that thy
ignorance and folly may be laid open unto all; for it was they that made the
commandments of God of none effect through tradition, which precryed standing
in the Synagogues, had the chiefest places in the assemblies, and was called of
men Master; and in these steps art thou and the rest of the Pries^s in England,
who say the same things; for at Christ's first coming he cried woe against such,
and the same Christ cries woe against the same things now; and whereas thou
say that at ^hrists second coming the commandments of God will be of none
effect through revelation; Here I charge thee to be a blasphemer, and do
speak that thou have no scripture for, and contrary to the scriptures, and
contrary to the Apostles doctrine; for Paul did witness Christ's second coming,
which was in the spirit, as in Gallatians 2. and 2. and says, I went up by
revelation and communicated unto them that Gospel which I preached amongst the
Gentiles; and he did witness the Son of God revealed in him, and all the
Apostles, who did witness him to be come again to them the second time, to
reveal the will of the Father unto them; this did not make the commandments of
God to be of none effect, and the same Christ we do witness to be come, and
has revealed the Fathers will unto us; for no man knows the Father but the
Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him; this we do witness, eternal living
praises to him for evermore; and by his revealing his Son in us, his
commandments are fulfilled; and so all such we do deny, that say by the
revelation at the second coming of Christ they shall be made of none effect.

Pr. Certainly many Old Testament Saints saw into the glory and liberty of New
Testament times, yet durst not cease from that worship which was burdensome,
worldly and carnal, till the Lord did come in person and call them out.

Answ. Here I do charge thee to prove where ever any of the Saints before
Christ was made manifest in the flesh, did continue in that worship which they
saw to be burdensome, worldly and carnal, but did declare against all false
worship, sacrifices, and services, which was worldly and carnal, and against
all who drew near to God with their mouths, whose hearts was from God, and
against all idolatrous worships which were carnal, and did cast off every
burden, as is witn^ssed in the Prophets which were before Christ came in the
flesh; and here all the Prophets and holy men of God shall witness against
thee, as Isaiah, Jeremiah, David, Ezekiel, Micah, and the rest who worshipped
God; and their worship was not carnal nor worldly, neither did Christ come in
person to call them out of their worship, for they had finished their
testimony, before Christ came in the flesh; who did fulfill their testimony, and
did bear witness unto it, that it was of God, and did declare all that were out
of that worship which the Saints were in, who worshipped God before Christ came
in the flesh, who was the end of the Law and the end of the Prophets, let him
that has understanding read these things: now here does Christ, the Saints,
and the Scriptures all bear witness against thee and thy doctrine, which would
make people believe that the Prophets and holy men of God, who were before
Christ came in the flesh, did live and continue in that worship which was
burdensome, worldly, and carnal, which here is proved against thee by Christ,
the Saints, and the Scriptures that shame may cover thy face, and that thy
mouth may be stopped, and that the simple may know the truth, for whose sakes
this is given forth.

Pr. So New Testament Saints may see into that liberty and glory which is to be
revealed, but let them not go forth before the time, but abide in New Testament
worship till the Lord come in person and call them out, and then they shall go
out all together, Mat. 24.27. It is indeed a worthy life which we live in the
spirit, but it is an unworthy deceit, that except we live out of the Gospel we
cannot live in the Spirit.

Answ. O be ashamed for ever to confess thy self a Minister of Christ and of
the Gospel: why do thou preach at all, or what art thou a Minister of, if
that Christ be yet to be revealed or uncome in person? which thou hold forth
to the people; and how many souls have thou led into that pit of darkness and
blindness, as to believe that Christ is yet to come in person? he that
confesses not Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh is an Antichrist and he
that preaches any other Gospel or any other Christ then that which did come in
the flesh, and was made manifest in the Saints, and is now made manifest and
witnessed to be come in the flesh, let him be accursed; now the Scripture which
thou bringst in Mat. 24.27. proves no such thing as another Christ coming in
person; for the same Scripture we do witness to be fulfilled in us, and in his
light do we see all those who are in the desert, and who are in the secret
chambers, whom they go out unto, who turn from the light of Christ within them,
to hearken unto those who cannot witness the com^ng of the son of man, as the
lightning from the East shines even unto the West, but talks of an expectation
of the appearance of Christ in person, and professed to be Ministers of that
Christ which yet is to come in person; and here thou art rased out from the
Apostles doctrine who did not preach any other Christ but that which was come and
made manifest, and did never tell of Christ's second coming in person, nor of
his personal reign; and thou that tells of such a deceit, that except ye live
out of the Gospel, ye cannot live in the Spirit; here thy deceit is indeed made
manifest, and thy life, who would separate the Gospel from the Spirit: But
against that life and deceit we bear witness, who by this Spirit do, and
according to the Gospel. Again, thou art teaching people how to set up Popery,
as follows.

Priest. If they will prove the Pope supreme Monarch, this way it may be done;
God made two Lights, the greater to rule the day, viz. the Pope; the lesser to
rule the night, viz. the Emperor.

Ans. Here thou have professed thy self long to be a Teacher and preached
against Popery, and have not been ashamed to accuse others of it, who stand
clear in the truth of God, witnessing against all such ways of da^kness; but
now thou art here found teaching people how to make the Pope supreme Monarch,
by saying, God made two Lights, the greater to rule the day, viz. the Pope, the
lesser to rule the night, viz the Emperor; and so makes the Pope and Emperor to
be those two Lights: Here I charge thee to prove wherever the Ministers of
Christ taught any such thing to the people, or did so contemn and despise the
Ordinances of Heaven, and the Lights which God made to rule the day and the
night, which thou compares to carnal men like thy self: And here thou have
perverted the Scriptures, and made thy folly and deceit manifest to all, that
they that can but read in the natural Heavens, will condemn thee, and out of
thy own mouth thou art condemned; for in thy paper thou have said, That which
is not Scriptural, is not spiritual: Now for that which thou have said, thou
have no Scripture to prove it, and the Scripture will testify against thee;
and the Sun and the Moon which are in their course in the Firmament of Heaven,
will testify against thee; and so these we do deny, and thy doctrine, with the
Pope and his Supreme Monarch, and all who worship the Host of Heaven, we deny,
being clear from their doctrine and deceit.

Priest. If they will establish implicit faith, thus it may be done, Job 1.14.
The Oxen were plowing, and the Asses feeding besides them; (i. e. the Priests
were preaching, and the people believing, this is to crucify the Word of God.)

Here thou art proved and made manifest to be a false Teacher, who art teaching
people how to establish implicit faith; and to blind the eyes of people, thou
bring that Scripture Job 1.14. when as there is no such word as implicit
faith spoken of there; nor in the Scripture thou finds no such word; nor did
ever any of the Ministers of God teach people how to establish any such thing;
and those priests who preach that, and that people which believe it, do make
the Word of God of none effect through tradition.

Priest. Thou art charging and accusing some to hold forth the mystery of
iniquity in principles, and to affirm a community of persons and things.

Ans. The mystery of iniquity we know, and them in whom it works in all
deceivableness of unrighteousness; and from it and its workings we are
separated by Christ Jesus, and in his Light do see and comprehend its workings
in the children of disobedience; and all vile and unclean persons, who are in
the lusts of uncleanness, and in the mystery of iniquity, and all things which
are separated from the light, we have no union nor fellowship with; and all
these practices we do deny, which are unclean, which is acted contrary to the
light, which is pure, in which we are called (not unto uncleanness, but) unto
holiness: And to this God is our Witness, and our Consciences also bears us
witness against all false accusers. So I charge thee who has put forth this
accusation, to turn thy mind to the light of Christ in thy conscience, and with
it thou may see in thy self the ground where this mystery of iniquity works;
and thou may see in thy self that which has unity, with that which is unclean,
the lusts of uncleanness, inordinate affections, and evil concupiscence; the
ground which the mystery of iniquity works in, is yet standing in thee; and
so of the same things of which thou accuses others, art thou found guilty,
which is for condemnation with the light.

Priest. It Is pity Christ should be the foundation, and wood, hey, stubble
built thereupon; yet this is possible, 1 Cor. 3.15.

Ans. Here thou have perverted Paul's words, and speaks thy own invention
contrary to the Scripture; for Paul did not say, it is pity Christ should be the
foundation, but said, other foundations can no man lay, than what is laid,
which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. Now if any man build upon this foundation,
gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, every man's Work shall be
made manifest: Now in the Light art thou made manifest, that Christ is not thy
foundation, who takes Paul's words out of their place, who witnessed Christ to
be the foundation; but thou art found building upon this foundation, gold,
silver, hay, stubble, and making a refuge of lies, which are for the fire,
whose work is to be burned in the day of the Lord.

Priest. Thou say, Wisdom is grown up to perfection amongst that people
called Quakers.

Ans. In the Light of Christ we dwell, which comprehends thy Wisdom, which is
earthly, sensual and devilish, and from that Wisdom these things published
forth in thy paper do proceed, which is full of lies and confusion; but in the
Light of Christ made manifest in those thou calls Quakers, art thou seen to be
in that Wisdom which is not perfect; and so thee and thy Word we do deny, which
is for condemation with the Light, which is contrary to thy earthly Wisdom.

Priest. Thou Priest Woodall art accusing me for numbering thee amongst those
who are guilty of preaching for carnal things, who reap carnal things; and this
thou makes thy defense, saying, This is my case, More then seven years I have
served in the Gospel, where I am receiving what a people freely give for my
Family, reproach in outward things, refusing a considerable settled maintenance
elsewhere.

Ans. Such as thou sowest, such shall thou reap; and all they who have given
thee money for preaching such things as thou have here published forth in
print, they have given thee money for that which is not bread, and so bought
the carnal with the carnal; but their souls are yet made merchandise of; and
that unjust gain which thou have received this seven years from that people,
will rise up in judgment against thee, who have not only used it for thy
necessity and support in outward things which were needful for the use of the
body, but have spent it upon thy lust and pride in thy family, spending more in
lust and pride, and gay apparel, than those whom thou receivest the gift from:
And thou who have professed thy self to be a servant to that people, and they
having given thee Wages so long for that which did not profit them, thou after
the manner of the Gentiles has exercised Authority and Lordship over them; and
whereas thou should be their hired servant, they call thee Master; thou
which should be the least of all amongst them, art greatest of all, exceeding
them all in pride and high-mindedness, in ease, in pleasures, in idleness and
fullness of bread; but as the Lord does open the eyes of those whom thou have
kept in blindness and ignorance, they will come to see thee and thy doctrine to
be contrary unto the Gospel of Christ, as they may plainly see and read in
those things which thou have published forth in print, which is serviceable
unto all who has understanding, that thy confusion and folly, and lies against
the Truth, against Christ, against the Saints, and against the Scriptures they
may see, which has been long hid, but now is made manifest in the Light unto
all who are come to know the free teachings of God, who will no more give thee
money for speaking a divination of thy own brain, and not from the mouth of the
Lord.

Priest. Who knows not that Tithes and Glebes were under that dispensation by
Divine Law ordained for the maintenance of the Priests?

Ans. Here thou would make people believe that thou denies tithes, which was
for the maintenance of the Priests under the Law: But as for the glebes which
thou speaks of, there was never any such thing ordained in the Law; here thou
have made it appear that thou art ignorant of that which was ordained for the
Priests maintenance under that dispensation; for they had no inheritance nor
glebe lands to maintain them, as some of the priests of England have; and yet
those priests in England which do receive tithes, and so upholds that which
thou seems to deny, yet thou owns them as thy brethren, and to be Ministers of
the gospel: And here your deceit is so plainly made manifest, that you accuse
one another, and condemn one another, all your hearts being exercised with
covetous practices, preaching for filthy lucre, all being agreed together to
persecute, revile and slander the pure truth of God where it is made manifest
in his servants to declare against all your deceits, that out of your snares
the righteous seed of God may be delivered, to testify against you and your
Ministry, under which the Seed of God is kept in bondage.

Priest. Reader, I have done; our Heavenly Father takes sleeping Disciples at
the best, Matthew. 26.40.

Ans. Here thou have uttered forth a lie, that all may plainly see; who says
thou have done, and in the next words says, Our Heavenly Father takes
sleeping Disciples at the best: Now from this Scripture in Matthew. 26.40. thy
words are proved to be false; for in that condition the Disciples were then in,
they were not at the best, who could not watch with Christ one hour; and the
Comforter was not then come, which afterward they did witness, by travel, and
labor, and fasting, and prayer, and watching day and night they did witness;
and we who do witness the same condition now, do testify against thee, and all
who make lies of the Apostles, who did witness Jesus Christ in truth and
uprightness of heart; and the same Christ do we witness, and do freely preach
him to every Nation, being made manifest to that of God in every ones
conscience to be witnessed.

Now as my first Query is printed in thy paper, the latter part of it I deny,
which was not given forth, nor spoken so by me^ In thine it is written thus:
How can that be said to be a natural Light, which witnesses unto God, and
against the things of the Spirit of God? Which is false. But in mine it is
written thus: How can that be said to be a natural Light, which witnesses unto
God in that which is holy, and against the natural inclinations of fallen man,
seeing the Scripture says, the natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.14? Now as every one has a desire to know the truth
of these things, that the occasion of stumbling may be taken away, they may
read the Query as it was given forth from me in page 16. of that printed paper,
called, David's Enemies discovered, which was put forth in print to be seen as
it was there written, before Woodals paper (which is now in print) was
given forth: And this I have given forth, that the truth may be cleared,
ovvning that which did proceed from me, and denying that which is not mine:
And as for Frederick Woodals Answers to the Queries, they are replied unto in
the paper abovementioned, and to the rest of his printed paper an answer is
herein returned, that he may not boast in his folly, but be ashamed and repent.

Now as in answer to that in the latter end of thy book, which thou directs
the Reader unto, thou seeing that thou have holden forth these things. which
thou can not prove, as the first Adam to be the Fountain of all natural good,
and so to blind the eyes of people that they may not see thy lie; and says,
thou means not primitively; and here thou speaks one thing, and means another;
but this covering is too n^rrow for thee, and under it thou can not hide thy
self, but thy nakedness and shame appears to all whose eyes are opened, and by
them thou art seen.

And whereas thou would^^ cover over thy shame of that thou have formerly
spoken in telling of two Images, the Image of God, and the Image of Christ, and
that the first was natural, and the second spiritual; and here thou speaks
contrary to the Scriptures, which says, he is the express Image of the Father:
And herein all who do witness the Scriptures to be true, must witness against
thee who speaks contrary to the Scr^ptures; and now to blind peoples eyes, thou
tells them thou understands it thus: Adam was made after the Image of God, God
the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit; Come, let us make man, not after our, not
my Image, To this I answer, Here thou have added to the Scripture, for God did
not say, Not my Image, as thou do charge him to say; for the Scripture says,
God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him, as Genesis
1.27. And thou calls the image in which Adam was created, the essential image,
and the image of Christ thou calls a personal image; and hereby them who dwell
in the Light, thou art seen out of the substance, in the images, making to thy
self images and likenesses from thy imaginations; but in them thou can not
know God and Christ, nor the image of God in which Adam was created in
innocence; and there is no such word in Scripture as Essential image; and here
thou go about to make three images, and so amongst the image-makers thou
art, who art out of Gods commands, and there thou may read thy self.

But now the Lord God is gathering his own seed by his eternal light, out of
all images and likenesses, to be conformed to the image of the Son, and to bear
his image who is invisible, which all the imaginers cannot enter into, who
stumble at the Light; but all such are seen by the children of the Light, and
denied; for now do they witness from the Lord the day of Redemption, yea
plenteous Redemption is now witnessed by them who dwell in the Light which
comprehends the World, and out of the World, and out of the Worlds teachings,
and out of the Worlds ways, and out of the Worlds Worships, into the pure
teachings of God, and into the Covenant, where they know God, and are taught of
him; and no more can they be led by the blind guides, for their eyes are opened
which were blind, and now in the Light of Christ the Way is seen which leads
unto God the Father of Light, and in it all false Prophets and false Teachers
they do see, and by them cannot be deceived, who come in sheeps clothing, and
are beautiful outwardly, decked with the Saints words, but inwardly ravening
Wolves. And now their covering comes to be taken of, which was none of their
own; and now the Wolf appears ravening against the Lambs of God; for the day
has made them manifest, and of them the Lambs of God are aware, and in
innocence are preserved, and in the pure Wisdom, which is not of this World, in
it they see and comprehend the Serpents Wisdom, subtilty, craftiness and
snares, which for the righteous seed are laid, but in the Eternal Light made
manifest to the seed; a way is seen out of them all, and by the Eternal Power
of the pure living God of life, deliverance out of them all is witnessed;
Eternal, pure, living praises to him for evermore.

Given forth from the love of God to the souls of those who desire to know the
truth, to take away all stumblings, and cut off all occasions from all minds,
that in the Light of Gheist the truth they may see to be clear from all
slanders and false accusations which from the unclean spirits proceeds, which
goes out of the mouth of the Dragon to devour the innocent; but from the
Dragon and all his Floods the innocent are preserved:

Given forth from him who a witness stands for the truth of God against all
deceit, R. H.
Written from Mondlesham in Suffolk, the 29. of the 3. Month, 1655.
The distance between Flesh and Spirit, etc.
THis is the Word of the Lord to all people, as I am moved of the Lord to clear
the scandals and false accusations cast upon the righteous seed; and as the
seed of God in all generations have suffered reproaches from the World, so now
the same seed where it is brought forth, suffers by this generation of evil
doers, and is afflicted and tormented, and shamefully accused now in England,
whom you call Quakers: And you say we deny all the Ordinances of Christ; and
you say we do not honor the Magistr^tes, nor are subject unto Authority, but
are disturbers and breakers of the peace, which is false.

The first accusation; You say we deny Repentance.

Ans. And this is false; for Repentance is the gift of God, and this gift we
have received, and his free grace, which teaches us to deny all ungodliness
and worldly lusts, Tit.2.12. and by repentance we have forsaken sin as it was
discovered to us by the Light of Christ which he has enlightened us withal,
and so the mercies of God we have found according to his promise, and are sent
of the Lord to preach Repentance to all people, who would have all men come to
repentance, and to the acknowledgement of the truth, that they might be saved,
2 Timothy 2.25. And with the Word of the Lord, as they are moved of the Lord, do
many go now with this Doctrine into your streets, into your markets, into your
synagogues, and into your cities, to call you to repentance, before the wrath
of the Lord come upon you, and both sons and daughters now are sent to preach
this Doctrine amongst you from the Lord; and for obeying the Lord herein, are
they reviled by you, and persecuted and falsely accused: And th^s is left for a
Testimony against you from the Lord, and shall bear witness against you.

The second Accusation is, That we deny Baptism.

Ans. The Baptism of Christ we own, which all the Saints were baptized into,
which was by one spirit into one body, as in 1 Cor. 12.13. and by this baptism
we do witness the washing away of sin, not only the washing away the filth of
the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God: But sprinkling of
Infants we deny, which there is no Scripture for. And all you who from your
imagination do imitate John's Baptism, and so go into the water, and say you
are believers, and have right to the Ordinances of Christ; but you to be
believers we deny, who are not yet come to repentance; and your Water Baptism,
which is but an imitation from the letter; for the Lord never sent you forth,
nor commanded you either to preach or baptize, as they did whom you go about
to imitate, who are not yet come to repentance, nor to the first principle of
the doctrine of Christ, nor to own the light of Christ in your consciences,
which should exercise them, and lead you to vvait upon God, and lead you to
repentance: And the Faith of believers you know not; for the mystery of Faith
is held in a pure conscience, 1 Timothy 3.9. which you cannot vvitness, which
hates the Light of Christ, which should exercise your consciences; and so your
minds and consciences are defiled, and with that mind you talk of faith, and
of the Ordinances of Christ, and of Water Baptism, which serves unto us for a
figure, as the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 3 21. And Jesus Christ was baptized by
John by water, that he might fulfill all righteousness, Mat. 3.15. And John was
a Prophet, and Christ is the end of the Prophets; and John's baptism was but a
figure; for he said he did but baptize with water; but Christ is the end of all
figures, types and shadows, and did fulfill them; for he fulfilled all
righteousness, and John's Ministry, and John's baptism; and he that fulfilled all
righteousness, the same baptizeth, which John did bear witness unto, and all
men came unto him, Joh. 3 16, but he baptized none with water. But this is a
mystery to thy dark mind, which knows not the baptism of Christ, nor John's
doctrine, nor Jesus Christ the true Light, which enlighteneth every one that
comes into the world, which John bore witness unto, John 1.9. but goes to
hold up the types and figures which Christ came to fulfill, and so deniest
Christ to be come in the flesh to fulfill all righteousness, and so thou art an
Antichrist, who holds up the figures which Christ came to fulfill; and so thou
denies the Scriptures and Christ, who said he came to fulfill all righteousness;
and the Saints baptism thou art ignorant of, which is, by one Spirit into one
body, 1 Cor. 12.13. And Paul who was a Minister of Christ, and preached the
Gospel, did bring many into this baptism, and he was not sent to baptize with
water, but to preach the Gospel; and all the Churches which he preached unto,
came to witness Christ's baptism with the Holy Ghost and with fire, by one
Spirit into one body, and were baptized into Christ who was the head of the
body, Romans 6.3. and by this baptism we are thus washed from all filthiness of
flesh and Spirit; but your imitated baptism of water we deny, who live in your
filthiness of flesh and spirit, whose minds and consciences are defiled; but
the baptism of Christ we own, which purifies our consciences from dead Works,
and keeps our minds undefiled by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of
the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3 5.

The third accusation is, That we deny the Sacrament, which is an Ordinance of
Christ.

Ans. For the word Sacrament, there is no such Scripture which speaks of a
Sacrament; therefore we do deny you and your Sacrament, and your Bread and
Wine, which is carnal, and feed^ the carnal which must die, and your communion
is in that which is carnal, in the creatures, and Drunkards and Swearers have
fellowship together with you in those things; and all liars, covetous ones,
profane and idolatrous ones, eats of the bread, and drinks of the cup, and
sits at the Table which is the Table of Devils: And this is your Sacrament,
which stands without in carnal bread and wine, and feeds the carnal, which
oppresses and murders the Seed of God within you; and you say, Christ has
left that as an Ordinance for you to practice, which is false, which we deny;
but the Supper of the Lord we own: The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it
not the communion of the blood of Christ? And the bread which we break, is it
not the communion of the body of Christ? for we being many, are one bread, for
we are all partakers of that one bread, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17, 21, 22. And this is
the bread which came down from Heaven; he that eats thereof, shall never dye:
And this Bread we all eat of, and this cup we all drink of, and this is that
which is practiced and commanded in the Church of Christ; and so we sit at the
Table of Christ, and cannot sit nor have fellowship with the Table of Devils:
And they who sit at your Table, and your Sacrament, and eat of your Bread, and
drink of your Wine, they dye, for it is not the bread of life; and you who eat
and drink it, do not discern the Lord's body; for it is spiritual, and your
Sacrament is carnal; and so you eat and drink damnation to your selves, not
discerning the Lords body, feeding the carnal with the carnal; and so we deny
your Sacrament to be any Ordinance of Christ, or the Supper of Christ, 1 Cor.
11.29.

The fourth Accusation is, That we deny the resurrection of the Body.

Ans. And that is false; for at the sound of the last Trumpet the dead shall be
raised; they that have done good shall arise to the resurrection of life; they
that have done evil, to the resurrection of condemnation. And we preach Christ
risen from the dead; and if the dead rise not, then is our preaching vain, and
your faith is also in vain, and you are yet in your sins, who know not this
resurrection, Christ risen from the dead in you, 1 Cor. 15.14, 15, 16, 17. But
some man will say, How are the dead raised? and with what bodies do they come?
1. Cor. 15.35. Thou fool, that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body
that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain,
but God gives it a body as it pleases him, and to every seed his own body.
There is also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial; and the glory of the
celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another; there is one
glory of the Sun, another glory of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars,
for one star differs from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of
the dead; it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in
dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power;
it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15.35.36, 37,
38. Now this I say unto you all, That flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of G^d, neither does corruption inherit incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.50, 51,
52. But this is to you all a mystery, who are in the first nature, whose
understandings are not enlightened by the light of Christ, who live in your
forms, notions, and professions of these things in the Letter, feeding your
carnal minds with the Letter, which is death, and kills, and so your minds
are drawn from the Light of Christ within you, into outward observances of
meats and drinks, bread and wine, diverse washings and carnal Ordinances, which
were figures of the time then present, Heb. 9.9, 10. and you deny Jesus Christ
the Substance, who is the true Light that enlighteneth every one that comes
into the World. Now to the Light in you all I speak, which Christ Jesus has
enlightened you withal; and if you love this Light, it will lead you out of
all your carnal Ordinances, and Worships, and diverse Washings, which stand in
the first covenant, which was before Christ, and is done away in Christ the
second covenant, and it will lead you to worship God in the spirit, and into
the doctrine of Christ, to yea and nay in all your communications. But all who
are got up high in forms and profession, you are not yet come to yea and nay,
but are out of the doctrine of Christ, and walk contrary to the Light of Christ
in your consciences, which Light shall be your condemnation that hate it, John
3.19, 20. though you be got up high in your forms and notions, and words of the
Saints conditions, who spoke in the light, and from the life: And you who have
the form, but not the life, shall be condemned by the life; and you who hate
the light, shall be condemned with the light and life which gave forth the
Scriptures.

The fifth Accusation is, That we do not honor Magistrates, nor are subject
unto Authority, but are disturbers and breakers of the peace.

Ans. Justice we own, and righteousness; and all who love the Light of Christ
which he has enlightened them withal, it will lead them to act Justice. And
all Magistrates, I charge you in the presence of the living God, to act
according to that which is pure of God in the conscience: And all Magistrates
who act according to that of God in the conscience, are honored by those who
fear the Lord, and walk in obedience to that in the conscience; and those who
act justice according to that in the conscience, they do not bear the sword in
vain, for that in the conscience is according to the law of God; and all you
Magistrates who are set over the people to do Justice, and execute the law
upon offenders, this is the Word of the Lord to you, To mind the Light of
Christ in your consciences, and it will cause you to act according to the
place of a Magistrate: But if you suffer Svvearers, and Drunkards, or Liars, or
Oppressors, or false Weights, or Strikers, or Quarrellers, or Fighters, and do
not punish them, or Whoremongers, or Idolaters, or idle persons, without a
calling; and thou that passes by these things, and do not act justice
according to the law, then thou acts not according to that light in the
conscience, and thou bears the svvord in vain, and that in the conscience will
take hold upon thee, and condemn thee, and vvil execute the righteous law of
God upon thee who refuses to act according to that in the conscience; but
those whom you call Quakers, act according to that in the conscience, and they
are no fighters, no strikers, no drunkards, no swearers, no oppressors, no
whoremongers, no idolators, no fornicators, no liars, no scorners, no revilers,
no false accusers, not proud, not high-minded, not thieves, not murderers; for
they give obedience to that in the conscience which crucifies them to all these
things, and so the Law cannot take hold upon them; and from the Lord do they
declare against all these things where they are yet standing, which the Law of
God takes hold upon. And you who are called Magistrates and Justices, as you
pass through the streets in the Cities and in the Markets, you may hear men
swear and lie, and be drunk in the Alehouses, and you pass by them: And when
any of the servants of the Lord, who are sent of the Lord into the Markets or
Cities, and declare the Word of the Lord against drunkards, swearers and liars,
who are cheating one another, and cozening one another, and bid them repent,
and declare to them the just judgment of God which is to fall upon them, and
all such whom thou who art a Magistrate, has neglected to act Justice upon,
and to punish according to the law, then they who are drunkards, fall a
fighting and striking, and hales them to thee who art a Magistrate, who
should punish the drunkards and swearers, fighters and strikers; and thou
say, they have disturbed the people, and broken the peace, when they have
declared the Word of the Lord against sin and ungodliness, and all the
unrighteousness of men, which thou should have punished by the Law: And thou
art called a Justice of peace, and this is thy peace which is kept with
drunkards, swearers, strikers and fighters, and is disturbed by the Word of the
Lord declared from the mouth of the Lord by his servants against all these
things, who art not guilty of any of those things: And here thou art no
Minister of God, but an encourager of evil doers, and discourager of those that
do well, who declare justice from God against those whom thou should act
justice upon; and when they are brought before thee, thou would have them to
honor thee, who art a vile person, and no Minister of God, and no honor belongs
unto thee, but he who ministers justice from that which is pure of God in the
conscience, is worthy of double honor; and because they will not honor thee,
who acts no justice, but according to thy corrupt will and is not obedient to
that of God in the conscience, thou sends them to prison, or out of the City or
Markets, or stocks or whips them; and if a drunkard or swearer will put off his
hat to thee and bow to thee, and call thee Master, thou do not imprison such
an one, nor punish him neither with Stocks nor Whips, nor counts him any
breaker of the peace: And here they who break the peace, and act contrary to
the Law of God, are spared, and are at liberty; and they who keep the peace,
and do violence to no man, they are punished by those who should act Justice in
the Land. And here iniquity is set in the place of Justice, and is at liberty,
and Truth is imprisoned by the Rulers of the Nation.

And to all Rulers I speak from the Lord to that in your consciences; minding
it will let you see who it is that is not subject to Authority; Whether they
that are drunk, or they who declare against drunkenness; Whether thty that
swear, or they who declare against swearing, and deny to swear at all; Whether
they that fight, and strike, and beat one another, or they who never lift up a
hand against any man, but declare the Word of the Lord against such things.

And them whom you call Quakers are no drunkards, nor no swearers; for Jesus
Christ says, Swear not at all, but let your yea b^ yea, and your nay be nay;
and so they abide in the doctrine of Christ, and keep the peace of God, and are
justified in the sight of God, and are no breakers of the peace, but are
subject unto Authority, and for conscience sake cannot break the commands of
Christ, nor do any wrong nor violence unto any man, and the peace; for they are
no fighters nor strikers, Romans 13.45. but they are smitten and stricken, and
they give their backs to the smiter, and hide not their face from shame and
spitting, as the same Seed Christ did, who passed before, Isa. 50.6. who
preached repentance, and spoke in cities, markets and villages, and by the
seacoasts; and then all the city was in an uproar, as it is now, and their
peace was broken, and they were disturbed, and they smote him on the face,
and buffeted him, and imprisoned him, lest if he should be let alone, all men
should believe on him. And you are the same generation now: for any who are
sent of the Lord now to preach repentance, to turn you from your iniquities,
that your minds might be turned to the Light of Christ within you, which
will check you for sin and evil; then your cities are on an uproar against
them, to persecute them, and so you fill up the measures of your fathers
iniquity.

A Word from the Lord to all you who are called before the Magistrate to be a
Jury, who swear before the Magistrates to see the Law put in execution, and
that you will execute the Law upon Drunkards and Swearers, and that you will
see that the poor, the fatherless and widows, be relieved, and not see them
want; and this you swear before the Magistrates, that you will see it
performed, and that none be idle nor wander abroad without a Calling: And some
of you that swear to punish Drunkards, are Drunkkards, and have fellowship with
Drunkards; and you that swear to punish swearers, are swearers; and here out of
your own mouths you are condemned, and by the Light of Christ you are judged,
who are Swearers; you are out of the commands of Christ, who says, Swear not
at all. And you see the Poor, the Fatherless and Widows in want, and you do not
relieve them; and you see idle persons without any calling, and you do not set
them on work, but they live in idleness, devouring the Creation: And herein you
do not perform your Vows, nor execute the Law which you profess, and so acts
contrary to the Light of Christ in your consciences.

Now to the Light of Christ in you all I speak, and charge you in the presence
of the living God, to take heed unto it, and it will let you see wherein you
have transgressed the pure Law of God, and suffered sin to reign unpunished,
and it will bring the condemnation upon you who have acted contrary to it; and
taking heed to the Light, it will lead you out of all those things which the
Law of God takes hold upon, and will add the Law upon every transgression: And
all you that act contrary to the Light of Christ in the Conscience, it will be
your condemnation: And you are they who deny the Ordinancs of Christ, which
walks not according to the Light of Christ which he has enlightened you
withal; and you are they who are not subject to Authority, who are not
obedient to the Light of Christ in the conscience; and you are the disturbers
and breakers of the peace, whose minds are not guided by the Light of Christ;
and this Light will let you see, giving heed unto it, who are out of the
commands of Christ, and are not subject unto Authority, nor obedient to the
Light of Christ in the conscience.

And here I have cleared my conscience to you all from the Lord; to the Light
of Christ in your consciences I speak, which will eternally witness me to have
spoken the truth unto you all, who have falsely accused the innocent.

As I was moved of the Lord, who is a Servant unto you from the Lord, in love
to all your souls, to set up righteousness in the Land. R. H.

The Light of Christ within, proved to be sufficient to lead unto God.
In Answer to a Book put forth by John Tombs and Richard Bax^er, In which they
go about to prove the Light within insufficient to lead to God; by many
falli^le Arguments, by Perverting of Scr^pture, and their own reasonings.
But their rule for proof being so fallible, uncertain and confused, that
oftentimes they prove that which they would disprove, and confess that which
they would deny.

For the convincing and edifying of those that are not satisfied concerning the
Light within, is this given forth by R. H.

Prove. 4.18.19. The path of the Just is a shining light, shining more and more
unto the perfect day. The way of the wicked is darkness, they know not at what
they stumble.


BEcause the Lord has appeared, and his True Light is broken forth, that by it
his Inheritance may be gathered, and his Dominion from sea to sea may be
witnessed; and because many with it are already gathered into the Covenant of
everlasting Life, and many are turning their faces thitherwards, enquiring the
way to Sion; therefore does the offense arise (like floods) from men of corrupt
minds, destitute of the Truth and spiritual understanding of the great mystery
of godliness, to wit, God manifest in the flesh, though appearing us in a form
of godliness, and words of Scripture, which in unrighteousness they hold, both
perverting the Scriptures, and falsely accusing others (to wit) Christ, the
Prophets and Apostles; and last of all, those called Quakers, that so by any
means the might quench the Light of that fire which God has k^^dled, or hinder
his Work which he has begun, that the vail which is over peoples hearts, under
which iniquity is hid, might not be read nor discovered: Therefore is there a
joining together, and making a confederacy one with another against those which
follow the Lamb of God, and keep the Word of his Testimony; for upon the same
account as we read Luke 23.12. that Pilate and Herod was made friends, who
before had been at enmity between themselves, which was to set at naught and to
deliver up to be crucified the Son of God; upon the same account is Baxter the
rigid Presbyter, and Tombs the pretended Baptist, made Friends, and call one
another Reverend Brethren, both setting themselves with their strength,
arguments and reasons, devised words, and false charges, against the breaking
forth of Christ's Light, and walking in his truth; for but a little while since
Baxter had said, that Tombs and the Anabaptists were the Authors and Fautors of
the delusion of the Quakers, as Tombs confesses in his Epistle. And Baxter
also confesses the same in his Epistle, That he has been too eager in
disputations, which he says is too well known in the Nation. And although here
is a great pretended unity betwixt them, yet it is but in hypocrisy; for in
one page of Baxters Epistle, he talks of holding the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace, as members of the same head and body, uniting their force for
the common Truth, against the pernicious Adversaries thereof: And in the next
page says, That he has already told the Episcopal Brethren, That Bishop Usher
and he did fully agree in half an hour; but says, That the wound is yet
u^healed betwixt him and Tombs; for he never treated with Tombs about such a
matter, but says, he is confident that they should agree in one day upon terms
of common charity and forbearance: So that to men of understanding it appears,
that Baxter is agreed with the Bishop and the Episcopal Brethren, but not with
Tombs no^ the Congregational Brethren; and further, it is manifest from his own
words, and according to his limit and time of treaty, that he could agree with
twenty four bishops as soon as with Tombs, for all their pretended unity and
agreement; for the^e is twelve hours in a day, and he agreed with one Bishop in
half an hour. So we seeing their book begin with such ly^s and confusions, we
know the whole Volume and effects of it will minister nothing else to the
people; the strength and force of those two lately pretended brethren joined
against the Quakers, in their two Epistles, and nine see ^on^, in which i^
thirty arguments and ten reasons against the sufficiently and spirituality of
Christ's Light wherewith he has enlightened every man which comes into the
World; yet for want of knowledge, and because of darkness, speaks against
themselves, and prove^ that which they would disprove, as by something
following may be made manifest.

1. As first, the charge against the Quakers in the 15 th page of their book,
is, That we put darkness for light, in that we make a natural Light, which is
but darkness in spirituals, as if it were to be heeded as men's rule in all
sorts of duties, and knowledge of the things of God.

Ans. This charge is false; for we do not make any natural Light if heeded, as
men's rule in any duty, nor to the knowledge of God; neither have ever held such
a thing; but this is the way of old of all slanderous tongues, first to lay
down a false position of their own, and then disproving it, makes people
believe that they have confuted an error, when they have but proved their own
words false; and so boasts in a vain show, as David says, Psalm. 39.6.
proving nothing against us.

Again, John Tombs says, page 28. That C^^^st makes men's hearts void of Light,
till they be enlightened with his Light, and that every man till he be
enlightened by Christ, wants Light to guide him in the knowledge of his duty,
and the way to salvation.

Ans. But in contradiction to that, in page 11. he says, that Christ ascended
far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things, to wit, with his Light,
Ephesians. 4.11. So here he has answered himself; for if Christ that is ascended,
does fill all things with his Light, then he does not make men's hearts void of
Light. In page 17. he says, That Christ enlightens the world with the
knowledge of God, as the Prophet of the Church; and if so, then men want not
Light to guide them in the knowledge of their duty, and the way to salvation;
so herein he has answered himself, to his own confusion.

Again in page 43. he says, That none of the Gentiles not barbarous people,
who had not the Scripture, nor such other teachings as God's People were taught
by, had the Light within them; which might be a ^^mpleat and safe rule or guide
to them for the pleasing of God.

Ans. In contradiction unto which, he says in page 60. that Christ as the
Mediator, enlightens with spiritual Light every man that comes into the World;
and page 62. That he enlightens Gentiles as well as Jews, with a spiritual
Light. And page 63. that Christ as the Sun of Righteousness was to enlighten
all Nations. So then, if those latter be true, then the former is false; for if
all that come into the World, both Jews and Gentiles, be enlightened with a
spiritual Light by Christ as their Mediator, and as he is the Sun of
Righteousness, then they do not want a Light within them, which is a complete
and safe Rule or Guide to them for the pleasing of God; and so by this the
Quakers Doctrine is approved and made good, instead of being disproved.

Again, that John Tombs may appear to be wise above what is written, he goes
about to prove many Lights under several names and distinctions; as page 12. he
says, There are Lights that like ignis fatuus, foolish fire, lead men into
dark places, lakes and bogs, wherein they that follow them, perish. Secondly,
There are lights that for a while lead men in the way, and then soon go out,
and so leave men in darkness and perplexity. Thirdly, That there is an amazing
light, that does by its brightness strike dead, and cast down to the Earth,
Rev. 1.16, 17. Acts 22.6.11. Act; 9.9. Fourthly, Christ is an excelling light,
not striking dead, nor casting down; nor blinding, Fifthly; That there was a
light in the law, but it was imperfect. Sixthly, That there is a bodily light
in animate bodies. Seventhly, That there is a natural light of Creatures.
Eighthly, There is a rational light of men, page 16. Ninthly, That there is a
Scripture Light; and (says he) the Word which is written in my Bible, shall be
my light, page 80.

Ans. In that which is abovementioned, he appears to be puffed up by vain
conceits, imaginations and distinctions, above what is written in the
Scriptures of Truth, till he manifests himself to be wholly in darkness, not
knowing what he says, nor whereof he affirms: For where does the Scripture
speak of any Lights like false fire that leads men into dark places, Lakes and
Bogs? but we read in the Scriptures, that he that walks in darkness, knows not
whether he goes; and there is the perishing in the Lakes: And where does the
Scriptures speak of such Lights as for a while lead ^^n in the way, and then go
out when men are in the way, and so leave them in darkness? And where do the
Scriptures speak of a natural Light, and a bodily Light, and a rational-Light,
and a Scripture Light? And whereas thou speak of an amazing light, that by
its brightness does strike down dead, and cast down to the Earth, and brings
Rev. 1 16, 17. Acts 22.6, 11. Acts 9.9. whereas it says, That the light of
Christ's countenance was as the Sun shining in his strength, which when John
saw him, fell at his feet dead; and Paul with the light was struck down; which
Light appearing to John and Paul, was Christ; yet in the next words contrary to
the Scriptures and thy own assertions, says, That Christ is an excelling
light, not striking dead, nor casting down, nor blinding: And so thy words is
but as a heap of confusion and contradiction one unto another, and to the
Scriptur^^; and so in a few words thou may be answered, even with thy own
darkness; for if thou knew the Light of Christ in the least measure, it would
keep thee out of the line of this confusion; and then thou would justify those
whom now thou condemns and falsely accuses to be guilty of thy own devisings.

Again, Another contradiction concerning the Light, from page 33. thou say,
That light from Christ as Creator, is conferred upon all men without exception
of any person: And to contradict it, in p. 37. he says, that the Gentiles are
without light. And p. 66. that Christ enlightens Gentiles as well as Jews, with
his spiritual light.

Ans. So to what end is all thy preaching and printing, but to utter forth thy
own confusion? And do thou think that all people are blind as thy self, that
cannot see plain contradiction? Nay, for the light is risen in which thou art
seen, if thou had more subtilty, craft and guile to cover thy self withal,
than thou have; but thou have appeared naked, that every one may see thy shame.

Again, John Tombs in the 26. page says, that in this life they that are born
of the Spirit, are flesh; whereas Christ says, He that is born of the spirit,
is spirit.

Ans. Herein thou art imprudent to place these two contr^dictions together, and
to set thy lie before Christ's Truth, to make people believe, that although
Christ said, He that is bor^ of the Spirit, is Spirit, yet it is not so; for he
that is born of the Spirit, is flesh, say thou; and to prove thy lie against
his truth says, that the new birth which makes us no longer flesh and blood i^
that se^ce, is not the birth of water and of the Spirit mentioned Job. 3.5. but
the Power of God by which he will raise us up, 1 Cor. ^.14. the birth of water
nor the Spirit, John 3.5, 6. is here in this life, the other is not till the
resurrection. Ans. Herein thy proof is as false as thy lie beforementioned;
for that which is born of water and of the spirit, is spirit, and also the
power of God b^ which we are raised up, is witnessed in this life, whereby the
Apostle said they were made members of Christ, and were joined unto the Lord by
that one Spirit of which they were born: And is this the Faith which thou
begets people into, that they cannot be born again in this life, of the Spirit?
So they have believed and followed thee long enough; for they were but in the
fleshly birth before thou came amongst them, and are so yet, and must not be
born of the Spirit by thy doctrine, while in this life, until the resurrection;
and so that they may believed thee, and not Christ, thou strivest to keep them
from minding of his Light within them, whereby they should be led to believe in
him, which says, They that are born of the spirit, is spirit; and that they
must first be born, before they ca^ enter into the Kingdom of God.

Again, page 29. says, That of such corruption as David was guilty of in the
matter of Uriah, want of Light to guide in the way of happiness, is a chief
part.

Ans. David did not want Light as the cause or chief part of his sin, but was
disobedient unto the Light which he had received, and that was the cause why he
did the thing that was sin against the Lord; but in this, as in the rest of thy
Book, thou would charge all iniquity upon the want or insufficiency of the
Light, and not upon the creatures disobedience to it; and so contrary to the
Scriptures, would make man's destruction not to be of himself, or his separation
from God not to be by his sins, but the insufficiency of the Lights and so
accuses the Light, and not the darkness; and accuses God, and not the
disobedient man; and so a^t become a fighter against God, Christ, his Light and
servants; and hereby thou ^rives to serve the wicked one, who rules by the
power of ^arkness in the disobedient, by raising thy strong Arguments and
Reasons against the sufficiency of the Light to lead God, ^ome of which
arguments I shall mention, that thereby people ^ay understand all the rest,
which are empty and foolish as to that which thou intends them.

Argument from Psalm. 81.11, 12. But my people would not hear^en to my voice,
and Israel would none of me; so I gave them up to their ^wn hearts lusts, etc.
Whence I argue, That Light in man cannot be a ^afe sufficient guide to a man in
his way to God, to which the leaving (...) person is reckoned as the greatest
curse and judgment; but to leave a ^erson to his own imagination and lust, to
walk in his own counsel, which (...) all one as to leave him to the Light
within him.

Ans. Thy Argument is not agreeable unto this Scripture, which thou makes as
the ground of it; for because Israel did not hearken to God's voice, no^ would
none of him, therefore he gave them up to their own hearts lusts; therefore
say thou, ^he Light is not a sufficient Guide: First, thou should have
^roved that the Light of Israel which is a fire, Isa. 10.17. and ^he holy one
as a flame, was not sufficient; and thou should have proved that the giving
of them up to their own hearts ^usts, was a giving of them up to that Light
within them: In ^his thy false and foolish Argument thou say, that God
reckon^ it the greatest curse to leave a man to the Light in him; which Light
before thou have confessed to be spiritual, and to be the Light of the
knowledge of God; and now thou say, To leave man to the Light, is to leave
man to his lusts and imaginations: What, is now Light become lust and
imaginations? Why then does thy Brother Baxter in his Epistle tell us, that it
is to be hearkened to, and obeyed? What are you now agreed to call the Light
darkness or lust? and when you have done so, that men may hearken unto it, and
obey it? Here is breaking of the command, and teaching others to do so. In page
68. of thy Book thou tells us, That the Teachers of the Law did teach many
things right about God's Being, Works and Worship, and yet thou say, that in
other things they were as blind as Molds: But in this have thou not much more
condemned thy self to be more blind then they are? for they taught Christ
aright about God's Being, Works and Worship; but thou have taught things false
about these things; for the Teachers of the Law did never say, That to leave
men to the Light was the greatest curse; but said, That Light is sown for the
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm. 97.11. And said also,
that the path of the just is as the shining Light. Neither did they ever call
the Light lust nor imagination, as thou have done; but when thou art sober, and
see thy confusion, consider whether it be not rather the greatest curse and
judgment from God, to leave a man to his own darkness and ignorance, (as thou
art) because he hates and despises the Light which should lead him to
knowledge and understanding of God, and of his ways; and is it not Justice in
God to give you up to the darkness of your own hearts and lust, which thou
falsely calls Light, seeing it is your daily exercise to study, p^each and print
against the sufficiency of Christ's Light, which people should believe in, and
obey, and which is the path of the just, and way to God, out of that darkness
which has blinded your eyes even so far, that you cannot see your own words,
much less the Truth of God, as it is manifest unto them that walk in his Light.

And in thy next Argument thou say, That because the Mystery of God was
hid, and Life and Immortality not brought to light to the Gentiles, therefore
they had not a light within them as a sufficient guide to God.

Ans. Thou might as well have said in plain words, That Christ who was given
a Light to the Gentiles, was not able to reveal the mystery of God, nor bring
life and immortality to light, because some were ignorant of it; but contrary
to thy false Argument, Christ was given a Light to the Gentiles, which light
did reveal the mystery of God, life and immortality to them who did receive
him; and those that did not receive him, though he was given for a Light unto
them, because they did not receive him, therefore was those things hid, and not
because the Light was not sufficient.

1. Argument, Romans 8.9. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same
is none of his: Whence thou argues, They have not light within them sufficient
to guide them to God who have not the Spirit of God: but every man has not the
Spirit of God; Ergo.

Ans. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. Which manifestation being obeyed is able to lead man to
God, so that there is no insufficiency in the Spirit or Light, in which God
has manifested something to every man, and therefore if every man be not guided
by it unto God, it is because he does not sufficiently obey and follow it.

12. Argument, From Matthew 11.27. John 14.16. Where thou Argues, they had not
a light within them sufficient to guide them to God, to whom the Son did not
reveal the Father, who did not go by the Son as the way to the Father, but the
Son did not reveal the Father to every man, nor did every man come to Christ,
John 1.5.10. Ergo.

Ans. The cause why they had not life, and did not come to the Father, was
because they would not come unto him that they might have Life, Joh. 5.40. and
not because his light in them was not sufficient; for these Jews did for a
season rejoice in the Light; which if they had continued in, would have led
them to the knowledge of the Father, and of the Son, as those of understanding
sees in those Scriptures which thou have asserted; and so thus in all thy
Arguments to manifest thy Ignorance of the Scripture and of the Light, instead
of charging men's guilt of disobedience, thou charges the light of Christ to be
insufficient; for they that did love and receive the light which Christ had
enlightened them withal, to them it was given to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven; but to those which did hate, reject and count it
insufficient, those things from them was hid, and their rejection was the cause
of hiding those things and not the light; and this may answer the most of thy
Arguments, and let thee see how thou stumbles because thou hates the light
which should discover unto thee both the cause of knowledge, and of ignorance,
and the ground from whence they both arise.

In many other of thy Arguments, thou proves nothing thou intendest, but
accusing falsely the Quakers, as in the 15, 16, 17.21, 22. Arguments: where thou
say, That they forbid People to sea^^h the Scriptures in those words page 48.
Christ says, Search the S^riptures. Quakers say no, but look to the light
within you; and that their opinion makes a supposed light within each man, a
safe rule and guide to each man, and is erroneous. Thirdly, That the opinion
and pra^^ice of the Quakers are evil, in making every man a Teacher, and makes
neealess the Teachers set by God for the work of the Ministry. Fourthly, That
their Opinion is impious, and that they make it u^necessary to pray for the
Spirit to enlighten men's Eyes i^ the knowledge of God. Fifthly, That their
Opinion is pernicious, which makes man to lean to his own understanding, be
wise in his own Eyes and in his own conceit, and that they bless men in
following their own light. Sixthly, That the Quakers place all their Godliness
in following their own supposed Light.

Ans. The ground of all those Arguments is false, and every particular thing
herein charged against the Quakers is false; for they have not denied tha^ men
should search the Scriptures, neither has their Opinion and practice made
every man a Teacher; Neither is it their Opinion that it is unnecessary to pray
for the Spirit to enlighten men's eyes in the knowledge of God, but do pray for
it and for our Enemies, so far that their eyes may be enlightened that they
might see their own darkness, and then they would not so falsely accuse u^ of
things that we never affirmed, but was always contrary to, and we never made
any man to lean to his own understanding, but do turn men to Christ's light,
which lets them see their own understandings which is false, and bring^ them to
the true understanding of Him whom the Father has sent into the World, which
brings them from being wise in their own eyes and in their own conceit; neither
do we bless men in following of their own light, but we say they are bleswd
who follow the light of Christ and walk as he walked: and see never did place
any Godliness in following our own supposed light, but in Christ who has
really enlightened us do we place all Godliness; and all are ungodly that do
not walk in his Light, but hate and despise it, and falsely accuse those that
walk in it; but well may they accuse us to be erroneous and impious for walking
in the Light, when they have accused the light it self to be but lust and
imagination; but in this they know not what they do, and therefore we pray to
God to forgive them, And whereas again we are charg^d Page 47. to make the
coming of Christ into the World to be needless and useless, by saying that he
has enlightneth every man that comes into the World; that charge is contrary
to the Truth; for in this we make him useful and needful to all people: Christ
was as a Light in the World, and as a Teacher to the Saints of Old, and to
Moses who bore his reproach, and to the Prophets which prophesied of him before
that in the fullness of time he appeared in the similitude of sinful flesh, of
which appearance the Apostles were witnesses; and so to preach him as a
Covenant to the Jews, and as a light to the Gentiles, before he so came into
the World, was not an Error; much less now when he is come and has so
appeared, for us to say that he is the true Light which has enlightened every
man that comes into the World that every man thtough him might believe is not
an error, but is the way to Salvation.

And whereas several other Arguments is made upon false grounds, as that the
supposed light in a man may lead him into a way whose end is death, this only
belongs to thy self, thou art guilty of it; for the true Light would have led
thee to have spoken Truth, and to have accused no man falsely, and would not
have suffered thee to have opposed by plain contradiction Christ's Words, nor to
have perverted the Scriptures in making them a ground for thy false Arguments;
and so that Argument against thy self stands, and that thy supposed light
leads into a way whose end is Death. Again thou say in some of thy Arguments,
If every man have a light sufficient to guide him, then there needs no
transforming nor renewing, nor putting off the Old Man, nor should be no
foolishness, nor need of a Rod of correction, nor need any train up a Child in
the way he should go, nor need not learn Childrens Literature or good manners,
and other things of the like Nature.

Ans. This is as if thou should say, that Christ is come into the World to
Teach, to Redeem, to Renew, and to Restore, and to Re^orm, and to do all these
works in them and for them, but they need not believe nor obey, nor Worship,
nor put off the old Man, nor Pray, nor Preach, nor Learn, because he is
sufficient as to all those things; but this we say, though Christ and His Light
be sufficient to lead men to the Father, and that though thi^ Light do shine in
the darkness, and convince man of his evil deeds, yet his mind must be turned
unto it to obey and follow it, which is that only which leads to the Father:
but though Christ become a Light into the World, and be sufficient and a safe
guide, yet none comes to the Father by Him, but those that believe, follow and
obey his Light, and do put off the Old Man with his deeds, and be renewed in
the inward of their minds, and do deny conformity to the World, and do hear him
in all things, and learn of him; so this our Doctrine shall be approved true
unto all that come unto God by Christ.

Again John Tombs in page 5. pretending to answer the Quakers Objections
(which was never by them Objected) goes about to pervert the Scripture, Luke
17.21. Behold the Kingdom of God is within you, says, To his apprehension, it
is more truly rendered among you, so that in his apprehension, he would make a
more certain rule and form of words then the Scripture, so in this he does not
answer our Objections, but contradicts Christ's words, and to prove his
apprehension, he says, That the Light within each man cannot be meant the
Kingdom of God, for the Kingdom of God is a thing that was not before Christ's
appearance in the flesh, and was taken from the Jews and given to the Gentiles.

Ans. Here thou would make people believe strange things, or Preach a new
Doctrine which has not been heard or read of before: thou have said, That the
Word written in the Bible is thy light, but there is not such a Word written in
that Bible, that says that the Kingdom of God was not before Christ's
appearance in the flesh, but thou may find it written in the Bible, that his
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, Dan. 7. Was not the Kingdom of God before
the World was? was not the Kingdom of God in the time of Enoch, Isaac and
Jacob, Abraham, Moses and the Prophets? And when the Apostles did Preach the
Kingdom of God was come nigh unto them, and was at hand, did they not Preach
that which was in the beginning? But herein it is manifest, that thou neither
own Scripture Light, nor Scripture Words, but this Doctrine few will believe,
that the Kingdom of God was not before Christ's appearance in the flesh; And
therefore it is returned back upon thee, that thou may see and be ashamed of
what thou have declared from thy darkness,

Again in page 55. another Scripture thou goes about to pervert, Col. 1.27.
Christ in you the hope of glory, but thou will not have it in you, but to you,
and so denies both the truth of the thing, and the Scripture words; for the
Apostle says, That this is the riches of the glory of this Mystery among the
Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory, but against the Mystery
and glory of it thou have set thy self to oppose; and also that history thou will not own to be true, and herein thou art guilty of that whereof thou have
accused others, and herein thou would make it appear to those that would
believe thee, that thy false apprehensions is the light of Scripture, and not
the Scripture thy light, as before thou said it was.

And in the same page 55. thou say, It is a mere fantastic delusion, to
imagine a Christ in themselves different from that Jesus Christ born of Mary,
who is the Savior of the world.

Answ. If so, then thou ownest that Christ as abo^e mentioned is in those that
do believe, except thou will deny that any Christ is in them, contrary to the
Scripture, 2 Cor. 13.5. and this which thou have here affirmed, thou and thy
brethren will not own, unless you deny what you have formerly preached and
printed.

Again page 41. thou have accused Paul falsely, saying, that Paul followed the
light within him, and yet he accounted this his great sin, Act. 26.9. 1 Timothy
1.13.

Answ. Paul in these Scriptures does not say that he followed the light within
him, but he followed his thoughts which led him to do many things contrary to
the name of Jesus; and what he did it was ignorantly in unbelief, and that was
his sin, and not following the light within, but if it be sin to follow the
light within, why does Baxter and thou say, that a man should hearken to it,
follow it, and obey it. And Baxter says, that he is no Christian that denies
it; and so here thy reverend brother has proved thee to be no Christian.

Again page 50. thou say, If David had had a light within him of it self a
sufficient and safe guide to God, he should not have been jealous of his own
heart and thoughts, so as to need God to search, know and try him; but it is
otherwise with David, and therefore he knew that he had not a light within him,
as a sufficient safe guide to lead him into the way everlasting.

Answ. D^vid says, Psalm. 119.11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might
not sin against thee; so that contrary to what thou have affirmed, he knew that
he had a light within him, which was sufficient to lead him to life
everlasting, and this light in him was that which made him jealous of his own
heart and thoughts, and let him see that he had need of God to search, prove
and try him, lest iniquity should be found in him; but what Prophet or Apostle
is it that can escape thy slanderous Tongue, who affirms that the Word of God
is not a sufficient guide to lead unto him? before thou said, a supposed
light was not sufficient; but here thou have accused the word of God with
insufficiency, and David that he did not know such a light in him, and so
would make him like unto thy self, a giver forth of lies in writing.

Again page 55. thou say, The light within each person is by creation, and
inward work of the Spirit; but the Gospel is the w^rd brought to our ears by
preachers without us, which is never received by many of those to whom it is
preached.

Answ. In this thou have said more of the light within each person then thou
have heard the Quakers say of it; for thou have here affirmed, that the light
in each person is an inward work of the Spirit, and thou have made it to be
more inward, spiritual, and effectual then thou have made the Gospel to be; for
the Gospel thou say, is but the word brought to your ears without you, and
by many never received; but the light of each person is a work of the Spirit,
which is more then words outward to the ear; so why have thou so much contended
against those who say Christ has enlightened every man with his light which is
spiritual, when as thou not only confesses all is enligh^ned, but says, That
each person ha^h a light within by creation and inward work of the Spirit; but
whether thou plead for or against the light in every person, it is but from
ignorance and darkness, both concerning the light and the Gospel which is
preached in every creature; and so whether thou own or disown the light in
words, it is manifest thou art out of the life of it, and knows not the
spiritual work by it; So these things are written unto thee that thou may
see thy self, and put thy mouth in the dust, waiting in silence, if so be there
may be hope.

Again page 65. thou say, The Apostle denies men's calling (...) the
Communion of Gods grace to be universal, 1 Cor. 1.9, 24, 26. And again in page
66. says, The Apostle then commanded every man every where to repent, Act. 14
16. Act. 17.30.

Answ. Herein thou have contradicted thy self, but yet falsely accused the
Apostle; for he does not deny men's calling to the universal grace in the
Scriptures mentioned, 1 Cor. 1.9, 24, 26. but does bear witness to their
calling which was already come into the obedience of the truth, and so all men
every where was called to repent, according to Act. 14. and 16. which is
Universal and the free grace of God which brings salvation has appeared unto
all men, Tit. 2.11. by which all is called unto repentance, and to the
knowledge of the truth that they might be saved; which call is universal.

Again page 33. thou say, Where lust imprisons light, where corrupt
affections put out the lamp of truth, there is no entrance of the light of
Christ into the soul.

Answ. Where then is that light which lust imprisons, and where is that lamp of
truth which corrupt affections put out? if it be not within, and if no light of
Christ be entered into the soul, how can it then be imprisoned or put out, if
it never was there, nor never shined? but this is like the rest of thy
confusion.

Again page 85. thou say, Light within you, whatever Quakers tell you, will
leave you in perplexity.

Answ. They shall be left in perplexity which do not walk in the light which we
have spoken of and declared to people, and this is that only which leads out
of perplexity into the knowledge of God and unity with him, wherein is the
peace and rest of all that in it walk.

But where did thou learn those revilings against the Light, or from what
sort of thy diverse Truths does those words proceed from, seeing thou say
there is two sorts of Truth? Metaphysick Truth, and Logic and Moral Truth, and
whether is Christ another Truth then those, seeing the Scripture mentions no
such name as Metaphysick, Logic and Moral Truth, and no other Truth do we own
then that which the Scripture declares of Christ to be the Truth, who has
enlightened every man which comes into the world, which light leads them that
obey it out of perplexity.

Again, page 68. Thou say, Let us be wise therefore so to use candles that
we do not burn day light.

Answ. The light of the day comprehends thee, and sees all thy works and words;
and see thou have lost thy wisdom and understanding of the light which the
day brings forth, and so though thou light thy candles in foolishness, yet thou
cannot burn the day light, although thou strive to do it; but thou may read
in the Scripture, that a fool when he holds his peace, is counted wise, and
he that shuts his lips, is esteemed a man of understanding, Prove. 17.28. So
if thou had learned to be wise thou would have been silent from that which
thou have preached in thy nine Sermons, which is but sparks of thy own
kindling, or candles of thy own lighting, the end whereof is to burn daylight
which is arisen, and has shined forth and cannot be quenched by all thy
candles, doctrines, nor arguments; for it is as impossible for thee to quench
or hinder the shining of that light which is now risen, as for thee to light a
candle, and thereby quench the light of the Sun in the natural day; and so that
Scripture is true unto thee before cited, for if thou had been silent, people
would have esteemed thee a man of more understanding, although inwardly thou
had been the same, but not outwardly so made manifest as thou art.

Again, thou tellest us of thy enjoyments, page 32. saying, that the best
enjoyments or best habitation here, is no better then lying upon a bed of
Thorns, or on the Mast of a Ship, where winds, storms, and perpetual tossings
take away all rest.

Answ. Then thou do not yet enjoy Christ, neither art built upon the Rock
which cannot be moved, neither art thou come to the Faith which they that
believe are entered into his rest, and so thou have truly numbered thy self
among the wicked, which are as a raging Sea that casts up mire and dir^, and so
art in the perpetual tossings, and so art such a one as the Apostle speaks of,
beguiling unstable souls, for how can thou bring any to the enjoyment of
Christ, when thou thy self art a stranger to that experience, and how can
thou establish others, when thou thy self art so unstable to be tossed with
every wind as the Mast of a ship; And what would thou gather People unto? To
a bed of Thorns, or to the top of the Mast of a Ship, where they should enjoy
nothing but continual tossings; therefore seeing thy self to be in that
condition, cease from opposing of that Truth which brings People to their true
rest, where they may lie down in peace and nothing make them afraid, (as they
cannot do upon the top of a Mast) and which Truth brings them to be as Mount
Zion which cannot be moved, nor their rest taken away, and who are not as
Children tossed too and fro with every Wind of Doctrine, which has been
Preached by such as have seemed to be somewhat in words and pretenses, but when
tried is found nothing but Emptiness and Vanity.

An Answer to Richard Baxters Queries.
1. Query, HOw comes it to pass that all Nations that never heard the Gospel
are utterly void of faith in Christ, when the Nations that have the Gospel do
generally know him more or less.

Ans. The Apostle says, they have all heard, but they have not obeyed the
Gospel, Romans 10.16 18. And the reason why all Nations are void of Faith in
Christ, is because they have not obeyed and believed that Gospel which is
Preached in every Creature, and the Nations which have that which thou calls
the Gospel, to wit, the letter, are as void of Faith in Christ as those which
have it not, and as void of his knowledge; for the Gospel is the Power of God,
Romans 1.16. And it is the Light of the glorious Gospel shining in the Heart,
which gives the knowledge of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, which light while
thou opposest the Gospel from thee is hid, and the eye blinded which should see
it.

2. Que. Why did not the World believe in Christ, even Generally before his
coming, if reason was then a sufficient light?

Ans. This is an Ignorant and unlearned question, who has said that reason was
then a sufficient light; or who does say that reason now is a sufficient light,
but thy self; but the reason why the World did not believe in Christ both
before and since his coming, was because they hated the Light in which they
should have believed, and was despiteful against the spirit of Grace, and all
its appearances, as thou and Tombs art at this time.

Qu. 3 Why did Christ preach himself while he was on Earth, if the people had
all sufficient light before?

Ans. He preached that they might believe and obey the Light which they had,
which was sufficient, that thereby they might be made children of the Light,
John 12.36. and to turn their minds to the Kingdom of God which was within
them, Luke 17.21. For this end was the preaching of Christ, and the Apostles,
Pastors and Teachers of his Church; for although Christ was given a Light both
to Jews and Gentiles, and this Light shined in their hearts, yet their minds
were to be turned to it; and they obey and follow it as the way to salvation;
otherwise it was their condemnation.

Qu. 4, and 5. Why did he send his Apostles to preach through the world, if the
people had sufficient light before? And why did he set Pastors and Teachers, if
all have a sufficient light in them?

Aasw. As the Father sent Christ into the World, so did Christ send those
Apostles, Pastors and Teachers into the World, Acts 26.18. He was sent to turn
them from darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan unto God; so that
although there was a Light which was sufficient, and the power of God was
sufficient, yet they must be turned to it, and obey it, or else they were not
saved by it; but Christ was a sufficient Light given of the Father for a light
and a guide to the Jews and Gentiles, before the Apostles preached him; but thy
questions are as if thou should say, If Christ or his Light be sufficient,
and if he did come into the World both to Jews and Gentiles, why need any
preaching, or bid others to obey and follow him, seeing he is sufficient? the
Apostles did not preach another Light than that which had already appeared
before they preached, and that which had enlightened every man come into the
World; and they said that all the Nations of them that are saved, must walk in
his Light; and so though the Light was come, and also preached, yet none by it
was saved, but they which did receive, believe and walk in it, and for that end
was it preached in the World.

Qu. 6. Why do the Quakers ge up and down teaching man their own Doctrines, if
all men have sufficient light already?

Ans, The ground of the Query is false; for the Quakers do not go up and down
teaching men their own doctrines, but do teach men the Way of God plainly, and
do instruct the ignorant, and him that is out of the Way, and do turn men to
that Light which is sufficient to lead them to God, and which will lead them
from all Hirelings who make merchandise of souls, bodies and estates of men for
their dishonest gain; and this Light of Christ (by which men are enlightened)
does justify us in our going up and down in teaching men to deny all
ungodliness, and all the Worlds lusts with which many are defiled, and in which
many are kept by those who deny the Light, and speak evil of it.

Qu. 7. Why do they cry out against us as being in darkness, when all m^n have
sufficient light within them?

Ans. You are in darkness, because you hate the Light; and while you do so,
your deeds are evil, and we cannot but cry against you, as Christ and his
Ministers did against those who were haters of the light; and what thougst the
l^ght be sufficient? that is nothing to your justification, while you rebel
against it, And you shall know that the Light is sufficient to condemn you, if
you do not obey it, to be led thereby unto life eternal.

Qu. 8. Will they pray for more Light and Grace, or not? if not, they are
impiously proud; if yea, thin it seems they have not yet Light and Grace
sufficient.

Ans. The Lord said unto Paul, My Grace is sufficient for thee; and yet Paul
prayed for more grace, and was not impiously proud, as thou have charged us;
and the Apostle said, 2 Cor. 9.8. God is able to make all grace abound toward
you, that ye always having all sufficiency, may abound, etc. So that these
Corinthians had sufficiency of grace, and yet were to abound, and they were not
impiously proud in praying for more. And though this to thee be a Mystery, yet
to us it is plain truth; and we are no more guilty in this then the Saints
were.

9. Que. Whereas they say the light within is sufficient if obeyed, the
question is, whether it be sufficient to make men obey it?

Ans. The light is sufficient, and has sufficient power in it to make men
obedient if received and obeyed, yet by the power of self no man either
receives or obeys it, but the command is of it, and the power from it by which
men do believe and obey; so that though this be a Mystery and Parable to the
Ignorant, yet it is plain to him that understands the leadings and power which
is in the Light.

10. Que. But how can any light be sufficient to reveal that which is not
manifested by it, or by any Revelation that does accompany it? No l^ght nor
Revelation among the Heathens in America does tell them that Christ was
incarnate, died, rose, ascended, or intercedeth for us; or is the King, Priest
or Teacher of the Church, or will raise the dead, and judge the world; how then
can their Light be sufficient to help them to the belief of this? I think it is
past controversy that no man has sufficient grace for salvation till his last
breath, etc.

Ans. The ground of this Query is ignorance, to ask how can any Light be
sufficient to reveal that which is not manifested by it; to manifest is to
reveal; but for thee to say, how can it reveal that which is not revealed by
it, is nonsense: And whoever has affi^med that the light has revealed that
which is not manifested by it; but this light which thou so hates, the least
measure of it being received is sufficient to manifest thy darkness and foolish
questions, and to manifest thy Ignorance of the things of God; and the Light of
Christ is the same in America which it is in England, and those Hea^hens in
America who love the Light of Christ and walk in it, although they have not the
Scriptures, does know more of Christ, his Life, Death, Intercession and
Teaching, then those Heathens in England, which have the Scripture of those
things, yet hate and despise the Light which gives the Knowledge of Christ, and
of his work of Salvation, and those Heathens which fear God and work
Righteousness shall be accepted of God and counted Christians, when those
called Christians which neither fear God nor work Righteousness, but despise
his light and deny the sufficiency of it, shall be accounted Heathens.

And whereas thou think its past controversy, that no man has sufficient
Grace for Salvation till his last breath; by this thou will make it without
controversy that the Scripture is false, and not to be believed; which
Scripture if thou want, what have thou more then the Heathens in America, but
rather a great deal less: Had not the Apostle Paul sufficient Grace when the
Lord said, My Grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. And had not the
Corinthians sufficiency of Grace, 2 Cor. 3.5. whose sufficiency was in God, and
from God to them made manifest; and had not they sufficiency in all things, 2
Cor. 9.8. And was Paul with those Corinthians at the last breath, when those
things were spoken; but thy thoughts have deceived thee, in thinking such a
thing to be past controversy; for thou must be both controverted and
contradicted, while thou thus in thy extremes and floods of fury, sets thy self
against the Truth, as it is made manifest in us, and also in the Scriptures.

Again thou say, Thou thinks it is time for men that have any sense of the
common interest of Christianity and Reformation, to lay by these contentions
that have brought you so low, and almost made you a prey to the common Romish
Adversaries, (saying) the Lord grant it be not too late.

Ans. Art thou now sensible of the emptiness in, and the disadvantage which
thou gets by thy contention; and thou may well see it, if thou be but sober,
how the Romish adversaries may have advantage against thee, condemning that in
them which thou allowest in thy self; and thou may have a ground of
jealousy in thee that it is too late; But as for an interest in Christianity
and Refor^ation, thou art far from it, who art striving to keep people from the
Light, by which people should be reformed, and by which they should be led into
the life of Christianity. And although thou confessest, that you are brought
low by contention, and by too eager disputation, yet again thou exalts thy self
and thy Brethren, as if you were above Christ or his Apostles in the Work of
the Ministry; for thou say, How few did Christ convert, that spoke as never
man spoke? And how many places did the Apostles preach in, where they converted
not one for a hundred that some of you see converted in one Parish. And thus
thou defames Christ and the Apostles Doctrine, to set up thy own; bu^ if thou
do not as well deny the Scriptures; as Christ and the Apostles Minstry, thou
may read how that three thous^nd were converted at one Sermon; and If thou
truly consider and try thy own Work, thou will see that all the Sermons which
ever thou have preached, has not converted one in thy Parish into the State of
a new creature, where all old things are done away, and all things are become
new, and so thy boasting thereby may be ended.

Again thou say, That you do not fear that quaking should become the Nations
Religion, we know those squibs will soon be out.

Ans. If it were but a squib that would so soon be out, what need you make so
much a do about it, and bring forth so many floods, and draw dry so many wells
to quench it? And what is the cause of such jealousies in your hearts as
sometime to fear that it is too late to strive against it? And why are you so
afraid that it should have its liberty in the Nation, if you think it will be
so soo^ out? but it is your constant practice to speak one thing, and to think
another; for this which you say is but a squib, will be as an eve^lasting
burning, that none shall be able to quench it; and it is the powerful
appearance of the Lord from Heaven; and who may abide the day of his coming? or
who may stand when he appears? Not those who have contemned his Light, and
reproached the children of it; not those who preach for filthy lucre, who serve
not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, who make merchandise of souls
for dishonest gain; but he that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly, he
that despises the gain of oppression, that shakes his hands from holding of
bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes
from seeing evil, such a one loves the appearance of him who is come a Light
into the World, and loves the children that walk in his Light; for he that
loves him that does beget, loves also those that are begotten of him, who
walk in his Light; but the Wicked shall become silent in darkness; and many who
have used their tongues, and said, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, shall not be
able to stand when he appears, nor to abide the day of his coming, which to
them that hate him, is destruction; but to them that love him, is everlasting
salvation. And this is the day of his appearance, in which blessed are they
that are not offended in him.

Truth and Innocence, Clearing its self and its Children;
Being declared in a few words, which in this day of striving, and of the Lords
power, is brought forth in many, against the deceveable ways of the
Unrighteous, which abound and is as Mountains in every Region, Country, and
County: But the Lord is now risen, to make them plain, that People may see that
they are but earth, and may feed upon the top of them.

Also in this Treatise is a Mountain of confusion, lies and slanders,
proceeding from one Jonathan Clap^am, a Priest, made manifest, which swelled
(as though it had been no Earth) against the Lords Mountain, and against the
way of his Holiness, which now the holy Seed which the Lord has blessed with
spiritual blessings, tread upon, as upon the Mire in the low Valleys, which is
dried up; and with it they are not defiled; for the feet of them that bring
glad tidings of the Gospel of peace, tread upon the top of those Mountains; for
Mountains were never seen till the Light appeared, which is now brought forth,
making all things manifest.

Given forth from the light of Truth, which answers the Truth in every man,
and continues the offense of the Cross to the deceit in every man, R. H.

To the Reader.
In the night all the beasts of the field raven; and now many of them are come
out of their Dens, into which they must be driven again; for the Lord is now
coming, and his Power with him, and his day is appearing to deliver his
prisoner, which has long been in the Pit covered with darkness; and now all
the Powers of Hell and Death gather themselves together that they may be broken
to pieces against the Heir of Gods Inheritance, which is not possible should be
kept always under the power of death; and as surely as they rise up against the
Lord, so surely shall they be broken to pieces; for the arm and power of the
Lord is with us, and no enchantment formed against us can prosper; for the Lord
has stretched forth his and touched our lips, and put his words into our
Mouths, and in this day has made us a defenced City, and an Iron Pillar, and a
Brazen Wall against the whole Land, even all both Priests and People, who deny
the Light of the Lord, to be the way of life, and not only against those gross
Priests of the Nation, who in their covetousness after money, piercing
th^mselves through with many hurtful lusts, having erred from the faith, and
having exceeded the false Prophets in other generations, for their ill savor
is so come up before the Lord, that he will cause even their own breath to
devour them, and their own confusions to make them ashamed. But we have also to
war against spiritual wickedness in high places, and the powers of darkness
under the form of godliness, and the Beast which is risen out of the Earth,
which has Horns like a Lamb, but is as a Lion; but with one Light are they
seen, and with one Power are they judged, and the secret counsel of the Lord is
the strength of them that fear him, in which we reign over all the ways of
unrighteousness, and works of darkness, in what appearance soever they come.

And now to thee Jonathan Clapham, and the rest of thy company, art thou not
ashamed to go under the Name of a Minister of Christ, and take Tithes, and sue
men for Tithes; and thou to number thy self, and take hand with them that are
persecuting and casting slanders upon the innocent? And do thou set forth thy
Refuge of lies, and do not thou think that all people that read thy book made
up with lies, will not see it, that fear God, and know that will return upon
thy pate, had there been no Reply to it? The day has d^clared thee; a witness
shall rise up in thee against thee and thy lies; that is the Word of the Lord
God to thee: What, you that be called Independents, now should be setting up
your Refuge of lies, and publish them to the chief Magistrates of the Nation,
they will not refuge under them, who be under the shadow of the Almighty, who
do believe and obey the Truth, and fear God! And what, you that be called
Independents, sue men for Tithes, cast men in prison for tithes! O shame! cover
your lips and faces; and you are they, the wicked Seeds-men, to sow your lies
abroad, and to proclaim thy self a liar to all the Nation, to say that the
Quakers deny prayer; do thou not think all the Nation will see thee and you
to be liars, who have procla^med your selves to be liars, in saying the Quakers
be Enemies ^o prayer. We are satisfied, and a thousand of people, concerning
you, your lies and slanders, and do see into what you run, and do beseech the
Lord to forgive you, for you have a lamentable cup to drink; for you do not
know what you have done in this great day of the Lord, and what you have stood
against; and is it not a shame for thee and you that are called Independents,
to take Tithes of them, and to sue them up to London for tithes, that you do no
work for? and to cast them into prison that cannot put into your mouths, whom
you do not labor for? Was ever such a company of Ministers of unrighteousness
known in any age? And is not all this your fighting against the Saints, and
opening your mouths against them, because they cannot put into your mouths, and
give you tithes and filthy lucre, and gifts and rewards, and hire. To demand
hire of them that have not hired you, is not this unrighteous? You know not
what spirit you are of, nor what Cup you are to drink of; the Lord forgive you.
And as for thy Book, all people that fear God, will be satisfied with reading
of it. And I tell thee, and all them that are called Independents in the
Nation, that are suing, persecuting, and imprisoning unto death for tithes,
that there is something raised up in the hearts of the people, that will not
believe lies; and many of them are so far satisfied, that they know that your
Books are but envy and malice, and stuffed full of lies and prejudice against the
innocent, and the Truth; and some of you have a mad blind zeal in persecuting
and imprisoning to death; but the Lord will be glorified in your folly; who
will carry his Lambs in his Arms; and the more you write and speak against
Truth, the more your blindness, madness aod folly, and lies, and dislike to the
people that fear God appears; and your speaking against truth, has advantaged
truth against your folly and madness; but out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings has the Lord ordained strength, and the Lord and his high hand is
with them. Art not thou and you such as the Apostle spoaks of, that serve not
the Lord Jesus Christ, but your own bellies, who mind Earthly things, the evil
Beasts the Apostles speak of, the slow bellies? Have not you all stained your
selves with this? Have not your fruits declared your Earthly minds? and worse
than Balaam, who sue them for tithes you do no work for? does not this load the
innocent? Are you them that keep the Gospel without charge? O hide your selves
for shame; the day is appearing that the evil beasts shall go into Dens, and
men shall go to their labor; but ye keep men from their labors, while you are
abroad ravening in the Earth: Are you them that keep the Gospel without charge,
that now call your selves Ministers, that are suing people for tithes, and if
they w^ll not give it you, cast them into prison? Now are you not clearly
proved to be them that the Apostle bids us turn from, that are covetous, and
make merchandise of the people, which have the form of godliness, but deny the
power, which the Apostle bids us turn from, which teaches for handfuls of
Barley and Corn, which have the love of money, which is the root of all evil,
which while you have coveted after, you have erred from the Faith, and pierced
your selves through with many hurtful lusts, which the man of God is to fly,
as you may read in Timothy and Titus, who are given to filthy lucre, and
strikers, and the covetous are disapproved to be Ministers of Christ. Now its
manifest that you are given to filthy lucre, strikers and covetous, and do
teach for filthy lucre, and will have lucre of them you do not teach to. Your
glory is defacing, and your beauty staining; God will stain it, whose end is
teaching for filthy lucre, you will force people to give you filthy lucre, and
do not teach them: It Is a shame to speak of the things you do, how such peoples
goods are spoiled who cannot give you Tithes or filthy lucre, which know in
their consciences you to be the false Teachers for filthy lucre; take a^ay that
your preaching would quickly down; and this makes you so mad and enrage^, like
a Lion that wants his prey, against them that put not into your mouths.
Consider, there is a check come upon you; to the Light in all your Consciences
I speak, which Christ has enlightened you withal, which lets you see your
Savior if you love it; and if you hate it, it is your condem^ation. And so I am
clear of your blood, be it upon your own heads.

And as for William Jenkins Priest in Black Friars in London who put forth his
Epistle for the vindication of Clapham's Book, building his hopes upon it, that
it would be of singular service to the establishing of those that were
wandering, and against us; now ^t is turned to the contrary; for it is of
singular service unto us for making your deceit manifest unto the people from
your own principles; and so those who consider the things therein published,
and the answer to them, w^l labor to find a better foundation to build their
faith upon; and they will see that they have long enough taken your words for a
ground of their faith, which now the truth has destroyed, that so every one
may be brought to the true Foundation, him that has enlightened every man that
comes into the world; and this is my desire to the Lord for those that read
it, that with the measure of God in them (which has no end but that God may be
glorified) they may both read, understand, and then they will see what the
wisdom of God is hid from, and what it is revealed unto, and the nature of the
fruit of every plant will be known; for the fruit of the righteous is a tree of
life; and he that wins souls is wise. For this end have I written, to cut
off the occasions of stumbling from the weak, that the way of life may be kept
clear to all who desire to walk in it, and in all them that come to the way of
life to walk in it, answering that of God in them, is my labor answered, and
my reward received.

R. H.

MY Kingdom is not of this World, neither do I receive honor from men, says
the Son of God ( John 18.36.) who treads the Wine Press alone without the
City, ( Isa. 9.6.) and of the people there is none to help him; and the
Government is upon his shoulders, who is the Prince of the children of Light;
and none of the Rulers of the darkness of this World, is any Officer in his
Kingdom, which stands in righteousness; neither have they who be not guided
with his Light, any power from him eit^er to bind or loose in his Kingdom; but
they who be in his Light, and in it walk, who be the Saints of the most high
God, this honor have all they, to bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles
in fetters of Iron; and they be in the power, which is over the power of the
Rulers of this World; and such do witness Christ to be their Mediator between
God and man, even the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. who thought it no robbery
to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6, 7. yet took upon him the form of a servant,
who said, I and my Father are one; and of him the Father gave record, and the
record that God gave of his Son, is eternal life, and this life is in his Son,
and this life is the Light of men with which all men are enlightened, John 1.4.
and he has enlightened every man that comes into the World. He preached to
the World with Authority, that every man in him might believe; and they that
believe might not perish, but have everlasting life in themselves; and they
that believed not in him who had enlightened them, was condemned already; and
here was authority in his doctrine, which the Pharisees had not in their
doctrine, Joh. 3.18. for they knew not the Light which Christ had enlightened
every one withal, which they that believed not in it, were already condemned
with it; and so their doctrine stood not in that which did save and condemn,
and so it was not in the authority of the Spirit, as the doctrine of the
Teachers of the World is now, out of the authority, not turning people from
darkness to light, which if they do not believe, is condemned already. And a
doctrine is crept into the World, which is pernicious and damnable, being
against the Light, and is with the Light condemned. Of which sort is one
Jonathan Clapham of Wramplingham in Norfolk, whose violence and rage is such
against the Truth, that he has not spared even the foundation of it, having
charged both the Father, Son and Holy Ghost falsely, as I shall make it appear.
And he has also falsely accused the Apostle Peter, and the Church of Corinth,
in his Book called A full discovery and confutation of the wicked and damnable
doctrine of the Quakers. But he ha^h more discovered himself than us, and more
confuted himself than us, as will appear in that which follows.

As first, in his Epistle directed to the Protector, the honor which God will
not give to another than Christ, has he given to another from Christ, and so
denied the Power and Work of the Son of God as Mediator, saying; That the
Magistrate is an Officer of Jesus Christ as Mediator, in his Political Kingdom.
And he says also in the same Epistle, That the Magistrate must not be an
Officer in the spiritual Kingdom of his Church.

To which I answer, Christ has not a Political and a Spiritual Kingdom; for
the Kingdom of Christ the Heir of God, is but one, which stands in
righteousness; My Kingdom is not of this World, says Christ, John 18 36. Now
Clapham confesses, That the Magistrate is no Officer of Christ's spiritual
Kingdom, of his Church. Now to say that Christ has a spiritual Kingdom, and a
Kingdom of Policy, or Political Kingdom, is blasphemy against the Son of God,
and will be taken notice of by the higher Powers. And to say, That the
Magistrate is an Officer of Jesus Christ as Mediator, is blasphemy also; for
what Magistrate in this Nation, or what Priest or people (besides thee) dare
own any to be joined with Christ as Mediator? Was there ever any such a thing
heard from any that profess to know the Scripture, to tell of Christ having a
Political Kingdom, in which the Magistrate must be an Officer, but not in the
spiritual Kingdom of his Church? Then why do thou so often in thy Book press
the Magistrate to exercise his Power to defend the Church, as thou call it?
This thy confusion I lay open for the peoples sake, that they may be wiser than
their Teachers.

Again, the Priest says, That Christ is the eternal Son of God, distinct from
the Father eternally, etc. And, that the Spirit was distinguished from the
Father and Son from eternity; as in page 17. of his Book; and that there is
three Substances, and but one Divine Being.

Ans. Here thou have showed thy self to be brutish in thy knowledge, and to
have no more understanding than a Beast which perishes. Therefore let all
People take notice, that Priest Clapham has exhorted to try men's doctrines by
the Scripture; therefore by the Scriptures he is charged to prove any such
thing, as that the Son of God is distinct from the Father eternally, or that
the Spirit was distinguished eternally from both the Father and the Son. Now
this I also affirm, that the Devil which did not abide in the Truth, he is
separated and distinguished from the Father eternally; but so is not the
eternal Son of God, for he is in him, John 17.11. John 17.21, 22. And again I
say, False Prophets and Hirelings are from the beginning, and from Eternity
distinguished from the Father and the Son; but so is not the Spirit of Truth:
So I leave it to that of God in all people, that with it they may see and know
which to believe; for Christ says, I and my Father are one; and he is not
Christ without God. Therefore that damnable doctrine is denied, which says,
That Christ the Eternal Son of God is distinguished from the Father eternally.
For few in this Nation are so blind (besides Priest Clapham) as either to
affirm or believe such a thing; or that there is three Subsistences, and but
one being: Is not a Subsistence a Being? Therefore if any other of the
Priesthood in Norfolk have joined with Clapham in his Book, or do own him in
these things, cover your faces together, and be ashamed that your impudency and
blindness do not lead you any more to blaspheme.

Again, Clapham says concerning the soul, in page 21* That the soul came
indeed from God, but was not of the Being of God; and that the soul is humane:
And when I asked him, Whether the soul was not immortal? He said, Yea, Humane
and Immortal were both one. To this I answer.

Ans. Woe is unto that people whose Leader is a fool, blind and ignorant of God,
of the Son of God, and of the soul of man, and of the Scriptures what they
speak concerning these things Now if humane and immortal be both one, then
every man that is come into the World, has a humane body, then the bodies of
all men that are come into the World, are immortal as well as the soul. But for
your sakes who are led by such, I say, The first Adam was made a living soul,
the second Adam was made a quickening spirit, 1 Cor 15.45. And you all have a
Light from the second Adam, with it to see what the soul is, which was made
living, and how again by Christ the quickening Spirit, it comes to be restored
into the same Life; and with the Light of Christ you will see the soul, and see
the Life which from Christ is manifest to quicken it up to the living God; and
so then you will know the Scriptures, and the power of God, and that the
Scriptures speak not of a humane soul.

Now the Ministers of Christ which are sent to turn people from darkness to
l^ght, and from the power of a Satan unto God, they are to watch over the souls
of those who are turned to the Light; therefore you all in the Light wait to
know the soul, and know the power of God which raises it up out of the death,
and then you will be wiser than your Teachers, as David was; and then you will
not come short of the promises which the Father has promised, even the sure
mercies of David. So in the Light all who wait upon God, come to the knowledge
of the Son of God, and of the Soul, which is to be watched over, and then you
come to that which is sure, even to the knowledge as David did, over all your
Teachers; and so you will come to know the key of David, which will open unto
you that which is sealed up from your Teachers, and so come to know the one
shepherd, and the one sheepfold, and the green pastures as David fed in; and
then you will not need the Priests meanings, being wiser then they, you having
the key of knowledge, which they and the Lawyers have lost, as Christ has said,
Matthew. 23 13. shutting up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, and from men now,
as the Pharisees did then; so that you need not say, there were such then; but
where are there now any such? I shall show you one; as John Clapham in the 37.
page of his Book says, That Heaven is not to be enjoyed while we be in the
flesh here. Now see whether he has not shut it up from all men while they
are here: But Christ who was anointed of the Father to preach the Gospel to
the poor, said not so; for he said unto his Disciples, Blessed are ye poor in
spirit, for yours is the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 6.20 Mat. 5 3. it was theirs,
and they did enjoy it; neither did Christ shut it from the Pharisees, but said
unto them, The Kingdom of Heaven is within you, Luke 17.21. And if they had
believed his words, they might have enjoyed and been Heirs of it, as the
believers were. And the Ministers of Christ were to preach as they went,
saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; and so they were not to shut it up
from men, as the Hypocrites did and false Teachers, which say, It cannot be
enjoyed while men are here. And here it appears that they shut up the Kingdom
against men, and neither enter in themselves, nor suffer others, Matthew. 23.13.
for if they entered in themselves, then they could not deny but that it might
be enjoyed. And here is the Scripture fulfilled, Matt. 13.19. they shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against men, saying, None can enjoy it here; but Heaven is
God's Throne, and the Kingdom of Heaven is within you; and so here as God has
said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and they shall be my people, and
I will be their God. And the Seed of the Kingdom was sown, and was reaped
amongst the Churches, and it was in them (that would not enter in it
themselves, nor suffer others) as a grain of Mustard Seed, and in others it was
as Leaven hid in three measures of Meal. And so the Kingdom was preached, and
the Gospel in every creature, and there were parables of the Kingdom, and the
World had it in the Parables in them; but they that did believe, had it in
them, in the power, in the power, out of the parable: He that has an ear, let
him hear what the power speaks, then shall be witnessed that which is written
both of the Power and of the Kingdom.

Again, the said Clapham has charged God and Christ falsely in his Book, as
that Christ dwells in his people two vvays; first by his special spiritual
presence. Secondly, By mystical union, and that is more than the former;
bringing this comparison, That one may dwell in a House, and have no union with
it; and says, That God dvvells in the Heavens, but has no union with them;
and that the union between God and believers cannot be comprehended by the
Saints here as in the 24 ^h. page of his Book.

Ans. Now let all take notice, and with the measure that God has given you, to
judge whether Christ can dwell in his people by his special presence, and have
no unity with them, as he has affirmed. And again, judge whether a mystical
union be more then his special presence, as he has affi^med. And again,
consider that Heaven is God's Throne and the place of his rest. And whether God
can dwell in the Heavens, and have no unity with them, with his own Throne, and
with the place of his rest. And consider whether there was ever such a doctrine
preached or believed among the sons of men from Abel unto this day; there is no
record of such a Doctrine, neither in the Scriptures, Histories, Heathens,
Pagans, nor others; therefore it is now fit to be recorded or put in Chronicle,
that all may see what a doctrine is crept into the World, and that all may see
that Night is come upon all such Prophets, that they have no vision nor
knowledge of God nor his ways. And this is the man that has set himself to
oppose and gainsay the truth, and is a daily reproacher of those that walk in
it, yet professes himself to be a Minister of Christ; and those whose hearts
are upright toward God, is he reviling, comparing them to Papists, Heretics,
Scribes and Pharisees, Indians, and such like; but to none of those in these
things beforementioned, neither to Scribe, Pharisee, Pope, Turk, Indian, or
Alcaron, can he be compared; for they have been all restrained by something of
God in them, from writing so blasphemously against God, and Christ, and the
Holy Ghost, the Soul, Heaven and Union, and the Saints, as he has done: And so
this is another Gospel than that which was preached by Christ and his Apostles,
and so by the Spirit of God to be accursed for ever.

And whereas he says, That the union between God and believers, cannot be
comprehended by the Saints here, he charges a lie upon the Saints, and speaks
contrary to the Scriptures, 1 John 1.7. 1 John 4.15. 1 John 5.20. for the
Saints did witness union with God here; for he that sanctified, and they that
are sanctified, were one; they said they were of God, and the whole World lies
in wickedness; and as he is, so are we in this present World; and they
comprehend with all Saints the height, and length and the breadth of the love
of God, while they are in the world. Now whoever would have believed it, that
the teachers in England had been so blind, or durst have spoken so contrary to
the Scriptures? they professing them so much to be their rule, and learning so
long, and studying so much to get the Letter of them, but now is found both out
of the Letter and Life; but now the day of God is risen in his peoples hearts,
and they are seen to be such before their books come forth: and now that which
they were judged to be before they published themselves in print, comes forth;
that all the world may see that the judgment of God is true from his servants,
upon them, and that all the Rulers of the Nation may see that such are not fit
to be held up, but be cried against; and if any should by a Law give such the
tenth parts of men's estates, they may expect that by the righteous Law of God
ten parts of theirs may be taken away and given to strangers; so if any people
maintain this doctrine, they maintain that which the curse of God comes upon,
and if they come not out from it, will be partakers of the plague.

And again, as concerning Hell, Clapham says, that men are not in Hell while
they are upon earth. And here is another lie.

Answ. The Prophet said while he was upon earth, thou have redeemed my soul out
of hell; and Jonah said, Out of the belly of hell cried I unto thee, and so the
believers doctrine was contrary to Claphams; for they knew both heaven and hell
while they were upon earth, and a redeeming out of the one into the other by
Jesus Christ.

Again, he accuses Peter, saying, that he speaks of the divine Nature being
communicated to the Saints, but understands divine graces.

Answ. The Apostle does not speak one thing and understand another as the
Priests do, for he speaks with the Spirit, and with understanding, and knows
how to divide the word of God aright, who spoke unto them that had escaped the
corruption, which is in the world through lust, and knew what it was to be
partakers of the divine nature; but herein the wickedness of this Priest is
manifest, who would keep people from being made partakers of the divine Nature,
and would shut up the kingdom of heaven from men while they are upon earth.

Again, he accuses the Corinthians in the 33. page of his book, to be the
ancient Heretics who were baptized for the dead.

Ans. Those who were baptized for the dead was no Heretics, neither did they
deny the resurrection of the dead, though Paul said, How say some among you,
that there is no Resurrection of the dead? yet he did not call those that were
baptized for the dead, Heretics; for those that were baptized for the dead and
stood in jeopardy every hour, did believe the resurrection of the dead, and did
wait for it, and did not deny it as Clapham says, who has proceeded on in his
book, with many of the like false accusations against us also: but it is a
small matter for us to be judged by such a one, for herein is but Christ's words
fulfilled, As they have done unto me, so shall they do unto you: for neither
Christ nor the Apostles, nor the Church of God has escaped his accusation; for
(Luke 6.26.) Woe unto you, says Christ, when all men speak well of you, for so
did they of the false Prophets; but blessed are you when men shall speak all
manner of evil against you, falsely for my names sake, for great shall your
reward be in heaven: now though against us all manner of evil be spoken falsely
in the Book before mentioned, yet in truth do we stand out of it all, and over
it all, and our accuser is found in the evil, and we clear.

And as for the 13. Sect. wherein he has wearied himself for very vanity, has
he proved nothing against us, but against himself; in which he has said that
we are enemies to the holy Scriptures, and deny Christ come in the flesh, also
his death and resurrection, and that we have said that Christ's flesh perished,
and that we own not the man Christ in the Heavens, as page 11. and charge us
to say, that he did not ascend into heaven, is not at the right hand of God,
shall not come to judge the world. page 12.

Again, Whereas Clapham says we deny prayer, the Lords Supper, and
Water Baptism, and giving of thanks at meals, and singing of Psalms.

Ans. This is false, as his own writing and confession will witness against
him, which in a former Letter said, that I prayed three times at one Meeting,
and now in this book says we deny prayer. Here confusion is grown into
impudency, and lies are made his proofs. Again, he says we deny the ^ords
Supper, yet confesses we own eding on Christ's flesh: Now Christ says, Except
ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood, ye have no life in you. And this is his
Supper, in eating of which the creature has life in himself. Therefore fly
from idolatry; I speak unto wise men, judge what I say; the cup of blessing
which we bless, is the Communion of the blood of Christ; and the bread which we
break, is the Communion of the body of Christ: For we being many are one bread
and one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread, 1 Cor. 10.14, 15, 16,
17. For the bread of God is he that came down from Heaven, and gives life unto
the World, John 6.33. Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this
bread; and Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life, he that comes to me
shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst, John 6.34,
35. I am the living bread which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this
bread he shall live for ever; and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which
I will give for the life of the world v. 51. But the Jews could not belive
this, neither can this Priest, but says we own fe^ding on Christ's flesh, but
deny his Supper, and so as blind as they: But by the life which we receive in
eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood, are we manifest to be of those
that feed at his Table, and cannot have communion at the Table of Devils, as
the Church of God could not, 1 Cor. 10.21.

Again, He says that we own baptism with the spirit, but deny baptism with
water: I answer, Who come to the baptism with the spirit into one body, they
are come to the one baptism which the Saints witnessed, not laying again the
doctrine of baptism, which wa^ several, but witnessing the one the substance of
the other, which was necessary to salvation; and so all those things in which
the substance was signified, whether circumcision or water, is not denied in
their time and place; when the obedience in them was from the command of the
spirit, and not from tradition; but people now in the ignorance of God and his
ways take up things by tradition, being both out of the command, and out of the
substance; and such deny the substance where it is witnessed: and as for this
Priest Clapham, he has never ministered water baptism as it was ministered when
it was a doctrine from heaven; for there is not one in all his Congregation
that had first received the holy Ghost, nor believed in Christ before he
baptized them with water, and so both the substance and the figure is denied in
him: so that in that in which he would accuse another without ground, is he
upon good ground found guilty.

And as for denying to give thanks, that is false, for we are bound in spirit
to give thanks always, to the Father who has made us meet to be partakers of
the inheritance of the Saints in light; and whether we eat or eat not, we give
God thanks; and this we are come to witness, to pray without ceasing, and in
all things give thanks, for so is the will of God concerning us, and in us is
it fulfilled; and we sing with the Spirit and with understanding also; but such
take David's conditions which wa^ made manifest unto him in the sure mercies of
the Lord to him; and sing his deliverances whose soul is yet in the pit; and
sing his prophesies, who never knew the spirit of prophecy in themselves; and
say they have roared all the day long by reason of their sins, when as they
have roared all the day long in fulfilling their sins and iniquities; and for
the scorners to say, they have no scornful eye; and for the proud to say, they
are not puffed in mind; such singing we deny, which is without the Spirit, and
without understanding also; For light is sown for the righteous, and joy for
the upright in heart: so to the light with which Christ has enlightened every
one that comes into the world; I speak, which tends to uprightness of heart,
and unto holiness, without which no man can see the Lord; those things which
are reprovable, are made manifest in the Li^ht; and that which does make
manif^st is light, which all who be out of it is in darkness and know not
whether they go, nor what they profit; as many now in these days, being kept
from the light and gate of truth by the doctrines of men, and so never come to
read in the Lambs book of life; which first all must come to know the vials
poured forth upon the earth, upon the Beast and his works, and his sear which
is found standing in all them who be from the light they be enlightened withal.
But the hour is coming, and now is, when all they that be upon the face of the
earth may see the appearance of the Son of God, and may receive his power in
the measure which his Father has given them to receive him in; therefore every
one who comes to see with the light of the Son of God, enter into tha^ which
you see to be of him, and out of that which you see to be of the World, that so
the everlasting righteousness and peace you may possess in your obedience to
what is made manifest, that you may come to see and favor the things of God,
from those things that be of the World; and as every one walks in the light,
you will be as a sweet smelling sacr^fice unto the Lord; and knowing and
feeling the power of ^he Lord, with it the everlasting door will be opened,
and the vvell-springs of life, to the feeding of the plants of God with the
uncorruptible food, which is every word which proceeds out of the mouth of
the Lord, which will be received as that of God, in every particular is kept
single.

Again, The Priest in his 3, 4, 5. Section says, That we deny the doctrine of
the Trinity, and that we hold equality with God, and the soul be ^ne being with
God, and corrupt the doctrine of justification.

Answ. For a Trinity of persons, there is no such doc^^^ne in the Scriptures,
neither the word three Persons, nor Trinity* and so three distinct one from
another eternally, as he has held forth, saying Christ is the eternal Son of
God, distinct from the Father eternally, and the Spirit is distinguished from
the Father and the Son eternally. This is a Tradition of men taught for a
doctrine, but no doctrine; and in denying of that, we do but deny Claphams
tradition; but as for the Father, Word, and Spirit, which bear record in
heaven, these three are one, and was never separated eternally; for Christ in
the days of his flesh, when he was in the world, said, I and my Father are
one; and said, I in them, and they in me, that they may be one, as we are one.
John 17.11. and 22. and so this doctrine of the unity of the Father, Word, and
Spirit, we own and vvitness; and as for our equality or unity with God, we
that believe in him are one with him, as the Scripture says; and as Christ
prayed for us that believe, John 17.21. that we might be one in him, and in the
Father; and unity we must confess, for that is a doctrine ^ffirmed by the
Apostles of Christ, that as he is, so are we in the world; and he that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are both one; and so we deny no
doctrine, but whatsoever is a doctrine, we vvitness it: And to say that we
corrupt the doctrine of justification, that is false, for we are freely
justified by his grace, and so do vvitness the doctrine of justification; and
who are true vvitnesses of it, do not corrupt it; but if while we seek to be
justified by Christ, we our selves be found sinners, is Christ therefore the
Minister of sin? God forbid, Gal. 2.17. but herein does the Priests of the
World corrupt the doctrine of Justification, professing to be justified by
Christ, while they themselves are found sinners, and say that God does account
them righteous in Christ, but unrighteous in themselves, and so would make
Christ the minister of sin; and to justify or save his people in their sins,
and not from them, and so by them the doctrine of justification is corrupted,
and the Scripture perverted, and the grace of God by which the Saints are
freely justified, is turned into wantonness, and so by their feigned words in
hypocrisy, they cast thick clouds and vails of darkness over the peoples
minds to keep them in ignorance of the redemption of their immortal souls,
which is to be redee^^d by the blood of the Lamb: they saying that the soul
came indeed from God, but is not of the being of God; and yet in the 51. page
tells of turning the whole frame of the soul to center in him again: if it must
center in him again, then it was in him before, and so let thy confusion stop
thy mouth. Now let all consider in the light which comes from the immortal God,
whether Gods being is not in life and immortality; and whether there is an
immortal life, but from the same being. For God breathed into man the breath of
life, and through the breath of life he became a living soul; Now the breath of
life came from the life in which the being is: and so to the people I say, you
have a light which comes from the same life, in which the soul lived unto God
in the beginning, before death passed over, which light is made manifest to
lead out of death, into the life from whence it came, and to witness again a
living soul, and the breath of life, and so to be wiser then all your teachers,
and to know him who has all souls in his hand, who breathed into man the
breath of life and he so became a living soul, and when he does the evil, the
anguish is upon it; and to feed atop those mountains which you have wandered
after in the forgetfulness of God, having forgotten God days without number,
Romans 2.9. But now the light is come and knowledge begins to increase and shine
in the hearts of the children of light, to give them the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, and these things live in us.
Therefore we are his witnesses, who is the light and life of men, and did only
for the seed sake let forth our knowledge of the mystery of God, that they may
be gathered into the fold among the Lambs of Christ; for the day of scattering
has been long, but now is the day of gathering begun, wherein all they shall
rejoice that fear the Lord. 2 Cor. 4.6.

And whereas many other accusations are charged upon us falsely, for the name of
Christ, by the Priest; yet seeing Christ the true Prophet has said it should
be so, because they know not the Father nor him who has enlightened every one
that comes into the World; therefore can we bear all things, being manifest
unto God, and to all men to be witnesses of those things, which he says we
deny. His accusations are these, That we deny the Resurrection of the body, the
last Judgment, Heaven and Hell, Are enemies to all the Ordinances of Christ,
are not true mortified persons, and our doctrine tends not to destroy sin;
That we are the common sink of all Heresies, and enemies to civility and good
manners.

Ans. Our doctrine is the same as is testified of in the Scripture of truth;
and where it is received, remission of sins is received, it being the same that
our Example the firstborn amongst many brethren, the first begotten from the
dead preached, which Gospel we preach to every creature, which Gospel is the
power of God; and where it is received does both destroy sin, and sanctify
them throughout in body, soul, and spirit, and by it is the members which are
upon the earth mortified: for this is the power that raised up Jesus from the
dead, and does also quicken out mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in
us, in which the Scripture is witnessed, which was a Treatise of those things
which was known and surely believed amongst the Saints, and which says, they
that are asleep in the dust of the earth, shall rise, some to everlasting life,
and some to everlasting shame and contempt: and from ^he true foundation,
witnessing these doctrines which the Apostles did not lay again the
foundation of: Repentance from dead works, and faith toward God, of the
doctrine of baptisms and laying on of hands, and of the Resurrection from the
dead, and of eternal ^udgment, Heb. 6.12, for we having learned what it is to
be baptized for the dead, deny such as say there is no ^esurrection of the
dead; the first frui^s of this Resurrection is Christ, 1 Cor. 15.22. of which
^hey that are of Christ are witnesses of these things, and they come to know
each seed in the light, through the figures and through the parables. Now in
the parables I say to you, that seed which you sow in the earth, whether it be
Wheat or other grain, you sow not that body which shall be, but God gives it a
body as pleases him. If it be so in the earthly parable, then learn to know
the seeds, and the nature of them, which God gives to each of them, its own
body; there is heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies; ^he glory of the heavenly
is one, and the glory of the earthly is another: and so all being turned to the
light, which you are enlightened withal, you in it will know the things that
differ both the seeds, the bodies and the glories: and so let every one be a
witness of what they profess of the things of God; for by the Spirit of the
Lord have we received the knowledge, and so are made witnesses of these things
which our brethren the Prophets and Apostles of Jesus Christ has testified in
the Scriptures; and though our way be called the sink of all heresy, as the
Apostle was called the ringleader of the Sect of the Nazerens, and his way
Heresy: yet in it do we worship the God of our Fathers; though the chief
Priests do call it so, yet that does not m^ke it so, no more then it did in the
Apostles days; for we are manifest to God in all our ways, and unto that of God
in every man's conscience. Again, Priest Clapham accuses us for working of
miracles, naming several places in which they were wrought, in the eighth
Section of his Book; so that all may take notice, that in vvhomsoever the Lord
is manifest to make his power known in doing good, that is the object of ^is
envy; so that it is manifest that he does not despise us, but God and his
power, so as if the power of God were not manifest in us, to convert, turn
unto God, and seal, we should not be despised by him. And also take notice
that the grounds of his knowledge of these things is reports that came to him,
as himself declares in his eighth Section, and yet in the beginning of his book
he says he will lay nothing to our charge, but what he has sufcient
personal knowledge of himself. Now he has not been personally present in
seeing or hearing any of those things which he charge against u^, as
pretended M^racles, and so the beginning and end of his work is a lie; and in
page 51. of his book he charges us with some in Yorkshire poisoning of
themselves in prison, which is false, and he has it but from a false report,
and so has no personal knowledge of it himself. And likewise he says, That
the light that all be enlightened withal, is the light of reason and
understanding; and that this light is natural, and that it is the light of
nature, and that the natural light is the remainder of Gods image, as in page
57.

Answ. Here has he fully manifested his ignorance of the light, and of Gods
image; as first, Of the Light, calling it the light of reason: Now some are
unreasonable men, and so all have not reason; and some are Idiots, and so have
not understanding. So then all are not enlightened with reason and
understanding; but Christ calls it not reason nor understanding, but calls it
the light which is the condemnation of all them that do not believe in it, and
with it those works which are wrought in God are justified, and that which is
after the flesh is condemned, and that which is able to justify and condemn
the creature in the sight of God, according to their obedience or disobedience
to God, is not natural; for there is no other condemnation bu^ the light, which
whosoever believes in it, are the children of it; and who are children of it,
are children of God, and heirs of the everlasting inheritance; and they that
walked in it was the light of the World, and their light shined before men; and
upon whom does not his light arise, Mat. 5.14? Job. 25 3. The wicked and
deceitful man does the Lord enlighten, they whose deeds are evil; though they
that rebel against the light knows not the ways of it, nor abide in the path^
of it, Job 24.13. And many such are in this generation; and are as Job did see
that such have light though they walk not in the paths of it; nor known at the
ways of it, because they hate it, but to the light in such are we made
manifest, and it shall witness us before the Lord, And such as were fools, and
scorners, and without understanding, the Lord bids them return at his reproof,
them who did hate knowledge, and said, I will pour out my spirit upon you,
and make known my words unto you; but they hated knowledge, and did not
choose the fear of the Lord, they would none of Gods counsels, but despised all
his reproof, therefore says God, they shall eat of the fruit of their own way,
and be filled with their own devices; for the turning away of the simple shall
slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them, Prove. 1.23, 29, 30,
32. Mark this is one with your case who hate the light which does reprove you;
by you the simplicity of Christ is turned away and despised, and your folly
remains, who hate the light and calls it natural reason or understanding; but
Christ calls it the light which is the condemnation of all them that do not
believe in it. And again, to say that is the remainder of Gods image, which is
natural, is blasphemy; for the image of God is spiritual, Christ the express
image of the Fathers person; and if there be a remainder of Gods image in all
men since the fall, as Clapham affirms, then there remains that which is
spiritual in all men; but to him I say, let all flesh be silent from saying
that the light, or any thing of Gods image is natural, for such things will not
the Lord suffer unpunished.

Pr. Again, Clapham in the 12. Section of his Book, says, That God is said to
be a respecter of persons, and brings Genesis 4.4, 5. to prove it, The Lord had
respect unto Abel, but unto Cain he had no respect.

Answ. Abel was righteous, and Cain was wicked, and God had respect unto the
righteous and unto the seed; and so it is now in all Nations, Kindreds,
Tongues, and People; every one that fears God and works righteousness is
accepted of him as Abel was: And God is no respecter of persons; for unto Cain
God says, If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? so if Cain had done
well, he should have been accepted as Abel was. So let God be true, and every
man a liar that says God is a respecter of persons, when as the Scripture
says, God is no respecter of persons; neither did the Apostles respect any
man's person, but declare against such as do, calling such filthy dreamers,
which had men's persons in admiration because of advantage, and those were they
which spoke great swelling words and separated themselves, sensual, having not
the spirit, against whom Jude is a witness, Jude 8, 16, 17. and against such
are we witnesses; and the Apostle James in his Epistle to the twelve Tribes, he
is a witness against such that respect persons, and told them that the Law,
which is light, would convince them that it was sin, and such was
tra^sgressors, and did not abide in the doctrine of Christ, has not the Father
nor the Son, as John witnesses 2 John 1.9. and all such as do respect persons;
now the Law of Christ which is written in the heart, whose Law is light, will
convince them to be transgressors, and so the light which convinces is one
with the Apostles doctrine, but contrary to Jo. Clapham.

Pr. Which again says, That grace is a created thing, and that the Scriptures
calls it the new creature, and brings Ephesians. 2.10. 2 Cor. 5.17. to prove it.

Answ. Here is no such thing in these Scriptures as that grace is a created
thing, nor that it is called the new creature: but the Apostle says, By grace
are we saved through faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God:
Now was that grace by which they were saved a created thing? if it was, prove
it by plain Scripture, else stop thy mouth; for we have searched the Scriptures
and we find no such thing; but we find that by grace they were saved, and that
they who are new creatures in Jesus Christ, the grace of God was their teacher,
as it is our teacher to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, godly, and righteously in this present evil world, which grace is able
to keep the hearts and minds in the knowledge and love of God, of all those who
are taught by it, but is not a created thing.

Pr. That the principles of Christian faith is established upon the Scriptures,
page 74.

Answ. Faith has but one foundation; and all who are believers, their
foundation is established upon Christ, who is the Author of Faith, before any
Scripture was written; Jacob, Enoch, Abraham, Isaac, had no Scriptures written
to establish their faith upon; and when Moses and the Prophets had known, seen
and believed, and from that wrote of him who was the true light, enlightening
every one, that in him very one might believe; so every one, whether they have
the writings of the Prophets and Apostles or not, yet they have that in which
they are to believe, which if they believe not is condemned, and believing in
the light, they come to be the children of the light; and here the first
principle comes to be known of faith; and so the first principle of the
doctrine of Christ must be known, before the doctrine be professed, and so all
who know not the first principle of faith, are far from the says; and who
knows not the first principle of the doctrine, is far from a doctrine; and so
the principle of a thing must be known before the thing; but the Scripture
speaks of nothing that the Christian faith is to be established upon, but upon
Christ who was glorified with the Father before the world was; by whom all
things which now are, were made, who has given us of his spirit: and to us it
is given to believe and suffer for his names sake, as it was given those who
were his true witnesses before us, and they did believe because it was given
them to believe by the spirit; so faith is the gift of God, and many have the
Scriptures which have not faith, which is the gi^t of God; and they which are
turned from the faith, are pierced through with many hurtful lusts, have the
Scriptures, and say they believe what the Scripture speaks: but this I say,
that faith is the ground of the Scriptures, and not the Scriptures the ground
of faith, and none can believe in Christ but they who believe in the ^ight
which Christ has enlightened every one withal that comes into the World; and
all who own Christ's Doctrine, who says, believe in the light, that ye may be
the children of light; which who believe in, shall not abide in darkness, but
shall have the light of life, and shall not enter into condemnation; but who
believe in any thing else, their faith is vain, they are yet in their sins; and
he that lays another foundation for faith then Christ, let him be accursed.

Thus having laid before the people some of those things with which his book is
filled, and for this end do I lay them open, that those for whom Christ died,
and unto whom his love is reached forth to bring them to the Father, should not
be corrupted with the unsound form of doctrine delivered unto them by their
Priest: And again as follows, I shall lay down some particulars which he has
held forth as affirmed principles in his book, which if you receive his
testimony, you must believe as your principles also; but if you come to try
them with the measure of the light that Christ has enlightened them withal,
then you will deny both him and them: therefore mark them as follows,

1 That the Magistrate is an Officer of Jesus Christ as Mediator.

2 That Jesus Christ has a political and spiritual Kingdom.

3 That Christ the eternal Son of God is distinct from the Father eternally.

4 That the Spirit was distinguished from the Father and Son from eternity.

5 That the Father, Son, and Spirit, are three substances.

6 That the soul of man is humane, and that humane and immortal is both one.

7 That Christ may dwell in his people by his special spiritual presence and
have no union with them.

8 That God dwells in the heavens, but has no union with them.

9 That the union between God and believers cannot be comprehended by the
Saints here.

10 That heaven is not to be enjoyed wh^le men are here.

11 That the Corinthians who were baptized from the dead, were anc^ent
Heretics.

12 That the light which has enlightened every man that comes into the World,
is the light of reason and understanding, and is natural.

13 That natural light is the remainders of Gods image in man.

14 That God is a respecter of persons.

15 That the grace of God is a created thing, and that it is called the new
creature.

16 That the principles of Christian faith is established upon the Scriptures.

I having here answered and laid open those things which is a mist of darkness
over the peoples minds and understandings, whereas they are either received or
believed, to the end that all who read it may come to that understanding which
is a wellspring of life, and to the knowledge of that truth by which iniquity
is purged out, and to the counsel of God in the heart, which is like deep
waters; whereby judgment in righteousness comes to be set up, by which the
simple and tenderhearted comes to be preserved out of the snares of subtilty
and craftiness, to walk in the light of the Lord, which is the path of the just
and the way of life, and all they are blessed with spiritual blessings that
walk in it, for they shall be able to tread upon Scorpions; and the deadly
poison that is under the tongues and in the hearts of the generation of Vipers
and Serpents shall not hurt them; and this power shall all those be endued with
which believe in the light of the Lord, answering that of God in all their
consciences, which leads into a chaste conversation before the Lord, ordering
their conversations aright in his sight; and all such who be turned to the
light with which they are enlightened by Christ, shall discern who serves God
and who serves him not, in this day when many profess him, but few serve him in
spirit and in truth, as he will be worshipped by them whom he has chosen.

Necessary Questions propounded to the Priests to be answered.
1 WHat is that in every man which the Gospel is to be preached unto, which is
able to receive, believe, and obey it; which if not received, believed, and
obeyed, is their condemnation?

2 And what and where that light is which every man must be turned unto before
they can receive the remission of their sins?

3 And whether that be not in the Heathens which if they obey not will be their
condemnation, though they have never heard nor seen the Scriptures, and what is
it that is the condemnation of such?

4 And whether any things which is not spiritual and eternal, can condemn the
creature from God for not obeying it?

5 And whether such have not the Gospel who have not seen nor heard the
Apostles writings, and what the Gospel is which they that disobey, the wrath of
God is revealed from heaven against, though they have not known the Letter?

6 And whether any be condemned for disobeying that which they do not know?

7 And whether that in all which are come into the world, by which they are
justly condemned, disobeying it, is not able and sufficient to lead them to
life eternal, obeying it?

8 And whether such who speak good words to the people, and they themselves be
out of the life of them, be not deceivers, and cannot profit the people at all?

9 And whether ever any was sent of the Lord to preach that to others that was
not fulfilled in themselves?

10 And whether the Gentiles have not that light in them, which justifies them
that believe in it?

11 And whether thou be in the life of all that which thou preachest to others,
und be a witness of it, if thou had not seen the Scriptures?

12 What is it to be baptized for the dead, and whether they who were baptized
for the dead did not deny the resurrection of the dead?

13 Did Christ own the praying of the Pharisees in the Synagogues, or did he
not call them heathens? and what was it that made them Heathens, seeing they
were Jews after the flesh? Whether was it not their idola^rous worship and
oppressing the people, and is not this your mark and proof by Christ's words?

14 Is there any unrighteouser trade in the Nation then the Priests in selling
the Letter, for they will have money of them that do not buy of them, as they
have of them that have agreed with them, and hired them?

15 Is there ever a Tradesman in the Nation so unrighteous that sells his wares
on the week day, as the Priests do on the first day, to take money of them, and
compel them to pay money they sell nothing to?

16 Is there ever a poor hireling or hedger, or labourer in the Nation, that
will force people that have not hired them, nor set them at labor, to pay them
money? would not this be an unrighteous thing in those laborers and hirelings,
as the Priests do take of them that have not hired them nor set them on work;
is this a righteous thing, let all honest hearts judge?

17 Whether would not the Priests account it an unright^ous and unequal thing
in us to compel them to repair our Meeting Houses in every County, and to give
us sums of money? and if so, whether are they yet come to the royal Law of
Liberty, to do unto all men as they would men should do unto them; and if short
of the Law, much more of (...) Gospel?

18 Are not you them that eat men's bread for naught? Mark, eat men's bread for
naught, to whom you do nothing for, and to pluck it out of the mouths of
fathers and children.

I wish that you were either in the Law or in the Gospel, for then some of your
practices, ways, or words, might be justified, which now they cannot; therefore
learn wisdom while you may see your folly, which now is made manifest with the
truth.

Richard Hubberthorn.

The Horn of the He-Goat broken: OR,
An Answer to Tho. Winterton his Book, which he affirms to be, A chasing of
the young Quaking Harlot out of the City; which if those that he writes against
be not by it chased out of the City, then all may take him to be a false
Prophet, which reads what he has affirmed by his Book to be brought to pass.
To the READER.
READER,
THE time is come and coming, wherein the God of Heavenis setting up his
Kingdom, which is not carnal but spiritual; and establishing his throne in
righteousness, and the day is appeared and appearing, wherein all that oppose
him shall be ashamed. Now when he is declaring his righteousness and his saving
health in the Nations, and now the Man of Sin and Antichrist is discovered, and
the hidden things is brought to light: and now when his enemies cannot hide
themselves any longer, but their shame must appear who are covered, and not
with the spirit of the Lord: Therefore I say, because the Lord in his mercy
has caused his mavelous light to arise in the earth, the Prince of darkness
is angry, and all his subjects, because their judgment draws nigh, and their
strength must be thrown down: And as the Lord has made manifest his light more
then in some generations past: Therefore the rage of the old Dragon is greater,
and his Angels and instruments who are to be taken with the Beast and the false
Prophet, and shut up in the pit, and sealed in utter darkness for ever, and
therefore he is come forth in his power and his strength, and all his subjects
every one with such weapons as they have; some with clubs, some with prisons,
whippings, reproaches, and mockings: some with their corrupt sensual wisdom to
oppose; some with lies, and slanders; but all is at work to defend their
Masters Kingdom, and would not have the man to rule (Christ Jesus) who will
judge all their unrighteousness, and bring down the Beast out of his seat:
amongst whom thou may see Tho. Winterton sitting near his Master, unto whom
he is fallen upon the throen of unrighteousness. In a former Book he denied any
thing above nature to guide man; and in this his last book would judge of us by
his evil consequence, and he has denied that he has any thing that is
infallible; but he says he judges by his imaginary faculty, and he judges us
in the 15. page to be Harlots, because we speak plain language, as Thou, and so
has made all the holy men of God Harlots and Adulterers, who used the same;
and so blasphemously against the spirit of truth has set himself, and makes
lies his refuge, as the rest of the Dragons Army do: and therefore these few
things mind, wherein his shame is laid open, and his lies denied, and his
sensual Queries answered, which rose from his imaginary faculty. And so take
heed Reader thou come no^ in the way of the liars, nor lend thy ear to the
wicked; but mind the light of Christ Jesus, which will show thee men of corrupt
minds and corrupt things, and seeing in the single eye. In vain does the Fowler
spread his net in the sight of the bird. Try all things by measure of the
spirit, hold that which is good. A friend to righteousness I am, and a lover of
thy soul.

R. H.

IN thy former Book thou have been proved to deny the Father, Son, and Spirit;
and denied that there is any thing in thee above nature: And in this book also
thou have made it manifest to be guided only by the natural senses, and so to
be sensual, having not the Spirit: and so in this thy sensual wisdom without
the Spirit of God, thou go about to prove us to be the Harlot, and to be
upon two dangerous designs; the first by our Doctrine, the second by the Sword.
First, as from our Doctrine, to prove it, thou bring four particulars, as
first, that we say;

That the peoples souls, understanding and reason, were carnal, fleshly and
unto condemnation.

To which I answer, All people which hate the light of Christ as thou do, and
set up reason and imagination to be their guide, and knows nothing above nature
in them, their senses are reprobate, and their understandings darkened, and
their reason carnal and fleshly, which is for condemnation with the light: and
to those that were sensual, whose reason was carnal and fl^shly, did the
Apostles minister condemnation, as thou may read in the Scripture; and yet
that proved them not to be harlot^; but their design in their Doctrine was, to
exalt Christ, which is the true light, and lighteneth every one that comes
into the World, and our design is the same, against which no enchantments,
lies, nor falls accusations from Priest or Atheists can prevail.

The second particular wherein thou would prove us to be the Harlot, and our
design to be dangerous, is, because we say, That Christ lighteneth every one
that comes into the world. And to this thou thy self in the fifth page of thy
Book confessest to be a truth clear from Scripture; and that this light
discovers to every one (that will) both good and evil: and in the fourth page
thou call this particular, That Christ has lightened every one that comes
into the World, a pure truth; and yet thou would make the people believe that
we were the Harlot for holding forth the pure truth; and so thy own breath as
fire shall devou^ thee. And hereby the pure truth of God which we hold forth,
is cleared, and thou broken to pieces by the stone upon which thou fallest. But
all the Atheism, and all the Pries^s doctrine cannot make the people so blind
as to believe that holding forth the pure truth of God, will make us to be an
Harlot, or our design dangerous,: and here thou have manifested ^hy spirit,
that all may see what we are accused for, and by whom, being accused to be
harlots, heretics, deceivers and deluders, blasphemous and dangerous, because
we hold forth the pure truth of God according to the Scriptures; ye^, so far
has God turned the wise backwards, and made their wisdom foolishness, that
even our enemies and accusers are forced to confess, that it is holden forth
to the pure truth according to the Scripture, for which we are accused, as T.
Winterton has done, to his own shame and confusion.

The third particular from which thou would prove us to be the harlot, and our
designs dangerous, are in these words, which thou say thou gathered from our
Doctrine.

That whatsoever believers in this light, it is as a fire and a hammer to break
and consume all carnal lust, and fleshly and selfish desires whatsoever, that
now they cannot sin.

Ans. Here thou have gathered that which we have not strewen, and in thy
imaginations thou have gathered thy evil thoughts, conceiving of that which
never was spoken from us as thou speak it, and now they cannot sin. But this
I say, that he that believes in the light, and follows Christ who is the
light, shall have the light of life, and shall never come into condemnation, if
he abide in the light which comes from Christ, the Word which is as a fire and
a hammer, which where it dwells consumes all carnal and fleshly lusts. And
hereby it is easily known who have the word, from them who have but the letter.
And whereas thou say that light is but to discover, and not active at all;
here thou have showed thy self to be ignorant, both of the light and of the
Scripture, which says the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and it shall
burn up and devour his thorns and briars in one day. And this light was
witnessed to burn and consume that which is contrary to it: and whereas thou
say, that if we will be purged, we must seek something else, for light will
not do it. I answer, God is light, as in 1 John, 1.5. and Christ is the light,
John 8.12. and if God and Christ who is the light, will not do it, then what
else must people seek unto to be purged? And again thou say, thou deniest
that light or any thing within man or without man, does or ever did so cleanse,
purify and make perfect the souls of men: and then thou addest, to make up thy
dark saying, as that it were safe and convenient to allow them no other guide
or director but the dictates of their own light and spirit within them: As for
the latter thou may take it to thine own, for we deny all those which walks
after their own, whether thou call it light or dictates, for that which is
their own is darkness, and not light; but those that follow the light of
Christ, and deny that which is their own for his sake we own. And as for thy
former, to deny that light, or any thing within or without man, does or ever
did cleanse or purify and make perfect the sons of men; let all here take
notice of thy Atheism, who has denied Christ and his light either either
within or without men to do it.

The fourth particular by which thou would prove us to be the Harlot, and our
designs dangerous, is in these words, That now the Scripture is no more a
guide for us to walk by, nor nothing without them, but the light within them,
and that seeks after any other guide but that within him, is in the flesh
still. Which words are thy one, and was not so spoken by any of us.

But to thee I say, that the Scripture which did foresee that which we now do
see, we own to be one with the light which was before the letter, and to be
our guide in the way of truth: and this guide is within us; but by the
Scripture letter without thee, thou neither sees nor foresees the things which
belong to eternal life, which if ever any come to see, it must be by the light
of Christ within them; and all who own this light, and with it is guided,
cannot deny the Scriptures which was spoken forth from the light within.

Again thou would accuse E. B. to be changing in his doctrine from one thing
to another, because he said, that all strife and contention, and revenge, was
of the flesh, and of the Devil, and to be condemned with the light: which
testimony is also true, and this testimony can we never deny nor change from.
And whereas thou bring his salutation to contradict that, where he says,
Make war in righteousness against Gog and Magog, and prepare for the Lord.
Herein thou have manifested thy blindness, which cannot see the war which
stands in righteousness, from that which proceeds from the lust: but as thou
have imagined carnally of all the things of God which was spoken from the same
spirit: and so as well may thou make lies, and pervert our words, as thou do
the Scriptures: and now having published many lies against us, thou make a
profession of thy own condition, that all people may see from what thou judge
us to be in delusion; thy words are these: Now forasmuch as I have not an
infall^ble spirit, infallibly to interpret what may be intended in these
revengfull expositions, notwithstanding my imaginary faculty might find ground
enough of bad consequence in them, yet I shall leave them to better judgments,
as in the ninth page of thy book.

Ans. Thy now leaving of us to better judgments, or to them that have the
spirit of truth, will not excuse thee for what thou have done already, that
has had nothing to judge us by all this while, (that thou have spoken and
written against us) but evil consequences out of thy imaginary faculty. How
art thou fallen from what thou seemedst to pretend against us in thy books! as
if thou had known that we had held forth false Doctrine, or intended a
carnal war, because we spoke of a war in righteousness. But now thou speak
plainly, that thou have not the spirit of Truth, truly to interpret what we
intend in our expressions; but leeves it to better judgments: Here thou have
manifested thy self a foolish builder; it had been less shame for thee if thou
had not begun, then having begun in thy imaginary faculties and bad
consequences, and now confessest thou want the spirit of Truth; here thou
have proved thy self to be the Harlot, and fit to be chased out of the City,
who does raise strife, accusations and lies against the truth of God from thy
imaginary faculties and bad consequence, being without the spirit of truth.
Again, in thy answer to E. B. salutation, thou boasts from thy imaginary
faculty, and say in thy 11. page, O thou proud presumptuous, ambitious
Quaker, whence is thy original? thou art not yet seven years old, and art
thou the only people of the whole creation, in the favor of the Almighty!
therefore woe be to them that live to see thee prosperous to a manly age.

Answ. Our original is before all ages, or the number of years, and before any
imaginary faculties (which is thy rule) was, and this in time being brought
forth, which before all times was, they who are found in their imaginary
faculties, as thou art, the woe comes upon them; and thy woe and torment will
increase, as the truth increases; as it was from Christ to the Jews, Scribes
and Pharisees, in the days of his flesh, who questioned the truth of his word
from the youngnesse of his years, as thou do his truth now, having nothing
to judge with but thy imaginary faculties, having nothing of infallible spirit,
and yet thou goes on accusing us, that we deny all matter and form of worship.
I say, where the spirit of truth is, which thou say thou have not, there is
both the matter and form of the true worship owned, and not denied; which
spirit we have, and know both the matter and form: but in thy imaginary
faculties there is neither. And whereas thou say, that we deny actual
obedience, and the authority of the Scriptures; that is false: for by that
authority that gave forth the Scriptures, are we daily in actual obedience to
the Lord. Again, thou bring several particulars, which thou call the
marks of the Harlot by which she may be known: as first, in her language,
which is to speak the word Thou to a particular person in stead of You, thou
would make the language of the Harlot; then all the Prophets, Christ and the
Apostles, did speak the language of the Harlot; and then the Scripture is
translated in the language of the Harlot, which does not use the word You to
any particular person. But here thou have made it more manifest to be without
the spirit, and to speak from thy imaginary faculties.

The second mark is her weapons, which is, saying that people is carnal, and
in the flesh, and that they know not the light of Christ, but stumble at the
stumbling-stone, and are in the cursed ground, and that they cannot believe
though the truth be declared unto them, they having not the spirit, but are in
their sins. And this thou say is the weapon of the Harlot.

Answ. Now these words were all used by the Ministers of the most high God
against the Harlot, as thou art manifest to be, who stumbles at the
stumbling-stone as it is written, Romans 9.32. John, 11.9, 10. Here thou may
see they which were no harlots told them they stumble at the stumbling-stone,
and told some that they were carnal, 1 Corinthians. 3.3* and the Prophets told
them they had eyes and could not see, ears and could not hear, and hearts and
could not understand, Isaiah, 44.18. and this was no mark of a Harlot in the
Prophet; but they whom he said was so, was Harlotted from the Lord, and Christ
told them, that they were yet in their sins, and told them they should die in
their sins, John 8.24. if they bel^eved not, and told them they were of their
father the Devil, and had not known God, but was from beneath, John, 8. And
these thing in Christ was no mark of a harlot, but they were harlots whom he
so Judged, and so thy marks discover thee.

The third mark, Her presumption, attempting to share with the Almighty. And
this which thou calls presumption, is to be guided by God; and hereby thou does
accuse all the Saints of God, for they all did so far presume as to be guided
by God and by his spirit, and to say that all the children of the Lord should
be taught of the Lord, and this was no presumption, nor no mark of the harlot,
and they said, as he, is so are we in this present World: and this was no
presumption, nor the mark of the harlot, but humility; if thou were not blind
thou would see it.

The fourth mark is, pretending to own the Scriptures, and speak much of
Religion, and yet have nothing in matter, form, or essence.

Answ. This has marked out thy condition, that pretends to own the
Scriptures, and professes them, and has not that Spirit which gave them
forth, being guided by the imaginary faculties, and so without the power and
effect of that which thou professes: but we by that spirit which gave them
forth, do them profess, and have the form, power, and effect, of what we do
profess; and so the mark of the harlot returns upon thy self, which is to
presume without the spirit.

The first mark, her attendance; the ignorant and the lewd.

Answ. If this be the mark of the Harlot, try thy self; for who is more
ignorant than he that wants the infallible spirit, as thou confesses thou
do? For this mark of the harlot thou cleares us from in the sixth page of
thy book, who there accuses us of subtilty: and in the 16 page, of ignorance;
and so thou multiplies thy confusion and ignorance. And for lewdness, thou may
own the guilt of that thine self: for if thou were not both lewd and mad in thy
divinations thou would not have so false accused those that have the spirit of
God, confessing thy self not to have it; but that it is that thy folly may more
speedily be made manifest unto all men, that the Scripture upon thee may be
fulfilled.

The sixth mark, her kindred, and that's the Ranters, which thou say is the
mark of the Harlot.

Herein thou have numbered thy self, thy own testimony being a witness to it,
and thy guide which is thy natural senses, and corrupt reason, knowing neither
light nor spirit of Christ within, and therefore no restraint thou knows from
thy diverse lusts, but both the Ranters and thou in your sensual liberty is
found, and by us you are both denied; for from that kindred we are redeemed, and
from all harlots marks.

The seventh mark is, she is the youngest of all Harlots, little above five
years old.

Ans. If thou would prove us to be the Harlot from the youngness of years, as
little above five, then thou must deny that which thou have asserted against us
in the 13. page; for there thou would prove us to be false Prophets from those
fruits that Christ spoke of Mat. 7.15. And if thou prove any thing against us
from that in Mat. 7. then it is not from the yongnesse of years; for that is
above five years since: so these confusions I return unto thee again, that
thou may see that blindness and confusion is the sign of the Harlot.

Now as in answer to thy Queries.
Query 1. WHether it be not lawful to presuppose things (...) are not, to find
out the truth of things that (...) And if so, then, etc.

Ans. It is not lawful for thee to int^nde into things (...) thou have not
seen, vainly puffed up in thy fleshly mind. (...) that goes into things that art
not, to find out the truth of (...) that are, goes from God the Truth, that is,
into a lie; and (...) presupposing things there, is not lawful; neither can
thou (...) ought there; for naught brings forth its like, being gone (...) God
that is.

2. Whether there had been any need of Christ's coming in the (...) Adam had
stood in his created estate?

Ans. Christ^s coming in the flesh is that everlasting (...) in which the
Creation stands, and in which Adam had his (...) estate, and so there was need
of that which gave Adam (...) being and recovery.

The third and fourth: Whether Christ restored to believers any (...) then Adam
lost? And whether there be any ground to believe that (...) in this life has
more communion with God, or are more pure or perfe^^ than Adam was in Paradise?

Ans. Art thou got above the Innocence in thy imaginations, and have the ground
of thy belief to seek? First, come down out of thy imaginations, that thou
may feel the ground of Faith; till then thou art no believer; and thereby be
led up into a perfect state, to have communion with God in Paradise; till then,
thou art not in that which Adam lost, and cannot underst^nd an estate above,
nor believe it though it be told thee; that which now enquires, must lose its
life ere thou come into Paradise: God's secrets must not feed Serpents.

5. Whether Adam in Paradise did not partake of that Light with which Christ
lighteneth every one that comes into the world?

Ans. The life of Adam in Paradise is the same, that is the light of the World,
wherewith he lightneth every one that comes into the World; and of this Adam
did partake in Paradise* which gave him Light and Understanding, which when he
went into the selfish knowledge, he became brutish; and this is a witness
against him.

6. Whether this Light of Christ, and all other Lights (within man, if any
there be) are not seated in the understanding and mind? And whether all men's
surest Light is not conveyed through the senses to the understanding? And
whether this will not more clearly appear, if considered, thae stopping of the
current of the senses, the understanding become^h totally dark as unto
certainties, it having nothing there to nourish it, but imagination?

Ans. In this thou shows thy confusion, with thy many lights, but have lost the
knowledge of the true Light, and so utters thy darkness; first asks if the
Light be not seated in the understanding, and then asks if it be not conveyed
through the senses to the understanding; but the surest Light is conveyed by
faith thereof, born in the understanding, and not by thy sense; and to thy wits
end that is carnal, must thou come, if this thou learn; for the mystery is
held in a pure conscience, and not in thy sensual understanding; and who knows
this, has their understanding enlightened by faith, and not by the current of
the natural senses.

7. and 8. Whether it argues not darkness in the understanding to determine
any thing real or certain, which was not conveyed by the senses to the
understanding? Whether for want of this consideration, many have not been
possessed with as strong a confidence of a certainty, as all their powers both
of soul and body could procure, yea to the laying down of their lives, and yet
a mere imagination!

Ans. To determine any thing before the Lord, argues darkness in the
understanding: But what he reveals in the Spirit of Faith, and leads unto by
his light, and not by the sensual understanding; and for want of this
consideration have many been possessed with a strong confidence of a certainty;
and not having found their ends therein, have turned back again into deceit,
ready to conclude there is no God, because he would not answer their
imagination, who determined things in their own wills, before the guidings of
his Spirit; and see if hereof thou be not guilty.

9. Whether John Lilburn was not as confident that God owned him in his
Religion opposing the Powers of the Nation, as Saul was in his design to
Damascus? And whether Saul's conversion to a Christian, and John Lilburns
resolving to a Quaker, be upon one and the same ground?

Ans. That John Lilburn was confident in his Religion, is plain; else had he
not so long been deceived; and that God owned him in opposing many of the
unjust Powers of the Nation, is as plain; else had not he lived to have been
converted; and that the ground thereof is the same wherewith Paul was
converted, is as evident as the rest, to them that are in the Light, and out of
the imaginations; and your envy to him since he owned the truth, is no small
Testimony of it; and so all things testifying together, the Tree will be known
by its fruits to them that are not blind.

10. Whethee God did not convey this new Light or Dispensation to Saul's
understanding through his senses, in that it is said he heard and saw, as a
sure ground to build his faith upon? And also, whether he did not give him
Power and Authority by signs and wonders, to convey to the understanding of
those to whom he was sent to convert, a sure ground of faith also?

Ans. Here thou have manifested that thou art blind and in confusion; for the
ground of faith is but one in Paul and those that were converted; and this
ground of faith is not of man, nor conveyed from one man to another, but it is
the gift of God, and Christ is the Author of it. In thy Query thou art speaking
of the Light in which he heard and saw, being the ground of Paul's Faith, and
the signs and wonders wrought by Paul, being a sure ground to convey faith to
the people: If thou were not blind, thou would see, that in Paul and the
people the ground of Faith is but one; and they that believed because of the
Miracles, their Faith as thine, does stand in that which is changeable, and is
not from the true ground; but those whom Paul preached unto, he told them, that
the Word of Faith was within them: The Word which he preached, and the Light
was in them, and so he was to turn them to the Light and to the Word which was
within them. And whereas thou asks, Whether it was not conveyed through the
senses to the understanding: First learn to know where it is, and what it does
enlighten in thee, and then thou will know what is conveyed through; for as yet
in thee thy senses are ignorant of it, though it shine in darkness.

11. Whether if John Lilburn have received the same ground of faith so conveyed
to his understanding immediately from God, as Saul had, or by some other whom
God has endued with Power and Authority to convey a ground of Faith, as Paul
did, then far be it from me for blaming of J. Lilburn for being a Quaker:
Otherwise, whether if he have not received the ground of faith aforesaid,
whether it be not easy to discern, that John Lilburn's Resurrection is but a
mere imagination or Quaking Delusion?

Ans. Faith is the gift of God, and not the gift of Paul; and herein thou art
blind: And Christ says, Believe in the Light while ye have the Light; but he
did not bid them believe in that which was of man, nor conveyed by men to one
another: Yet thou confessest that it was conveyed to Paul immediately from God.
Therefore seeing thou make a difference, show who did ever receive Faith, or
the ground of it, and not from God, and what was the ground of Abraham's Faith,
and Enoch's, before the Scripture-Letter was written: But the ground of John
Lilburn's Faith is immediately from God as Paul's was; and therefore thou
may cease blaming of him for his being turned to the Faith.

12. Whether it be not easy to find out whether the Quakers doctrine be a
dispensation of God, or a dispensation of man's will? Whether if it be of God,
he will not take the same care for the divulging of it, as he did of his former
dispensation? that is, by such evidences as no false Minister could procure; as
when he commanded his Apostles to preach to the world, and to baptize them that
believed, and to teach them to observe all things, etc.

Ans. Although our Doctrine be of God, yet to thee and all in that nature, it
is not easy to know, nor find to be so; for none knows our Doctrine whether it
be of God, but he that does the Will of our Father, and walks in his obedience;
and it is manifest, that thou yet hate the way whereby our doctrine is known;
for thou having not the Spirit of Truth, how art thou like to know that
doctrine which is of God, from imaginations? that which thou tryes withal
being thy imaginary faculty; but that the Lord takes the same care for his
Ministers now, as ever he did, is manifest even by such evidences as no false
Minister can produce; for never any of the false Ministers which the Lord did
not send, did turn any from their iniquity, nor from darkness to the light, nor
from the power of Satan unto God, which now many do witness from the Ministry
which God has now raised up in this age, which is the torment o^ the false
Prophet; for if it had not been evidenced in power and by the Spirit of the
Lord, to be contrary to the false doctrine, especially in turning people from
the wickedness which your doctrine keeps them in, then it might have found
favou^ amongst you, and would not so much have been despised; but to us it is
an evident token of salvation, and that from God, though (...) of perdition.

The Rebukes of a Reviler fallen upon his own head.
In an Answer to a Book put forth by one John Stetham called a Minister at
Terli^g in Essex.
WHereas the Ancient of days has appeared, and the Lord God of Israel, and of
his holy Seed for ever, has in these our days, being his appointed time,
stretched forth his hand to gather in his Remnant which has been scattered and
starved upon the barren Mountains, and he has made known his A^m and Power in
raising up his righteous Branch, and is bringing out of captivity his own
chosen, that his own name may be exalted for evermore; and his marvelous light
has he caused to shine forth unto many that have set in darkness; and he has
cried, Behold me, behold me, unto a people that has not been called by his
name; yea, from this time it shall be said, What has God wrought? And who is
like unto them that are saved by the Lord, a happy people? And blessed are they
whom he has chosen for his own Inheritance; they dwell in their Tents, and
none can make them afraid; for there is no Enchantment against Israel, nor no
divination against the Seed of Jacob; he that curses them, it shall return upon
his own head; and he that defies them, shall surely be confounded in a day; for
God has spoken, and it shall surely come to pass, he has said, and it shall
not be revoked: They that wait upon him, shall never be ashamed, but his
presence shall go before them, and his righteousness shall be their reward.
Therefore O ye Mountains and Hills, wherefore are ye gathered together? ye high
and lofty Oaks, and rebellious children, to what purpose have ye set your
selves as in Array for Battle, against the Lord and against his Anointed? in
vain have you sought divination against Israel, and to no purpose have you
risen up to resist Mount Sion, whom the Lord is establishing and exalting above
the Dominions of the Earth; and though many set themselves (and of the wisest
too, in our age) to gainsay the truth, which is revealed, by subtle Arguments,
and have traveled in pain to bring forth misty vapors, to blind the eyes of
the simple, and have laid (and sought so to do) stumbling blocks of iniquity
before the people, by multitude of crafty productions and lying arguments: Woe
unto you wise Writers and Scribes; you have taken away the key of knowledge,
and have neither entered the Kingdom, nor suffered others to enter that would;
what will be your doom? and what will be your judgment? Oh the heavy hand of
the Lord will be upon you, your damnation sleeps not a moment. And whereas John
Stelham (one of Gogs Army against the Lamb and his followers) a falsely
supposed, and contrarily called, and unjustly named Minister of the Gospel,
has out of his corrupt, wicked, old, lying heart, (which he confesses he
has) brought forth a large piece out of Babylons Treasure, of falsely
collected, and falsely framed arguments, whereby he has sought to offend the
way of the Lord, but the rather has burdened his own soul by his own
wickedness, and offended himself, and made himself unworthy of life eternal,
and is reckoned in the sight of the Lord, and proved in the sight of man, to be
indeed sinful, ( John Stelham;) yea, he is numbered, and truly too, among
Babylons children, and the Liars and Hypocrites, whose portion is in the Lake,
and not among the children of the Lord, for them he has set himself to oppose,
and by his subtilty secretly sought out Enchantments, and endeavoring to curse
whom God has blessed, he is accounted among the uncircumcised, and shall not
dye the death of the righteous, neither shall his last end be like unto his,
except he repent; yea, God has kept him back from honor, and to shame and
disgrace he is already promoted in the sight of all the Saints, and all his
work is trodden down as a branch of a dead Tree, to be cast into the fire: And
what though he has traveled full ten Months, or more, yet his birth is
imperfect, and the fruit of an Egyptian Womb, which has obtained neither
praise of God, nor favor of man: And what though his Arguments be many and
subtle, through the strength of his divellish Wisdom, whereby he has
descended into the darkness to fetch up his stuff, and invented in his mind,
and framed in his evil thoughts, which has filled his Volumes by his envious
pen. And what though he has taken seeming occasion against us by his industry,
and bent his tongue to utter it as friendly and zealously, as may blind the
single eye, and in as great hypocrisy and pretended righteousness as possibly
may: What then of all these things? Let him take this for an Answer in full to
all his many Arguments, and to his whole Work, and whatsoever is brought forth,
or may be yet lodging in his sinful heart ever to declare. We are of God, and
his Covenant is with us, and the whole World lies in wickedness; and he that is
of God hears us. And this is enough Reply to all what he has, or can say
further against us. And this Testimony the Father gives of us, who has chosen
us in him before the World was; and let him and all our Adversaries know, That
our Religion is in that which keeps unspotted of the World, and our acceptance
with God is in him, who is the Light of the World, who exercises our
consciences in all good things toward God, and toward man: And though we
answer not, yet are we no worse; and though we answer, yet are we no better;
praise of men approves us not to God, nor dispraise of men makes us not
sorrowful; but our peace is in the Father, whether the World do us love or
hate, or praise or dispraise us.

And first of all, like unto Rehum and Shimshai, and their companions, he
appears with his Dedication much like unto theirs, from the same Spirit, and
unto the same end, as may be seen Ezra 4.9, 11, 12. etc. and in the manner of
Amaziah Priest of Bethel, unto Jeroboam the King, with a Message much of that
nature, as in Amos 7.10, 11. etc. And this man with his feigned flattering
titles, appears to the chief in Authority for approbation of his Wo^k, that men
may accept it the more: But that is little worth if God accept it less; and in
much secret hyyocrisie has he uttered the intent of his mind in less than a
sheet of paper, to the Protector and Council of State, whom we hope in for more
honesty than to believe lies, and the indictments of a sinful wicked heart:
Well, but if they will harden their hearts to believe unrighteousness, they
shall be filled therewith, till both the ancient and honorable, and the false
Prophet that prophesies lies, which is the tail. Isa. 9.15. be consumed
together, (...) the Dominion shall be given into their hands: then among his
flattering titles, he seems secretly to Complain of Abuse made of the Press,
for the spreading of Anti-scriptural, and Antichristian Errors, as he says:
Indeed his own works do prove his words true, that the Press is abused, which
has by his Pen scribled so many Lies, Reproaches, Slanders, and Errors, and
the Press the instrumental cause of spreading them abroad, whereby the Press
has been abused, to the dishonor of Religion and Piety, if not to the
dishonor of Authority also. Then he seems to hint at the Cruelty and Outcry of
many, for crying Club-law against the men called Quakers; but whether with
approvement, or otherwise of it, his mind is not uttered; however by the Lies
and Slanders ensuing out of his own mouth, it is easily proved, that he is of
that very generation of persecutors; though he so well do not approve of
Persecuting with the hand, yet he allows, and himself is guilty of persenting
with the tongue, which is one in nature; so that hereby the great hypocrisy,
of this man appears, in condemning others secretly of what himself is guilty of
openly; then he is pleased (though the Lord be vexed) to cast forth his peevish
smite against the light of Jesus Christ, wherewith every man in the world is
lighted, in words thus venomously uttered, that perverse Principle of their
(viz Quakers) self-adoring light: Will the Protector and Council believe this,
or will they promote him to honor or magnify him, because of his opprobious
speeches against the light of the Son of God? let them answer and testify
against him, for blasphemy, who has in his hastiness uttered his envy and
wickedness, and no less then denied the Lord that bought him, in calling, and
shamelesly stiling the pure light of Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life,
Perverse Principle, and Self adoring light: and thus it is manifest the Press
is abused by such an Anti-scriptural, and Antichristian error, proceeding out
of John Stelhams old heart, and manifested from his Pen; then with his lying
Message he follows after his flattering titles, and says ere long the Lord
himself will rebuke them ( viz Quakers) to silence, that they shall neither
write, nor speak so presumptuously etc. If his Lords believe this Message, they
shall never bless him, but in the end curse him, when the production of his
lying Prophecy appears, which is deceiving of their Souls, and will prove a
curse upon them, and posterity, and is feeding of them with hopes of vanity and
lies, and on his own head shall his false vision fall; a Rebuke into silence
shall come upon him, the sin is his; writing presumpuously, and arrogantly, and
the judgment thereof shall he feel, and all that believe him; truth shall be
established, and his lying tongue is but for a moment; then his lie he adds to
his Message which is that the Lord Jesus is fighting against them ( viz
Quakers) with the Sword of his mouth, etc. What wicked presentation is this to
the chief Rulers of Nations! even lies, one heaped upon another, to suggest
into the minds of men, to stir up wrath in their hearts, against the just: nay,
Jesus is our Prince of peace and righteousness, and is with us, and fights for
us, and who can be against us? none but such as are his enemies, and have
denied him, and his light; and counted it a perverse Principle. O how fain
would John Stelham, (sinful indeed) gain a Kingdom by flattering, and have
praise of his works by his Lies, which he has made his Refuge, and his Weapon
too! they that believe him shall perish with him; that's all that may be said!
his flattering titles and words of guile, may gain upon the wicked, but the
just man is preserved from the fury of a deceitful tongue; then his (supposed)
humble Supplicate after his false Vision and lying Mess^ge is. That every
person whatsoever, may not impute, strike them ( viz Quakers) Corporally, etc.
This appears fair in word, if his meaning was right; yet while he supplicates,
That every one may not, though whether he means any one may not, (I determine
not) strike them corporally, etc. Yet to publish his Lies, and Errors, and
Slanders, he would have liberty, and this is but so much more secretly to
strike in the greater hypocrisy, in more crafty subtilty; and indeed, well may
the Priests of England be ashamed of what has already been acted, as to
striking and cruel abuses, and works of that nature; the blood of many harmless
has been spilt woefully in streets and Steeple Houses, through the means of the
false Prophets, and it may be they will now take another Weapon, seeing that
has failed, and not wrought effect; no more shall any formed weapon against
the innocent; and though some of them have shamefully cried, Fight Lads for the
Gospel; others may with as much hypocrisy write for the fighting lads, and in
as great deceit: And then he gives an Exhortation in his Supplicate, and says,
Be p^eased to let them ( viz Quakers) know that we are guarded by a bett^r Law,
then what they upbraid us with; its time to be ash^med that you have been so
long guarded by a Popish Law; yet the secret crafts of this man is noted, in
this subtle suggestion; a better law would he have? what does it too much
shame you, by the name of Popish Law, and would you be less discovered, if the
law of the same virtue, were of another Authority then Queen Mary, and of
another Dominion than the Pope? therefore a Law from the Protector he would
supplicate, if possible, That how ever we may not have liberty to deliver our
Doctrine in their Assemblies, as he says; and this evil man, and decever, who
waxes worse and worse in his way, impudently slanders the way of God, and
reproaches the Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, and would wickedly make men
(more honest than himself) believe, that these men's ( viz Quakers) Tenants, as
he says, are as reprobate stuff of the Jesuits, their blasphemies as horrid
as the Popish Parasites: O the wickedness and impudence which has appeared
out of this man's heart in those few words wickedness in that his words are
lies; and devilish, and impudent, in that he dares thus to appear to an
Authority, with the Dedication of Lies; Let him take notice of this, we are
clear from his false Accusations, and of Popish Doctrines; But they that are
one wi^h him, are not from being guarded with a Popish Law; and these are truly
Romes Subjects, who are guarded with his Law; more than we are Romes
Emissaries, which scarcely he would cast upon us, and make the Protector and
his Council believe it, if their hearts be so hardened: But better is thought
upon concerning them, though I.S. would make them evil, suggesting evil into
their hearts: But a false Prophet is known by his Lies and Slanders, and secret
smiting; and then he says, He would have some of this Sect ( viz Quakers,)
more narrowly watched, etc. and stigmatized: Oh cruelty! out of the abundance
of the heart his mouth utters, like a Pot boiling, with anger that cannot
contain it within the mouth; what lodges in tbe heart of this man, consider;
what less, then in their hearts, who ^ere Queen Maryes Jesuiees and Priests, if
the Protector and Council would answer the cruel intent of his mind, as Queen
Mary did theirs? Balaam, or worse he is; or he has sought enchantment, and
would curse before they sent for him to do so; but it shall return on his own
head, who is watched against for a Wolf and Devourer, and stigmatized for a
Deceiver, and false Deviner; one who art marked for a false Prophet, and known
to be so, by every one who is taught of God; and in the end of all this
secretly uttered wickedness, and cruelty, insinuatingly expressed to suggest
evil into the minds of men more honest than himself, he wishes for Blessing
upon his Highness and Honors, that they may discern true Spirits from false,
such who proceed out of the mouth of the false Prophet, from such as proceeds
from the Father, and from the Son; indeed of such a gift of discerning they
have need, and by the fruits they may try every Spiri;t and in a just trial, by
just judgment, are thou tried, and they spirit is made manifest, to be the
spirit which proceeds out of the mouth of the Dagon, who wars against the
Saints, and out of the mouth of the Beast, who has many Heads and many Horns,
which Beast arose up in the Apostasy since the Apostles days; and thy spirit is
made manifest to be the spirit of the false Prophet, who deceives the Nations,
for thy fruits does discover thee a liar; a slanderer, a perverter of the right
way of God, art thou proved, and such things proceeds out of the mouth of the
false Prophet, and so let them beware of thy spirit, who art not guided by the
spirit of Christ Jesus, nor of the Father, but a worker of darkness, and a
rev^ler of the light of Christ, calling it (false Prophet-like, as being led
with the spirit of the Dragon, and the Beast) Perverse Principle: We have
measured thy spirit to be as I have said; and he that speaks otherwise, speaks
as a lie; and if the Protector and his Council believes o^herwise, they believe
a lie, and cannot obtain a blessing, though thou with thy lying spirit pray for
them, whom God (the Father of blessings) hears not, but is against thee; and
this is my prayer, the Lord rebuke thee, and thy wicked tongue, and give the
Protector and his Council a better understanding than to believe thee; else
will the Lord make them cursed to themselves, and to the Nations; of them my
heart hopes better things, and this might serve for a full Answer to thy whole
Book; and by this little of thy work that I have viewed, and turned unto the
sigh of all, art thou discovered to be an enemy to God, and a secret envier of
his people; and by what thou have said it appears what the rest of the whole
matter can be; an evil spirit cannot bring forth good works; but yet a little
further, is my matter unvayled for the sake of the upright.

And further, J. S. after his wicked Presentation to the Rulers of this Nation,
with lies and evil Speeches proceeding out of his old heart, he writes an
Epistle (out of the same heart) to the Church, as he calls them, wherein is
many words uttered, but altogether tasted with that leaven of his malice,
against Quakers and Quakerism, who seems to be the greatest burden upon his
evil heart, because truth is among them, and if truth go on, his deceit will be
more made manifest, wither, and perish; and so as subtly as may be he would
defend himself in the sight of his Church that his shame may not appear before
them (it may be least his Hire should be abated) and he seems to cast a cloak
upon them; but whether out of pure love to their Souls, or for his own Gain,
and such a sum of Money, God knows; how ever the least Child in the truth
dwelling in the light, sees his length, and can measure his state, and knows
that good cannot come from an old lying heart, and he speaks something of
wondering after the beast and false Prophet, but has not described what the
Beast is, and the false Prophet: And I refer the Reader to a Book called The
Measure of the Times: wherein the Priests of England, such as J. S. is reproved
according to the Scripture, to be the very branches of the same Root of false
Prophets which all the World wondered after in John's time; and though he speak
much to his Church of Christ without, and of his birth, blood, and his
righteousness, and justification thereby, etc. but to all that, I say, All are
Reprobates but such in whom Christ is within them, and none are justified but
such, nor has any part in the inheritance of God, though they may profess
never so much of Christ without; and what he has done for others, yet except
he be within them too, to change and renew them, and give them power over all
their sins, their profession of him is vain.

I am no picker of Quarrels; else many of his words might be searched, which I
run over hastily, knowing his voice to be the voice of a stranger, and not of
Christ, who never made use of an old sinful heart to pen Epistles to Churches.

But into this lets search; he says, Christ blesses Infants Baptism: Where,
or when, I ask proof of this, and till then I say J.S. has belyed Christ, and
the generation of the just; Well may he belly us, when he has belied Christ, who
could not ble^s that which there was not: there was no Infants baptism that
ever we read of in his days: sure people will be more wise than to be
established through Lies; else their sin be upon them, if through hardness of
heart they be given up to believe Lies, that they may perish.

He speaks of a well ordered Conversation; Inded this seems Hypocrisy, to
exhort others (their Churches) to that which many of the Independent Teachers
have not thmselves, who are Hirelings, and takes Gifts, and Rewards for
Preaching, and is in the way of all the Deceivers of old; and they that do
these things have not a well ordered Conversation, but a Conversing with the
generation of ungodly; and when we read the plain words of Christ, Luke 17. The
Kingdom of Heaven is within you, he says, we madly wrest the reading of the
words, when we neither add nor diminish; now he seems to say, It is the Kingdom
of Heaven among you, and not the Kingdom of heaven within you; and so blames
the Scripture, and confound^ the doctrine of many of the Independents, who say,
the Scripture is believers Rule; but he seems to charge ths Scripture with
false translations, and therefore is subject to alteration, and so cannot be
the Rule of Believers according to his own account; and thus by wicked men are
we blamed when we do not speak according to Scripture language, and now as
wickedly charged by I. S. for speaking just in the Scripture-expressions, with
madly wresting the words; but thus it was before; and whatsoever we do now, by
enemies must be reviled, and our words abused, contrary to our innocent intents.

Then in the end of his Epistle, he desires the Prayers of his Church, that his
Reply may be accompanied with power according to the truth of it.

Indeed so it shall, and no more; according to the truth of it, which is very
falsehoods and deceits; so shall the power of the Lord confound it, and turn it
into folly and confusion, as may he seen by a sober man, who this following
does with patience read, and weigh.

Then many things is uttered by him in his Epistle to the Reader; he seems to
show, he says, how R. F. and his Associates have made up A Litter and Fardel
of Erroneous Divinity: and secretly charging us with making up of what we
profess from some Writers before us.

But to this I answer, His reproachful words Litter, and Fardel, and
Erroneous, we bear with patience, rather rejoicing that we are accounted
worthy of the reproach for the truth sake from an envious man, then to be angry
with our reproaches: But however, let him and all our enemies know, what we
profess and bear witness of, we receive not from man, but from God; even the
Gospel which we testify of, by the revelation of Jesus Christ in us we received
it; and informs others to the same door, which is, by our Ministry, that they
may receive the same: and this is but his poor shift, to undervalue the power
and truth of Jesus, in the sight of men, who would falsely make men believe,
That our Doctrines are but the spawn of many ancient Errors, as he says,
brooded by some Modern Writers, when as the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles
we bear witness to by the same spirit, and not to any other Authors who were
without the Spirit of Jesus: and all these shifts saves not the Priests of
England from being discovered, and their deceits and abominations to be made
manifest by our Light and Doctrine, which is the Light of Christ, and the
Doctrine of the holy men of God before us.

And further, his wickedness appears by reproaching and reviling dead men, such
as H.N. Jacob B.W.E. with others, whom I confidently believe were men in their
Generation more honest than himself, and more upright with God, and sincere in
what was made known to them, then this same reviler who is set to revile both
living and dead, if they do but cross his fancy: Let all men take notice of
these things, and of his rebukes, with an evil heart, whom the Lord does and
will rebuke by the Spirit of his mouth, in the day of his just judgmens, who
art a reviler of the just both living and dead: and all alonge in that Epistle,
as in the rest of his Book, which is the Rebukes of a Reviler, he bends his
very tongue, as the poison of Aspes being under it, against the Quakers,
reckoning them with the Papists, and such others; but this is but as the
Pharisees his forefathers did, who numbered the Son of God, and condem^ed him
with transg^esso^s, and betwixt two thieves.

And in the end, he desiers his Reader to receive in love, what in his Book is
found agreeable to the Spirit of God in Scripture truth, agreed; so let it be,
and therefore many things in his Book, which is not given forth by the Spirit
of God, nor according to the Scripture truth, which the honest Reader may find
upon a serious reading and search with the Spirit of God, and according to the
Scripture, is to be judged and condemned, and not reeeived; what shall the
honest Reader receive this for truth, That the Light of Christ Jesus is A
Perverse Principle? and that Christ bl^ssed infants Baptism, with very many
such like things of the like nature proceeding from the same spirit, which is
proved not to be of God, but of the Devil; for every tree is known by his
fruit, and every spirit by its works, and words: many other things more
devilish, if more devilish can be, he charges us withal in a most unreasonable
manner, that our Religion is the Fort of Babel, and that Jesuitical Plots and
Designs are carried on by some of us; and Quakerism is built upon the fourfold
pillar of Papistry, with such like; the very transcribing of his words shows
his wicked spirit by his unsavory words; which things we do deny in the
presence of the Lord, and are clear in his sight from these devilish
accusations, though J. S. play the Devils part, in this Epistle as well as in
his whole Book: and is an accuser of the brethren, and is to be cast out and
judged with the life of God; and to give testimony against his lies and
slanders is sufficient Answer, and the next time he enterprises the like Work,
we demand of him witness of his words, what these Jesuitical plots and Designs
are, we do carry on; Which slander is so divelish, could he prove what he
says, his words would take away our lives; but to raise the unclean spirit
against us, though the Nations is truly supposed the purpose of his words, and
not being content with what he himself can believe us in, his work reaches to
raise the rage of whole Nations to execute their fury as well as his own upon
us, and so his words gives ground to all the wicked that does believe him (for
none else can) to persecute the people, and way of the Lord, under the false
account of being Plotters, of having ill Designs, which thing we stand
witness against, and seek the peace of all men, though he have bent his tongue
for Lies, and brazen'd his face to utter them without fear or shame, to suggest
evil into men's minds that they may harm the upright; but it is known by his
words what lodges in the heart of such a person, who thus openly and
impudently does slander just men to the taking away of life, if any were so
divilish to witness lies and slanders, as he is forging of them, and declaring
of them, and that to the Protector and his Council too; but from these things
we being clear, are the more ready to bear his Lies with Patience, and does not
pray for fire to devour him, though he be our enemy and the Lords; but rather
wishes his returnig from his ungodilness, than a destruction upon him in his
ungodliness; and whereas the subject of his matter invented in his mind and
brought forth into view, is a going about to prove that in 22 particulars
mentioned by him, we do contradict the Scriptures; but his ground is false from
whence his whole work proceeds; for not in any particular of what is mentioned
do we contradict the Scripture, though his whole work be founded upon this
thing, of our cotradiction to Scripture; and while we be proved in the sight of
the Lord, we reckon his slanders to be rather a testimony to us, that we are of
God, then a discouraging of us in the ways of God: and we do not allow that J.
S. be our Interpreter, and the Expositor upon our words; for then no question
but he will judge out of his prejudicial mind, false judgment, and pervert the
innocent words into contradiction of Scripture, and of our selves; but to the
single mind and Witness of God in every man we appeal for judgment, and do in
the sight of God commend our selves to every man's conscience, and beg not
belief of any, but know all that be in the Light of the Son of God, witness to
us, and feel our Doctrine to be the Doctrine of godliness, reaching to the
Witness of God in every one, whereby we are a good savor to God in all: And
though J. S. judge our Doctrine to be Scripture-contradictions, yet his
judgment is but out of his old lying heart, which can bring forth no better
than it self, even false judgment and lying words, which out of it has
plentifully abounded in his false rebukes; therefore let the Reader first
search into the ground from whence his Work and Judgment does spring, and try
if an old lying heart, and sinf^l wretch (as he confesses he is) can bring
forth good fruit: No, we matter not what his judgment of us be, when as we
know the heart is corrupt from whence it does spring; not in the Light of the
Spirit of God do we in any one particular insisted upon by him, contradict the
Scriptures, though by his dark mind so he wickedly judges of us, even as the
Pharisees, his forefathers, did judge of Christ to be a blasphemer and a
contradictor of Moses and the Prophets, who did fulfill them, and put them to an
end, and not destroy them, nor contradict them in the sight of his Father,
though to their corrupt judgment; and Christ tells them that they erred, not
knowing the Scriptures nor the Power of God, who had old lying hearts, and were
sinful wretches, even such as John Stelham has confessed himself to be; and
therefore his words and judgment, and theirs, is like to be all of one nature,
judging Truth to be Error, and the Way of God to be Heresy and Blasphemy; this
the Pharisees did of old, and even thus does John Stelham and his companions do
at this day: But why should any be troubled hereat, seeing herein Christ's words
are fullfilled upon us, who said, They shall speak all manner of evil falsely
against you for my Names sak^? And so has this man done with his light,
scornful spirit, and fulfilled Christ's words, who because he has not known the
Father nor the Son, has spoken evil falsely against them that follow Christ:
And this were sufficient answer to his whole Book. Yet let us see what follows,
and let the Reader try with all moderation, that he may be edified, and may
know the true Spirit from the false, and the doctrine of the Gospel from lying
visions, and may cleave to the Truth, and escape the error: And let none
believe hastily things uttered without knowledge, out of J.S. deceitful heart.

FOrasmuch as many of the Servants of the Lord have been moved of the Lord to
set forth in order several Declarations of those things which the Light of the
glorious Gospel shining in their hearts, has given them the knowledge of, and
for this end are they published, that others also may know the certainty and
truth of those things which are believed, known and enjoyed amongst us; not
that they can be known by reading the Letter in which they are declared; but
through their diligence and obedience to the Light wherewith Christ has
enlightened them (though not for it) which is the same Light which shined in
our hearts, and gave us the Light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ; by which Light of the glorious Gospel, who are faithful
in it to the Lord, their understandings come to be opened, that they stumble
not at those things which are testified in the Truth, neither at that which is
declared in other Scriptures, but it being that in this our day it has pleased
the Father to bring forth in life and power, that mercy and truth (which the
Scripture speaks of) by which iniquity is purged out; and as it is become a
savor of life unto life in those that receive and believe in it; so it is also
become a savor of death unto that death which remains in both Priests and
people in this age, who hate the Light, who can scarce hear it named, or that
people should be turned unto it (as the Apostle did turn them from darkness to
the Light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they might receive the
rem^ssion of their sins, and be partakers of the inheritance amongst them that
are sanctified) but when they hear that preached or printed, which they may do,
and out of which they cannot receive the remission of their sins, then envy
rises up in them, and a perverse mind, and ungodly speeches, and false
accusations, saying, that we speak of a natural Light, and of a natural
Conscience; when as we speak of the true Light which has enlightened every one
that comes into the World, and in which Christ's Doctrine stood, who said to
the people, and to the Pharisees again and again, I am the Light of the world,
as John 8.12. John 12.46. but now because the Light is come, and the glory of
the Lord is risen upon us, and we declare it freely, as we have received it;
therefore is floods of ungodliness risen up against us: But it is impossible
that the Seed which the Lord is manifesting his Light and Power to bring forth,
should be kept always under the power of death; which Seed is now terrible in
the Lord's Power, and will yet be more terrible as his power increases, which
is now going forth as an Army with banners; for the torment of the wicked is
already begun, because the righteousness of God is now spreading over the
Nations, and neither the Rulers of the darkness of this World, nor all the
Printings and Preachings of those who be out of the life of God, can hinder
that which the Lord has begun, and is carrying on by his own power, though the
Nations are angry, because that by the Light of his glorious Gospel shining
forth, his wrath is revealed upon them for their ungodly deeds, that the
Scripture which cannot be broken, may be fulfilled; and therefore it were
better for them there may be hope, then to rise up against that which is more
unchangeable than the Heavens and the Earth: And therefore in vain have the
Enemies of God, and people in all professions joined themselves together
against the Light of Truth, and the Way of the Lord, which many in our days
have fallen upon, but are broken to pieces; and it has fallen upon many, and
grinded them to powder, and nothing shall escape; for the day of the Lord is
come, and it is very nigh to you that hate it; a day of darkness and of
gloominess, of clouds, and of thick darkness; and now the seed of God is as the
morning spread upon the Mountains; a great people and a strong, there has not
been ever the like, neither shall there be any more after it, even to the years
of many generations; a fire goes before them, and behind them a flame burns;
the Land is as the Garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate
Wilderness; and nothing shall escape them; the appearance of them is as the
appearance of horses, and as horsemen, so shall they run, etc. the Earth shall
quake before them, the Heavens shall tremble, the Sun and Moon shall be dark,
and the Stars shall withdraw their shining, and the Lord shall ut^er his voice
before his Army (as he now does) for his Camp is very great, for he is strong
that executes his Word; for the day of the Lord is great and very terrible,
and who can abide it?

And now, according as the Prophet Joel prophesied, is it come and coming to
pass, Joel 2.2, 3, 4, 10, 11. against which Seed men of corrupt minds, and
reprobate concerning the things of God, are risen up, who in their first
appearance in their Writings, profess themselves to be that which they are not,
seeming right unto many through their feigned words and fair speeches,
deceiving the hearts of the simple, for whom Christ dyed; but afterward in the
same Writings (to those that see) they manifest themselves what they are; and
being so considered as they are seen and known, cannot deceive; and therefore
to all people who desire to be edified and satisfied in the ground and truth of
things as they are made manifest by the Lord, to the Light in you I speak, that
in it you may be able to understand truth in what I say, and by the truth to
judge of things that differ; for such as the Tree is, such is the fruit; an
evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, neither can one Fountain send forth
sweet water and bitter.

Now as concerning a Book given forth by John Stelham (Priest at Terling in
Essex) who having an evil eye because God is good, and being filled with
indignation because God has mercy on his own Seed whom he has blessed, has
out of the abundance of his heart spoken it forth: Now the way to know that
which is spoken in darkness, is to read it in the light; and if his Testimony
in any thing, as coming from him, is to be believed, it is that which is
concerning his own condition; and if his estate and condition be such, that in
it he can receive the things of God, and minister them to others, then they may
be received; but if his condition be such, that in it he cannot receive the
things of the Spirit of God, then that which cannot receive, cannot minister;
and so he is to be silents and none to expect the things of God from him, being
neither fit to reprove, nor to rebuke, but to be reproved and rebuked, as will
appear as follows.

The ground in him, and the heart out of which this abundance of words in his
Book proceeds, in it (as he declares) is yet the root of all error, and of all
sin is in him, and seen by him not mortified, and that he has an old lying
heart, and flesh, wherein there dwells no truth, no good thing; a sinful wretch
and worm, subscribing himself the sinful John Stelham, as in his Introduction,
in page 80. and p. 117.

Now therefore, we having found out the root and the ground to be a root of
Errror, and the ground of Deceit, and a heart wherein dwells no truth, nor no
good thing, therefore from that which is unclean, shall we not expect that
which is clean to proceed, nor truth from that wherein dwells no truth; but
from the lying heart and deceitful tongue has the Lord delivered us; so that
if we be called revilers, and be rebuked, and a charge laid against us, as to
contradict the Scriptures of God, and be called Antiscriptural, Antichristian,
and Antispiritual; we have now learned to know whence it does proceed, even
from the lying heart, and flesh, wherein there dwells no truth; and we can bear
it, because we know, that til that heart be taken away, and a new heart known
wherein is truth, we must be reproached and spoken evil of falsely, for his sake
who has taken away the old lying heart, and has given us a new heart, wherein
truth dwells, and where truth proceeds out from; and herein are we manifest
from the children of this generation, and herein are the two states known, and
the two conditions of men, according to the testimony of Scripture, and the
parable which Jesus spoke, Luke 6.39. Can the blind lead the blind? shall they
not both fall into the ditch? And ver. 45. A good man out of the good treasure
of his heart brings forth that which is good. And, an evil man out of the
evil treasure of his heart brings forth that which is evil; for out of the
abundance of the heart his mouth speaks. And hereby is the Tree known, by his
fruits; and the heart of the wicked was ever filled with lying and vanity; and
understanding was hid from them; the Lord was grieved with such that did err in
their hearts, and had not known his ways, Psalm. 119 70. Psalm. 140.2. and this
was an evil which was under the sun, that the hearts of the sons of men were
full of evil and madness, while they live, Eccles. 9.3. And such a heart was
in the Scribes and Pharisees, a lying heart, wherein dwelt no truth, filled
with evil thoughts, as Christ said, Wherefore think you evil in your hearts?
Mat. 9.4. and out of the heart did arise all false accusations, calling the
truth blasphemy, and the way of it heresy; and such who be in the state as
John Stelham confesses he is, was never appointed by the Lord to watch over
souls. But such where Christ did dwell in their hearts, and because they were
sons, God sent forth the Spirit of his Son into their hearts, Ephesians. 3.17. Gal.
4.6. and such had truth in their hearts, doing the Will of God from the heart,
and did draw near unto God with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith,
having their hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and their bodies washed
with pure water; these did not profess the things of God in an old lying heart,
wherein dwelt no truth, but called upon the name of the Lord with a pure heart,
and said, that the end of the commandment was charity out of a pure heart, and
of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned, from which some swerved (in the
Apostles days) having turned aside unto vain jangling, and such desired to be
teachers of others, but the doctrine is corrupt, and the Mystery of Faith is
not held where the heart and conscience is not pure; and the Lord is good unto
such who be of a clean heart.

Now as concerning the Scriptures.
John Stelham's Testimony from the old lying heart, wherein dwells no truth,
is this: That the Scriptures are the Word of God, and truly so called; and the
Letter and Scripture is all one, as p. 3.4. but to contradict that himself, he
says in p. 5. the Letter taken strictly is but legal administration; using
these words, The Letter kills, i.e. the bare legal command without a promise
of power or pardon, as a bare Letter, void of strength, life and spirit, it
leaves all men under a killing sentence and curse. Let them that have
understanding, judge. Again, as concerning the Letter, in page 6. he expresses
himself thus: The Spirit is given by it: And in the next words says, the
Scripture is but instrumental to the Spirit.

Now mark; the Letter taken strictly being legal, without a promise of power or
pardon, void of strength, life and spirit, (the Spirit to be given by this
which he confesses is void of strength, life and spirit) and is but
instrumental to the Spirit, whether this be not contradiction and confusion,
let them that read judge: For in reading these things which he has published,
many may seal to the confession of his own condition to be truth; but that
which he has declared of the things of God, to be false; for now the Light
being broken forth, such doctrine cannot be received nor believed, that the
Spirit is given by the Letter, but that which is declared in the Letter, was
given forth from the Spirit, which was in them which spoke it forth; but
people may long have the Letter, and think in it to find God and eternal life,
and may dye in their sins; though J.S. say, that not one man in the world knows
God to be God, till he finds him in the Scripture: But I say unto him as Christ
said unto the Pharisees, Who had neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen
his shape, had not his word abiding in them, nor did not believe in the Light;
and that he was the Light which did enlighten every man that comes into the
World; search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Eternal life, and
they are they which testify of me, says Christ the Life; but those thought
that they had the life in the Scriptures, deceived them, for they vvanted the
Life when they thought they had it: And so I. S. thoughts that he has the
Spirit by the Letter, dece^ves him; for when he finds the Spirit and Eternal
Life, then his old lying heart in which is no truth, but the root of error,
will be taken away, and so the Light which comes from Christ the Life, in
which the Spirit is received, condemns all such thoughts, for they proceed
out of that heart which is not upright before the Lord, neither is it set to
seek the Lord in that way in which he and his Spirit is found.

Again, I. S. talking of the Scriptures, intrudes into things which he has not
seen, comparing it with that which he has seen; and so in what he says, he is
blind, saying, The Scripture is a more standing Rule than Visions.

To which I answer, The night is upon him that he has no vision, and
therefore does not know what a Vision is a rule unto, nor the continuance of
it, as those in Israel, which said that every vision fails, and so would not
have them a standing Rule; and that Reproach of the Visions of God were so
common, that it was become a proverb amongst them; but the Prophet who was
in the Light, and had the vision of the Lord, and had the Word of the Lord, he
was to reprove that proverb, and to tell them, that they should no more use it
as a proverb in Israel, and said, The days are at hand, and the effect of
every vision; and so with the Light, who be in it, do now reprove all such
proverbs and preachings against the visions of God; for from the visions was
the Scriptures spoken forth, and that which they had seen, they declared; so
that which gives forth words, is greater than the words, and without vision the
people perish, and they may perish while they have the Letter; but they cannot
perish while they have the vision; and although there be vain visions, they do
not make the true of none effect.

And although there be Sorceries and Enchantment, that does not make the true
resurrection of the dead of none effect; but the blind must stumble at the
things they do not see.

Again J.S. s^ith, That the Authority of the Scriptures is owned ed among the
Jews to this day.

Ans. No; Christ is not owned amongst them, who is the Authority and Power,
unto which the Scriptures give testimony that he is so, neither are they yet
converted, as thou thy self confessest; and they who be in the unconverted
estate, do not own the Authority of the Scriptures, though such may talk of
them, as thou do, speaking that of them which they never spoke of themselves.

Again, I.S. says in the 17. page, As deep things as the Spirit has revealed,
they are all in the Scripture.

Ans. Nay, There were things revealed which were unutterable; and many things
which were revealed, and also written, which are not in the Scripture, as the
Book of Nathan the Prophet, and the Prophecy of Ahijah the Shilomite, and the
Visions of Iddo the Seer, which was against Jeroboam the son of Nebat, 2 Chronicles.
9.29. And the Book of Shemath the Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 1.2, 15. And the Book of
Jehu. 2 Chronicles: 20.34. and the Book of Gad the Seer, 1 Chronicles. 29.29. and the
Book of Jaser, 2 Samuel 1.18. and the Prophecy of Enoch, who prophesied of the
coming of Christ in his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince
all that are ungodly, of their ungodly deeds and hard speeches which ungodly
sinners have spoken against him, as Jude bears witness: And he also saw and
prophesied of Israel according to the flesh; that they should do wickedly, and
sl^y him who was the light of the world; And much more which is not written in
the Bible; And that which is manifest unto Paul, which he wrote to the
Corinthians, in an Epistle, not to company with fornicators; that whole Epistle
is not in the Bible, 1 Cor. 5^9. And likewise that which was revealed unto Paul
in the dispensation of the grace of God given unto him, how that by revelation
God made known unto him the mystry, which he wrote unto the Ephesians, in a few
words, whereby they when they read, they might understand his knowledge in the
mystery of Christ, which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men,
as it was revealed unto his holy Angels and Prophets by the Spirit, which
Epistle, in which that mystry was written, is not in the Bible, Ephesians 3.3.
And the Epistle which Paul wrote to the Laodiceans, which he charged the
Colossians to read amongst them, (and that theirs should be read in the Church
of the Laodiceans) wherein his thanks and prayers to God was for their
steadfastness in the truth, wherein he made manifest the unprofitable talkers,
who went about to draw them from the truth of the Gospel, and from their
diligence in good works of eternal life, as many vain and unprofitable talkers
are in the world now doing the same work.

And whereas J. S. says, That the Epistle of Paul to the Colossians was read
as the Word of the Lord in the Church of the Laodiceans: Why does he not bear
witness that Paul's Epistle to the Laodiceans was read as the word of the Lord
amongst the Colossians, Collossians, 4.16. And if he read in his Church the
Epistle to the Collossians as the Word of the Lord, why does not he read to his
people that which was written to the Laodiceans, they both being given forth
from one Spirit? So let him consider of those things above mentioned, and try
whether his words will stand unreproveable, 67. page, saying, God might have
revealed more than is in the Scripture, but he pleased not so to do: In that
page mentioning Samuel, Moses, and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles,
saying, All that they have spoken is written both according t^ what was written
before, and for substance the same.

Answ. What I have spoken, and shall here speak, may sufficiently make
manifest, that his words proceed from the old lying heart, in which dwells no
truth; for I have showed out of the Prophets, and out of the Apostles many
things which was both revealed and declared, which is not in the Bible written:
And likewise I shall show farther, of the things concerning Christ, testified
by John, and we know that his Testimony is true, saying, And there are also
many other things which Jesus did, the which if they should be written every
one, I suppose that even the World it self could not contain the Books which
should be written, John 21.25. So that all is not written which was revealed,
wrote and spoken, which if much more were written which was made m^nifest, by
it with that which is written, could they not know the Lord, their minds being
from the light of Christ, which does reveal and make manifest that which may
be known of God in them.

And many who have the Letter, and are Ministers of it, are sensual, having not
the spirit, nor the word of God, nor the testimony of Jesus, and their Ministry
is but as Chafe to the Wheat, and the Lord is against them; For what is the
chafe to the wheat? says the Lord, Jeremiah 23. Is not my word like a fire,
says the Lord, and like a hammer breaks the rock in pieces? Now many have
the letter, and know not the word of the Lord as a fire, neither is the rock
broken with the letter; and such use their tongue, for it is their own, and the
power of the Lord is not come over it; such cause the People to err, and does
not profit them, being not sent, nor commanded of the Lord; for who are sent
and commanded of the Lord, the Lord uses their tongue^ to speak his words,
which he puts into their mouths, and such words does profit the people, and
not cause them to err, being spoken according to the law, which is light; And
the testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit of Prophecy; and such do witness
the Scriptures, that as they cannot be broken, so they cannot be denied by the
Spirit which gave them forth to be a Declaration of those things which was
revealed, known, and believed: But they are not that which they are a
declaration of; the letter testifies of the eternal life, but it is not it,
neither gives it: It testifies of the light of the glorious Gospel shining in
the heart, whih gives the light of the knowledge of the glory of God; but it is
not that light which gives that knowledge: It testifies of the Way, but Christ
is the Way; and of the Word, but God is the Word; and of Redemption, but Christ
is the Redemption, and not the Letter, though it testifies of Justification,
and Sanctification, but they are wrought by the Word in the grace and power of
Christ, and so every one who will own the Scriptures, as they were given sorth
to be owned, must first own that of God in them, which is manifest to work in
the Creature, that which they testify of, that Christ the power of God they
may witness, working all their works in them, and for them, according to the
Scripture.

But contrary to the Scripture, J.S. from the root of Error, says, That the
written letter is a Spiritual Arm, and Sword of the Spirit, and that the very
power of the written letter puts Satan to flight: And in the same Page, says,
That the Devil has Scripture in his mouth.

Answ. Let the People take notice, and read the Scriptures, and see if there be
any such thing, that the Sword of the spirit was ever in the Devils Mouth, for
the spiritual Armor which is said to be the Word of God: But the Word of God,
which is the sword of the Spirit, is that by which he is to be destroyed and is
the mystery bid from him and all that follow his lusts: But though the Devil,
which did not abide in the truth, and his Ministers who are out of the truth,
may take the letter in their mouths as they have done, and say its written so,
but the word of the Lord is not in their mouthe^, which is the sword of the
Spirit; and such will use the letter in their mouths, which cannot sease from
sin, whose eyes are full of Adultery, beguiling unstable Souls, their heart
being exercised with coveteous practices; cursed children, which have forsaken
the right way, and are in the Error of Baalan, loving the wages of
unrighteousness, and taking them, and such have the letter in their mouths,
but knows not the Word of God, which who comes but know, it restraines them
from all such practices.

Again, J.S. from his blindness and root of Error, and lying heart, wherein
dwells no truth, but much confusion, says, that the letter, i. e. the
Scripture is the true ground of the believers Faith: and again in the same page
says, That Christ in the Scripture is the true Ground of Faith: And to prove
the former, he brings Prove. 22.19, 20, 21. That thy trust may be in the Lord, I
have made known to thee, this day even to thee; have not I written to thee
^xcellent things in Councels and Knowledge, that I might make thee know the
certainty of the words of truth that thou might answer the words of truth to
them that send unto thee?

An. By this scripture the Lord is made the ground of Faith, and not the
Letter: And therefore did the Prophet make known excellent things in writing,
in counsel, and knowledge, and for this end did the Apostles both preach and
write, that the Faith of those which heard them, and read their writings, might
not stand in the wisdom of words, nor in the letter, as its ground, but in
Christ the power of God, and Christ who preached the true doctrine, that in it
every one might believe, said to the World, and the Pharisees, While ye have
the light, believe in the light, that ye may be the Children of light, and
these had the letter, but did not believe in the light, which light is Christ,
and which light is the foundation of Faith, and is the foundation of many
generations, in which many did believe; before this letter which declares of it
was written; And that Faith which stands in the light, and in the power of God,
is the ground of the Scripture letter, from whence it did proceed; after they
believed they spoke and wrote that which now is declared, in Chapters. And
every one which coms to the true ground of Faith, must come co the light to
believe in it, that they may be the Children of it, and then the Scriptures
will be profitable unto them, they with the light having the understanding
opened to see for what end they were given forth, and how they come to be
fulfilled, and witnessed in that which gave them forth; for the ground of Faith
to believers is but one both before and since the Scripture was written, which
is Christ, in whom whosoever believes shall be saved, let Christ be in what he
will, for he was the ground of Faith, when the letter was not; and he is the
ground of Faith when it is, and no other foundation for Faith can any man lay,
than that which is laid, Jesus Christ who is the true light, and enlighteneth
every man that comes into the Word, that all men in him might believe; and
they that believe not that he is so, shall die in their sins, as Christ says,
John 8.24.

But J.S. going on in his own devised Fables, would pervert the words of truth,
both in our writings, and in the Apostles, as it is manifest, in his writings,
of this reviling Rebuke concerning, R.F. and J.N. E.B. and F.H. and others,
which whosoever read their words, and his, they may discern truth from devised
fables without much Reply upon it, as in places he is mingling his own words
with theirs, joining a lie to the truth that he may contradict it as false, as
every one that reads with understanding will see, which when they have spoken
plain truths, which he himself has often in his Book confessed unto to be
truth, will afterward give his meaning to (...) words, as he has done unto
the Apostles words, saying, If they mean thus, etc. Then he goes about to
contradict his own meaning, and when he has contradicted his own meaning.;
then he says he has contradicted their words, though he have before confessed
the truth of their words; so he has not contradicted the words as they were
spoken, but because they spoke not his meaning with the words, therefore the
true words must be false in his judgment, and bear his rebuke, as his Book does
make manifest, and adding his lie to the words of truth, these two things are
his greatest proofs to resist the truth; In page 77. he has mingled his own
words with the words of R.F. in which page he acknowledges a former addition,
and yet renews another, R.F. having been speaking of the light which has
enlightened every man which comes into the World, (he adds) which where it is
(and it is in every man, it renews the judgment, etc) he here adding his own,
and then rebuking it, would make people believe lies, that all might be damned
who believ not the truth.

But on the contrary, for we never have said that every man's judgment, is
renewed with the ligbt, though they be enlightened; for they are enlightened
who have it, and who are void of true judgment because they hate the light
which they be enlightened withal. And also the Apostles words he perverts and
gives meaning unto, which if he did not they would be a plain testimony with
that which he has set himself to oppose, so giving meanings both to their
word^ and our words, his meanings must be the ground of his Believers Faith,
and not the Scriptures, as he said before.

The Apostle Peter speaking of a more sure Word of Prophecy, wherein they did
well to take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, till the day
dawn, and the day star arise in their hearts, 2 Pet* 1.19. knowing this first,
that no Prophecy of the Scriptures is of any private interpretation; for the
Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved of the holy Ghost. To this J.S. adds not heart-prophesie, no
breast-prophesie, but written down in Books, etc. which is contrary to the
Apostls words; for he does not exclude heart-prophesie, for there was never any
prophecy but did proceed out of the heart before it was written in any Book.

And the Apostle says, Until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your
hearts, and that holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost,
and that which moved them to speak Prophesies was in their hearts, and the
Apostle did not bid them wait till the day star did arise in the Scriptu^es,
but till it did rise in their hearts, and then he told them how the Prophesies
of the Scriptures came.

Peter saying. Until the day dawn, and the day star arise in our hearts, J.S.
says, That is until by the study of the Scriptures, more light he cleared up,
etc.

Now let all them of understanding, read, and compare his words, and the
Apostles, and they may well conclude with his confession, that he has an old
lying heart, and flesh, in which dwells no truth, but the root of error and
gainsaying of the truth; and as for many others of his devised fables, and
false meanings, though I let them pass here unanswered, yet they may be seen
with the mind informed in the truth; and all who are of God, and of the truth,
may know that it is a small matter for us to be rebuked, or judged to be in
confusion, who so evidently has confounded both our words, and the Apostles,
into his own false meanings, and so contradicts them both; but that remains
sure which gaves forth the Scriptures, and abides in us, and we know that they
cannot be broken, but must be fulfilled, as they were given forth by the Word,
which they were given forth from, by taking heed unto which the young man's way
is cleansed, and by which the old lying heart, is reproved; that which was
given forth from that Spirit, cannot be by it denied; but that which would
darken words without knowledge is denied; that which would set up devised fables
above Christ, the Spirit, and Scriptures, that by the Spirit is denied without
contradiction, and as we shall by the Spirit, and by the Scriptures try John
Stelhams Doctrine; which if he deny them both, then by his own Argument we
shall prove him, and see whether he will own himself to be judged by that with
which he would judge others, whether they be Messengers sent by Gods Spirit:
His Assertion laid down Page 60. to try withal, is this: Such Messengers as
speak more than is in the Scripture, are not sent by GOD'S Spirit nor guided by
him to what they say.

By this then is all that of him before mentioned, cast out, being both more,
and contrary to what is in the Scripture; as also that which is to be declared,
as follows in his second head, as he calls it, of Scripture Contradiction; he
is speaking concerning a Trinity, and three Persons: which words are not spoken
in the Scriptures, he meaning the Father, Son, and Spirit, by such name^ as the
Scripture never did, and so about words and names which the Scripture does not
mention, arsing out of the Divination of his heart does he multiply words to
hide the truth and shu^ the Kingdom from men, and so has no ground for the
word three persons from the Scripture; but the Scripture in one translation
speaking of Christ being the express Image of the Fathers Person, and in
another ^ranslation says, that he is the express Figure of the Fathers
substance as he is witnessed to be by those that know him; and so till he find
the word three persons and Trinity in the Scriptures, let him own his own rule
to judge him, to be no Messenger sent by God^ Spirit, because he speaks more
than is in the Scripture, who says, the holy Ghost is a Person, and this
person dwells in Saints, though not personally: (mark this) A Person dwell in
the Saints not personally: all this confusion is as tares, which men gather,
which must be bound in bundles and cast into the fire; for what is the Chaff to
the Wheat, or what is all such invented words to the knowledge of the Father,
Son, and Spirit, which are one, which bear record in heaven? and are three that
bear witness in earth, the Spirit, and Water, and the Blood, and these three
agree in one, and when these are known in their witness in man, what they
witness unto, and what they witness againsti within and without, such will
give them names according to their works, and according to the Scriptures.

The Third head of John Stelhams Scripture Contradiction is concerning the
light which every man is enlightened withal; which of all things is most hated
by all such whose ways, words, and works, are contrary ot it; for it being
risen in the hearts of the Children of men, to give the knowledge of the truth,
has in this day made many wiser than their Teachers; and now they which have
caused people to err, are by the light seen, and by the Children of light are
denied: and they being denied, their envy is up against the light which has
made them manifest; and they walk not by the light, nor according to the
Scriptures, bu^ there is a line of confusion comes over them; by which now they
walk, and from which their writings does proceed, as John Stelham in page 52.
says, they may affirm agreeable to the Scripture, and yet contradict the
Scriptures in saying Christ is in every man, or that the light in every man
leads to the Father; and says, Christ, God, or as God is in every man, and a
spark of his god-head-light is in every man; but there is not in every man that
redemption light which leads to the Father.

That light which Christ has enlightened every man withal leads to the Father,
all who are led by it, and believe in it, and condemns all from the Father
which do not obey it, but hate it, and speak dispitefully against it, who are
turned out from God who is light and truth, into the confusion, saying, that
the God-head-light is not the Redemption-light; but with the light that Lie and
confusion is judged for ever: and in affirming that the God-head-light is in
every m^n, and then calling it common and old Creation-light, and
Scripture Light, page 61. and the light of Nature, page 74, 75, and a legal
light, page, 76. and a created light, page, 78. and an universal light, (unto
which I say,) as God is, so is his light, and so is his godhead not created,
nor natural; and as every one comes to know the light, which by J.S. is so
reviled, they shall neither follow, nor believe his Doctrine, till he can prove
when the light of the Godhead was created, and how it became natural, or
legal; or where he had those names, for the Scriptures does give no such names
to the light; and so by his own rule he speaking more than is in the Scripture,
is not a Messenger sent by Gods spirit, nor guided by it in what he s^ith.

As also in other things, as in Page 64. saying, That light without S^ripture is
no light: Then Enoch's light in which he walked wi^h God was no light, nor
Jacobs light, nor Isaacs, nor Abraham's; for they were without these Writings,
and this letter which he calls the Scriptures; but they were not without light:
And thousands have so much light, whether they have the S^riptures or not, as
to see this darkness, as to say light, though saving light without Scripture is
no light; did the Scriptures make the light to be light, and was the saving
light made by that which was written? let all take notice and turn away from
such: in another place he calls the Scripture but the declaration that Christ
is the Word, and calle^h them a Vessel that the light is put into, in p. 43.
and 44 Now let them of understanding consider and judge whether the vessel be
the maker of that which is put into it, and whether Wine that is put into a
Bottle be made wine by the Bottle, or whether it is not Wine without the
bottle, and Water put into a vessel be not W^ter without the vessel, or whether
the vessel make it to be Water: J.S. says, Every verse of Scripture is a
little vessel of light, and that light without scripture is no light; so these
things have I laid open, that every one may see how the Lord has turned wise
men backward, and made their Wisdom foolishness, and that they may see how
those stumble and fall, and are snared and taken, whose light is turned into
darkness, and how great that darkness is; and now is the Scripture not
denied, but fulfilled; for now is the Light and Truth come into the World, by
which they are found to be blind, who said they saw, and in which they see,
that were blind: And now the depths are seen which are covered with
darkness, and Babylon is seen, the Mother of Harlots, which bring forth in
confusion, and bind up in ignorance. Other confusions and lies I shall also
mention, given forth by J.S. in his Book.

As p. 68. he says, that God was and is the Word, according to John 1.1. and
in p. 69. he says, The Father is not the Word, nor never so called; (which is
a contradiction.) And in p. 70. says, Christ is more in the Scriptures, than
in his Saints, (which is false) for greater was that which the words came
from, than the words, which did but declare of the fullness from whence they
came, as all that know Christ will bear witness unto, and against all such that
say Christ is more in the words, than in them who spoke the words.

Again in p. 73. he says, Christ the Author of salvation to them that obey
him, speaking in the Scripture, saves by the Scripture; which is false, and
contrary to the testimony of the Scriptures, and the witness of them who
witnessed his salvation, who said, By his Life are we saved, and by Grace
through faith, which was the gift of God, and not by the Letter, and their
Witness was true for God and his Works, and against all such who are of a lying
heart, and spirit of error, who would make the Letter to be the Light; yea
more, even that which makes light to be light, and so greater; for that which
makes a thing, is greater than a thing that is made; and would have the Letter
to be the Word, when as the Letter says, God is the Word; and would make the
Scriptures to be that by which people are saved, as in p. 73. saying, Christ
saves by the Scriptures; but the Scriptures speak no such thing of themselves;
for they say, there is no other name under Heaven by which men can be saved,
but by the name of Jesus; neither is there such a word written in the Bible,
that says, men are saved by the scriptures, nor that the Light of the Godhead
is natural, as I. S. says, that he may set up a light of scriptures, as he
calls it.

And he speaks in p. 82. of having our minds darkened with the light of
Scriptures: Mark, does that light which he has in all his Book been exalting
above the God head-light, and above that Light which Christ has enlightened
every man withal, darken men's minds? What is it then that must enlighten them?
Here is his testimony of the Light brought up to the full, that all who can
receiv it, may believ it, for he says to us, if our minds were not darkened
with the light of the Scriptures, the two texts in Romans 10.18. and Col. 1.23.
might resolve us how the Gospel is preached to every creature, and not to the
principle of Light in the Conscience; how can the Scripture resolve us of the
Light, if it darken our minds? But by these things this is made manifest, that
darkness has blinded his eyes, that he neither knows the Light, nor the
Scriptures which were given forth from it.

Again, Another of his contradictions concerning the Light, in page 23, 24.
compared with page 75. is this, saying, the Light that shined in Paul's heart,
and the Light that shines in the Scripture, is the same Light; and God who
shines in the heart by Gospel Light, according to the Apostles words, 2 Cor.
4.4. contratrary unto which in his 75. page, he says, That the Gospel Light
about matters of salvation, of which the Apostle speaks, never entered, never
shined into men's hearts.

Ans. To this let all take notice, and consider, whether of these two
Contraries they are to believe; The one saying, God shines in their hearts by
Gospel Light; and the other says, It never entered nor shined into men's
hearts: But if the Scriptures or the Apostle is to believed, he says, For God
who-commanded the Light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ; but we have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the excellency of
the power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.6, 7. Here was the light of
the Gospel shining in their hearts in matters of salvation, giving them the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; and they were the
Vessels in which the light did shine, and from which they spoke the hidden
Wisdom of God in a mystery; and so that which they spoke of the Light, and of
the Gospel, is yet a mystery unto such whose eye is blinded with the god of
this world, and the ways of unrighteousness, knowing neither the light nor the
Gospel of salvation, but filling up their iine of confusion, as has been
already manifest, and may further be made manifest.

Again, John Stelham in his sixth Head of Scripture-contradiction, speaks
concerning the Law, and goes about to distinguish between the two Covenants
which the Scriptures speak of, but knows not what he speaks, nor of what he
affirms, but contrary to the Scriptures, speaking of a Moral and Ceremonial
law, which the Scriptures speak of no such words, nor no such distinctions, as
of a Moral law to be the Covenant of Works, and that the Ceremonial law is not
a Covenant of Works, but of Grace.

And whereas he tells of a Covenant of Nature, which is one with the Covenant
of Works; and so here is several Covenants which J. S. has made, and several
Names here given to the Covenants, which God never gave, nor they which spoke
of the Covenants never gave such names to the law in the words of Scripture, as
Moral, Legal, Natural, Ceremonial; so that is all without, and contrary to the
Scripture language.

And whereas he goes about to prove Adam to be under a moral law, wdich he
calls a law of Works, but has no Scripture to prove it from, but from his
suppositions; as thus: If it was not of Grace, it was a Covenant of works: And
again, if the Covenant of works was not made with Adam in innocence, God could
not in justice require satisfaction of his posterity under the fall; etc. A
third supposition to prove Adam under a Covenant of Works, is this: Either he
stood under a Covenant of Works, or was under the Covenant of Grace, or he was
under no Covenant, etc.

Unto which I answer; All such Priests and Teachers who be out of innocence
themselves, cannot tell what Covenant those are in with God, who are innocent,
and in the Image of God, in holiness and righteousness; and therefore from such
have we so much perverting of the Scriptures, and violating of the law of God,
to make it according to their imaginations: But unto such God says, What have
thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant into
thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee?
Psalm. 50.16. Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit: But
I say, That Covenant in which Adam was with God in his innocence, and in his
image, he stood in that, and by that by which he was made a living soul, and in
that was in unity and covenant with God, for the disobedience of which, he was
driven out from God into the earth; and none were under the Law of Works,
neither was that Law added, uhtil there was transgression, which it was added
because of it; but that which is innocent, and without sin, unreproveable in
God's sight, is under no Law, but that which endures for ever, which does free
from sin and death those that be in it, which is made manifest unto some since
the fallihg from it, and which the Isles are to wait for, till it be made
manifest, where it is not al^eady revealed; and all who come to have right to
speak of God's precepts, and to take his covenant into their mouths, they see
and comprehend all such darkness, which does not speak according to words of
Scripture, but speaks of three Covenants, contrary to Scripture, saying, that
the first Covenant promises nothing of salvation, nor mentions nothing of a
Savior; and yet says, that, that Covenant is a part of God's Word, and his
Will and pure Law, (and yet mentions nothing of a Savior) and again says,
that the Moral Law he calls of Works, which promises no salvation, mentions
nothing of a Savior) that this which mentions nothing of a Savior, is to be
a directory and rule to true believers, for the ordering of their
sanctification (as it is also in Christ's hand, guiding them by his Spirit) so
this cannot build nor join together, and so time to cease building any more in
confusion; but in denial of that false doctrine, I say, That there is but two
Covenants spoken of in the Scriptures, which is a plain testimony of them,
without any such confusion or contradiction, as the Apostle to the Hebrews,
saying, In that he says a new Covenant, he has made the first old, etc. And
in the first Covenant, as you may read Heb. 9. In all these things there was
Christ held out and mentioned in the shadows and figures; and so that Covenant
which promises no salvation, nor mentions any thing of a Savior, that we
deny; for there is no such Covenant in the Scripture^; -- For that which said,
Do this, and live, promised life, and mentioned Christ who is the life; and by
Christ who is the Life and Light of men, is that Covenant fulfilled; and by his
Power both the obedience and life is brought forth, of which that Covenant
speaks; and the new Covenant being come that God has promised, wherein he
has put his Law in their hearts, and his Spirit in their inward parts, and all
such need not to come to such Priests to be taught, who tell of a Covenant which
promises no salvation, nor mentions any thing of a Savior; for we who be in
the second, know the first fulfilled, which Christ was held forth in, under
Ordinances of Divine service, and a Worldly Sanctuary, and diverse washings, and
carnal Ordinances, which never made the comers thereunto perfect as pertaining
to the Conscience. But now is Christ the Covenant of God, and Covenant of
Light, come and preached, and with his Light shines in men's Consciences, that
he may make perfect as pertaining to the Conscience; which Covenant is now
witnessed among thousands, and such denied who speak of a Covenant that
mentions nothing of a Savior, and that to be the Rule of true believers.

Again, in John Stelham's fifth head of Scripture-contradiction, he speaks
concerning sin, saying, That the more a soul is sanctified. the more he sees
his moats to be beams; and that Paul was groaning and sighing all his lifetime
under the body of sin and death.

Both these are false; for the more a soul is sanctified, he is not the more
taught to lie, or to see falsely; but the more he is taught to see clearly, and
discern a moat to be a moat, and a beam to be a beam, and knows the difference.
And Paul thanks God who had given him the victory over sin and death, which he
had not while he groaned under the body of it; and so both the Saints and the
Work of sanctification, is falsely accused by such, and such are to be denied as
Enemies to God, and to his Work.

In the reading of this, let all people take notice, that in the several and
particular heads of J. S. Book, where he says, he has contradicted us, he is
proved himself to contradict the Scritures; and so far as he contradicts the
Scriptures in those particulars, so far he may say he contradicts us, our
testimony being one with the Scriptures in those things.

Pr. For in his sixth head, as concerning Justification, he says, He that is
justified, is justified by God, not under the aspect or notion of a Saint, and
as such, but of a sinner, and as a sinner believing in Jesus, not as he loves
God, or overcomes the world by Faith, etc. but as believing on Christ dying,
etc.

Now this testimony of J. S. is contrary to the Scripture; for God never
justified any as hating of him, nor as a sinner, but as made obedient through
faith, according to the Scriptures, as the Apostle witnesses, Gal. 2.16. Even
by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we
might be justified by the faith of Christ, etc. so they believed, that they
might be justified; and the ungodly they were first called out of their
ungodliness; and whom he called, them he also justified; and they whom he
justified, them he also glorified; and by him all that believe are justified
from all things from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses,
Acts 13.39. And so all who are justified by the Lord, are justified from their
sins, and not in them, as all shall witness who come to be justified by Christ
from their iniquity.

And whereas J.S. would set the Law and Justice of God at a difference with
the Gospel, and as contrary, in saying, The Law and Justice finds and leaves us
sinners, Gospel and Mercy declares and pronounces us righteous: Now the one
pronouncing a man to be righ^eous, and the other pronouncing the same to be a
sinner, these two are contrary: But the Scripture has another testimony,
saying, Mercy and Truth are met together; Righteousness and Peace have kissed
each other, Psalm. 85.10 Now here is unity; here is not Righteousness
pronounc^ng one thing, and Mercy another; for the righteousness of God is
revealed from Heaven against the disobedient; and this will not leave them
disobedient nor sinners, if ever they come to mercy; for it does not leave them
as it finds them: And so that Doctrine is accursed from God, which says, That
Justice finds them sinners, and leaves them so; and to say that Justice
pronounces them sinners, and Mercy pronounces them righteous: But to satisfy
all people, a few words may serve to answer the volume of that darkness and
blindness given forth by him beforementioned; should a man full of words be
justified? Job 11.2.

Again, concerning J.S. in his seventh head concerning Regeneration, he says,
That the Word of God that is preached, was never without, or besides Scripture,
etc. And as in other places he has said, That the Spirit is given by the
Letter, so here he would make Regeneration to proceed from it; which this
being denied, he concludes it had been better the Scripture had not been known
nor written.

An. The Word and Gospel were preached unto Abraham without Scriptures, and
before the Scriptures were written; and they who are regenerated and born
again, it is by the immortal Word which is able to save their souls; which Word
was before the Letter was written; and who be begotten again, and born by that
Word, it is profitable for such that the Scriptures were written and given
forth, and the Scripture by such is honored; but such who call the Letter the
Light and the Word, and that which begets again into the new birth, by such
both the Work of God is despised, and the Scriptures perverted and denied.

Again J. S. in his 8. Head of Contradiction, speaking of perfection, utters
forth more confusion and contradiction to himself, in his speaking of the
Communion of the Saints in Heaven, and does lie concerning the Saints on earth,
saying, the Saints in Heaven hoped for the perfection of their bodies at the
Resurrection, etc. And again contradicts that, in saying, that at death they
have a final perfection, and a full harvest, and reward of peace, etc.

Ans. Now this is the issue, that all people may take notice he has so envied
perfection and Christ's Doctrine, which says, Be ye perfect as your Father
which is in Heaven is perfect: And them who now preach that Doctrine, that he
has set out a Volume to declare against the Saints being perfect here; yea,
and his envy has reached to Heaven, to prove that the Saints in Heaven are not
perfect, but wait for the redemption of their bodies; which now if people mind
the Scripture, there is no such doctrine in it as the Saints in Heaven have not
received the Redemption of their bodies; for they who had received the first
fruits of the Spirit upon earth, did wait for the adoption; and for the
redemption of the body, till the creature it self be delivered into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8. And this was witnessed, and is
witnessed; and this is the Work of the Worlds Teachers, instead of presenting
them perfect in Christ Jesus, as the Apostles did, they would make people
believe that the Saints in Heaven their bodies are unredeemed; if so, where is
that redemption wrought?

And whereas I. S. would make people believe, that there are none clean; now
Christ said concerning those that follovved him, Now are ye clean through the
Word which I have spoken unto you, John 15.3. And David says, that the Lord is
good unto such as are of a clean heart, Psalm. 73.1. And the Lord said
concerning his people, that he would pour clean water upon them, and they
should be clean from all their filthiness, Ezekiel. 36.25. and this Prophecy was
to be fulfilled: And the Lord said also by his Prophet Zephaniah, That his
Remnant should do no iniquity, nor speak lies, neither should a deceitful
tongue be found in their mouth, Zeph. 3.1^3. And Paul preached Wisdom among
them that were perfect; and as many as were perfect, should be so minded; and
Christ preached to the pure in heart, that they should see God, Matt. 5. Now if
there were none perfect, Christ preached unto such as there was not.

Now this is the chief ground of J. S. and the rest of the Enemies of truth and
of perfection, to declare against it, because some fall from it; as his
instance of C. A. or others in the like, To which I answer, Their falling into
that which is not perfect, does not make that which they fall from, imperfect;
for the Angels that kept not their first state, which was perfect, did fall
from that which was perfect. A Virgin state is perfect; but if any go out of
that state, and become foolish, yet that which they depart from, is perfect:
And if any do fall from the Truth, and do not abide in Christ's Doctrine, that
does not make his Doctrine to be imperfect; for Christ says, Except they abide
in him who is perfect, they cannot bring forth fruit: Is not he that is in
Christ perfect, though some do not abide in him? And is not the Truth Truth,
because some deny it? Was not Christ's Doctrine and the Apostles true, because
Demas did forsake it, and love the present World? And was not that part of the
Ministry which Judas had committed unto him, perfect? And was not he the true
Christ that Judas preached, though afterward he betrayed him? Now if people do
but truly consider all those that now do turn from the way of Truth, which is
now preached, and lived in by us, it may be an evident token to justify us in
the Way of Truth, seeing what they go into when they go from the Light which
Christ has enlightened them withal, which while they abide in it, are kept
out of all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and so long they may speak of
perfection, and of the gift of God which is perfect: But if any go from the
Light, then they are let at liberty to act all uncleanness with greediness, and
so are cast out from us, and from perfection: And if any such deny the Truth,
and forsake it, yet there remains in them a witness for the truth, and against
their own uncleanness, as in C. A. who from the Witness of God in him was made
to confess, that if he had continued in the Light of Christ, he could not have
so sinned against the Lord, and so by his transgression fell from the way of
Life, and could not continue in Christ's Doctrine any longer; and so such things
may satisfy people concerning the way of Truth; for while they are of us, all
such things is denied by them; but when they go out from us, then they become
Drunkards, Swearers, Profane, Adulterers, Fornicators, and so every evil Work
is committed, and then they turn to the Priests Doctrine, there all such things
are, and are excused; and then the Priests rejoice and give thanks if any turn
from the Light of Christ, and the obedience of the Gospel, into drunkenness and
profaneness again, where they were before; and if they will but swear and
respect men's persons, and use the rod of violence, and pers^cute and shed the
blood of the innocent, and be conformable to the World, that is the Priests
rejoicing; and if any turn from the truth into any act of uncleanness, then
they take that as a proof against those that abide in the truth; and such a
thing is a better proof to them then all the Scripture; and those are they that
rejoice in iniquity, and watch for evil, and so they rejoice in that which we
have cast out as abomination; and these are they that plead for a life in sin
while they are here, and that say that the saints glorified in Heaven do yet
hope for the resurrection of their bodies, and so not come to the end of their
hope though in Heaven; when as the Saints upon earth witnessed the end of their
hope, the salvation of their souls. Now these may well deny perfection on earth,
who deny it in heaven, which the Saints, we, and the Scriptures do witness it
in both, and against all such who are not fit to speak of the things of God.

Again, in his ninth Head of contradiction, he speaks of a warfare (which yet
himself never came unto) and in it he wrests Paul's words, and so would turn the
truth into a lie, saying as if Paul should say thus: If sin that wars and
sights in me, has no power to condemn me, then there is no condemnation to me:
Which words Paul never spoke, and it is a lie in the ground; for it is not sin
that is the condemnation, but the Light which lets men see their sins, because
men love darkness rather than light, as many in this age have manifested
themselves to do, and the light shall be their condemnation, who are not yet
come to the War, nor to the Victory which the Scripture speaks of.

Again in his tenth Head of contradictions speaking of repentance, as if he
would prove that we denied or disclaimed godly sorrow; and his proof is this;
If we disclaim in-dwelling sin in the godly, we disclaim godly sorrow. Let all
people take notice of this, If we deny in-dwelling sin, we deny godly sorrow;
this is contradiction in the highest degree; but against it, this I shall
affirm, that none comes unto godly sorrow, but they deny in dwelling sin; and
they that do not deny in-dwelling sin, denies godly sorrow.

Again, John Stelham in his eleventh Head of contradictions to the Scripture,
in his speaking of the Word and means of Grace, he is setting up that which
before he has been pulling down, in p. 123. where he says, That they are
justified from all Legal obligations and conditions of their own workings both
within them and without them. And in page 174. he is setting up obligations and
conditions of Reading, Hearing, Prayer, Preaching, to which he says Life and
Salvation is promised; and so would have salvation come by Works, which he has
so much declared against before, and so makes prayer, reading, preaching, etc.
not only the means through which salvation comes, but the cause for which they
are saved, saying, To Prayer is promised salvation. Now to the informing of the
minds of people, I say, That all promises are to the Seed, and the fulfilling
of the promises is witnessed through its obedience to Christ's command, and
through the Works of righteousness; but none can pray so as to be heard of God,
and accepted, but who have first known, heard and believed him whom they call
upon, which none do but who own the Light which Christ has enlightened them
withal, which teaches to pray, hear, read and preach with knowledge and
understanding,

Again J.S. in his twelfth head concerning baptism, would go about to prove
the sprinkling of Infants to be the baptism, and so denies both John's, and
Christ's, and the manner of them, and sets up another which the Scripture does
not mention, as sprinkling Infants, which who reads his Books, may see his
proofs; by consequences he would have the Scripture speak that which it never
mentions in plain precepts, and so would turn the truth into a lie and so by
his own rule in the 68. page of his Book shall he be judged; Such Messengers as
speak more then is in the Scripture, are not sent by Gods spirit, nor guided by
him to what they say. But that all people may come to a right understanding of
the Scriptures, and that which is testified by them, is to come to the Light
which Christ has enlightened them withal, which Light was before Ordinances
were, and which Light gives to see the place of Ordinances, and their time
wherein they are to be obeyed; for the Light comes from the substance of all
the diverse vvashings, and carnal Ordinances, and it leads into the one Baptism
which is the substance of that of Water, which John who was a prophet, was
the Minister of; and Christ said unto his Disciples, John verily baptized with
water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire; but he never
commanded them to baptize with water, but commanded them to go teach all
nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and
although some of the Disciples, and Paul for a time did baptize with water, yet
who shall judge their permission in it? although Paul an Apostle of Jesus
Christ witnesses, that he was not sent to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, 1
Cor. 1.17. and thanks God that he had baptized no more of them, yet witnessed
that they were all baptized with one spirit into one body. And J.S. says, To
be against Infant Baptism is contrary to Acts 2.28, 29. This is false, for that
Scripture does not command it, nor give president for it; let the Reader search
if he find any such thing as the Scripture proving Infants baptism; but the
promise is to as many as the Lord shall call: And so he has foully belyed the
Scripture; for if that Scripture be contrary to such who are against Infants
Baptism, then must he prove from that Scripture Infants baptism to be commanded
as pr^ctised, which he cannot do, and so is a perverter of the Scripture: And
it is truth that we do deny brain-imaginations and sprinkling Infants with
water. But then he rambles over many Scriptures, proving the Baptism of
Believers; these proofs are impertinent; what is this to prove Infants
baptism? So that is passed by here, as making arguments against believers
baptism, except one professing that were our present Adversary; but in this he
is pursued from all the Scriptures; he cannot prove in Justice that ever
Infants Baptism was either commanded or practiced, though he craftily wind
about never so much in his imaginations and consequences. And in the general I
answer, Much by us has been written and spoken to this purpose; so our
judgments in this charge is fully known, of which we are not ashamed before
men, as being fully justified herein in the sight of the Lord. And so as to
that particular more need not be said.

Again in the 12 th Head of Scripture-contradiction, as he says, concerning
the Lords supper J.S. makes much ado, because of our denial of carnal
inventions and imitations practiced by many in the exercise of that called the
supper of the Lord, though with one heart and mind we say and witness, That
Christ's flesh and blood is our meat and drink, and none have life within them
without it; yet does receive it in the spirit and power of God, and does bear
out testimony against imitations and false likenesses set up in the World, as
the wicked and profane people, such as live in pride and wickedness, and
covetousness, both Teachers and people, eating a little bread, and drinking
Wine so many times a year, in such a form, and manner, and way, as Christ nor
his Apostles never practiced such things in, and no change wrought among
people, but both before and after (if not in the very time) fulfilling all
wickedness and unrighteousness in words, and ways, and thoughts, yet by false
suggestion from their Teachers, believing vainly themselves to be the better,
or saints for the practice of such things; whereas they do the more thereby vex
the Lords soul, and grieve his spirit by hypocrisy and deceit; this we call
carnal inventions, and do deny it in the presence of the Lord, that it is ev^l,
and not accepted of God, but condemned in his sight. J. S. proves not that any
thing which Christ instituted to be practiced among the saints only, ever was
practiced in the World among such who are not called, neither sanctified; and
this is abomination to the Lord, to practice the saints words or ways, and have
not the spirit of the Father, which we cannot see among the people of this age,
no, nor manage them professing to be selected Church Members, but pride and
envy abounds among them all, and in that spirit of disobedience in which they
live, to the Ordinances of Christ they have no right, to practice that which
only is to be practiced among them that have the spirit of the Father, and
nothing that Christ instituted for his saints, do we deny in its life and age;
but lives are changed, and Antichrist has ruled, and even the things which
once he instituted, your practice of them who are polluted, are an abomination
to him. And this is a full answer in general as to the thing, though I pursue
him not in every particular word and argument, to lay open his folly; but our
judgment in this is known; he that can receive it, let him; and the belief of
the wicked we shall not beg: In these things we are approved of God, and in the
denial of all false imitations; and who is he that shall condemn?

In the 14 th Head, concerning Prayer.
Concerning prayer, we do not contradict the scripture in our pract^ce, J.S. is
the liar herein, who has made it a subject to treat two leafs upon; for
praying in the spirit, and by the spirit, and in public and private too, we
own, and do practice, as is known to thousands; our Enemies can witness for us,
and according to the scriptures too, and not contradicting to it any way: But
this is the offense against him at which he is troubled, that we should deny
the prayers of the Pharisees, or of such who are in the steps of the prayers of
the Pharisees, viz. who for a pretense make long prayers, and stand praying in
the synagogues, who are out of Christ's and the Apostles Doctrine, and the
prayers and practices of such we do not deny according to the scripture, which
says, the sacrifices of the wicked are abomination to the Lord; and they shall
receive greater condemnation who make long prayers for a pretense* as it is
manifest concerning many in this genetation, and against the praying of the
Hypocrites, and of Hirelings, who pretend to pray in love to souls, when as if
they had not a great sum of money from the people, would not pray among them,
but seek a place to pray at, among such who would give them money and hire; and
this praying is for a pretense; and we do deny it in public, and do not offend
God herein, though we vex J. S. hereby, because some will not worship the Beast,
and bow a hat off, while he is praying in an idols Temple, which he complains
of in J.P. though he himself that, pray^ has a cap on; and he confesses
himself not wicked men's prayers are accepted, public or private; and here he
has condemned all his own praying, who confesses he is wicked and sinful, and
his heart is old and lying; let all take notice of this, which if he had not
confessed it, it is sufficiently proved: Then why shall he ever hereafter be
offended, (seeing his prayers are not accepted according to his own confession)
if any tell him so, or declare against his praying; and before any can truly
pray, they must receive the Spirit of the Father (and them we know who are not
led by the Spirit of the Father) them and their prayers are to be declared
against by the Saints, and are condemned in the sight of God. And J. S. says,
If this counsel be followed, viz waiting in the Light till the Spirits leadings
be known, it makes known nothing of public Ministers, Church Officers,
Baptism, Lords Supper, public order of prayer, nor of Christ as Mediator, nor
of the Spirit of promise etc. The Light that every man has, makes manifest
nothing of this he says; he in this is a liar, and as landerer of the people
of God, who are led by the moving of the Spirit, in the Light of the Word
Christ Jesus, that lights every man, and owneth the public Ministry of
Christ, which is received by the Holy Ghost, and Church, and Baptism, and
Christ as Mediator, and the Spirit of promise, and all these things all the
Saints upon earth, who have the spirit of Christ, shall witness against J.S.
herein to be a liar of the Light and Spirit of God, and so is a transgressor,
and his wickedness may largely be laid open; but the least of the children of
Light may see his folly and madness, who also lyingly says, that Quakers they
nourish up people in the Light that every man has, (which is the Light of
Christ Jesus) in opposition to Scripture Light: This is also utterly false, and
a lie, and the Author proved to be of the Devil; for the Light of Christ leads
up in the fulfilling of the Scripture, and not in opposition to it; but by his
lightness and lies he is made manifest to be a deceiver of the people; and so
take thy own words in thy conclusion to thy self; thou art he that is alienated
from the Scripture, and from the Spirit of God also, by thy lying spirit of
contradiction, which is manifest in thy Writings.

In his 15. Head concerning singing, We do not contradict the Scripture;
(herein again thou art a liar) but singing with the spirit and with
understanding we own, of such as are redeemed out of the World, and are not of
the World; but singing of David's experiences, sung in the World by such who
are of the World, this singing we do deny, as it is practiced in this
generation, in Rhyme and Meeter, in a vain multitude of people, where all or
most of them do dishonor God in singing David's words, which themselves are out
of the life of, and in a life quite contrary; singing the Law of God is dear to
them, and that they exercise themselves in it, when every moment of time they
are exercised in wickedness, and cast the Law of God behind them; and thus
singing lies, and that which is not true to them, yet in the Name of the Lord.
Other Reasons many may be given why we deny singing in this form, and manner,
and way, as singing is practiced in this generation; but this instance is
sufficient to all honest people; but cavillers mouths are not soon stopped, not
by the truth: And all J. S. professes as to maintain this manner and practice
of singing, are all impertinent; he proves that the saints sang, and were
exhorted to it; but what is this to the purpose to prove the World must sing,
who are unconverted? which singing we oppose only, and not the saints singing
in (...) spirit, who are moved to it by the spirit. O thou liar! Wher^fore do
thou say, To be against singing David's words (by the World in Rhyme and Meeter)
as we do, is contrary to Ephesians. 5. Col. 3. does these scriptures hold forth any
such thing, (let the Reader try) as that David's experiences may be sang in the
World in Rhyme and Meeter? nay, they do not; and so thou art a liar on the
scriptures, to be taken notice of, and marked for a wrester of the scriptures;
and in this we have often declared our minds by words and writings, that
poetry, and J. Hopkins and T. Sternolds brain-invention we have denied; yet
David's Psalms w^ have owned, and do own them, as they were given forth by the
spirit of God, and not as they are perverted, and added, and diminished to such
a compass of syllables as they are now in practice; and thus I have given you a
further testimony for, and against singing, wherein we deny it, and wherein we
own it, and so leaves his muddy stuff, and so counts it not worth raking in;
only a lie or two, or more he is proved in, as the Reader may take notice also
of one thing more, where he charges R. F falsely to speak falsehood, for saying
the priests of England they teach people to sing lies in hypocrisy; this they
do, and do wi^kedly in it; and he has added to their wickedness in denying it
to be so; for to all people without exception, they give to sing, I am not puffed
in mind, nor have a scornful eye, and they making not exception in giving forth
these psalms to sing: Some that they give it forth to, are puffed in mind, and
have scornful eyes; and these they teach to sing lies in hypocrisy; to any
honest man this appears true, let J. S. shuffle and twist never so much.

In the 16 th Head concerning Elders and Ordination.
We do not herein contradict the Scripture, but witness forth according to it,
that who are moved by the Spirit of God to watch over the Flock, and ordained
with gifts thereunto, may take the oversight of the Flock wittingly, and of a
ready mind, and not by constraint, nor for filthy lucre sake, as J. S. and his
generation of false Teachers, who preach for hire, and for gifts and rewards;
such are not ordained of God to watch over the Flock, but run, and were never
sent, and therefore shall not profit people at all; and such an ordination we
deny, who are ordained at schools, or by natural arts and sciences to speak
their brain-study by a Glass, this is by man, and not of God, and God does deny
it, and we testify against it by the spirit of God, and do say, The call to
the true Ministry and Eldership, is not by man, nor of man, but by the Lord,
according to Gal. 1.1. yet such a one is approved of all the Saints, and go
forth not contrary to men who fear the Lord; for the spirit of life is one in
them that are called and ordained by it, and in them that bears witn^ss to
truth what such does approve with the spirit that are called by ^he spirit.
This is our judgment, and the judgment of Truth, what ever J. S. or any of
his fellows raise up to oppose it; and herein we do not contradict the
Scriptures; he is that liar in the subject matter on which he treats in the
title of the Section.

In his 17 th Head concerning Ministers Maintenance.
Concerning this we do no way contradict the Scripture, but witnesses
according to it, that the Ministers of Christ does receive freely, and gives
freely of what they have received from God, and having plan^ed a vineyard, may
eat the fruit of it, and keeping a flock, may eat of the milk of the flock: and
when they go into a house, may eat such things as are set before them, and yet
may not be chargeable to any man, and this is according to Christ's
instructions, and not contradictory to the Scriptures, though J. S. be pleased
to so style it, but all such who preaches for hire, or takes hire for
preaching, and seeks for their gain (for 50 l. or 60 l. per annum, or the like)
from their quarter (a Parish or Town) and such who take Tithes, Gifts, and
Rewards for preaching, which people should not give them except they preached,
and such who have sums of money, and lives in pleasures and vanities, and lust,
and fullness of the Flesh, as the Priests of England do, (this maintenance we do
deny) and them that act those things, we deny to be Ministers of Christ, or
that any Maintenance by way of Ministry does belong to such who are greedy dumb
dogs, and can never have enough, as Isa. 5, 6. such practices and men we
oppose, and does no whit contradict the Scripture, but it witnesses to us
herein, and against all such; and therefore I. S. and his Brethren the
Independe^ts who acts such things, they contradict the Scripture, and so are
truly guilty themselves in action of what they falsely accuse us in words; for
such who walks in the steps of the false Prophets, as he and they does that
preach for hire, and takes Gifts and Rewards for preaching, are contrary to all
the true Ministers of Christ, and the Scripture; and the Spirit that gave it
forth condemns them, and much as to this we have publicly spoken, and written,
and so here I need say the less, though much might be said to manifest I. S.
folly and vanity; though they that plant a vineyard may justly eat the fruit
thereof: yet what is this to purpose? he is a thief that eats of the fruit of
that which he has no^ planted, but is hired thither for so much per Sermon, or
per annum, and plants nothing for the Lord; and he that preaches the Gospel,
may live of it; but this shames I. S. and this Generation of Teachers, who many
of them might beg bread at peoples doors, had they not a Law by violence to
compel maintenance from them; which thing is a very shame to all righteousness,
which is practiced by most of the Priests of England at this day, grievous to
be related, what unjust Judgments against them for to maintain Ministers, so
called; what is the thing that J. S. pleads for Tithes, or an hundred or two
hundred pound a year? he is a Liar, to say that we contradict the Scripture,
because we cannot uphold this, but must bear witness against it: so whilst he
falsely charges us with contradicting the Scripture, in the very same thing he
and his Generation are found in this practice contrary to all the Ministers of
Christ that ever was sent by him, and in the very practice of the Deceivers,
Antichrists, and False-Prophets, in making merchandise of people through
covetousness, in preaching for hire, and in seeking for their gain from their
quarters; and this is the very truth, let J. S. and all his fellows read their
own contradiction to the Example of all the Ministers of Christ, in their
cu^sed practice of Maintenance, which is the greatest oppression this day in
England: and this is their grief against us, because God has opened our mouths
to declare against them, and to show their solly and wickedness unto all
people: and when the Law of the Land cease to maintain them, which will come
sooner than they expect, then may they beg their bread, or perish for want; and
that is all the fruit that their Vineyard of wild Brambles will bring forth to
them: and if every particular of his words should be searched, much rottenness
might be let forth: but in plainness I have spoken, as to the truth of things
in pleading for truth, and in denying the Deceits, and the Oppression of
Hirelings, which I cannot call Ministers Maintenance.

His 18 th. He^d concerning immediate Calling.
In this we do not contradict the Scripture. J.S. is a Liar herein also; but we
say, Such as are called of God, are called by his Spirit, and led with it, and
fulfills the will and work of God in the Spirit; and such as are called by the
Spirit of God, are approved by all the Saints of God, who with the same Spirit
bear witness to such as are called by it, and speaks by it: The Ministry of
God is not of Man, nor by Man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which is
not learned by natural Arts, but received in the Holy Ghost; and this the
Scripture bears wirnisse to; but the Call to the Ministry, by natural Learning
at Oxford, and Cambridge, this I deny, and trample upon; and all your Arts, and
knowledge, and Humane Study, and Languages, is not able to make a Minister of
Christ, (this I do affirm;) though they approve one another, yet are they not
approved of God without his Spirit; and they that have his Spirit, deny Natural
Learning, as to be made a Minister of Christ hereby: and E.B. his words are
owned, transcribed by J.S. cited Page 16. in the Warning, etc. and all that he
says, does not prove, that any of the Ministers of Christ were called by the
Church, or approved unto that work of the Ministry, by them who were not called
by the Spirit, and guided with it; he says, the sending of God is twofold,
and for this he has no Scripture to prove it, and so holds forth that which
the Scripture will not evidence: And further he says, he pretends to no such
Call of an Apostle; if he have not the same Call, by the same Spirit as the
Apostles had, he is no Minister of Christ, and in measure he has confessed to
be without the same Call as the Apostles were called with, and will not pretend
such a Call.

Again, He falsely Charges R. F. with Crucifying the Ministers of Christ: which
is a Lie, and of the Devil, though none of us may spare to call Hirelings
greedy dumb Dogs and devourers, and lazy shepherds, and in this we do not
contradict the Scripture, nor work offense toward God, nor our neighbors: And
he concludes, Who of us (we or they) shall have the worst of it in Conclusion,
the day shall declare: unto that we are willing to come, by which we, and all
the blind Priest^ of England shall be manifest; and we know Liars, such as J.
S. shall not have the better, who is to us made manifest already to be out of
the way, and out of the power and life of God.

His 19 th Head, concerning immediate Teaching.
In this we do not contradict the Scripture, as J. S. falsely charges us withal,
but do say (that we are taught of God) and needs no man to teach us, ^ut as the
anointing of God, which abides in us, and the promise of God is fulfilled upon
us Jer 31. we are all taught of God from the least of us to the greatest, with
whom the Covenant of God is established, and this is the cause wherefore we set
forth our selves to the World, who are yet in the unconverted estate, that they
also may come to the knowledge of the ways, and teachings of God in the
Spirit, and may come into the Covenant of peace, where none need to say, know
the Lord, but all these are taught of him, (yea and immediately too) by his
spirit, and this we do witness, and the Lord does witness with us, though the
unbelieving heart of J. S. and his fellows cannot believe it, but does gainsay
it, as being contrary to the Scripture, when as themselves does contradict the
Scripture in denying it, so proving themselves guilty of what they do accuse us
of falsely; but this is that their folly may appear to all men, as it does to
us, and J. S. says, he is yet to learn the promise of the immediate teachings
of God, to be given to all that are to teach others; and this does make it
manifest, that himself is without the promise of God, and is not yet taught of
God, and so without Gods Covenant, being not learned in the teaching of God by
his Spirit, which is immediate.

And thus to confound truth, he has by his confession shamed himself, and
showed himself to all men to be unlearned in the doctrine of Salvation.

Further, he says, If God had intended to have given teaching immediately
without any medium, then would he not have sent Preachers abroad for them to
hear: mark this man's blind productions, and what impudence is in his heart,
who holds forth, That God intended not the thing to be what be promised should
be, he promised to teach his people himself; and this man holds forth, that he
intended it not, and so has no less than charged God with Hypocrisy (let the
Reader mark this) but this is the ground wherefore the Ministers and Preachers
were and are sent abroad, to bring all people to be taught of God by the
Spirit, and to inform their minds to the gifts of God in them, that by the
spirit received the knowledge of, they might know the things of God, which is
not known but by the Spirit of God, which all the Children of God are led and
guided by, and they that are not led with the Spirit of God, which Spirit is
immediate, (are not the heirs with Christ) are none of his, let J.S. say what
he will, or may; this we believe, and this the Scripture gives testimony of for
us, and with us.

Yet further to manifest his folly, he says, It is erroneous enough, and
contradictious to the whole Scripture, when R. F. truly tells him, and says,
Thou that art not taught of God, shows that thou speaks a vision of thy own
heart, and not from the mouth of the Lord: let the Reader search where the
error and contradiction to the whole Scripture lies in these words, or whether
he has not proved himself blind and ignorant, and in error, and contradicton
to the Spirit of God

Further, he says, Never did any but Gods slayers, and Spirit-wounders go
about to s^parate the Word of God and his breath: Now let this be considered;
Christ did tell them (the Pharisees) who had the words which God had spoken by
the Prophets, that they had never heard ^he voice of God; here he divides or
separates betwixt the words and the voice (or breath) and was no God-slayer,
nor Spirit-wounder, as thou have wickedly and blasphemously laid down thy
position, where thou have concluded Christ to be one against whom thy words
are laid down: let the Reader prove thy doctrine.

His 20 th Head, concerning Questions.
In this we do not contradict the Scripture, J. S. is taken with a lie in his
mouth, who has made it a subject to treat upon, (for Questions in their places
we own) but such as are of the Devil we deny; as Christ did, who showed
himself as a fool unto all men's wisdom when the subtle Pharisees and others
tempted him, who would not answer their crafty Questions, though them that
questioned in simplicity, he did to resolve and satisfy them, and inform them
in the knowledge of the Father.

Then some leaves he has filled wi^h producing some of our Queries out of
some of our Books, Commenting thereupon, and would prove them ignorant and
unprofitable, and the like; but it h^d been more just, and of a better report
for him to have ansvvered them, and shevved them to be (as he says of them) to
all people, rather than in a manner back bited them, and reproached them, and
not shevving wherein it lies; and if they be so needless, and vain as he
says, then the sooner had such a wise man (as he thinks himse^f) J. S.
confuted them by sober and plain answers; but what if our folly in the
sight of men, be wisdom in the sight of God, and his wisdom foolishnnsse
with God? no matter what he say of us, who has shevved himself already, and
confessed truly that his heart is old, and lying, and sinful* so we can
expect no better jud^ment from his Pen, then what is in his heart; but while we
are approved in the sight of God, we matter not what men say of us, especially
one that has set himself to be our enemy, and the Lords enemy: and I leave the
honest sober Queries to be read, which he has falsely branded with Pride and
ignorance, and such like, (as this) What Rule have you in Scripture for putting
off the Hat? (this is an honest Question) which he wickedly slanders with
pride: And whether is your Gospel free without charge, as the Apostles was, yea
or no? These and such other Questions he rails against, to be ignorant, and
quarrellous, and vain, and of the Devil: Now it had been more honest to have
confuted them in answering discreetly, than to have thus branded them. And he
says, It is one thing to take Hire for Preaching, and another thing to preach
for hire, whereby his scope is to excuse himself if it may be, and his
Brethren, (who are Hirelings,) and would not be counted to preach for hire,
though he dare not deny, (lest all men should see his folly,) but that they had
hire for preaching: but then let him tell us, when, or where ever any of them
preached, and had no hire; and then we will believe they preach not for it; but
such as receive sums of money of one man, ^or a Country, which would not be
given him, except he preached to them, this same man is a Hireling, and
preaches because he has hire, and has hire because (that's the ground) he
preaches. Further, he says, Christ's righteousness which justifies a believing
sinner, is not the essential righteousness of his Godhead; and here he has
spoken ignorantly, and held forth, as if there is two Righteousnesses of
Christ, which I call for a proof from him for; else let him confess, to his
shame, that he has added to the Scripture; for the righteousness of Christ is
but one, by which all the Saints are justified.

Further he says, ignorantly enough, That which is done accord- to the bare
letter of the written Command, or from a Gift of the Spirit, or in a Gospel way
from a living principle of grace, ^cts of ^olinesse by the Holy Spirit, and
Faith given stirred up, This is a righteousness of ours, says he, and seems
to separate it from the righteousness of Christ, as he holds forth: let men
behold his ignorance. Further he says, though it be wrought by the strength of
Christ in us, yet as to Justification, Paul would not be found in it; (this)
for a word, (mark again Reader) can thou see any thing here but ignorance, as
if Paul were justified by ano^^er Christ then what wro^ght in him to will and
to do? Furth^r he says, Paul counted all things but loss and dung, even what
he had done, or suffered, since conversion, that he might win Christ. Mark
again, What was the converting of many hundred of souls by Paul? and many other
Works of God wrought by him, but dung and loss? so J. S. holds forth; this is
ignorance indeed; he has showed his ignorance by what he has said, and not
proved in any thing, that concerning Questions we contradict the Scriptures.

His 21 th Head, concerning Civil Honor.
In this we do not contradict the Scripture, by Arguments nor practice, but do
honor all men in the Lord, and cannot respect men's persons, nor have them in
any admiration for any advantage; yea we honor men in reproving them in their
unrighteousness, and J. S. pleads much for civil Honor: the Scripture speaks
not of Civil Honor; and the Question is. What this honor is that he calls
civil? and wherein it may be done, and not in transgression, nor in respect of
persons; Magistrates are to be honour^d by subjection to their just Commands,
Requests, and Laws; and by patient suff^ring under their corrupt Laws, and evil
Commands, and not resisting evil: yet the person of no man is to be respected;
for he that does, commits sin and is a transgressour of the Law of God, and
Ministers of Christ are to be respected for their works sake; and they desire
no honor nor praise of men, but know, Reproach and infamy is their respect
from the men of this Generation: And as for Hirelings and Deceivers, they are
respected of the World, but condemned of God, and of his Saints, and testified
against; and Parents are to be respected in the Lord by their Children, and
Masters by their Servan^s: but where God commands one thing, and parents or
masters another, as it often comes to pass, in Christ's time, as it does now,
whether to give respect to God or man, this I leave to be judged by sober men
that make conscience of what they say: And thus in short I give a testimony how
we honor, and would have all honored in the Lord, and leave J. S. long
Discourse to him and his Company, and do bear witness against the vain
Superstition, and foolish Customs of this Generation.

His 22 d Head, concerning Swearing.
In this we do not contradict the Scripture, but says and practise^^ according
to Christ's words, Swear not at all, which is spoken absolute and without
condition, and mitigation (and he says) we take these words of Christ against
his meaning, and this is false and wicked too in ^. S. who would be seen to
hold forth, that when Christ said, Swear not at all, he meant not as he spoke,
(for both Christ and the Apostle James were righteous in what they delivered
concerning Swearing, who forbids all manner of Swearing, no cause excepted, and
we take Christ's words according to his mind, and does deny all Oaths, and
abides in Christ, and the Apostles Doctrine, and ou^ yea is so, and our nay is
so, and whatsoever is more comes of evil, and J. S. would plead for swearing
before a Magistrate; but that Magistrate which fears God, and loves his way,
will believe a man sooner that cannot swear for conscience sake, then he that
makes no conscience of Swearing, and such a one is liker to testify lies with
Oaths, then he that for conscience sake denies Oaths; and in his conclusion he
says scholastically (though ignorantly) they that will not expound Scripture by
Scripture, and compare the precepts and ex^mples for swearing without
prohibition against it, fall into Scripture contradiction; but R.F. nor others
will; therefore, etc. This is unfound, and laid down, but not proved at all,
neither ma^or nor minor, and hereby he has concluded wickedly, the Apostle
James, and Christ himself to be fallen into Sc^ip^ure contradictions, who did
expr^sly forbid all swearing and did not compare the precepts and examples for
Swearing, with the prohibition against it, and thus J. S. is taken uttering
folly with his tongue, and has drawn a conclusion upon Christ, and the Apostle
James to be contradictors of Scripture; let shame cover his impudent forehead.

And they that charge Christ, and the Apostle James with contradicting
Scripture, are enemies to God, and of the Devil, and for eternal vengeance:
but John Stelham has done so, and therefore he is an enemy to God, and of the
Devil, and for eternal vengeance.

But further at large, as concerning Swearing, our testimony thereof is la^d
down at large in a Book called, The glory of the Lord arising.

And whereas further, I. S. as a man not weary of iniquity, goes on after his
false charging of us with contradicting to scripture, ^harges us again, that we
contradict our selves in many things; which accusation we bear with as much
patience as we do his former, seeing they are all out of one heart, and to the
same end; for it is a small thing for us to be judged by man, and so that
wherein he charges us with self-contradictions, I pass lightly over, having
cleared the truth, That we do not contradict the Scriptures; but if this man J.
S. had been in Generations past, what would he have said of Isaiah, who was
sent to tell Hezekiah from the Lord, That he should die, and not live? 2 King.
20.1. At the same instant of time the word of the Lord came again to Isaiah,
that Hezekiah should be healed, and that he should go up to the house of the
Lord: These were both the words of the Lord to Hezekiah, and yet no
contradiction in Isaiah, though such a Spirit as J. S. would so have judged:
And what would he have judged betwixt David and Jeremiah? Psalm. 119. and the
103. and Jer. 23.29. David says, The Words of the Lord are sweet unto his
taste, yea sweeter than the honey to his mouth: And Jer. says, The Word of the
Lord is as a fire, and like a h^mmer, which breaks the Rock to pieces: Now
there is no contradiction in these two, not to that Spirit by which they are
guided, though so it might seem to such as J.S. whose minds are dark: And what
would he have judged of Christ's words, Matthew. 12.30. and Mark 9.40. where
Christ said, He that is not with me, is against me; and he that is not against
us is with us? and yet in these words there is not contradiction to him that
has an ear to hear: But if J.S. had been in those days, out of his evil heart
would he have charged the holy men of God to be contradictions to themselves;
it is very like that he would; and these things I leave with the Reader to be
considered of; for we who have the same Spirit, do clear Christ, and the holy
men of God from contradictions, and knows J.S. and such as he, to be seekers of
occasions against the Just, and would make off^nces where there is none; for as
I have said, we do not allow J.S. to be the Interpreter of our words; for then
no question but he would have his own end, and meaning; and J. S. says, We
deny the letter of the Scripture to be Scripture; this is charged upon him to
be a lie, as it is well known through this Nation; both in Doctrine and
conversation, we own the Scriptures; and to deny Matthew, Mark, and John's
Declarations of the Gospel, is no denial of the Scripture; for the Gospel was
preached to Abraham, which Gospel was, and is the power of God, before these
four men did declare it, though we deny their Writings to be the very Gospel,
which is the power of God; yet we do not deny but they truly declared of the
Gospel: and this is to own the Scripture as it speaks of it self to be.

Let J. S. judge what he will of us: and whereas he speaks of Gospel-letters,
and Scripture Gospel, the Scripture gives no such names to it, but says, the
Gospel is the power of God, and that is the Gospel which we preach, even the
power of God unto all people, let J. S. judge by consequence what he will.

And further he would plead for the Title of Master, from the Example of
Abraham's Servant; but this is nothing to prove the lawfulness of a Minister of
Christ, that they may be called Master: for Christ says to his Ministers, Be
ye not called Masters; and the Spirit of Christ being our rule, that leads us
in the fulfilling of Christ's words, let J. S. shuffle as he will: Also he lies
of J.N. to say, he denies and grants the same thing to be in the letter: for
though he say, He that believes has the witness in himself, which is truth;
yet he does not say, The Letter is the Belivers witness, which he seems falsely
to be charged withal; and he says, the Spirit of God must give the spiritual
understanding of the Scriptures; But this he does in another way, than that
whereby he inspired the Penmen of the Scriptures.

Now this is false Doctrine: For Christ the way, the same to us, as to them,
and not another way of understanding Scriptures, nor by another Spirit than
that which gave them forth; and he says, Christ directed to himself, John
5.39. as revealed in the Scriptures, and more than that, as conveyed by the
Scriptures to a Soul: Now let the Reader take notice and search that Scripture,
Whether he has not added to it, yea or nay? or where any ever had any Christ
conveyed to them by Scriptures: It does say, the Scriptures testify of him;
but it does not say, that he is revealed in the Scriptures, nor conveyed by
them to a Soul; and this is his additional gloss to corrupt the Text, to
undervalue the eternal Spirit of the Father, by which Christ is only revealed,
and received, and not by the Scriptures.

And for E. B. to say, That he came not to them with enticing words, neither
what he had gathered from the Scripture without him, but to declare the Word of
the Lord, and not to speak his own conceivings and imaginations, this is true,
and no contradiction in it; though J. S. say, these cannot both be true, to
say, That he neither came with what he had gathered from Scripture, nor his own
imaginations: For the Apost^es of Christ did not preach what they had gathered
from Scripture, neither their own imaginations, but preached the Wor^ and
Gospel of God which they had received from God, and not gathered from
Scripture, nor in their own imaginations: and because he says, both these
negatives cannot be true, then it is concluded, that himself preaches either
what he has gathered from Scripture, or his own imaginations, and let him
choose to say whether he will: And in the next, he will be proved a false
Prophet; and that E. B. compiled a Book out of Scripture Collections, is false;
for having the same Spirit which gave forth the Scripture, which brings the
Scripture to remembrance, is not compiling a Book out of Scriptures: and J. S.
is found a false Accuser; and E.B. neither a self-Contradictor, nor
self-Curser: and these are true words to this Generation, and owned with the
Spirit of God, though J. S. in his scornful spirit abuse them: he that has
the Word of the Lord from the mouth of the Lord to declare, he is reviled and
mocked.

But he that speaks the imagination of his own heart from the Saints
conditions, he is heard and owned; and this is neither Scripture contradiction,
nor self contradiction, let J. S. judge out of his own heart what he will:
neither is this self-contradiction, to ask, Which of the Saints had the
witness of their souls union to seek in the Letter, and yet to affirm, the
Spirit opens, and brings that which is spoken in Scripture to remembrance? Let
J. S. first answer the Query in plainness, which is an honest query, and not
to imply from it his own conceptions; to make appear self-Contradict^ons, let
the sober Reader judge, where the contradiction lies: and he says, the Spirit
is in the le^ter, and goes about to prove it if he could: if the Spirit be in
the letter, then all must have the spirit that has the letter, and the Spirit
is wherever the Bible is, which I do deny; for many have the Letter, and
prof^sse it, which knows not the spirit, and many have the Bible in their
pocket, which have not the spirit there: and this will be confessed by J. S.
and all his fellows; and so he must revoke, who says, the Spirit is in the
letter, and the spirit gives life, but the letter kills: In his proof he says,
The written Word, viz. the Letter is of greater authority then the writer: Mark
here, Christ was one of them which gave forth Scripture, and he was a greater
authority than what was written: and I say, as it is plain to all honest men
who can believe truth, that the holy men of God, who had the spirit, were of
greater authority than the Scriptures since have been which they left behind
them. But J. S. has set Christ, and all them that gave forth scripture to be
less in authority than the scriptures: Let wise men judge of this matter; he
says, They were imperfectly holy that wrote forth the Scriptures, and this is
an absolute lie; for the scr^ptures give ^his testimony of many of them that
wrote it, that they were perfect men; and he has also slaundered Christ to be
imperfectly holy: and in his next let him prove what this imperfect holiness
is, and till then we deny that there is any Holiness imperfect.

Further he says, The promises of the scripture are his ^hariot to convey him
(spirit) whither he pleases to go; But where is his proof for such a Doctrine?
but all that he says, does not prove that the spirit is in the letter, though
he say to make up the sum of his matter, Daily experiences do demonstrate that
the spirit is in the letter: but where is the man? let him answer, that thus
has experienced, that always when he has seen the letter, and handled the
letter, has seen and handled the spirit; the testimony of an honest man I will
believe, but not J. S. assertion out of his own heart.

In his 2 d Head of self-contradiction.
Concerning hearing the Word, this is not contradiction, to say, they who are
of God hear his Word, and yet to deny the hearing of such as J. S. who is not a
Minister of the Word, but a Professor of the Letter; for proud men, and
covetous men, and false Accusers, such as J. S. is, we are exhorted to turn
away from, by Paul: and this is not a denying our selves to be of God, as J. S.
would charge us withal, because we deny to hear Hirelings; for we hear Gods
Word, and his Voice, and therefore do we deny to hear D^ceivers; and this is no
self-contradiction, nor saying, nor unsaying, let J.S. judge what he will, the
Saints shall be my witn^sse: and though we say, that the Saints Teacher cannot
be removed into a corner, as says the scripture, and that the saints will
find their teachers as they lie in their beds: both these are true, and not
self-contradiction: let a sober Reader judge, whether he can find contradiction
in those words: but fain would J.S have his lies believed for truth, that he
might have praise of men, for his works have gained no praise of God; and he
says, R F. has not proved lies yet against him: if it were so, let the Reader
search whether there be none proved against him now: but let him not say like a
Pharisee, I am no liar, but rather let him repent of his lies and wickedness.

His 3 d. Head concerning the Light within.
Wherein much ado he makes as to prove the light of Christ spoken of Ioh. 1.9.
to be a natural light, and he says, the light given to all men, even that
light spoken of Ioh. 1.9. is a dim light, and is cold, and insufficient to
Salvation, and unable to make true discovery of the true Savior, and such like
contemptible undervaluing words of the pure light of Christ, by whom the world
was made, who lights every man in the World: and by this it is known more
evidently what Spirit J. S. is of: but there is none of us who have received
the knowledge of God by the very light of Christ which shines in our hearts can
believe him: and this is no contradiction to say, that every man is lightened by
Christ with the true light, and yet to say, some men are living in a natural
condition: both these are true, for some hates the light of Christ, and their
deeds are evil: and such are in a natural condition; but this does not prove
that Christ has not given them light, though they be in a natural condition; I
leavit to spiritual men to judge, though they say, it seems strange, that some
should live a natural condition, and yet have the light of Christ given them,
says he, as if every man brought a Savior with him into the world. This last
is his false conception; but he is man's savior by whose power every man is
brought in to the World, and if J. S. did but understand as we do, that some
love the light, and some hates it: such as hate it denies Christ: he that loves
it receives Christ: who knows this stranges not; I.S. wondering shows his
Ignorance who would secretly charge us to be bewitched with a Notion of
accounting nature grace, which we do not, and it is his own condition: he that
conceives Lies, believes them and tells them, is the rather bewitched.

And further, he says the light in every man is a poor, base, beggarly scrap
to the Gospel treasure: these words are uttered in his hastiness, and without
either fear or knowledge; for he that lights every man with the true light of
life, (or of Condemnation) is not base beggarly scrap^, as I. S. says it is,
for it brings to the ^nowledge of the Gospel treasure and pearl, and not other
light, and thus whilst he thinks to prove us self-contradictors, he proves
himself a vilifier, and a blasphemer of Christ Jesus the Savior of the World
who lights every man that comes into the World. Again, he would make this
contradiction, because we say every man in hi^ first state is as a Beast, and
yet saying every man is lightened; but this is not contradiction no more than
the former is; and then he speaks of natural conscience, and s^cretly charges
us as if we should say it is potent, and victorious at last; but this is a
secret slander of his; for we say Christ only is victorious, and through him
are we made Conquerers, and not by natural conscience: and he speaks of Gospel
conviction to be above the conviction of natural conscience; but I would know
of him where the Gospel conviction works, if not in men's consciences? and so in
his next let him div^de if he can, and show the d^fference of such convictions.
Further, he would say that this is contradiction to say that every man in his
first birth may see himself to be natural; and yet to say that the light which
discovers natural corruptions is not natural, but spiritual; both these are
true; for the light shines in darkness which shows the darkness, and is not
darkness but light; and he that c^n understand that Scripture John 1.5. shall
see the truth of both these to be no self-contardiction.

Further, he says the Scriptures are a rule above the Saints light, and unto
it, and not so, their light above the Scripture; this is confusion, and he
knows not whereof he affi^ms; for the Spirit of God is the the Saints rule, and
that is greater than the Scriptures, and the rule of the Spirit of God is above
the Scripture: but such as J. S. who talks of Scripturres to be a rule, and yet
acts these things which the Scriptures declare against, are but found in deeper
hypocrisy; for he that is ruled by the Spirit of God walks up in the
fulfilling of Scriptures. And further J. S. confess^d, and says this he knows,
that he is more brutish then any man, and has not the knowledge of the holy;
and this is truly ^onfessed; his own works manifest his own condition to be
true; and he confesses he never obeyed natural light as he ought, and as he
might, and this is truly confessed; for if he had obey^d that light which he
calls natural, he would not thus have stumbled at him who has lightened every
man.

And further he charges a deceit when men will put off that for redemption
light which is but old creation light, let him charge them that are guilty: but
yet we say that the same is Redeemed by whom the world was created; and this is
without any deceit; and he that lighteneth every man with the light, that is
but one, he is the Savior of all that receive him in the light, and he is the
condemner of all that hate his light; this is no self-contradiction, but the
very truth as it is in Jesus. Further ^. S. would make it appear if he could,
that we contradict our selves concerning sin and Christ; but his whole Section
I leave to be read in his Book, and let the wise Reader judge whether his proof
be any such thing: only his lie will prove what he says; he says, We hold
Christ to be in all; this is his Lie: for we say Christ is not in the
Reprobate, neither did we ever affirm that Christ is not in the Reprobate, and
so is not in all: neither do we concerning Justification contradict our selves
in the Spirit of God, though so it may appear to J. S. blind mind, and so
would make it appear to others by blind arguments by his own meaning. Again J.
S. would charge self-contradiction upon us, because we bear witness to the
New Covenant, and does say, the children of God are taught of God, and needs no
man to teach them, but as the anointing within them: and yet does write and
print: here he says we condemn in others what we allow in our selves. Now to
all honest people this is no contradiction, neither a condemning in others what
we allow in our selves: for therefore we write, and print and speak, that all
may come to the knowledge of this thing, and may be converted to God, and know
his teaching within them; but what would J. S. have said of John who told them
they needed no man to teach them, but as that within them? and yet did write
Epistles to them: ^ery like he would have called this contradiction. And the
same is our cause, who does and must do (though J. S. and his companions be
grieved therewith, because their folly is laid open thereby) print, and write,
and speak, that people through the Ministry be brought to know the teaching of
God in themselves, and yet herein in the light of the Spirit of God, do we not
contradict our selves, let J.S. say what he will: neither do we allow in our
selves, what we condemn in another, this is one of J.S. his lies; we allow the
Ministry of Christ, yet does not allow the Ministry of Deceivers, and yet is
not in contradiction, and this in short may give the Reader to understand the
deceit, and deceivableness, to lie in J. S. who is found seeking offenses
against us, without any cause given him: and he lays snares for another, which
does entrap his own feet. And whereas he has transcribed E B his Confession,
in the warning to Underbarrow, which confession is still owned, and no
self-contradiction proved by it: For though God spoke by G.F. to him, yet this
does not contradict the teaching of the spirit of God, as that E. B. was not
taught by the spirit of God: For, as I have said, G. F. did minister as many do
at this day, that people should come to the teaching of God in themselves; and
herein we do not contradict the scriptures, let J.S make as many blind
Arguments as he can: and that instance about J. L. being of the same nature
with the former: The Answer supplies both his Proofs, neit^er of which does
prove us in contradiction, but is a witness to the Ministry of Christ, and to
the Conversion received through it, wherein we are taught of God, and need no
man to teach us, but as the anointing, the spirit of God within us, which is
immediate, and yet we preach the Gospel to others, that they may come to
witness the same with us, even the teaching of the spirit of God, and for this
end is the Ministry of God sent by us to bring others to the knowledge of God
through it, and this is no self-contradiction, let J.S. say what he will.

Further, J.S. does instance E.B. his calling man's light natural and carnal in
the Warning, etc. and would call his contradiction to some who deny the light of
Christ to be natural and carnal, as the Priests of England term it; but this
is no contradiction; for though we do deny that the light of Christ Jesus is
natural and carnal, and does not allow any so to call it; yet the light of man
by which carnal men do judge of carnal transgressions, is natural: E.B. does
never say that the light of Christ is natural and carnal, but the light of M^n
is so he says, and in this Instance there is no contradiction; neither in any
parts of the words following, which are transcribed: and much might be said as
to the occasion of those words being uttered, when E. B. was in prison falsely,
as many have been since, who was one of the first that by imprisonment was a
sufferer for the name of Jesus in the North part of England, before J. S. was
troubled with any of us: but it is sufficient what is said to the man's light,
by which carnal men judge of any thing, is one thing, and the light of Christ
Jesus which is spiritual men's guide, is another thing: E. B. spoke of man's
light, and J.S. foolishly opposes him, as if he spoke of the light of Christ
Jesus, and so opposes his own conception. And further J. S. asserts, That
Scripture light is the standing rule for faith and manners; so are not
immediate revelations, and teachings. Here he has set up the Scriptures above
the Spirit of God, and above the Revelation of Jesus Christ: the Saints were
led by what the Spirit revealed, and taught: Christ said, he should teach into
all truth, and they that were the Sons of God were loved by the spirit of God,
and that was their rule to be led by in their Faith and manners: But yet see a
Hypocrite, (J.S. is he) that pleads for scripture to be the rule, and yet is
acting in many things contrary to the scriptures, as at large may be instanced;
neither is in all the scripture the scripture called light, but scripture
says, Christ is the light.

Further he says, There is sufficient light in the scripture to guide men to
salvation: Mark his Doctrine, whether he has not preached another thing than
Christ to be the way, and whether he has not made Christ, and the blood of
Christ of none effect, without which no salvation: But he says, there is
sufficient in the Scripture to lead men to salvation, and neither Christ nor
his blood is in Scripture, let it be moved

Further he says, The scripture was given by the spirit for a rule; this we
desire a proof of by plain scripture, and till then we deny it. And further he
says, The spirit gives out himself by scripture: and yet he says, he never
said, the scripture did give the spirit, and this is an absolute contradiction,
as may be noted; so J.S. is taken in the snare, contradicting himself in one
quarter of a sheet of Paper, and has not at all proved us to be
self-contradictors concerning any of these things mentioned by him.

Further, he says in his 8 th Head, That our possessing perfection, and
quaking after Moses Example, cross shins on the other; but wherein he does not
show, neither can the honest-minded read any contradiction in it, but only it
seems J. S. has set himself to cavel.

Further, he says, We contradict our selves concerning Quaking and trembling,
from this confession, That the same power that made Moses to quake and tremble,
the same power we witness; but wherein does this contradiction appear in these
words? let honest men try the cause, and J. S. be silent. And whereas he
instances, J. P. standing in an evil cause, and of I. P. he may be silent,
whose blood he or his Generation fought after: and now might they well be quiet
of him, their wills being stifled by drinking his blood as it were: but that
wicked men must add to their own wickedness till it be fulfilled, that they may
receive their reward; and I. P. was bold, as is the children of God; and though
J. S. would clear himself and his company from what was done to I. P. yet by
the effect it appeared that there was enough envy in them toward him and the
truth; and though his body be in the ground, yet the Spirit of the Lord which
guided him stands alive, a sufficient witness against them, and all their
cruel and wicked dealing; and let J. S. judgment be what it will, neither
concerning growth of Grace, nor forms of Religion, nor fruits of the Spirit do
we at all contradict the Spirit of God: neither does he prove us in these
things whereof he accuses us in strife and debate, (except against such as
J.S. and the Devils Kingdom,) neither in emulation, hatred, scoffs, or any of
these things which the Lord has redeemed us from, though we be falsely accused
in these things, as in many other by him; and whereas he would prove their
preaching in their method, and Points, and Reasons, and Uses from the example
of the Saints in former ages, he falls far short in effecting his extent, for
he cannot prove that they studied for what they spoke, nor that in such a way
they delivered what they said an hour by a glass, etc. as the Priests of this
age do; also if it were they preached in the like manner as the Apostles did,
yet not by the same spirit, but by the spirit of error, and for a wrong end;
that is the thing which makes their manner abominable, when as they are not
guided with the same Spirit of the Apostles, and their preaching in their
method of points, and particulars is rather an art of preaching by humane
policy, and not the gift of preaching by the Spirit of God; neither do we
concerning humility and love contradict our selves, but are in humility and
love toward all men; even such as wrongs us we seek no revenge against, and
herein does our humility and love appear, yet cannot we respect any man's person
with hat or knee, and that is it which J. S. I suppose is offended with.

In his 13 th Head concerning Ordinances.
He charges us with self-contradiction, because we say we own praying, etc. and
yet has given over Family prayer, morning and evening, and at meals, but this
is no contradiction: for we own praying in the Spirit of God, bur do deny it
without the Spirit, and this is no contradiction; he may as well say it was
contradiction in Christ to cry against the prayers of the Pharisees, and yet to
teach his Disciples to pray, and to pray himself; this is the same cause of
ours which he foolishly charges with contradiction, and as I have said the
prayers of the Wicked we deny, and yet does own prayer in the Spirit, and who
are moved by the Spirit morning or evening, or at meals, or otherwise, and this
is truth, let J.S. gather what he can from it.

Further, he says, If we teach one another, why do we condemn them for
teaching? But to this I have answered; Preaching or Teaching by the Spirit we
own, and without the Spirit we deny; and because we say we own all that which
is Gods, as Baptism, the Lords Supper, and Sabbath, etc. yet does disown in
practice their Water Baptism, and their form of breaking of Bread and Wine,
and their forms of Church fellowship, and their form of keeping a Sabbath; this
he charges to be contradiction, but it is not so in the sight of the Lord,
though I.S. falsely so judge it; for their Baptism and breaking of Bread and
Wine, and their Church Fellowship, and keeping of a day, I say their exercise
in these things we do deny to be of God, as in measure is proved, and may be
further if need require; and I say we own that which is Gods, and which is led
unto by his Spirit, and practiced in his fear, and counsel, and yet we do deny
all their Imaginations of any thing which God commanded, does own the command
of God, and yet does not contradict our selves, though I. S. falsely so judge
of us.

Further, he charges us with self-contradiction concerning speech, and silence,
because we check some for speaking, and yet speaks or writes our selves; but
this is the same with the former, and the same answer will serve, that speaking
that which is not in the Spirit we check, which is not the voice of Christ but
of the stranger, and yet does own that which is spoken by the Spirit of God,
and herein does not contradict our selves.

Further, he says, We contradict our selves concerning Conscience and Laws,
because we say there must be no Law concerning Religion, viz, to bind any man
to worship in this or the other way, and to bind him from this or that way of
Worship, and yet in exhorting the Rulers, that their Laws be according to that
in the Conscience; but in these words there is no contradiction; for the Laws
being according to the light in every man's Conscience, that Law will not bind
or limit the conscience from this or that way of worship in Religion; for that
Law is unjust, which binds or limits the pure conscience of any man: but that
Law which is contrary to the light in every man's conscience, is oppression, and
we bear witness against it: and though we do say no Law must be laid upon
Religion, that is to say, to bind any man's Conscience to or from such a form
of Religion: and though we further say, that all just Law is, and should be
according to every man's Conscience; yet in this there is no contradiction.

And whereas J.S. speaks of such Laws, who persecuted, prisoned, and crucified
for the testimony of a good Conscience, God has hewn down in all ages, says
he: Let the Rulers of England take notice of this from the mouth of one of
their Teachers. And further I add, so will God hew down in this Age all those
Laws by which many are persecuted and prisoned, as he has done in other Ages:
therefore let it be considered by them.

And he says, The Magistrate is not to level his Law with every man's
conscience and light: and this he speaks in opposition to us, but he needs not;
for we say the same, that some men's Consciences are defiled, and we do not
desire the Laws to be made according to men's several Opinions, and defiled
Consciences, but according to the light of Christ Jesus in every man's
Conscience, which is but one in all, and is according to the Law of God, and
every just Law will be according to it; and though J.S. by his own meaning
would make it appear Contradiction in our saying no Law must be concerning
Religion, and yet saying, all Laws should be according to the light of Christ
in the Conscience: Now by these words we do not mean that we would have a Law
according to Religion, but no Law to limit to or from this or that manner of
Religion: And this does very well agree with our saying, Let all your Laws be
according to the Light of Christ: so by his misinterpretation of the first, he
makes it appear to be contradiction to the second; but it is not in the light
of the Spirit of God.

And further, R. F. saying, the Law of God answers his Justice, and the Light
of Christ in the conscience answers the Law of God, which is perfect according
to that in the Conscience: these words J. S. charges with two Errors: but let
the Reader try where the Error lies, and not believe J. S false deduction from
R.F. plain words, which are simply uttered, though subtily wrested.

And J. S. speaks as if some would have Magistrates to make Laws to bind
themselves from striking at Offenders, Blasphemers, Gospel, and Church
disturbers, etc.

In answer to this, We are not they that would have any Magistrates to bind
themselves from striking at offenders, who are truly able to judge of Offenses:
we own that such should be punished according to the offense; but the
Magistrates Law reache^ but to the outward man to keep that in peace and good
order, and not to the inward man to bind or limit that.

And as for Blasphemy, and Gospel and Church disturbing, we find many
Magistrates not able to judge thereof; but many on the other side calling ^^th
blasphemy, and reproving of sin in Teachers and people, Gospel and Church
disturbing, and so by false judgment making such offenders which are not, and
so abusing their power, and condemning the innocent rather than the guilty: and
these are such as J. S. speaks of, where the strong man armed keeps the house,
and these are rather a terror to well-doers then to evil; and such Magistrates,
and such Laws by which the just are oppressed, and the hands of the wicked
strengthened will the Lord confound in a day, to the glory of his name, and to
the refreshing of all his People who are now every way oppressed by evil men,
both by Teachers and People.

And as for the rest of his Book, its but of the same nature with the former,
and not worth answering to; only his lies I do deny; and his first following
is, that all our doctrines are raised upon the ruins of the Scriptures
excellency and authority: this is false, neither does his proof at all make it
good. His second lie is, that our corrupt Tenants are built upon false and
novel Interpretations, and this is two lies together; our Tenants are not
corrupt, neither do we build any thing which we hold upon false
Interpretation^. His third lie is, that it is pride that has bred and does
feed our Opinions and Practices: and this is also false; and to prove it has
wrested some of E. B. words. His fourth lie is, that unbelief begets and
procreates all our errors, and our love of error with our derisions of the
truth; here is many lies folded up in one, which are all denied with the life
of God, and the author of them proved to be of the Devil, and we proved to be
of God, who are spoken all manner of evil against falsely for the name of Jesus.
His fifth lie is, that we do subtly couch many errors under specious words
of truth: this lie also I bear witness against, as also against his sixth,
wherein he charges us with mere ignorance, and wilful blindness about the
covenant of Grace, etc.

His seventh lie is, That much of mystical Babylon and confusion is in our
Writings and ways: this is also a lie and of the Devil; and also against his
eighth I bear testimony; our doctrine and practice ends not in Apostasy,
neither are they blasphemy against Christ, as J.S. impudently asserteth; so
that from the first of his book to his last, his whole Work is born witness
against, not to be of God but of the Devil; and in vain has he striven, and
his Work shall not accomplish any part of his desire: for the Quakers against
whom he has written, cannot be offended in Christ, though J.S. have
endeavored for to make their way and doctrines in the sight of men abominable;
but his Work shall not prevent the purpose of the Lord, nor the gathering in of
the upright hearted from the mouths of devouring Shepherds, such as J. S. and
the Priests of England; who is it that does not begin to see their deceits and
abominations? yea thousands do, and many more shall do; so that all their
striving to uphold their kingdom is but in vain; for God has blasted all their
glory, and he will teach his people himself, and govern them by his own Law and
order, and the Kingdoms of this World shall be changed, and shall become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ; and Antichrist and all his Ministers
shall be confounded, and the Beast and the false Prophet shall both be taken
alive, and cast into the lake.

Ah, John Stelham, against whom have thou set thy self, and exalted thy horn?
against whom have thou bent thy strength and shot forth thy envy in crafty
words of guile? who is it that thou have defied, and girded on thy armor
against, and counted them as nothing before thy uncircumcised strength? even
against the Lords people have thou thus done; though thou will not now know it,
yet one day thou shall know it, when iniquity is come to an end, and
transgression finished, and thou shall stand in thy lot at that day, and
receive according to thy work a just and righteous reward from the hand of the
Lord in the day of judgment, when every secret work of iniquity shall appear
to condemnation; and in the mean time the Lord will bring forth good unto his
people, even from thy evil, and all things (even thy evil purposes) shall work
together for good unto such whom God has called: and thy works and purposes
which are to trouble them, and to break them, and to make them appear vile in
the sight of men, even thy work does the Lord turn to establish them, and to
unite them: and in the sight of men thy working against us proves us to be of
God, and thy self to be of the Devil, who was a persecutor from the beginning;
and thou shall be scattered in thy imaginations, and thy whole work has God
confounded, and it shall not accomplish any whit of that end propounded in thy
sinful heart, which has brought forth mischief, for its blasted in the anger
of God, and men shall neither call it, nor the father of it any more blessed.
And friend, had thou known how little it does accomplish of thy evil intent,
thou would have spared thy labor, and employed thy service to another end,
and then had not thy wickedness so greatly appeared in the sight of God, nor
thy shame and nakedness in the sight of men as it now does by this thy sinful
deed, brought forth of a cursed womb, and conceived in unrighteousness. Alas,
alas man, how art thou fallen into the pit which thou have dug for another!
and how does the shame overtake thee, which thou have thought should have
fallen upon us! Let thy wickedness correct thee, and know thou, that the Lord
will not forsake his people, who cannot be offended in Christ, though thou cast
stumbling blocks of iniquity in the way, and would cause them to sin; but even
so much the more as thou speak evil against the way of the Lord, are they
the more upright therein, and the more loving and delighting in the path of
righteousness, and thou have but the more fully discovered in many things from
thy own pen, the wickedness and wrath that has secretly lodged in thy heart:
and it appears that thy wisdom is devilish, and from below, deceiving and being
deceived, and thy path is in craft and subtilty, and not in innocence and
plain simplicity: and in this manner, and by this means chiefly is thy work
managed unto an evil end, but the Lord has rebuked it, and will do yet more,
til it appear to all men, as it does to us to be what I have said of it, and it
shall be a shame to thee, and shall not receive praise neither of God nor man,
but condemnation in the sight of both; and had thou known that we are
established even on the top of Gods holy mountain, and cannot be moved nor
shaken by such weak pitiful blasts of confusion and ignorance, coming out of
thy mouth, where poison lodges under thy tongue; sure had thou known it, thou
would have traveled in another path; but that thy folly might appear unto
all men, is thy work sent abroad, that they may see what lodges in thy mind,
even more envy them in the heart of Balaam, and more desire of evil to the
Lords people than ever was in him; and thou fulfils the measure of thy
forefathers wickedness, till the sum be accounted, and destruction follow;
thou have too much troubled thy self in laboring, and thy reward will not
contervail ^hy pains; had thou but only spoken against us, we should have
born it, and thou might have been the more excused; but in that thou have
spoken against the light of Christ, and called it a perverse Principle, and
many other blasphemous words of bitterness against the very truths of Jesus.

This is the cause wherefore we have answered thee, and thou art utterly
inexcusable; for what thou have done, it is not altogether through ignorance,
though much ignorance be in it, but out of perfect rebellion, and purpose of
mischief; and for Maste^y we do not strive with thee, but rather wishes thy
repentance, than thy destruction; and who does not believe but your kingdom (I
mean the Priests of England) is going down apace, and your glory fading as a
flower, and the Lord will make you a shame to your selves, who have for many
ages preyed devouringly upon the upright, and through perfect covetousness have
made merchandise of Souls; and now many has an eye opened to see your shame,
and it appears with horrible detestation; even the saying is fulfilled, As
troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests murders in the way
by consent, as the Prophet said: and as Christ said, Woe unto you, you will not
enter your selves, nor suffer others to enter that would.

Wherefore thou J. S. even thou repent of this thy Wickedness, for the wrath of
the Lord is gone forth against thee, and evil have thou done against God, and
against his people, and against thy own soul, and this thou shall know one day
to thy exceeding sorrow, unto which time we leave thee, and could have born
all thy scandalous terms without replying again, but only for the sake of the
simple, that thy neighbors may see thy folly, and all men to whom thine and
this does come; and we have not been large, but in short have in singleness of
heart born our testimony once more to the truth of the glorious Gospel which
we have received of God, and not of man, and against thee and thy sinful
heart, and whatsoever proceeds out of it; for thou being evil, how can thou
speak good things? The Tree must be good before the fruit can be so; but out of
thy evil heart have thou brought forth evil, and must receive the reward of
evil whether thou will or no. And what if we should go about to show wherein
the Priests of England do contradict the Scripture? Might not we have a large
Catalogue, even all in your Worship, and in the most of your practices acting
contrary to the Scripture, and contradicting that spirit that gave it forth, in
doctrine and in conversation? in such an enterprise as this, might we make your
folly sound abroad. And as to the contradicting of your selves, and being of
many judgments and opinions, and difference in many particulars about the
things of God among your selves, herein you abound almost above measure, and
thus if need require, could I by the strength of Jesus sufficiently make you
appear abominable in the eyes of all just men; and so think not in thy self
that thou art free from Scripture and self-contradiction, but truly guilty your
selves in what thou have wickedly accused us of falsely, which does but prove
ehee to be of thy Father, who is an accuser of the Brethren, according to
Christ's words, we are spoken all manner of evil of falsely for the Name of Jesus
Christ, whom we serve, and therefore are hated of the World, because we are not
of it; but without much more words, I leave this J. S. our adversary to the
judgment of the great Day, wherein we and he shall receive according to our
deeds; and til then is as willing to have dispraise as praise of men, who is
not a Jew outward, but a Jew inward; Who has no praise of men, but of God, who
is of the Kingdom of Christ, which is not of this World.

The cause of stumbling removed from all that will receive the truth, and from
before the eyes of the wise men of London.
In a Treatise showing the difference between the Spirit of a man which the
Candle of the Lord, and the Light which has enlightened every man that comes
into the world.

Also showing, that though there be diversity of Administrations, yet there is
not diversity of Lights and Spirits by which they are ministered: And showing by
clear testimony what the more sure Word of Prophecy is, which the Apostle
Peter exhorts the people to take heed unto, until the day did dawn, and the
day star arise in their hearts.

Herein also is a false Hosanna, and a false testimony reproved, and a false
witness is rejected, and an untimely birth cast out, though for the time of
travel it might have been a Monster, being above two years, but in the end is
brought forth for destruction; tht Name of him which has so long traveled to
bring forth wind and confusion, is one known in the City of London by the Name
of John Jackson, being by the truth of this following made manifest, that so by
every motion of the Spirit of Truth, and every testimony given from it,
Understanding and Knowledge of the Truth may be increased in those that follow
on to know the Lord.

THe Light is broken forth as the morning, and the health of the Nations is in
it, and is springing forth speedily, and the righteousness of the righteous
Seed is gone forth before them, and the glory of the Lord is revealed to his
Seed, which now calls, and the Lord does answer, Here am I; and the Lord has
made, and is making his Seed as a watered Garden, and like a spring of water
whose waters fail not, and is raising up the foundations of many generations,
that people may come to build again upon thus Foundation which they have been
driven from, especially by their Pastors; for says the Lord, Many Pastors have
destroyed my Vinyard, they have trodden my portion under foot, and made my
pleasant Portion a desolate Wilderness, and have made God's Heritage as a
speckled Bird; the Birds round about are against her, and all the Beasts of the
field come to devour, Jer. 12.9, 10. And now is the Lord come forth against
these devourers, even as a Lion bereaved of her young ones; for the Lord will
not suffer the spoil of his Heritage any longer, but will dress his Vinyard
that it may bring forth fruit unto him. And now is the Lord casting out the
blind Watchmen and the foolish Prophets which have followed their own spirit,
and have seen nothing; and all such is the Lord casting out, and his
everlasting fire is he kindling amongst them. And now I hear a cry of torment
going through the Nation. Can any kindle a fire among Serpents, and they not be
offended and shoot their stings? Can any touch the Vipers, but they will swell
with venom? And when Scorpions are trodden upon, will they not show forth their
strength? Can that nature suffer death patiently? Nay, patience proceeds from
that Seed which slays the enmity, and destroys the man of sin; and
therefore as we have one Seed to witness for, so there is one to witness
against; and as it is the Work of the Spirit of God to approve the things that
are of God, so it is his Work also to reprove those things which are contrary
to sound Doctrine, to the end that every one may know as well what to reject
and deny as error, as what to own for truth and sound doctrine. Therefore of
necessity must every one be turned to the Light which Christ has enlightened
them withal, that they may discern what they are to approve, and what they are
to reprove; and that judgment is true which stands in the Light, and in the
measure of the Spirit of Truth.

To the READER.
MEN of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie, and the heart
of man is desperately wicked and deceitful above all things. Hear this ye wise
men and foolish; The more ye strive against the Lord, the more is your wound
made incurable; and the higher you rise in envy, always the deeper is your fall
in confusion. And now Christian Reader, whose heart God has opened to see and
behold the things that be eternal, and can truly discern of different causes,
and between the good and the evil, and between the light and the darkness; This
Book is sent forth in the pursuit, and after a Book called Hos^nna to the Son
of David, etc. by a nameless Author, whose work indeed was hardly worthy of an
honest man's Name, though very subtly and craftily he prosecutes his purpose,
and traverses his steps full cunningly, as this worlds wisdom could guide him,
in which wisdom he cannot know or receive the things of God, and therefore it
cannot be expected that the things of God should be received from that wisdom;
and though he has confounded in his words his description of the Light of
Christ, sometimes speaking well of it, and sometimes otherwise, and not knowing
hardly whereof he has affirmed, his words are so confounded and mixed in his
corrupt reason, in giving forth his knowledge of the things of God, which he
seems to be ignorant of, but only as he has the knowledge of them from the
Letter, by which no man can come to the knowledge of God, nor of the things of
his Kingdom, without the revelation of the Spirit of Jesus, and the operation
of the same Spirit: But Friends, the Testimony of God stands sure for ever,
though men would confound it in their own reason: And this is the Testimony,
That Christ lights every man that comes into the world, which Light is
sufficient to lead every man to God, or else to condemn every man from God; and
this Testimony is true, notwithstanding all the opposition against it; and it
shall abide sure for ever, though men strive never so much in the gainsaying
of it. And this is the Testimony which we have born, and shall bear to the end;
and who believes it, and who believes it not, this is the hand of the Lord
according to his pleasure, and to him we leave it, and so we do and must clear
our consciences from time to time, while the Lord gives us a being. And herein
we are a good savor to God, and our reward is with him, whether Israel be
gathered or no, Isa. 49. And also this nameless Author, which is supposed to be
one John Jackson, known in this City, has taken some seeming occasion against
us by searching our Books, and (as he says) has found some contradictions in
them, which may appear to be so to his dark mind; yet in the sight of the
spirit of the Lord, that is truth, which he sees to be no other than error:
However this is sent forth for the true information of peoples minds, that they
may know that truth is bold and confident, and that it is Armor which
defends from all Enemies, and gives strength to answer the craftiness of
men. And this same John Jackson has showed himself now to be one with the
common Priests of the world; for as they have done, so has he opposed the way
and people of God, and with the very same arguments, showing that he is of the
very same spirit with them, his discourse and arguments being of the same
nature as theirs are; yea he has showed himself to be of the very same spirit
with all the open profane wretches which does revile, and scorn, and abuse in
every Town and Country, the Lords people; and as they do so, so has he
written with subtle Arguments to the very same end, as they reproach and scorn
(to wit) in a derision, and despising the way and servants of the Lord; so that
his self-separation is now seen what it is, to be a very cheat and hypocrisy,
who while he professes a separation from the World, does practice the very
same wickedness* and is not changed from them in nature, though he be in
appearance. But what a poor work has he brought forth in two years time? which
he says his work has been as Embers raked up in ashes, yet a work that gains
no praise of God, nor very little of the praise of any man: It seems he has
hatched mischief upon his bed, and brought it forth in the morning: Who would
have thought but a wise man in that time would have brought forth a larger
piece, and more to purpose? I am sure he might have made better use of his time
in another exercise, than to have writ against the servants of the Lord: It had
been more honest for him to have set his pen to paper, and studied to have
given his testimony against the Prid^, and Drunkenness, and Oppression, and
Whoredoms, and Wickedness in this great City. I say, it had been more honest,
and liker a Saint, to have sought the reforming of profaneness and wickedness
that greatly abounds in this City, than to have studied two years to bring
forth his invented stuff against a harmless and innocent people, which he, nor
any can justly charge with evil, but as he has dug deep by his
imaginations, in recollecting a seeming-contradiction out of our writings,
which is no contradiction, no more then Christ's words are, who says, Except ye
eat my flesh, and drink my blood, ye have no life in you: And yet in the same
discourse says, The flesh profits nothing: And for Isaiah to go with the Word
of the Lord to Hezekiah, to tell him he should dye and not live; yet in the
same instant of time, told him he should live and not dye: Would not John
Jackson have counted these contradictions? But what he has done in this, in
sending forth a Book against the Quakers, he has been so far from beating down
sin, drunkards, and rude scorners, and abusive men, that he has fully
strengthened their hands, and the wickedst people in this Nation are very glad
of his work; he has given them matter to oppose truth withal; but his reward
and theirs shall be both with one hand, and he shall drink his portion in the
same Lake with such whose hands he has strengthened; and let him know, and
them all, God has established us upon a sure Mountain, which the Gates of Hell
and Death cannot prevail against. So his work is counted of us, and cast by as
our spoiled prey of Babylons treasure; only this is sent abroad after it in
the pursuit of it, which is not done with multitudes of words of man's wisdom,
but in the plain nakedness of innocent truth, which is more strength than all
his arguments of guile whereby he would deceive the people; but he can deceive
none but such as are deceived already; for all that are in the Light, and in
the Truth, sees beyond all that he can say, and are established where his words
can never reach them, to take away their peace, or disquiet them; for as I
said, we are established upon a sure foundation, and are tried and proved, and
cannot be blown away with any windy Doctrines of men, which begets into strife,
and not into true sincerity of heart, but woe unto that man that works offense,
and does cast stumbling blocks in the way of the simple. And though the Lords
people be a suffering people, yet woe unto them that cause thom to suffer. And
though he and some others in their spirits were elevated, thinking thereby to
trample upon the innocent by that occasion happ^ning concerning J. N. which was
not suffered of the Lord to be as an occasion to destroy his people, but as an
occasion to try them, and to prove them, and thereby are they tried and proved,
and the more settled rather than confounded; and John Jackson and such like may
glory in such things for a moment, because the appearance of it seems evil, yet
the Lord will make their glorying void, for the Lord has ways enough to
preserve his people; and this we have found in many needful times. And as
concerning this thing which was looked upon as a breach among us by many, yet
it is over, and Truth stands a top of it, and the beauty of Truth appears
through it all, and Truth is more lovely when it is proved and purged: What if
the Lord suffer his to be led and tempted for a season, let not the wicked
boast of this; for though the righteous fall, he shall rise again; but the
wicked fall into mischief. But yet we learn something by this, what a great use
the Devil has made hereof, and how many Books and lying Scribblers has been
sent forth about it concerning us, which are all counted by us no better than
the most corrupted Treasure that ever grew in Babylon; and the best of it is
but baubles to please vain minds; for men of sound understandings can take no
pleasure therein. And we see how by all means the Devil and his people seeks
occasion against the ways and people of Gods and how glad are the wicked when
they get an occasion against the Lords people! And how do they glory in it, and
boast in it for a time, thinking that their hands are strengthened in a greater
boldness to do mischief! And John Jackson is one of those that takes pleasure
in these things, and he has managed his business with a great deal of craft,
but there are none that will praise him for it, except such whose wicked hands
he strengthens, and such as he must have stumblings, after the way of the Lord
has been so fully manifested, and they receive it not, and they must fall and
be broken. And seeing that the wicked does take occasion, and seeks occasion
against the innocent, this will make many more watchful and more circumspect,
and more to walk in God's wisdom, and to deny their own ways, lest offenses
come by them: And let him put off his Armor, and lay down his Weapons, and I
wish he may spend the next two years to come better than he has done these
last, aod that the little fire in the Embers may kindle to the burning of his
corruption, rather than into a blind zeal against the innocent people. And what
in this Book is written, is not to contend or strive for mastery, but to clear
the Truth, and to remove all cause of stumblings from before the face of all
the upright in heart.

A Friend to all people, E.B.
London the third of the ninth month, 1657.
MAny untimely Births in ages past and present have been brought forth, and the
Work of such has always been to destroy the Heir, the Seed which the Lord
has blessed, that so the Inheritance might be theirs, and so would thrust
themselves into the Kingdom; but they know while the Seed of the promise is
alive, it keeps them out, and will not let them meddle with those things which
they are not born unto; for they are sons of bondage, and children of falsehood,
and must not be heirs with the son of the free woman, etc. David, out of whose
root the righteous seed did arise, the bright and Morning Star, he saw that
Seed in his days, and was aware of them, and gave his testimony concerning
them, saying, In heart ye work wickedness, you weigh the violency of your hands
in the Earth; the wicked are estranged from the Womb, they go astray as soon as
they be born, speaking lies; their poison is like the poison of a Serpent, they
are like the deaf Adder that stops her ear, charm one never so wisely. Break
their teeth, O God, in their mouth; break out the teeth of the young Lions, O
Lord, let them melt away as waters that run continually, when he bends his
bow to shoot his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces, as a Snaile which
melts; let every one of them pass away like the untimely birth of a woman,
that they may not see the Sun, etc. Psalm. 58.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And again he
says, Behold he travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and
brought forth falsehood, Psalm. 7.14. and so there was a traveling and laboring
before they could get their iniquity brought forth, as we have true
declarations concerning the ages past, how many have traveled and brought
forth wind and confusion; so likewise in this age by experience can we give
testimony of the like births which has been brought forth to the sl^ughter
amongst Babylons children, and here is one of the same birth born and brought
forth in this City of London, to which I shall speak something at present;
although he conceal his Name, yet the seed you shall know by its fruits; it is
one that would be reckoned amongst those children that in the Temple cried
Hosanna to the Son of David, M^tth. 12.15. But the Seed which David called Lord
is risen, and has rebuked the false voice; for it is not every one that cries
Lord, nor every one that cries Hosanna, that enters into the Kingdom, but such
as hears the Word of God, and does it.

Now the testimony which this Author gives to that which after a long travel is
come forth, is this, That it has been in his breast two years and upwards,
while it at length is come forth as an untimely birth, or as that which is born
out of due time, laboring under the burden of being both unnecessary and
unseasonable.

Such a Testimony as this, seems to beget a Wonder in the airy Spirits of men,
as if a Monster were to be seen, (What, two years travel, and yet an untimely
birth!) And many such false cries are in this City, which enters into the
sensual part of men, and gets into the affections; but there is a Seed risen
which has received from the Father the spirit of judgment and understanding,
and it does not own things according to the report, nor judge of things
according to their names in outward appearance, but has a measuring line given
unto it, and a true balance whereby voices, ways, worships, and testimonies is
tried before they be approved; and therewith shall this spirit be tried, and
voice which is come forth crying Hosanna to the Son of David, or a testimony to
the Lords Christ; which being truly weighed and searched, may prove a testimony
against the Lords Christ, which has enlightened every man that comes into the
world, in setting up man's spirit to be the light instead of the Lords Christ.
But first let us consider the burden under which this man has labored; which
is, as he says, that which is both unnecessary and unseasonable. First
unnecessary, because the same has been before by better hands; so it is not to
be admired as a Monster, because it has already been, and effected nothing.
Secondly, unseasonable, because those are already resolved, that Jesus Christ
is the true light which has enlightened every man that comes into the world,
which he would resolve, that the spirit in every man is that light; and so
according to this, every man must follow his own spirit instead of following
the light which Christ has enlightened him withal. Now this burden thus
considered, which is both unnecessary and unseasonable, having been in his
breast above two years, all that have received the spirit of judgment, and
knows the workings of the mystery of iniquity, and can truly read the state of
those which are filled with unrighteousness, knows that this birth is cursed
before ever it came forth, and it had been better that it had never been born
nor brought forth into the world; for it will be to the great aggravation of
his sorrow and misery which did conceive it, and so long travel in it, and at
last brought it forth; but among the untimely births shall we reckon it, which
never saw the Sun, nor never received blessing from the Father; and happy shall
he be that rewards thee as thou have rewarded us, and happy shall he be that
takes and dasheth thy untimely birth against the stones, Psalm. 137.8, 9.
Against this birth has the Lord stretched forth his everlasting arm to dash in
pieces; and this is not the first of Babylons children which in this age and in
this City has been brought for^h to the spoil, nor the first which this man
has brought forth; for he has brought forth another without a name, which is
both as unnecessary and as unseasonable as this: And so from experience he may
say, that it is both unnecessary and unseasonable either to conceive, or bring
forth any such thing against the seed which the Lord has blessed; for there
was never any as yet which did strive against the Lord or his anointed ones
which did prosper, neither shall to the ends of the earth.

So the burden of this man is searched and judged, and f^und not to be the
burden of the word of the Lord, though he thought it to be so, when in him he
felt the fire of enmity, b^yling and bubling up within him, as in his Epistle:
But we have found it to be such a burden as the false Prophets in Jerusalem
did see for the people, which was false burdens and causes of banishment, Lam.
2.14. But if the fire of the Lord had been kindled in him, it would have
consumed this birth in the womb, before ever it had been brought forth.

But the hour is coming and now is, in which the Lord is fulfilling his promise
according to the Scriptures, which says, that he will make Jerusalem a
burdensome stone for all people; all that burden themselves with it shall be
cut in piece^, though all the people upon the earth be gathered together
against it, Zac. 12.3. And as this was spoken, so it is fulfilled, and
fulfilling, that the testimony of God may be sealed up among his children: For
now is the light risen with which the Lord Christ is gathering into the new
Jerusalem, the City of the living God, and now has many burdened themselves
with it, and so burdened, that they cannot tell how to unburthen themselves of
it. But to ease themselves of that burden which is ready to press them down,
they break forth into reviling terms, and unsavory speeches, and false
assertions against the light, and those that walk in it, and will deny both the
light and children of light to be spiritual: Some calling it natural light,
some calling it natural conscience, some created light, some the light of
reason and understanding; some old creation light, some a dim light, some the
spirit of man, and so burden themselves with it: and when they have both
spoken and printed such things to ease them of their burden, their burden
grow^ again; and so they do not cease to vex and grieve the holy spirit of God
from day to day, and when they have burdened themselves with the enmity
against the light, and the works of righteousness, proceeding forth from it to
the father, then they cry the burden of the Lord, the fire of the Lord within
them. But says the Lord to such, I will destroy that man and his house, and
the burden of the Lord shall ye mention no more, for every man's word shall be
his burden: for ye have perverted the words of the living God, of the Lord of
hosts our God, Jer. 23.36. Therefore is the measuring-line gone forth to
measure the false burdens whereby they pervert the words of the living God,
with their own words and imaginations; and unto those which ever were
reproachers of the way and people of God, the Lord says, I will bring an
everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame which shall not be
forgotten, Ier. 13.40. So this is written that no man should any more burden
themselves with the burthensom stone, whereby they will be broken to pieces if
they fall upon it: But that every one may come to it, that with it they may see
their false burdens, and the sin which does so easily beset them, and may
cease grieving of the spirit of the Lord while his spirit striveth with them;
and may come to know every man his own word, which will become his burden when
it returns again unto him. But the word of the Lord goes forth and returns not
empty, neither does it burden him which it goes forth from, when it returns
again unto him. Although the true burden of the word of the Lord be known in
many before it go forth from them.

Therefore then seeing that it is an untimely birth, and not that which is born
of the spirit, which is come forth from him to whom I now am to speak. Now
least others being in the same blindness with him, think as he does, that it is
a true voice, or Hosanna to the son of David, or a true testimony to the Lords
Christ, I shall weigh his testimony, seeing that the true voice is gone forth
both in the days of his flesh, and since; in which days he was truly declared
to be the light of the world, and the true light which lightneth every one that
comes into the world, Joh. 1.9. Joh. 8. Now seeing that this Author has set
up another thing to be the light which has enlightened every man, then Christ,
viz. the spirit of, (...). I shall try this testimony according to the
Scriptures, whether it be a testimony of the Lords Christ, or a testimony
against him, in these things following, which are the Heads of his Doctrine
concerning the Light.

Concerning the LIGHT, what it is.
It is the spirit of every man which is in him, and without which he cannot be
a man, and is the candle of the Lord, Prove. 20 27. This spirit of a man is the
Reason of a man, or tht Understanding of a man. What this Light does, it gives
him to know his Creator, and the end of his creation, (viz.) who made him, and
why he was made; also how he should answer the end of him that made him; and
that God set up this light in man to see by, both whom he is to serve, and how
he is to serve him, together with the reason thereof, because God made him. And
with this light God has set up a Law, which Law is called Light, Prove. 6.23.
whereby the will and mind of his Creator is made known unto him, and he
sufficiently qualified to see it, understand it, etc. p. 7. It searches the
inward parts of the belly: At first it moved upward, and it could look God in
the face and serve him: But now since the fall the Thief is got into this
candle, and has dimmed the light, and covered the aspiring ascendent quality,
and now it burns downward, and discovers the things beneath, p 6. That it is
all eye, it sees all that is done, but does nothing; it neither likes nor
dislikes, approves nor disproves, but as it is in conjunction with a Law. p. 10.

Thae it is the property of Light to make manifest, Ephesians. 5, 13. page 29.

That it is not in the power of the Light, as it is in every man, so much as to
call any thing that is done, either good or evil. p. 32.

That the Light did drive Adam from the voice and presence of God; so far is
the Light from leading up to God, that it drives the soul from God, and keeps
him in the fall, p. 53.

That it does not lead into all truth such as love it and obey it, p. 54.

Nor does it reveal all truth to them that love it and obey it: And that
neither the Light, nor the Law does convince of the sin of unbelief.

That the Lamp and the Light are convertible terms; Thy word is as a Lamp,
Psalm. 119.105. and that the Light and the Law is one, p. 30. So by this the
Light which is the spirit of man, or man's Reason; and the Law and the Word
which of that which is called a testimony of the Lords Christ, we shall try it
with the former Testimony of the Lords Christ, as it is written in the
Scriptures, which was given forth from those which were true witnesses.

First, as in answer to these things, there is not one Testimony in the
Scriptures, neither from Prophet nor Apostle, that ever said the spirit of man,
or man's reason and understanding was the Light which every one that comes into
the world is enlightened withal: but the testimony of truth concerning those
which followed their own spirits, is this, The Lord sent his Prophet Ezekiel to
cry, W^ unto the foolish Prophets that followed their own spirits, and had seen
nothing, Ezekiel. 13 3. Now they were not without the spirit of a man; for then
they could not be a man, as he says: now if they had the spirit of man, and
reason, and if this was all eye, how was it that they saw nothing, when he
says, It sees all things? so it is not a true testimony of the Light, nor of
the Lords Christ: But the spirit of man is the candle of the Lord, and the Lord
having lighted it, then it searches the inward parts of the belly. And David,
who knew wh^t the spirit of man was, and what a candle was without light, and
what it was when it was lighted, he said, For thou will light my candle; the
Lord my God will enlighten my darkness, Psalm. 18.28. So if the spirit of man be
the candle of the Lord, then whether does not Christ enlighten every man which
comes into the world? and whether is not that light Christ, seeing the spirit
is but the candle, and that it must be lighted?

Another testimony of his, is this, That it is the property of light to make
manifest, Ephesians. 5.13. but all things that are reproved are made manifest by the
light; for wha^soever does make manifest, is light, p. 29. And again in p. 32
he says, that it is not in the power of the light, as it is in every man, so
much as to call any thing which is done, good or evil.

Answ. Whether of these two contraries must men believe, whether the light is
able to make manifest whatsoever is reprovable; or that there is not power in
it to call any thing good or evil? But by this all men may see that this is not
a true testimony to the Lords Christ, nor to his Light. Never was there any
such doctrine preached by any that cried Hosannah to the Son of David, nor that
did give testimony to the Lords Christ, That there is not power in the light to
call any thing done, good or evil. Now let all who have received the
measuring-line, and the equal balance, weigh and consider, seeing the
Scripture says, Whatsoever thing is approvable is made manifest by the light.
Is evil deeds reprovable? then they are made manifest, then you see them to be
evil deeds; lying to be an evil deed, swearing to be an evil deed, drunkenness
to be an evil deed, covetousness to be an evil deed, pride to be an evil deed,
whoredom to be an evil deed, false accusing to be an evil deed, gainsaying the
truth to be an evil deed, anger and wrath to be evil deeds, and these things
are reprovable, and as the light does make them manifest, so it reprove^ them,
and such are convinced of sin because they believe not in Christ; so that
unbelief is reprovable, and is made manifest by the light. And whereas some
say, That the light does not reprove for the sin of unbelief; that is false,
for unbelief is reprovable, and whatsoever things are reprovable is made
manifest by the light; but he that do^th evil hates the light, and will not
bring his deeds to the light lest the light should reprove him, Joh. 3.20. And
Jesus said unto certain Greeks and people which stood by him, which objected
against his words, which was no Saints nor Believers, While ye have the light
believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light, Joh. 13.36. Now he
did not bid them believe in that which could not reprove unbelief: I am come a
light into the world, that whosoever believes in me should not abide in
darkness. And Jesus cried an^ said, He that believes on me, believes on him
that sent me. Also Joh. 12.44.46. This light was not man's reason nor
understanding, neither was it man's spirit that was the true light which
lightneth every one that comes into the world, Joh. 1 9.

Again, another false testimony concerning the light, is this, That the light
did drive Adam from the voice and presence of God; and so far is the light from
leading up to God, that it drives the soul from God and keeps him in the fall,
p. 53.

Answ. This Doctrine is to turn the truth of God into a lie, and to call light
darkness, and darkness light; for there is no such testimony in the Scriptures
that the light did drive Adam from the voice and presence of God; but Adam
says, I was afraid because I was naked, and I hid my self. It was because he
had disobeyed Gods voice, not because he was enlightened; for the Scripture
says, It is your sins that has separated you from God; it does not say that
it is the light which has separated you from God, or driven you from him: this
may well be called a damnable Doctrine, or Doctrine of Devils. Has God sent
his Son a light into the world to drive the souls from God, and keep them in
the fall: Now let all consider and judge that ever knew the light, whether it
be darkness, or it be light which drives the soul from God, and keeps it in the
fall. Now this doctrine being compared with the Scriptures, is utterly false;
and there is a few that profess godliness in this Nation, that can bear it, or
approve of it; and for such as account themselves the highest profession, and
above forms, under the name of Seekers, to publish such a thing in print; here
it appears that the best of men i^ but as a Briar, and the most upright is
sharper then a Thorn-Hedge; for the day of thy Watchmen, and thy Visitation
comes, now shall there be perplexity, Mic. 7.4. Now here is a day for trial,
that they which can, may try the spirits and doctrines whether they be of God.
Now I shall lay it to that of God in all, is it not the work of the Devil to
drive the soul from God, and to keep people in the fall? If so, then it is not
the work of the light which lightneth every man that comes into the world; is
not this to call light darkness, to say that the light is so far from leading
up to God, that it drives the soul from God, and keeps him in the Fall: What is
that which leads man out of the fall, if the light keep man in it? As this is
contrary to Scripture, and to truth, so it is contrary to his own words, as in
page 7. there saying, That by the Light is the will and mind of the Creator
made known unto man, and he sufficiently qualified to see it, and understand it.

Answ. How can these two stand together, That the light drives man from God,
and keeps him in the fall; and again, That it makes known the will and mind of
the Creator unto him, and sufficiently qualifies him to see and understand it;
This cannot truly be called Hosanna to the Son of David, nor A Testimony to the
Lords Christ, but a line of confusion which is stretched out, wherein darkness
is come forth as a cloud, and spreads it self over the earth to darken peoples
minds from the knowledge and understanding of truth, by words without
knowledge; but his folly shall proceed no further unreproved and made manifest.

Another false Testimony concerning the light is this, That at first it moved
upward, and man could look God in the face, and serve him; but now since the
fall the Thief is got into the Candle, and now the Spirit burns downward, and
discovers the things beneath.

Answ. What is the nature of the Light changed? or is the spirit so changed,
that before it ascended upward, and now downward? We shall try this according
to the Scripture, which says, Who knows the Spirit of man that goes upward,
and the spirit of a Beast which goes downward to the earth, Eccles. 3.21. so
then if it goes downward, it is the spirit of a Beast, and not the spirit of a
man: And here it is plainly evident, that he knows not the spirit of man from
the spirit of a Beast, so unfit to cry Hosanna to the Son of David, or bear
testimony to the Lords Christ. But as for the Light which has enlightened man
that comes into the world; the fall did not ^hange the quality of the light;
for the light is the same as it was, but darkne^s cannot comprehend it, neither
knows how to give a true testimony of it, but confusedly speaks of two lights;
the one springing up with man in his natural birth, suitable to his natural
birth, and another light suitable to the new birth that is born of the spirit.

This is a test^mony which is not to be found in Scripture, to be two Lights
suitable to the two births; for he that is born of the flesh persecutes him that
is born of the Spirit, and God has put enmity between the two Seeds; but to
say that there is two lights suitable, and so the one natural, and the other
spiritual; the one of the earth, earthly; and the other of the Lord, from
Heaven, as the two births are; this is not a testimony according to truth; for
the light is but one, and the spirit of truth is but one; and the same spirit
which led the Saints which believed, into all truth, the same did convince the
world of sin, because they did not believe in Christ, Joh. 16.3. And that light
which is the condemnation of the world, who love the darkness rather then
Christ, the same is the Savior of all them that believe; and one man loves it,
and another hates it; yet it is the same light, Joh. 3.19. but the Scripture
bears no such testimony as that there is two lights in man, the one spiritual,
the other natural; and for any man to say that the light of Christ is natural,
is blasphemy against the Son of God, and is a sin not easily forgiven; and it
is hard for such to find the place of repentance; for every one that comes to
repentance, must first come to the light which Christ has enlightened them
withal, and must know it to be spiritual, and confess it so, and with this
light come to discern the two births, the one from the other, and their several
natures; and how that the one birth is guided by the light, it being as the
eye, giving them to see what to speak, before they speak and so keeps them out
of the worlds line, which is confusion; and as a Te^cher giving them to
understand what to do before they do it, and so keeps them out of the
condemnation, bringing their works beforehand to judgment, and so their works
are wrought in God, who answer the light which they be enlightened withal; but
the light is not suitable, nor according to that birth which is born after the
flesh, but condemns that in all its ways and actions, and is given to lead the
creature out of that nature, and out of that birth, into the regeneration, to
lead out of the deeds of darkness, and out of the shadow of death, into the
living inheritance, among those that are sanctified in Christ Jesus.

Another testimony concerning the light, relating to the two Covenants is this,
That as there was a new Covenant diverse from the former, the old, so there
must of necessity be another light to accompany it, diverse from the former,
that is, as then man's spirit, so now the spirit of the Lord, etc. page 35.

Answ. There are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit; and there are
differences of Administrations, but the same Lord; and there are diversities of
operations, but it is the same God which works all in all, 1 Cor. 12.4 5.6.
Now all people is to know that there was a ministration different from the
administration of the Gospel, the new Covenant a different administration from
the old; but there is no necessity that it be ministered from another spirit,
nor from another Lord, nor from another Light; therefore to say, that because
the Covenants or Administrations are diverse one from another, that therefore
it must not be the same spirit, but the one by the spirit of man, the other the
spirit of God, and that the lights is to be diverse the one from the other,
this is a false Testimony; for the same spirit in which the Law was administered
(the first Covenant) in the same was the second administered, which does make
perfect according to the conscience. Now as all people is brought out of their
own inventions and imaginations, and from following their own spirits, to own
the light of Christ which has enlightened them; they should know the
diversities of Administrations, and the diversity of operations, and yet but
one Light, and one Power, and one Spirit, and not as many lights as births, nor
as many spirits as operations, not every Administration to have a diverse light
to accompany it; for though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven,
or in earth, as there be gods many, and lords many, but to us there is but one
God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are things, and we by him; howheit there is not in every man
that knowledge, 1 Co^. 8.5.6 7. and though there be in the world many lights,
yet to us there is but one, him by whom all things was made, which does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, that in him all men might
believe; and as every one believes in this light, they shall know that man's
reason and understanding is not the light which every man is enlightened withal;
for some are unreasonable men, and some are void of understanding. Neither is
the spirit of man the light of the world, which does enlighten every man that
comes into the world; neither is any thing called the light of the world (in
the Scripture) but Christ; for says Christ, I am come a light into the world,
that whosoever believes on me should not abide in darkness, Joh. 12.46. Then
spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world; he that
follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life, Job.
8.12. And again, I am the light of the world, Joh. 9.5. And the messenger which
was sent before his face to prepare the way of the Lord, and to bear witness to
the truth, said, In him was life, and the life was the light of men, and that
was the true light which enlightneth every man that comes into the world; Joh
1 4 9. And this is the light which in all ages, generations, and under all
administrations the Saints did bear their testimony in; and this light did
never change nor alter, though ages and generations have changed, and men have
changed, and do change, and the minds of men change, and their ways change, and
their worships change, and forms and religions, which are not according to the
light which Christ has enlightened them withal, which changes not; which as it
is followed, will lead them out of those ways which do change, which is not the
living way; for the new and living way is one with the light which every man is
enlightened withal, which is every man's way to the Father who follow it, and
every man's condemnation who disobey it.

Another testimony concerning the first man Adam in his first estate without
sin, the sum of it is this, That as it was at first, that is, at his beginning
made so, that is, without sin, for so was he made Eccles. 7.29. upright,
without crookedness, without invention, that this man, yea in his purest
naturals, cannot receive nor discern the things of the spirit of God until he
is born of the Spirit, or from above, according to Joh. 1.13. and 8.3, 6. 1
Cor. 2.14.

Answ. This testimony is false; for the first Adam before the fall was the son
of God, Luk 3 38. and did know and perceive Gods voice and power, and he knew
Gods command, That he should not eat of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil,
which if he did he should die the death: for he was in Gods image, and the Lord
spoke unto him, and he perceived it, and he had right to eat of the tree of
life which was in the midst of the Garden; and if Adam had continued in that
state, there needed no Law to have been added because of transgression, neither
had there needed any precept upon precept, nor line upon line; neither any
teacher or instructor of the ignorant; for there had no death passed over to
separate God from his creature which he had made in his own image, and given
him power over all creatures; but to say the Son of God in the image of God,
without sin, in uprightness and power, to say that he is sensual, having not
the spirit; or to say that he is the natural man that cannot receive nor
discern the things of the spirit of God, this is greater blasphemy then that
which the Apostle reproved, Rev. 2.9. in those which said they were Jews, and
were not but were the Synagogue of Satan and all such which brings forth such
mists of darkness and ignorance to blind the eye in people which should see the
things of God in clearness, are to be reproved sharply that they may be
ashamed, and no more bring forth that which is both u^n^cessary and
unseasonable, and contrary to truth, as J. Jackson has done.

And further he adds, That the natural man which Paul speaks of, 1 Cor. 2.14.
and compares it with 1 Cor. 15.44.45. is not to be taken for the carnal sinful
man, but for a man in puris naturalibus, merely natural, p. 37

Let all therefore consider Paul's words, Which things also we speak, not in the
words which man's wisdom teache^h, but which the holy Ghost teaches, comparing
spiritual things with spiritual: but the natural man receives not the things
of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.13, 14. But he that is
spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man, ver. 15. Now
whether any man that has the spirit of God can judge that this is not spoken
of carnal and sinful men; or whether any by the spirit of God can judge that
this was spoken of a man in the pure nature, without sin; and let all who have
the spirit of judgment judge whether Adam in the image of God without sin, did
account the things of God as foolishness unto him; and if any so judge, let
them prove it, That in Adams innocence, without sin, the things of God were
foolishness unto him; or whether the cross of Christ which Paul preached was
foolishness unto any but unto carnal and sinful men. So every man I exhort to
come to that of God in you, to know the salt in your selves to savor withal,
that you may know that Doctrine that stands in the devised words of man's
wisdom, and not in the power of God, which would turn the truth of God into a
lie, and pervert the mind from the right understanding of the things of God:
But the day is come which has brought forth light, and knowledge, and
understanding to the simple, whereby they see the deeps which are covered with
darkness, and they come to see and comprehend men's wisdom, and their fountain
what it brings forth; for how should that which is unclean, bring forth that
which is clean? So that now we do not only know the words of those which have
set themselves against the truth, but the spirit and power from whence they
speak, and so in faithfulness bear our testimony against it, that the folly of
those may be made manifest unto all men who wilfully oppose the truth, and
their own selves through wilful-blindness, and so count themselves unworthy of
eternal life; exercising their strength, wisdom, and knowledge to shut up the
kingdom of God against themselves and others, laboring to keep all people from
the light in the darkness, as is made manifest in this generation. How many
have set themselves to preach and print against the light which Christ the way
to the Father has enlightened every man that comes into the world withal? But
now has God the Father raised up his own seed acco^ding to his promise out of
the North to spoil Babylon, Jer. 51.48. I have raised up one from the North,
says the Lord, and he shall come from the rising of the Sun; he shall call
upon my name, and he shall come upon Princes as upon mortar, and as the Potter
treads clay. Isa. 41.25. The promised seed of the Lord is come forth, and is
spreading over the Nations as the morning over the mountains, and blessed are
they that receive their testimony; for from the wrath of the Almighty shall
they be delivered; their bread shall not fail them, and their waters shall be
sure, and their fountain shall never be empty, but plenteous redemption shall
they daily witness, and waters of life shall their thirst be satisfied with,
and all the noise of the Bruits shall not hurt them; for the Lord is with them;
therefore can they not be afraid, nor dismayed at that which comes to pass upon
the earth; now because light is risen, therefore is the evil eyes offended, and
have now turned their testimonies against the light, to make people believe
that it does the same works that darkness, sin, and Satan does, which is to
drive the soul from God, and keep it in the fall, and that it is not able to
show the good or the evil of an action, to approve nor disapprove, which is
true of the darkness, but not of the light; For there is nothing that does make
manifest those things which are reprovable but the light; neither is there any
thing which does bring man from that estate where he is driven from God, and
lead him out of the fall, but the light; and so it is time to come out from
among all such for all people that desire to know Gods ways, lest they be
partakers of their plagues, and there be none to deliver; for many are hardening
their hearts in this day of Gods tender love and mercy; and so evil do they
requite the Lord, that instead of turning at his reproofs, that they may find
mercy, they are in their wisdom devising evil words, and reproachful terms
against the light by which the Lord does reprove man for his iniquity, and are
exercising all their abilities to make the light even as darkness, and would
exclude the power of God from it: Whenas there is no man that does receive
power or wisdom from God, but in the light which Christ has enlightened him
withal; therefore is Christ now preached as he declared himself to be the light
of the world, Joh. 8. and as his messenger declared him to have enlightened
every man that comes into the world; and this light is now preached and
witnessed to be sufficient to lead unto God all that obey it, and to let them
see that their works are wrought in God, Joh. 3. and is sufficient to be the
condemnation of all the world that hate it, according to Joh. 3.19. And for our
thus bearing witness of the sufficiency of the light, many are risen up against
us, even slanderous tongues, such as the poison of Asps is under; but the Lord
has delivered us from them, and will manifest his strength unto us, in bearing
testimony to his light, and the power of it, against all the powers of
darkness, and overcome them; for God has given his power to his own seed, the
children of light; and those that rise up against them, it is but that they may
be broken to pieces; for whosoever falls on this stone, they shall be broken
to pieces, and on whomsoever it falls it will grind them to powder.

Object. But some men say, That the light is not sufficient to lead unto God
those that obey and follow it: and for a proof says, That Paul did not
disobey, but follow the light which was in him: and yet says, That he obtained
mercy because he did it ignorantly; which if he had disobeyed the light, he had
sinned against knowledge; so the light in him was either not sufficient to
discover to him the error of his way, or at least it did suspend its act of
enlightening him in the knowledge thereof; it check^d him not, it convinced him
not, etc.

Answ. To say that Paul did not disobey, but follow the light within him, that
is false; For he followed his zeal in madness, and persecuting the Saints; and
followed his though^s which were false, thinking that he did God service, and
thinking that he ought to do that which is contrary to the light, and so kicked
against the pricks, instead of following that which did prick him; and as for
him in that condition, and the rest which persecuted Stephen to death, though
they did it ignorantly, yet it was not because they were not enlightened, nor
because the light was not sufficient to have given them the knowledge of him
whom they did persecute, but because they did resist that which was sufficient
to have given them the knowledge. As Stephen, a man full of the holy Ghost, did
bear witness, saying unto Saul and the rest, Ye stiff necked and uncircumcised
in hearts and ears, ye do always resist the holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so
do ye; which of the Prophets have not your fathers persecuted, and they have
slain them which showed before of the coming of the just One, of whom ye have
been now the betrayers and murderers, who have received the Law by the
disposition of Angels, and have not kept it. When they heard these things, they
were cut to the heart. So here is little ground in those for any to say they
follow the light within them, and to say that they was not enlightened, which
had received the Law, which is light, by the disposition of Angels, and d^d not
keep it. Here they disobeyed that which they had received, which was the light,
and did always resist the holy Ghost which was able to have led them from their
disobedience and stiffneckedness; and if they did persecute to death for lack
of knowledge, and so did it ignorantly, it was because they rejected knowledge,
and forgot the law of their God which they had received, as the Priests did in
Hos. 4.6. and because they did forget the Lord, as those did in Jer. 18. so it
was not because they were never convinced nor reproved, but because they would
have none of his reproofs, for they would not walk in his ways, neither were
obedient to his law. But I say, Did not Israel know? To Israel he says, All
day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gai^saying
people, Romans 10.21. Therefore let no more such clamorous speeches come forth,
as to say such have obeyed and followed the light within them; which if they
had, then when God had called, they would have answered, and it could not have
been said they had been disobedient, which when Stephen told them of their
resisting of the holy Ghos^, and their disobedience to the law, which was
light, his words did answer something of God within them, when they were cut to
the heart, and that which had disobeyed the holy Ghost, and the law which they
had received, that did stone him to death, and therein they did kick against
that which did prick them. But the li^ht of Christ is sufficient to lead all
unto God which do obey and follow it; and there was never any in all
generations from Abel unto this generation, that did ever in such ignorance,
and wilful impudency, preach and print against the sufficiency of the light of
Christ as in this age is brought forth; for as others did reject the lesser, so
these the greater; Others did disobey that which they had received from the
disposition of Angels; and those, that which is given by the Son of God, who
says, I am the light of the world. He does not say that the spirit of man is
the light of the World, nor that man's reason is the light of the World, as some
have said; neither did ever Christ say, That his light was insufficient; but
did bid those which were of the World believe in the light, that they migh be
the children of light, Joh. 12.36. and did tell such which were of the World,
that the kingdom of God was within them. So there was something in them which
was of power: but such a doctrine is now hated in the World, to preach any
thing within man to be of power or ability to guide or lead man to God, or
sufficient to believe in: but the S^ripture says, The word of faith is in thy
heart, (which was the Word the Apostles preached) to obey and to do it, and
says comes by hearing, and bearing by the Word of God: but how shall they hear
without a Preacher? B^t I say, Have they not all heard? Yes verily, their sound
went out into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the World, but
they have not all obeyed.

But again it is said in the false Hosanna, That the discovery of sin and
iniquity may be where the sound of Christ, as a door, as the light, as the way,
may not have been; and for proof says, it was so in the first man; that
measure and degree of light which discovered sin to him, was the law written in
him.

Answ. He who is the light of the World, in him was life, and this life was the
light of men, and he is before all things, and by him all things consist; and
the first man Adam who was made a living soul, and was the son of God, the
light that was in him, was the light of the son of God, while he remained in
Gods image, and when he was fallen from Gods image into transgression; that
which made manifest his transgression was the light which he was fallen from,
and God did never write his law in man's heart but there was a measure of
Christ: But men in ignorance and blindness pretend to be Ministers of
distinctions between their Law and Christ, when as they neither know what they
say, nor whereof they affirm, not seeing how it was added because of
transgression, till the seed should come, ordained by Angels in the hands of a
Mediator; Gal. 3.19. and as well ministered forth in the light of the Mediator:
For though there was, and is diversity of administrations, and of operations,
yet the same Lord, and the same Light, that Light in which the Prophets saw
Christ, and prophesied beforehand of the coming of the Just, was the same in
which the Apostles witnessed him come; and the same light which lets men see
their sins, is that which lets them see their Savior, and leads them from
their sins to Christ, as they are obedient to it. But to say there is the
discovery of sin and iniquity where the sound of Christ as a door, the light,
the way has not been, this remains to be proved, seeing the Apostle says,
That the sound is gone into all the earth, and the words to the end of the
world: Have they not at all heard? Yes verily: That which makes manifest is
light; Is there light making sin manifest, and is there nothing of Christ,
seeing that his life is the light of men, and that men have no light but what
proceeds from his life; When was ever Christ and the light which discovers sin,
separated? and where is that Scripture which says that the sound of Christ, as
a light, has never been heard, where sin and iniquity is discovered, but that
which has brought forth these things may well be called an untimely birth,
which ntver saw the Sun, not never knew the light which Christ has enlightened
every man withal which comes into the world? for a little of this fruit does
manifest that tree from whence it springs, and so we shall judge the tree by
it is fruits: Another fruit from this tree is to give his testimony of the Law
of Faith, which is this.

How far the Law of Faith may be said to be written upon every man's heart, is
not given unto me to understand; only this glimpse I have of it, That it
appears to have had an influence upon the heart of man by those sacrifices
which were offered up to God before the publication of the positive Law,
wherein as well Cain as Abel offered sacrifices, Genesis 4.4.

Answ. This testimony does not proced from the word of Faith in thy heart; for
that would give an understanding how the Law of Faith is written in the heart,
as well as how the Law of Works is written; and this thy glimpse which thou
says thou sees from the proposing of the promise, and the influence which thou
says thou see upon the heart of man, by the Sacrifices of Cain as well as
Abel, offered unto God; if this thy pretended light and glimpse which is so far
of Christ, be truly weighed and tried, it may prove but a vain vision, and a
divination of thy own heart, as all who consider thy testimony of the Law of
Faith, in saying, that the discovery thereof arises from what is without; and
that it had never been known, nor never thought of, nor never would it, or
could it rationally have come into the heart of man to have conceived such a
thing, but from the declaration of God in his promise. Here it does appear
Faith is a mystery to thee, and thy eye has not seen it, nor the ear heard,
neither has it entered into thy heart to conceive Faith in the working and
operation of it. And in that thou say well, that it was not given thee to
understand how it is written upon every man's heart; and thou had done well if
thou had not stretched thy self beyond the line of thy knowledge and
understanding; for thou thy self confessest, that unto those first believers,
Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, Daniel, and the rest,
there was communicated unto them a Spirit of Faith, and a Light suitable and
proportionable, whereby they were enabled to behold Christ, who was the object
of their Faith: Then if it did arise from the Spirit of Faith within them, and
the Light of Christ, who was the Author of their Faith, it did not arise from
the Declaration of God in the promise without; so that the mystery of Faith
which is held in a pure conscience, is yet to be learned, which was
witnessed amongst the Saints: So when thou writes again of the Law of
Works, or the Law of Faith, or the discovery which the Lord makes to his
creature under the diversity of these administrations, keep back to the measure
of the gift of God, and then vvil thy testimony be no larger then thy
knowledge, which is a guilt has spread over many in these days; but this I
say, Blessed is the man which does not condemn himself in the thing which he
allows, and which does not destroy himself with the breath of his own
mouth; but there is a generation which their own breath as fire shall devour
them.

Again, concerning the Light which every man is enlightened withal, which is
thy stumbling block and rock of offense, as it is unto all the rest whose deeds
are evil: Thou say, God has not anointed it to that Work, nor laid the
weight of eternal salvation upon the shoulders thereof, it being too weak for
that service.

Answ. Him has God anointed, who is the Light of the World, and has
enlightened every man that comes into the World; and there is no work of
eternal salvation wrought, but in the Light which every man is enlightened
withal; and this Light is of him, and from him which bears the sins in his own
body, and is not too weak for that service which the Father has given him to
do; and this Light is Christ. And whereas some say, Has every man Christ?
Every man has Christ to save or to condemn him; and Christ is as truly the
condemnation of those whose deeds are evil, as he is the Savior of them that
believe; and as those that believe in the Light, are already saved by Christ;
so also those that believe not in his Light which he has enlightened them
withal, are already condemned: And so Christ is near unto every one, to answer
every man's work according to the nature of it, whether he serve sin unto death,
or be found in the obedience of truth unto eternal life; for now is the day
appeared to try every man's Work of what sort it is; and now are many offended
because the Light is broken forth, and their eye is evil because the Lords is
good. But woe unto the World because of offenses; if any have the Spirit of a
King, let him search out the cause of the offense which is now broken forth
amongst the children of men, that the enmity which is in all sorts of people of
all professions, should rise up together, and become a body, the wicked jo^ning
hand in hand, preaching, and printing, and crying for unity, which they are
making up of enmity, that they may be strong against that which the Lord has
now brought forth in his Light and Power, to be Witnesses unto him in every
place wheresoever he does call them, witnessing forth his Mercy and Truth, by
which iniquity is purged out, and preaching the Gospel to every creature,
whereby they may come to the knowledge of the truth, that they may be saved:
But in the World it is so come to pass in these days, that he that can but give
reviling terms and hard speeches against the Light which Christ has enlightened
every man withal, calling it natural or insufficient; and if they do but
revile those whom they call Quakers, and put this in the beginning of his Book,
then it passes with toleration, and has as good approbation from the World,
as any of the Priests have for their Ministry; but if any man begin to speak of
the Light within, and the Anointing within, and the Word of Faith in the
heart, and of the Mystery of Faith in a pure conscience, and of the sprinkling
of the heart from an evil conscience, and of believing in the Light, as Christ
said; such a one speaking of these things, and not directing his speech in open
reproach against them called Quakers, the peoples hearts will be fi^led with
jealousies, lest he be one. So that even the Light is become a reproach unto
them, and their derision daily; but the Lords hand is turned against all such,
and he is turning the wise men backward, and making their wisdom become
foolishness: For once there was a seeking after Light in many, that it might
rise and open the things of God unto them, and reveal the mysteries of his
life, whereby their souls might be satisfied: And now when it is risen in many,
and has brought forth its powerful effects, now the man of sin has his time,
and does prevail in many, to make them believe that it is not the Light, which
is able to save the souls of them which believe in it, and does beget a spirit
of jealousy in them, which is stronger than death, and begets a fear in
them, which works torment; and many now does fear and are jealous, that that
Light is not the Christ which has enlightened them, and every one that comes
into the World: And this is the work of Satan in the hearts of the disobedient,
which as every one comes to obey his Light, and to answer his perfect love to
them, which is manifest in the Light, tha^ fear will be cast out, and life will
be given to that Witness of God which once did breath after his life, without
which the soul cannot rest nor be satisfied: And this shall many come to
witness, as the man of sin comes to be revealed, which lets, and will let,
until he be taken out of the way, and then shall they see at what they have
stumbled, and by what they have been overcome; and then they will know that it
had been good for them if they had walked in the Light of the Lord, instead of
setting themselves against it: And as the Light it self by such
beforementioned is denied, so the Testimony which the children of Light give
of it, is also despised and contended against, as if it were not to be owned
for a Doctrine of Truth, which Doctrine of Truth has been laid often before
people, and is yet once more, that they may consider, prove and try, and so
believe, and so be able to give a testimony from the Witness of God in
themselves.

First, We say that Christ is the Light of the World, according to his own
words, John 8.12. And again we say, That he has enlightened every man that
comes into the World, according to his words who was sent a Messenger
before his face to bear vvitness to the truth, and his vvitness is true, John
2.9. And as Christ has enlightened every man that comes into the World, so we
say to every man, warning both small and great to believe in the Light, that
they may be the children of Light, which was Christ's Doctrine to the World,
John 12.36: And now what Christ does and effects by it in those that believe
in his Light, and follows it, which effects and operations by the World is
denied, and by us is affirmed; some of the effects of it I shall mention, which
is opposed; as first, That it will not let those that are guided by it, take
Gods Name in vain, but vvil draw them out of the Worships of the World, and
keep them in the fear of God, and to stand still in it, is the first step to
peace. That it discovers things that are contrary to it. That it is their
Teacher that love it, and their condemnation that hate it, according to Christ's
words, John 3.19. That waiting in it, will guide them to God, and show them the
way to the Father, as Christ says, No man comes unto the Father, but by me,
John 14* 6. And no man comes unto the Father by Christ, but as they are led
and guided by his Light within them. That it opens all the Scriptures, and
leads man out of the fall, up to God; for him has the Father given to be a
Leader and Commander unto the people, and he leads them by his Light. Another
effect is, That it convinces of all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and is a
Teacher and Director, teaching and directing in righteousness, purity and
holiness, etc. And that the Light is but one in him that loves it, and in him
that hates it, leading the one to God from whence it comes, to receive eternal
life, and condemning the other from God, because he obeys not the truth, that
he might be saved. And this is the Testimony of Truth which is now held forth,
never to be denied. But who has believed our report? even they to whom the Arm
of the Lord is revealed: And this is the way by which people may come to know
the truth of this Testimony, by obeying the Light which Christ has enlightened
them withal, thereby shall they know whether this Doctrine be of God, or
whether we speak of our selves, and whether all those effects are not brought
forth by the working of Christ's Light in them; and then they shall not believe
one^y because of our words, nor be envious against it because of other words,
but will find the testimony in themselves, which is according to the record
which God has given of hit Son, and according to the Testimony which we have
given of the Light; and he that believes, shall be established.

Now that which opposes this, is that which bea^eth a testimony contrary to
Christ, who says, For this end was I born, and for this end came I into the
world, to bear witness unto the truth; and every one that is of the truth,
hears my voice, John 18.37. And this was his witness, and his Messengers
witness, that he was the Light of the world; and, that this is the true Light
which has enlightened every man that comes into the world, John 8.12. John
1.9. And this contrary testimony which is brought forth, is this, That it is
the spirit of man that is the Light which has enlightened every man; and so
going about to prove the spirit of man not to be sufficient, under this would
destroy the sufficiency of the Light of Christ. But the Scriptures never did
give testimony that the spirit of man was the Light of the World; neither did
we ever say, that this Light was the spirit of every man, nor a natural Light;
and therefore this man who has writ a volume in proving a natural Light, or
man's reason insufficient, let all people take notice what he contradicts or
disproves by it; he does not by it contradict nor disprove any thing that we
have said; for we never did affirm that man's reason was the Light, but he has
labored to contradict himself: He has set up an Image, and then glories in
breaking of it down, and from our words draws a false inference, and glories in
confounding it; and this is the general course of our opposers, to raise a
false proposition or conclusion from their own imaginations, and then
contradict it, and then cry, The Quakers contradicted, or confuted, and their
Doctrine disproved, and they irrecoverably slain; and many such cries are gone
forth in the World among people, like the noise of many waters.

To which I answer, Nay, they are not of such a birth that they are so easily
slain, nor of such a Doctr^ne that they are so easily disproved; for the
immortal birth is brought forth, unto which God has given wisdom and
understanding to be as wise as Serpents, and in their innocence is their wisdom
brought forth; which Seed inheriteth the strength of the Almighty: So though
they be permitted to fight and contend against the truth, yet to prevail is nor
given them. Therefore in vain is the Net spread in the sight of any bird, and
in vain do they exercise their strength against the Lord's Anointed; for this
which they have brought forth, is but as setting of briars and thorns in battle
against the Lord; or as if the untimely birth should strive against that birth
which is brought forth without deformity, to slay it, as those in former ages,
who were wiser in their generation then the children of Light, sought to slay
the Heir, that the Inheritance might be theirs. In like manner do men now also
rise up against the life of the same Seed which is risen in the hearts of the
children of men, to slay it; that so they may profess the Scriptures in their
high swelling words of vanity, having men's persons in admiration because of
advantage; for if this Seed does live, which the Lord has not only brought to
the birth, but also brought forth, it will stop that profession which stands in
the hypocrisy, and will quench that violence of fire in which that zeal flames
out, which is not according to knowledge: But the Seed is risen which inherits
the strength of the Almighty, which can bear all things, and suffer all things,
and will come to reign over all gainsayers; for all the high swelling words of
vanity shall come to naught, and truth shall be exalted over all, in the power
of the eternal Spirit, when blackness of darkness will cover all those spirits
which have spent their strength against the appearance and manifestation of
Truth; and those that now boast themselves in their presumption against the
servants of the Lord, and testimony of truth, shall come to be a servant of
servants, even to the least in the Kingdom of God, before they have right unto
that which they now profess, or before they be counted worthy to cry Hosanna to
the Son of David, or to bear a testimony to the Lords Christ; for he will have
none such to be his Witnesses as deny his Light which he has enlightened every
man withal; for the true Witnesses bear this Testimony of Christ, That he is
the true Light, and is the Light of the World, which has enlightened every man
that comes into the World, that every man through him might believe; and every
one in whom the Witness is found true, is justified of God.

Another Accusation is again Richard Farnsworth, for saying, That Christ did
break the Passover with his Disciples; and herein he is charged to want Light;
or that the Light in him was not sufficient to open this; and that he did not
discern between the Passover and the Supper of the Lord; and likewise is
accused for calling that a shadow which the Scripture says was but to show the
Lords death till he came.

Ans. To call the Supper the Passover, does not demonstrate that he wants
light, neither that the Light is insufficient; for the Di^ciples called it the
Passover which they prepared for him; and Christ called it the Passover which
he eat with his Disciples, Mark 14.12, 14. Matthew. 26.20, 21, 22. and that which
they eat, he broke; but it does not say, that he broke his bones, nor eat his
bones; yet he eat the Passover with his Disciples. And whereas he is accused
for calling that a shadow, and many now in imitation take Bread and Wine, and
call that the Lords Supper, opposing those that are come to the Substance, and
witness the substance, eating that which is meat indeed, and drinking that
which is drink indeed: But this man which does oppose Richard Farnsworth and
others in these things, he has the least reason to mention this Supper or the
breaking of Bread, of any; for others do call their breaking of Bread, and
drinking of Wine, the Lords Supper, because they practice it; but this man does
neither practice that as the Lord's Supper, nor witness the substance; so that
this is the greatest hypocrisy to contend about that, or to accuse others, in
denying of that which he himself denies the practice of: S^, that this Accusers
Doctrine and Accusations want both ligh^ and reason.

Another Accusation is against these two Writers, Richard Farnsworth, and
Francis Howgil, as if they should be in an unreconciled difference; because the
one has affirmed, That the Light of Christ is sufficient to open all the
Scriptures: And the other says, Thou that tells of opening Chapters or Verses
by meanings, thou never heard a word of Christ.

Ans. These are no differences; for the Light of Christ and man's meanings are
contrary: So for the one to say the Light does open; and the other to say man's
meanings does not open, this is not contrary; So the confusion is turned again
to the accuser, and does not belong to these two Writers. So the ignorance of
this Accuser is to be taken notice of, which would make people believe things
that are not; for if he write his Book for those that can neither read, see,
nor hear, his labor is in vain; and if he write it to those that can read,
see, hear and understand, they will account it foolishness, especially in this
day when the Light of life is broken forth among the children of men, to give
them an understanding according to truth, for in this day he that keeps
silence is reputed wise; and better is he that keeps silence, then he that
speaks, unless the spirit of the Lord give him utterance.

Another Accusation is against W.D. he speaking to such a one as is guided by
the Lamb, etc. saying, The Light in thy Conscience, the righteous Law, cries
through thy earthly heart, and brings it into judgment, etc. And then speaking
of the parable of the little leaven hid in three measures of meal, that it
changes the whole lump into the nature of it self: So the little light that
shines in thy dark heart, is the powerful Word of Faith, and that the Light is
the sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed, until the day
dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts. And for these things he is accused.

Ans. Those that are guided by the Lamb, do witness that the Light, the
righteous Law, cries through the earthly heart, and brings it into judgment,
and will not accuse one for saying so. And as for speaking of the little light,
as Christ spoke of the little Leaven, was it no offense in the days of the son
of man to preach that the Kingdom of Heaven was like unto a grain of
Mustard Seed, or like unto a little leaven? And is it an offense now to preach
the word of Faith to be as a little light, or to preach the anointing to be as
a little light, in those in whom the light is little, does this also offend
you? What then if we should say, That Christ is the light of life, the son of
righteousness, and the glory and express figure of the Fathers substance in
some, and but as a little light, or day star in others, or in others as a light
before the day star arise in their hearts? Is not the light great in some, and
little in others? And is not Christ the same? May that only be called Christ
which takes away the sins? And may not that also be called Christ which
pierces through the soul, and reveals the thoughts of many hearts? Luke
2.35. May he only be called Christ unto whom the Father has given the Heathen
for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth, for his possession? who
reigns, and has, all his enemies under his feets, and is not he the same as
he is descended into the lower parts of the earth, and which took upon him the
form of a servant? So therefore that none may err in their judgments concerning
the testimony which is given of Christ, and of his light, his light is more or
less according to his manifestation in every one, there being given to every
one a manifestation of the spirit to profit withal, and every one is to be
turned to the measure of their manifestation, to know and witness Christ in it;
though in many it be but as a little light, yet they are to be turned unto it,
while it is so, which as it does increase, and is enlarged, it may be called,
or declared under another name than little, as the Kingdom of Heaven is not
always like unto a grain of mustard seed, nor as a little leaven but comes to
rule in the children of men: And whereas the Accuser replieth against the
light, and against Christ to be the word of Faith; saying, Christ is called the
Word of God, Rev. 19.13. but not the Word of Faith; and yet says in page 45.
That Christ (...) the Author and finisher of Faith.

Answ. If Christ be the Word of God, and faith come by Hearing, and Hearing by
the Word of God, then how is it that he is not the word of Faith, being that
word by which Faith comes when it is heard? and he being the Author of it, may
he not then as well be called the Word of it, as the Author of it, seeing he is
the Word by which it comes? but that all may understand what this word of faith
was which the Apostle preached. This was Christ, Romans 10. and they preached no
other Word to be the Word of faith but Christ, That whosoever believed on him
should not be ashamed: So that if the ignorance of Christ and of the Apostles
words, were blotted out of the hearts of our Accusers, they would be silent,
and the daily reproach would cease.

And whereas it is affirmed by us, That the Light, or a measure of Christ
within, is a sure word of prophecy, or a more sure word of prophecy, as Peter
says, 2 Pet. 1, 19. And whereas many are offended at this, and labors to make
people believe that this is the Writings of the Prophets which is the more sure
Word of Prophecy the Apostle speaks of because he says, Knowing this first,
that no prophecy of the Scriptures is of any private interpretation; for the
prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost, etc.

Answ. Now I shall make it appear that it was not the Writings of the Prophets
which was that more sure Word; as first concerning that, here is one thing held
out to be a sure Word, and another thing held out to be more sure, as unto
those to whom it was spoken: And as concerning the first:

That which is held out to be a sure Word, is that which came from the Father,
the voice which came from the excellent Glory, saying, This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased; and this voice which came from heaven the Disciples
h^ard when they were with him in the holy Mount. This was a sure Word when it
was spoken, and when it was written, it was a sure testimony, as sure as any of
the Prophets Writings; for the Prophets did see that he was to come, and he
that was to come was the well beloved Son of the Father, and they wrote this
down, and it was a sure testimony of Christ; and Peter and the rest saw that he
was come, and did hear the voice from the excellent glory proclaiming him (...)
be the Son of God; and when they had seen it, they wrote it down; and this was
a sure testimony, yea a surer then the Prophets; and that which the Apostles
were eyewitnesses of, and did write down for truth, was as much to be taken
heed unto as that which the Prophets declared; and this will all men of
understanding judge, that the Apostle Peter did not direct the people to the
Prophets words, to take heed to them because they were more sure then his own,
and more to be believed. But although the Apostles words and writings were
confirmed with more power and witness of the Spirit then the Prophets, and both
true, yet the Apostles Ministry unto those which did not see those things which
the Prophets saw, much less those things the Apostles saw; no, not so far as
the dawning of the day, nor to the day-^^ar risen in their hearts; therefore
Peter dividing the Word of God aright, says unto them, We have a more sure
word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your
hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. It was more sure for them to take heed unto that which was
as a light shining in a dark place, till the day star did arise, and the day
dawn in their hearts; then the declaration from others without them, declared
in words and writings; as thus for example, by experience; to such I shall
direct my speech, who cannot witness the day dawned, nor the day star risen in
their hearts, nor has heard the voice from the excellent Glory; to such I say,
That which I have seen and heard, the visions, power, and glory, wherein I am
an eyewitness of his glory, and of his appearance, this I may declare and
write unto you, and you may believe it; But to such I say, It is more sure for
them to take heed to the light that shines in the dark place, till they come to
witness in themselves the day dawned, and day star risen, and the Son of God
made manifest in them, then to take heed to the words which I have declared,
though it be a true testimony; for the Apostle did not write to himself, nor
say that it was more sure unto him, but unto them unto whom he wrote his
Epistle; for unto him no Word of prophecy was more sure then that which he had
seen and heard when he was with Christ in the holy Mount. So this may inform
your understandings who may have more desire to know the truth, then to oppose
it, and may put to silence the vain disputings by men of corrupt minds, who are
destitute of the truth, always corrupting the words of truth to oppose the life
of it, as many such there are in these days, which the Lord has, and will
rebuke sharply, that they may be ashamed; but all who are led and guided by
the light of Christ shall know the anointing in them, and the word of faith,
yea the Son of God: He that can receive it without offense, let him.

5. Object. But he that has opposed us, says in page 25. of his Book, in the
second part, That the dawning of the day is rather an evening then a morning.

Answ. Now let all which have but known a day and a night in the Creation,
judge, whether the evening or the morning be the dawning of the day; or,
whether the day star be a forerunner of the day, or of the night, then it will
not be incredible which I have said before, that he calls darkness light, and
light darknest; but in such things our opposers will not receive a good report
from those which can give true judgment, and to such it is left to judge of
those things.

Obj. Again he says in page. 35. That the spirit of truth was not a Comforter
to the Apostles, nor a reprover to the world before Christ was ascended; and
yet himself, to contradict himself, says, that he was in them before, and
dwelt in them, the same spirit, but not in the same measure.

Ans. Here is Babylon at the height, fit to be pulled down, but needs little
answering, seeing that it answers it self; and for such reasons as these he
might well conceal his name: And if he could have put this off by hiding his
Name, for an Hosanna to the Son of Daiud, or A Testimony to the Lords Christ,
then he might well have baosted, and have gloryed in his shame, as if there had
been no spirit of discerning in those he calls Quakers, nor others; but the eye
of truth is not yet so blind, but we know an evening from a morning, a night
from a day, and a lie from truth; and we know also that the disciples had a
measure of the spirit of truth while he was with them upon earth, and this
spirit did both comfort them, and did carry them on in obedience to his will,
and in the power of this spirit went forth into the world, and reproved the
world of sin because they did not believe in Christ; and the devils was subject
unto them by the spirit of truth that was in them, before Christ ascended; and
to this there is a Cloud of witnesses: So that this from him, filling his Book
with such things as these, is as if a man should fill a Barn with Chaff instead
of Corn, and deceive others with selling it for Corn.

Another contradiction of the same nature, is this, That the manifestation of
the spirit is given (to no man for himself, bu^) to every man to profit withal,
to edify, and build up, and do service in the body, as an hand, foot or eye,
or some other member of the body etc. and to contradict this, in the next words
he says, Not that the spirit, or the manifestation of the spirit is given to
every man (i e.) to every individual person forasmuch as some men are sensual,
having not the spirit, therefore no manefestation thereof, page, 17.

Ans. This is like the former, and so to be cast out with it; for his
distinction of words between every man, and every individual person, will not
cover him; for where the Scripture says every man without distinction, that
is, every individual man and women: And the Apostle says, But the
manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal; he does
not say, not to every individual person: And this also I say, and affirm, That
to every man is given a manifestation of the spirit to profi^ withal, and he
that profits with it, by it shall be justified; and he that does not profit
with it, by it shall be condemned, because he is an unprofitable servant; and
this truth shall stand when all confusion shall have an end, yet some are
sensual, having not the spirit.

Obj. Again in despising the testimony from the m^asure of the gift of the
spirit of God, when they have spoken according to the measure, and could not
boast themselves above their measure: but in their measure witnessing the work
of God as it was fulfilled in them, such he scornfully reproacheth, saying,
What means those cracks and crannes in their knowedge, knowing but in part?
there is no pieces, nor parts, nor measures, nor degrees in absolute
perfection; whosoever says he knows perfectly, he knows not how perfect his
knowledge is; and the first of those is called a vain man, boasting of that
which is not, and of a false gift, and is like clouds, and wind without rain.

Ans. Herein is Paul's Doctrine (as well as ours) declared against, to be but as
cracks and cr^nnes, and a vain boasting of a false gift; for Paul says, We
dare not make our selves of the number, or compare our selves with some that
commend themselves, but they measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing
themselves with themselves, are not wise: But we will not boast of things
without our measure, but according to the Measure of the Rule which God has
distributed unto us, a measure to teach even unto you; for we stretch not our
selves beyond our measure, not boasting of things without our measure, that is
of other men's labors. Now this measure of which he thus spoke, was in Christ,
so in perfection; and there is parts and degrees in Christ, and so in absolute
perfection; so far as every man is in the measure of the gift of God, so far he
is in Christ, and so far his knowledge is perfect, and abiding in this he
abides in that which is perfect, and as he glori^yes in this, he glorys in a
true gift, and none shall make this glorying void.

Obj. And whereas John Jackson says of those that say they have but attained
in measure, he calls that the bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of the
Oxen, which declares plainly that they are not at home, they are not in the
City, but have certain miles to travel before they arrive.

Answ. This is a false interpretation, as I shall leave it unto all of
understanding to judge; for the bleating of the Sheep and the lowing of the
Oxen, d^d signify Saul's disob^dience unto the commandment of God, for which
the Lord did reject him. But when Paul said he knew in part, and prophesied in
part, and would not boast above his measure, this did not sign^fie his
disobedience to the Lord, but contrariwise his obedience, and that he wa^ in
Christ Jesus: so this was not as the bleating of the Sheep, or the lowing of
the Oxen, neither did it show that they were not in the City; for Paul
testifies of the holy brethren which he was a Minister unto, That they were
come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general Assembly,
and Church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven; and to God the Judge
of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator
of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling. Now let him that has thus
accused, show how many miles these had to travel before they came to the City;
and whether there was any parts, measures, or degrees in these; or whether
there was absolute perfection without any measure of degrees of it? and whether
Paul was not come so far as these, unto whom he preached wisdom, even among
those that were perfect? and might he not in that estate say that he would not
stretch himself beyond his measure? But this I say, none are true witnesses of
perfection but those who know their measure and abide in it: and likewise those
that call the witnessing of the truth in a measure of the Spirit, the bleating
of the Sheep, or the lowing of the Oxen, such never knew perfection, neither
yet presses after it, but would keep all others from it by despiteful terms
against the measure of the spirit which leads unto it: But the day is come,
and the light is risen, which has found out and discovered all the cunning
craftiness of men, in which they go about to deceive the hearts of the simple,
and beguile unstable souls; but the elect seed is risen which i^ is impossible
to deceive; for it is not the Scripture words which men may take and speak in
the hypocrisy, which can darken our knowledge, nor any way hinder the
testimony of truth in those which have received it in the power of God; only
with such things the blind may lead the blind, and with such things they may
strive to keep others out of the kingdom which have not tasted of the good word
of God, neither are brought to know a measure of God in themselves, whereunto
to be obedient; but I see the Lord is opening a way for such to come out of the
pits which they have been led into, in opening their eyes and letting them see
that their Watchmen are blind, and that understanding is departed from them,
even from their Leaders, and the counsels of God is dep^rted even from the
ancient, and the people are even like to perish for want of vision, because
they have not seen for themselves, but their Teachers have seen for them vain
visions, and lying divinations, and prophesied lies, causing the ignorant to
believe them; but the Lords hand is stretched out against such, and is
stretched out to gather his own seed from such, to bring them into the fear of
the Lord, which is the beginning of wisdom, and into the knowledge of the holy,
whithis understanding, Prove. 9.10 which understan^ing is a Well sprin^ of life.

Another seeming strength risen up against us, is the conceit of the discovery
of a Schism in the body, as if the Band or Girdle which bound up the body were
broken, and as if there were now a character brought forth amongst us, showing
a variety of persons, doctrines and practices, and as if the testimony of our
being of the body of Christ, from the unity in the body were ceased, and as if
the Heads were divided; and as for proof, instances G.F. to J.N. J.N. to G.F.
J.B. to J.N. and as if it were not person, but party, which some wonder at,
admiring and waiting to see the Lords counsel and pleasure in it.

Answ. All those that wait to see the Lords counsel and pleasure, and his
wisdom in this thing, shall see it and be satisfied, and it will for the time
to come be more for the confounding of those that vvatch for iniquity, then any
way for confirming them in iniquity; and by that which God has done, and is
doing, shall the Girdle and Band of our love be made stronger, and in this
shall the sight of our enemies fail, and become blindness; for their thoughts
is not as Gods thoughts in these things, neither their eye as his eye, for he
saw a better thing for us in these things then they have imagined; for that
which they thought wrought for evil, has wrought together for good unto
those that stand in Gods counsel, who always waits to see those works which
stands in his wisdom^ contrary to man's reason; for that which they thought did
break, that has bound; and that which they thought did separate, that has
united together; so that there is not a difference nor dividing of Heads, not
in persons, nor in parties, nor in doctrines, not in practices, but the same
unity in the body, in the faith, in the seed, in the covenant, in one heart,
and one soul, one way and worship of God in the Spirit is now as much, or more
then ever before witnessed; so that God has cut off occasion from those that
seek occasion and has taken away the cornerstone that the wicked thought to
build upon; and hereby has God tried* and discovered, and brought to light
that which lay in the bottom of the deepest pits; for God has brought in this
his day, many things forth, to try and prove those who said they were his
people; and those that a few days since seemed to be like Lambs, do now
manifest themselves to be in the nature of Lions, and ravening Wolves; and
those that pre-end to wait for the coming of Christ in power, and had the Name
of Seekers, they are now found to reject his coming, and to be such as watch
for iniquity in those among whom Christ is come; and now they are turned
backward, and now drink up that which they had vomi^ed up; for now if they
could but find any iniquity among such as God has made known the glory of his
power among; or if they can but suppose or imagine any such thing from false
conceptions and conclusions, this would be a sufficient ground to them to print
a Book upon and publish it abroad, and but that the Lord has been on our
sides, well may we say, when all sorts of men and religions has risen up
against us, by their violence had we been consumed; for the powers of darkness,
and all the diverse worships of the Beast, are now more joined together then
ever, and the deepest subtilty of the Serpent is now at work in his members, to
devise ways, and change the Laws and times, whereby the spirit might be
quenched which God has raised up in his children, whereby a mighty cry is gone
forth through the Nations against the Mystery of iniquity, where it works,
both in the root and the branches of it; and now is the burden of the Beasts of
the South felt as truly as in the Prophets days, Isa. 30.6 from whence comes
the young and old Lion, the Viper, and fiery flying Serpent, and now does the
mighty and terrible cry of the spirit of the Lord go forth to the men of this
generation, as it went forth before time to the Egyptians, concernig this which
the Lord has wrought, (your strength is to stand still) and if this counsel of
the Lord be by you received, you shall know more of the ways and workings of
the Lord with his children, and that all things which the Lord has done is for
the furtherance of the Gospel, and that those which are approved may be made
manifest; what a strong ground of occasion would the envious one have thought
he had, if he had come among the babes in Christ who were met together at
Corinth, hearing Paul say that there was divisions among them, and said that
there must be heresies among them, that they which are approved may be made
manifest, 1 Cor. 11.19. and this was no character that God had broken them
without hands, nor that he had made their profession of unity of no force, but
through this manifestation he did work schism out of the body, that so there
should be no Schism, Rent, Heresy, nor any such thing in the body; and this
thing was not that the enemies of God might glory against the truth; and if any
labor to seek occasion against the holy Brethren, and say they are divided
into Heads, because two eminent men of them withstood one another, as
concerning eating with the Gentiles, viz. Paul and Peter; to such I say, he
that gathered at first into unity, is the healer and Repaired of such breaches;
and they may profess and witness as much unity after this as ever before.

And these three which the envious one has mentioned to be at difference in
Doctrine and practice, viz. G.F. J.N. and J.B. the unity in the life and power
of God in them, and in their Doctrine and practice shall stand for a witness,
and for a condemnation against all the accusers: and now seeing that their
occasion is taken away, their accusations may cease; and if such Prophets be
deceived, then let them consider who has deceived them: I the Lord has
deceived that Prophet. Therefore what would such a Prophet think of the
Apostles words when he says, There must come a falling away first, that the
man of sin may be revealed? Would he, or could he judge this a charecter that
the day of Christ were at hand: or that through such things the power of it
should be made more manifest; or that those among whom these things were
wrought, should be thereby the more united? To believe this will bring men even
to their wits end, it being so contrary to their thoughts and conceivings, and
this may well confound their vvisdome, and turn them backwards, and bring them
to question truth of all that which ever they have written, spoken, or acted
against those whom the Lord has manifested his power and work among,
contrary to their judgment and discerning; for the vvays and workings of the
Lord is deep, and his secrets are with those that fear him, and not with
those that despise his appearance, and speak evil of that they know not; and
the Lord will yet work greater things in the earth, that such may be
confounded.

And what will such say, if the words of Daniel the Prophet be fulfilled in
these days, saying; And some of them of understanding shall fall to try them,
and to purge, and to make them white, even to the time of the end, etc. Dan.
11.35. Does not God hereby try men, and try their spirits, and try their
discernings? should any in such cases judge before the time, the Lord will m^ke
it manifest; for this cause will God bring such into judgment; Therefore I say
unto you, that your strength is to sit still, and let the Lord alone, and let
his people alone, and let him work his own work in his own way, and presume not
to be his counselor; for who has known the mind of the Lord? let such as
have, dwell in it, and preserve knowledge, so shall they always abide in
strength, and power and Union with the Lord, and one with one another; and men
shall yet know for all that has been, that we are his Disciples because we
love one another; and none shall make our glorying* and rejoicing in the unity
of the spirit, and in the love of God, void; but it shall abound more and more
to torment the spirit of enmity which would break it, or accuse us for
professing of it; but over that spirit we are in the Lord

But what if some should rise up, ev^n from among our selves, speaking perverse
things, and draw Disciples after them, and go out from us, as they did from
among the Apostles, that it might be made manifest, that they were not all of
us: Ought this to be laid to our charge? Or, ought the way of God to be
accused, because of such things, to be Heresy, or Schism? If this seem to you
an evident token of perdition and of error, yet to us of our Salvation, and
that of God. And we are assured that we are of God, having the witness in our
selves yet not bearing witness of our selves; for there is one that bears
witness of us, even the Father which is in Heaven, and his witness is true,
being unto us a seal of assurance.

Therefore from henceforth this is a Warning to small and great, that they no
further proceed in that which is both unnecessary and unseasonable: For this I
say unto all such, that it is unnecessary and unseasonable, to seek to persuade
us that the truth is error, or that the light which every man is enlightened
withal, is the spirit of every man; for that is not according to the record
which God has given of his son, nor which the Son has given of the light; but
blessed be that day, and bl^ssed for ever be that po^er in which a seed is
brought forth, unto which the Father has given a true testimony; in which they
shall never be confounded which abide faithful; for great is the mystery of
godliness, God manifest in the flesh; and against this manifestation is the
power of darkness risen up, and all the messengers and ministers of Satan,
under all forms and professions, has joined themselves together to make their
arm strong against the Son of righteousness; his righteous life, and righteous
ways, which now he is bringing forth, among his children; but out of the mouth
of Babes, has God ordained strength, against which all the powers of darkness
cannot prevail; and unto which strength all our enemies must bend, and bow; and
come for salvation; For that which now the leaders of the people, have set
themselves against, when they have finished their course, and the anguish comes
over their souls, then will they confess, That it had been well if they had
loved the light, and walked in it, which they have so long hated, and despised,
with those that walk in it; and all those which have exercised their strength,
to shut others out of the Kingdom of God, by their Preaching, Printing, and
false Accusations, they shall know that while they serve sin, they are free
from righteousness, and do keep others from it; But the time is coming, that
their mouths must be stopped, and the Lord will cause his everlasting
righteousness to spread abroad, as broad Rivers, and streams, unquenchable, and
nothing shall hinder it; and this is the day in which the Lord will try those
that dwell upon earth, as he has tried many, and measured them with a true
line, and has found them deceitful, although they have made profession of his
name, and of his words for a cloak for their iniquity; But now the light is
come into the world, and there remains no more cloak for their sins, nor hiding
place for their iniquity.

An Epistle concerning the sufferings of friends showing the Priests wickedness
and persecutions.
GOD has a great work to do in this generation, to pull down the abominations
which has long reigned, and many are straightned till it be accomplished; and
only such must be exercised in this work who are called, chosen, and faithful;
and many have been called, but have not been faithful, but have destroyed in
their works, that which they seemed to have established by words, and was not
faithful to witness the fate of their words by their works; so that by a true
search we have found the words of righteousness in many, but we have found the
works of righteousness but in few; and though God has shined into the hearts
of many by his light, yet there are but few children of it in comparison of the
disobedient: The eye of God has looked into the world, and he sees men differ
more in words then in life and conversation; and some in words do witness for
God, but in their works deny him: As for example, How many of late years had a
zeal stirred up in them by the spirit of the Lord against the abominations of
the Priests, and the oppression of the tithes, preaching both down, even as
that which denied Christ to be come in the flesh? So that if words had been
that which would have finished the work, the Land had been cleansed before this
time of that abomination; but the Lord has brought a trial upon such spirits,
whether they will own their testimony through the spoiling of their Goods, and
imprisonment of their bodies; and therefore has God suffered an earthly power,
and a Law to try them, and now they do rather deny their Testimony, then suffer
by that Law which gives the Priests tithes; as for Witnesses, most of the
baptized people in England have betrayed their testimony and profession in that
thing: And how are you worthy to be called Saints which bear such a testimony?
can this equally be compared with the testimony of the Saints of old? Did they
cry down false worships and false teachers in words? and did they uphold them
by giving them wages? Have you not herein sinned against light? Did you not
once see that they were never sent of God? And will you now uphold them because
you cannot suffer for your testimony? Is not your paying them wages, and giving
them tithes, a greater witness for them then your preaching them down in words
is against them? and may they not herein rejoice over you? Christ is not herein
your example, which for this end was born, and for this end came into the
world, to bear witness to the truth, and did finish the work which the Father
had given him to do, and was made perfect through sufferings; but such never
need suffer who preach down deceit in words, and hold it up in works. And the
Apostles is not your example; for they were in works that which they declared
in words: therefore has God cast you by, as not fit to be Laborers in his
Vineyard: But a people is the Lord raising up, whom he is giving his holy
spirit unto, whose witness to him must stand as well in works as in words, who
love the truth more then their lives or liberties, goods or estates, and are
valiant for it upon the earth, which cannot be subject to the powers of
darkness, nor the Rulers of the darkness of this world, but believes that
whatsoever they deny for Christ in this life, they shall receive a hundred
fold, and in the world to come life everlasting. And these are they whom the
Father will exercise with his holy spirit, in the gathering his seed from the
ends of the earth, and for the turning of many to righteousness; and such shall
shine as the stars in the firmament of Heaven, when as the false and deceitful
witnesses shall be turned into darkness because their testimony is not able to
endure the trial; for the Lords house must be built with tried stones, that the
winds of persecutions cannot blow it down: and upon such will his light arise,
who when they are tried, are found faithful, and who are counted worthy to
bear a testimony in this work though it be through sufferings in this day, when
the powers of the Earth have set themselves to wear out the Saints of the most
High God by changing times and Laws, whereby to restrain the liberty of the
Lords people whose worship stands in the spirit, and in the truth. Times they
have changed by a Law in making the first day of the week to be their Sabbath,
but that day is more profaned then any of the seven. And Laws they have
changed, to get a grou^^ to stop the word of the Lord from having free course
and (...) utterance among ^he people.

These seek to scatter the power of the holy people, and to (...) the truth to
the ground by their acts of cruelty, and de^rees (...) unrighteousness, and by
a tolerating cruelty and or pression among a company of Priests which are worse
then those in Hosea'^ days, who then were, As a Troop of Robbers that wait for
a man, eve^ so the company of Priests murder in the way by consent, Hos. 6.9.
and says the Prophet, I have seen a horrible thing in the house of Israel; but
now we may say, We have seen a more horrible thing in the Land of England, even
a company of Priests taking men's horses from their work, their Corn off their
field, driving away their Oxen and Kine out of their Pasture, taking their wool
out of their Barns, taking away their Brass and Pewter out of their Houses,
taking away their Bedding off their Beds, even off their childrens Beds: Such a
horrible thing was never seen in Israel; for the Priests Robbery was not so
great then, as now; for they did never so spoil men's goods nor destroy men's
Estates, nor imprison men's bodies, as now in England the Priests, have done; so
that they do not only exceed the false prophets of Israel; but also all the
Robbers both in Israel and in England, has not spoiled so much Goods and
Cattle as they have done within these five years; some without any Law, or
pretense of Law; and others with false oaths and false witnesses, and the Law
not permitting a man to give in a true witness except he will swear, contrary
to Christ's command, who says, Swear not at all: which swearing is as great a
sin as bearring of a false witness. And by the^e things do they seek to wear
out the Saints of the Most High God, first taking away a man's Goods, and then
casting him into prison; as Christ said to the Saints, so is it come to pass in
these days also amongst us, The Devil shall oast some of you into prison, and
you shall have tribulation ten days: If the Devil now, or his Ministers or
Messengers of Satan, be permitted to cust some into prison, or bring
tribulation upon others, do they therefore think that we will yield to the
devil, or to his Messengers that we may be free from tribulation and
imprisonment? Nay that is not the price of our redemption nor way of
deliverance; ^or that which was written before-time, was written for our
^earning, which through suffering and patient continuing in well doing we have
learned, without which we could never have learned nor known Christ's words
fulfilled as they are; therefore happy i^ that day wherein the everlasting love
of God is broken forth unto us, in bringing us his children, prophets, and holy
Apostles, to rejoice over the false Prophets, and false Teachers; though they
spoil our Goods, and imprison our bodies, yet we can rejoice over them, and
suffer the spo^ling of our Goods with joy, knowing that this is for a testimony
against them, by which the reproach which the Lord will bring upon them, will
appear to all men. And this is so far from silencing our testimony against
them, that it does daily renew it; so that if all that which is past were
forgotten, their daily abominations does so increase, that a testimony must be
continued against them; for of them the Scripture is true, which says, Evil
men and deceivers wax worse and worse; for the deceiver in former ages was
never so bad, as by force to take away the goods of those that would not hear
them, and take away their lives by imprisonment, as some have done, because
they could not pay them tithes, as this Record of the unjust sufferings will
make manifest.

Our brethren the prophets h^ve given their testimony concerning such Prophets
and Priests which was profane, and that the Lord found folly amongst them, as
Jeremiah says, Jer. 23. he had seen a horrible thing amongst them, they
strengthened the hand of evildoers that none did return from their iniquity,
and it is so now for these reasons.

How can a drunkard return from his drunkenness, when he sees his priest drunk?
and how can a swearer return from his swearing when he sees his priest swear,
and hire men to swear falsely, as many have done in this Nation?

And how can a covetous man return from his covetousness when he sees his
priest so covetous that he takes away men's goods by violence, which he has no
right unto, but only through covetousness makes merchandise of People; So how
should any return from such things who are taught by them; and how can a proud
man return from his pride, when he sees his teacher lead him into it by
example; How can an envious man turn from his envy, seeing his teacher envious,
and provoking others to wrat^ and envy?

So these Reasons prove that the Prophets words are true, that ^one can return
from their iniquity by following the practice of their Priests; and Christ's
words are fulfilled also, Math 23. which says, they lay heavy burdens upon
people, grievious to be born, and devour Widows Houses, as many in this Nation
can wi^n^sse, who have their Goods spoild and taken from them, as this
following Record makes mention, abounding all the cruelty and wickedness which
ever was heard of, or read of, exceeding all the false prophets in Israel;
althoug they had a price, and preached for hire, yet they never did use such
cruelty for their Hire as these have done; and exceeding all the false teachers
among the Gentiles, which never was known to sue any at the Law that would not
hear them, much less to take from them seven times the value of what they
demanded; but the Lord does for a time let his children deeply suffer, to
fulfill the testimony of truth in this thing, that it may be recorded for ages
to come, the faithfullness of their testimony, and the cruelty of their
oppressors; and then will the Lord finish the testimony of their sufferings,
and will give them an inheritance among the Seed which he has blessed; and all
their persecutors shall be ashamed; for God will bring an everlasting reproach
upon them, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be forgotten, Jer. 23.

Richard Hubberthorne,

A Call to the Ministry, according to the Scriptures, held forth in these few
words following, contrary to that Call which is of man, and by man.
To the Reader.
IT being of the Lord so ordered, that a public Dispute was appointed betwixt
Thomas Dance Priest in Sandwich in Kent, and those called Quakers, which was
upon the twelfth and thirteenth days of the second Month, in which many weighty
things concerning Religion was discoursed of; in which it was first proved by
us according to the Scripture, That Christ Jesus the true Light, has
enlightened every one that comes into the world, Joh. 1.9. and Joh. 12. And
another weighty matter concerning Religion discoursed upon, was the
righteousness by which man is justified before God, which by us was witnessed
and proved to be only by the righteousness that was in Christ Jesus, being also
made manifest in us, the everlasting righteousness being brought in, according
to Dan. 9.24. Again upon the tenth day the discourse was, Whether the
Scriptures were the Word of God: The answer was, That the Scriptures were
Writings, and the Writings was not the Word, but the thing written of was the
Word of God: Unto which the Priests also consented. Another thing was
concerning the Call to the Ministry, whether theirs or ours was according to
the Apostles, and according to the Scriptures; the heads of both which Calls
are declared as follows, that all people may judge according to their measure
of the gift of Christ, whether of them is according to Scripture-Testimony.

THat by which the Apostles were called into the Work of the Ministry, having
gifts differing according to the measure of the manifestation of Christ, by the
same am I called, which is also according to the Scriptures, as Ephesians. 4. Unto
every one of us is given Grace according to the measure of the gifts of Christ,
by which gift according to the measure of it, were they made, some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, etc. And this was
by the power, virtue and operation of the gift of Christ in them; and as then,
so now; for there is not another way to be called into the Ministry by, neither
does any profit the people at all, but they who minister from the power and
moving of that gift which they have received from the Father by Jesus Christ;
by which gift was I called out of the World, and separated for the Work of the
Gospel; by which gift I saw that which had corrupted the earth, and by it was
moved to minister against it; which gift is that which has the power in it
both to convince and convert unto God, according as the Apostle Peter (who was
unlearned in the Letter) was made a Minister by the gift of the Spirit of
Christ, and says, 1 Pet 4.10. As every one has received the gift, even so let
him minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of
God; And, if any man speak, let him speak as the Oracle of God; and if any man
minister, lee him do it as of the ability which God gives, that God in all
things may be glorified. So that that Ministry by which God is glorified, and
people converted, is that which proceeds from the operation and power of his
own gifts in them, which is that Ministry which perfecte^h the S^ints, edifies
the body of Christ; brings into the unity of the Faith, unto the knowledge of
the Son of God, and unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the stature of
the fullness of Christ. But they which gather Scriptures together in their
earthly Wisdom, and from that which they have gathered, minister unto others,
this Ministry does not perfect the Saints, nor edify the body of Christ, nor
bring to the unity of the Faith (but into strife and divisions) nor to the
knowledge of the Son of God, but leads from his knowledge; nor unto a perfect
man; but pleads against perfection; nor unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ; no, not unto the measure of the least Saint; so that
Ministry is to be ceased from, which proceeds not from the measure of the
Father's gift; and that only continued unto the end of the World, which his
gift calls into, and carries on in. So I by the measure of his free Spirit,
being called and made a Minister of it unto others ( not of the letter, but of
the spirit) in which in all ages the true Ministry stood; having not received
it of man, neither was I taught it but by the revelation and manifestation of
the life of Christ in me. Which Spirit in me according to its measure, is as
true and as infallible as it was in them which by it were made Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets and Teachers formerly, being the same in power, virtue
and operation as it was, as able to reveal and make manifest, to teach, edify
and perfect as it was, and to beget people out of the World into the Covenant
of Light and Life; and all who are Ministers of Christ for the gathering of his
seed from the ends of the Earth, into the Kingdom of his dear Son, must from
the same Spirit witness their call and separation to that Work; and all other
calls are false, and their Ministry profits not, which does not singly proceed
from the measure of that gift; but all who do abide in the measure of his gift,
and from it minister, by it they are manifest to be of God; and in that
Ministry they commend themselves unto every man's Conscience in the sight of
God; and this is the calling and Ministry, in which as every one abides, they
glorify God. And this is the Ministry of reconciliat^on which was committed
unto the Apostles, and is unto his Ministers now; by the power of which, the
Devil's Work comes to be destroyed, and then all things reconciled in one,
things in heaven, and things in earth: But that Ministry which is received from
man, and taught by man, never reconciles any thing unto God, but does separate
from God, and beget into enmity; but that which proceeds from the measure of
the gift of God, brings every one to know the truth in their own particular;
which Truth as they abide in it, sets them free from sin; and this Ministry
has the power in it, in all them that have received it, to save them that
preach it, and them that hear it, and obey it; and no other Ministry does
profit the people at all, but that which from the gift of God is ministered; so
that this call and Ministry here declared, is one with, and according to the
Apostles and the Scriptures.

The Heads of Priest Dance his professed Call to the Ministry, as follows.
Pr. If I should speak nonsense (as others do) then I might say, that I am
made a Minister by the measure of the gift of Grace, and then I should be
accounted a Minister as well as they, etc.

But I do not pretend to any infallibility in my Ministry, but as these Acts
6:6. which when the Apostles had prayed, laid their hands upon them, although
(says he) that laying on of hands is not of such necessity, but that a man may
be a Minister without it; and as Timothy, although he had some extraordinary
gifts, yet he was not infallible, 1 Timothy 4.14. and (says he) I desire the
Office of a Bishop, which he that desires, desires a good work, according to
1 Timothy 3.1. And as for his Qualifications, they are such as whereby he might
have advantaged himself more abundantly in the world as to outward means, nnd
might have been clothed in S^a^let, etc. but did rather choose and incline
himself to be a Minister of the Gospel; and that the outward means was not his
end in choosing to be a Minister; but if that he could be satisfied, or see that
there did not want laborers in the Lords work, he could freely leave off, etc.
And further he said, That God had made his preaching effectual for the
converting of many, and that there were many, though not in that place, yet
some in that place, of whom he could say as the Apostles said, That they were
the seal of his Ministry, etc.

These being the heads of the particulars.

Objections against this Call.
WHereas thou say, That it is nonsense to say that a man is made a Minister
by the gift of grace;

Ans. Then the Apostles spoke nonsense when they witnessed forth their call to
the Ministry; for to every one of them was given Grace, according to the
measure of the gift of Christ, from which Grace they did minister, Ephesians. 4. But
the Apostles spoke sensible truth; therefore he that contradicts it, speaks
nonsense and ignorance, as will further appear in saying that he pretends unto
no infallibility in his Ministry.

Ans. Then he pretends to nothing of the Spirit of God, much less to be a
Minister of the Spirit, as Paul was, 2 Cor. 3.6. For every measure of the
Spirit is infallible, or undeceivable; bu^ that which is fallible is
deceivable; and whosoever is taught by that Spirit, is deceived; and Thomas
Dance pretends to have no other Spirit but that which is deceivable and
fallible; so that it is time to turn away from such.

Again, he charge Timothy that he was not infallible; which is a false
charge: For wherein was he fallible or deceivable? but he was so infallible,
that he not neglecting the gift of God that was in him, he by it was able to
save himself and those that heard him, 1 Timothy 4 16. And he ministered from the
gift of God in him, which he had received by prophecy, and so not from a
fallible spirit, but from the infallible; and so he is accused falsely by T.
Dance.

Again, Tho. Dance says, That he desires the Office of a Bishop, etc.

Ans. But consider what such a one must be (which is) blameless, vigilant,
sober, not rude and scornful, but of good behavior, apt to teach, not apt to
laugh and jeer, and cause the people to be light and vain; he must not be given
to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient, not a br^wler,
not covetous (as it does appear those Priests are guilty of, which have nothing
to preach from but the infallible spirit, which does always deceive people)
but one that rules his own house well, having his children in subjection with
all gravity; for if a man know not how to rule his own house well, how shall he
take care of the Church of God? but it is manifest that Tho. Dance ruled not
his own Church or people well, but rather provoked them to wantonness, rudeness
and laughter, which is madness: Not a Novice, lest being lifted up with pride,
he fall into the condemnation of the Devil: But T. D. was so lifted up in the
pride of his heart, that he gave two meanings to one place of Scripture, and so
falls into the condemnation of the Devil.

Pr. And whereas Thomas Dance says, That his q^^^ification is such, that he
might have been clothed in scarlet, etc.

Ans. What might thou have been, a Lawyer or Doctor, as one of thy Brethren
said? Which if thou had, by that the Nation is deceived, though not in so
high a measure as by professing the Ministry; but that is taken up as the most
profitable Trade to get means and live in pride: What if thou had been
clothed in Scarlet, in Velvet, in Purple, or any other gorgeous apparel? and
in that apparel which thou art already clothed with, will thou be condemned
when thou comes to know any measure of the gift of the true Ministry to be thy
guide.

Pr. Again, whereas thou take the people to be a seal of thy Ministry.

Ans. All the people that were in place, and some more, may seal it to be
fallible and deceivable, as thou have confessed it to be; but there is not one
that can set to their seal that it has brought them to a perfect man, nor to
the knolwedge of the Son of God, nor to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ; and so it has not effected any of the Work of the true
Ministry; but when thou comes to be searched narrowly, filthy lucre will be
found to be the end for which thou Ministrest, without which thou would be
silent.

And now further to manifest that, that he pretends not to any thing of the
infallible Spirit in his Ministry, these his principles or doctrines declare as
follows, with the answer of truth to them.

Pr. That every individual man was not enlightened by Christ.

Ans. Which doctrine is contrary to John 1.9. which says, that was the true
Light which enlighteneth every one that comes into the world; and to pervert
the Scripture, he gave two meanings, that the people might take whether they
would, so that they would but deny the form of sound words, and the plain
Scripture: The first was this, That Christ enlightened every man that is
enlightened. Or else, Secondly, That he enlighteneth some in every Nation. Now
let people consider how that this can be the meaning of the Holy Ghost, as he
said it was, seeing that here is two meanings, and it is either the one or the
other, but he knows not which; which does plainly manifest that he has not the
mind of the Spirit, which is but one, and speaks as it means; but the
Scriptures cannot be broken by such meanings, which says, th^^ ^very man is
enlightened with the true Light.

Pr. That the whole body of the Gentiles was not enlightened.

Ans. Then by what shall those Gentiles be condemned who are not enlightened,
seeing that Christ was given for a Light to the Gentiles, as the Prophet Isaiah
says? But he does not say, to some of the Gentiles, and not to the whole body;
and though the Gentiles were once darkness, Ephesians. 5. yet the Light shined in the
darkness; and the Apostle turned them unto that Light which shined in the
darkness, that the eye which was blinded, might be opened: He did not come to
give them eyes, but to open the blind eyes; not to give them light, but to turn
them to the Light that was in them, as Acts 26.10.

Pr. That the Gospel is an external Light, and not invisible; and that it is
not the Light within.

Ans. Which is contrary to the Apostles doctrine, which says the gospel is the
power of God, Romans 1. which is not external nor visible, but invisible, and
shined in their hearts, 2 Cor. 4.6. and it was hid unto those that were lost;
but that which was visible, they could see and hear with the visible eyes and
ears; but both the Gospel which is the power of God, and the eye that sees, are
invisible.

Pr. That Christ being the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, as
John said, 1 John 2.2. is meant only the world of believers.

Ans. In this he would break the Scriptures, and contradict the Apostle, which
says, He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only (who were
the believers) but for the sins of the whole world; Which whole World, John
said lies in wickedness; but the whole World of believers lies not in
wickedness, but is of God

Pr. That they must reconcile the Scriptures.

Ans. The Scriptures cannot be broken, John 10.35. but is reconciled and at
unity in themselves, and in all those that know them; but he that gives two
contrary meanings to one Scripture, he does not go about to reconcile, but
rather to pervert them, and to take away the plain testimony of truth (which
they give) from peoples understandings; but the key of knowledge is found
again, which opens the Scriptures (...) mystery of them. And herein is the
ignorance of ^eachers and people, in saying the Scriptures are not reconciled;
it is they that are not reconciled to God nor the Scriptures, and so they utter
forth their blindness, ignorance and error.

Pr. That the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ, was not the Law of the
Spirit in the Saints, but that they were two Laws, etc.

Ans. This is a false distinction; for God ^ath said that he will write his Law
in their hearts, and put his Spirit in their inward parts* And the same Law of
the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, being in the Apostle's heart, had set him
free from the Law of sin and death, Romans 8.2. So it was not two Laws, but one
Law.

Pr. That there are two righteousnesses of Christ, the one without the Saints,
to justify thom; and the other within the Saints, that did sanctify them.

Ans. Christ's righteousness is but one, and that by which they were both
sanctified and justified, was but one thing, even the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor.
6.11. and Christ in them was Gods righteousness, and the hope of glory, who was
made unto them righteousness, and if Christ was in them, then his righteousness
was in them; or else he and his righteousness is divided, as this Priests
doctrine would make them.

Pr. The said Priest denied that they were justified by that Christ that was in
them, when he was questioned about it.

Ans. If they were not justified by that Christ that was in them, then by
another Christ, which is no less than to preach two Christ's; and so he has
preached another Gospel than the Apostles preached, which whosoever does, is
accursed.

Pr. That David when he was guilty of adultery and murder, was not in a
condemned state, but in a justified state.

Ans. Here he would make God a justifier of the wicked in his wickedness; but
in that state David was condemned of the Lord, and suffered his anger and
terrors, when his iniquities went over his head, and were too heavy for him to
bear; and he was not justified until that through judgment he was redeem from
the guilt of murder and adultery, and other sins which (...) over his head: So
such Teachers as he who would have God account them just who are unjust, and
them holy who are unholy and unrighteous, are as the false Prophec^, who put no
difference between the holy and profane, and spoke peace to the wicked, where
there was no peace, counting them good who did evil; saying, they that do evil
are good in the sight of the Lord, Mal. 3.15. as the Priests now say, though
they be sinners, yet they are righteous in God's account; so they would make
God a liar, accounting men to be that which they are not, and to be in Christ
when they are in sin, in the Devil's Work.

Pr. And concerning them in Heb. 12. who were come unto the spirits of just men
made perfect, he said it was meant, that they were in Heavon, and not upon
Earth.

Ans. Thus by his false meanings he has often perverted the Scriptures,
calling his false meanings the meanings of the Holy Ghost; but these mentioned
in Heb. 12. were them the Apostle wrote unto upon earth; for he did not write
to men after they were deceased; and these that he wrote unto, were come unto
the innumerable company of Angels, and to the City of the living God, and to
the spirits of just men made perfect.

Pr. That any creature that holds that principle of being justified by a
righteousness within, living and dying in that principle, cannot come to Heaven.

Ans. Christ is the justifier of them that believe in him, and his Doctrine is,
I in them, and they in me: So Christ and his righteousness is in the Saints,
and God has brought in the everlasting righteousness, which justifies, which
is not at a distance, separate from the Saints, as these false Teachers have
imagined. And the Apostles Doctrine and Principle is Christ in you, which
whosoever lives and dies in this, comes to Heaven; but on the contrary,
whosoever has not Christ and his righteousness in them, to justify them,
cannot come to Heaven.

Pr. That, that which fitted men for the Inheritance (among the Saints) did not
entitle to the inheritance, or not give them a part in the inheritance.

Ans. This is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine; for he thanks God the Father,
who made them meet to be partakers of the inheritance with the Saints in Light,
Col. 1.12. for he both fitted them for the Inheritance, and did entitle and
give them a part in the Inheritance, translating them into the Kingdom of his
dear Son, ver. 13.

Pr. That we cannot contain an infinite righteousness in us.

Ans. Then you cannot contain the righteousness of God, for it is infinite and
everlasting, as in Daniel 9.24. and then you cannot contain Christ in you, who
is God's righteousness, and who is infinite; and so by this Doctrine he makes
all reprobates, as all are who know not Christ in them; for they who did not
retain God in their knowledge, were given up to a reprobate sense.

Pr. That it was false doctrine to say a man must first partake of the
righteousness which justifies, before it can be imputed to him as his.

Ans. He has here counted that false doctrine which the Saints witnessed
fulfilled in them; for the righteousness of God was imputed to the Saints in
the true belief, whereby they did partake of Gods righteousness through Faith,
before it could be accounted theirs; except that this Priest in his false
meanings would count that to be a man's which he has no right to, nor part in;
for the faith wherein Abraham did partake of Gods righteousness, was reckoned
to him for righteousness; and he unto whom God imputes righteousness, in his
spirit there is no guile; though these Priests would impute righteousness to
the wicked, as theirs, who are full of guile and sin, having no life, nor
right in God's righteousness, while they live quite out of it.

Pr. That God offers salvation to all men, but he intends it but to a few.

Ans. There he would frustrate the grace of God, and his salvation, which is
free for all; and so he would make the offers of God's salvation to many
thousands, to no purpose, as if God proffered that to many which he never
intended to give them: Was there ever such a belying of God as this? For what
is it less than to make God a respecter of persons? If all men by nature be in
wickedness, and liable to condemnation, as this priest confessed, and yet
salvation is intended but for a fevv, (though offered to all) how is God no
respecter of persons? and how is Christ given to be his salvation to the ends
of the earth, and a Light unto the world, that all men through him might
believe? and whosoever believes in Christ, shall not perish, but have
everlasting life; so that all may freely come and be saved, according to the
Love and Will of God, who does not intend that any shall perish except they
reject his way, and the offers of his grace, which has appeared to all men.

Pr. That a Minister of the gospel does not know who are elected.

Ans. There he has belyed the Ministers of the gospel; for they could discern
the elect from the World, as it is written, Ye shall discern between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not; and Paul and Peter vvrote to the
Elect: So these Teachers who know not the Elect, and yet exhort all their
hearers to believe and lay hold on Christ, their preaching is in vain; for if
God has but intended a certain number to be saved, and the rest to be
condemned, then they set their Hearers on work in vain, and many to expect that
which they are never like to have: So these people are in a miserable state.
And note, that these Priests though they take sums of money and tithes of their
Hearers in many parishes in the Nation, yet they know not who are elected
among them, according to this man's words.

Pr. That the Sword of the Spirit is ineffectual without the Letter.

Ans. The Svvord of the Spirit is the Word of God, which was effectual before
the Letter was, to Enoch, to Isaac, to Jacob, to Abraham, and others; and from
the Word was the Letter given forth, and the Letter is not effectual without
it.

Pr. That there was no Scripture written, but what is extaut, and in the Bible.

Ans. Yes, against that shall the Scripture bear witness; the Book of Nathan
the prophet, the Book of Ahijah, the Book of Idd^, 2 Chronicles. 9.29. the Book of
Shemaia, 2 Chronicles. 20.15. the Book of Gad, 1 Chronicles. 29.29: the Book of Jehu, 2 Chronicles. 34. the Book of Jasher, 2 Samuel 1.18. the prophecy of Enoch, Jude 2. one
Epipistle of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.9. one Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephesians.
3.3. one Epistle to the Laodiceans, Col. 4. All these Scriptures were given
forth from the same spirit, and to the same end and use as those are which are
bound up in the Scriptures, although these be left out.

Pr. That there was no Scripture ^or Writings appointed of God to be a Rule of
Faith and Manners, but what is bound up in the Bible.

Ans. Those Scriptures which are not bound up in the Bible, were given forth
from the same spirit, and by the motion of the Holy Ghost, and so for the same
ends and uses that the other Scripture was given forth for; and as he appointed
the one, so the other.

Pr. That the Letter does antecede and go before the spirit in all that walk in
the spirit.

Ans. This is false, for the spirit did antecede the Letter in all that walked
in the spirit, who gave forth the Letter from the spirit.

Pr. That the works of Christ in some respect are not perfect.

Ans. That is false, for every gift of God is perfect; and every work of Christ
is perfect in all his children; but that spirit in thee which is fallible,
makes nothing perfect, and therefore judges all things, yea Christ and his
Works to be fallible and deceivable, like it self.

Pr. That the Law requires more strict and exact obedience than the Gospel.

Ans. Nay; The Law says, Thou shall not commit adultery; but the Gospel says,
Thou shall not lust: The Law says, Thou shall not kill; but the Gospel says,
Thou shall not be angry. The Law says; Thou shall not forswear thy self; but
the Gospel says, Swear not at all, Matthew. 5. And so the Gospel requires more
exact obedience then the Law, contrary to this affirmation.

Pr. That God chose a Devil to be one of his Ministers, in choosing Judas; and
his proof for it is this, That the Divine Nature did not see it good to
communicate the knowledge of all things unto the humane nature; and therefore
though he was a Devil when he chose him, yet he knew it not.

Ans. This is a charging of Christ with ignorance, contrary unto John 2.24.25.
which says, That Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all
men, and needed not that any should testify of man, for he knew what was in
man: And though Judas by transgression became a Devil, and the Devil abode not
in the Truth, does it therefore follow that he was never in the truth? But
Christ speaks of him, and to him, as well as to the rest, that they had power
to cast out unclean spirits, Matthew. 10.1. and that the Spirit of the Father
spoke in them, Matthew. 10.20. So that there was no difference while the Spirit
of the Father led him and taught, till the Devil entered into his heart to
betray that Lord of Life. So that is a false charge to say, That Christ sent
out a Devil to minister the Gospel.

Pr. That the Spirit of God may accompany a Ministry, and the Minister not have
the Spirit.

Ans. This is another Doctrine than ever the Prophets or Apostles preached; for
I never read in the Scripture, that ever any did minister for God, which had
not the Spirit, or that ever any was converted unto God by such a Minister as
had not the Spirit: Therefore prove this assertion to the people, where, or
when the Spirit of God did accompany that Ministry, when the Minister had not
the Spirit; so that thou m^ist as well, as thou have said, not pretend unto any
infallibility (nor unto any truth in thy ministry) for if thou did, people
would see that thou did pretend unto that which thou art far from: So that if
thou would not pretend to minister neither, no more than to have the Spirit,
it were better for thee.

Pr. That the power that went forth in the Apostles Ministry, was in God, and
not in them; but as they have it communicated to them by the exercise of Faith.

Ans. Here thou have confounded thy self; for if they had it communicated to
them by their exercise of Faith, then it was in them; for the exercise of Faith
is within, in the pure Conscience; and so the power was in them, from which
they ministered, and they did not abuse their power, but from the power
ministered forth their gift as they had received it.

Thomas Ramsay said, That we preach a Doctrine of Devils, in saying that men
may be free from sin in this life.

Ans. Then the Apostle Paul preached a Doctrine of Devils: For he said, Romans 6
2. How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? And in the 7 th.
verse says, He that is dead, is free from sin. And in the 18 th verse he says
to the Believers, being then made free from sin, Ye became the servants of
righteousness; and in ver. 22. he again tells them, That now being made free
from sin, and become servants to God, you have your fruits unto holiness, and
the end everlasting life: And this was spoken to the Romans while they were in
this life, and it was not a Doctrine of Devils, but the Doctrine of the Gospel;
and Christ preached the Doctrine of perfection in this life, Matthew. 5.48.
saying, Be ye perfect as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect; and also it
is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. And this is not a doctrine
of Devils, but of Christ the Son of God; and Paul preached Wisdom among those
that were perfect; 1 Cor. 2 6. and David preached the Doctrine of perfection in
this life, saying, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of
that man is peace, Psalm. 37.37. Now David did not bid them mark such a man as
there was not: So the Doctrine of perfection is that Doctrine which both the
Prophets, Christ and Apostles preached, and so not the Doctrine of Devils, if
we preach the same; but all those that preach up sin, and that men must live in
it, and that they cannot be free from it while upon earth, these are Messengers
of Satan, and preach the Doctrine of Devils, and people need not that doctrine;
for they are willing enough to live in sin, without having it preached up, and
being strengthened in it; and that makes them so willing to pay the Priests
such Wages, for calling the proud happy; and those that work wickedness, Saints
and justified persons; for without such Wages not a priest in England would
preach peace to them in their sins, but they would all be silent; for if people
come once to know Christ their Teacher, and he in them the hope of glory, who
saves his people from their sins, then no man will buy their merchandise any
more, but will come all to hear and learn of the Father, and come to witness his
Covenant and his Teachings, and shall not need that one teach another, saying,
Know the Lord, for all shall know him from the least to the greatest, Heb.
8.11. And this shall all come to witness that come to be translated into the
Kingdom of the dear Son of God; and then shall they come to witness his Words
who is the Lord from Heaven, who says, Be ye perfect as your Father which is
in Heaven is perfect; and be ye holy, for I am holy. And this is the voice from
Heaven.

The real Cause of the Nations Bondage and Slavery, here demonstrated; and the
way of their freedom from their sore and hard Bondage, asserted.
Presented unto the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, who have a
Power and Opportunity put into their hands to do good (and to fulfill the
expected ends of many) if they improve it.

From one that has seen the corruption which bondageth the whole Creation, and
that waits for the redemption of the creature from under it. R. H.

I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the
beginning; afterward thou shall be called the City of Righteousness, the
faithful City, Isa. 1.26. ( Not before.)

When this is fulfilled in England, it shall be truly called a free Nation or
Commonwealth. (Not before.)

THere has been a time when the prudent has kept silence; but now Wisdom has
opened her mouth, and will be justified of all her children; for the Lord is
reviving the spirit that has been imprisoned, and taking the yoke from off the
Disciples necks, and is going on in the Name of his Power to make his creature
a free creature, and his people a free people, and the Nation that serves him,
and obeys his Law, a free Nation; and the thunderings of his power is gone
forth, and his Light is risen to discover and destroy that which has deceived
the Nations, and to give a discerning unto all, of their freedom from their
bondage, and in what it stands; and that is to be cast out which gendereth to
the bondage of the Soul, Spirit or Conscience, in any exercise of Worship or
obedience unto God, which springs from the measure of his own life, which must
not be hindered or quenched by any Law, Power or pretense whatsoever. Therefore
from the free Spirit of Life and Liberty in Christ Jesus, this is proclaim^^ to
the whole Nation, and the Nations round about, to take off their bondage, and
to take away their reproach, which has lain upon them for want of the life of
Christ, which is now risen to do its own work, and perfect its own praise, and
to deliver its own Seed, wheresoever it has been in captivity; the power of
life must deliver it from all that which causes shame and reproach, which is
the iniquity and transgression of the Life of Christ, which is the original
cause of bondage to every Nation, which the Lord has promised to take away in
one day, Zac. 3 9. And his Work and Power shall be known by its fruit, which is
to take away the^r sin, Isa. 27.9. One great yoke of bondage which is upon the
Subject^ and Seed of God in this Nation and others, is that Ministry which is
not free, neither will minister without money, and the people are not free to
hear them; yet a yoke of bondage is laid upon them to pay them; and this
iniquity is established by a Law: So here is neither free preaching, nor free
hearing, unto which the free Spirit raised up in this Nation, declares thus:

That every one that will minister, must do it freely, and as of the ability
which God gives him, and as the Oracle of God, and that no profession of
people may maintain another Minister; but that there may be a free preaching,
and a free hearing among all people, that so it may be a free Nation; and they
that will have Teachers according to their own lusts and judgments, they to
maintain them; and that there may never any such iniquity be established by a
Law, as for one sort of people to maintain another Minister; for this has
caused heart-burnings, envy and strife, insomuch that little Justice could be
done for the Nation, by reason of the cry of complainers and oppressors, as at
every Parliament, every high Court, every Assizes and Sessions, and petty
Courts, there has some (pretended) Minister or other been presenting
Addresses, Petitions or Complaints, and so have stopped the just and lawful
proceedings of the affairs of the Nation; which interruption may easily be
prevented, and the Courts of Justice freed from such brawling and unreasonable
complaints, which has been more interruption to Justice, than any thing in the
Nation besides, and has more hindered the peoples deliverance from being a
free people and a free Nation, than any thing in the Nation besides. So let
every form and profession of Religion maintain their own Minister, and maintain
their poor which are crying at their Meeting House doors, and in the Streets,
in the Name of their God, for some relief; that so there may not be a beggar in
England; for herein the Christians in name, are become even a reproach among
the Heathens, to see their own flesh stand naked and uncovered in the streets
and Steeple-house doors, and at their doors, and they turn their ears from the
poor, and forget God, and loses the bowels of compassion, and are not merciful
as the Father which is in Heaven is merci^ul; and so walks not according to the
Scriptures, but is a disgrace to Religion, and even a reproach among the
Heathen. So let no more the cry of the Priests nor of the poor be heard in our
Land, the one crying for Laws to persecute and receive money of those who they
preach not unto, which receives no teaching from them; which cry is intolerable
to be heard or suffered in a free Commonwealth: And the other for want of the
creatures of God, when as others spend the creatures of God upon their lusts
excessively; and so the Creation is out of order. (...) those that are come
into the Gospel-Ministration, and to be taught of the Lord, and have received
Christ Jesus the Lord, and walk in him, it is not so amongst us; for the
creatures of God are not spent upon the lust, nor destroyed; neither is there a
beggar amongst us, who are truly of us in the obedience of truth; so that we do
not desire that any people or profession in the Nation should maintain our
poor; for they are our own flesh without respect of persons; for if any of us
have of this Worlds good, and see our Brother stand in need, and shuts up the
bowels of compassion from him, the love of God does not dwell in us; neither
does any other maintain those that minister unto us the Word and Doctrine; so
we according to the royal Law of Liberty, desire to do unto others as we would
have them do unto us; and thus to be a free people and a free Nation. So every
form and profession will enjoy their own Minister, till they come to know him
unto whom the gatherings of the people must be, viz: Christ: So that neither
Parliament, Assizes, S^ssions nor Courts, will have any thing to do in matter
of Religion, but to keep the peace of the Nation; and then he that has the
Word of God, may speak his Word faithfully and freely without interruption, so
that the Gospel of God may have its free course, and be glorified; and that
great oppression of Tithes (which lies heavy upon the whole Nation, which God
raised up his Spirit in the Army once to testify against) may be taken away,
that what was then pretended, may be now fulfilled, and the people eased of
their oppressions, which they have long felt the burden of, and groaned under,
that so (as a free people) they may be delivered from that bondage, and the Law
may be disannulled by which that bondage is imposed upon them. So this will
beget love in the Nation, and all persecution, cruelty and bitterness w^ll
cease, and every one may freely and quietly enjoy the fruit of his own labor;
then with much freedom and cheerfulness will every one minister of his substance
unto all necessary uses, knowing that the earth and the fullness of it is the
Lords: And when this universal love and free Spirit is begotten among people,
then will righteousness establish the Nation, and that will be brought forth
which many sincere hearts and tender consciences has waited for seve^^l years;
and many have been even almost weary and faint in their minds in waiting for
that which they once had a lively sight of, and hopes to enjoy in the Lord's
promise of Liberty and Freedom, opened in their understandings ten years since,
insomuch that some have been ready to tempt God, and say that he was slack
concerning his promise; and some for want of long patience have lef^ off
expecting that which they once believed and hoped for; but God is reviving the
hopes of the contrite ones, and in them that had said there was no hope in
them, is he renewing strength to believe that God will give Judges as at the
first, and Counselors as at the beginning; the Judges at the first were not to
judge for gifts nor for rewards, nor the Priests were not to preach for hire,
nor the Prophets were not to divine for money, but the Judges did minister
justice freely between man and man, and the Priests did minister the Law
freely, which was added upon all transgression: So in those days there were no
Priests that troubled the Courts, Judges nor Counselors with Addresses,
Petitions or Complaints for maintenance; no suing at the Law, no imprisoning
men's persons for Wages, nor no spoiling of men's goods, and there was not such
delays in executing judgment upon transgressors, as is now; for the Judges sat
in the gate, and executed judgment speedily upon the offenders, and cleansed
the Land of evildoers, and so every one was to wait on his M^nistry which he
had received from the Lord, and are to do so now, if they do it unto the Lord:
He that judges for God, is not to respect any man's person in judgment; and he
that has the Word of the Kingdom, is to minister it freely, and then the
people will minister their carnal things freely to every one that has need; so
that whereas even from the Priest to the people, all have been given to
covetousness, strife and debate, every one now will be given to love and
freeness one to another; for he that has spiritual things, will minister them
freely, and he that has carnal things will minister them freely; and so will
all come from under the execution of the Law, and from all strife and
contention.

Another great oppression wherein iniquity is upheld by a Law, is in the
Ministration of the Law between man and man, it not being done freely, so not
as in the beginning.
HE that does minister the Law, let him do it freely for the Lord, and for
righteousness sake; and let him be as one of the Judges in the beginning, and
as one of the Counselors, whose eyes were not blinded with gifts and rewards;
and so it will come to be a free Nation, and then every man will not seek his
own, but every one another good; and then will pure love spring up to one
another, and one will seek to preserve and save another, and not devour and
destroy one another about earthly things, as now they do; so Christ's Spirit
will be found among all sorts of people, Ministers of the Law, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Subjects of the Nation, which were to save men's lives, not to
destroy them; and then the Scriptures which cannot be broken, will be fulfilled,
and peace will be extended as a River, and righteousness as a mighty Stream.

For it is this spirit which I have mentioned in Lawyers and Priests, which did
not minister freely, but for covetous ends has made merchandise of peoples
souls and estates, that has broken the peace of this Nation, as many has had
a deep experience; even when the Army was in its first purity and zeal for God
and his Truth, that Spirit did creep into their Counsels, and corrupted them,
and did creep into Parliaments, and corrupted them; and when there was any
appearance of a Monarchy or Government arising in the Nation, that spirit crept
into every high Court, and corrupted it; so that whole Nations are corrupted
with that spirit; so that till that spirit be purged out, there is not like to
be a free Nation, or a free people: For it was that Spirit which brought Israel
into bondage, which was once a free Nation, and not in bondage to any man,
while the Judges judged freely, and the Priests preached freely, and the
Prophets prophesied freely without money, or without price; then was Israel a
free Nation, and a free people, and the glory of all Nations: But when the
Judges judged for gifts and rewards, and the Priests preached for hire, and the
Prophets divined for money, then they became as corrupt as the Nations of the
Gentiles round about them, and then they came into bondage and captivity, and
then profaneness went forth from the Priests into all the Earth, as it does
from those in England, which are in the same state. Now see that sin and
covetousness is a reproach to any people, as Solomon says, Prove. 14.22. and it
is that which brings them into bondage from being a free people. Now if none
may minister the Law, but those that do it freely as unto the Lord, and as his
Ministers, then that covetous self-seeking spirit will be purged out in Judges,
Counselors, Lawyers, Attorneys and Solicitors, which would devour the Creation
to spend upon their own lusts, that seek for great places to enrich
themselves, and destroy others; so that Equity, Law and Justice is lost, and
the free ministration of it in this Nation; so that in many cases a man had
better suffer himself to be defrauded, then to seek to the Law for Justice, the
administration of it is become so corrupt; and the Law is so perverted by them,
that a man is not suffered to plead his own cause, but is forced to hire a
Lawyer or an Attorney, and men are not suffered to bear a true and faithful
witness, nor to have the truth and justness of their cause confirmed by the
mouth of two or three Witnesses without swearing; and so people are still stepped
in bondage by deceit and oppression, from having the liberty of their pure
consciences; and so neither Law, Judges nor Counselors are now as at the
beginning, nor such as ought to be in a free Commonwealth.

Now whereas in your late proceedings it is ordered and granted, that every one
shall have their free liberty, first as an English man; secondly as a
Christian: Which liberty hitherto we have not enjoyed; for as English men we
have not had our just liberty in the Nation; first, as concerning the Law;
secondly, as concerning the worship of God; for in this our own Nation, and in
our own Counties, where we have been well known (and also just and true, and of
good report, and no evil justly laid to our charge) have we been shamefully
abused, whipped, stoned, prisoned, and both our bodies and goods spoiled,
accounted as vagrants, and not permitted as English men, to have the liberty of
the Law, because we as Christians, could not transgress the commandment of
Christ, which says, Swear not at all: So that if we may have our liberty as
English men, then not to be persecuted in our own country as vagrants, where we
are known to be no such persons: And from hence let a true testimony in yea or
nay, be taken in our Law without an oath; for he that can take liberty to
swear, and so to break Christ's command, will take liberty to lie also. And 2
dly, If we may enjoy our liberty as Christians, then we are not to be forced by
a law to maintain the Antichristian Ministers, nor to be forced to swear
contrary to Christ's command; and also that Act and Law is to be abolished,
which is to persecute any for traveling on the first day of the Week; yea,
when many on that day has but traveled to the Worship of God, has been
imprisoned, and some their horses taken from them, and never yet had them
again; and this is contrary to the Christians liberty; for the Christians, and
the disciples of Christ in the primitive times, traveled upon that day; and
Christ himself traveled upon that day, as you may read in Luke 24.15. where
two of the disciples traveled from Jerusalem to a village called Emaus (and
Christ being risen from the dead, traveled with them (which was from Jerusalem
about 6 furlongs, and that same day they traveled back again from Emaus to
Jerusalem; verse 33. which in all is about 15. miles; and if they had traveled
other 15. miles more, it was but the Christians liberty, and no Law to the
contrary: So let that be repealed which binds and limits us from using the
Christians liberty, and for walking as they walked.

And let not any Magistrate be encouraged by you to act any cruelty or
persecution from his will, upon any for the exercise of their consciences in
the fear of God, in obedience to his will; for the day of your trial is come,
and the day which will make all things manifest, and every work of what sort it
is.

An opportunity has been put into the hands of many, to act for God, who had
no heart to improve it, but have improved their own interest for their own
ambition, and God has made them as a reproach and a byword among the people,
who have sought their own, and not another good, and have abused the power put
into their hands: Therefore you that have not yet lost your day nor time,
redeem it, lest the Lord cast you by also, as not fit to do his Work, as he
has done others.

An Answer to a Declaration put forth by the gene^al consent of ^he People
called Anabaptists, in and about the City of LONDON.
FRiends called Anabaptists, whereas you say, You are misrepresented to the
Nation;

1. As such as are opposite to Magistracy.

2. As such as would destroy the public Ministry of the Nation, who differ
from you in some things about Religion.

3. That you do countenance the People called Quakers in their irregular
practice.

4. That you endeavor a Toleration of all miscarriages in things
Ecclesiastical and Civil, under pretense of Liberty of Conscience.

5. That ye design to murder and destroy those that differ from you in matters
of Religion, thereby endeavoring to make you odious to ^^me people fearing
God, and also to incense the rude multitude against you, to provoke them (if
possible) to destroy you, etc.

Unto the first of which you say, Though we cannot answer in justification of
every individual person that is of our profession in matters of Religion, yet
we can say this, and prove it to all the world, that it has been our
profession, and is our real practice to be obedient to Magistracy in all things
Civil, and willing to live peaceably under whatever Government is, or shall be
established in this Nation: For we do believe and declare Magistracy to be an
Ordinance of God, and ought to be obeyed in all lawful things.

Ans. For you to give up your selves willingly and peaceably into whatsoever
Government is, or shall be established in this Nation, without any limitation,
and to submit unto any Power or Magistracy that does or shall rule, as the
Ordinance of God, without any limitation or qualification, is far below that
Spirit which was once in some of you in that profession; for you have told of
having the Laws regulated according to the Scriptures, and of having Judges as
at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning; and then not to submit to
what Government soever, but that which is according to Equity and Justice. And
what do you bear Arms, or fight for, if not for a Government according to
truth, and that Righteousness may establish the Nation? Some have judged this
to be the very Design and End of the War and Controversy against many that
were Governors and Magistrates, and were by some called the Ordinance of God,
and the higher Power: And if now you resolve to live peaceably, and submit to
whatever Government shall be establish^d, then your Fighting is at end. And if
any shall come in, and establish Popery, and govern by tyranny, you have begged
pardon by promising willingly to submit and live peaceably under it as the
Ordinance of God. And if Jeroboam come to reign, and set up Calves to worship,
and cause the people to sin, yet you will submit and live peaceably and quietly
under it, accounting it the Ordinance of God. And if a Pharaoh come to rule, he
that bears rule must be counted a Magistrate, and a Magistracy must be
accounted the Ordinance of God by you, and peaceably submitted unto; and
whatsoever Government they set up by their Act, will be accounted lawful things,
and you must submit to them, else you have proved your selves all liars; but
some did judge that ye had been of another spirit.

To the second you say, As for the public Ministry of the Nation, who differ
from us in the matter of baptizing Infants, and some things in
Church Government, we are so far from endeavoring to destroy them, that we
judge they ought to have the liberty of their consciences therein; and that it
is our duty to stand by them and preserve them (so much as in us lies) from all
injury and violence.

Ans. It seems then that there is not so much difference betwixt them and you,
as will make them Antichristian, and you Christian; and there is a near
compliance, when as it is your duty to stand by them and preserve them while
they are baptizing Infants: But can you stand by them and preserve them, and
not tell them that it is Antichristian, or contrary to the Scriptures? And do
you think that they will do as much for you, as to stand by you while you are
plunging your Members in the water? And although you do so as you say; is not
this contradiction to your selves in what you say in the same Paper? For do you
not say, That you will not tolerate any miscarriages in things Civil or
Religious? And whether is not this a miscarriage in things religious, to
baptize Infants? And whether do you not tolerate this miscarr^age in them,
while you stand by to preserve them in it (as you say) from injury and
violence? But who does offer any violence to them which are their guard
against? but the Priests will hardly believe you; and if they ever have power,
that will not pardon you for so saying; and therefore you had better have been
silent, than have showed pour weakness and ignorance for nothing.

To the third you say, Concerning the people called Quakers, it is well known
unto all (that are not wilfully ignorant) there are none more opposite to their
irregular practices than we are; nor are there any that they have expressed more
contradiction to in matters of Religion, than against us, though their
provocation therein, has not put us in the least on a desire of depriving them
of their just liberty, while they live morally honest and peaceable in the
Nation.

Ans. Is not this secret smiting without a cause? What irregular practice is
that which you accuse them of, and will not mention? is this honestly done?
What, are they worse than the Episcopal Priests you mention to them, wherein
they differ from you? and why not to the Quakers? Is it enough for any man to
believe that they are irregular, because you say so without any proof? Or dare
you not mention wherein you judge it so, lest they should disprove you? But you
say, there is not any they have expressed more contradiction to, in matters of
Religion, than against you. Answ. That is false; for they have more
contradicted the common Priests of the Nation, as their Books and sufferings
will witness, although they have according to truth contradicted you, and also
have more of your contradictions and confusions to declare concerning you,
which are not yet published: But what do you account their irregular practice?
Is it because their yea is yea, and their nay is nay in all their
communications (and yours not so?) Or is it because they cannot swear at all?
Or is it because they cannot have any man's person in admiration because of
advantage, or because they cannot respect the person of the rich, nor honor the
person of the mighty? Is it because they do unto others as they would have
others to do unto them? Or because they speak the truth every one to his
Neighbor, without partiality or hypocrisy? Or is it any thing relating to
these things abovenamed? If not, in your next mention in what, or else the
wise in heart will judge you to sprak only from your imaginary conceit. But
what is your end in so secret smiting them? Do you think to excuse your selves
by accusing them? And who is it that does charge you in countenancing the
Quakers in their practices either regular or irregular? I know none that has
any ground so to charge you: But to men of understanding who can see beyond
words, you rather appear to be begging a pardon of the Episcopal and Presbyter,
and the vvild Boys and Apprentices of London, by accusing the Quakers, as
hereafter will appear; and that fearfulness and unbelieving is entered into your
hearts, and so your spirits are betrayed into a slavish fear; but if ever you
be accepted or owned of God; you must own that for your strength which the
Quakers live in; and if ever any rule for God in this Nation, they must own
that Light, Life and Spirit which they are guided by, and then they will not
despise, but have unity with the Quakers.

To the fourth you say, Whereas we are further charged with endeavoring an
universal Toleration of all miscarriages both in things Religious and Civil,
under pretense of Liberty of Conscience; it is in both respects notoriously
false. And we do before the Lord that shall judge both quick and dead, yea
before Angels and Men, declare our utter detestation of such a Toleration; for
in matters Civil we desire there may not be the least toleration of miscarriage
in any, much less in our selves. Nor do we desire in matters of Religion, that
Popery should be tolerated, the blood of many thousands of the People of God
having been barbarously shed by the Professors thereof; or any person tolerated
that worship a false God, nor any that speak contemptuously and reproachfully
of our Lord Jesus Christ, nor any that deny the holy Scriptures contained in
the Books of the Old and New Testament, to be the Word of God; and yet we are
not against tolerating of Episcopacy, Presbyter, or any stinted form, provided
they do not compel any others to a compliance therewith, or a conformity
thereunto. For whatever Composers of any form of Worship, may possibly err, it
is derogating from God and his holy Word, and injurious to men to compel any to
the practice thereof.

Ans. What confusion is here, and contradiction both to your selves, and to the
ex^mple of Christ? As to Religion, you will not tolerate Popery, because the
blood of many of the people of God have been barbarously shed by the professors
thereof; neither will you have any persons tolerated that worship a false God;
nor any that speak contemp^uously and reproachfully of the Lord Jesus Christ;
nor any that deny the holy Scriptures contained in the Books of the Old and
New Testament, to be the Word of God. And yet you are not against tolerating of
Episcopacy, Presbytery, or any stinted form: Why will you not tolerate Popery as
well as Episcopacy? Have not the professors of Episcopacy murdered and slain,
and do labor to murder and slay the people of God, as well as the Papists?
And why will you tolerate the Common Prayer among the Episcopacy, and not the
Mass Book among the Papists, seeing that the Mass was the substance out of
which the Common Prayer was extracted? Here is nothing but partiality, to
tolerate one thing and not another of the same kind: And why will you not
tolerate the persons of those that worship a false God, nor the persons of
those that deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, nor the persons of those
that speak contemptuously and reproachfully of the Lord Jesus Christ?

Ans. If you will not tolerate their persons, then you will murder or destroy
their persons; and herein you have proved the accusation against you to be
true, that you have a design to murder and destroy those that differ from you
in matters of Religion: As for instance, those that worship a false God, they
differ from you in matters of Religion, and you will not have any of their
persons tolerated, and their persons must be destroyed for differing from you
in matters of Religion. And they that deny the Scriptures (that is, the
Writings) to be the Word of God, (that is, to be Christ, whose Name is called
the Word of God) you will not tolerate their persons, then you will destroy
them, because they differ from you in matters of Religion. And those that speak
reproachfully of Jesus Christ, you will not tolerate their persons, then you will
destroy their persons because they differ from you in matters of Religion. and
thus having contradicted your selves, you have also contradicted the example of
Christ; for he came among those that worshipped false Gods, even stocks and
stones, and graven Images, the Works of men's hands; and he was not against
tolerating their persons, neither came he to destroy men's lives because of such
things, but had a Gospel to preach unto them, whereby they might learn to know
the living God, and turn from dumb Idols, and those that speak reproachfully
against him, and said he had a Devil; yet he was not against tolerating their
persons, but preached the Kingdom of God to them, and did bid them seek it, and
the righteousness thereof; and told them that the Kingdom of God was within
them; and he was among such as denied that there was a God, or Christ, or
Resurrection, Angel or Spirit; and this is more than to deny the Scriptures to
be the Word of God, which indeed is words, and not the Word. And Christ was not
against tolerating of any of the persons, as you have expressed your selves to
be, and so showed forth a murdering Spirit: But seeing that you will not have
any person tolerated that worships a false God, what must be done with their
persons? But what difference is there (in the ground or cause of toleration)
between those that worship a false god, or they which worship the true God
in a false way? And if the persons of neither of those should be tolerated,
then the toleration would but reach a little compass But who must be Judge of
that blasphemy, contempt or reproach spoken against the Lord Jesus Christ? Was
it not blasphemy in the Apostles days for one to say he was a Jew, and was not?
Rev. 2. v. 9 And is it not as great blasphemy now to say that he is a Christian
or a Believer, that is not? And must not any person be tolerated that speak
such words? And must not such a person be tolerated that denies the Scriptures
to be the Word of God? Then it appears they must not be tolerated that say, In
the beginning was the Word, as John 1.4. Nor that say that Christ is the Word,
and that the Scriptures are they which testify of him, as John 5. And if we
search out your toleration to the bottom, it will be reduced into this compass,
That none shall be tolerated but those that say as you say, and profess what
you profess; and you among your selves are as a Kingdom divided, that cannot
stand; and you are not they which are fit to Rule in the Nation to prescribe
Liberty, nor give toleration; but if you had been of Christ's Spirit, you would
have professed Toleration, and not Destruction unto all persons in matters of
Religion; and then they that have the Gospel of Christ, may minister it freely
among those that worship a false god, and among those that worship the true
God ignorantly, and minister it among the Papists, ^piscopal and Presbytery,
Heathens, Turks and Pagans, which are all out of the way, and so to convince
the gainsayers, so that all the wicked impositions, cruelty, persecution and
killing one another about Religion, would cease, and then the Gospel of peace
which is the power of God, would rule over deceit; and Truth and Righteousness
would increase and spread over the Nations; but you have appeared to be of a
spirit of Confusion and Contradiction; for when you have spoken against
tolerating the persons before mentioned, yet you say (in contradiction to it)
you are not against tolerating Episcopacy, Presbytery, or any stinted Form,
provided they do not compel any others to a compliance therewith, or conformity
thereunto, etc. Now consider, and let even your own foolishness correct you: Is
not the Papists (which ye have have excepted against) a stinted Form? And are
not those that worship a false god, a stinted Form? And are not the Sadduces
that deny that there is either God, Christ, Angel, Resurrection or Spirit, a
stinted Form? And is not the Jews a stinted Form, although they speak
contemptuously of the Lord Jesus Christ, which before you have said you will
not tolerate their persons, because they speak contemptuously of the Lord Jesus
Christ; and now you say you will tolerate, because they are a stinted Form: How
must the Jews be converted who have spoken contemptuously and reproachfully of
the Lord Jesus Christ, calling him a Deceiver, a Blasphemer, and that he had a
Devil, seeing you will not tolerate their persons until they be converted? And
how shall the Heathens that worship false gods, be converted, seeing their
persons must not be tolerated? And what must be done with those many hundreds
of Congregations in England which worship God in the Spirit, and yet do deny
the Scriptures (as Words and Writings) of the Old and New Testament to be the
Word of God, but do confess them to be a Testimony of the Word, and of him who
is the beginning and end of the words, in whom, and by whom they all come to be
fulfilled to the Saints: What must their persons be done with, seeing they must
not be tolerated? But you may say, That those things was spoken in your haste,
or at least in your fear, whereby you were surprised in the Uproar of the rude
Boys and Apprentices of London: But a little fear entering into the Hypocrisy,
does try your spirits, and cause you to bring forth the intents of your hearts,
as in your paper is manifest.

To the last you say, Forasmuch as we are charged to murder and destroy those
that differ from us in matters of Religion, We do not only abhor and detest it
as a cursed practice, but we hope we have approved our selves both in this City
and the Nation, to the contrary; notwithstanding the great provocation of some
who have endeavored our ruin. For that we desire is, just liberty to men as
men; that every man may be preserved in his own just rights; and that
Christians may be preserved as Christians, though of different apprehensions in
some things of Religion; in the prosecution whereof, our lives shall not be
dear unto us, when we are thereunto lawfully called. The designs of our
adversaries in these calumnies, are to mis-represent us to some people fearing
God, and also to incense the rude Multitude against us, purposely to provoke
them (if possible) to destroy us.

Ans. In what you have before expressed, you have more given than taken away
the occasion of this Charge against you, by your instancing the not tolerating
of such persons beforementioned; for if you did (as you say) desire the just
liberty of men, as men, then every man without respect to Apprehensions,
Persuasions or Worships, as a man and person, should be tolerated, that those
who are Christians, might inform them of the true God, when they worship false
gods: And hereby you give great occasion unto those that seek occasion from
you, when you with a general consent cry against the tolerating the persons of
so many sorts of people about differing from you in Religion. And as for some
of them whom ye would accuse as irregular, many by experience can witness, that
neither Weapon nor Tongue formed against them, can prosper; and the time may
come when you may be glad to be upholden with a little of their strength, and
not to reject those whom God has, does, and will own for his people in the
midst of their Enemies; for God has made them even as eyes to behold the
spirits of men, and the changings of their ways, and to give them a reproof in
due season, when they darken Wisdom, and confound their matter by words without
knowledge, in false fears and haste, when they are out of patience, and out of
Faith in God, as the Baptists here have done; and the fearful and unbelieving
cannot accomplish the righteousness of God, neither will he bring forth his
intended Work by them; but such as are of a true Spirit, that look only at the
glory of God, and setting up of his Truth, who are come to the spiritual
Weapons, and do not wrestle with flesh and blood, but with the powers of
darkness, and with spiritual wickedness, and such as are not false accusers of
others, but seek the good of all men, such will the Lord honor and exalt in his
Work, and they shall perfect his praise.

So Friends, you have been hasty to utter words before the Lord, for which his
reproof justly comes upon you: Therefore let your words be few, and mind the
fear of the Lord God, which is the beginning of wisdom, and that will slay your
false fears, from which unsavory and unsound words has proceeded; for your
Religion is vain while your tongue is not bridled; for it is better to be still
and keep silence, then to utter words from the line of confusion (that is
stretched over you) thereby to get a name in the Earth; which Line all people
walk in, but those who are led by the Spirit of God to speak words that cannot
be condemned; for it is the Spirit of the Lord God and his Power, which must
slay the enmity in you, which is the ground of your prejudice and hard speeches
against the Lambs of Christ; which when that is slain within, then those evil
fruits of the lips will cease without, and then the fountain of Life will open
in you, which brings forth fruits of another nature; and when the fruits of
your lips is truth, righteousness and peace, then will you have fellowship with
the Father and the Son, and with us who walk in his Light.

A Copy of a Paper sent to the Council of State, in the Year 1659.
LEt every one that will minister the Gospel, do it freely, according to the
example of the Apostles, and the Ministers of Christ.

And do not you go about to provide any maintenance for any Ministers of any
sort in the Nation; for in that you will but lay a yoke upon the Disciples
necks, and an imposition upon tender Consciences, which cannot do any thing but
what they do freely as unto the Lord; and let every one that will preach the
Gospel, live of the Gospel, and not upon any settled or State maintenance; for
thereby you will but set up another Image, and continue the same oppression of
tithes, though under another name, upon the people, and will neither ease nor
satisfy the people at all; for the cry of the honest and godly people of this
Nation, is, to have a free Ministry, and free maintenance, and are willing
f^eely to maintain those that minister unto them the Word and Doctrine, and are
not willing that the Civil Magistrate should meddle with that which relates to
spiritual things in this case; and so every sort of people in the Nation,
freely maintaining their own Ministry, puts an end unto all troubles, suits,
complaints and petitions of that kind, in which the Nation has long been
burdened and troubled with; which with much ease and satisfaction to all
people, this way may be ended, and no other way can.

R. H.

A word of Wisdom and Counsel to the Officers and Soldiers of the Army in
England, etc. To weigh and consider before the light and power of their day be
shut up in darkness when they cannot Act for God.
THe people of this Commonwealth has by deep and sad experiences not only
seen the falseness and deceivableness of many fair words and pretenses, whereby
they have been betrayed of their liberties and freedom, and nothing yet but
bondage and slavery is left upon them, but they also through their deep
sufferings have learned to know the spirits of men. And though every appearance
of a Power that arises gets new words and fair pretenses, but still in the old
spirit: Yet we do perfectly know, that it is the new Spirit of the Lord put in
the inward parts, from which men must act for the Lord and for the Liberties of
his people, before they be established in righteousness, or enjoy the liberty
of their Consciences. And we see that God has given time and days, which
should have been days of liberty and of plenteous redemption: But through men's
departing from the leadings of God, and suffering their own wisdom to pervert
them, they became days of persecution and cruelty, which for the Elects sake
(which suffered in them) was shortened; as for instance;

1. Oliver Cromwell in his days made many Vows, Promises, Engagements and
Professions for the liberty of tender Consciences, as the honest people of this
Nation are not ignorant; and how that at Dunbar, he confessed unto God in his
prayer, That if the Lord would but deliver him that time, he would take away
that great oppression of Tithes; which when he was delivered, both at that and
many other times, and had a prize put into his hand, yet had no heart to
improve it; but contrary to all his prayers, promises and engagements, suffered
and tolerated the wicked spirit of persecution, in the murdering Priests and
Magistrates to Rule in the Land over tender Consciences, even until violence
and blood covered the earth and filled the whole Nation, suffering Laws to be
made for Tithes, and for persecuting of tender Consciences, and so building
again that which he had destroyed, and so made himself a Transgressor; but for
the elects sake his days were shortened.

2. In the days of R. Cromwell many of that succeeding Parliament began to
declare their sensibleness, how that O. Cromwell had betrayed the Nation and its
Liberty, and left them in great bondage, debt, persecution and slavery; But how
soon they were perverted, and became more bloody and cruel against all that
fear God, (the upright in heart are sensible) setting up in themselves that
which they declared against in him, and instead of giving liberty and freedom
to the Army and to the people of God, they voted down that liberty and freedom
which they already had (viz.) of meeting together one with another in the fear
and worship of God, and so they became cruel as the Ostrich in the Wilderness,
and as evening Wolves; but for the Elects sake was their days shortened.

3. The long and late Parl. they came up with greater pretenses of liberty and
freedom, then all that was before them and the people generally applauding of
them, by telling them that they were the beginners of settling the Nation in the
way of a Common wealth; and did expect they should perfect the peoples Liberty
and Freedom outwardly (which by the other Powers they had suffered under)
expecting that they should remove those burdens which was laid upon tender
Consciences by impositions and cruel sufferings, and in their beginning they
seemed to be given up to do the work expected from them, and did publish it in
their weekly news to the Nation several times, that it was their real intent to
make the Nation a Free Commonwealth, not in name but in Nature, and this was
often expressed by them; and indeed they did something more then those that
went before them, in setting at Liberty those that were imprisoned because they
could not pay Tithes to the Priests; and because they could not swear, and
because they could not put off their hats to honor pride and ambition, and
because they spoke the Truth against the deceits of the Priests, which both the
Soldiers and the honest-hea^ted in the Nation knows how treacherous they have
been, and the hinderance of every appearance of God in the Nation; for the
chief cause of Gods breaking down, and of bringing into ignominy, shame and
reproach those late powers before mentioned, was, the letting in of the Priests
spirit and flatteries, as O. Cromwell, if alive, would witness, or those that
are alive may witness for him, that he had never been such a covenant-breaker
and betrayer of the Nations Liberties, but by letting in that wicked interest,
which made him a reproach, a byword* a hissing among the people. And the two
late Parliaments, it was their joining to that betraying interest of the
Priests, and neglecting of the Nations business that brought darkness and
confusion, and consequently a dissolution upon them: And the last as I said,
did something more then the former; But when they began to revive the Committee
for plundered Ministers, and did not take notice, nor call any Committee to
subdue or punish the plundering Ministers, of which they were informed from
diverse parts of the Nation, which had feloniously taken away the goods of many
an honest innocent man; then did Gods Indignation grow hot against them, and
then was it time for them to be dissolved; for they had finished their day, and
they had done all that ever they would have done for the Lord; for bonds and
violence was in their hearts, but for the Elects sake, which has always borne
a true Testimony against the oppression and cruelty under which the Innocent
suffers, was their days shortened.

All those before mentioned had their day from the Lord given them to try and
to prove them, and they have been tried and proved.

And now you the Army have your day from the Lord, wherein you will be tried
and proved; and you will be more inexcusable if you do not the things
pretended, then any that has been before you; for you see what has been the
cause of the fall; and you see how that through Pride and Ambition, flatteries
and fair pretenses, the Cause of God, and the Peoples Liberties have been
betrayed by those that have fought honor one of another, and not the honor
which belongs unto God only; Therefore if you would have the Lord to honor
you, and keep you in renown in the Nation, seek not your selves, but deny your
own Lordships honors and Excellencies, let none cleave unto you by flatteries,
in giving you titles in seeming respect and honors, for that will betray you,
and lead you from that Innocence by which you should act for the Lord; and as
now you have Power, exercise it, in choosing men fearing God, and hating
covetousness, ambition, pride and honor, that so the Nation may enjoy that
Liberty and Feedom which they have long waited for, and suffer none to act that
persecution in your names which has already covered the Nation with blackness
and darkness, and has brought Gods curse upon their proceedings.

One thing is upon me to acquaint you with, which many of you it may be does
not know, which is this; One of the little horns which pushed and persecuted
the Lambs of Christ, is springing up again, and begins to be as fierce as ever;
For yesterday in the Exchequor at Westminster* Judge Parker and Judge Wild
would not receive a true answer from an honest man (who is well known for his
uprightness) against a false Bill exhibited against him by a Priest, unless
he would give it in upon Oath; and therefore because he could not swear for
Conscience sake, but did testify the Truth from his heart, he was committed
Prisoner to the Fleet, and several others True and Just men, and Friends to the
Commonwealth, was denied the Law, and their answers rejected, because they
could not swear; but in whose names and by whose authority they act those
things is not yet declared to the Nation: If those Judges act those things in
the name and by the authority of the Army, or their late chosen Counsel, let it
be openly manifest; and if not, but they did it in their own names, let the
Nation know it; For this is worse then the last Parliament, who did set many
free who where so imprisoned, and did give Commissions and receive Testimony
without swearing; and Judge Parker seems to have forgotten that knowledge and
fidelity which he had of that people when he went his last circuit in the
North, and his so favoring the Priests now, shows that he has forgotten since
he confessed that he was Sermon-sick at Carlisle this last Summer, when he wished
that a Quaker had been there, and saw that they had reason to declare against
them, etc.

But to us it is no strange thing to see men so apt to change and to betray
their own knowledge for filthy lucre sake, while the corruption of the Laws
through bribery and deceit is upheld, which once the Soldiers had a clear
sig^t o^, and a determination to pull down, and now it is the only day of their
trial to prov^ themselves, and it is doing of that which you have accused the
Parliament for not doing, that must make you manifest; for people will no
longer believe words; for your selves know, that the good people of the Nation
have made daily complaints and Petitions, and the Officers and Soldiers also,
against that general oppression of Tithes, and the Parliament has only given
them thanks for their good expressions, and good affections but done nothing,
until their thanks did even become loathsome to the people.

Is it not a grievous thing, and intolerable to be born, that innocent and
faithful men (who see and deny the Priests deceit) should be forced, whether by
Law or Violence, to give them the tenth part of all their labors and increase,
and they with that money to buy horse and arms to raise a Rebellion, to murder
and destroy those men who deny to give them that which your Law has caused to
be taken from them, and so both the Law and Priesthood is joined together in
oppression of the people!

And the Nation is very sensible that all this while they have but been
deceived by promises and fair pretenses; Therefore be diligent to improve the
light of your day, before the Sun set upon you, and you be shut up in darkness,
and the power to do good be taken from you.

A member of his Army, who makes War with the sword of his mouth, Richard
Hubberthorn.
London the 24. of the 8. mo. 1659.
An Answer to the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, from the People (called
Quakers. A Copy of which was given to the KING by them upon the 4. day of the
5. Month, 1660.
AS it was the Disciples Religion, Principle; and Practice, to obey Christ's
command, as in Mat. 5.34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by
Heaven, for it is Gods Throne; nor by the Earth for it is his footstool;
neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King; neither shall thou
swear by thy head, for thou can not make one hair white or black; but let
your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay, for whatsoever is more then these comes
of evil; and this being the Apostles Religion and practice, rhey preached thi^
doctrine unto others, as it is written, James 5.12. But above all things my
brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any
other oath, but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay, lest you fall into
condemnation; so this is our doctrine, principle and practice, that we cannot
swear at all, by any oath, lest we fall into condemnation, and so sin against
Christ; and if we do suffer or be persecuted, and imprisoned, because we cannot
swear, then it is for our Religion and exercise of our Consciences, and
obed^ence of truth unto our God, in which suffering we shall rather die then
sin against him.

And whereas it is required of us to testify our obedience as Subjects unto
Charles the second as our lawful King, and own his Supremacy and Government in
all just and lawful commands, whereupon an oath of Allegiance and Supremacy is
tendered.

As it is our principle, and has ever been our practice to be obedient
Subjects under every Power ordained of God, and to every ordinance of man (set
up by him) for the Lords sake, whether unto King as Supreme, or unto Governors
or any set up in authority by him, who are for the punishment of evildoers,
and for the praise of them that do well, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. and unto such we do
freely promise obedience unto all just and lawful commands: And we do own and
believe that it is not without, but according to the purpose of the Lord, that
he has this day and power given him as King, head and chief Magistrate over
this Nation, that while he has this day and power, he may rule for God in
civil and outward affairs, and matters relating to the outward man and estate,
in which all his just and lawful commands we can willingly be subject unto, not
for wrath, but even for conscience sake, and all commands which are otherwise,
whether from him, or any other, we shall willingly and patiently suffer under
them what men shall be permitted to impose upon us, and thus we do accept and
own the King and his Government, as he and it is according to God, and
answerable unto him, we are willingly obedient, and in Conscience bound to
accept it, and shall yield subjection thereunto; but if otherwise, contrary to
God, he rule in tyranny, oppression, injustice, or the like, that we must bear
witness against by the spirit of truth, but not by outward opposition, as
rebellion, by insurrections, plots, or carnal weapons, to destroy or overthrow,
either him or the Government thereby; for that is contrary to our life.

But as for swearing, it being contrary both to Christ's command and our
Consciences, as we never have, so we never shall swear, neither for, nor
against any Man, Power, or Government, but shall be true and faithful to what
we promise and profess.

And as concerning the Church of God, and spiritual things relating unto Gods
Kingdom, we own only Jesus Christ as Supreme Head, Ruler, and Lawgiver there,
according to James 4.1. There is one Lawgiver which is able to save and to
destroy, and as it is written, Ephesians. 1.12. that God has given him to be the
head over all things to the Church, which is his body, the fullness of him that
fills all in all; and as the Apostles did hold forth him to be the head of
the body the Church, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that
in all things he might have the preeminence, Col. 1.18.

And him we do own as head, Ruler and Commander in all matters of Faith,
Obedience, and Worship, in things appertaining unto his Kingdom; and he only
is to rule (give laws and order) in the Consciences of men, by his spirit,
light, and power; and as he is the author of his people Faith, so he is the
defender of it, and them in it; and so to him we give the Dominion, Rule and
Government, as Head and Supreme over his Church, and not unto man: so in him
who is our Life, King, and Lawgiver, we honor all men, and do seek the peace
of all men, and not the destruction; and unto this we do acknowledge, and bear
witness to, who are members of his body, which is his Church.

Richard Hubberthorne. George Fox the younger.
London, 23. day 4. Month 1660.
Antichristianism reproved, and the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles
justified against Swearing. In Answer to John Tombs's six Propositions for the
lawfulness of Swearing.
All which Propositions are both against Christ and his Apostles Doctrine, as
is here pro^ed according to the Scriptu^es: For the satisfaction of all tender
Consciences.

Because of Oaths the Land mourns, Hos. 4

And (as says the Prophet) every one that swears, shall be cut off, Zach.
5.3.


The Epistle.
John Tombs,
IS it not a shame for thee, who art called a Baptist, thus to manifest thy
self, and divide thy self from thy own people? Have thou not taught people to
swear, first one way, and then another? Did ever any of the Apostles so in the
Primitive times? But on the contrary, that people should not swear at all. And
why do thou bring the Scripture that was spoken to the Jews, and apply it to
the Christians? And why do thou bring the Scripture where the Angel swear,
but brings not the Scripture which says, All Angels must worship the Son who
says, Swear not at all? So is not this like Antichrist, and Anti Apostle, that
preaches up that which Christ and the Apostles denied, as in Mat. 5. James 5.
And whereas thou say in thy Epistle, that thy writing is short and
indigested; in that thou have said truly, for how can they that fear God digest
it, seeing it is so contrary unto Christ and the Apostles Doctrine? And so both
thou and it are become an ill savor to God and them that love him; but thou
shall be rewarded according to thy work. But God has made thee manifest, who
hatst so long been hiding thy self under so many false coverings, but now art
discovered, that thou should no more deceive the Nation.

R. H.

But on the contrary, from the Scripture it is proved, that the Believers and
Christians are not to swear at all; Therefore to them that are in Christ Jesus
no Oath is lawful.
WE read in the Scriptures of truth, Matt. 5.19. That whosoever breaks the
least commandment, and teaches men so, he shall be least (or not at all) in
the Kingdom of God.

But we do find some men, especially John Tombs breaking the commands of
Christ, and teaching men so, therefore he is guilty of that judgment: but to
the first proposition which is this:

That some swearing is lawful.

His proofs are these:

That which is not de toto genere, in its whole kind evil, may be lawful; but
swearing is not de toto genere, or in its whole kind evil therefore some
swearing may be lawful.

Answ. This argument is thus disproved.
To break any of Christ's commands, or to deny the Apostles Doctrine, is de toto
genere, in its whole kind evil; but to swear at all by any Oath is to break the
command of Christ, and to deny the Apostles doctrine, as Mat. 5.35, 36, 37. and
Jam. 5.12. Therefore to swear at all is not lawful, but evil, according to
Christ and the Apostles Doctrine and in the state of condemnation, Jam 5.

Again John Tombs concluding that his major is manifest of it self, goes

To prove this minor thus.
That is not wholly evil about the use of which some Directions are given by
God; but God gives directions about the use of swearing, as Jer. 4.2. And thou
shall swear the Lord lives in truth and judgment and righteousness; ergo.

Answ. By the same argument may it as well be proved that the Christians and
believers in christ may be circumcised, offer incense, burnt-offerings and
sacrifices, because for the use of it God gave some directions, and therefore
it is lawful: but as circumcision, incense, burnt-offerings and sacrifices of
the Law is ended in Christ, so is the Oaths which was among the Jews in him
ended also to the Believers, and by him forbidden: for it was said of old time,
Thou shall swear, and shall perform thy oath to the Lord; but Christ in the 5.
of Mat. makes mention of the Jews oath which God gave once directions for, yet
says he, Swear not at all; here Christ puts an end not only to frivolous and
vain oaths, but to the true oaths which the Jews was once commanded of God to
swe^r; for these oaths are they which Christ's words has relation to; for he
came to end the Jews worships and oaths, who is the oath of God; Christ the
truth and righteousness of God says, Swear not at all, which ends the Jews,
which was to swear in truth and righteousness.

2 Argument.
That which is approved by God is lawful; but some swearing is approved by God,
Psalm. 63.11. Every one that swears by God shall glory; ergo.

Answ. That Scripture Psalm. 63.11. says thus, but the King shall rejoice in
God; every one that swears by him shall glory; but the mouth of them that
speak lies shall be stopped. This was spoken of David the Anointed of God, who
was in that covenant of the Law, wherein he might swear in truth and
righteousness, that oath, As the Lord lives, and as my soul lives; but there
was some in that time, which if they used that Oath, the Lord lives, surely
they swear falsely, Jer. 5.2.

But what is that to the Christians under the new Covenant who are under
Christ's command, who says, Swear not at all, neither by that oath which David
and the Jews swore by, nor any other oath? but if upon any occasion they were
required to testify their obedience whether they would be subject to such or
such things, their answer was to be yea or nay, and to keep their words; which
is more then the hypocrites and hireling Priests in these times has done by
their oaths; for this we have good experience of, that such as do now plead to
swear for a thing, has sworn against the same thing, and do now preach against
that which they have preached for, so that they will preach, pray, or swear any
thing for their belly, and for filthy lucre; and the oath which David was to
swear in truth and righteousness who called Christ Lord, he that was David's
Lord and glory says, Swear not at all, who has all power and glory.

Again, whereas John Tombs instanceth Abraham, Isaac, David, Solomon, Elijah,
Micah, Elisha, the women of Shunem, and Itai, Uriah, and Samuel, etc. their
swearing and entering into covenant to be examples for swearing.

Answ. All these were under the first covenant, and was in that which Christ
called the old time, Mat. 5. and proves nothing that Christians in the new
covenant should swear; for although Abraham swore, and Solomon swore, yet
Christ which was before Abraham, and greater then Solomon, says, Swear not at
all; and although David swore, ye^ he was David's Lord which said, Swear not a^
all; and though the Angels swore by him that lives for ever, yet Christ unto
whom all the Angels shall bow and worship, says, Swear not at all; so that all
these arguments and Scriptures does not prove that it is lawful for the
Believers and Christians to swear at all, but it is Tombs ignorance in his
applying Scripture in disobeying Christ's command.

Again, To prove swearing lawful John Tombs says that Paul put an oath on the
Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 5.27. which words are these, I charge you by the Lord
that this Epistle be read unto all the holy brethren: Now says Tombs the Greek
word transl^ted I charge you by the Lord, is, I put the Lords oath on you, or
swear you that this Epistle be read to all the holy brethren; a like charge are
1 Timothy 6.13. 2 Timothy 4.1. etc.

Answ. This is the long and thick mist of darkness which has been long kept
over the understandings of people, that when the plain Scripture will not prove
their ends and intents, then they tell people it is otherwise in the Greek, or
Hebrew; did not the Translator of the Bible understand Greek as well as John
Tombs? or are we not to believe the Scripture as it speaks, till again it be
translated by him? but lest he should be wise in his own eyes, as it is in the
Greek it is here set down, that all that can read and understand it, may judge
whether Paul did put an Oath upon them, or did swear them to read that Epistle
to the brethren.

As 1 Thessalonians. 5.27. (...), that is, I oblige or charge you in the presence of
God, etc. Not, I put the Lords oath upon you, or swear you, as John Tombs
says; for if they did read the Epistle among the brethren, then his obligation
or charge to them was fulfilled; but seeing John Tombs says he swore them, he
might have declared in what manner they were sworn, seeing Paul was at Athens
when he wrote to Thessalonica.

Again he says the like charge is in 1 Timothy 6.13. which according to the Greek
he would make an oath; the words are these, (...), that is, I enjoin or command
thee before God, not a putting an oath upon them, or causing them to swear, as
John Tombs says.

Again, he says there is the like charge (or oath) put upon them in 2 Timothy
4.1. which in the Greek is thus, (...); that is, I charge thee in the presence
of God, etc. Not that he took him sworn, or put an oath upon him, that the
should preach the word but did charge him to be instant in season* and out of
season in his Ministry.

Again John Tombs says in the times of the Gospel Paul used this Oath 2 Cor.
1.8. But as God is true, etc.

Answ. Now those that mind this Scripture may see that Paul does only justify
Christ's words in keeping to yea and nay, saying that with him it was not yea
and nay; for says he, ver. 18. but as God is true, our word toward you was not
yea and nay, and ver. 19. for the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached
among you by us, even by me and Sylvanus and Timotheus, was not yea and nay for
all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen.

So that; this Scripture is so far from bringing people to Oaths and swearing
that he labors to bring them all to yea and nay in all things, and so to
Christ the substance, in whom all the promises of God are yea; so that the
Apostle might well use these words, That as God was true, etc. so also were
they true to their yea and nay, the end of all oaths; other Scripture Tombs
bring to prove the Apostles did swear, as Romans 1.9. and 9.1. Gal. 1.20 Phil.
1.8.

Answ. As to the first, Romans 1.9. where the Apostle says, for God is my
witness whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of hi^ Son, that without
ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers; is this a proof for men to
swear and take oaths either for men or against men? has not the man here lost
the understanding of a man? thus to compare and call this the Apostles oath
when he takes God to witness that he prays for the Saints continually; and his
saying in Romans 9 1. I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also
bearing me witness in the holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness, and
continual sorrow in my heart etc, and Gal. 1.20. where the Apos^le says. Now
the things that I write unto you, behold before God I lie not, is this an oath
to testify the truth of his writings against lies? indeed this we desire that
John Tombs and the rest of the Priests in this Nation would write nothing but
what God would witness unto the truth of, and that they would speak truth
before God and not lie; then they would not thus abuse the Apostles words, and
plead for swearing from them, when as the Apostles intend no such thing in
their words here asserted: and whereas it is again said that the Apostle took
and oath. Ph^l. 1.8. where he says for God is my record how greatly I long
after you in the bowels of Jesus Christ. Now let all honest and sober-hearted
men consider whether the truth of God and the Apostles that speak it forth be
not abused, that from a novice that is lifted up in pride, and that would do or
say any thing for his hire, he should bring those Scripture to plead for
swearing and that lawfulness of oaths, in all which the Apostle took God to
witness his love to the Saints and labor in the work of his ministry,
signifying to all that understand how that he spoke the truth and did not lie,
and kept to his yea and nay according to Christ's doctrine (and did not swear at
all.)

Now further to prove swearing Lawful, John Tombs brings

This fifth argument.
That which has a necessary use for the benefit of humane society is not
unlawful; but some swearing has a necessary use for the benefit of humane
society; ergo.

Answ This argument is thus disproved, and both the major and minor, to be
false.

For to break any command of Christ is of no necessary use for humane society;
but to swear any oath is to break his command; ergo. For Godlines^ is
profitable unto all men, in all their societies; bat he that swears goes from
Godlin^sse into ungodliness and trangression, which trangression is of no use
nor service amongst Christians; so that John Tombs might as well have thus
stated his Argument, that to break Christ's command is of benefit to humane
society, therefore to break Christ's command is lawful etc. and might thus have
proved it, that exc^pt we break Christ's command, we cannot preach for hire nor
sue men at the Law for tithes, nor live in pride, ease, and vanity, nor keep
our places of profit, and benefit, which is necessary for our society (of
Priests) ergo.

But we whose eyes God has opened, do see that all his book tends to the
persuading of people to swear, when Christ has said Swear not at all, and that
which he now would swear for, again; he would svvear against for the same
advantage and profit which he has in his eye; yea or he would persuade all
men not to svvear and bring Scripture to prove it upon the same account, so
that what he does in this kind is because of advantage: for two years since
he did not preach this doctrine nor write those arguments.

Now it being proved that the followers of Christ, and believers in him are
not to svvear at all, then all those promissory oaths upon which John Tombs
has grounded his other propositions, is not to be taken: But again to prove an
oath of supremacy to King Caesar, he brings the example and rule of Christ, and
argues thus, If the Lord Christ in the days of his flesh did ackovvledge Caesar
as supreme Governor in his dominions, and did subject himself to his
jurisdiction in answering before the Roman Deputy, and was obedient to his
parents real or supposed; then all Christians even the highest Ecclesiastical
Prelate should be subject to the King as supreme Governor in his Dominions; and
for proof of this he brings Mat. 22 21. when the Pharisees shevved sus the
Tribute money, Christ bid them Give unto Caesar that which was Cesars, and
unto God the things that are Gods; so then it was the tribute money that was
due to Caesar: but does this prove that Christ did swear, or was any example of
swearing to Caesar, or account C^sar the head of the Church and Ruler in
Ecclesiastical things? so that this Scripture proves the contrary then for that
which thou brings it; for those Pharisees that brought the money to Christ,
said they knew that be respected no man's person, but taught the way of God in
Truth; so then if Christ be our example and rule in this, then to the supreme
King or Kings we must not respect their persons, but give them their due, which
is that tribute which has their own superscription upon it; and we must teach
the way of God in Truth, and give unto God the things which are Gods, which is
all honor, glory, and rule in spiritual matters, and give to Christ alone the
pr^heminence, which is head of his body which is his Church, and we must not
swear at all, neither for nor against any man; for Christ did not swear neither
for nor against Caesar, and we must live peaceably with all men, nor envy nor
fight for nor against any man; and this is quite contrary to what Jo. Tombs
would persuade people, or to what he understands from the Scripture, which
would make people believe that Christ was an example of the oath of supremacy
to Caesar, so that people may well be blind and ignorant who has such Teachers.

But we also shall follow the example of Christ, as 1. Tim. 6; 13. who did
witness a good confession before Po^tius Pilate; and this is a good confession
before any King or Ru^er now to say that we have obeyed the Truth from our
heart, and have not broken the Commands of Christ by swearing for, or against
any; neither have we transgrest the example of Christ in respecting any man's
person, neither do we in our hearts envy any man, King, Ruler, or people, but
has love even to our enemies, and can do good to them that hate us, and can
pray for them that persecute us, and do desire and daily labor that all men
might come to the knowledge of the Truth, that they might be saved. And this
good Confession we can witness before the King, or any in Authority, and say
that God is our witness, and our Conscience also bears us witness in the
sight of God, as the Apostle did, and we can say also that we speak the Truth
before God, and lie not; for our eyes is not blinded with gifts and rewards,
neither have we taken Oath, Covenants, nor Protestations for Parties, Powers,
or Religions, but since we knew the way of Christ, we have walked in it, and
kept to his Commandment and Oath, which is yea and nay in all things, and so
have not entered in condemnation with those that are given to change; but the
unchangeable Priest, the unchangeable Covenant, and unchangeable Law has been
our Rule, and of this we need not be ashamed, but in Gods power and Authority
can we hold up our heads, when others do bow down their backs always
(crouching under every power and change of Government) as David's enemies did,
Psalm. 69.23. for that is their place and condition, as the Apostle does
witness, Romans 11.10

Again Jo. Tombs says, that Paul a Saint was subject to the judgment of Caesar
and appealed to him; then he acknowledged him supreme, etc, ergo.

Answ. Paul was a Prisoner for the word of God and testimony of Jesus, and
appealed to Caesar for justice, because he was unjustly accused, and had not
done any thing worthy of bonds or of death; therefore according to their Law he
ought to be set free; but Paul did not call Caesar the supreme head of the
Church, and chief Ruler in Ecclesiastical things; for if Caesar had been the
supreme head of the Church of which Paul was a member, he would have needed but
little appealing unto for setting of him at liberty; but in such Arguments as
Tombs has used, is manifest the ignorance of foolish men, wherein their folly
appears to all men, as the Scripture says, 2 Timothy 3.9.

And whereas thou say that there is holy and harmless Christians, and many
upright souls whose Consciences are very tender, and many godly persons that
have excepted against that Oath, and the lawfulness of taking of it, as fearing
it may take away the liberty of their Consciences, which is dearer to them then
their lives?

Ans. These that are so, are in a better condition then thy self, and to such
thy ministry if received, would beget them from their holy and harmless
state, into trangression of Christ's command, and from the tenderness of
Conscience into hardness of heart; and now to answer their objections thou
tells them that it was imposed for excluding of the Popes jurisdiction, etc. if
so, why doft thou preach it up to be imposed upon the holy, harmless, godly
Christians, who are redeemed from the Popes power and jurisdiction, and is come
into the doctrine of Christ and into the life of Christ, which is out of all
such Oaths.

Thou art a miserable Comforter to tender Consciences; but thy end is seen, and
therefore thou can not deceive many; but for those that thou have before
mentioned, who are holy, harmless upright, and godly, which are tender of an
Oath; they ought to be thy Teachers, who thy self art far from righteousness or
tenderness of Conscience; therefore for thee it is a shame to be an imposer of
Oaths upon tender Consciences, who professest thy self a Minister of Christ,
who did forbid all swearing; and his Ministers did preach against it, and said,
Above all things swear not at all, lest they fall into condemnatien, and not
into the obedience to Christ's command; therefore they that fear God, will turn
away from such. 2 Timothy 3.5.

Now says John Tombs, the grand objection against swearing is our Savior
words, Mat. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. and Jam. 5.12. which words (says he) does seem
expressly and fully to forbid any swearing at all, excluding some sorts of Oaths
by name, and the rest by general terms, that our communication should be yea,
yea, nay, nay, and what is more, comes of evil, or of the evil one; yet says
he, We must of necessity find out a limitation of the speeches, as we do; and
the limitation is this, that is, frequent, vain, light, profane, unnecessary,
customary, passionate swearing, or in secular matters of no importance, in
these Scriptures are forbidden.

Ans. Indeed it does plainly app^ar that thou must of necessity either disprove
Chris^'s words, or else deny thy own, seeing they are contrary the one to the
other; so therefore thou say that it was those oaths abovementioned that was
forbidden by Christ and the Apostles. And I shall show it plainly that thou
have no necessity to limit Christ's words to vain and profane swearing, (but
only that thou would have thy words true, and his false) for Christ's words in
Mat. 5. does not intend such Oaths; for he speaks of the true Oaths which was
used among the Jews, and such Oaths as Christ told them they were to perform;
for it was not said in old time, that they should perform vain, light,
profane, unnecessary, customary and passionate oaths, but such as they were to
perform betwixt the Lord and them, and the solemn vows and covenants which they
made in old time to their Kings, and one unto another, the Christians now by
the command of Christ was not to swear these Oaths, neither any Oath true nor
false; so that Christ is not to be limited to intend vain Oaths; when as for
instance, Christ mentions the Jews swearing, who was in the Commandment, who
did deny all vain, customary, false, and passionate swearing; so that Jo.
Tomb's limitation is taken away, and Christ's meaning must be as large as his
words, which is not to swear at all by any Oath, but to keep to yea and nay in
all promises, professions and engagements upon all occasions, and so to keep
out of the condemnation, whereby all peoples consciences may be kept clean to
the Lord in all things, and they brought to the exercise of a good Conscience;
for the Lord is now teaching his people himself, and bringing them to obey the
doctrine of his Son, in which they may find peace for their souls, and not to
be in bondage unto such Teachers as are given to change with every Government,
who preach as the false Prophets did, for handfuls of barley, and pieces of
bread, and such are they who preach the lawfulness of swearing (or sinning)
against Christ's command; but the Lord has made them manifest, and is redeeming
his Elect and Chosen from amongst such who have made a prey upon people, and
fed upon their sins, but not upon the life which the Saints was in.

An Answer to a Book called, A just Defense and vindication of Gospel Ministers
and Gospel Ordinances.
Put forth by J. G. in which he pr^tends an Answ^rs to E. B's. Trya^ of the
Ministers, and other things against the Quakers.
But on the contrary has manifested, that he is altogether ignorant of the
Gospel Ministry and Ordinances, as will appear to him to him that reads this
Answer with desire to understand the Truth, and so to receive satisfaction.

And instead of clearing the truth in any particular, he has falsely charged
God, Christ, the Holy Spirit, the Primitive Churches, and the Quakers, with
such thingt of which they were never any of them guilty; as will appear in the
following Testimony.

Given forth from him who desires the edification and satisfaction of all in
things appertaining to the Kingdom of God. R. H.

Psalm. 59. The Workers of iniquity have no knowledge, there is no faithfulness
in their mouth, their inward part is very wickedness, and with their words they
show forth the same.


WHatsoever is written or acted against the Truth, and those that walk in it,
is but a fulfilling of the Scripture of Truth, which says, The way of the
wicked is darkness, and they know not at what they stumble, Prove. 4.19.
although the stumbling-stone be the Light, the Foundation of many generations,
in rejection of which many go about to build, and would be approved; one of
which I shall here mention.

John Gaskin, who would defend and vindicate the Priests, their Preaching,
Practice and Maintenance, though contrary unto Christ, his Apostles, his Light,
and his Words declared in Scripture, as will appear.

And first, That his Testimony may be received, he begins in an appearance of
feigned humility, and begging of Pardon for his sl^ps and impertinencies, and
rudeness of style used against the Quakers, saying, his work is not with
Eloquence nor Humane Arts.

In the examination of which, we do find that he has often slipped, and used
much impertinency of speech, and rudeness of style, and neither Eloquence,
Spirituality, or true Humanity in his Works; many of which being so plainly
seen to all, is accounted not worth printing again: But something here is
mentioned, by which all the other may be compared and judged.

Again, diverse Reasons are alleged as a cause of printing J.G. his defense of
the Priests: First he says, The great malice and envy against the Ministers,
and the many Letters and printed Books sent by Quakers, and the great growth
and increase in Errors; and because many of his old Friends and Acquaintance
are (as he says) seduced from the Church; and to strengthen such as are
wavering through ignerance and weakness, and to clear himself, etc. and that it
might be seen, and come into many hands.

Ans. He that would accomplish those things before-named, to wit, subdue
malice, envy and error, and instruct the ignorant and him that is out of the
way, and strengthen the weak, he must be such a one as is led by the Spirit,
and walks in the Light of Christ, which is so much hated and contemned by
Priests and their defenders, that first those things may be subdued in
themselves, and then minister against them in others; but none of those things
can be done by that spirit which has ruled in J.G. but that his latter reasons
which he says moved him to print, may be fulfilled, that is, that it may be
seen, and come into many hands, and that to thy own shame, when they read and
consider thy unlearned Logic, wherein thou go to prove, that it is not
sufficient to bring us to Heaven, to be freed from sin; for thou say, a Horse
has no sin; and so by thy comparison, a man without sin is but as a Horse; so
that thou have truly said, thy work is without Eloquence or Humane Art: But
seeing thou have taken in hand to put things to public view, in thy next prove
who those men are upon the Earth that are without sin, and are not sufficient
for the Kingdom of Heaven; and whether was it any thing that did separate man
from God, but sin? And was not Christ only made manifest to take away sin? And
is not man perfectly righteous when his sin is taken away, and made the
righteousness of God in him, which takes it away, to wit, the Lamb of God,
which all the Nations of them that are saved, must walk in his Light? and it is
those that hate the Light, and i^ against freedom from sin, that have no
understanding of the mysteries of God, which is like the horse or mule, whose
mouth must be held with bit and bridle, and are like the beast that perish; but
they that are freed from sin, are not so, neither is the horse their
comparison; but herein thou have shamed thy self and thy Ministers, that they
should be so ignorant, as neither to teach thee better doctrine before thou
did write, nor correct thee when thou had written; but to suffer such a
thing to appear in this Nation where Light is broken forth, that the state of
freedom from sin is no better then the state of a horse; but as the Scripture
says, Your folly shall be made manifest unto all men; Which Scripture is daily
fulfilling, and we are satisfied in it.

Again, to vindicate the Priests of England to be Ministers of the gospel, thou
bringst many Scriptures, whereby thou would prove them to be lawfully called,
though they be out of the power of God, and want the power of that which they
teach, p. 7.

As the sons of Eli (thou say) were lawful Priests, though they were wicked
men; and this is a fit comparison, as thou may read in the first of Samuel
2.12. Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial, they knew not the Lord; and so
according to this thou have rightly compared the Priests; for though they have
the name of being called, yet know they the Lord no more then the sons of
Belial, did.

Again in the same page thou say, The Scribes and Pharisees were called to
teach, and Judas was a true Apostle; from which thou would prove the call of
the Priests to be a true call to the ministry.

Answ. If the Priests did minister as truly as the Scribes and Pharisees did,
that is, read or speak the Scriptures truly; then thou might exhort the
people to do as the Priests say, but not to do as they do; but seeing that they
do not truly speak the Scripture, but by consequences pervert it, as thou have
done in thy book, it is not therefore a good doctrine to bid the people either
do as they say, or as they do, because they both say falsely and do falsely. And
as for thy comparing of them to Judas, as for his being called, and receiving
part of the Ministry; that they are not like unto him in, because as yet they
have no part nor lot in that matter; but for his treachery and covetousness,
bearing the bag, and betraying the Lord of Life for pieces of money, in that
they may be compared to him.

But thou say, The wickedness of the person does not disannul his Office,
being lawfully called thereunto; until he be degraded from that Office: And to
prove it, thou bringst several Scriptures, as Ezekiel. 34.3. where the Shepherds
eat the fat, and cloth with the wool, and did not feed the Flock, Isa 56.10,
11. They are dumb dogs, that cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to
slumber, they all look to their own way, every one for his gain from his
Quarter; Come ye, say they, I w^ll fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves with
strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. And
these say thou, were truly called. From which example your Ministers, as thou
thus provest, are lawfully called to the work of the Ministry; but when these
Ministers and people read thy book, they will not much commend thee for such a
defense for them; but how do thou prove that those before mentioned were
lawfully called unto the work of the Ministry, being wicked persons? but when
thou read'st the Scripture over again, thou may see that those are such as
the Lord said did run, and he sent them not; and said the Lord says, when he
had not spoken unto them, Jer. 14.14. Now in this Vindication thou have not
done any thing of that pretended confuting E.B. his Book, called, A jusl and
lawful Trial of the Ministers and Teachers of this age; but have rather
confirmed it; for he truly compared them unto those spoken of beforementioned;
and thou have compared them as to the sons of Eli, which were sons of Belial,
and knew not God; and so his Book yet stands in force (for a trial to such)
unanswered.

And again, as for thy pleading for tithes for such as are like the sons of
Belial, thou have no precept, practice nor example in Scripture to plead for
such a thing, neither as such, nor as the Ministers of Christ. And whereas thou
mention'st Acts 4. and Acts 5. and 1 Cor. 9.4.5, etc.

These Scriptures speak nothing of tithes, nor of any Maintenance to the
Ministry, but only how that when they had planted a Vinyard, they might eat of
the fruit; and when they had gathered a Flock, might eat of the Milk; and when
they had sown spiritual things (amongst a people) they had power to eat, and
power to drink; and so it was ordained that they who preached the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel; but it was not ordained that those who preached the
Gospel, should live by forced maintenance, or by making merchandise of men's
Goods and Estates; of which the Priests in England for which thou writest this
defense, are guilty.

Again, thou go about to defend the Priests sprinkling of Infants, saying,
It is a sign or seal of salvation, page 64.

Ans. If this be true, that all children thus sprinkled with water, have the
seal of salvation by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, and are by this baptism
made partakers of Grace, and united into the Church as Members of the Church,
why do you say both Priests and Professors, that there is no falling from
grace? Have not many been so engrafted into the Church, and received that seal,
whom you now call Heretics and Deceivers? Why do you so confound one principle
with another? For we have been already so engrafted into the visible Church,
and made partakers of that Grace which you say it is impossible to fall from.

And thou bring'st Calvin's words, which says, That although there be but a
little water cast upon our heads, yet notwithstanding it is not a vain figure;
for the Heavens are opened upon us, and God speaks in it, as it were from
Heaven, and Christ is there present with his blood, as Witnesses of the usage
and operation of the Sacrament; and says, Baptism is a token and proof of our
cleansing, or a seal and character whereby God confirms unto us that all our
sins are cancelled and abolished, and that they may never be rehearsed nor
imputed.

So then by this, he that has a little water cast on his head, he hears God
speak in it, and Christ being present with his blood, washes away all sin, and
this is a proof of his cleansing. So why do thou and the Priests speak and
write against us as being fallen from Grace, and departed from the Truth,
seeing we have received as well as you, the seal of the Covenant, and proof of
cl^ansing, and cannnot fa^l from it; if your doctrine be true? But as for
sprinkling Infants, thou have not brought one Scripture to prove it; but say,
Baxter against Tombs has proved it; and quotest Calvin and Beza, as if their
words were plainer proof for thy purpose than any Scripture; for there is no
Scripture (without invented consequences) that is a precept for it; and when
thou have wearied thy self, and can not prove it, thou say, whatsoever may
be proved from the Scripture by consequence, to be the scope and meaning of the
Scripture, is sufficient proof, p. 73.

Again, thou ask us a question, To show thee one command or example in the
Scripture for the baptizing of those that are grown up* whose Parents one or
both were Christians by professing the Gospel of Christ.

Ans. If thou knew the Scriptures, or did weigh thy own words, it would stop
thee from asking such foolish and unlearned Questions; for thou self thy
confessest, that those which were grown up, were baptized, and that they had
also received the holy Ghost before they were baptized; and as for them or
their Parents being called Christians by their profession, many believers were
baptized and followed Christ, before the Name Christian was given to them, as
thou may read Acts 11.26. that after much people was gathered, and so became
Churches, they were first called Christians at Antioch; so whatsoever their
Parents were called by profession, that is nothing to that which thou art about
to prove, (sprinkling of Infants.) But to conclude thy proof for Infants
Baptism, thou quotest Rob. Brook, who (thou say) has read more
Ecclesiastical Histories to find out the rise and beginning of the baptism of
Infants in the Church of Christ, then all the Quakers; and yet he could never
find the beginning of it. So here all this while thou have pleaded for that
which thou know not who was the first Author of; and so thou have run out
thy self into mere ignorance; but that thou may be informed and made wiser
then thy Teachers, and thy learned Readers of Ecclesiastical Histories, I shall
show thee the beginning of that Baptism, and who first invented holy Water: In
the reign of Pope Alexander, was holy Water first invented, Water mixed with
Salt; and by the saying of these words, We bless water mixed with Salt among
the People, that all men sprinkled therewith may be sanctified and purified;
and this we command all Priests to do, as Pliny writes.

And herby thou may know the first Father or Inventer of this your practice,
the Pope, and not the Apostles; so when thou writes again, do not so undervalue
all the Quakers, as thou have done in this thy Book, as to say that they dare
not read Latin Books, nor have read Histories; and thou say we count it a
sin for Ministers to learn Latin; but these are but false aspersions; for we
do not account it sin to learn Latin, Greek or Hebrew; neither are we afraid
to read them; but we do so far read and know them, that we have found out the
Priests deceit, by pretending that of the Tongues which they had not; and
though you preach and practice that which you know not where it had its
beginning, yet we know how deceit came in, and how it has overspread you
with darkness and ignorance; and because you see not, therefore you judge us to
be blind; but the Light of knowledge is arisen, in which we see before the Pope
his holy Water mingled with Salt, or sprinkling Infants was; and see the
beginning and end of those dark inventions; and our Doctrine and Principles
tend to the bringing of people to know a true living Foundation for all their
practices; and that the darkness of Popery and traditions of men may not always
keep people in blindness, to practice the Popes inventions instead of the
Apostles and Christ's Doctrine, who by the bright shining of his Light is
leading people to his baptism, which is by one spirit into one body, by fire
and by the holy Ghost; and such can no longer be kept in that which does not so
much as wash away the filth of the flesh; but comes to the answer of a good
conscience, and witnesses the baptism which saves, as the Apostle Peter
says, 1 Pet. 3.21. and such are come to the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost.

Again, to fill up thy book, thou have charged many false things upon us, and
so findst thy self work, by enlarging thy lies one after another.

As first thou say some of us have affirmed that Christ did never arise from
the grave, and that his body is rotted within the grave, and that some of us
have made a mock of his Doctrine of Justification, by the imputation and the
intercession of Christ.

Answ. These things are thy own, and were never affirmed by any of us; but on
the contrary, that Christ is arisen from the dead, and is become our first
fruits, and by the imputation and intercession are we justified, and of God is
he made unto us Justification and life.

Again thou say, we neither know nor understand what your Ministers preach.

Ans. Yes, we both know and understand that they preach lies in the name of the
Lord, and we know and understand that thou art going about to make a defense
and vindication for them in so doing.

Again thou say the Quakers say, it matters not whether a man do any good
works, seeing they make him not good, page 41.

Ans. This is false, for none of the Quakers ever said so; for our goodness is
of the Lord, and not of works; and because we have received goodness and mercy
from him, therefore do we those things that please him, and are obedient to his
will and commands.

Again, page 43. that we say a man is saved by harkening to the light within
him and obeying the same.

Ans. We never said that by harkening or obeying, that man is saved; but by him
which they are to hear and obey are they saved; and without harkening to his
voice, and obeying of him to whom he is preached, there is no salvation.

Again, page 47. Thou say the Quakers in stead of blessing and praying for
their Enemies, curse them.

Answ. This is false, for we bless, and curse not; but all cursed practices,
words and actions we testify against, and for this cause are we accounted thy
enemies, because we tell thee the truth.

Again, page 48. Thou say instead of abhorring our selves, we justify our
selves.

Answ. This is of the number of the rest, a false accusation; for self is that
which we bear witness against in all, justifying nothing but what God
justifies, and cond^mning nothing but what God condemns.

Again page 49. Thou say the Quakers are so proud to think and say they are
more perfect then the Apostle Paul.

Answ. When did any of the Quakers say, they were more perfect then the
Apostle? but it seems thy tongue is at liberty to make a refuge for the
Priests, and fill a volume of paper with lies.

Again page 51. thou say, that many of the Quakers go up and down naked to
manifest that they are as perfect as Adam was in Innocence.

Answ. Their going naked is as a sign unto thee and the Priests, whom the Lord
is stripping of the sheeps cloat^ing, that all may see your shame and
nakedness, and that which you have been covered with is but as leaves, and a
formal National profession of God, without his life, power, or spirit, and you
must be as naked from this covering, before you be innocent, as ever any Quaker
has been from their clothes.

Again page 56, 57. thou say that we do condemn not only the Churches now in
being, but all that ever have been; the Churches of Asia, Corinth, Galatia, and
Thessalonica, etc.

Ans. This is but an addition to thy former lies, for those Churches we do own,
and all such as do walk in their life, and are guided by their spirit; for the
Church of the Thessalonians was in God, 1 Thessalonians. 1. but thou have appeared to
be of another spirit, and have manifested thy self to be a condemner of those
Churches, as well as of us, as in page 55. thou say in the Church at Corinth
that there was such corrupt members among them, as you can scarce find in the
worst of your Congregations.

So of that which thou falsely chargest us, thou art truly guilty thy self, and
so have condemned those Churches, and justified your selves: But what
corruption was it that was so bad in those Churches, that is not in the worst
of your Congregations?

Again, as a proof for thy condemning your own Churches, thou brings Brightmans
words, saying, Behold whatsoever is first, that is true; and whatsoever is
later, that is false, chapter 3. p. 113. So that hereby, by thy old Author and
Logic, thou have proved all your Churches in England to be false; for the
Churches of Asia, Corinth, Galatia, and Thessalonica, these were the first; but
the Churches in England, Episcopal and Presbytery, these are later, therefore
false.

Again page 60. Thou say, the Quakers say they are so perfect that they
cannot grow in knowledge nor grace.

Answ. The Quaker^ never said so, but on the contrary, we do grow in knowledge
and in grace, whereby we see, and comprehend, how thou and the Priests do grow
in rage, enmity, and false accusations against us; and we know also, that you
must fulfill your measure of iniquity, and that all manner of evil must be
spoken against us falsely, and so we are satisfied, because we suffer not for
evil doing, but for well doing.

Again, p. 61. Thou chargest us not to obey the commands of Christ, but do
teach men to break his commands, twice in one page, and again in the next page.

Answ. All which does but prove and manifest thy unbridled tongue, under which
is the poison of Asps; but if thou, or any other could in meekness or
simplicity prove that we have eith^r broken any of his commands, or taught
others to break them; then we would be convinced, and thou should be counted
a Reprover and Instructor in righteousness; but on the contrary, we see that
bitterness and a lying spirit has possessed thee, and that thou only invents
and imagines false things to fill up thy book, which we were never guilty of,
which never any sober man, that had but the parts of a man, would never lay to
our charge, seeing that both our principles and practices witnesses to the
contrary.

Again, to make thy Volume large, in p. 82. thou bringst the same lies over
again, charging us to say, That we are more fuller of the Spirit then the
Apostles, and of more knowledge, and stronger in faith then the Apostles.

Which affirmation is thy own, and not ours; and therefore is returned back to
be condemned where it did arise.

In p. 83. thou say, the Quakers will have no Order; and p. 84. thou say,
We are wise in our own conceit, and that we think our selves wiser then Christ
or his Apostles, or Churches.

All which is but multiplying lies, and so not worth much speaking unto, but
only that people may see, how thou have run out thy self till thou have no
order over thy tongue nor over thy pen, which have been so long time, as above
half a year, in adding lie unto lie, to make a defense for the Priests; and so
it appears that Truth will not defend them; and thy defense of lies will not
long defend them; for God will sweep away the refuge of lies; and he that
loves and tells a lie (as thou have done) has no part in the Kingdom of God.

In page 94. thou accusest Sarah Blackborow as concerning a woman speaking in
the Church, as if she had said that the flesh was the woman; from which thou
concludest, that then the flesh must be married to Christ, and so would make
up absurdities from thy own words.

Answ. This is thy ordinary way of proving Error; first to affirm a lie of thy
own making, charging it upon another, and then draw a conclusion, answering
this lie: but Sarah Blackborow nor any other of the Quakers have ever said that
the flesh was the woman: but that which Sarah Blackborow said, was, that the
flesh was to be silent; and that which spoke in thee was that which was silly,
and was ever learning; but when any does pray or prophecy, whether man or
woman, and speak forth that which God has made manifest; that is the spirit of
the Father in both, and is not to be quenched; for there is neither male nor
female, but all is one in Christ and in the Spirit, from which preaching and
prophesying proceeds; and the promise is that daughters as well as sons shall
prophecy: and in the Church at Corinth they might all prophecy one by one,
that all might hear, and all might be edified; but thou say, those women that
did prophecy, it was not in the Church; where then did they prophecy, if not
in the Church? or what was the Church? for it is written, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. that
the Church is in God. And where must a woman be when she prays or prophesies,
if not in the Church which is in God? And where was it that Philips four
daughters prophesied, whether in the Church or out of it? and where was it that
Priscilla did minister, whether in the Church or out of it? and Pheba a servant
of the Church, whether she might not pray nor prophecy in it? and Priscilla,
who was a helper of Paul in Christ, and labored with him in the Gospel, Romans
16. might not pray or prophecy in the Church?

But now to speak the truth in plainness to thee, that which thou cavell'st
against, it is not the woman nor the man, simply considered, but it is the
Spirit speaking in either, which thou can not bear; for where the Spirit of
the Father speaks in man or woman, thou setst thy self against it to oppose it.

And thou say Susan Bond said, Christ was the husband, and of him they were
to ^e taught; and thou say, Sarah Blackborow did like the answer well.

Answ. Who could like it ill? was not that a good answer? And thou thy self
must own Christ to be thy Teacher, and learn of him before ever God will make
use of thee in his service or work, though the Priests may make use of thee for
their defender.

Again page 99. thou say, we deny that any should either rule in the Church,
or have any honor.

Answ. No, We do not deny the Head of the Church, which is Christ, to rule and
to have all the honor; but we deny any Priest to bear rule by his means, or to
receive the honor due unto Christ; for we see they are such as seek honor of
one another, and not the honor which belongs to God only.

Now whereas-thou goes about to vindicate that wicked men may sing Psalms, and
to prove it makes this argument, If any be merry, let him sing Psalms; now
wicked men are merry as well as godly, though they have no true cause, Ergo,
page 87

Ans. This Logic does but prove thy own ignorance and darkness, and not the
thing intended by thee, as we shall show; but first to answer thee with thy own
contradiction; Do thou not say in the next words before this argument, that
the chief ground (or cause) is the moral duty lying upon all men by the
commandment of God? now if wicked men do sing Psalms by the commandment of God,
do they do it without a true cause? Is not the commandment of God a true cause
of any action to them which are commanded by him? But in this thou art but
building again that which thou have destroyed, and so mak^^ thy self a
transgressour, and so let thy own confusion correct thee. In the same page thou
say, Thou will make good what thou have written by Scripture; Come then, here
we shall try thee; Where in the Scripture do thou prove that wicked men may
be merry and sing Psalms, though they have no true cause? but on the contrary
have thou not read in the Scriptures, Ps. 69. that David was the song of the
Drunkards? and if drunkards now in Taverns and Alehouses say and sing, I am not
puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye; and say, that as a weaned child they have
behaved themselves; by thy argument, if they be never so wicked, yet because
they are merry in their wickedness, they may sing lies in the name of the Lord;
and by thy argument be Justified as men doing only that which God had
commanded them. And again thou may read in Scripture Joel. 1, ^5. that such
wicked men and drunkards were called to weep and howl; for their misery was
coming upon them; so the Prophet did not call them to sing David's Psalms,
because they were merry in their wickedn^sse as thou have done; and again thou
may read Amos 8.3. That the Songs of the Temple shall be turned into howling;
and these wicked men in the Temple were merry, and by argument might sing
P^alms or spiritual Songs; but the Prophet says instead of singing they must
howl, and come to bitter lamentation, and praise is not comely in the mouth of
Fools, as the wise man says who is taught of God, but the mouth of a Fool
pours forth his folly, and the instruction of Fools is folly, Pro. 16.22. And
this Scripture we see fulfilled in thee, for thy instructing of Fools and
wicked men, because they are merry in their wickedness, they may sing Psalms
as a Command from God, and herein I have answered a fool according to his
folly, least he should be wise in his own conceit; and although David calls
all Gods host, and all living things made and created to praise the Lord, the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Heavens, and the Waters, the Earth, the Dragons, and
the Deeps, Fire, Hail, Snow, and Vapor, Storms and Wind fulfilling his word,
Mountains and Hills, and fruitful Trees, all beasts, Cattle, Creeping things,
and flying Fowls, Kings of the Earth, and all People, etc. And now as David
wa^ in the Covenant, he saw the Creatures as they stood in their Covenant,
uncorrupted; and so in a fit capacity to praise the Lord, only man degenerated
and unrestored again into the Covenant, he saw it was not comely for him to
praise, nor to pray, nor to take Gods word in his mouth, nor to speak of his
Statutes; so far from Justifying thy Argument, that wicked men because they are
merry, therefore may sing Psalms: but when the Priests or people takes notice
of thy book, and what Logic thou have learned to justify the wicked in their
singing, as well as the godly, and how thou have shamed both thy self and them
with such foolish confusion, and University Logic, its like they will set thee
no more a work, to defend and vindicate them with such weapons.

Again page. 89. thou say, that it is said by the Prophet Prove. 21.4, that
the ploughing of the Ploughman is sin.

Answ. Here thou kast belyed the Prophet, and perverted his words a^ thou have
done the Quakers: for the Prophets words is an high look, and a proud heart,
and the ploughing of the wicked is sin, but he does not say that the ploughing
of the Ploughman is sin; But who can escape the envy of sl^ndrous tongues,
which accounts lying no sin, if thereby they can accomplish their own wicked
end? but the truth has found thee out and made thee manifest* and the Priests
had better wanted thy defense, then to be so shamed by it, as they will be
unless they deny both thee and it.

Again, in the same page thou say, to hear, read, pray, sing Psalms and
giving of thanks, they are works morally good being Commanded by the Lord: but
the person doing them, being not justified, they are not good to him: for
whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

Answ. This is another piece of confusion, and charging of God foolishly and
fasly, to say that the Lord commands those things to be done* and those he
commands to do them, in doing of which it is not good to them but sin. Where
have thou learned? or where do thou read of such a doctrine, that wicked men
are commanded of God, to do such things, which in doing is not good to them but
sin? Is God or Christ then the Minister of sin, or commands a man to commit
sin? Is not this Blasphemy and Error in the highest degree? And how dare thou
speak of God, or of his Commands, or of his obedience, seeing thou thus
Blasphems him in his Worship? but this shall remain as a Testimony against
thee; many other lies and abominations have thou spoken against us, and against
God and his Truth; a few of which is sufficient to make thee manifest.

In page (107.) thou say, our Quaking fits many are of opinion that they are
diobolical, by a kind of witchcraft, and say, thou have heard strange
relations of Enchanted Ribbans and giveing drink after, etc.

Answ. Upon the same account many was of opinion, that Christ had a Devil and
was a Deceiv^r, and that the Apostles were Ringleaders of Sects, and Heresies,
and such strange relations might have been heard concerning the Apostles in
their days; and it seems to thee, that such reports is sufficient proof; but
this is contrary, to what thou have said in an other place, that thou would
speak nothing but according to what was written in the Scriptures; And whereas
thou tells of Enchanted Ribbans; Is there some Ribbans that are enchanted? it
may be thou meanest enchanting Ribbans; but if so, where did thou ever know
such a thing? and for proof, thou names Gilpin and Toldervyes books, which
neither of them does relate such a thing; so that it is thy enmity and
wickedness; for there was never any such thing among the Quakers, as giving
Ribbans and drink after; but that charge thou might have laid upon the
Priests and their Defenders, for there are the most ribbans used, and
justified, till in pride they are become the Servants of the Devil, and there
is the giving of drink one to another until they be enflamed, and made
unsensible of God and of his fear, by which they are enchanted, and bewitched,
that they do not obey the Gospel, but are given up to their own hearts Lusts,
and thereby are become the Servants of sin and so free from righteousness.

Lastly, not only we have been falsely accused in these and many other things
by thee; but even the spirit of God, which is the Fountain of cleanness, is by
thee charged and accused to be corrupt, and defiled page 33. by passing through
man's corrupt nature (thou said) it becomes defiled.

Answ. Is not this a sin against the holy Ghost which shall never be forgiven,
to charge the spirit to be corrupt and defiled? And in this thou also chargest
both the Father and the Son to be corrupt and defiled, for they are one; so
that if one of them be corrupt, the other is corrupt also; and as the spirit is
in the Saints, so is the Father in them, and the Son the hope of their glory,
and none of them are defiled by man's corrupt nature. But there is that in man,
by which that which corrupts his nature is wrought out, so that man is made
clean and undefiled by the spirit, and that spirit is not made corrupt and
defiled by Man; for that is contrary to the Scriptu^e, to say, that by man's
nature the spirit is defiled; but to say, that by the spirit man's nature is
cleansed, and sanctified, this is according to the Scripture: but it is the work
of Satan and his Messengers to Blasphem God in his Temple, and so account his
spirit (by which he leads into all truth) an unholy thing; and so thou art of
the number of them which account the blood and spirit of the Covenant an unholy
thing; and we seeing and knowing these things, as concerning our selves we are
satisfied, because the Servant is not above his Master; for if the Master be
called Beelzebub, and the spirit a defiled or corrupt thing, well may we be
called Deceivers, (although we be true) and falsely accused with all manner of
evil, according to our Masters words, and these things we should bear in
patience and silence, as to our selves, but as in respect unto others we are
constrained, by the uncorrupted and undefiled Spirit of the Lords, to testify
to the world, that their deeds are evil, and to manifest the workings of Satan
in the Mystery of Iniquity, which now already works in many, justifying the
wicked, and condemning the just, which is abomination to the Lord, which his
Spirit will not bear unreproved; and not only the just men are condemned and
falsely accused, but also the just, undefiled, eternal and unerring Spirit is
accused by him, who makes a defense for the Priests in their unrighteous
practices and Wages; so by the plain evidence and demonstration of Truth, he
being made manifest to be an Enemy to God, and by his wicked Works and Words I
do judge him not worthy of much more answer to his Book; and also I do judge
him not able to prove any of the false accusations charged in it against us,
some of which is herein returned unto him again; which when he does but
really weigh it, and consider, it may be he will sit down in silence, and wait,
if there may be hope of his forgiveness for this (not only ignorance, but)
wilfulness, charging us, the Spirit of God, and his people, with that of
which they were never guilty; for we are in the Truth, unto which every
tongue shall confess, and by which every Opposer shall become silent before
the Lord; and in the Spirit of this Truth do we desire not the destruction,
but the repentance and forgiveness of our Enemies: And those that do abuse us
and wrong us ignorantly, their sins vvil be sooner blotted out, than those who
wilfully have set their hearts and tongues to work wickedness; for they shall
receive the greater condemnation.

The k^^^^edge and life of Truth, is that we desire all people may com^ ^^to,
that by it the power of the wicked one may be taken away, which so
furiously works in the hearts of those which receive not the Truth in the
love of it, but bring forth floods of enmity and bitterness against the Lambs
of Christ; but the love of God which thinks no evil, neither does any unto
another, is that which when it is felt and obeyed in all, will dry up those
floods from off the face of the earth, that there may be a place of rest for
the redeemed and elect Seed, who only has the Lord and his Light for their
Habitation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, for their
Armor and Defense.

Something that lately passed in discourse between the King and R. H.
Published to prevent the mistakes and errors in a Copy lately printed contrary
to the knowledge or intention of the party concerned; and not only so, but
also misprinted and abus^d in several particulars; therefore it was thought
convenient for the removing of errors and mistakes, to be reprinted in a more
true fo^m and ord^r for the satisfaction of others.

R. H. SInce the Lord has called us, and gathered us to be a people, to walk
in his fear, and in his truth, we have always suffered and been persecuted by
the Powers that have ruled, and been made a prey of for departing from
iniquity; and when the breach of no just Law could be charged against us, then
they made Laws of purpose to ensnare us; and so our sufferings were unjustly
continued.


King. It is true, those that have ruled over you, have been cruel, and have
professed much which they have not done.


R. H. And likewise the same sufferings do now abound in more cruelty against
us in many parts of this Nation; as for instance, one at Thetford in Norfolk,
where Henry Fell (ministering unto the people) was taken out of the Meeting
(...) whipped, and sent out of the Town from Parish to Parish, ^^^ards
Lancashire; and the chief ground of his Accusation in his Pass (which was shown
to the King) was, because he denied to take the Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy; and so because that for Conscience Sake we cannot swear, but have
learned obedience to the Doctrine of Christ, which says, Swear not at all;
hereby an occasion is taken against us to persecute us; and it is well known
that we have not sworn for any, nor against any, but have kept to the truth,
and our yea has been yea, and our nay nay, in all things, which is more then
the Oath of those that are out of the truth.


King. But why can you not swear? for an oath is a common thing amongst men to
any engagement.


R.H. Yes, it is manifest, and we have seen it by experience; and it is so
common amongst men to swear and engage either for or against things, that there
is no regard taken to them, nor fear of an Oath; that therefore which we speak
of in the truth of our hearts, is more than what they swear.


King. But can you not promise as before the Lord (which is the substance of
the Oath?)


R. H. Yes, what we do affirm, we can promise before the Lord, and take him to
our Witness in it; but our so promising has not been accepted, but the
ceremony of an oath they have stood for, without which all other things were
accounted of no effect.


King. But how may we know from your words, that you will. perform?


R. H. By proving of us; for they that swear are not known to be faithful, but
by proving of them; and so we by those that have tried us, are found to be
truer in our promises, than others by their Oaths; and to those that do yet
prove us, we shall appear the same.


King. Pray what is your Principle?


R. H. Our Principle is this, That Jesus Christ is the true Light which
enlighteneth every one that comes into the world, that all men through him
might believe; and that they were to obey and follow this Light as they have
received it, whereby they may be led unto God, and unto righteousness and the
knowledge of the truth, that they may be saved.


King. This do all Christians confess to be truth; and he is not a Christian
that will deny it.


R. H. But many have denied it both in words and writings, and opposed us in
it; and above an hundred Books are put forth in opposition unto this Principle.

That some of the Lords standing by the King, said, that none would deny that
every one is enlightened.


Lord. And one of the Lords asked how long we had been called Quakers, or did
we own that Name?


R. H. That Name was given to us in scorn and derision about twelve years
since; but there was some that lived in this truth before we had that Name
given unto us.


King. How long is it since you owned this Judgment and Way?


R. H. It is near twelve years since I owned this Truth according to the
manifestation of it.


King. Do you own the Sacrament?


R. H. As for the Word Sacrament, I do not read of it in the Scripture; but as
for the body and blood of Christ I own, and that there is no remission without
blood.


King. Well that is it. But do you noc believe that every one is commanded to
receive it?


R. H. This we do believe, That according as it is written in the Scripture
that Christ at his last Supper took Bread and brake it, and gave to his
Disciples, and also took the Cup and blessed it, and said unto them, And as
often as ye do this, (that is, as often as they brake bread) you show forth the
Lords death till he come; and this we believe they did; and they eat their
bread in singleness of heart from house to house; and Christ did come again to
them according to his promise; after which they said, We being many, are one
bread, for we are all partakers of this one bread.


Kings Friend. Then one of the Kings Friends said, It is true; for as many
grains make one bread, so they being many members, were one body.

Another of them said, If they be the bread, then they must be broken.


R.H. There is difference between that Bread which he brake at his last Supper,
wherein they were to show forth, as in a sign, his death until he came; and
this whereof they speak, they being many, are one bread; for herein they were
come more into the substance, and to speak more mystically, as they knevv it in
the Spirit.


Kings Friends. Then they said, It is truth, and he had spoken nothing but
truth.


King. How know you that you are Inspired by the Lord?


R. H. According as we read in the Scriptures, That the inspiration of the
Almighty gives understanding; so by its inspiration is an understanding given
us of the things of God.


Lord. Then one of the Lords said, How do you know that you are led by the true
Spirit?


R. H. This we know, because the Spirit of truth it reproves the world of Sin,
and by it we were reproved of sin, and also are led from sin unto
righteousness, and obedience of truth, by which effects we know it is the
true Spirit; for the spirit of the wicked one does not lead into such things.


King and Lords. Then the King and his Lords said, It was truth.


King. Well, of this you may be assured, That you shall none of you suffer for
your Opinions or Religion, so long as you live peaceably, and you have the Word
of a King for it; and I have also given forth a Declaration to the same
purpose, that none shall wrong you nor abuse you.


King. How do you own Magistrates or Magistracy?


R. H. Thus we do own Magistrates: Whosoever is set up by God, whether King
as Supreme, or any set in Authority by him, who are for the punishment of evil
doers, and the praise of them that do well; such we shall submit unto, and
assist in righteous and civil things, both by body and Estate: And if any
Magistrates do that which is unrighteous, we must declare against it, only
submit under it by a patient suffering, and not rebel against any by
insurrections, plots and contrivances.


King. Then the King said, That is enough.


Lord. Then one of the Lords asked, Why do you meet together, seeing every ^ne
of you have the Church in your selves?


R. H. According as it is written in the Scriptures, the Church is in God,
These. 1.1. And they that feared the Lord, did meet often together in the fear
of the Lord; and to us it is profitable, and herein we are edified and
strengthened in the life of truth.


King. How did you first come to believe the Scriptures were truth?


R. H. I have believed the Scriptures from a child to be a Declaration of
truth, when I had but a literal knowledge, natural education and tradition; but
now I know the Scriptures to be true by the manifestation and operation of the
Spirit of God fulfilling them in me.


King. In what manner do you meet, and what is yt order in your meetings?


R. H. We do meet in the same order as the people of God did, waiting upon him:
and if any have a word of exhortation from the Lord, he may speak it; or if any
have a word of reproof or admonition, and as every one has received the gift;
so they may minister one unto another, and may be edified one by another,
whereby a growth into the knowledge of the truth is administered to one another.

One of the Lords. Then you know not so much as you may know, but there is a
growth then to be admitted of.


R. H. Yes, we do grow daily into the knowledge of the truth, in our
exercise and obedience to it.


King. Are any of your Friends gone to Rome?


R. H. Yes, there is one in Prison in Rome.


King. Why did you send him thither?


R. H. We did not send him thither, but he found something upon his Spirit from
the Lord, whereby he was called to go to declare against Superstition and
Idolatry, which is contrary to the Will of God.

Kings Friend said, There were two of them at Rome, but one was dead.


King. Have any of your Friends been with the Great Turk?


R. H. Some of our Friends have been in that Country.


Other things were spoken concerning the liberty of the servants of the Lord,
which were called of him into his service, that to them there was no
limitation to Parishes or places, but as the Lord did guide them in his Work
and Service by his Spirit.

So the King promised that we should not any ways suffer for our Opinion or
Religion; and so in love passed away.

R. H. His Answer to John Horn.
J. H. IN thy Answer to my Queries, thou seem to be resolved to say
something, although it be absolutely contrary to the truth, and to that which
thou know to be Truth, as will appear in what follows.

In answer to my first, thou say, Christ in his Spirit ascended up to
Heaven, when his Body was upon Earth: Is this an answer to the Question? Is the
mind or Spirit called the Son of man, according to John 3.13. which came down
from Heaven? And no man does ascend up to Heaven, but the Son of man which was
then in Heaven. So by this thy Answer it appears then, that the Spirit is the
Son of man, and that there is no other Son of man that ascends into Heaven, but
the Spirit; then what becomes of that body thou speaks of, if the Spirit only
be that Son of man?

In thy Answer to the second and third Queries, thou provest in thy way, that
Mary did that which was forbidden by Christ, when she held him by the feet, and
worshipped him; but in Mat. 28.9. there is no forbidding of her to touch him;
but this is plainly manifest, that thou art in a snare, and cannot tell how to
get out; and yet thou will be saying something, though thereby thou more
ensnares thy self; but this Scripture thou will once know fulfilled, The Wicked
shall be silent in darkness.

When thou should answer to the fourth, thou tellest of its being a secret,
and of prying into things above what is written; although the ground of my
Query is grounded upon that which is written in Luke 24.4.

To the fifth thou say, That the Women did distinguish which was Christ, was
certain; but how they did so, is a foolish, curious Question: What certainty
is there that they did know, when thou know not how? but this is like
the rest of the Priests doctrine, beating the air, and leaving all people in
uncertainties, and yet would be paid for so doing; but the Lord has made thee
manifest with the rest, that you cannot deceive much longer.

To the sixth thou say, the two Angels were seen visibly, but were not
Bodies nor Persons of men; but in thy answer to the fourth, say, that they
both saw them as men and heard them speak, and had two individual Forms: Now if
thou were but simple, and not wilfully blind, thou might be the more excused.

In thy answer to the seventh, thou art more lost and confused then in all the
rest; for when thou should answer who were the eleven Disciples that were met
together, mentioned Luk 24.33. thou say that Thomas might occasionally be
gone out.

Ans. If he was gone out, then the eleven was not together, as Luke 24. Again
thou say, that Matthias was chosen before the Evangelist wrote his Book: What
darkness and ignorance is this! Thou art not questioned when the Book was
written, nor when Matthias was chosen, but who was the eleven that was
together? and whether was Matthias one of the eleven, seeing he was not then
chosen when Christ did arise from the dead? But there needs not much be said to
thee, only to let thee see thy own folly, lest thou should say thou art wise.

To the eighth thou seem to affirm, that the Scriptures are to be taken as
they speak, and not otherwise a Mystery.

Ans. Then why do thou and the Priests give meanings to the Scriptures, and
do not let people take them as they speak, but makes them such a Mystery
without your meanings, and so plain with them? but this is thy practice and
doctrine to condemn thy self in the thing that thou allowest, and builds again
that which thou have destroyed, and so makes thy self a transgressor.

Lastly, In thy conclusion thou falsely chargest me, That I do not believe that
any of these things mentioned in these Scriptures, be really done. Which is not
my Faith; for I do believe that those things mentioned, were really done and
fulfilled, as the Scripture speaks; but it is no new thing with thee to accuse
falsely, and to make lies thy refuge; but what in all those things thou have
done against me, I do forgive thee, and do vvarn thee for the time to come,
that thou go not on to commit the unpardonable sin against God and his Spirit,
never to be forgiven.

Again in thy last paper thou declarest thy ignorance of the two Seeds, and
ask, what be those two seeds?

Answ. These two the Scripture speaks of, the seed of the Woman, and the seed
of the Serpent.

2 Who did or does sow them seeds?

Answ. God does sow the one, and the wicked one the other.

3 Where be they sown?

Answ. In man.

4 When be they sown?

Answ. When man had a being, and a body to receive them.

5 What be the bodies they shall rise with?

Answ. Their own bodies according to their own natures, the one pure, and the
other defiled.

6 Whether be these two seeds, and two bodies in all the world, or two seeds in
every man, and the two bodies to or in every man?

Ans. The seeds are but two in the whole world, having each seed its own body,
and in every one, until the one be cast out.

7 When shall those seeds arise, or be raised, whether after the bodily death,
or after the spiritual death?

Ans. Every one in its own order, after the death of that which is born of the
flesh, and also after the death of the spiritual wickedness, which is yet alive
in all hirelings and deceivers (such as thou art) where the seed of God is yet
in its grave.

8 What are the graves these are in, and out of which they shall arise?

These of which the Scripture speaks, which when thou come to understand it,
thou will understand both the seeds and graves of which we speak; Christ the
seed made his grave in the wicked, and in the rich in his death, and out of
that grave shall rise with his body into everlasting life; if thou can
receive it thou may be satisfied.

And as to the 9. Query, Why I say, that the one shall rise unto everlasting
life, and the other unto condemnation?

Ans. Because it is so, therefore I say so, and if thou say to the contrary
make it manifest; but in this as in other things thy folly and ignorance is
manifest, to ask why I speak the truth which thou thy self dare not deny to
be truth.

R. H.

A short Relation of the twelve changes of Government that has been in England
within these 8 years, under all of which we have suffered Persecution.
SInce by the Lord we were called, chosen, and separated to be his people, and
had unto us committed the word of Reconciliation, and since his eternal power
broke forth and was manifest amongst us, has he done great things in the
Earth; for he has prepared his way, and made it plain before the face of all
people, by the appearance and testimony of his eternal light in their hearts:
which has not only there shined, but is broken forth into a life of
Righteousness in many whom the Lord has accounted worthy to be his servants in
his Work, to raise up a seed unto Jacob, and to gather the dispersed of Israel
and Judah, (both Jews and Gentiles) into the Covenant of Light and Life with
the Father, from whence they are erred by transgression: and for the
accomplishing of this work and service has the Lord furnished us with
spiritual Weapons to war even against spiritual wickedness in high places, 2
Cor. 10.4.5. and against the Rulers of the darkness of this World, Eph^s. 6.12.
which has appeared under many Forms and Governments since the breakings forth
of truth in this Nation. Yea many Heads or Governments has been raised up and
cast down again by one Hand and Power: and have all from the Lord (through his
Servants) had a word of Wisdom and Counsel administered unto them, what they
should do that they might be established: which if they did not, the Lord would
break them to pieces: which word of the Lord was fulfilled upon them all. And
every diverse Head had a Horn in it, to push at the Lambs of Christ withal, and
at every appearance of his Spirit and Power in his people; but for his Elect
sake was their days shortened, and his breakings and destruction came upon them
according to his word spoken to them by his servants at diverse times.

And it is to be observed as the Lords doing and ordering by his mighty power,
that within this eight years, si^ce we have been persecuted and cruelly used
for the Name and Testimony of Jesus, and the Answer of a pure Conscience, there
has been twelve Changes of Government in this Nation, which have all of them
more or less been guilty of our Sufferings, either in acting against us, or in
suffering others to act cruelly, and not endeavoring to restrain them, when
they had power in their hands to do it, and the sufferings laid before them,
who suffered for righteousness sake; so that they could not plead ignorance,
but was left without excuse, which now in the day of their misery and
tribulation some of them do consider it when their time is no more.

I. As first in the time of the long Parliament, in the Year One thousand six
hundred fifty two, although many pretended, some prayed, and some fought for
Liberty of Conscience in matters of Religion, yet at that time were we
imprisoned, beat, and persecuted, for obeying and worshipping our God in Spirit
and Truth, according to his teaching; and at that time the Priests rage begun
to burn like fire: and they run one unto another, and kindled the wrath in one
another against the Truth, even to petition against the spreading of it (and
those that walked in it) as a dangerous thing; and they generally with one
consent called the Truth Heresy, Delusion and Blasphemy: and those that
ministered it abroad they called Ringleaders of Sects, as in the Apostles days
there was the like example.

But these was warned in their day, not to persecute the innocent, nor to
uphold those that preached for filthy lucre, who served not the Lord Jesus
Christ but their own Bellies, But they hearkened not to the Counsel of the Lord,
but shut their ears against his Instructions: therefore was their day taken
from them, and their Power given to another, that they also might be tried.

2 In the year (1653) a Council of State was called, by ( O C.) but they did
nothing to take off the weight of oppression in the Nation, neither in
Spiritual nor Civil things; for Pride and the deceitfulness of Riches entered
into their hearts, that they did not regard nor set themselves wholly to do
that which the Lord did require them although they were warned of God in their
time, yet the Yoke of the oppressor was not taken away, but under it the Nation
groaned and they wrought no deliverance in the earth.

III. Then the Little Parliament sat in the same year, and there was a plant of
Righteousness (tending toward some equity and freedom) springing up in them,
but the strength of deceit and subtilty in others, did quench it before it
brought forth any thing to perfection, and in that time the Priests fierce
persecuting Zeal was so inflamed, that many Petitions from several parts of the
Nation was presented (against the Quakers) to the Parliament, and their
continual clamor, Petitions and Addresses (and they being not regarded and
harkned unto) was one cause of the continuance of the Nations bondage and
oppression, and God never prospered such as received them into their Councils,
or gave heed to their reports, but a Curse and Destruction always followed
them in their undertakeings, whose ear was open unto such things. And in the
time of his Power and Government, was persecution continued about Religion,
though much was pretended to the contrary; they also were warned, and wisely
counseled in their day, and so was left without excuse.

IV. Again in the same year was ( O C.) made Protector who had his day, and
power in his hand to have done good; and to have done that which he and others
pretended; but he joining with the covetous Priests and their Interests; to
make his arm strong, thereby betrayed the Lord and his People into the hands
of, sinners. And instead of removing Persecution, he caused new Acts to be made
to Persecute by, and so brought a Curse upon himself and Family, and
Tribulation upon those that trusted in him: And the Lord did often visit him
with reproofs and instructions, until he hardened his heart against all
reproof, and then was he given up of the Lord, and of his People, to his
appointed end, as an Example to all Hypocrites and Treacherous ones.

V. Again his second Parliament was called, and fat in the year 1654. In their
days was not the Land eased, not freed from its bondage, and when they had let
in the Priests Spirits, and was incensed against the Truth, and intending to
make Laws to Persecute, then were they broken, and their power taken from them,
who in their day was warned, but did not the thing which the Lord required of
them.

VI. Oliver's 3d. Parliament, which consisted of two Houses, sat in the year
1657. they more than any of the rest, did draw back into that which they had
declared against, and they let in the Priests Persecuting Spirit, and made Laws
for Persecution, and many were Imprisoned in the time of their Government,
because for Conscience sake they could not pay Tithes to the Hireling Priests,
and because they could not Swear, contrary to Christ's command, Mat. 5. And they
had many warnings and admonitions from the Lord, which they rejected, and so
the Lord rejected them, as from doing his work.

VII. Then Richard Cromwell in the year 1658. was made Protector, whom the
Priests flockt to as their Rock of defense, that he as their Joshua might lead
them into their promised Land, which was but a Benefice of Tithes or
Augmentation, their prayed for Inheritance, and they told him that the Gospel
was bound up in him, and so did cleave unto him by Flatteries, as they did unto
all the rest before him for their own ends; but the suffering seed of God,
which could not Flatter him; was not set free: who freely declared unto him the
word of the Lord, and instructions from the Almighty before his day was over.

VIII. And again his Parliament sat in the year One thousand six hundred fifty
nine, they continued and did not free the Sufferers, and imprisoned ones, who
suffered only for the worship of their God, and for the exercise of a good
Conscience; but they went on swiftly in the way of their destruction, to impose
Worships upon people, and to decree unrighteous Decrees: and upon that Rock of
Religion they were broken as others had been before them, though they were
exhorted to righteousness, and told of the evil that did come upon them.

IX. The ninth Government was again the Long-Parliament, who came in with great
pretenses and resolutions, and protestations to make this Nation a
Free-Common-wealth, not only in Name but in Nature; And they begun well, and
to call the prisoners up to London who suffered for Conscience sake, and freed
some of them: and many of them intended to take away that great Oppression of
Tithes, whereby much deceit, and many d^ceivers are held up in the Nation: and
then the Priests rage was kindled against them, and they cursed them in their
pulpits, and preached up War against them, and themselves get Horses, Pistols
and Swords to fight for their Tithes and Maintenance: and when they were
routed, then they again petitioned the Parliament, some begging pardon, and
some pleading not-Guilty: and the Parliament was so blind, that upon their
Dissimulation they let in the Priests again; and begun to gratify the Priests,
and establish Tithes, and then the wrath of God broke forth against them, and
their Destruction was prophesied of, and told them that it should shortly come
upon them, as it came to pass: because they would not receive the Lords Counsel
in their day.

X. Then the Army and Committee of Safety (so called) had the Power and
Government in their hands, which they did not improve as they might have done
for the liberty of the Subjects: neither did they receive that counsel from the
Lord which would have opened their understandings how to have ruled for him,
but with corrupt reasonings among themselves perverted one another, and
confounded their own work, reasoning out the good and honest intentions of some
that was amongst them, until they all became as a heap of Confusion, and their
work broken to pieces. A just reward of their own devices, and following the
counsels of their own hearts; neglecting the Advice of that Spirit of
righteousness which should have led and also established them in the work of
the Lord in the Nation: so as unworthy and disobedient were they cast out.

XI. Then again the Long-Parliament had another day of Trial given them into
their hands; but a mad zeal and fury attended them, against the honest and
upright-hearted people; and the Fury of the Oppressor was highly exalted
amongst them, burning like fire, in which they could not contain themselves,
nor possess their own Spirits in quietness; in which fury was folly: the
effects of which did betray and destroy both themselves and others. They being
diverted from their first intentions, and desire after righteousness, a just
recompense of reward for their disobedience came upon them, according to many
true Testimonies from the Lords servants unto them; which if in time their ears
had been open to the Lords instructions, and their hearts inclined to
righteousness, that swift and sudden des^ruction had not so soon come upon
them: but they being blinded with fury in their anger, would neither hear nor
see that which was the effect of their own work, nor the Lords hand of Justice
near come upon them, as now they may consider it.

XII. The Secluded Members then came in as a rod of Gods anger, and of Justice,
or a prey upon them; and it was manifest to the seeing Eye that God had turned
his hand against all those which ha^ abused his Power, and neglected his work,
who had sought and set up themselves ins^ead of the Lord and his righteousness:
and now when the Lords hand is justly stretched forth to wound those that by
him would not be healed, who shall forbid it, until the cause be removed, and
they purged through judgment and suffering?

And now unto you the present power, King and Parliament: be not high-minded,
but fear; be not lifted up, as though by your Arm, Power, and Policy, you had
got a Victory; For it is Righteousness yet which the Lord does require; and if
by his immediate power (without your Sword) he have cut off all those that you
might be grafted in: Consider therefore Gods end in so doing; for it is by that
immediate power of God (which has broken them) that you must stand, (if you do
stand) for God is the same; and will be to you as he has been to others, as
you answer or not answer his requirings: For it is not Persons that God
accepts, but he that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted of him;
therefore as you look to be established by the Lord, do righteousness, equity
and justice to every man, without respect of persons: and according to the
equal and Royal Law of God walk, doing unto others as ye would that others
should do unto you. Take heed of imposing any thing relating to the matter of
Worship upon the Consciences, le^^ you kindle Gods wrath against you, (as
others have done) which will not easily be quenched; for upon this Rock have
many been broken, and others wounded so, that they could not again be healed.

And two things we would mind you of especially.

First, That you are not come in by your own Sword or Power, but by a
remarkable hand of God in such a way as neither your selves, nor any other
could have expected.

Secondly, Consider what a flood of unrighteousness, licentiousness, and
fl^shly liberty has of a sudden overspread the Nation upon your coming in;
which although it received some little seasonable curb by a Proclamation from
King Charles (till which, scarce a man scaring God, and that could not join
with them in their rioting and drunken healths, could pass the Streets in most
places of the Nation) yet the body of that iniquity still stands in many
places, as in May-games, Fiddlings, Dancings, Stage Plays, and diverse other
ungodly vain Sports, by which Gods righteous Soul is still grieved, the Spirits
of all people that truly fear God sadned, the weight of that wickedness which
already lay upon the Nations mightily increased; quite contrary to what such a
work as your coming in after such a manner required; All which speaks dreadful
things against these Nations in the sight of many, who are most acquainted with
Gods fear, and have that Eye in them which foresees evil to come, in whose
hearts and mouths it is now to warn you, in love to your own Souls, (who are in
power to scatter such Wickedness) and the Nations peace and wel-being, that the
Wrath that is already threatened might be prevented from coming in your day. And
we desire, that you may take more notice of the Lords warnings to you, then
others have done that have gone before you, that Gods hand and power be not
turned against you, as it was against them.

R. H.

An Epistle to Friends.
OH my dear and truly beloved Friends, by the holy Spirit of my Father is my
heart freely opened and enlarged unto you, even in the love which is as a
Fountain of Life which plentifully flows forth in the virtue of the Father in
the hearts of the beloved children of God, which many Waters cannot quench,
amongst such who have known the Lord in the outgoings of his Power, to be as
the Morning to your souls; the virtue of whose Grace and Love has been as a
dew remaining upon your branches, and whose Doctrine has even dropped as the
rain upon your tender-Plants, that you thereby might be refreshed and nourished
up unto eternal life; the Lord God has honored you with his presence, and has
often fed you with his living appearances and manifestations, and you have
known what it is to drink of the pure Waters of Life, even from that living
Fountain which does always flow in the Spirit, by which there is pure and
spiritual refreshment ministered unto the soul; and the Waters of Strife have ye
refused, which does corrupt those that drink them; and so as it has been, so
let it always continue, that you may be kept clean by the Word which you have
heard from the beginning, and by which you have been gathered out of the World
by the Word of his Power, and fed together as sheep of his pasture, and lambs
of his Fold. So let not the feeling-sence of the loving kindness of the Lord be
forgotten, neither let the purity of your first love decrease; but let the dear
love of the Father in the freeness of liffe, flow forth plentifully one toward
another, which is the bond of perfection among the children of Light, by which
you will come to be established in the free Spirit of the Lord, in the unity of
Life, and in the fellowship of the Gospel, not being subject to change, or be
moved from that Word and Spirit by which you have been taught and led in the
way of Life, and by which you have known the mind of Christ; and by his gift
of Righteousness which you have received, are you able to try every spirit (as
you abide in it) whether it be of God, both as to Doctrines without, and as to
motions within. So therefore let nothing move you nor unsettle your minds from
that measure of Life which in all things is a perfect Instructor, which will
keep you in a pure Dominion over all feignedness and formality, even to dwell
in the substance, which is the holy life of the Son of God, where the true
love, the heavenly voice, and pure joy is felt and known as in the beginning,
always remembering how the Gospel in power came unto you, and how in fear and
much trembling it was both preached unto you, and received by you, with the
many blessed effects of its operation, vvorking your conversation out of the
earthly nature, and from the earthly body, into the heavenly body, in which you
are able to take up his Cross (if it be daily) to follow him in the
regeneration and newness of life, even from the true knowledge of him in whom
ye have believed, and by whose power you stand: For when we consider the
infinite deepness and largeness of that love with which we have been clothed
(and have even covered others withal) and likewise the many experiences of the
Father's dealings with us, in working all our Works both in us, and for us,
this cannot but deeply engage our hearts unto him, how that ever since we have
known him to be our Leader, he has always gone before us, preparing our way,
that we might serve him; he has for his seeds sake even reproved Kings, and
has quenched the violence of fire that was kindled in many hearts against us;
he has by his Wisdom put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, that he may
clear us from all their reproach: He has not only kept us alive in our
suffering under the Wrath of our Enemies, but in the power of his spirit made
us to reign over them; and not only over our outward and open enemies, but also
over the secret smitings of the wicked one, which would privily slay the
righteous: He has had a tender regard to his innocent ones, to keep them out
of the snares of the betrayers, and to keep them in the unity of his power and
love, in the which I speak unto you that know these things, whose ears the Lord
has so opened, that you can try Words; and whose eyes also he has unclosed,
that you can see that which causes divisions and offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine of Christ, and avoid it; for hitherto, even until this day, have you
learned by good experience, and some through sufferings, that whatsoever has
risen up to oppose the Lord in his Way, to quench the strength of his Love, or
to break the unity of his people, whether it has been by spirit or letter,
under never so innocent pretenses, the Lord has brought it down, and
confounded it, and made it to be as dust under the feet of his Saints; so that
we may together say, to the praise of our God, that we know the depths of
Satan, and are not ignorant of his devices. Therefore in the sense of this
experience, put on strenth, O ye Arm of the Lord, by which he will do great
things, and through whom he will make his power known to the Nations, in
setting up his Kingdom and Government, and his Peace, of which there shall be
no end; Let nothing hinder the setting up of his Scepter of Truth and
Righteousness amongst you; and let the Life of Jesus in his Love and Power,
reign over all the earthly spirits, and over the spirit of Jealousy, which is
strong as death, and cruel as the grave; which being not received, it can hurt
nothing but its own habitation in which it lodges. So keep your selves pure in
the love of God, and be not partakers of other men's sins, walking worthy of the
holy and blessed calling in which the Lord has given you an inheritance among
the living. And dwell in the spirit of meekness, in which the Wisdom and Power
of God you will feel, to the refreshing of your souls; for as you therein
abide, you are our joy in the Lord, and a strength unto us in his Work.

Another Epistle to Friends.
IN the life of the Son of God dwell, that in it you may be made manifest unto
all, answering the just, and reproving the unjust, for he is come to rule who
must put down all rule and all authority under his feet; and in him is the
living dominion felt, and the faith in the power, which overcomes the edge of
the sword, and subdues Nations, in which is the dread of the Almighty to bring
under the stout-hearted even by the power of the holy seed which is spreading
abroad in the earth for the finishing the Fathers work in the ear^h, which all
are witnesses of who do abide and walk in his light, where you may all enjoy
your peace with the Lord, and be kept in his power, over the power and spirit
of the world, in the everlasting covenant of light and life, where you may all
feel the growth of the seed in you; into the Fathers gift, which is the life
immortal: so dearly beloved and truly begotten in my Fathers love, dwell in
that which gives you a sight, knowledge, and fee^ing of him who has begotten
you into a measure of his life, light, power, and image; and hereby will you
all be united into one, serving one another in love, for God is love, and we
are his off spring, and to the world is he manifest through us, as being his
natural branches, and the breaking forth of his light and power, and is as set
upon a hill, unto which all eyes look, and from which the sincere and tender
take their example; so dear hearts in the path of the Just walk, which is a
shining light which shines more and more unto the perfect day, so as children
of it all walk that you to others may be examples, and leaders out of darkness,
and out of the ways of death, into the Kingdom of the Father, which stands in
the Light, righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; in which the
power and presence of my heavenly Father preserve you, and keep you in his
living Dominion.

Reasons why no Imposition ought to be upon men's Consciences by any but the
Lord.
1. BEcause no man can persuade the conscience of another either what God is,
or how to worship him, but only the Spirit which God has given to instruct
man.

2 Because to impose any thing upon another man's conscience either to do or
practice, is not to do unto another as he would have another do unto him, and
therefore is contrary to Christ's doctrine.

3 Because all obedience or service that is thereby obtained, is for fear of
wrath, and not from love, nor for conscience sake, and will but continue so
long as that fear or force abides upon them.

4 Because thereby no man can make an Hypocrite a Believer; but it is possible
that thereby he may make many Hypocrites.

5 Because that in all forced impositions upon men's consciences there is of the
wrath of man exercised, which work^ not the righteousness of God, but rather
begets enmity one toward another.

6 Because that men are not made thereby loving Subjects, but forced Slaves.

7 Because that by the force of imposing any thing upon men many are thereby
hardened in their hearts, and resolved to resist, when as by love and leaving
them free, they might easily be persuaded of that which otherwise they will not
be.

THE END.

