THE Rock of Ages Exalted above Rome's imagined Rock On which her CHURCH Is
builded:

She proved not to be the only Church of Christ; her corrupt Doctrines
reproved not to be Apostolic, but contrary to the true Church of Christ in the
Apostles Days.

Also, Diverse Arguments answered, which may convince the Papists that they are
not the true Church. Wherein a Book is also answered, called, A Catechism
against all Sectaries; Newly published by C. M. in the Year 1661.

By Francis Howgil, a Member of that Church which is coming out of the
wilderness.

LONDON, Printed for G. C. at the west end of Paul's, 1662.

A Table of the principal things contained in this Book.
COncerning the true Religion, what it is, and where it is demonstrated. Page
7, 8, 9. The Church of Rome proved to be the false Church* P. 10, to the 20*
and page 59. The Pope proved not to be the Head of the true Church* and Christ
proved to be the Head of the Body, which is his Church, and the Rock upon which
his Church is built. P. 20. to 24 Purgatory proved to be an erroneous Doctrine,
which is held forth by the Papists; and their Praying for the dead proved to be
another false Doctrine, not commanded nor practiced by Christ or his Apostles.
p. 25, to the 28 The Papists Doctrine which says Christ is really and
personally in the Mass, and in the Eucharist, proved to be Blasphemy and great
Idolatry. 29 to 36. The Papists Mass, and their Ceremonies, proved not to be
Apostolical, P. 36. to the 38: The Papists honoring of Relics and Images of
Saints, and praying by Beads; proved to be but the inventions and traditions of
men, and contrary to the doctrine which the Apostolic Church held forth. P.
39, to 47 The Doctrine of forbidding certain kind of Meats, and forbidding the
Scriptures to be read by all, answered. P. 47. to 56. Concerning Miracles. P.
76. Answers to eight Propositions set forth by C. M. in his Catechize
aforesaid. From P. 78. to the end.
A Book entitled, The Glory of the true Church discovered, as it was in its
purity in the Primitive time. Written by the same Author.

The Rock of Ages exalted above Rome's imagined Rock on which her Church is
builded, etc.
GReat has been the Havoc and Spoil that the Beast which John saw rise out
of the waters, made against them, in destroying them who received not his Mark
in their foreheads; and the cry has been long, Who is able to make war with
the Beast? and great has the suffering been (these many ages) of the Children
of Light, and still is of the Members of the true Church of Christ, which is in
God, which has proceeded from her, who sat as a Queen upon the Waters, which
are Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People, which has been the seat of Mystery
Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, who has held out her golden Cup of
Fornication, full of Abomination, false Doctrine and Error which the Nations
have drunk of, and the Kings of the Earth have been made drunk with, and all
have been in instability, and have reeled and staggered up and down in the
dark, in the night of ignorance, and have wildered in the Mysts o^ Error, and
lost the true Foundation, and are gone from the Rock upon which the true Church
is builded, which is neither Peter nor his Successor, but Christ the true
Foundation, which abides sure; and all that believ in him, and have their
minds staid upon him, know settlement and establishment in that which the Gates
of Hell prevails not against.

But blessed be the Lord, he is come, revealed and made manifest, who is able
to make war with the Beast and his followers, and a discerning is given unto
his servants, that they can distinguish betwixt the Cup of Fornication, and the
Cup of Blessing, and betwixt the Table of the Lord, and the Table of Devils;
betwixt the true Church, the Lambs Wife, and Mystery Babylon, the Mother of
Harlots; betwixt the Heavenly Treasure, which is communicable to the Saints in
Light, who are Members of the true Church, and the Merchandise and the corrupt
treasure of the Harlot, which the Nations, Kindreds and Tongues have been
forced to buy, by reason of the forcing and compelling power of the Beast; and
so the Nations have been begotten into a strange nature, into the cruel nature,
killing one another about the forms of Worship, and shadows, and the substance
has been known but to a few, neither the Lambs nature, which is meek and
innocent, and the Leaves of the Tree of Life, which heals the Nations, has
been known but to a few, which is the cause of all the Broiles, Murders and
Massacres, Imprisonments and cruel Torments which the Nations have afflicted
one another with, who have professed Christianity, but have been out of the
life, and out of the nature of the true Church, which Christ is the Head of,
which is Wife unto the Lamb; and herein is the true Church manifest from the
false; The false Church has propogated and increased her number of Members by
force and awe, and Cain's Weapons, and many have been forced into a belief, and
a feigned kind of Profession, rather than by sound Doctrine, or answering God's
Witness in Peoples hearts and consciences. But the true Church, who is of the
Husband's Nature, her weapons have been, is, and will be spiritual, and yet is
mighty through God, to beat down strong holds of sin and wickedness in people,
and has by sound Doctrine and a good example, answered God's Witness in
people's Consciences, without forcing to any thing, but recommended themselves
to every one's Conscience in the sight of God, and would have every one
persuaded in their own hearts (by the Lord) of the truth which they believed*
and not to take things by tradition and hearsay, as the false Church and her
Members have done, and so have had no assurance of God's Spirit in their hearts
for what they did, and so doubts have arisen in the mind, because whatsoever is
not of faith, is sin: But God is opening the eyes of many, and enclining the
hearts of many to seek after the assurance of God's blessed Spirit in their
hearts, for what they do believe.

And now Reader, I shall present thee with a great fardal and bundle of the
Whore's Merchandise, and of the counterfeit Ware which she has long deceived
the Nations with, which has long laid as moldy and rusty in this Nation, but
now new trimmed up, and presented again to this Nation as for precious treasure,
and it is not to be concealed in a narrow corner, or put off under hand; so
that this Merchant of Babylon has presented it to public view with a great
confidence that people that has been tossed up and down, and have found no
rest for their souls, at last may come to make a trial of this Merchandise, and
see what it will do; but lest any should be cheated and deceived with such
counterfeit Traffic, I could not choose (having the knowledge thereof) but
declare against the deceit thereof, and to give warning unto all to beware how
they touch, taste or handle it, lest they be defiled and corrupted by it, and
their understandings darkened, and their Consciences defiled: And the
Merchandise is this, tituled, A short Catechism against all Sectaries, by way
of Question and Answer; wherein all the Doctrines and Practices of the Church
of Rome are asserted for infallible and Apostolical; wherein also it is holden
out, That the Church of Rome is the only true Church, out of which there is no
salvation; and some Arguments to prove the same: Also in this said Book, all
that are not of the Church of Rome, arecondemned already as Heretics,
Sectaries, wholly to be without salvation: Newly published and translated by C.
M. and London printed for P. S. 1662.

And though we have given public Testimony both in word and writing (in diverse
Nations) in doctrine and practice; yet such has been the envy of many
professors, who have denied the Church of Rome, that they have accused us for
holding Popish tenants, yet now on the other hand by this Popish Author, we are
condemned as Heretics and Sectaries, and to be without salvation: And thus
they who have been under the Beasts power in the Apostasy, have tossed us upon
their horns from one to another, and have pushed us this way and that way; and
every party and sect has reckoned us, and joined us with them whom they judged
to be transgressors; but it is a small thing to us to be judged by man's
Judgment; for our Judgment is with the Lord, and he judges in righteousness,
and unto him we appeal, who in his own day, when righteousness comes to be
revealed in peoples hearts, they shall come to know us as we are, and the truth
which we believe and walk in as it is in Jesus.

But that such a heap and bundle of false Doctrine, and Superstitious and
Idolatrous practices may not go unreproved God has put it into my heart to
bear my testimony against it, and all the confused heap of darkness which is
laid down for Catholic Doctrine, and to discover the deceit thereof, lest any
should be beguiled and led into the dark paths of Ignorance and Error, and
should become an Inhabitant of that City, which has shed the blood of the
Prophets and Martyrs, where now Christ is crucified.

First of all, the Author says, There is but one true Religion wherein any can
be saved.

Ans. It Is true, there is but one true Religion in the which salvation is
witnessed, which is confessed by all who profess Religion, and every one will
needs lay claim to it; and many have contended even by force and arms since the
Apostasy entered in, and has killed and destroyed one another about the name
or sound, without the thing it self; and all Professors of Religion who are in
that nature, are not in the true Religion in which salvation is witnessed: The
true Religion stands in the Power of God, and to be exercised in those things
which the Power of God directs every one in, who believe in it, and to be
obedient unto the commands of Christ, and to keep his sayings, and to follow
his Example in righteousness and holiness; and in that which overcomes the
World, and gives victory over it, and keeps out of the pollutions of it. And
this is the pure Religion which purifies the heart and conscience from dead
works, and teaches to love Enemies. Now the Church of Rome is manifest not to
be in the one true Religion, but have departed from this Faith, and this
Doctrine: Let all Nations bear witness where your Religion has been professed,
how you have kept this Faith, and walked in this Religion; if any have dissented
from you these many hundred years, and that upon good grounds, as Luther and
Calvin, which thou art so angry at, and bring'st many Calumnies against, and
slanderous things, and lies, of which thy Vessel is full. Now they, with all
others that dissent from you, you have reckoned (and do) as Sectaries and
Heretics: And in case it were really so, if you were in the true Religion, and
in the Faith of Christ, you would not destroy so many men's lives as you have
done within these thousand years; I appeal to all Nations where your Authority
has been exercised; how many have you killed, tortured, burnt to ashes, and
destroyed the Workmanship of God: But it may be thou judge such a distinction
as this will cover a little, as, To hate their Heresy, and to love their
persons; but how you have loved their persons, I hope England has not yet
forgotten; instance John Wickliffe, whose bones you took up and burnt forty one
years after his decease; and how many hundreds more hathbeen burnt to ashes in
England, in later years, as Heretics and Sectaries, whose blood yet speaks and
cries for vengeance upon that City, that Church and Religion, which has drunk
the blood of the Prophets and Martyrs. So in what I have said, the Church of
Rome (to all unbyassed spirits) will appear to be out of that one true Religion,
and that Faith and Doctrine which Christ delivered; and so salvation is not to
be looked for amongst killers and destroyers: And so what I have said may
convince the Author of this Book, that they are not in the one true Religion in
which salvation is witnessed.

And this Roman Church has been always visible and universal since the
Apostles days, and Infidels have always been obliged to join unto her; yet
one cannot be bound to seek that which is invisible: And the marks and signs of
this Roman Church are four, comprised in these words. I believe in the true
Church, which is One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic.

Answ. That there was a Church at Rome in the Apostles days, is not denied; so
was there at Antioch, at Philippi, at Thessalonica, at Corinth, and diverse
other places that I might instance, which were as visible as Rome was, and as
much a City set on a Hill, as Rome was; and not inferior in Doctrine, Gifts and
good Works, to Rome at all, but as to Precedence and Antiquity, may claim
priority before Rome: And if he pleads that Peter was at Rome, and (as he
says) was Christ's Vicar and Bishop; and if because of this, Rome does excel,
(which the Scripture is silent in) Jerusalem might claim priority before Rome
in this, for he (we read of) was more conversant at Jerusalem, and a Minister
of Circumcision, and Paul ministered to Gentiles, who preached two whole years
both to Jews and Romans, which were Gentiles; but it seems the very imagining
Peter to be Bishop of Rome has made Paul's work void, and has turned his work
out of doors; but however he which has usurped the Name of Christ's Vicar, has
turned both Peter and Paul their Life, and Doctrine, and Practice out of doors,
to set up Pride and Deceit. But what blindness and ignorance is this, to judge
that God has bound himself so by prom se to any place, that he will always
continue with them, whether they abide in his Doctrine yea or nay: And though
Christ said, The Gates of Hell should not prevail against the Church, had this
only a Limitation to one place; if it must needs be understood of a place
outward, because of these words aforementioned, then why is it not extended as
well to Antioch, and the seven Churches of Asia, and the rest aforementioned;
has not the Gates of Hell, and powers of darkness prevailed against them
places, and the Turks taken possession thereof. And as for your Church at Rome,
which thou says cannot err, and has always been visible and universal: What
say thou to Marcilianus, Christ's Vicar as you judge? Whether did he not lose
his keys when he sacrificed to Ido's, in the tenth year of Dioclesian? But it
may be then thy Church must not reside in Christ's Vicar, but in a general
Council: But hereafter we will consider whether they have been always one, and
could not err.

Secondly, That whereby the Roman Church gives us a Mark and Sign to be the
true Church, to wit, Universality and Visibility makes her clearly to be a
Harlot; for John saw the true Church fly into the Wilderness for time, times,
and half of time; now if yours has been visible and universal all this time,
times and a half, then you are not the true Church; for Universality
comprehends all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People; and if this be the Seat
of your Church, then absolutely your Church is Mystery Babylon, (and not the
Lambs Wife) for she sat upon Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, Peoples and
Languages, which were Waters.

And here is your Catholic, Visible Church measured with God's Measuring-Rod:
First, To be the Harlot, because she was never in the Wilderness. Secondly,
because her seat has been so Universal and Catholic, as Natious, Kindreds,
Tongues, Peoples and Languages has been the seat of your Church, which are the
Waters which John saw; and so truly may be called the Great City.

And as for Infidels being obliged to join to you, this has been because you
have forced and compelled by your power and outward force where you had
dominion, and to escape your tortures, rather than by sound Doctrine, or a holy
Example. Or,

Secondly, Because your Religion has stood in so many formalities and
ceremonies, which has been very pleasing, and so near unto the Heathens nature.

And thou says, that one cannot be bound to seek that which is invisible: I
say, through faith God has been seen who is invisible; and Christ said, Seek
and ye shall find; and the Kingdom of God is spiritual and invisible, and the
natural and visible eye never discerned it, for the Church is in God, and God
is a Spirit, and Christ is the quickening Spirit who is the Head of the Church
which is his Body; and the spiritual and invisible eye is that which discerns
the Head and the Body; and you that look gazing after things that are visible,
have never discerned the Members of the true Church of God as such, neither
have known them, but have condemned them as Heretics in all ages, as your
generation has done, who have been in Cains way.

Secondly, If Unity, Holiness, Universal and Apostolic, be the marks and figns
of a true Church, then yours is not the true Church no more then they you count
Sectaries and Heretics, which thou say, are no more one than Cats and Dogs:
The comparison is odious, and like a suarling, catching spirit, who would tear
every one that comes nigh thee. And what if there be Protestants, Puritans,
Anabaptists, Independents and Quakers, these titles are but nominal, and there
is not one amongst all these, but they acknowledge one God, and Jesus Christ to
be the Head of the Body which is his Church, and one Spirit by which the Saints
are sanctified; and they acknowledge Christ's Doctrine in words, and his
Worship, that it is in spirit and in truth, and walks nearer to the practice
of the Apostles and the Church in their days, than you do: And if in some
things they do vary, why may not variety be allowed by thee, where it is only
nominal and circumstantial, as well as thou can allow variety of Ave Mary's,
Creeds, and Pater Nosters, which thou say delights? But why have thou not
judged at home? Thou must not think to lead us like Animals by the Head, as
your Church does poor ignorant people, to receive every thing for Apostolic
Doctrine, because the Church of Rome calls it so, and cries Unity: Might not
the Sectaries as thou callst them, return this upon your selves, that you are
not at unity, and not one? What means the diversity of Orders in your Church,
which may be called sects, that is, Jerome's Order, Austin's Order, Gregory's
Order, Carmalites, Crouched Friars, Franois, Anthony's, Bennet's, Dominick's,
Trinity, Basil, Brigandine's Orders? All these kind of Orders, and many more,
with every one their distinct Service, Formalities and Ceremonies, what a heap
of Sectaries are here, and yet Rome cries Unity! Besides, what contradiction in
your Councils, may hereafter be made manifest, and in your Vicars, one throwing
down and condemning that which others have set up for Apostolic doctrine. So
if Unity be a mark of the true Church, then you are without this mark and sign
more than they which you call Sectaries.

Thirdly, If Holiness be a sign of the true Church, you are without this sign
also more than the Sectaries, as you are pleased to call them: What cruel
Murders, Massacres, Tortures, Bloodsheds has been acted by your Church, and
that by Commission from his Holiness, (so called) Christ's Vicar, against them
that have dissented from you upon good and warrantable ground, only upon the
account of Religion, because they could not acknowledge the Pope to be the
Head, and Christ's Vicar, and receive all Decrees, though never so repugnant
unto the Doctrine of Christ; yet because for Conscience Sake many have denied
such things, nothing but fire and sword have been threatened, and the force
thereof has been known in many Nations; as for instance, in Germany and the
Low Countries, France, Pyedmount, Holland, England, and Ireland of late years,
many thousands massacred (not in War, but) in holes, hundreds of Houses burnt,
men, women and children; children taken from their Mothers Breasts, and knocked
against the Walls, tossed upon Pikes and Spears, wounded with Swords, thrown
into Lakes and Rivers, stripped naked, starved in cold seasons, through such like
inhumane and savage cruelty: Commissions given from your Nuntio's and Agents to
rob, to steal, even Servants from their Masters, even upon this account only,
to weaken and enfeeble the Sectaries and Heretics, as you style them, to
advance your Holinesse's Chair, and to progagate your holy, or rather unholy
Church and Religion, which things remain fresh in the memory of many Nations to
this day* besides, does not your Church tolerate Stews and Adulterous Houses in
the Cities where you have Dominion? Besides, Pride abounds amongst you, more
than the Nations beside. And so your Church has neither this Mark nor Sign of
Holiness.

Fourthly, As for your Church being Catholic and Universal, you want this sign
also; If it be One, Universal comprehends all Nations, like as all the World
(in comparison) were your Church: What, is Germany, France, England, Scotland
and Ireland, nothing? What, is all the Turks Dominions of your Faith? And thou
say, In Asia, Africa and America, all is coming to an end. There is that
risen, and arising in America, which must spread over the Nations; the breath
of the Lord blows, which will daily dry up the Waters, which is the Seat of
your Church, which you so much boast of: And what, have you converted all the
Indians? nay have you not hardened their hearts against the Name of Christ,
because of your cruelty and unholy conversation among them? So that the Name of
Christ and Christian, is become as odious unto them, as Mahomet is unto you;
And so you are without this Sign, as that you are the true Church.

Lastly, That your Church is Apostolic, if this be the Mark of the true
Church, then you are without this also; for you neither Apostolic in Doctrine
nor Practice; your weapons are carnal, theirs spiritual; their Head was Christ
the Light of the World; your Head is visible and carnal, which darkens the
World; they turned people from darkness to light, and to the Word of Faith in
their hearts, and to know Christ in them to justify them: But one of your
Rabbis told us lately, you had no such Doctrine in the Church of Rome, as
Christ in you: The Apostles turned them to the Anointing, and to the Spirit,
to be taught by it, and to be led by it into all truth, and to worship in it;
and you turn them to Images, Pictures, Crucifixes, Beads and Altars, and so
keep people in outward things, which feed the sensual and corrupt part. Lastly,
they said bodily exercise profits little; and most of your Worship stands in
observing of days, meats, drinks, washings, sprinklings, Altars, Tapers,
lighting and bearing Candles, bowing, creeping to the Cross, turning, wheeling
this way and that way in all time and parts of your Worship; so that there is
no time left for the heart to be exercised toward God; And so you are not
Apostolical, and so are without this true sign of being the true Church of God.
But I shall descend to particular things, which is asserted, and seems to be
proved, but very weakly: But we can expect no Wine but such as is in the Bottle.

It is asserted by this Author, That the Pope is the Head of the true Church,
in which salvation is only to be expected; And his proof he brings, is this;
Christ has so ordained it, in saying to Peter, Matthew. 16. 18, 19. Upon this
Rock will I build my Church; and Christ has given power to him and his
Successors to be a Head to rule and govern the Church; and as there is an
Emperor to be Head of the Empire, and a King of the Kingdom, so Peter and his
Successors are the Head of the Church, and have the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, to bind and to loose, and to remit and retain sins.

The Apostolic Church has this Doctrine, That Christ was given to be the Head
of the Body, which is the Church, which is spiritual, though in the World, yet
not of the World; and the Father has committed all power in Heaven and Earth
to the Son, and has ordained him to be a Leader, a Teacher, and a feeder of
his Flock, and to be his salvation to the ends of the Earth, and his glory he
will not give to another: But it seems the Church of Rome has soared so high
in their conceits and imaginations, that they judge all this Power to be given
unto the Pope, Peter's Successor, as they say: Now we do not read of Two Heads
to the One Body, which is the true Church, Ephesians. 4. 4. 15. And so this is a
contrary Doctrine then that of the primitive Church; and Christ who is the Head
of the Body, he said, Lo I am with you to the end of the world: And so it is
the mere arrogance and pride of the Pope to be called the Head of the Church,
and an intrenching Christ's Power and Prerogative; and that ever Peter was
called the Head of the Church, we do not read; and that of the 16. of Matthew
is but a poor proof to prove Peter to be the Head of the Church; for Christ
spoke unto his Disciples, ver: 15. and asked them, Whom say ye that I am? Peter
as one amongst the rest said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God; and
Christ said, Upon this Rock will I build my Church, viz. Upon him which was
revealed unto Peter by the Father, the Son of God, which was the Rock which the
Fathers eat of, and drank of, Christ the Rock of ages; and another Foundation
can none lay (said the Apostle) then that which is laid already, Christ the
Rock and Cornerstone, and not Peter; for Christ is unchangeable, and abides
for ever, and so was not Peter, though Peter and the rest of the Apostles
received power from Christ; yet in the 22. and 23. verses of the same Chapter,
he was gone out of the savor and discerning, and Christ said unto him, Get
thee behind me Satan, for thou savourest not the things of God; and what though
it could be proved that Peter was at Rome, a Pastor, an Elder, or a Biship, who
fed the Flock, and did feed the Flock, and so might be reckoned as an Elder,
and worthy of Honor in respect of his labor and diligence in the work of
Christ; is the Promise so entailed to Rome or to any place, that the next that
succeeds in that place must needs receive the same honor, when he does not the
same work, which is worthy of honor, neither is in the same power; but this I
am sure of, though the Church of Rome lay claim unto Peter's Bishopric, as they
say, yet they have not done his work.

And secondly, If Peter was at Rome, and a Pastor, yet he was not a Lord; for
Christ reproved that when they strove which should be the greatest, and said
unto them, The Gentiles exercise Lordship one over another, but it shall not be
so among you; and though Peter and the rest of the Apostles who were in the
power of God, had that which did open into the Kingdom of God, and shut out
that which did defile; yet this we are sure of, he sold no Pardons nor
Indulgences for gain and filthy lucre, as many have done whom you call Peter's
Successors, and Christ's Vicar, and Universal Bishop, and visible Head; but
it is manifest how the Pope became visible Head, and Universal Bishop, not
because of any work or labor in the Doctrine of Christ, or the Work of the
Gospel, but by means of the Roman Emperor; for while the Christians were under
persecution and suffering, there was no talk of Visible Heads, or much of
Universal Bishop, for then Rome had no more priority then the rest; for the
Churches at Constantinople, at Jerusalem, at Caesaria, at Cyprus and
Alexandria, for the first three hundred years, they had as much power in their
several Churches, as Rome had, and often the Elders or Bishops of the aforesaid
Churches did reprove sharply the Bishop of Rome; But at last about five hundred
years or upward, Phocas to aspire to the Empire of Rome, he murdered his own
Master Mauritius and his Children, to attain unto the Empire; So at that time
Boniface the third was Bishop of Rome, and Phocas somewhat fearing, and willing
to have Boniface his favor, condescendeth to all his Petitions and grants him
to be Universal Head-Bishop over all Christian Churches; and there was the
first rise of Rome's visible Head; for this frivolous reason of being Peter's
Successor, could never have raised him to that height, but then the Emperors
Power and Authority became to be the more forcible plea; for before that time
the Bishops of Rome were chosen by the Emperors consent, but after he had got
power, Emperors could not be chosen but by the Popes consent; and then came the
Bishop of Rome to be a visible Head, and be called Universal Bishop, Christ's
Vicar, a Lord Spiritual over all the Churches, and in process of time, Lord
temporal over all the Empire.

And thus your Church of Rome became magnificent and great, and to sit as a
Queen upon the Waters, Nations, Kindreds and Tongues, as you acknowledge your
Church of Rome has spread over; and here is a Head and a Body which are joined
together in union: Christ is the Head of the true Body, which is his Church and
his Wife; and Antichrist he is the visible Head of his visible Church and Wife,
Mystery Babylon.

The next piece of Merchandise which the Author brings forth to view, is
Purgatory, and prayer to be made for the dead, and also prayer unto the Saints;
and the Authors proof is 1 Cor. 3. 15. where the Apostle speaks, Every man's
work shall be tried, and that work which will not abide the fire, must be
burnt; and this the Author calls the fire of another World; and prayers for the
dead he proves out of the 12. of Maccabees, and prayer to the Saints: He says,
it is lawful to pray in this world unto good people; and Paul while he lived,
did pray for others, and also did beg their prayers: And the Angel in the first
of Zachary prayed for Israel; and there can be no harm in praying to them that
can pray for us.

Ans. Them that dwell in the shadow of death, are like to speak out of thick
darkness; and they that have made a Covenant with death, are loath to have it
broken; and they that have a mind to continue in sin while they live, have a
mind to put the evil day afar off, and Judgment afar off, and evildoers will
never have it time to give account for their evil deeds, and so puts it off
till they are dead, and to another world; and let the Devil have pre-eminence
in their hearts while they live, and reckon their sins venial, and light
faults; this is contrary to the Doctrine of the true Church of Christ, and
contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who said, The wages of sin is death; and
there is no sin goes unpunished nor unjudged; and Sion is redeemed through
judgment, and by the Spirit of burning; and Purgatory is a fiction, a
falsehood, and a lie; and there is no cleansing from sin in another World;
Solomon says, As the Tree falls, whether to the North, or to the South, so
shall the tree lie; and the Word of God, who has received it in their hearts,
which is as a fire that purifies; and the Blood of Christ is that which
cleanses from all sin: and there is not any cleansing from any sin, but by it,
and there is no cleansing in another world; but Purgatory has been invented,
and prayer for the dead, that thereby the Pope might be enriched, and sell the
invented Prayers and Ave Mary's, and so cheat people of their money; and
there is no sacrifice to be offered for the dead who dye in their sins, nor no
remission after this life.

And as sor praying to the Saints, the Scripture makes no mention of; and
though Paul did pray for others, and beg the prayers of others, yet he prayed
not for them when they were dead, neither did beg the prayer of the dead, but
prayed for them who were believers in the true Church, and desired the prayers
of them that were living Members, and were alive, and lived in the world, and
were redeemed out of it; and the Angel prayed not for the people of Israel when
they were dead; and that which thou calls Jeremy's prayer in the Maccabees, was
never spoken by the Spirit of the Lord, nor the offering was not made in the
will of God; and the Prophet says, Though Abraham know us not, and Israel be
ignorant of us, yet thou O Lord, art our Father. And the Lord said unto David,
Seek my face, and call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear and
answer: Not upon Mary, Peter and Paul, Dominick and Anthony. Again, it is
contrary to the practice of the Saints in the primitive times, and contrary to
the Doctrine of Christ, who said unto his Disciples, Whatsoever you ask in my
Name, the Father shall give it you: He does not speak of any other Name;
neither is any Prayer or Supplication accepted of the Father, but in the Name
of Christ alone. So these Doctrines are false, and Doctrines of Devils, never
commanded nor practiced by any of the Saints in the primitive times, but only
have been invented and practiced by the Apostates, who have erred from the
faith and Practice which was once delivered unto the Saints, which the Church
of Rome has made shipwreck of in many things, which I have made appear; and I
shall proceed to more particulars to manifest it, lest. any should be beguiled
with such deceitful Babylonish Merchandise which the Nations are too much
corrupted with already.

The next false Doctrine which the Author lays down, is, That Christ is really
and personally in the Mass, and in the Eucharist: And his proof is Luke 22. 19.
1 Cor. 11. 25, 26. For says he, God who is Almighty, is able to change Bread
into his Body, and Wine into his blood (in the Mass) as he did change the Water
into Wine, and make the World of nothing. Hence also by the way you may learn,
that we are no Idolaters, adoring the Eucharist, because it is no more Bread,
but whole Christ, our God and Redeemer, who places himself there by Miracle
after the Priest has uttered the sacred words of Consecration; yet the
external accident of Bread and Wine remain, as our eyes represent to us; but
faith tells us, the true Body of Christ is hidden under it, and the substance
and nature of the material Bread is there no more.

Oh horrible Blindness, and gross Ignorance; great Idolatry, and horrible
blasphemy; your Priests by their words it seems, can make God who made all
things, and can make Christ the Redeemer, then your Priests are greater then
God and Christ; for he which creates and makes, must needs be greater then
that which is created and made: And thou confesses that it is really Bread and
Wine before the Priests sacred words are uttered of Consecration, but
afterward it becomes the real and true body of Christ; yea, whole Christ our
God and Redeemer: So it is clear that the Priest has power, in your judgment,
to make the body of Christ, to make God and whole Christ a Redeemer; Oh that
ever such gross darkness should enter into the hearts of the sons of men: As
for those two places in Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11. it is but a pitiful ground for you
to plead, that the material Bread, and the material Cup is the very Body and
Blood of Christ; was not Christ present, when he broke the Bread, and gave the
Cup, and after too, and alive. Did they eat his Body when he was with them, and
drink his Blood? Was his body broken for them then, before he was offered up?
and was his Blood shed then, before he suffered upon the Cross? nay it is
manifest he was alive in the Real Body, after they had earen the Bread, and
drunk the Cup, and this was a sign unto them of his Suffering for them, and of
his Death; and as the Apostle says, As often as they eat the Bread, and drunk
the Cup, they showed forth the Lords death till he came. (And revealed himself
in his own life and power) and then they saw and feel'd that which was
signified through the figure before, that like as the Bread and the Cup did
nourish the natural man, likewise their souls were fed and nourished with the
Bread of Life; and the Cup of blessing which they knew and feel'd little of,
when Christ broke the Bread, and gave the Cup; and does not Christ say, I am
the Door, I am the Way, I am the Vine; and also, This is my Body, and This is
my blood: Why should one place be literally and naturally understood and
interpreted, and not another so.

2ly. And we do not question what Christ can do, but what he did; That he
turned water into Wine we do believe; and that God made the world of nothing is
for thee to prove yet, and that Christ made himself Invisible, and passed
through his enemies sometimes without being seen, we believe; but that he made
himself Invisible, when he broke the Bread, and gave the Cup to the Disciples,
is clear contrary to the aforementioned Scripture, and diverse others; or that
he conveyed himself so invisibly into the Bread, and into the Wine, as you
ignorantly suppose, or that he was so under it, as thy own word is; so as that
he was not seen visibly by the Disciples, even when they eat the Bread, and
drank the Cup, and after he blessed it (is utterly false;) for they saw him
before he took the bread, and when he took it, and blessed it, and brake it,
and when they eat it, and after they had eaten, he was visible in all these
moments of time, is very evident both by Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, in their
Narration of the Supper; and so all your twining and turning, and vain
arguments, are made void.

3ly. We do not believe that ever any of your Priests turned Water into Wine,
or Bread into Flesh, or Wine into blood, of one sort or other; much less into
the flesh or blood of Christ: for thou say the external Accidents remain, as
our eyes represent unto us after Consecration; but yet the nature of the
material Bread is no more, as your faith teaches you; so it seems you confess
the visible appearance which may be seen and felt, as to the natural Aspect
does remain; that the natural Elements of bread and wine still remain in sight,
but the substance, nature and matter is no more in being, I shall appeal to the
light of Christ in your consciences, whether this be true yea or nay; Nay it is
so ridiculous a thing, that I dare appeal to any man or woman that have not
lost their senses, whether that which may be seen with the natural eyes, and
may be felt by the natural hands, and tasted by the natural taste, be not the
very same in nature and matter after Consecration as before, if the external
Accidents do remain, as you say it does, we will join issue with you in this
thing for trial, if you dare venture it, and put it to proof, you and we with a
joint consent will choose Bread and Wine, and you and we will both eat and drink
of some part of it before, and then your Priest shall consecrate it, and we
will hear and see what he says, and does, provided that he shall only speak
to it, or pray over it, and then when he has done, we will both eat again; and
if it be not of the same substance, and the same effect, as to your own
understanding, sense and feeling, as you are men and creatures; which if there
be no alteration, but it remain the same in substance, in taste, in matter,
nature and quality with that before Consecration, then you shall confess your
error, and deny your Doctrine; but if it be altered, we will deny ours, and
join unto your Faith.

Or secondly, If you will stand to trial, and appoint time and place for two or
three of you, and two or three of us to meet together, where both parties may
be secure as to their persons, you and we will take Bread and Wine, and one
part of it shall be unconsecrated, and another part you shall be allowed to
consecrate as well as you can for the honor of your Church, and that which is
consecrated, and that which is unconsecrated shall be set together, and shall
be watched by some of each party; and if that which is consecrated, do corrupt,
and decay, as that which is unconsecrated, then you will renounce your Doctrine,
and leave your killing about it; but if it do not corrupt and decay as well as
that which is unconsecrated, then we will deny our Faith, and confess that you
are the true Church.

Lastly, If you be not Idolaters, there was never any in the world, who say,
that to adore or worship the Bread and Wine after consecration, is no more
Bread, but whole Christ, your God and Redeemer, who places himself there upon
the Altar by miracle: It Is a miraculous thing indeed, that that which is given
unto you by the Priest, which enters in at the natural mouth, and goes into the
belly, should be the body of Christ, and whole Christ, and very God and
Redeemer, as thou say; that one person should contain whole God, seeing the
Scripture says that the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him; for he is the
very fullness that fills all things: Oh gross darkness, and palpable ignorance
which you have led people to believe! and call this Idol that Rats and Mice may
eat, whole Christ, God and Redeemer! And you have destroyed and burnt to ashes
many for Heretics, who could not believe this Doctrine. Therefore all people
it is time to look about you, and see where you stand, and what you join unto:
If you cannot receive this Doctrine for holy and Apostolic by the Church of
Rome, not worthy to live; and without doubt, might not, if this Church had but
that Authority which sometimes it has had in England: but I hope the eyes of
many are open to see and detect this damnable Doctrine.

So what I have said in this particular, may be enough to confirm them who are
in any measure in the truth, and to keep them back who have desires after this
fornication, which the Nations has drunk too much of: But I proceed to another
particular; but before, take a word or two about the ceremonies.

The Author says, That ceremonies were used by Christ at his last Supper; and
they excite people to their devotion during the Sacrifice; but for proof you
must, expect none from this Author, and the Scripture is silent in the thing;
and Ceremonies and Formalities are so far from stirring up the mind to God,
that they indeed draw the mind to be busied in the exercise of them, from
waiting upon God, and from worshipping him in the Spirit; and such Worshippers
are only accepted of him.

The Mass is said in Latin, and the rest of Divine Service; for if it were
not, ignorant people might easily be mistaken, if these Mysteries were done in
the vulgar Language; and because the Scripture has been written in Latin.
Greek and Hebrew, and these three Languages were written upon Christ's Cross,
and therefore these three Nations ought to use them at their Mass and Divine
Service; but the Priestly Garments and Ceremonies gives enough to understand
what is done at the Mass and Divine Service.

Ans. This looks with a bl^ck visage to be Apostolic Doctrine; but however I
shall search into it, and examine it by the Apostles Doctrine, before it be
condemned: It Is a good shift (indeed) to keep people from mistakes, not to let
them know what they say or do; but this is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, 1
Cor. 14. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14; 15. If a Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who can
prepare to Battle? And except words uttered, be understood, how shall it be
known what is spoken? If the meaning of the voice be not known unto him to whom
it is spoken, the speaker and the hearer are Barbarians one to the other: And
when one understands not what is spoken, how can he be edified? And all
services ought to be done to edification. So your Church is erred from the
Apostolic Doctrine; and your Mass, and your Service does not edify at all,
but you are as Barbarians one to another; for your Worship goes on in such a
pack Road, that the vulgar people would soon learn it, and know it, and (it may
be) slight it, if they should know the worthlesness of it; and therefore the
only way (you judge) is to keep them in ignorance. And what mystery is there
in the Mass and your Service, seeing that it stands in crossings, cringings,
and abundance of endless ceremonies, and reiteration of words, which are patcht
up by many Authors, contrary to Christ and the Apostles Doctrine: But it seems
the Priests garments and ceremonies gives understanding enough to the Auditors;
a dumb show is enough for them, (like a Poppet Play) to make them understand
the Mysteries of your Mass, an unbloody Sacrifice indeed, in which there is no
remission nor acceptance. And here thou have acquainted us with a Mystery
indeed! Because Latin, Greek and Hebrew was written by Pilate upon the cross
of Christ, therefore they are called Sacred Languages! Sure the church of Rome
has lost both Faith and Reason; Will any that has a friend that should be
crucified upon a cross, and an enemy who condemned him, should set over him
words in Latin, Greek and Hebrew, in contempt, that therefore a man should
count the Cross holy, and the Language sacred, as the Church of Rome does, is
great ignorance and idolatry, of which she is full, and therefore is not
Apostolic, nor the one true Church in which salvation is to be looked for, as
the Author would make people believe.

The next false and superstitious Doctrine which this Merchant of the Church of
Rome holds forth for Apostolical, is, The Relics and Images of Saints, and
also Prayer by the Beads, by number and tale, as Brick-makers sells their
Brick; And this the Church of Rome would put off unto us as Apostolical
Doctrine.

The Relics and Images of Saints are honorable in regard of the Saints which
they have relation unto, and God himself makes use of them for his Miracles.
Moses was enforced to honor the holy ground where the Angel appeared, Exodus 3.
and David commanded the Ark to be adored, because it was God's footstool,
Psalm. 99. 5. And to honor the Relics and Images of Saints is no Idolatry; for
that is Idolatry to worship false gods; and Christ does not take it ill that we
honor his Saints and Friends: And to number our Prayers, if Hail Mary be said
upon Beads threescore and three times, it is because Mary lived so many years;
and the Prophet prayed seven times a day, and Christ three times in the Garden:
And it is not evil to say our Prayers by number; and if five Pater Nosters be
said, it is in honor of the five wounds, and what would there be amiss in
this. And it is not Idiots that prays by Beads, but Catholic Kings, the Pope,
Cardinals and Bishops makes use of them; and variety delights the mind, and
there is no better prayers then the Pater Noster, Ave, and the Creed.

Answ. The Relics, or that which remains for all the Saints and Members of
the true Church of Christ to follow, and to honor, is, To live in the same life
that they lived in, and to honor him who was their life, by whose power they
fulfilled the will of God, and to walk in the same footsteps, is to honor him
that was their life, and them also, who walked as examples of righteousness;
and that power by which they became examples of holiness and righteousness; but
for the Church of Rome to worship pieces of Cloth, Dead Bones, Painted Images,
which may as well be called the Images of Cain, Ishmael, Judas, and all the
seed of Evildoers, as well as the image of Christ, or Peter, Paul or Mary, for
any thing that they know, which they have but received by story, and is but as
old Wives fables, which Paul to Timothy reproved. And has the Church of Rome
no better thing to put them in mind of the Saints life, then a dead Picture or
Image made by the hand of the Crafts-man upon a wall, or a board, or parchment,
or paper, this is Idolatry; for Christ promised to his Disciples, and to the
true Church, That he would send his: Spirit to lead them into all truth (which
is an invisible thing) and to bring to remembrance what ever Christ had spoken,
and whatsoever was necessary as to Salvation, whether the Saints life and holy
practices which they lived in; or whatsoever else as conduced to their peace
and justification with God; and what Images did God make use of to show his
Miracles by? This is* but an old fable formed by the Apostate Christians, whose
minds are turned after shadows and vain shows, and is erred from the invisible
life, and worships the works of men's hands.

2. Though Moses did put* off his shoo's according to the command of the Lord,
where God appeared in power and glory to him* What is this to your purpose? as
to create and form places, and Consecrate them as holy, and then command
reverence and honor unto them, this is but to worship the work of your own
hands; and though David say in the 99 Psalm. 5 verse. Exalt the Lord God, and
worship at his footstool, for he is holy. What of all this, does God call
Relics or Images his Footstool. And if the Author do judge that it was spoken
of Zion and Jerusalem outward, where Aaron and the rest of the priests
worshipped; yet does not Christ say, It Is not at Jerusalem, etc. But they that
worship God, worship him in spirit and truth: What, does not the church of Rome
profess Christianity and Apostolic Doctrine, and will now turn Jews or
imitaters of them? What is Rome? Jerusalem or Zion? And must Pictures invented,
and dead pieces of bones and wood, be recommended unto the Nations as holy
things? This is contrary to the Apostolic church, and with the life of God is
judged; and the life of the Saints whom you honor in words, and make pictures
of, and worships the works of your own hands, and crucifies the life where ever
it appears, that they lived in, and teaches a contrary doctrine.

3. Confession may be made in words of the true God, and talk may be of his
wondrous works, and yet people Idolaters; the church of the Jews who
acknowledge the true God, and had seen and heard of his wondrous works, they
eat and drank and rose up to play; and these were Idolaters, and such is the
church of Rome (who take peoples minds up with garments and Vestments, with
Altars and Candles, with Crucifixes and Agnus Dei, with Images formed by
Painters, with a piece of Bread called a Holy Host, and Eucharist, an unbloody
Sacrifice) who neglects the life, and him that is the Head of the Body, and his
Witness in their hearts and consciences, and leads them to worship and honor
visible and carnal things, and to busy their minds in the exercise of outward
things* which profits little or nothing at all, and so are Idolaters,
worshipping the works of your own hands, which Christ and the Apostolic church
bore testimony against; for* that which the creatures mind goes out after,
besides, or without that which may be known of God in the heart, is made an
Idol of, and the true God is not minded; and them that honor Gods Friends and
Saints, walks in their footsteps, live their life, and honor their sayings; but
your Church is contrary, who would kill, and have killed about these invented
Fopperies,* which is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine. God accepts not prayers
by number nor tale, nor for multitude of words, which are without
understanding, and without the Spirit; this Christ counted as evil, and
reprehended the Pharisees, and said, It was like the vain repetitions of the
Heathen, who thought to be heard for their much babbling* and the Salutation
which the Angel gave to Mary* is no prayer: And that which is called the
Apostles Creed, is no prayer; and them that are unconverted unto God* may
prattle and prate over the words, in the unbelief, and never have any
acceptance of God: And though the Prophet did pray seven times a day, it was
according to the motion of God's Spirit in his own heart, which showed him his
state and necessity; and what is this to imitators, when they pray not with the
same Spirit, neither in the same words? And what if Mary lived threescore and
three years? who gave commandment that Hail Mary should be said threescore and
three times over? The rest of the Saints are like to have but small shares of
worship and honor, if she go with all this in a day. And what five wounds is
that which the Church of Rome dreams of, that five Pater (...), must be said
for the honor of? With Deceit and Ignorance you wound him every day, and your
Pater nosters does not honor him at all, pattred often over with your polluted
lips, who are given to speak lies, and your tongues to speak mischief, which
Christ accepts not: What, are you all new creatures that say, Our Father
which art in Heaven? Are you born again? Are your Natures changed? Sin you not?
Do you hallow his Name, who do not love that which shows your evil deeds? Would
you see his Kingdom come, which stands in righteousness? Where will you appear?
Or how will you stand when he appears in his Power and Glory to take vengeance
on all them that wis^ not that he should rule in their hearts, who is the true
Light that lights every man that comes into the world? Would you see his will
done on earth as it is in Heaven, when you walk contrary to his Doctrine which
the Apostolic Church walked in, and sets up a numberless number of Traditions
and Inventions of men instead thereof, which the Lord accepts not, and you
pray not with understanding?

5. As for your Beads, which are neither Jewish nor Christian, but mere
Heathenish, as to reck on the number or tale of that which you call your
prayers by; and though Kings, Popes, Cardinals and Bishops do the same, this is
but a small proof as for Authority; Kings have drunk of the Whores Cup, and
Popes and Cardinals have usurped power that Christ never gave, as to exercise
Lordship, and be Lawgivers unto others; for the Lord is the Saints Lawgiver,
and the Saints Life and Judge, and he will not give his glory to another; for
Kings have 'drunk of the Whores cup of Fornication, and Popes have usurped
Authority, and Cardinals have exercised Lordship over men's consciences, yea and
over great Kingnomes and States too. And if they pray by Beads, as others do
set forms by number and tale, they are as much Idiots as the rest are, who know
not the Spirit to pray by. And so this is no authority to prove your practice
Apostolical and holy; as for variety of prayers and worships, it delights the
carnal mind indeed; but they that worship God in spirit and truth, they pray by
the spirit, and in it, as David and Christ prayed, whether seven times, five
times or three times, and with understanding; and that which they prayed in,
was not various, but one; and it is by that one spirit which is not various, by
which the sons of God cry Abba Father; and the variety of your formed charms,
bablings upon your Beads, God has no regard unto, but is a smoke in his
nostrils all the day. And they that have exercised themselves in these things,
have not the witness of God in their own consciences that they are accepted of
God; and so I shall proceed to another Doctrine called Apostolical, and holy;
and that is about Meats, whether they may be lawfully eaten at all times.

The Author confesses they forbid certain kinds of meats, but it is but at
certain times; and they are forbidden not as they are evil, and the Creatures
of God, but because they are forbidden by the Church; and his proof is the
Apple which Eve and Adam eat was not evil in it self, but being prohibited; so
to eat that which is good of it self is not ill, but to eat contary to the
Superiors mind and order, this is evil. The Bible and Scriptures ought not to
be read, but leave is to be asked of the Superior, because there are many hard
passages, which they which have little or no learning, as Peter testifies in
his second Epistle, Chap. 3. some understands it one way, and some another; and
therefore it is the fittest for Learned men to judge of them, and they must
judge whether people be in a capacity to read them.

Answ. And why are Meats forbidden at certain times. Is this like the
Apostolic Doctrine? Are not all times and seasons in the hand of the Lord, and
are all good to them that believe, and to the pure all things are pure, all
times and seasons, all meats and drinks being sanctified by the Word, which
made them all holy unto all that do believe: And if you forbid them not as they
are Creatures of God, but because they are forbidden, I say, who did forbid
them, or when were they forbidden? by Christ, his Apostles, or the true Church
of Christ in their day; but on the contrary Christ taught, That which goes in
at the mouth, and in at the belly does not defile the man, but that which
proceeds out of the heart, which is corrupted. And Paul said, What is sold at
the shambles may be eaten, and no question made for conscience sake; for to the
clean all things are clean, and to the believing all things are pure; and who
limited such meats for such days, and such times, the true Church? No: but the
Church of Rome, who are going on in that Doctrine the Apostle spoke of the 1.
of Tim. and the 4. which he reckoned a doctrine of Devils: but here is your
Argument that must bring you off, because you forbid it not at all times; I
say, if it be a Doctrine of Devils to forbid at all times, then it is some part
of the Doctrine of Devils to forbid at any time, seeing time and things are all
good in the hand of the Lord: but if this Doctrine should hold, what would
become of your Dogg-days, and of your Lent, which has been patched up Week by
Week by diverse Popes; and of your Wednesday, Friday and Saturday Fasts, so by
this account of yours half of the year is either unholy, or else some meat is
unholy for half of the year; but there is few but sees your blindness, that in
this much need not be said, but only thus, That which may be lawful in it
self, when it is prohibited by the Lord unto any particular, then it becomes
evil; for whatsoever is not of Faith is sin: But Christ alone, unto whom all
power is committed, has the sole power over the Heart and Conscience; and for
any to make Injunctions and Prohibitions contrary to him, the same is
Antichrist; and so the practice which your Church commands is not Apostolical,
but you bring yoaks upon the true Disciples necks; which they that are made
free by the Son, cannot stoop unto, neither join with; for whosoever does, goes
into bondage: And Christ is the Supreme Power unto whom all power is committed;
and when He justifies, what Superior can condemn? And there is no need of
asking leave of them that are Superiors, which reckons themselves as so, seeing
every man stands clear in the sight of God, when he transgresses not against
the Supreme Law of Christ in his Conscience; and to offend any Superiors who
lays any Injunction contrary to the Command of God, is not to offend God,
neither to break his Command.

2ly. It seems all parts of Religion is monopolized by Mystery Babylon, in
which Rome is comprised, not only Patents and Pardons sold for eating of meat,
but authority and license must be given to every one that reads Scripture, a
thing which the Apostolic Church (before the Pope had a being) knew nothing
of; but on the contrary, some were exhorted to read the Scriptures, and some
were commended for reading of the Scriptures, and for searching whether the
things were so as Paul testified; and in this they were counted more Noble then
they at Th^ssalonica: but now it is become an ignoble thing, and not at all to
be suffered to read the Scriptures without Patent or License in the Church of
Romes account, who have laid down Ignorance to be the Mother of their Devotion:
But the danger is, because there are hard passages which are not understood
when people have little or no Learning, as the Author says: What was it for
want of natural Learning that Peter complained they* wrested the Scriptures,
and therefore is it for want of natural Learning that the Scriptures are not
understood, and for want of this they must not be read, as the Author says:
Ignorant man! what was Peter such a great Learned man? a poor Boat-man, or
Fisherman, whom the Scripture says was illiterate; in the Acts, when they
beheld Peter and John, and that they were illiterate men, and saw their
boldness, and took notice they had been with Jesus: What was it want of natural
Learning that Peter spoke of, then he spoke against himself, for he was
illiterate: but it was such a Learning that they wanted as this Author wants,
who is untaught by the Spirit, and unlearned in the Doctrine of Christ, and
such wrest the Scriptures, and do not understand hard sayings, because the deep
things of God are revealed through the Spirit of God, and not by natural
Learning, as this Author, who would sell Licenses and Pardons for reading the
Scriptures, as they have done for eating Flesh in Lent; but a story of Robin
Hood, a Comedy, or a Play is more frequently read by the Members of the Church
of Rome, which begets into looseness and profaneness, a thing which this
Generation is in love with rather then the Scriptures; and though the
Scriptures be applauded in words as for the rule of Life by many, and a Judge
of Controversies, yet how should they be ruled that may not read them without a
License, or a Toleration from the Superior: If it be lawful to read with
Toleration, it is lawful to read without Toleration; for the toleration of men
neither adds to, nor diminishes from any spiritual exercise; and Timothy
read the Scriptures of a youth, and who gave him his Toleration? And Apollos
was a mighty man, and a knowing man in the Scriptures; from whence had he his
License?

3. Because thou judge according to the judgment of this present evil world,
that they are only fit to read the Scripture, and give interpretations upon
it, who are naturally learned, and have the wisdom of this world: I say, Nay,
the world by wisdom knew not God, neither know him now; and them that had
natural learning, rejected the Foundation; them that had the Hebrew Language
set Christ at naught; they that had the Greek tongue, withstood Paul, and
called him a babbler; them that had the Latin Tongue (the Tongue of the Whore
your Mother) persecuted the Christians in the first three hundred years after
Christ, as your own Histories do relate: So according to all these who had
only the knowledge in the natural Languages, they did not understand the things
of God; and it was the wise builders which builded by art and skill in the
Earthly Wisdom, that rejected the true Foundation and Cornerstone; but on the
contrary, we say, according to the Apostolic Doctrine, that the Scriptures may
be read, and ought to be read; for they are profitable for instruction and
correction, and information, to make the man of God perfect, and thoroughly
furnished to every good work through faith in Christ Jesus: And I would have the
Author know, that we do not look upon Cardinals, Friars, Monks and Bishops, to
be the alone men of God, so that they alone have the sole power to tolerate the
reading of Scriptures; for he is a man of God who is born of the spirit which
sanctifies and leads into the clear paths of Equity and Righteousness, who
walks not after the flesh, neither fulfils the lusts thereof; and such there
are, and have been, which have been unlearned in natural Tongues; but this is
the way to keep your Church in reputation, to believe as you believe, and every
man to put out his own eyes, and live by another's sight, and hang his faith
upon another's shoulders; this is not like Apostolic Doctrine, for the Apostle
said, Let every one be persuaded in his own mind (not by other men's minds) and
he that believes, has the witness in himself, and has it not to seek among
the litteral Rabbis, who darken Counsel through words; and it is not for want
of natural learning, that one understands the Scriptures this way, and
another that way, but because they want the understanding of that Spirit which
gave forth the Scriptures, which Spirit universally is given to all men and
women (a measure of it) to lead into truth, and through which the deep things
of God are revealed: And it is not your Traditions* Inventions, natural
Learning, Schools and Colleges, Fryeries and Covents, in which the Spirit of
God is only limited; but every one that seeks, finds, whether learned or
unlearned; for of a truth, God is no respector of persons: And so the mind of
Christ is manifest unto them that believe, and the one Spirit into which the
Saints were baptized, is that which opens the Scriptures truly as they are, and
discerns the times and the seasons, and fulfilleth it in the hearts of them
that believe, and manifests the state unto which they were spoken. And if the
Scriptures be so hard to be understood, by reason of the hard sayings, or
because of the Translations, what have you been doing these fourteen hundred
years, with all your learning, with all your Councils, Popes, Bishops and
Clergy, that you have not translated them aright, or so plain that they may be
understood by all that reads? But then your Doctrine, Worship and Practice,
would be soon manifest not to be Apostolical, nor consonant and agreeing to the
practice of the true Church of Christ.

And now I come to the effectual Arguments and pregnant ways which the Author
tells of, which will work upon the Sectaries to make them return to the
Catholic Church, which he says they have groundlesly forsaken; and now I
shall come to try his arguments, and search the force of them, which he lays
down as the most efficacious way to convince all Sectaries (as he is pleased to
style them) to come to the Church of Rome; but the hope of this man will be
like a Spider's Web, for unto all whose Eyes God has illuminated in any
measure, will come to see the weakness of this Philosophy and vain deceit,
which he has laid down as a chief instrument to convince all, that the Roman
Church is the true Church, and that salvation is only concluded in her.

1. The first argument he takes from Matthew. 18. 17. Christ sends us to the
Church (says he) if any neglect to hear her, they must be counted as Heathens
and Publicans: From hence this is the Argument, That, that Church is to be
heard in which there is most assurance to be had that one is in the way to
salvation; but in the Roman Church there is most assurance, therefore the Roman
Church is to be heard.

Ans. The Minor is false, and also the Conclusion; That Church which has the
foundation of its assurance without, it is not the true Church of Christ,
neither is to be heard; but the Roman Church has only their assurance of
salvation without them, therefore are not to be heard; it is manifest their
assurance stands only in outward things, as Antiquity and Visibility, which
are not the alone Marks of the true Church; Cain was ancient enough, and there
were them that were in Cain's way before Rome was so highly elevated; and that
for Universality and Visibility, there is no assurance in that, for all the
World has wondered after the Beast, and the Whore has sitten upon Nations,
Kindreds and People; and so the first argument is denied, and proved to be
false* I shall lay down another; 1. That Church which has always been so
visible and Universal since the Apostles days, as has had its seat over
Nations, Kindreds and Tongues, is not the true Church of Christ, but the
Harlot; but the Church of Rome has been universal over Nations, Kindreds,
Tongues and People, therefore the Church of Rome is the Harlot, and not the
true Church of Christ.

But I shall not traduce thee in thy vain deceit, but return thy arguments upon
thy self, which thon chargest upon others.

1. As first, That Church is not to be heard whose Authors and Doctors are
Cozeners and Impostors.

2. But all are Cozeners and Impostors but the Church of Rome.

Again, That the Church of Rome has the Marks of the true Church, and no
other, as Antiquity, Miracles, holiness of life, Universality. Again, That the
Church of Rome takes the narrow way that leads to life. Again, Because the
Church of Rome keeps Sunday instead of Saturday, by Tradition; therefore she is
the Church of Christ.

To the first; If that Church is not to be heard, neither her censures
regarded, whose Authors and Teachers have been Cozeners and Impostors, then the
church of Rome is not to be heard, nor her censures regarded, because the chief
Authors have been Cozeners, Cheaters and Impostors, who have been out of the
power of God, and have taught for Doctrine the traditions of men; as Purgatory,
prayer for the dead, only to cozen and cheat by, to fill the Bags and Coffers
of the Popish Clergy; which Doctrine is contrary unto the Doctrine of Christ
and the Apostolic Church; therefore the Church of Rome is not to be heard.

2. That the Church of Rome has the marks of the true Church, and no other, as
Antiquity, Holiness of life, Miracles, and Universality* This is false; there
were Churches before Rome, that had these marks; and there has been since, and
are now, more then the Church of Rome: Antiquity some of them called Sectaries
will allow you a thousand years to be called a Church, and yet prove you
Apostates both in Doctrine and Practice. Your Miracles are but cheats, deceits,
and lying stories, if your own Authors be searched; you confess most of your
Miracles are wrought by your Images, works of your own hands.

2. Antiquity without Truth, proves nothing; and holiness of life, if your
Church be holy, which is profane? tolerating (as I said before) Whoredoms,
Stage Plays, vain sports and pastimes, which draw people from the fear of God;
and many foolish sopperies which I shall not now mention; so that there are
them that have dissented from you, which are more ancient in the Faith, more
holy in life and conversation, more agreeable in doctrine and practice, to the
true primitive Church, then you are. And as for Miracles which are wrought by
the true power and finger of God, there has been, and are more amongst them
called Sectaries, than in the Church of Rome: The blind have received their
sight, the Lepers have been cleansed, the Lame have been made to walk, and the
deaf have heard, and the dumb have spoken, the dead have been raised, and many
that have been bound by Satan forty years, are loosed; and there are
thousands that are Witnesses of it, and can testify the truth thereof, even in
this time, and in this year, in Scotland, England, Ireland, Germany and
America, 1662. So there is a true Church which has the Marks of the true
Church of Christ, more than the Church of Rome; therefore the Roman Church is
not the alone true Church.

3. To the third argument, That the Church of Rome keeps Gods commandments, and
walks in the narrow way of Christ's counsel, therefore she is to be heard: How
she keeps the commandments of God, is known, if he mean the ten commandments;
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing
that is in Heaven or Earth, neither bow down nor worship them. Now you make
Images of things in Heaven, as of God and Christ, and the Holy Ghost, and of
Mary; and as for things in Earth, you have Images of all sorts, witness your
Masse-Houses, called Churches, your Cloisters, Fryaries and Covents; so that
every place is filled full, and worship unto them is taught by you for Doctrine,
contrary to God's Doctrine, and your distinction of Latria and Doulia will not
serve; for it is mere deceit; he that honors an Image, and bows down before it
in his heart, whether you may judge it represents this or that, is an absolute
Idolater, and knows not the spirit which Christ said he would send to the
true Church, which should bring all things to their remembrance both what he
did and said, and the Saints life and example to remembrance, (without your
Pictures.) And how you are in the narrow way, is known to many thousands that
you do not walk in it at all, neither take up the cross of Christ, which is to
crucify the lusts, affections and desires of the flesh, but takes up outward
crosses, and bears them on your necks, or pin them on your sleeves, or hang
them about your necks, and all because Christ was crucified on the cross: And
here you are honorers of Pilate and the Jews, who crucified Christ upon the
cross as a blasphemer, rather then honorers of Christ; and the strait and
narrow way you are ignorant of, and Christ's sufferings you are strangers to:
What! your Popes are as Emperors, your Cardinals as Lawgivers, your
Ecclesiastical Officers as Lords of great possessions in the Earth, except some
begging Friars, which you have pressed into a voluntary humility, without
necessity. And how do you love your Enemies? How many Indians have you
destroyed and killed as dogs? and how many that have professed the Name of
Christ have you burned and destroyed as though they had been Wood, and only
fuel for the fire. And how can you say your Pater* Noster, about which you
make so much ado, and say, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them* that
trespass against us; if the Heathen have trespassed against you, if them you
call Sectaries have trespassed against your Church, how do you forgive them?
and how do you fulfill the Law of Christ, and keep his Counsel, seeing that you
are out of his Doctrine; away with such deceit and hypocrisy, God has found
it out, and is judging it by his Saints, who rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have
no confidence in the flesh, nor in fleshly Traditions and Imaginations, but
lives in the power of God, and walks in the Spirit* and therefore because you
walk contrary to the Command of God and Christ's Counsel* and are out of the
narrow way that leads to life* your Church is neither to be heard, minded, nor
heeded.

The fourth Argument that the Church of Rome is the true Church, because they
keep their Sabbath of the Sunday by Tradition, and not upon the Saturday, as
the Jews did; and therefore the Church of Rome is to be heard, because they
have Tradition and solid Reason on their side. Thy speech bewraies thee, which
bespeaks thee rather a Heathen then a Christian; for the Heathens had a day
that they celebrated to an Idol made like the Sun, called Sunday, and another
day which they celebrated to an Idol called Saturnus, called Saturday; and in
this your Church is not to be heard, who is out of the form of sound words: but
the Seventh day was the Jews-Sabbath, which none that professes Christianity
ought to keep, seeing that Christ put an end to the shadows: and the Saints
Sabbath is a stranger to the Church of Rome; he that has overcome the World
and the Devil only knows God's rest, and the true Sabbath, of which the Jews
was a figure; and the Sundays thou calls, it is no more a Sabbath reckoned by
the Lord of Life then that which thou calls Saturday; for every day is kept
holy to the Lord by him that witnesses the work of Redemption, and this is
according to the Apostolic Doctrine; and if because of example the Christians
whom you are pleased to style Sectaries, do observe the first day of the week
in the Power of God, for his Worship, then they are as much, if not more to be
heard than you, and have as much solid reason on their side as you; and thou
must not think to carry the matter on with such frivolous arguments as this, to
advance Mystery Babylon; for this is a a knowing age blessed be the Lord,
wherein the wisdom of God is revealed, and that which comprehends all
shadows, types, days, times, years, meats, drinks, washings, and other
figures, they are all seen over, and he is come and manifest which is Head of
the true Church, (and not the Pope) who was, is, and is to come, life it self,
truth it self, power, strength, and everlasting satisfaction to thousands, and
ten thousands, who have believed, (and to a numberless number which are yet to
be gathered into God's sheep-^old, and into the narrow way of Christ) which
will deny, and does deny upon good grounds, and infallible Testimony from the
Eternal Spirit, that the Church of Rome is either in whole, or in part, any
part of the true Church of Christ.

And seeing this valiant Champion has made so fair a proffer, that all their
Priests, Jesuits, and Catholics over all the world, will turn to the Sectaries
way (as he calls them) if they can but get a clear and satisfactory resolution
to the following doubts:

Answ. I am one which do acknowledge my self to be reckoned by him as a
Sectarian; yet as a Sectarian is reckoned by the true Church of God in the
Primitive time, in the Apostles and Christ's days, I do not reckon my self as
such; and that I am a Minister of the Everlasting Gospel I dare not deny,
seeing a necessity is laid upon me to acknowledge the same; yet herein I do not
glory, but in him who has called me for the work sake; and I know the Teaching
of Christ Jesus, and his Doctrine, and no other thing this many years have I
published, but that which I received of the Lord, and from him by his Spirit,
which is according to the true Faith and Godliness, which was in the Primitive
Church (before ever Rome did lay claim to be the only true Catholic Church,
excluding all others but her self to be in the way that leads to salvation) I
which am as one amongst many thousands which God has manifested his mind unto,
shall answer in clearness, and according to Apostolic Doctrine, and the
manifestation of his Spirit; but when I have so done, I am afraid this
Champion, with the rest of the Priests and Jesuits, and the rest of the
Catholics over the World, will hardly own his Challenge, or consess that Doubts
are answered* yet however if it satisfy but one of a thousand I have my
reward* and shall put it to trial.

The first thing the Author, who it seems knows the mind of the Church of Rome
in all things, both as to Doctrine and Practice, which they do allow of, and
the contrary they vvil deny, (he knovvs to the full) or else he would never
(sure) have made such a bold challenge.

The first thing that they would be resolved in, is,

Whether any can clearly show that any Teachers, Doctors or Ministers, are sent
of the Almighty God to preach and reform the Roman Catholic Church, and that
they are not some who say the Lord says, when the Lord has not spoken unto
them, neither sent them, Ezekiel 13. 2.

Ans. What the Roman Church and their Members will take for a satisfactory
resolution as to themselves, I somewhat question, and do doubt the resolving of
the most; but however by the same commandment that the Apostles did evidence
their commission, that they were sent to reform the Church of the Jews, and
also them that had made defection from the Faith amongst the Gentiles; this may
be shown:

1. The Apostles of Christ Jesus did declare their commission which they had
received from Christ; and for other proof they sought none amongst them that
were auditors or hearers, but the witness and testimony of God, unto which they
desired to be approved in the sight of God.

2. They showed the Jews, that they held the types and the figures, but did not
receive, or believe him who was the substance, in whom they all ended; they
were sent to bear testimony to the true Light that lights every one that
comes into the World; and to preach down days, times, months, years, fasts,
feasts, sabbaths, circumcision, temples and offerings, the priesthood and the
sacrifice, which were but to continue until th time of reformation, and the
bringing in of a better hope, by which they drew nigh unto God, and had an
access unto him, and they declared their Commission against a voluntary
humility, and worshipping of Angels; all which things the Church of Rome do
stick in, and vindicate for Apostolic Doctrine; and many more things which the
Church of Rome is run into, contrary to the true Church of Christ, and
therefore had need of Reformation: So that which is contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ and the Apostles, and practice of the primitive Church in the first
hundred years, is in the apostasy; but Rome is in many practices and doctrines
contrary to the true Church* therefore needs reforming.

And so God has manifested himself in this his day of Power, and has
discovered the Church of Rome to be contrary in doctrine and practice to the
true Spouse of Christ, and has stirned up, and moved many by his Power and
Spirit to preach the everlasting gospel, and to declare also against the
defection of the Church of Rome, and her apostatizing from the Faith; and they
are not of those whom the Prophets spoke of, which ran, and the Lord sent them
not; for them were the false prophets in Israel, and they were manifest by
their fruits, of which there are great store in Rome, who are manifest by their
fruits, and they are such as are in Cain's way, who would kill, and such as are
seekers of gain from their quarter, and such as take the Jews tithes; and these
the Lord never sent to be Teachers or Ministers to bring to the knowledge of
Christ; but we deny all these things, and your Church in the very ground and
foundation, and know that it will be swept away when the Beast is taken alive,
upon which your Church now rides; then shall you see that that which you long
put off among people as Apostolic Doctrine, will not be received any more,
neither traditions nor inventions of men for the Worship of God.

The second doubt which the Author would be resolved in, is, Whether we can
make good what Luther and Calvin, with all Protestants, have boasted that they
would do, to reform convincingly one of the silliest Roman Catholics that is,
and to begin, do it in the matter of the real presence after Consecration?

What Luther and Calvin have said unto you as about your Worship, Doctrine and
Practice, has been made good by themselves while they were living, and in the
body; and what they said, did not only inform the minds of many of the Roman
Catholics, but reformed them too which were not of the silliest amongst you;
not only one, but thousands did see your error and deceit, though they in some
particulars did but differ from you: But now that is manifest which denies
your Foundation in the very ground. And what I have said as about the real
presence of Christ's Body being in the Bread and Wine after consecration, if
thou dare put it, and endeavor the trial thereof (according as I have in
reasonableness propounded unto thee) it will convince many of the Roman
Catholics of their error, or else many of the Protestants of their error; and
so if thou dare adventure it, make no more boasts, but let it come to trial,
as before is propounded unto the Church of Rome, if she, or any of her Agents
dare admit of it.

3. The third Argument which he promises, If it can be proved from the
Scripture, (which he calls God's written Word) that the Sabbath Day is
commanded by God to be kept on Sunday, and that little Children are to be
baptized.

What others have said as to these two partibulars, who were but departed a
little way from you in diverse things, as to their judgments, I shall not stand
to vindicate; because the Church was rather but a coming out of the Wilderness,
rather then come already into her first purity; but I am one of those amongst
many thousands in Europe, who denies the Church of Rome as to be the Bride, the
Lamb's wife: and yet I shall not vindicate either the one, nor the other, but
deny both, as amongst Christians ( viz.) (...) to keep the Jewish Sabbath upon
Sunday, as the Author calls it, and Sprinkling of little Children is like the
other, an invention in the Apostasy, never that we read of commanded, commended
or practiced in the Apostles days as such. The first day of the week the
Apostles met together, and worshipped God, not by virtue of the Jews
commandment, but in the power of God, and you only have them both, and keep
them both by Tradition and Custom, without Commandment; and so are out of the
power of God, and out of the Saints life.

4thly. The Fourth Argument: Can the Sectaries with reason and ground
sufficient* condemn all Catholics that were so many Ages before Luther and
Calvin, for being no better then Heathens? and convince me, that adhering to
you I shall be more secure in my salvation, then in joining to them that have
time out of mind, been of the only saving Religion.

Ans. The Sectaries have not gone about to condemn every individual man before
Luther and Calvin, for no better than Heathens; we believe some were; and we
believe many were as bad, (if not worse) they that walk in the practice of the
Heathen, and bring forth fruit, but not unto God, are in the Heathens Nature;
but the generallity of the Church of Rome have (for these many hundred years)
brought forth no better fruit than the Heathen, and therefore are in the nature
of the Heathen; for like as the Heathen persecuted the Christians in former
days, even so has the Church of Rome persecuted the true Christians in their
day, and in this are no better than Heathens; instance the bloodshed, murder,
cruel deaths you have put many unto since you have had the Name of a Church;
and therefore are no better than Heathens in nature: And for Antiquity, it
proves nothing without Verity; and there can be no assurance in your Church,
seeing that it stands upon tradition and hearsay, and outward performances,
and bodily exercises that profits little; but some whom you call Sectaries
have more assurance, for it is the Spirit of God that gives it; and as there is
obedience yielded unto the Lord (that Spirit) he gives them assurance; and
them that are born of it, do overcome the world, and his Spirit bears
witness to their spirits, that they have overcome, by which they cry Abba
Father: And this Spirit of truth that leads into all truth, brings more
assurance unto them that are led by it, and worship it in, than can be had in
all your outward Formalities, Ceremonies and Traditions:

5. Argu. Can you make evident at least, that in your Flock, and Luther and
Calvin their Guides, there is more holiness and virtue than can be found among
the Catholics, and that you go the narrow way that leads to life?

I answer, Yes; I am one among many thousands who are not of the Church of
Rome, yet am of Christ's Flock which he has cleansed by his blood, and
revealed his virtue in, and his holy life; and it is made manifest that they are
in the narrow way more than the Church of Rome; they are in the way that leads
to life, and abide in Christ's Doctrine; We love them that hate us; we bless
them that curse us, we pray for them that persecute us; but so does not the
Church of Rome, but kill them, and persecute them that oppose her: We say,
Without righteousness and holiness be revealed and wrought in our hearts, we
can bring forth no fruit unto God, neither can be members of the true Church;
but if any conform unto the practice of your Church in outward things, he is
counted a good Member of your Church, though righteousness and holiness,
self-denial, humility and love be wanting. Therefore we are the Church in which
there is more holiness, virtue and life enjoyed, than in the Roman Church.

6. Can you show us any miracles that ever were wrought in testimony of your
Religion, or that the Catholics Miracles are wrought by Beelzebub? And now thou
have asked us a resolution of the doubts, and let all that are illuminated,
judge how we are deluded.

It Is an adulterous generation that seeks a sign; and what Christ wrought, was
reckoned as no miracles by them that are in the unbelief; yet these signs have
accompanied the Gospel, which is the power of God; the blind have been restored
to sight, and the dead have been raised, and the deaf have heard, and the lame
have been made whole, and this has been witnessed by many; and we have a cloud
of witnesses which your Church know not of, and by the effectual working of
God's power these things have been done, which does give testimony, and confirm
our Religion. And for your Miracles, the most that ever I heard of, has been
done by Pictures and Images, as you have testified, which are but fabulous
stories. And now let them who are lightened with the true Light of Christ, judge
who are in the delusion; and now let all judge whether these be not
satisfactory Resolutions unto the aforesaid Doubts or Questions, which may
convince them that have erred from Christ the power of God, and gone in their
own traditions and inventions, and have forsaken the strait way, and the narrow
path that leads to life, and all are exhorted to come unto him, (who is the
light and life of men) that their souls may live, and that they may witness
assurance of the love of God unto them by his Spirit's manifestation. And now
let us see whether the Author will keep to his word, whether the church of Rome
will all turn unto our way, which is Christ, the way, the truth and the life,
or they will follow their visible Head, the Pope, who is changeable, and does
not abide for ever, who leads only to an observance of outward things, but
neglects the weightier things to walk in.

And now I shall come to some Propositions, which the Author says has been
propounded, which are unanswerable; and the Propositions are against all
Sectaries; and the Propositions are laid down by Francis Costorus, (as the
Author says) of the Society of Jesus, which has been laid down fifty years ago,
and they are in number eight; and with them eight Propositions the Author says
he has put all the ablest Ministers of Germany and the Low Countries unto
their wits end; now I hope some will be able to give an answer, and yet keep
both their Faith, Wit, and Reason.

1. The first Proposition is this, That never since the Apostles time, till the
Year 1517. ( wherein Luther began his Doctrine) were any found in the world who
did consent with either the Lutherans, Calvinists, or Anabaptists, or other
Sectaries opinions; nor ever shall any of the Sectaries prove that any of the
Apostles or Evangelists were of their Faith, and so by consequence the
Sectaries are without Faith; and they are the men whom the Scriptures in
several places affirms that should come, In the latter times false Prophets,
etc.

Answ. As I said before, any opinion which Luther, Calvin, or the Baptized
people do hold, I shall not stand to vindicate it, because they have so holden;
yet in many things they are separated from you upon good ground, and their
Doctrine and Worship was far more consonant and agreeable unto the Apostles
days then yours are; but I am one that owns my self a Protestant, who denies
the Church of Rome; and I do say this Proposition is silly, poor, and feeble;
and I do not believe that any was so hard put to it, as to be brought to their
wits end by answering of it; for what need he talk of since the Apostles time
till such a year, we shall come to the Apostles time and age, and if any society
of people now are found the same in Faith, in Doctrine, in Worship, in Life,
Practice and Conversation, then they are the true Church: And let Francis
Costorus, with the rest of the Roman Merchants take that Faith to themselves,
and that Doctrine to themselves, and those particular points of Worship and
Tradition to themselves, since all the world has wondered after the Beast, and
has worshipped his Image, and this was since the Apostles days. And if the
Church of Rome plead the whole world as for a proof, John saw that Antichrist's
false Prophets, Deceivers, were entered in then, fifteen hundred years ago, and
the world went after them, and he saw the whole world wonder after the Beast,
and the Whore sit upon the Waters, Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People, and
this comprehends the World, the Whores seat; and we matter not for her consent
neither to Doctrines and Principles, nor opinions; nor for the approbation of
them that have drunk of her Cup. But if we can prove a people which are
gathered by the Word of God, and through the preaching of the Gospel, into the
same Faith, Hope, Doctrine, Life and Practice which the Apostls walked in then,
this is the Church which is coming out of the Wilderness again, where she has
been preserved, while the Mother of Harlots has sit as a Queen, and has been so
visible as over all the World, and has made the Nations drink her Cup of
Fornication; and therefore your Unity in this thing, and in this time is clear,
that the Church of Rome is not the Church of Christ: but there are some whom
Rome is pleased to call Sectaries, that own the same Practice, the same
Doctrine, the same Faith which the Apostles walked in; and therefore this great
Proposition is false, That all that have separated from the Church of Rome have
no Faith, or a new fancied Faith; and now I come to his second Proposition.

2. Propositon: The Religion and Faith of the Roman Church has not been any
way changed, in any Article that belongs to Religion, by any Pope, Councils, or
Catholic Bishops; but it is the very same Faith has remained entire, and
inviolate, from the Apostles to this present day.

There were Churches planted before there was any at Rome; and the Faith which
they received, was that which did overcome the world, and gave them victory
over sin and death; and the Religion which the Churches of Christ professed, as
Corinth, Galathia, Thessalonica, and the rest of the Churches which the
Apostles planted, is no more like the Faith and Religion of the Church of Rome
now, then Black is to White; as for instance, Prove us out of the Scripture
what foundation you have for Purgatory, for selling Indulgences and Pardons for
sins; and what Scripture have you for Auricular confession, for an Unbloody
Sacrifice, for Prayer to Saints, for worshipping of Images, (in the
New Testament) for observing of Lent, consisting of so many days? And what
Scripture and example from the Churches that were in the Apostles days (before
Rome was called a Church) concerning prayer for the dead, for yours crosses,
your tapers and candles, for anointing with oil and cream in Baptism, which
was only invented by Pope Clement, which another Pope (Pope Silvester)
confirmed, 315. Plat. Volat. Sabil. And what example from the true Church for
baptizing of Infants, and for Godfathers and Godmothers, in Christ's day,
when he planted the Church? And that Infants should be baptized, and only at
Easter and Whitsuntide, was not this ordained by Pope Leo, in the year 676.
Lib. Council, Volat. Pol. Chron. And was not Transubstantiation, which you call
the Body and Blood of Christ after the consecration, when the Priest has
whispered over the Bread and Wine a few Latin words, As, Hoc est Corpus meum,
hic est enim sanguis meus, etc. The Bread is turned into the natural Body of
Christ's flesh, blood and bone; was not this ordained by Pope Innocent, held at
Latterane by twelve hundred Romish Priests, Monks and Friars, in the year 1215.
decret. de summa Trinitate, Cap. firmiter. And whether are not these articles
of the Church of Rome, yea or nay? If I should traduce the church of Rome in
their Bishops and Councils these 12. hundred years and upward, I might bring a
cloud of witnesses that the church of Rome is not the same in articles of faith
in Religion, but diverse Popes (I might prove) have made distinct articles, and
diverse Councils and Bishops; so that I might clearly prove, and can, and shall,
if God permit me with life, if I hear any more of the church of Rome, or the
Author of this Book, that I shall prove, that the church of Rome in the
articles of her Faith, is not the same that the church of Christ was in before
Rome was planted a church.

2. I shall prove (if need require) her universal Councils (as she calls them)
to vary, and her Bishops to be different in their Decrees, and that her faith,
in points of Religion, is not the same from the Apostles day, to this time, as
the author of this Book would make people believe; but what I have said to this
unanswerable Proposition, (as he calls it) may be sufficient to convince both
the Author and them that are doubtful in their minds about this particular.

3. Proposition is, That neither the Sacraments nor Ceremonies, or any Doctrine
of the Church of Rome, contain any thing that is contrary to the Scriptures,
but learned Doctors maintain the same, and that there is no alteration in any
article of faith. And then the Author makes a conclusion, though full too
hastily, That they which dissent from the Church of Rome (which he is pleased
to style Sectaries and Heretics) have no reason to withdraw from the Catholic
Church.

Ans. As for that which you call the Catholic church of Rome, we find such
diversity of Orders and constitutions one distinct from another, that to begin
to enumerate them all, would take up much time before one ended, and would
prove tedious to the Reader to view over the variety of Constitutions and
Decrees that have been made concerning the ceremonies, Sacraments, (as they
call them) and other Doctrines of the church of Rome, which at this time is not
my intention; but Pope Alexander commanded that unleavened Bread should be used
in the Supper, in the year 1119. Lib, Council. great. Sabil. Before that time the
outward Bread was indifferent whether it was leavened or unleavened;
notwithstanding the Greeks do use leavened bread unto this day, in that which
is called a Supper, and they use Wine only in the Cup; but the Church of Rome
mingle Water with their Wine, according to Pope Alexander's Decree: And the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, of turning the bread into the body of Christ,
and wine into the blood (as they say) was an unknown Doctrine in the Apostles
days, and also among the Greeks, until Pope Innocent the third, 1215. Likewise
Honorus the third, he made a new Ordinance, That the Sacrament of the Altar (as
the Church of Rome terms it) should be worshipped and kneeled unto of the
people, and also it should be born unto the sick, yea, and that with
Candlelight, though it be at noonday, in the year 1214. D. 3. Tit. Cap. 10.
Lib. Council, Pant. And Innocent the third ordained that the Sacrament of the
Altar should be kept under lock and key, that such as were like to dye, might
not want spiritual comfort at the time of their death, Lib. Council, Cron.
Pant. Pope Innocent the 8th. permitted that the Priests of Norduegia might fing
Mass with Water for lack of Wine, in the year 1484. Math. Palm. Pant. And as
about the ceremonies about the Sacrament or Mass, in a Council held at
Rottomage, it was decreed that the Sacrament should not thenceforth be given to
Laymen nor Lay-women in their hands any more, but the Priests should put it in
their mouths, contrary to the use and practice of the primitive church; yea and
of the church of Rome it self many years after, Lib. Council, etc. And so here
the church of Rome is contrary to the former churches, and to their own church
of Rome in former times, though C. M. would elevate the Propositions of Francis
Costorus (a Jesuit) unanswerable.

4. Proposition* The Author says, It cannot be proved that any have been
admitted Priests, but were duly consecrated by Bishops* Whence we infer, That
Lutherans, Calvinists, and other Heretics, are no true Ministers, neither are
of Divine Priesthood, because they give to people a mere piece of bread and
nothing else, and they have no power to absolve people from their sins, but
send them away entangled with sin, as when they came to them.

Ans. As for the consecration of the Priests of Rome, you have consecrated many
who are out of the Doctrine of Christ, who are traitors to Kings and
Governments; and it is a Maxim, and a thing meritorious in your church, to slay
a Heretic, that is, one dissenting, or not consenting to your corrupt
principles; and as one deceiver has ordained and admitted another, so has
your Bishops and Popes ordained the rest to execute their drudgery and corrupt
traffic; and as I have offered unto thee before, if it be not a piece of
bread, and wine, except mingled with water, (according to your changeable
Ordinances beforementioned, put it to trial upon the terms I before mentioned,
that you may be made manifest to be deceivers, or else we, to all people. And
as for your Absolutions and Pardons, it has been that which you have sold for
money, which made Luther and diverse of your own church to deny you, because it
has been contrary to Christ and the Apostles Doctrine. And as for forgiveness
of sins, it properly belongs to Christ, and to them that are in the same Power;
to them that confess, forsake and turn from sin* to pronounce forgiveness and
mercy; but the members of your Church confess from day to day unto your Priests
that are as much entangled in sin as they who do confess, and neither do repent
nor find mercy at the hand of the Lord; and your confessors, and they that do
confess, they are defiled as much with sin when they end their work, as when
they began.

5. Proposition. It cannot be found in the holy Scripture, that nothing is to
be believed but what is clearly and expressly contained in the same: Hence
follows the overthrow of the ground work of the Sectaries, who say that nothing
is to be believed but what is expressly set down in the Scripture.

Ans. What others have said as to this particular, I shall not now stand to
vindicate, because it is not my work to vindicate every particular judgment
and person who believe contrary to your church; but I say, many are of that
mind (that are not of your church, that things may be believed to be true,
according to the manifestation of God's Spirit, though the Scripture in express
words does not declare the same; yet you to bring in fabulous stories, which
you call unwritten verity, that are to be believed though never so repugnant
unto the Scripture, and to the truth contained in it, this we cannot receive,
neither believe; and this will never be attributed by the Lord unto any for
unbelief, although you say it.

6. Proposition: The Author says, He would fain have Luther and Calvin, and
the other Sectaries, to show where Matthew's Writing is called holy Scripture,
more than Nichodemus his Gospel; and seeing they cannot prove the one no more
than the other, they must needs believe something that is not written in the
holy Scripture.

Ans. I shall let Luther and Calvin alone, they were men that God did honor,
and I do honor, and many more as in their day; they are at rest in the
Sepulchers of their fathers, where your reviling cannot touch them; they
prevailed in their Doctrine and Faith so much against you, as you have not
recovered in a hundred and thirty years, neither I believe ever will so long as
the Church of Rome will have any cause to call her self Christ's only visible
Church upon Earth. And I do not believe Matthew's Writing only because it is
reckoned by you and us for holy Scripture, but because we feel by the Spirit of
God that gave forth all words, that it is a declaration of those things which
were brought to pass in his day, and likewise Mark, John and Luke, testify
unto the same matter; but for Nichodemus his Gospel, as you are pleased to call
it, the Spirit of God does not testify in us unto the same, but that it is
repugnant unto the mind of the Spirit, and is a mere patcht up thing in the
corruption of time, wherein many things are contained that are in opposition,
and contrary to Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, their Declaration. And so thy
feeble Argument is answered, which thou conclud^st has not been alterable
these fifteen hundred years; and let not him that puts on his Armor, boast,
but him that has overcome, and puts it off.

7. Proposition is, That it cannot be shown for this fifteen hundred years,
that there has been any Catholic that held that the Pope of Rome was
Antichrist, or that did rail at the most holy Sacrifice of the Mass, or
Invocation of Saints and Angels, and usual Praying for the Dead, and such like
works of Piety belonging to our Faith and Religion, which the whole world has
laudably practiced and reverenced for fifteen hundred years.

It is a wonder that this Author belonging to the the Church of Rome, is not
ashamed of his Arguments, and the silly Propositions that he has propounded
from another hand: It seems neither this Author, nor Francis Costherus, whose
Propositions the Author has vaunted in, and boasted of, knows the Apostles
Doctrine, who said, The whole world lay in wickedness: and If any man loved the
World, the love of the Father dwells not in him: and Christ said to his true
Church, Ye are not of the World, therefore the World hates you: and again, I
have chosen you out of the World; and John in his day saw through the Spirit,
all the World wandering after the Beast, and worshipping his Image (and not the
Image of God) and saw all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People to be Waters;
and the Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People to drink the Whores Cup; and
these the two Authors brings in for a great proof, and for an unanswerable
Proposition, as that the whole World lies in wickedness, in whom the love of
God dwells not in; and they that have drunk of the Whores Cup of Fornication,
and they that have wondered after the Beast, to wit, the whole World, these are
his dark cloud of Witnesses, to prove that the Pope was never called
Antichrist. Will they that have received the Roman Faith, and accounts the
Pope Christ's Vicar, and the Visible Head, call him Antichrist, which has
exalted himself, and the Church of Romes Faith over the whole world, as the
Author boasts, That the whole world has laudably practiced and reverenced
Invocation of Saints, and Praying for the Dead, for the Piety, Faith and
Religion of the Church of Rome for this 1500 years: This proves the Church of
Rome to lie in wickedness, and to be contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of
Christ and his Apostles. And this does not clear the Pope at all, but rather
makes him to be an Antichrist, and your Church to be the ill-favored Harlot,
and not the true Church of Christ. Have thou forgotten how John Bishop of
Constantinople would needs be chief Bishop over all the rest of the Churches,
about the year two hundred fifty and upwards, and how the other Bishops cried
out against him for to be Antichrist: But your Bishop he got to be called
Chief-Bishop over all Christian Churches; not by consent of the Elders nor
Churches, but by the means of Phocus a Heathen Emperor, as before I have said;
and is not he much more an Antichrist? And as for the Sacrifice in the Mass,
Invocation of Saints, and Praying for the Dead, which thou say is a laudable
practice, I say none has or does reckon it worthy of praise, but they that
worship the Beast and his Image, and have drunk of the Whores Cup, and are
erred from the Faith and Religion that the Apostles and true Church of Christ
were in, which all the world did that wondered after the Beast.

Lastly, this I say, He that teaches a Faith, a Religion, a Doctrine contrary
to the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, is an Antichrist; But the Pope this
1500 years has taught a contrary Doctrine; therefore he is an Antichrist. The
first Proposition is evident from diverse testimonies of Scriptures, who
teaches only to pray unto the Lord in the name of Christ, and for them that
are alive in the body, and not for them that are dead. The Second is proved by
the Authors own testimony, That the Pope and Church of Rome has prayed unto
the Saints, and prayed for the Dead this 1500 years (to his shame be it spoken)
therefore the consequence must necessary follow, The Pope is an Antichrist.

8. And last Proposition is this, That the first Authors of the Christian Faith
in Germany, Italy, Spain, France, England and Low Countries have acknowledged
no other Faith, nor brought any other to them, then the Catholic. Roman Faith,
which the whole Universe has acknowledged, which we have learned of our
Forefathes; therefore they that have brought in another are accursed.

That which the Whole Universe has acknowledged (in the Apostasy) which lies
in wickedness, seeing all has wondered after the Beast, and drunk of the
Whore's cup since the Apostles days, is but a lame and pitiful argument, as to
prove the Church of Rome the true Church; and as for the Faith delivering (such
as it was) to the Nations beforementioned, only excepting Spain, because it is
probable that the Apostle Paul spread the Faith there, seeing that he said he
had a purpose to come there into Spain, which if he did, thy boast may cease as
for the planting of Religion there; and we know he was no hypocrite, but the
same Faith and gospel which he had preached over the Regions, he would preach
there; and his Gospel and Doctrine we find contrary to the Church of Rome; he
condemned diverse Doctrines which the Church of Rome holds, as forbidding
Meats, Marriages, new Moons and Sabbaths, and voluntary humility, and
worshipping of Angels, and praying unto them, and praying for the dead; and if
you brought the Christian Faith (so called) into the rest of the Nations first,
and the aforesaid Doctrines mentioned, and preached them up for Apostolic
Institutions, then you brought in a Doctrine and a Gospel that is accursed,
which you have received of your forefathers, who wondered after the Beast, and
received his mark, and have been drunken with the Whore's Cup, to wit, the
Universe which you lay claim to, and none but you called Christians: So that it
is manifest, your Visible, Universal Church is the Harlot, and has brought in
another Gospel, and other Doctrines than the Apostles, and so are anathomized;
for the Apostles preached the Power of God to be the Gospel; and you have
preached traditions, inventions, old Wives Fables, and outward ceremonies for
the Gospel, and so have deceived the Nations; and now when they begin to
dislike your Traffic, you are angry; but the day has made manifest, that
discovers all your deceit.

And now I have answered the substance of the Book, and also the eight
Propositions proposed by the Author and thee, and I am not yet at the wits end,
as thou says the Ministers in Germany and the Low Countries have been, neither
at Wisdoms end, but am in it, and ready (if you will lay down your carnal
weapons to begin with thee, and to vindicate the Truth as it is in Jesus,
against the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, whenever I shall hear of thee*
or any that pertain to your Church make such another bold attempt, as to
condemn all since the Apostles days for Sectaries, Heretics and Scismaticks,
who have dissented from you; and shall endeavor in the strength of Christ to
vindicate and contend (though not with Cain's weapons) for the Faith and
Doctrine which was once delivered to the Saints before the Apostasy, and now is
manifest again in us, and is with us, when the Apostasy is coming to an end,
and the everlasting Gospel is to be preached again to them that dwell on the
Earth, and to Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and people that they may come to the
true Foundation again, and to the Rock of Ages again, that they may be
established in righteousness for ever, the joyful sound whereof is going into
the Borders of Babylon, which will make the Inhabitants thereof to abhor their
City in which they have inhabited, and they shall return to Zion with Songs of
Deliverance, and everlasting joy upon their Heads, because the hour of God's
judgment is come, and coming upon the Harlot, and the Year of Redemption is
proclaiming to the Captive, and the dead shall be raised to life, and shall
hear the Word of Life, and their graves shall be opened, and they shall have
victory over it; and they that hear the voice of the Son of God in themselves,
shall live, and shall deny the voice of many waters, and the voice of your
Church, Mystery Babylon, whose seat has been upon them.

And as for Doctor Baily, which the Author asserts for his proof, and lays
down his Reasons wherefore the Church of Rome has been, and is still the true
Church, by way of demonstration. He says, That the Church of Rome was an
excellent flourishing* Mother Church; this Church could not cease to be such,
but she must fall either by Apostasy, Herefie or Schism* Now Apostasy (says
he) is a renouncing of the Faith of Christ, and no man will say that the Church
of Rome had ever such a fall*

2. (He says) Heresy is an adhering to some private and singular Opinion, or
Error in Faith, contrary to the approved Doctrine of the Church.

Ans. Whatsoever the Author is pleased to boast of the Church of Rome, we do
not find flourishing for Faith, wholesome Doctrine and sound conversation, more
than other Churches that were planted before her, as is evident both by
Seripture, and the best Ecclesiastical Histories, which the Church of Rome her
self will allow of; and so I can say, the Church of Rome has had a fall (and
prove it too) by Apostasy, Heresy and Schism* As,

First, she is fallen from her first Love, and from the Doctrine of Christ, who
taught to love Enemies, and to do good to them that hate them, and to pray for
them that persecuted them: Now the Church of Rome has not loved their Enemies,
neither such as they reckoned as so, but have persecuted them to death, and to
banishment, who did not receive their Doctrine: And this renouncing of that
Faith which was once delivered to the Saints by Christ himself, who taught to
love Enemies, and if they beat them upon the one check* turn the other; but the
Church of Rome is out of this Faith and Doctrine, and has renounced this Faith
of Christ, and has denied the power of God, and placed it in a Man, to wit,
the Pope, that infallibility is in him And this is in the Apostasy.

2. If Heresy be an adhering to some private Opinion or Error in Faith, then
the Church of Rome is in the Heresy; for the Faith that was held among the
true Churches, was that which did overcome the world, and give victory over
sin; and Faith in Christ was that which only gave an interest into the Kingdom
of God; but Cardinal Bellarmine (a chief Pillar of your Church) has asserted
this for the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, That a man has a two fold right
to the Kingdom of God, first by the merits of Christ; Secondly, by the merits
of man's good works, or works of supererogation: And this is an adhering to a
singular Opinion, and is an Error in the Faith that was generally held in the
true Churches of Christ, as witness* He works in us to will and to do, viz.
Christ. So that there is nothing appropriated unto the creature as a creature.

3. This is an Error in the Faith of the Church of Rome, who teaches, and are
taught, That there is a place called Purgatory in which men are cleansed from
some light faults, or venial sins; and this is contrary to the faith of the
true Christian Churches, and is no less than Heresy; for the true Church, or
Churches of Christ, taught, That the blood of Christ alone cleanses from all
sin, and that he is (to wit, Christ) the propitiation for sin, and the
everlasting Sacrifice and Offering; but you have other Offerings, as the
Sacrifice of the Mass, which you call an unbloody Sacrifice, which is contrary
to the faith of the Christian Church in Christ's and the Apostles days, and
therefore is Heresy.

Again, praying for the dead, and praying to Angels, and worshipping of Images,
is absolute Heresy, and contrary to the Faith and Doctrine of the true Church
of Christ.

4. And as for Schism, the Church of Rome has separated from many other
churches in their practice, and also have excommunicated them as Schismatics
and Heretics, witness the Eastern churches, the church of Caesaria, and diverse
others, as about your Lent, your fasts, feasts, and invented holy days, which
the true Church of Christ did not allow of; but you have brought those things
in as Apostolical, and excommunicated all the rest that would not bow unto you:
As for example, about the Feast of Easter, the time when it should be
celebrated, though Victor the Bishop of Rome excommunicated all the Eastern
Churches because they did not accord with Rome, Eusebius. Lib. 5. cap. 23. At
which Iraeneus, Bishop of Lions in France, sharply reproved him, ibid. cap. 23*

So in many more things which I shall not now stand neither to trouble my self
nor the Reader, which the church of Rome has departed in her practice from the
primitive Church, as you may see farther in a Book entitled, The Glory of the
true church discovered; Published by F. H.

And whereas the Author desires to be satisfied by what General Councils she
was ever condemned, or which of the Fathers wrote against her; or 3dly, By what
Authority she was otherwise approved.

Ans. Because the Author is so confident in his assertions, as though they were
unanswerable, I return this short answer, which if I hear any more from the
Author may be amplified.

For instance, In the year 287. there was a Council of Bishops called at
Sinvis^^, where the Pope was condemned (which your Church has taught could not
err) for sacrificing to Idols.

At a Council held at Carthage decreed, That Clergy men should not meddle with
temporal affairs.

At a Council held at Valentia in France, a Decree was made that Priests should
not marry; and these were called Christians, and some of Rome's Visible,
Universal Church.

And this was again reproved and condemned in the first Council held at Tolledo
in Spain, they decreed that Priests should marry. And now Rome look to thy
unity.

Again at a Council held at Caesar Augusta, accursed all them that eat not the
Sacrament in the Church* but the church of Rome has decreed that it may be
kept, and ready to carry abroad to sick people, and upon other occasions, out
of the Church.

At a general Council at Constantinople, decreed, That Mary shall be called the
Mother of God; as though God were generated by natural generation, which is
Blasphemy.

The Council of Armenium decreed for the Armenians, That Christ was not God.

The Council of Chalcedon (which was one of the four Councils that Pope Gregory
compared to the four Gospels, and that their Decrees were sure and certain as
the Scripture, yet) Pope Leo did not stick to condemn it, and all of them as
unadvised, viz. the whole Council.

So Councils have erred, as is evident; and that which some have decreed for
Apostolic Doctrine since the Apostles days, other Councils have condemned as
Heresy, though called Christians as well as the Church of Rome; and yet they
have condemned that which some Councils did allow.

So the Pope has erred, the Councils have erred, as is manifest in what I have
said, that I shall not trouble my Reader in large things, which I could, and
might do upon another occasion, if I hear any more from the Church of Rome.

2. By what Authority she* (viz. the church of Rome) is reproved. In short, Leo
the fourth, Bishop of Rome, made void the the acts of Adrian, Bishop of Rome.
Stephanus made void and abrogated the Decrees of Formesus and Sabian, Christ's
Vicars so called; commanded that Pope Gregory (another Vicar* so called) his
Writings and Decrees should be burned. And all these beforementioned did say,
and the Church of Rome holds it as such, that they were Peter's Successors. So
here one Father or Head of the church, as they reckon the Bishop of Rome, has
confounded another.

3. The Nicene council determined, That Images were not only to be placed in
the churches, but also worshipped; and the then Pope said, that Images were
laymens Calenders.

The Latterane council under Julius, did repeal the Decrees of the Pissan
council: The Bazil council decreed that a council was above the Pope; but the
Latteran council decreed, that the Pope was above the council, that he that
should think otherwise, should be counted a Heretic: Yet the Bazil council
aforesaid, decreed, that they that judged that a council was not above the
Pope, were Heretics. And yet the Church of Rome lays claim to visibility and
universality over all the World, and yet one as distinct from another, as black
is to white, and is as unsuitable as Snow is in Summer, or Rain in Harvest. One
word more, and I have done.

Boniface the eighth, a great Father of the Church of Rome, and a Pope, That no
man in the World can be saved, unless he be subject to the Roman Church, like
this Author. And Pope Paschal thus said, That no Council could make Laws for
the Church of Rome.

And so much of General Councils, and of the confusion of the Church of Rome; a
few words more of Synods, and I have done.

1. Bernardus says, the Church of Rome was polluted with many Superstitions;
that the Bishops were biters of the Sheep, rather than true Shepherds:
Sometimes (says he) I have admired that there should be a Traitor among the
twelve Disciples, but now I much more wonder that among so great a company of
Bishops and Prelates, one upright Disciple cannot be found, Apop. Chr. Lib. 13,
p. 260.

Gregorius Theologus, who lived about three hundred years after Christ, did
determine never to come more at Councils or Synods, Because (says he) there
comes more evil than good out of them; for the contention and ambitiousnesse of
the Bishops is above measure, said he, Anno 300.

D. Paraeus said, Often has the Truth suffered wrong in Synods, because all
that were assembled, agreed in one error, so that Truth came to be passed by
with silence, Iren. page 57.

Again, Gregorius Nazianzius used to say, That he never had seen any good end
of any Council or Synod, Vide Inst. Clav. 4. Lib. 9. cap. 11.

And some Synods have said, That remedy was not to be expected from the Clergy,
who were the cause of the Disease, Anno 1616.

So the Author says, Whose company did the Church of Rome leave? And from whom
did she go forth? And where was the Church that she did forsake, that she
should be counted Heretical and Schismatical?

I say, She left the company and society of the Primitive Church in Christ's
and the Apostles days, and she went forth from the rest of the Churches that
were planted, as I instanced; The Church of Rome in the year 193* did
excommunicate all the Eastern Churches: And where was the true Church that she
did forsake? says the Author. Not only one, I say, but many, to wit, The
Doctrine that the Apostles had laid down and preached at Antioch, at Philippi,
at Corinth, at Ephesus, and the rest of the Churches of Asia.

And so the Church of Rome is proved to be an Apostate, in the Apostasy, in
Heresy, in Schism; so that there is an absolute defection from the Life and
Power of God which was manifested in the Apostles days, and therefore the
church of Rome is not the true Church.

What I have said as to the Doctrines and Grounds which have been laid down by
the Author, I shall refer it, and the answer, unto Gods Witness in every man's
Conscience; and if I hear any more of the Author, his great Boasts, or
ambitious challenges, which may reach to all that do dissent from the Church of
Rome, as to be Heretics, I shall engage in the strength of the Lord to
vindicate the Truth, however opposed, and shall further (if God permit) be
ready to give a more large and full answer unto the Doctrines, and Practices,
and Worship of the Church of Rome, and prove them to be contrary to the
Scriptures, and the Apostolic Doctrine, and the Faith that was once delivered
unto the Saints.

So in what I have said, I hope may convince the Author of his vain
assertions, and them that are inclined toward Babylon, it may put a stop to
that which would too readily close with every thing which goes under the name
of ANTIQUITY.

But in what I have said upon the whole matter, I hope will be sufficient unto
all who read with a single Eye, without prejudice; and unto such I say, The
Lord give them an Understanding, that they may see and discern the way which
leads to Life and Felicity, from that which leads to the Chambers of Death,
and the paths that take hold on destruction.

FINIS.

