A Hue and Cry AFTER THE Abdicated B -- of E -- Who has lately withdrawn
himself from Justice.
THese are to give Notice, That whereas a Court-fawning, Athe -- Indulging,
False-hearted, Selfish, Matchivilian, Insinuating, Levitical Jacobite has
lately withdrawn himself from the places of his usual Residence (God knows
whither!) These are to give Notice, That if any manner of Person, Man, Woman,
or Child, Protestant or Papist, Christian or Pagan, Williamite or Jacobite, can
give any Tidings of the said Non-obedient, Active, Resisting Reverend Father,
so that he be brought back alive, to receive the just Reward of his late
Actions, shall have a Pecuniary Gratification of 5000 French Crowns.

But that you may not mistake, either in the Person or Character, I will
describe him in his proper Colors, which are as changeable as his Religion and
Allegiance.

This Grand Incendiary of credulous Bigotism, (contrary to the Principles of a
good Christian) changed, like the Camelion, to the prevailing Colors, and
(like a Lobster stewed in his own Sweat) turned in a moment from Black to Red.
And now you will find the pretended Holy Father of the W -- d transformed into
a Bully of the Sword.

This Impostor of his Holy Order, this Shame to his most excellent Profession,
and scandal to all Protestants, particularly to the best constituted Church in
the World, of which he lately pretended himself a Member, you will find him in
the Habit of a Soldier; his Black Gown and Laun converted into a Scarlet Cloak,
his Holy Vest into an embroidered Coat, his Canonical Girdle into a glittering
fringed Scarf, and Sable Hat-band into a Scarlet Feather.

In this Heroic Equipage (they say) he was met upon the Road, in Company with
several of his deluded Jacobites, taking his way to the nearest Seaport for
France, in order to appear In propria Persona at the Gallick Court, to give his
two Masters St. Lewis and St. James a Verbal Account at large of what was more
briefly contained in his two Treasonable Letters lately seized.

He is long Visag'd, lank black Hair of his own, (but now in a Flaxen Perriwig)
indifferent tall and slender, fawning Looks, flattering Smiles, a false Heart,
deceitful Tongue.

He cares no more for the Church than for the Alchoran, but yet he Worships the
Church Lands: He Is a main Incendiary and Politic Jacobite, one who for a long
time has made it his Business to Buoy up and encourage credulous Bigots, that
pin their Faith, without Examination, upon their Instructors, and believe that
all they say is Gospel. He loves to shelter himself under the Wings of Tyranny
and Popery, (...) great Admirer of his Young Master Heliogavalus, His Welsh
Highness. He cares not whom he amuses, and whose Example he follows, so he may
but have the Honor to stand fair with his Masters Lewis and James. He is a Don
of King, James's own peculiar Promotion when Duke of York, and one of his
Cabinet-Council during the Reign of King Charles the Second, at which time he
could never study for harkening after News; in Parliament time a constant Man
crowding in the Court of Requests, or Lobby of the House of Lords, cringing and
fawning on some Grand Debauchee or Atheistical Bravo.

He was lately Chairman to a Numerous Club or Gang of Jacobites that haunt --
House in Shoals, where they sit croaking, like Frogs in March, against the
Government.

He Idolizeth King James as the Heathens did their False Gods, first make the
Idol, and then Worship it. French Tyranny's the Moloch to which he would offer
up his own Posterity, and his own Native Country the Place which he would make
his Valley Gehinnon. He pretends to be a son of the Church of England, but uses
her no better than a Stepmother, to offer the Price of her Preservation for
the Redemption of her professed Enemy.

In fine, He is one of those I evitical Jacobites, that believe a Popish Prince
may do any thing, but abridg them of their Power; if he does that, he is an
Vzziah, he has invaded their Properties, and must be turned out of the Temple
with a withered Arm; and then it is lawful to send for a Prince of Orange to
help them, it is lawful to devolve the Government into his Hands, and humbly to
implore him to take care of their Ark. But no sooner are their Properties safe,
and King William by the General Consent of the Nation advanced in his own Right
to the Vacant Throne; but they are offended at his Protestant Zeal, tell him
they never sent for him to make him their Sovereign, call him King de Facto,
slight his Protection, and rather than acknowledge their Deliverer, would put
on their Philistine Yoke again. Would you go in pursuit of this Prodigy of
Nature, this Grand Incendiary of all our Troubles, who has endeavored to
kindle the Fire, and left us to put out the Flame, keep this Paper by you, and
when you meet him, you need not fear knowing the Person; and when taken,
deliver him into the Hands of Justice, and you will certainly receive the
abovementioned Sum (as a just Reward) for so meritorious a Service.

Books newly Published.
AN Account of the late Horrid Conspiracy to Depose their Present Majesty's K.
William and Q. Mary, to bring in the French, and the late K. James, and ruin
the City of London; with a Relation of the miraculous Discovery thereof. Also
some brief Reflections on the Trials of the Lord Preston and Major Ashton, who
were chiefly concerned therein, and found Guilty. By a Gentleman who was
present at their Trials. Price 6 d.

The History of the Royal Congress at the Hague, together with an Account of
the Glorious Canopy and Chair of State, the several curious and admirable
Fireworks, the many Triumphal Arches, and of the other vast Preparations made
for his Majesty of Great Britain; with an Exact Draught of the manner of K.
William's Entry into the Hague, and reception by the States General. Translated
from the Dutch Copy Printed at Leyden. Price 6 d. Both Sold by the Booksellers
of London and Westminster.

London, Printed for E. Golding. 1691


