THE PURITAN CONVERT, Not to Prelatick Protestantism, and yet to Prelatick
Protestantism; nor to Popery, and yet to Popery; but absolutely, and without
Reserve, to Apostolical Christianity: That is, to whatsoever Doctrine or
practice, Prelatick Protestant or Papist can prove, to have been taught the
World by the Apostles of Jesus Christ.

OR, A DISCOURSE By way of a LETTER: Showing, That Prelatick Protestants, if
they will be true to their Practices and Principles, have all reason to turn
Papists, in all things as to what Papists indeed hold; but in nothing as to
what Papists are vulgarly believed to hold: And that de facto Non-conformists
would turn Papists, were they not imposed upon by false Principles, and
notorious Slanders, devised by the first Separatists from the Church of Rome.
By W. H.

Come and I will teach you how great things God has done for my Soul.

Printed Anno Domini MDCLXXVI. Permissu Superiorum.

THE CATHOLIC NAKED TRUTH. OR, THE PURITAN CONVERT, TO Apostolical
Christianity.

BUT why the Naked Truth? Because I design a Candid. Naked Description of a
Puritan, Prelatick Protestant, Papist, etc. I expect the fate of Poor Robins
Adamite: Some body or other will have a lash at me. But if I escape so well as
the Author of the Prelatick Naked Truth has done, I hope no blood will follow.
To wit, to be first lashed by a severe Animadverter; and then to be stripped
Naked afterward. Had the Candid Author been stripped first and then whipped, his
Case had been more pitious. The Animadverter was a little too hasty. A Third I
hear has taken him to task, but they say he is a more Gentle Whipster.

With my Soul I compassionate him, as one merely imposed upon by Forgeries, and
false Principles, devised by the Reformers, and amongst others, especially by
this, that the New Scripiure is the adequate Rule of Christian Faith and
Worship. Go on, Worthy Sir, to Fast and Pray, whilst others Feast and Play at
Lantrelue.

The First Letter. What the Author means by a Prelatick Protestant, Puritan,
etc.
My Dearest Friends and Nearest Relations,
IT is my hearts desire to speak with every one of you; and to tell you with
all Sincerity, what the All Good God has done for my Poor Soul; but the
troublesomness of the times, and your great distance from one another, not
permitting me so great a comfort; I have thought fit to communicate to you my
good Wishes of your Eternal Happiness by Ink and Paper. Our dear Redeemer,
Jesus Christ, Bless my Poor Labors to you all, and stir up others, who are
better able, more fully to instruct you in the way to Everlasting Bliss; which
I know to be the great desire of your Souls. After the search of many years
spent in Prayer, Reading, and conference with Persons of different persuasions,
I doubt not but I have found out the Truth: Almighty God be forever Blessed for
it. I doubt not but I have found out the True Church of Jesus Christ, the
indeed People of God, who walk in the direct Path to endless Beatitude; and
whosoever walks, as they walk, and teach, shall infallibly see God for ever. I
confess, I am Converted from Puritanism: But, to what? to Prelatick
Protestantism? No; nor to Popery neither: But to Ancient Apostolic
Christianity. Though indeed, I have not so much left Puritanism, as Prelaticks
call it, as added that to it; wherein I found it (and I hope many of you will
find it) come short of the Holy Apostles Doctrine, and Institutions. That you
may the better understand me in my ensuing Discourse, I will briefly Explain to
you, what I understand by a Puritan, what by a Prelatick Protestant, and what
by a Papist, and what by an Apostolical Christian, which I profess my self, by
the Grace of Jesus Christ, to be.

I understand by a Puritan, one that being Visited from Heaven by rousing
checks of Conscience, could find no Rest for their troubled Soul, by living
under the liveless Ministry, and Spiritless form of the established Religion of
England. One, who by reading some portion of Holy Scripture, or other Spiritual
Book, or by hearing some awakening Sermon, was so struck from above, that he
had nothing in his Heart nor Mouth, but that great Question of the man concern:
Sirs, What must I do to be Saved? One, who from the Visitation from on high,
had so much life in him, as to be sensible of the heavy burden of a hard Heart;
and whose great Prayer to the Almighty was, To take from him his Heart of
Stone, and to give him a Heart of Flesh. No Books, no Company, no Sermons, no
Thoughts were gustful to him, but such as were conducing to the melting and
changing of his Heart and Soul. All Lip-labor he deemed but lost Labor, so
long as his Soul within was not changed; so long as his Heart was hard, he
could find no satisfaction in words and expressions, though never so
Pathetical, whether uttered by himself, or others, or set down in Printed
Books: Nay, he was so far from being satisfied with such wordy Devotions, that
he was even afraid to use them, for fear of being guilty of damnable Hypocrisy.
For Example, to say, or read by way of Prayer; O my God, my All! How I love
you! How my Soul is grieved that ever I have offended you! his Conscience
telling him, he had no such Affections, but that his Heart was hard as a very
Stone. No relenting of hearty sorrow for past iniquities; no tender resentments
of the innumerable Divine Benefits; no strong hopes of future Eternal Goods;
nor yet affrighting fears of the dreadful day of wrath; Conscious to himself of
a great deal of ill past, and clear conviction of no present good disposition
in his Soul, and yet assuredly persuaded there must some good be in the Soul,
or no hopes of enjoying the Almighty for ever; without holiness, true Internal
Holiness, Heart-Holiness, Spirit-Holiness in this life, no hopes of seeing the
All Good God in the next. And thus much of a Puritan, I think none that has any
sense of a God can mislike, of whatsoever persuasion he is, whether he be
Papist, Protestant, or Phanatick. I do not use these terms to revile, or
exasperate any one; but merely for distinction sake. And I beseech my Reader
not to be offended at them, if he meet with them now and then in my following
Discourse. God forbid, I should willingly anger those wounds, which with my
Soul I desire to cure.

But what do I understand further by a Puritan? I understand one, who wearied
out with wrestling against the corruptions of his own Heart, still finds much
evil in the interior of his Soul, boylings of anger, flames of concupiscence,
greedy desires of Money, and the things of this life; and however exteriorly
reformed and changed he may seem to be to the World, he is dis-satisfied within
himself, that he is not changed enough; nor changed enough, I say; although his
profane Kindred and acquaintance, think him changed but too too much; because
he will not, nor dare not Revel it with them as formerly. Instead of Plays, and
Comedies, his entertainments now are the Holy Scriptures, or other good Books,
written by such who experimented in their own Souls, what they taught others;
the works rather of Pious Men's Hearts, than of Learned Men's Brains. Whilst his
Companions are roaring and rallying in Tippling Houses and Taverns, he is
sighing, and groaning in his Bedchamber, or Closet; wrestling with his
offended God by hearty Prayers, according to what most presses his wounded and
afflicted Spirit. He dares not lie, he abhors an Oath as Hell; he is afraid to
cheat or cozen any he deals with; though he finds to his grief, but too great
desires of worldly wealth in the bottom of his Heart. Upon days set apart for
the Divine Worship, he wishes he could keep his Soul wholly fixed upon God. He
can by no means satisfy his Conscience, by bearing a part with his Lips only
in any forms of Prayer, though in themselves never so holy and good, for an
hour or two, and then to spend, or rather wast the rest of the day in idle
talk, disports and pastimes, or somewhat worse, Dalliances, Revels, etc. But
his employment is to lay up a stock of provision for his poor Soul to live upon
all the week after. Then he labors to renew his first repentant sorrow for his
life past, and to confirm his weak resolutions of another kind of life for the
time to come, etc.

But what hurt in all this? if this be to be a Puritan, would to God all the
world were Puritans. What need of such a Man's Conversion? Whither must he turn?
What must he change to? unless it be from better to worse. But may he not
change from good to better? why, what is wanting in him? That you shall hear by
and by. Only take notice for the present, That I am so far from being Converted
from thus much of a Puritan, that I most heartily wish I could Convert all the
World unto it. The poor afflicted Puritan, sadly, and deservedly affrighted
with the fear and apprehension of Eternal damnation, labors and works how he
may avoid it: And Beading in the Holy Scripture those words of our Blessed
Savior; Come unto me all ye that labor, and are burdened, and I will refresh
you: And seeing a necessity of some righteousness or other to entitle him to
Heaven, and finding nothing in himself but sin and wickedness; and having heard
much talk of the righteousness of Christ, and of being saved by his
Righteousness, and finding some places in the Epistles of St. Paul, which seem
to sound that way, all his care is to apprehend that Righteousness, and to rely
upon what Jesus Christ has done and suffered for him: And by this means he
begins to deem himself in a secure condition. By the Blood of Christ thus
apprehended and applied by a lively Faith, he grows very confident and assured,
all the fire of Hell is quenched as to him, and he fears damnation no longer:
And though unworthy of his Heavenly Fathers Benediction for any thing in
himself, yet appearing before him in the Garments of his Elder Brother, he
doubts not of a Blessing, and that an Eternal one too. And this conceit if it
do not make hm very bold to sin, at least it makes him very negligent in
adorning his Soul with Piety, Charity, Meekness, Patience, Humility, and other
Christian Virtues; partly thinking them impossible to be attained; partly
deeming there is no absolute necessity of them to his Salvation: He having
nothing to do, but to believe that Jesus Christ has done all for him, and what
Love, or Piety, or other Virtue necessarily follows from such a Faith, he
willingly admits: but for the rest, solicitously to endeavor after the
acquisition of Virtues, he looks upon as the working of an Old Testament
Spirit, and a derogation from the perfect Salvation by Jesus Christ, and his
Righteousness. The Old Covenant was, Do this and Live; but now he is under a
better Covenant, Believe and Live, or Live and do this. The impression his
first awakening has left upon him, keeps him from returning to open lewdness
and profaness; but his Faith of this imputative Righteousness of Christ, makes
him take little pains in the cultivating of his own Soul, either in purging it
of the Relics of ill habits, or in planting in it the Divine Virtues, our Lord
Jesus taught us to exercise, by his Word and Example. And this is our Puritans
first mistake; and a dangerous one too, as I shall show afterward.

His next mistake is; he begins to quarrel with all Exterior Worship and
Ceremonies. And he falls into this mistake by reflecting upon his own
Experience, as having reaped no benefit by forms of Prayer, by Bowing at the
Name of Jesus; by looking upon certain days as Holy Days, and Fasting-days,
etc. Hence he begins to think, all such Observances are wholly useless and
unprofitable, if not abominable and superstitious besides. And he is much
confirmed in this his Imagination, by considering the open profaness, and
little sense of God, he observes generally in zealous Conformists. Moreover, on
the other side, he takes notice of his Brethren Non-Conformists, that they are
generally free from open and scandalous sins, and at least sigh and breath
after Interior Spirit and Devotion, which certainly must be that must give us a
Title to Heaven, rather than a few cringes, or Exterior Verbal Devotions, which
any one, though never so Profane, may easily exercise; and indeed he sees with
his Eyes many do Exercise, who give no Testimony at all of any work of
Regeneration in their Hearts; but by their profane, light, and vain
Conversation, give too clear evidences of their being still in their natural
unregenerate condition. And accordingly their Preachers in their Sermons have
little life or zeal; and seldom discourse of such Truths, as are apt to awaken
Men's Consciences, and make them lay to Heart the great concern of the Salvation
of their Souls: Or if they do at any time Preach of Judgment, or Hell;
Repentance, or a New Life; they do it very coldly and imperfectly, and seem to
talk like Parrots what they have learnt by rote, and out of others Books, and
not what they have had any Experience of in their own Hearts. Such Reflections,
joined with some places of the New Testament not rightly understood, make him
think, that whatsoever was pleasing to Almighty God, or profitable to the
Jewish People under Moses; Now we that are under the Gospel, must be Spiritual
Worshippers, if we will be Worshippers in Truth, and must cast away all
Exterior forms of words, and outward observances of days and places, as
hindrances to True Spiritual Gospel Worship. And all agreeing, that the Body of
the Mosaical Law is abolished, with its Priesthood, Sacrifices, special
Garments in time of Divine Worship, particular days to be kept Holy, etc. This
being confessed by all, as well Protestants as Papists, and finding no clear
express mention in the New Testament of any Exterior Rites, (except a very few)
appointed by our Blessed Savior, or his Apostles; no Holy Days, nor
Fasting-days, no particular Garments for Priests, no set forms of Prayer for
them, or the people, except one little short one, commonly called Our Lards
Prayer; and deeming that the New Testament was written to instruct us
Christians in the whole Body of Gospel Worship, as the Old Testament was
written to instrust the Jews in the Mosaical manner of Service: Our
well-meaning Puritan makes no doubt, but all Ember-days, Vigils, Lent-Fast,
Christmas Day, Good Friday, Ascension, Whitsontide, etc. are mere humane
Inventions, a mere Will Worship; the blind observers whereof can expect no
other reward, at the day of Account, but that sharp check; Who has required
these things at your hands? instead of a, well done Good and Faithful Servant,
enter into the Joy of thy Lord, which they vainly expected for a toilsom
observance of a company of burdensome Ceremonies of their own devising. And
this I understand by a Puritan.

By a Prelatick Protestant, I understand one, who agrees with the Puritan in
this, that he expects Salvation by the extrinsecal Righteousness of Christ
without him, not by any interior Righteousness within his own Soul. Though some
of the Prelatick Clergy begin to scoff at the Doctrine of Imputative Justice.
One of them lately in a Sermon before His Majesty, called it, and not
improperly, The Mummery of Imputative Justice. As if he would tell us, that an
Imputative Holy Man, is a mere Christmas Mummer, who to little Boys and Girls
seems a Prince in his assumed Bravery; but Persons of years and understanding,
see under his borrowed Regal Attire, a poor Cobbler, or sorry Botcher; or like
the Daw in the Fable, who had made himself very gay with the fine Feathers he
had stolen from other Birds; but when each Bird, being to appear before their
King in their proper Array, snatched back their stolen Feathers; the poor Daw,
that had made himself fine with another Bravery, became the common object of
scorn and laughter. Such will be the sad Lot of merely Imputative Saints, who
to themselves, and their Brethren, seem very fine, in the extrinsecal
Righteousness of Christ, put on by their Fantastical Faith, whilst God and his
Angels, under all this conceited, assumed Bravery, see a lascivious, wanton, or
a covetous Miser. But if the Prelatick Protestant and Puritan agree in the
Doctrine of Imputative Justice, wherein do they differ? Has the Prelatick
Protestant no terrors of Conscience upon him, as well as the Puritan? Generally
speaking, Prelatick Protestants (I wish it were a slander) are very profane,
and give no signs of any Interior trouble of Conscience. And if any of them
begin to be heartily troubled for his sins, he is observed either to turn
Fanatic, or Papist; that is, either to practice what he professes, as to
Holy Days, and Fasting-days, Confession of sins to a Priest, and such like
Rites, wherein he agrees with the Church of Rome; or else to turn Fanatic, and
scoff at all such observances, as Legal, mimical, and superstitious. But whilst
he continues Protestant, in what differs he from the Puritan? why, he is very
angry with the Puritan, that he will not abstain from Flesh in Lent, upon
Fridays, Ember-days, and Vigils of Saints: Though practically speaking, no body
takes less notice of them than himself: Only on the Sunday before, as the
public Minister of the Great God in Pontificalibus, in time of Divine Service,
he advertiseth the people of such and such days of Abstinence, and Fasting, as
occurr: And the poor Puritan, because he will not solemnly invite the people to
observe, what himself never intends to take the least notice of, must for this
be silenced, and suspended both from Office and Benefice. Again, the Prelatick
Protestant, he wonders the Puritan should scruple the Adorning the Communion
Table with two Wax Tapers, thereby to proclaim before God and Man, that he is
of that Church, which in the Primitive times for fear of persecution, served
God Almighty by Candlelight in Dens and Caves. And the simple Puritan thinks
it all one ridiculous, to have Candles upon his Table, at noon day unlighted,
as lighted; Nay, of the two, it seems to him greater nonsense to have them
unlighted. For that the Papists who light them, may pretend Ornament and
Increase of Splendour: But to have them there, and not to light them, no account
can be given, unless it be for that it is less expensive. Moreover, the
Prelatick Protestant wonders, what hurt the Puritan can see in making the Sign
of the Cross, upon the Forehead of a new Baptized Infant; though even he
smiles at a Papist, when he makes it upon himself, or his Victuals; which the
Puritan can by no means understand. If our Lord Jesus, says the Nonconformist,
would have Christians Cross their Children, in memory of his dying upon a
Cross; I cannot think it credible, that he should prohibit them to Cross
themselves, upon the same account. Or if he must be wise above what is written,
he thinks he may as well credit the Papist, who says, He has a Tradition for
Crossing himself; as the Bishop, who says he has a Tradition for Crossing his
Children. The Prelatick Protestant wonders the Puritan can doubt, the Holy
Eucharist (as he begins to call it) is really and truly the Body of Christ?
since our Blessed Lord says so plainly of it, at his last Supper, This is my
Body. Why then should any one doubt of the Feal Presence of our Saviors Body,
where himself says it to be? Or why should any one refuse to Adore upon his
Knees his Blessed Savior, under whatsoever form or shape, he shall please to
represent himself unto him; provided it be himself really, truly and indeed, as
here none can doubt him to be, having his own infallible word for it. And why
he may not appear to us in the form of Bread, after his Ascension, as well as
he appeared to St. Mary Magdalen in the shape of a Gardener, after his
Resurrection, M. Thorndike cannot understand. Nay. Dr. Cosins in his History of
Traensubstantiation goes yet further, and says, Page 44. It is not questioned,
whether the Body of Christ be absent from the Sacrament, duly Administered
according to his Institution, which we Protestants neither affirm nor believe:
For it being given and received in the Communion, it must needs be that it is
present, though in some manner veyled under the Sacrament; so that of it self
it cannot be seen. And Page 117. Protestants do freely grant, and firmly
believe, That the Wine (as has often been said) is changed into the Blood of
Christ; but every change is not a Transubstantiation. Now the Puritan wonders
how any of this belief can boggle at the Popish Transubstantiation, or change
of Bread, in the Holy Communion, into Christ's Body. If there be no change at
all made in the Bread and Wine, says the Puritan, either by Prelatical, or
Popish Consecration; without all peradventure there can be no Real Presence of
Christ's Body. The same remaining the same, without any change, must needs be
the same. But if there be any change made; in Accidents, its evident there is
none; our Senses, and all Popish Doctors confessing as much. If therefore there
be any change, it must be in the substances of Bread and Wine; and if so, what
can such a Change be more properly called, than Transubstantiation? or the
change of the substances of Bread and Wine, into the substance of our Blessed
Saviors Body and Blood, the accidents of figure, taste, and color remaining
unaltered? The Prelatick Protestant wonders, that the Puritan, when he is going
out of this World, should find difficulty to make a particular Confession of
his sins, if any grievous matter lie upon his Conscience; and humbly desire the
Prelatick Priests Absolution, saying over him after his special Confession: By
the Authority of Jesus Christ committed to me, I Absolve thee from thy sins, in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. The Puritan
replies; if Jesus Christ has Instituted any such Ordinance, he sees not why
every one should not frequent it every year, or as often as he finds himself
conscious of any heinous crime with the Papist. But Jesus Christ having
Instituted no such Right or Sacrament, he wonders any dare be so bold to press
it upon any Christian living, or dying; and indeed least of all dying: when
sure, if ever, we ought to have a care, not to seek to please Almighty God, by
unprescribed Will Worship, or Inventions of our own. Moreover, the Prelatick
Protestant wonders at the Puritans Niceness, that he can by no means be
persuaded to Bow at the Sacred Name of Jesus; when Nature teaches us a Relative
Reverence to any thing that has a Relative Respect to a Person whom we Honor:
Every one without scruple standing bare in the Presence Chamber; nor does any
one pass the Kings Chair of State without a Reverend Bow, whether His Majesty
be there or no. And the simple Puritan deems it as gross Idolatry to worship
Sounds, as Colors; Names, as Pictures; and stranges, that any one who does so
superstitiously cringe and bow at the Name of Jesus, should smile at a Papist
for respectfully putting off his Hat, when he passes by the Picture of the same
Jesus. The sound of the Name of Jesus being vanished and gone, before the
superstitious Worshipper can make his Mimical Congy, whereas the Picture, a far
more lively Representation of the same Great Lord is permanent, and remains to
receive its Devout Reverers Relative Respect. The Conformist wonders what there
is in a decent White Surplice, that should boggle the skewish Puritan: And the
Puritan admires how any one can think a Surplice should become a public
Minister of the Divine Worship, and yet throw away, as Babilonish Rags, the
Popish Girdle, Stole, and Casuble, which add Splendour and Decency to the same
unwritten superstitious Garb, unless it be because they are more chargable. The
Conformist wonders at the Puritans scrupulosity, that he cannot say Amen, to
that Prayer in the Burial of the Dead: That we with this our Brother, and all
other departed in the true Faith of thy Holy Name, may have our perfect
Consummation and Bliss, both in Body and Soul, etc. We must pray for the Dead,
says the Rector of St. Martins in Oxford, in his Sermon called the Schismatical
Puritan. Thy Kingdom come, O Lord raise the dead Prisoners in the Grave. And
herein we pray for their Souls and Bodies. God be with them to comfort their
Souls deprived of their Bodies. And to the Puritan this seems plain Popery. In
fine, the Prelatick Protestant wonders at the Puritans pride, that he will not
submit his Judgment in matters of Faith, to the determination of a Council of
all the Reverend Bishops of the Land, His Majesty as supreme Head and Governor
presiding: And the Puritan is amazed, that if we may pin our Faith upon another
man's sleeve, and safely believe, as a particular Church in England believes;
how it can be unsafe to submit ones judgment to the determination of a General
Council of all the Learned Bishops of the Christian world, his Holiness the
Pope as supreme Pastor presiding, and believe as the Universal Church of Christ
believes. It Is fitting, says the Conformist, that for order sake, in Christ's
Church there should be in every Nation some supreme Governors, to whose
Directions, in matters of Divine Worship, all should submit, else we shall have
as many Christian Religions, and ways of Worship, as there are Parishes; nay,
as there are private Families, or particular Persons. The Puritan replies; if
we must conclude our Lord Jesus governs his Church, as our reason tells us it is
fitting he should, for Union, Decency, and Order govern it, and not according
to the infallible written Rule of the New Testament: If the Case be this; It
seems to him as rational, that he should for the same Reasons of conserving
Union, Decency and Order in his Church appoint one supreme Pastor over all
Christians dispersed in all the Nations of the World, whom all should obey in
the vacancy of General Councils, for fear forsooth otherwise, there should be
as many ways of Christian Worship, as there are several Christian Kingdoms, of
Commonwealths. I speak not this to revile the established Religion of the
Nation, but to excite the Professors of it to observe devoutly, what they
Christianly profess, as to Holy Days, Lent, Fridays, and other Fasting-days,
Confession of sins to a Priest, and other Holy and Profitable Rites, when
Piously, and Reverently performed, and by which they are distinguished from
Non-conformists.

And by this time I hope, My Dearest Relations, you understand what I mean by a
Prelatick Protestant. But what do I understand by Popery, and a Papist? Why
what should I understand by a Papist, but what the generality of people
understand by a Papist; Those things we call Stones, which every body commonly
speaking calls Stones; and so I understand by Popery and a Papist, what every
body commonly speaking calls a Papist and Popery. By a Papist then I understand
one, that worships Stocks and Stones, Medals, and Pictures of Jesus Christ, and
the Virgin Mary, and other Saints, as Gods, and consequently prays to them, and
puts his whole confidence in them; as the ancient Heathens did in their dumb
Idols of Jupiter Mars, and Venus, etc. I say one that worships Pictures of
Jesus Christ, as Gods: Not barely one that has such Pictures, and for pious
purposes also, for that Prelatick Protestants have as well as they. Protestants
have Pictures of Jesus Christ and his Holy Mother, not only in their private
Houses, and public Churches, but even, their very Common Prayer Books are full
of them in the last Impression, to excite in the Beholders mind a lively
apprehension of our. Blessed Saviors life and death. Nor can I think, they
that are so ceremonious in devoutly Bowing, when they hear the Holy Name of
their Savior Jesus, can forbear in some devout fit, especially those of the
tenderer Sex, from kissing the Picture of their same dearest Lord. But here is
the difference betwixt them and the Doltish Papist: That the Papist Bows at the
Name of Jesus, and kisses his Picture, with a design to give Divine Honor to
the very Name and Picture; but our Prelatick Protestant does the same thing,
intending only to give them civil respect, as he would give to the Name or
Picture of his King, Furthermore a Papist is one that believes the Pope can
give him leave to commit any sin for Money; or if any one were so bold to
commit the sin before he got leave to commit it; it is but giving so much Money,
and the same Holy Indulgent Father can so perfectly pardon your sin, as you
shall not be in the least danger of any punishment for it, Temporal or Eternal,
in Purgatary or in Hell: And all this, though you have no purpose at all to
forsake your sin. And this his Holy Father can do by a plenitude of Power,
which he has of disposing and applying to whom he pleases, penitent or not
penitent, the superabundant merits of Jesus Christ our Blessed Savior and his
Millions of Saints, of all whose merits the Pope is supreme Lord to dispose of
them to the living or dead, as he by his un-erring Spirit thinks fitting. I say
to the living or dead? for this Papist believes, that the Pope can free, what
Souls out of Purgatory he pleases, paying their debts for which they are there
in prison, out of the stock of the supererrogatory works of Saints: Always
provided that in lieu or rather purchase of so great a favor, some of the
deceased parties friends give a large alms to his Holiness. Moreover, the
Papist Honors the Virgin Mary much more than he does her Divine Son or God the
Father; and therefore for one Prayer he makes to God, he says ten to the Holy
Virgin. But alas what are his Prayers? A company of Latin words he neither
understands, nor cares to understand, which if he do but patter over in such a
number, though his mind and heart be wholly taken up with worldly thoughts and
desires, he thinks he has done such a meritorious work, as God almighty is
obliged for the great Honor he has done him to give him Eternal Happiness. If
he do but believe as his Churchmen believe, though he be wholly ignorant of
their Belief, his Soul is safe enough.

Besides, he makes not only Gods of Holy Men departed, but even of sinful Men
whilst they live. Hence he makes less scruple of breaking Gods Laws, than he
does of violating any Ordinance of the Pope, or any Law of his Church. He must
by no means touch the least bit of Flesh on a Fasting-day, against his
Church's Law, upon pain of damnation; but if he commit Fornication, it is but a
Venial sin, and sprinkling himself with a little Holy Water, he is as pure from
all spot as a new Baptized Infant. And as for obedience to Magistrates, if they
be not of his Religion, he ows them no Allegiance: And it he have by Oath
obliged himself, he has a Holy Father can dispense with him for that or any
other Oath for a piece of Money. If his Prince persecute him for his Religion,
let him but have so much desperate courage to Sacrifice his own life, to Stab
or Poison his said Persecutor, he shall at Rome be Canonized for a Saint. Nor
can private persons expect any fidelity from him, when he is thus traitorously
rebellious against his Liege Lord and Soverain. Therefore whatsoever promise he
has made to an Heritick, he may lawfully break it, and cheat and cozen him
without any scruple: Nay, need make no more difficulty of killing an Heritick,
than of a common Highway Man. As for Fasting and Mortification, if he but
abstain from Flesh, though he drink all day long the best Wines he can get,
fill himself at noon with all variety of Fish, and stuff himself again at night
with all sorts of Sweetmeats, he has like a good Christian piously and
sorrowfully commemorated the bitter death and passion of his dear Redeemer; he
has done a work of a strange force to satisfy for his sins, to suppress his
corrupt inclinations, to elevate his mind to Heaven, to cast out the Devil, to
obtain the Holy Ghost for himself or others. As for Virginal Purity, if he do
but make a Vow of Chastity, and keep himself from Marriage, though he be as
familiar with Nunns as Lay People are with their lawful Wives; he is one of the
Virgins in the Mystical Book of St. John, who follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes. As to Pardons and Indulgences it is wonderful what he believes. For a
round Sum of Money paid to his Holy Father the Pope, he can purchase a Pardon
for himself, and his Heirs for ever, for whatsoever sins he or they may
possibly commit. Sins that are to be committed by himself twenty years hence,
or by his Posterity a hundred years hence, he has a Pardon for them already in
his Pocket, under the Broad Seal of Christ's Vicar upon Earth: which our Lord
Jesus neither can nor will deny, but has engaged his infallible word to ratify
and confirm and all this, though the Persons who have obtained this Pardon or
Indulgence should chance to dye without the least Remorse or Repentance for
their sins. And by this the World is taught to understand what a Blessing it is
to have a great Estate, for that Rich Men who have but Money to purchase one of
those Pardons, can never fail of Heaven; whereas the Poor, and those of slender
Fortunes, for want of them, must be hurried away into Eternal Misery, without
Bail or Mainprize. Moreover, by virtue of these Pardons, they have leave to
commit all manner of villainies without sin, or at least without any danger of
receiving any prejudice by sin, These Papists they will tell you indeed, their
Church is a Holy Church, and has all means imaginable to suppress vice, and
encourage to sanctity. They have a Hell to set before audacious sinners, to
terrify them from committing mortal and grievous offenses, and they have a
Purgatory with which they threaten lesser offenders. But in very deed both
their Hell and their Purgatory, are so easily avoided by any one that has a
little Money, that he must be one that startles at his own shadow, that can at
all be terrified by either. For had you committed all kinds of sins imaginable,
if you have but the Impudence to tell your Ghostly Father all those villainies
in his Ear, though you be so far from resolving to amend, as you secretly
purpose when you have cleared the old, to begin a new score, provided you do
but profess to your said Confessor, that you are sorry and say you will amend,
he by three or four words in Latin, Ego te Absolvo, etc. By the Authority of
Jesus Christ I Absolve thee from thy sins; does as perfectly free you from all
obligation to Eternal Torments, as if you had never sinned. And as for the
temporal pains in Purgatory, which may be due to you for want of a true sorrow,
and a hearty purpose to amend, it is but saying Seven Pater Nosters, and as many
Ave Mary's, upon such a Saints day in such a Church, and you go strait to
Heaven clear from all spot and stain. There are many more ridiculous
absurdities which this sadly deluded Papist believes and practices, but these I
think are sufficient to make any Man in his wits to abhor Popery as the
greatest piece of Nonsense imaginable. And understanding by Popery, what has
been said (and yet that is not half of that Ridiculosity, which the Generality
of people in England understand by it) he that should turn Papist, be he for
Religion, Protestant, Jew or Turk he must certainly for understanding be a Mad
Man, Child or Fool, either one that has lost his wits, or one that is not yet
come to his wit, or one that never had, nor ever shall have any wit.

But were not our Ancestors here in England for many ages together all Papists?
Are not whole Nations, France, Spain, Italy and others generally Papists? Have
we not some thousands of Papists still remaining in our own Country. Are all
these Children, Fools or Mad Men? Let them look to that. You and I are sure
that no Man that has half the understanding of a Man, can think that such a
bundle of ridiculous Tenets and Absurdities, can look like any such thing as a
Religion revealed from Heaven: And if they confess themselves to be Papists,
and to hold those witless absurdities; the Conclusion unavoidably falls upon
them. They must be Children, Mad Men, or Fools. Unless you will say, they know
well enough all those ridiculous absurdities, how irrational and senseless they
are, as well as you and I; but for temporal ends, in their Hearts being of no
Religion at all, they make a profession of believing and revering all the
abovementioned Fopperies. And this I must confess is another strange folly in
these Papists, and a contradiction not to be paralel'd in the most blockish
uncultivated Indians. For the Happiness, Riches, Honors and Pleasures of this
life, they make a show of believing most seriously a thousand absurdities,
which they laugh at in their Hearts; and yet they are so senseless, as they will
loose their Lives, Estates, Dignities and all, rather than abjure those very
absurdities. Further, They are so ashamed of their doltish Religion, that
charge them with any of their stupid opinions; and they will profess by all that is
Sacred, they neither believe, nor practice any such things, as you lay to their
charge. And yet you and I know most assuredly that they do in the very bottom
of their Hearts so strongly adhere to them, that they would part with Life and
all that is dearest to them, rather than forego them. But how come you and I to
know they hold such and such absurd fancies, they so constantly professing they
hold no such thing? Can any body know their minds and practices better than
they themselves? That Is a considerable Question, and shall be answered
afterward. Sure if this be their Case: That indeed they do not Worship and
Pray to Pictures, and Stocks and Stones as Gods, nor believe any such
extravagant power in their Holy Father at Rome to pardon or give leave to
commit sin for Money, and a thousand other absurdities, which commonly they are
charged with: And yet they will rather endure all losses of Estate, Liberty or
Life, then relinquish the said detestable abominations, methinks they do not
deserve so much to be persecuted, sequestered, imprisoned, hanged drawn and
quartered for Traitors, as to be pitied and cast into Bedlam for Mad Men, or to
have their Estates begged for Natural Fools. There is some Mystery lies hid
here, which we have not yet discovered. Either they are grossly and stupidly
mistaken in matters of Religion, or else we are strangely mistaken in them, and
what is indeed their Religion.

But for Gods sake, as you desire our Eternal Welfare, which you seemed in the
beginning of your discourse so heartily to pretend unto; of what Religion are
you your self, who write thus for the satisfaction of your deluded Puritanical
Kindred and Acquaintance, whom you so pity and compassionate? If you be neither
Puritan, Prelatick Protestant, nor Papist, what are you? A Jew, Turk, or Pagan?
No, I thank the All Good God I am a Christian; An Apostolical Christian. That
is, one that believes whatever Doctrine can be proved to him, to have been
taught the World by the Apostles of Jesus Christ: One that admits of any
practice introduced into the World by the same Apostles: One that reverences
all Books or Writings, as of an in allible Divine Authority left by them. Nay,
if the Holy Apostles left any in Commission as their Successors, to make
Ordinations observable by all Christians, I receive all Decrees of such
Delegates of the Apostles also But these are general terms, what do you believe
in particular as to the Worship of God in this World, and the state of departed
Souls in the other, and such line controverted points betwixt Papists and
Protestants? Do you believe all those Papistical Doctrines you mentioned above
or no? I thank my God, there is not one of them, which I do not detest as Hell
it self. But what do you positively believe? I do believe whatsoever Jesus
Christ taught his Twelve Apostles, and what his Twelve Apostles taught the
World. And I do believe Almighty God has left us who live in this Seventeenth
Age from our Dear Savior, certain and infallible means to know what they
taught the World in that first Age in which they lived; at least so much of
what they taught and established as is needful for us to know and practice, to
dispose us for Beatitude in the other life. For that otherwise the universal
Redeemer, should not have been a sufficient Savior of all the World, but only
of that part of it, which had the happiness to live in that first Age of
Christianism; or at most only of such Ages as were so near that Primitive Happy
Time, that they could certainly and infallibly know what Truths were taught,
and what practices in order to the bettering, to the preparing of Mankind for
Heaven, were set on foot by Jesus Christ, or his infallible Delegates,
Substitutes or VVitnesses.

But what means has Jesus Christ left us at this distance from the time wherein
he illuminated the World by his Divine! resence, to know how he lived, and how
he taught his followers to live to come to Eternal Life. Has he in some strange
Island, preserved some Hundreds of Venerable Old Men, who have been kept alive
ever since that first Age, to testify to all Generation, what kind of Doctrine
they had heard with their Ears, or what kind of Worship they had seen with
their Eyes, taught and established by the first Planters of Christianity? No, I
know no such thing. Though this would have been a strange favor to the World,
would the Almighty Creator have wrought such a Miracle in favor of Ignorant
Man. But what then? Did Jesus Christ after the manner of Moses write a Book of
all Christian Rites and Observances, or did he not at least command some one of
his Twelve Apostles, or all of them together to write some such Book, so full,
so complete, so plain, as none that would not willingly mistake could possibly
mis-understand it? Certainly he could not but foresee, what disputes would
arise about observances of Days and Sacraments amongst Christians in future
Ages. Why did he not tell us plainly by some Authentic Writing or other: His
pleasure was, that all the Mosaical Rites and Observances of Days should be
abolished, and instead of them he would have no Exterior Rites and Days at all;
or else if he would have any, why did he not take care that some Book or other
should be written, wherein every one that could read might see, how many Rites
called Sacraments he would have to be used amongst Christians, and how and to
whom, and by whom he would have them to be administered? Whether he would have
certain days observed by Christians in memory of his Birth, Death, Resurrection
and Ascension or no; any set days of Fasting, any distinction of Garments in
Priests from the People or no? But himself to write never a Book to this
purpose, nor any of his Apostles to write any thing but his Holy Life and Death
four times over, and some little of the Life of some one or two of his
Apostles, and a few occasional Letters of two or three of his Followers to
particular Christians, whom they had fully instructed by word of mouth; what
can we conclude from all this? But that surely Jesus Christ has left us some
other means, than those written Books we have, fully to instruct us in the
whole Counsel of God in Order to our Eternal Salvation. Indeed I find an
Ancient Prophecy, that in the latter days God Almighty would write his Laws in
his Peoples Hearts. Was this to intimate to us, that whosoever would find fully
and clearly the Laws of Jesus Christ in the latter days, he must not so much
consult written Books as the Hearts of Christians? And truly there is no other
way without a miraculous Revelation by the Ministry of Angels, or some such
means, for us who live now to know what was taught or practiced sixteen hundred
years before we were born, but only by Books written in that time or near that
time, or else without Books by the oral Tradition of Fathers to their Children.

But what Certitude can there be in this? Could we speak with every Father and
Son that has lived since the Apostles days, and should they tell us
unanimously, that they had been taught to believe and practice thus and thus:
For Example, to Baptize Children or not to Baptize them, to abstain from Flesh
on Fridays or not to abstain in memory of our Lords bitter Death and Passion,
and to humble our selves for our sins, and such like; no body could doubt of
the truth of such a Testimony, more than he does mistrust his own Eyes or other
Senses? But all the intervening Fathers and Sons 'twixt us and the first Age
wherein our Lord Jesus lived, except only our Fathers and Grandfathers, being
gone to another World; my Grandfather can tell me certainly what his Father
taught him concerning Fasting on Friday, Baptizing of Infants, Reverencing such
a Book as of Divine Authority, written by a Holy Man talled Matthew sixteen
hundred years ago; but what assurance can he give me, that all his Progenitors
have practiced and believed after the same manner ever since the Apostles days?
Why, what assurance could a Jew that lived in our Blessed Savioms time, have
given to a Pagan, or to one of his own Children, that the Books of the Law of
Moses were written by a Holy Man called Moses, who familiarly conversed with
God, so many hundred years ago? He could only have discoursed to him after this
manner. Thus I was told by my Father, and thus all our Neighbouts were told by
their Fathers, and it is impossible in any Age since our Great Moses, all our
Ancestors should agree together to tell their Posterity so great a lie, to
their own, and their Posterities Eternal damnation. One Man may tell an
impudent notorious lie, but a whole Country cannot conspire in a lie which
they know to be a lie; or could they, some neighbor Nation would tell the
Cheat to Posterity. In like manner must the Apostolical Christian answer, when
he is demanded an account, why he reveres such and such Books as Apostolical
writings, or observes such and such Rites as Apostolical Ordinations. And this
is the belief and practice of an Apostolical Christian in general. Whatsoever
this present Age, or any other Age since the Apostles time in several Nations
and Countries, unanimously attest that they have received from their
Forefathers from the Apostles, and he cannot positively show that it was of a
later date: begun for Example in or near such a time, by such and such, he
submits to it as Apostolical; and this though it cannot positively be proved,
that, for Example, such a Book or Practice was received in every Age since the
Apostles days, by positive Testimonies out of Authentic writings of every
particular Age. And thus much satisfaction and no more could Jacob have given
to his Children, why he kept the Sabbath day, commanded by Almighty God to our
first Parent Adam above two thousand years before. He had neither Scripture nor
other Record of writing for any such Institution, the use of writing being
unknown to the world till afterward, when God Almighty wrote the Ten
Commandments in Two Tables of Stone. He could only tell them, thus he and his
Neighbors had been immemorially taught to believe. And their objecting, how
could they tell but some body out of a supersttious opinion of more Sanctity in
every seventh day, than in every sixth or eighth, might have introduced the
will worship of such an Observation; such an Objection, I say, as this, would
not have excused them before God from such an Obligation, which the whole
present Generation told them they had observed immemorially from Adam. And
indeed, though it were granted that according to the Holy Scriptures, we
Christians are obliged to keep every first day of the week Holy* yet it cannot
be proved out of Scripture or any other Book, or by any other Argument, but the
immemorial tradition and practice of several Christian Countries, that the day
we now observe is the true first day of the week, from that first first day on
which our Blessed Savor rose from Death to Life. And yet that there should be
Christians who should make no distinction betwixt Friday and the other days of
the week; though, go into all the Christian Countries of the world, and you will
not find one before Luther, but say they have immemorially from the time of the
Apostles abstained from Flesh upon it in memory of our Blessed Saviors bitter
Death and Passion. I fear me at the day of Judgment, their pleading they found
no such command in all the New Scripture will be no sufficient excuse. If
others fast not as they should do upon that day, must I therefore think I am
excused from fasting upon it as I should? No more than I am excused from laying
aside my worldly Affairs on Sunday, and spending it in Holy Exercises, because
others profane it by drinking and disports. But this by the way only.

As to the satisfaction of that considerable Question above, How we should know
what the Papists believe and practice better than themselves, at least better
than they will tell us what their belief and practice is, as to praying to
Images, buying Pardons and Licenses to commit sin, etc. I must tell you
plainly, I have lived above 20 years amongst them, and I could never yet meet
with so much as one single person, that believed or practiced any one of all
those stupid absurdities I mentioned in my Description of a Papist; and the
truth is, there is not one such Papist in England, nor any where else, but in
Protestants Brains and false Imaginations. Nor do I desire any one should
credit me as to this particular, nor the Adversaries of the Roman Church
neither, but let him ask the first Papist he meets, whether he pray to Images
or no; believe the Pope can give him leave to commit fornication for a piece of
Money or no etc. And if the first Papist he meets with will acknowledge no such
thing, let him propose the same questions to the next he meets, and so to
others, until he find one: or if he can find none, let him not for Phrases in
printed Books which he mis-understands, slander his innocent Neighbors. We
easily mis-understand one another writings, but when we discourse together we
explain our selves what we mean by such and such Expressions, which at the
first hearing cause a wrong understanding in us. And I easily persuade my self
would those of several Persuasions in our sadly divided Country, familiarly
and friendly converse together, and ask an account of each others belief and
practice, we should soon if not be of one mind, at least so far be of one
Heart, that it would be far from us from thinking of persecuting one another to
death for our differences in points of Religion. We suppose the
Roman Catholics hold such and such absurdities, and then here I can have you,
and there I can have you against the Wind-mills of our own Brains. Would Dr.
Stilling fleet or others who write against the Church of Rome, when in some
Catholic Author they meet with some Doctrine or Practice which shocks their
understanding with its (as it seems to them) ridiculousness and absurdity, but
reflect that there are great numbers of persons of sound Judgment and Virtuous
Lives, who believe and justify all Doctrines and Practices truly Catholic;
methinks they could not but suspect; surely I either mis-understand this
Author, or else its only his private opinion, and consequently he alone, and
not the whole Roman Church ought to have dirt cast in her face for it, or or
else they have some Reasons for such a belief or practice unknown to me; and
therefore before I write against it, I Will consult some Romanist of judgment and
understanding about it, who by word of mouth can more plainly declare the said
Doctrine or Practice, and their Reasons for it, if it be indeed owned and
justified by their Church. Such candid sincere dealing as this would cut short
many of our disputes, and strangely conduce to a happy composure of all our
differences. And indeed had we a deep sense of one another Eternal Happiness
and Misery, and strong hearty desires of rightly informing one another in the
direct paths to Eternal Beatitude, we would do some such thing, rather than
misconstrue one another innocent sayings, and lie at the catch to make
picquant re-parties upon each other, as we do.

But, my dear Relations, to give you an account of that strange and hardly
credible, and yet most certain truth, viz. That you living amongst Papists, and
conversing daily with them, nay and often discoursing with them about Religion
too, yet do quite mistake their Religion, and do not at all understand what
they either believe or practice as to their way of Worship, but imagine a
thousand fopperies and madnesses concerning them, which they no less than your
selves abhor and detest with their Hearts. To give an account of this strange
Paradox. Should an Englishman tell a Turk at Constantinople: Sir, I come out of
a Country, where we are not all of one Religion, and for this cause, the
supreme Magistrates persecute those of a different persuasion from them, and
all this merely through a mistake, because they mis-understand one another. The
persecuting party fancies that those whom they persecute hold the most stupid
opinions in matters of Religion, that ever were held by Men: worship Stocks and
Stones as Gods, pray to them, put their confidence in them, etc. think they can
have leave from their Chief Priest, whom they call their Pope, to commit any
sin for money, etc. that is all the absurdities I mentioned above; and yet
notwithstanding not one Man of all the discountenanced party, holds so much as
one of all the Absurdities with which he is charged, but is ready by all that
is Sacred to abjure them all in general, and every one in particular? What
think you would a stranger imagine, to whom such a Narration should be made?
would he not Reply? Surely you do not speak all one and the same Language, or
else if you do, you seldom or never discouse with one another about matters of
Religion, or else you are are a strange blockish people, who cannot understand
common sense; or else the discountenanced party are Men of no Conseience, and
therefore when you demand an account of them concerning their Religion, they
make no scruple to believe in their Hearts one thing, and to swear to you they
believe quite contrary: but then one would think they might abjure their whole
Religion, and conform Exteriorly to the Religion established, and so avoid the
penalties of the Laws in force against them; or else the Ruling Power gains a
considerable Revenue or some other notable advantage, by discountencing
dissenters from them in matters of Religion. No. Pecuniary Mulcts as they are,
through the favor of a Gracious Prince exacted, add nothing at all to the
public Treasury, and the whole force of the Nation is far less formidable to
Externs, than otherwise it would be, were it not for our disunion amongst our
selves. What then is the true Reason, you neither can nor will understand one
another? No body is malicious against his Neighbor, merely because he will be
so, when he is not only no gainer by his malice, but also prejudiced by it,
which notwithstanding if I understand you aright, is the state of your
Country. What must we say in this case to satisfy a stranger to our Affairs?
Why, I would tell him the plain truth: That is, About a hundred and fifty years
ago we were all of the present discountenanced parties Religon, but the Supreme
Power thinking fit in many things to change, or as they phrased it, to reform
the way of worship taught them by their Ancestors, partly aggravated real
abuses, which stood in need of correction, and partly calumniated with a
thousand lies those who would not join with them in their pretended
Reformation, and those lies have been propagated from Fathers to Sons ever
since. Moreover there is a Real and very Considerable difference as to diverse
points, betwixt the Religion established by Law, and the Religion of dissenting
Papists, as we call them: Especially about Transubstantiation, Invocation of
Saints, and Purgatory: And now you know people of different persuasions, are
very apt to slander and mis-understand one another, hoping thereby to make
their own cause more plausible. Besides, those of the established Religion
having the free use not only of the press, to write whatsoever they please
concerning the discountenanced party, but also having the command of all the
public Pulpits, in which every week they represent their Adversaries how they
please to the whole people, no body being permitted to gainsay or contradict
them, nor even to write any thing but by stealth; and after all, their
Apologies for themselves come into the hands but of a very few: And it being
very unreasonable to persecute with loss of Estate or Life, good and peacable
Subjects purely for their Consciences in matters of Religion, and this about
some nice Points only; the Ruling Party (or rather the first Reformers) to
justify their own severe Laws against dissenters, are forced to slander them
with a thousand lies before the vulgar Multitude, who easily believe what is
told them by their Ministers, especially if they be such as they Reverence for
their seeming learning and good life. Nor do I by what I am a saying accuse the
whole present Clergy of lying against their Consciences, when they tell the
people that Papists pray to Stocks and Stones as Gods, can have pardon of sin
past, or leave to commit sin to come for Money. No, I believe many of them do
really think so in their Hearts, having been often told so from their Infancy,
and knowing little of Papists but from printed Books, and these made by their
Adversaries too. But the first Reformers who had been educated in Popery, could
not but lie against their Consciences, when they told the people such lies
concerning Papists as I have made mention of above. In like manner new Apostate
Priests must needs have very bad Consciences, when they accuse, as they do,
Papists of such things, as their own Consciences tell them, themselves were not
guilty of when they were Papists. For Example, the Author of that Scurrilous
Pamphlet, The Rates of sins in the Custom-house of the Church of Rome: What
Conscience could he have? when he could not but fore see that the common people
would thence be confirmed in their mis-belief concerning their Catholic
Neighbors, that they can have pardon and leave to commit any sin for Money,
which in his Conscience he knew to be most false. And yet after all, one that
had a mind to vilify the Church of England, might with the like semblace of
Truth, Entitle a Book, The Rates of sins in the Custom house of the Church of
England, and make good the Title by setting down the Pecuniary Mulcts which are
exacted in Bishops Spiritual Courts for Adulteries, Fornications, Dispensations
in Marriages, etc. as if in the Church of England, you might have leave to
commit Adultery for so much, and Fornication for so much, etc. when all this
while, these are only Pecuniary Punishments by which the Ecclesiastical Power
discountenances, and endeavors to prevent sin and wickedness. And yet what
hurt do such Paltry Pamphlets the simple half-witted Multitude? Jesus have
Mercy on the Authors of them. But I am giving an account of our
misunderstanding one another in matters of Religion.

Add moreover, that Papists do practice certain things which those that are
either very ignorant or very malicious may easily make a bad construction of.
For Example, they most commonly say their Prayers kneeling before some Picture
of our Blessed Savior, or his Holy Mother, or some other Saint; hence
half-witted people that have often heard that Papists worship Images as Gods,
do really think they pray to the Picture they kneel to God Almighty before.
When if you saw their Hearts, or would believe their Tongues, they are as far
from adoring such a Picture as God, as Socrates was from worshipping the
Clouds, as the common people imagined, when they saw him bow his Body to the
Creator of all in the open fields: And do no more pray to Pictures than you do
to the bare walls, or Communion Table set Altar-wise, you kneel before when you
are at your Prayers. What you do to your Communion Table, or to the Name of
Jesus, that they do to the Picture of the same Jesus, and no more. And would
you without passion and partiality converse with them, you would find what I
say to be most true. To illustrate what I am a saying, give me leave to insert
a pleasant Story told me by a Protestant Lady. It seems in a Church in Town,
certain Gentlewomen (and these oftentimes but a quarter-pac'd Conformists, as
the Animadverter upon Naked Truth phrases it) sit very near the Communion
Table, or half-pac'd Popish Altar; now Thorough-pac'd Conforming Ladies entering
the Church, show their respect toward the Holy Table, by making a low
Reverential Court'sy: the Gentlewomen that sit near the Superstitious Altar,
taking all that respect as done to themselves, wonder much at it, and whisper
to one another; Madam, Is that Lady of your Acquaintance? No. Nor of yours
Madam? No. Surely she either knows, or thinks she knows some of us, she so
civily salutes us, etc. Madam; you mistake; It Is not to you, but to the Holy
Eucharist, which is wont to be dispensed from the Sacred Table you sit so near;
the Devout Lady gives all that respect. Just so fares it with the Religious
Papist, who passing by the Image of his Dear Crucified Lord, Reverently pulls
off his Hat, or Respectfully Bows his Head. The half-witted Protestant having
been told from his Cradle that Papists worship Stocks and Stones as Gods, now
believes the Papists to be Idolaters, not because his Minister told him so; but
because he has, as he thinks, been an Eyewitness of their Idolatry; when all
this while the Devout Romanist shows all this respect not to the Carved Wood or
Stone, or painted Cloth or Paper he bows before, but to his great Lord Jesus in
Heaven, represented by those Figures. Put all that has been said together, and
you will see there is no great wonder in it, that the commonalty of our sadly
divided Country should believe a thousand lies in matters of Religion,
concerning their Catholic Neighbors, especially if you add that those who
have been about 150 years slandering of them, have withal told the vulgar,
that Catholics are such a cunning and deceitful people, that you may not
believe them in one word what they say to you concerning their Religion, but
being ashamed of their Fopperies, they will deny them if you lay them to their
charge: Or if at any time you meet with any whose candor and sincerity you are
so convinced of, that you cannot think he would tell you a lie: Then you must
imagine him to be of a particular belief and temper from all other Catholics,
and though he hold no such absurdities by reason of his better understanding,
learning, etc. yet the generality of the people most certainly hold them all. O
the craft and cunning of the Devil and deceitful Men, thus to blind and
miserably impose upon the simple and well-meaning vulgar! Jesus of his Mercy
open their Eyes, and make them see who they are that thus sadly delude and
cheat them. Besides the Laws being very severe against Catholics, many are
afraid to have a better opinion of them than they are taught to have, though
they even see they are much slandered, lest they should be convinced of the
truth of their Religion, and then be obliged either to damn their Souls if they
would not embrace it, or loose their Estates and Preferments if they did
embrace it. Finally, Catholic Religion is a Holy and Strict Religion, and
therefore no wonder if the Professors of it be hated and ill spoke of by the
wicked and loose world. Libertines willingly speak ill of those that are strict
and very conscientious in their ways, but being ashamed to revile them for
their Virtues, (though that be the real quarrel which they have with them) they
mis-interpret their innocent and good Actions, and calumniate their persons
with a thousand slanders. For Example. Catholic Religion teaches, that if any
one have wronged his Neighbor by cheating, cozening or stealing any thing from
him, he is bound if he be able under pain of damnation to make restitution, and
without this no Tears, no Prayers, no Faith in the Blood of Christ can save
him. The same Religion teaches also, that you are bound under pain of damnation
to confess your most secret sins to a Priest, and that if you be truly
penitent, and resolved to lead a new life, upon the Priests absolution on Earth
you are most certainly pardoned in Heaven. It teaches also, that you have a
like obligation to abstain from Flesh in Lent and upon other days of
Abstinence, Fridays, Vigils, etc. Now Flesh and Blood does not like these
Restraints. And hence those that have no mind either to make Restitution of ill
gotten Goods, or to discover their shameful sins to a Priest, or to abstain
from Flesh on certain days, and understanding that Priests when people confess
to them, enjoin them to make Restitution, and if they be not able to fast,
enjoin them oftentimes to give Alms in lieu of it, and in such cases dispense
with the Ecclesiastical Law of Abstinence; this is ground enough to calumniate
poor Papists, and to tell the simple Multitude, that they can buy pardon of
their sins for Money, and have leave from their Priests to break any Law of God
for Money, and let them commit what villainies they please, it is but confessing
them to a Priest, and this without any repentance, or purpose of Amendment.
Misereor super turbam. What Christian Heart would it not make to bleed to see
how the well-meaning Multitude are abused and imposed upon by their deceived
Guides?

My Dear Relations, For the love you have to your Immortal Souls, do your
selves that right as but familiarly to converse with your Catholic Neighbors,
and with as little passion as you can, do but ask them an account of their
Religion, and do not against all common sense and reason, believe the Testimony
of their Adversaries concerning them and their Religion, rather than them
themselves, and if you do not find that you have been taught a thousand lies
concerning them, and that they hold nothing nor practice nothing but what they
are able to give a very satisfactory Account of to any impartial Enquirer, then
say I am a Knave, a Liar, and a Cheat, one that deserves no Mercy from God or
Man, in this World or the next; but if you find what I have said to be most
true, pray for those that have deceived you, and think seriously what it
behooves you to do, and whetehr you have not reason to suspect those Churchmen,
who stand in need of such notorious lies and slanders thereby to defend
themselves against their Adversaries. If Popery be such a doltish and senseless
Religion, then what need of belying it and slandering it to make it odious to
the People? and what fear of Its overspreading the Nation by a free and
unlimited Toleration? But the truth is, it is a Holy, and most rational
Religion, and such as Men must cease to be Men, or they cannot but acknowledge
the Finger of God in it, when it is duly and truly represented as it is in it
self, devoid of all those fopperies and lies with which it is calumniated by
its Adversaries. For the love of God, what Papist in the world believes that
the Gospel is but a Fable of Christ; that the Bishop of Rome is a God; Not any
sin, but is or may be indulged amongst them, and scarce a known sin but there
is a known price for it, and at their Market-rate you may commit them when you
will, that they allow Whoredom all the year long, and the practices of other
uncleanness not to be named among Men in some Months of the year; that mortal
sins are put away by Agnus Dei's, by little parcels of the Gospel, by Popes and
Bishops Pardons, etc. That Christ is the Savior of Men only, but of no Women,
for Women are saved by St. Clare and Mother Jane: That the Pope may check when
he pleases the Epistles of St. Paul, and control any thing avouched by all the
Apostles: That we must simply believe the Church of Rome, whether it teach true
or false; and if the Pope believe there is no life to come, we must believe it
as an Article of our Faith? What Papist in the world believes one of all these
Madnesses and Blasphemies? and yet the whole Roman Church is charged with them
all, by no less a Man than the present Archbishop of York; if that Book be his
Grace's, which is commonly sold in London with his Name to it, and the Printers
also, under the Title of a Manul of Active Positive, and Oppositive Divinity;
written by him to preserve a Noble Lady from the danger of Popery. I confess a
Protestant to whom I read a Dialogue in that Maunal said, Surely some body to
disgrace his Lordship had Printed it under his Name: But on the other side it
is not credible that a Book should be publicly sold, all over England, for
four years together, under so Great a Persons Name and yet be none of his, if
there were any thing in it his Lordship was ashamed to own. I well foresee what
I have written will be ill taken by many, but I dare not but discharge my
Conscience, and profess as in the sight of God, I wtite not thus to disgrace
any Man's Person, but merely to dis-abuse my well-meaning Relations, who I am
sure have such a Zeal of Godliness, and true Sanctity, that they would love
Papists and their Holy and strict Religion with their Hearts, were not they and
their Religion misrepresented unto them. To defame a particular Person is a
great wickedness, but to slander a whole Church is a Detraction of a higher
rank, and assuredly does oblige the Detractor to revoke his Calumnies. God be
merciful to us; we have faults but too too many, what need of belying one
another? Let us believe one another what we say our Tenets of Religion are, and
dispute against those, and not against the uncharitable surmizes of our own
Brains. To judge my Neighbors to be guilty of most horrid Blasphemies, when
they protest they abhor them no less than my self, if this be not to Judge my
Neighbor, which is notwithstanding most severely prohibited me by my Blessed
Savior, I know not what is. Now for a Grave Doctor to accuse not some private
Authors, but the whole Roman Church of all those Blasphemies and Absurdities, I
but now mentioned, and yet not that so much as one single Papist you can meet
with will own so much as one of them, I am at a stand what to think. Surely no
Man could be so malicious to write such things on purpose to abuse a poor Lady;
and on the other side to think that a Doctor of Divinity could be so ignorant
of the Tenets of Papists, as to believe that no body can be a Papist, but he
must necessarily believe the Pope is a God, that he may have leave to commit
almost any sin at a known price when he will; that the Gospel is a Fable etc.
Had he in plain terms told the good Lady, some Roman writers as he understood
them, or as Protestants cited them, held such and such Absurdities and
Blasphemies, but not one Papist she could meet with would own so much as one of
them; this would have signified nothing to the retaining of her in the
Protestant Communion. For the Reply would have been easy: Either you
mis-understand the Authors, or else they are at most but the phrensies of some
particular Men, and consequently I may be a Papist and hold none of them, but
abominate and detest them all. But that he might be sure to preserve the Lady
from the danger of Popery, under the disguise of a Dialogue, he makes a Papist
give for Reasons why he cannot become Protestant, the Blasphemies and
Absurdities above; which is as much as to tell her, if she will turn Papist
such and so Blasphemous must her Faith and Religion be. Methinks knowing many
of his Catholic Neighbors to be Men of good Judgment and honest Conversation,
he should have demanded of them, whether such things were generally believed by
them or no, before he had printed them as Reasons, why a Papist could not
change his Religion: for if one may be a sound Papist and hold none of them,
then all his Lordships discourse falls to the ground, whatsoever some
particular Doctors may hold concerning them. Though that also be a mere
calumny, and should any be so extravagant as to assert such Diabolical
phrensies, he would be cast out of our Church as a Blasphemer.

And that you, My Dear Relations, may see that I have not at all wronged the
Doctor, I have thought fit to transcribe some few Lines out of his 7th. Chap.
Page 101. The next to his Dialogue. The foregoing Sixth Chapter, says he, gives
an account of some of the Blasphemies and Abominations of the Roman Church,
many more might be instanced, etc. Where in plain terms, as before under the
disguise of a Dialogue, he charges not barely some particular Authors, but the
whole Roman Church, and all Roman Catholics with the Blasphemies in the
foregoing Dialogue. He goes on; Where is their Piety toward God, while they
affirm that the Gospel is but a Fable of Christ, etc. Nay even that the Bishop
of Rome is a God, etc. Where is their Sobriety and Chastity, while they
Authorize Stews, allow Whoredom all the year long, etc. Scarce a known sin but
there is a known price for it; and at their Market-rate you may commit them
when you will, etc. Such extravagant Discourses though they may hinder some
from ever examining the Catholic Religion, yet they are oftentimes, God
Almighty outshooting the Devil in his own Bow, happy occasions of the
Conversions of others. I remember to have read of a German Count, who
reflecting how diverse of his Catholic Neighbors were Persons of a very sound
Judgment and Understanding, he began to think with himself, how they could
believe such strange Doctrines, as were by his Ministers commonly laid to their
charge, hereupon he resolved to inquire into their Tenets, and he found for a
great part they held no such Doctrines as they were commonly taxed with, and as
for what they did indeed hold, they had very good Reasons for their Faith. And
so by the merciful Grace of God became a happy Convert to that Religion, the
which before he impartially examined it, seemed so exotic and incredible unto
him. Which I hope, My Dear Relations, will one day be your happy lot also. Take
but pains heartily and diligently to inquire and I doubt not but it will. But
if you will needs go on to think your Catholic Neighbors to be such Monsters
of Men, and to hold such horrid Blasphemies and Absurdities, which they profess
no less to abhor and detest than your selves, I hope I have done the duty of a
Christian Kinsman, and to my grief must one day bear witness against you, that
I told you how grossly you mis-apprehended the True Worshippers of Christ, but
you would neither believe me, nor seriously use any means to inform your selves
aright. But I hope better things concerning you.

Another great cause of all your mistakes is the scandalous lives of too too
many Roman Catholics. For the truth is, no Catholics believe so much as one
of the abovementioned Absurdities, yet many of them (Christ Jesus mend us all)
live so as they may seem to a prejudiced beholder, to believe diverse of them,
Considering their Mock-prayers, Mock-fasts, and Mock-confessions without any
Amendment of life, etc. But to help you against this, you must remember the
Counsel of St. Augustine to cast your Eyes not only upon the Cockle, but also
upon the good Wheat, and if you will needs be comparing the Professors of our
several Religions together, do not compare the best of your own Religion with
the worst of ours, but the best of ours with the best of your own, and the
worst of ours with the worst of your own; and do not consider how little our
Fasting-days, or Holy Days, or Confession of sins, etc. conduce to Piety as
they are observed by the Libertines of our Church, but what helps they would be
to make all the world better, were they observed in a due and Christian manner.
Another great cause of your mistakes is, that great Lie devised by the first
Reformers, viz. That the New Testament is a Complete Rule of Faith and Manners
for all Christians. Hence whatsoever Practice or Ceremony you cannot find
there, you reject it as a Superstition and Will Worship. And this makes you
quarrel with all Abstinence from certain kinds of Meats on Fasting-days, and
with all Holy Days except Sundays, with the Sign of the Cross, etc. Whereas
Christian Doctrines and the Evangelical way of Worship were first taught the
world by the Apostles before they writ any thing at all. Nor did ever any of
the Apostles or all of them together go about to write a Book of the whole Body
of the Christian Law, like to those of Exodus and Leviticus written by Moses,
as is manifest to any one that considers the Nature of the Books of the New
Testament. The four Gospels are a History of our Blessed Saviors Life and
Death, who lived as to the External Rites of Religion according to the ^ewish
Law, and so we cannot reasonably in any of them expect, what Holy Days or
Fasting days or Ceremonial Rites we Christians are to observe in the time of
the Gospel. Indeed had the Acts of the Apostles been intended as an exact
Narration how the Apostles lived as to the whole course of their life, what
days they kept Holy, and what they fasted, and how; and what Sacraments they
administered, and now, and with what Rites, etc. we might reasonably have
expected there some mention of Ascension and Christmas Day, of Lent and
Abstinence from Flesh on Fridays, of Renouncing the Devil, and the Sign of the
Cross in Baptism, etc. But that Holy Book making mention only, of some few
particular passages, of two or three of the Apostles lives, the Apostles might
well keep diverse Holy Days besides Sunday, and abstain from Flesh in Lent and
upon other Fasting-days, and use the Sign of the Cross, etc. and teach the same
also to their first Converts, and yet there be a profound silence of them in
the Book of their Acts. As for St. John's Prophetical Book, it looks nothing
like a Ritual, or an Account of what days and Rites in the Divine Worship are
pecular to us Christians. The rest of the New Testament are Epistles, or
Letters of Spiritual Counsel, written by St. Paul or some other Apostle to
Persons already instructed in the Christian way of Worship. And why they should
make mention therein of all Christian Exterior Rites and Days, I understand
not, unless perchance the Persons they wrote unto had been deficient in such
Observances.

The Adequate Rule of our Faith and Manners are the Doctrines and Practices
taught the World by the Apostles of our Blessed Savior. And the Holy
Scriptures are an Excellent, but not the only means whereby we may assuredly
come to know what Truths were taught, and what Practices were set on foot over
the whole Earth by by the same Apostles. We must consult the immemoral Faith
and Practices, and unanimous attestations of several Christian Countries, and
what they joynly witness immemorally to have received from Father to Son from
the Apostles, whether it be a Book written, as they tell us, by the Apostles,
or a Doctrine taught by them, or a Ritual Observance ordained by them, we
safely submit unto it as Apostolical. For that the several Christian
Inhabitants all over the World could never possibly meet together to forge a
lie. And it is no small cause, My Dear Friends, of all your mistakes, that you
conceit you know the Holy Scriptures to be the infallible Word of God by their
own light. There Is no doubt but any one that reverently reads those Holy Books
cannot but acknowledge that there are very many Excellent Truths declared in
them, but that every thing in them is infallibly true, and that they were
written by Men un-erringly inspired by the Holy Ghost, it is not possible we
should ever have come to know so much, but by the teaching of our Parents, who
from our Infancy imprinted upon us a Reverence to those Sacred Writings above
all others. And did we but reflect that the assurance we have that the Books of
the New Testament were written by Apostolical Persons, is only this, that so
all Christian Countries since the Apostles have immemorially believed, our
Discourse would strait tell us, there is all reason we should ask of those
several Countries from whom we have received those Divine Books, in what sense
they have been always taught to understand them? and interpret them
accordingly; and what Rites and Observances they received together with them?
and admit them with the like Reverence. And it will be hard to give an Account
to our Blessed Savior, why with such awful dread you submitted to the four
Gospels or Epistles of St. Paul as most Sacred and Divine, and yet dared to
reject as superstition and Will Worship certain Practices and Observances
delivered to you by the same Hands immemorially from the Apostles. Mistrust not
the Providence of our Dear Redeemer, he has in all Ages had a Watchful Eye over
his Holy Church, not permitting her to Apostarize by Idolatry, or be defiled
with Superstition, or to deliver to posterity her own Inventions, for
Apostolical Traditions. But more of this hereafter. Till you hear further from
me, my Dearest Friends, let me only obtain this favor of you, to do your
selves this right, to converse familiarly with Roman Catholics, and to hear
impartially what they have to say for themselves wherein they differ from you,
and not to fancy they believe a thousand Absurdities, which they no less detest
than your selves.

Yours ever. W. H.

FINIS.

