REMARKES UPON A PAMPHLET Styled, A Letter to a Dissenter, etc.
In another Letter to the same Dissenter.
SIR,
AN highly applauded Pamphlet fell into my hand, at that instant when I was
sealing my last Letter to you, relating to the Penal Laws and ^ests, I then
purposed to tell you my thoughts thereof in a Postscript, but being diverted
till the Post was gone, and yours of the 8th Instant mentioning the thing, this
comes to tell you, that I have slightly run it over, and do perceive the Wordy
Author designs thereby to allure the Dissenters to a Contempt and Rejection of
the Kings benign Purpose to them. Its Title, and another Circumstance, your
early notice of it, inclines me to conclude that it was wrote to you; whether
so or not; I shall briefly Remarque upon it. The great Man sets out floridly;
As a Modish Person, he accosts the poor Dissenter by way of Address. The
Courtship seems to me sudden and surprising, and I suspect the Design, for I
take it to be something Iudas-like, for one of the Epistlers Figure and Spirit,
to approach a Mechanic, and a Schismatic to boot, in the humble way of Hat
and Knee.

But he doubts not of kind reception, provided that his Dissenter will take his
Word, when he affirms, that he is neither a Coward, nor a designing or
freetfull Man. I wish he had put his Name to his Letter, because some will have
it, that the Author is a Person so transcendently Haughty and Ambitious, that
he little regards what, or whom he Sacrifices, may he but become head of a
party. But,

If he gains not the Point, by the glorious Character which he ascribes to
himself, his reasons must undoubtedly (as he conceits) win him the Day; his
friendship commanding you to allow them to pass Muster, for he pledges his
Word, that the time of day, disposes him to Charity, therefore in this nick of
time, you are neither to call into Question his Wisdom, Honesty, or Affection;
a most lucky period.

In confidence that I have at least an equal title to your Friendship, his
being but newly contracted, and ours what Storms has tried; I shall, in my old
plain-dealing way with you, observe, that the Gentleman's stock both of Charity
and Truth is very suddenly exhausted, for he instantly charges to his
Dissenters account both the Exclusion and Rebellion: Were the Fact so, and the
Brat laid at the right Door; Why should this high Pretender to Loyalty, check
in any Delinquent, a graetful Resentment of his Majesty's Forgiveness? But,

Should the Fanatic (to avoid wrangling with the Church of England) agree to
make an equal Partition with her, of the mentioned Crimes, and their deserved
shame? The half would far exceed his due share: Then will it be consistent,
with her breeding, and superlative Virtue, to yield him the honor of all the
Repentance and Confession.

In the next place your Friend craves audience, and passing the Complement,
that he yet hopes you in your Wits, he bids you beware of New Friends (a very
pertinent caution, your Friendship with him being yet in the blossom) and

He bespeaks you to be a prudent Christian, and not to hazard the public
Safety, by the desire of Ease or Revenge. Good again.

To enforce the first ( viz.) that you are to suspect new Friends, he
insinuates, that you are not to be carried over, by smooth Language now put on
to engage you, by the way, the expression intending to insinuate a cheating
Design, had been as well worded (Words (with abundance of spite) being mainly
what fills the Paper now before me) had it said, putting off of smooth
Language, or making what is Gilded over, to pass as Current Coin; but whether
off or on be best, in this place; in the next, the Gentleman doffing his
Clothes, personates an enraged slighted Mistress (or Rival) and tells you, that
she (for to follow our Amorous Author, we must for a time change the Sex) had
the the first offer, and you have ouly the coy Ladies leavings. It is then
evident (and shall be anon further made out) that she held a parl; with your
new Lover, ay, but if you will credit her, she saw his Deformity, and therefore
rejected him. I doubt you will get little by enquiring of the Sqeamish Dame,
whether punctillios of Honor, hopes of higher Terms, or the Devils Pride and
Envy, did not occasion her rash refusal, and whether she does not too late
repent it? for Questions of this kind do rarely receive direct and honest
Answers. I shall therefore according to my wonted freedom, exhort you to stand
upon your Guard, that she may not play you a trick, and then reproach you. He
now (for the Aggressor in Love, must be concluded to wear Breeches) makes court
to you, examine carefully, I beseech you, whether you are his Choice, and not
his Refuge, if the last, it will be your wisdom to make sure terms with him,
and allowing the Gentleman to mean as he would be taken, you have his own
advice, that you are not to yield over hastily to new Friends upon their
bespeaking you fairly. He tells you, that you cannot reasonably flatter your
self that there is (with your Lover) any inclination to you: I incline to think
as he does, if he takes it, that beding together is to be the next thing in the
case, (then it is probable that no Love is lost) but I have heard, that a Person
disappointed in his first Amor, is ever after cold, and indifferent, in
Affection; and therefore since the Church of England affirms, that she refused
to strike up a Bargain, I will believe, that a chaste Dissenter, may live in the
same Kingdom, with the Romanist, without the hazard of a Rape.

They (the Papists, says the Letter) never pretended to allow you any Quarter,
but to usher in Liberty to themselves, under that shelter. Well then, you are
out of danger of being put to the Sword, you may have Quarter, a Grace refused
you by the Church of England. Ay, may you say, but what are the terms? why,
such as are very equal, and highly reasonable, both Parties have been long and
sorely galled by the Canon of the Church of England. The Papists will now help
to dismount them, and they call for your aid; I pray what harm in all this, and
why so much noise against it?

And it proceeds; Nay, at this very hour they can hardly forbear in the height
of their Courtship, to let fall hard words of you, so little is nature to be
restrained. The Gentleman may well say, Pudet haec opprobria nobis,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.


You and I do know, at this very hour, and so does he, the names of dignified
Sons of the Church of England, who declare, that the Devil will have both
Papist and Dissenter. This I Am sure is none of the softest Language.

But you are told in the next Paragraph, That Liberty and Infallibility are the
two most contrary things in the World. I affirm, that it is beyond
contradiction true, that our errable Church of England has run to the Arguments
of that Church, which claims Infallibility; to justify her self, in her
attempts, to extirpate Dissenters; and ( right or wrong) they had been Ruined,
had not the present Kings Clemency rescued them.

But the Principles of the Roman Church allow not Liberty to Heretics. Nor do
those of the English Church to Schismatics; such she esteems her Dissenters,
and as such, she (when in Power) constantly treats, and labors to destroy them.

If so, the argument of present hugging, in order to the better squeezing
hereafter, vanishes; and the seting up Bills, and offering Plasters for tender
Consciences; may deserve as great regard from the Romish, as from the Lambeth
Church, and in our present conjuncture much more.

The Gentleman goes on to tell you. The other day you were Sons of Belial, now
you are Angels of Light. And he asserts, that to come so quick, from one
extreme to another, is such unnatural a motion, that you are to look to your
self. Pray do so, and in doing it, remember, that in the word of a King there
is Power; and that the Church of England, which now has none, to hurt or save
(till her present exigence extorted a Complement) styled you a Child of
Darkness.

In the next place the Men of Taunton and Tiverton (for sound or Jingle sake,
no doubt) are hooked in, and their Loyalty ridiculed: notwithstanding in this
our Church-Mans opinion, that renders them vile, it would not offend a good
Subject, to see others imitate them, and tho H. (at this day) non est litera;
methinks Hull and Hallifax o a Northern-man, should chime every whit as well as
T. and T. of the West; wherefore, pray prevail with your new Friend (who will
not break with you in trifles) to write a second Letter Northward, and if your
Intrigue with him continues till the return of the general Post, ( for we are
admonished to have a very tender regard to Horses) I doubt not but he will be
obliged to tell you that the worthy Inhabitants of those Places, have the
courage to ure Loraliy with any of his Majesty's Subjects. If I mistake them,
Libera me.

Now our Valiant Author ( the West being vanquished) points Southward, and
picks a Quarrel with the poor Quakers. This may well surprise you, I Am sure it
did me at first sight; for you and I believe they will not draw the Sword, much
less encounter a Goliath; therefore you may say, certainly no fear of them to a
fearless Man; ay, but the Gentleman now handling them, resolves to spoil an
English Proverb, and to his courage would monopolize Wit, and the Quaker he
says has learned to speak sense, and which is worse, he becomes mannerly, to
such a degree, that this your new Friend ( who grumbles for a place at Court)
begins to suspect himself in some danger of being post-posed; for the Quaker
having given the King decent thanks for his Protection, may, for ought he
knows, become Courtier. (Sir) you are now to believe the Gentleman has spit his
Poison, for he tells you, that no sharpness is to be mingled where healing only
is intended; and he promises hereafter to say nothing to expose particular M^n,
how strong soever the temptation may be, or how clear the proofs to make it
out; he might as well have said, Now Gentlemen Dissenters look to your hits, we
have been Complicens, provoke me not to detect our Rogueries; please me or all
shall out, (but begging his Pardon) he shall speak for himself, and see what
follows; it is in friendship this; for Arguments sake, and to promote the
proposed healing, the honest well-meaning Man, ( not willing to tell tales)
bearly whispers you, poor deluded Dissenter, in the Ear; that to his knowledge
there is Death in the Pot, your Minister is a Knave, you are Sold, the Money is
Paid, and you are most certainly Betrayed.

Is not this said like a Church of England Worthy, not tied or confined to this
or that subdivision of Protestants, like one estranged from sharpness, and who
affects and intends healing? Can Hell it self furnish a more inveterate and
malicious Insinuation?

We remember the time, when some Men talked of Pensioners in Parliament; they
obliged the World with a List of those who were reputed such, and if I mistake
not, with the Name of him, who they said, hired and paid them.

The Dissenter now addressed to, for his own safety, ought to challeng this his
new Suitor, for the Names of such Ministers as have made the bargain and sale
suggested, and methinks his Charity, and the warmth of his Affection, should
dispose him to gratify such a modest and necessary Request; if it be refused I
must conclude my Friend so far gone in his Passion, that he has wholly lost his
Understanding, should this Gentleman's Courtship, any longer impress, or
influence him.

Now our Author falls with down right Blows upon the Addressers, and bestows
bitter Invectives upon them, and upon the Government to boot; that part of his
Libel deserves and probably will be reckoned for in Westminster Hall, therefore
I shall shun the danger of becoming his Accessory by transcribing him.

Then he betakes himself to Flattery, and tells you, that if you had to do with
those riged Prelates who made it a matter of Conscience to give you the least
Indulgence, but kept you at an uncharitable distance, and even to your more
reasonable scruples continued stiff an inexorable, the argument might be
fairer on your side.

I conclude then, that your Argument to accept of Liberty from the King, is no
way enervated: Is here any sort of proof, that Prelacy has changed its
thoughts, and put on tenderness to you; you may not trust this undertaker in a
thing so valuable as is that, now discussed, the Church of England cannot
intend well, or use you so, ( without incurring the guilt of Perjury as I have
heard her say) till she gives up her Laws of force, and you see that her Zeal
to uphold them occasions this great concussion in the Kingdom, wherefore, I
doubt she is not right; and your only sure way of dealing with her, seems to me
to be, to disarm her by Act of Parliament, of every Weapon which the Gospel did
not put into her hand, then I Am sure She can do no Mischief.

Reverend Mr Baxter's expectation was raised about twenty six years since, by
the same pretense, as now yours is to be, but after the then Prelacy (which I
am confident the present will not disown) had long triffled with him and his
worthy Brethren, about healing, in the Savoy Conferences; they found themselves
disappointed and shamd: If the Church be as skilful in Surgery as our Author
would persuade, she was the more to blame to hold the Patient so long in hand,
as then she did, and in fine to leave or make the Wound worse then she found
it. ( honesty I do find is absolutely necessary to a good Surgeon) The same
Spirit still lives in our Churchmen, or it may in time to come return again,
and possess them; you have then no other way to conjure down the evil Spirit of
Persecution, but by a Repeal of the Penal Laws, that only can assure you, that
a rigid Prelacy shall not hereafter destroy you; and you have reason to take
the Alarm at your Woers next harangue, ( Nescit nox missa reverti). She or He
(no matter which) has enchantment in her Face, and can instantly put your Nose
out of joint with your new Friend, nay look you Dead; for you are told, that at
this very hour and in the heat and glare of your present Sunshine, the Church
of England can in a moment bring Clouds again, and turn the royal Thunder upon
your Heads, blow you off the Stage with a breath; if she would give but a smile
or a kind word, the least glimpse of her compliance would throw you back into
the state of Suffering and draw upon you all the arrears of Severity which have
accrued during the time of this kindness to you.

This is in truth ( my good Friend) plain dealing, look to your self therefore,
and make your peace with her, or you perish, ( if you believe her) for Clouds,
Thunder and Tempests a wait, (and as she says) are at her command; She can at
pleasure take you into her Power, add to your Yoke, and chastise you with
Scorpions, and that is not all; She can bring you to an Aster-Reckoning, lash
you for playing Truant, and exact what you have run in Arrear (this last
discovery will undoubtedly porcure the Gentleman an Address of Thanks from
Doctors Commons, for the City Dissenters are near two years Reut run, there)
Nay, and to complete your misery ( after all the Reckonings paid) She can by
her Excommunication, throw you, with a quick hand to Satan.

You may demand, what shall poor I do in this my great Strait? Why, as you love
your Life keep out of her Clutches, defy her, and atone our English Jupiter,
That he may not entrust his Thunderbolts in this mad Hand.

Be true, I beseech you, to your Interest, and deport your self so to the King,
that your new conciliated Friendship, which she upbraids, and envies, may not
be endangered.

I shall now give you a Reason or two, why you may justly suspect this
Gentleman, now making Love to you in the Name of the Church. I find his Letter
stuffed with malicious and false Infinuations against dissenting Ministers
(amongst whom I never found a Knave) I will therefore hope that my telling you
Truth, though to his Disparagement, will not be taken as a Breach of the Rules of
good Manners.

If the Church of England's Commissioners in the present Treaty with you, have
been tampering with those of the Roman Communion, and offering Terms for the
Life of their dearly beloved Penal Laws: If they, to come a little closer, have
proposed, That if the Roman Catholics will not join with you, for the Repeal
of those Laws, they shall be secured against any imaginary Danger from the
Test-Penalties, in a succeeding Reign, by a Mortgage of the Honors and Estates
also, of some great Men driving that Bargain. I say, should this be true,
there is certainly Mischief in her Heart, and she will reveng your running her
into this Encumbrance, by teaching you hereafter, (as Gideon did the Men of
Succoth) with Briers and Thorns.

If She has her Ambassadors at this very Hour, treating an Alliance with the
Papists, and proposing to yield them Liberty by Act of Parliament, with
Exception of the Fanatic.

If these, or any others, should at this time, prate and bu^, Fears and
Iealousies in your Ears, you are obliged to be deaf; upon pain of all the
Mischief they intend you. The Church seems to t^emble the bloody Tyrant, and
seeing her Power reduced, she would be content for a time, to turn Pedagogue,
and whip-Boys, to keep her Hand in^ure.

The Church Plenipotentiary, toward the close of his Letter, points his Wrath
toward the King and his Government: And with you, he seems to descend to calm
(but very wickedly intended) Reasoning. It is with Regret that he beholds you
disposed to quarrel the Church of England now she is upon the Brink of
Suffering: It Is very unkind in you, for she never persecuted the Dissenters,
but by Direction, and as she was set on: A bad Excuse, you know, is better than
none. The Gentleman further insinuates ( and you are to believe him if you
will) That the taking away the Penal Laws and Tests (the Bane of Religion, and
of Liberty) will put you under a Tyranny, and absolutely destroy you. In truth
( Sir) were I in the East Indies, the sight of this lamentable Complaint would
greatly move me, for I should doubt the Case of the Church of England to be
very deplorable, but it is a great Blessing that all this is Misrepresentation,
and soul Slander. The King's Promise secures her of Peace and Plenty, and that
Act of Parliament which shall secure you out of her Paws, may give her further
Security if she wants it. This her grim faced Representative, seems to take his
short and angry Turns, like the Tower-Lyon, and ever and anon roares; but it is
not want, but a ravenous Appetite to rend and tear, that occasions all this
Wrath and Rage: Nature will be Nature. Therefore you may tell the Church in
your Excuse (for a reason of your Doings ought something to appease her toward
you) in the language of the Lepers: (My Distress is great.) If I still sit
here, I dye, if the Syrians save me alive I shall live; if they kill me I shall
but dye.

To cokes and work you off, from getting Liberty of Conscience, from the only
Hand which can dispense it: You are told that some of the Church of England
were Trimmers for enduring you, and the Maxim was, It is impossible for a
Dissenter, not to be a Rebel.

This Gentleman certainly thinks that you have forgot, who gave those moderate
Men that Name of Reproach, therefore you may tell him, That to your Knowledge
the Church esteemed them but spurious Sons, and could not endure them, becaufe
they gave you a good Look; you need not go to Gloucester to make this out; but
if you should let me engage you to take Salisbury in your way, and enquire
there how the Church treated a Protestant Reconciler. If you do so, pray use
your Interest with her, and try whether in this height of her Caresses, she
will demonstrate the sincerity of her Affection to you, by recomending it to
that Doctor to recant his Recantation.

As to the Maxim cited, It is impossible for a Dissenter not to be a Rebel. I
am certain it was delivered from a Pulpit, nearer to Ludgate then that of
Limestreet.

So much for the Gentleman's angry and whedling part; Now I bring you to his
Politics: and the Dissenters are mere Fools, if they trust not to his most
wise Conduct, for he says you (silly soul) act very unskilfully against your
visible Interest; this were to purpose indeed, if made out, but the Mischief of
it is, the powerful Argument of Interest turns against him; The Dissenters
Liberty may nowbe certainly established, but, says the Church, I see my
halcyon Days at hand, put on a little Patience, and then you and I will treat
about the Matter. Were you in the Extremity of the Stone, and sure of receiving
present Ease by an infallible Surgeon, your next Neighbor, who tells you
his Price, and ever made good his Word; how would you entertain that Friend's
Counsel, who should say, let me advise you to wait a little, for I hear that
Germans excel all others in this Case, and about Six Months hence I may bring
you one from Vienna to try his Skill: But to be plain with you, when he comes,
he will leave you as he finds you, if you break with him for Terms; but I do
think he will not be unreasonable, for he has a very good Character: I know
you have an Answer at Hand, therefore (without leading you) I pray transmit it
to this your Counselor.

A Word or two more, and I have done; He passes his Word, That the Church of
England is convinced of its Error, in being Severe to you. I know not how this
will pass with you, but being too much a Stranger to this Author, and to the
nature of his Commission, I should be glad to see her put out her own
Declaration of Repentance; for should this Person have Authority to speak for
her ( tho of old, true Penitents spoke for themselves) he does it so ukwardly
in this Paper; that, to be plain, I suspect it is insincere; for he contends,
and that with the height of Passion, to uphold her Penal Laws, and I have no
other Quarrel with her, but about Thunderbolts.

He proceeds, The Parliament, when ever it meets, is sure to be gentle to
you: it is the first thing we agree in, and it grieves me that we could not hit
upon it sooner; I do hope and believe, he is at length in the right, but that I
may not be cheated; if you find him in good humor, when you see him; let him
know from me, ( with my service) that my suffrage shall never help him, or any
of his Spirit and Principle into the House of Commons; He admonishes you not to
misapply your anger, allow another Friend to exhort you, not to misplace your
Voice, when the King shall please to call a Parliament, and you will oblige
your self and me.

Setemb. 10 1687. Adieu, Yours Affectionately, T. W.

FINIS.

