THE RECORD OF SUFFERINGS FOR TITHES IN ENGLAND.

The Sufferers are, The Seed of God, or, The assembly of his Firstborn, or,
The First Fruits unto God in England, in this Age, who are called to be
faithful, and have been found faithful; therefore have we suffered willingly
the spoiling of our Goods, for to us the Truth is more precious then our
Estates, Lives, or outward Liberties, and therefore has the Lord accounted us
first worthy to suffer for his Name sake, and to be as Lights in this deceitful
Generation.

Those which our sufferings is a testimony against, is that Priesthood which is
light and treacherous, which in all Ages the Lord raised up faithful witnesses
against; for Isaiah said, That they were all blind and ignorant, and dumb dogs,
and never had enough, Isa. 56. 10, 11. And Jeremiah said, That the Prophets
prophesied falsely, and the Priests did bear rule by their means, Jer. 5. And
Ezekiel said, They fed themselves, and not the flock, Ezekiel. 34. Mica said, They
preached for hire, and divined for money, Mic. 2. 11. and Hosea said, That they
were as a Troop of Robbers that did wait for a man, so the company of Priests
did murder in the way by consent, Hos. 6. 9.

And in these days we may say, that they are worse then any troop of Robbers,
or any that preached for hire, that ever went before them, as will appear in
this Book following, by their devouring Widows Houses, spoiling men's goods,
and destroying men's persons.

Given forth from those whom the Lord regards, who do tremble at his word, for
which cause we are in scorn called Quakers, whom the Lord has raised up as his
army, before whom the Nations shall tremble, Joel 2. and bow down their backs
always before the truth.

London, Printed for Tho. Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1658

To the READER
GOD has a great work to do in this generation, to pull down the abominations
which has long reigned, and many are straightened till it be accomplished; and
only such must be exercised in this work, who are called, chosen, and
faithful; many have been called, but have not been faithful, but have destroyed
in their works, that which they seemed to have established by words, and was
not faithful to witness the life of their words by their works; so that by a
true search we have found the words of righteousness in many, but we have found
the works of righteousness but in few; and though God has shined into the
hearts of many by his light, yet there are but few children of it, in
comparison of the disobedient: The eye of God has looked into the world, and
he sees men differ more in words then in life and conversation; and some in
words do witness for God, but in their works deny him: As for example, How
many of late years had a zeal stirred up in them by the spirit of the Lord
against the abominations of the Priests, and the oppression of tithes,
preaching both down, even as that which denied Christ to be come in the flesh:
So that if words had been that which would have finished the work, the Land had
been cleansed before this time of that abomination; but the Lord has brought a
trial upon such spirits, whether they will own their testimony through the
spoiling of their Goods, and imprisonment of their bodies and therefore has
God suffered an earthly power, and a Law to try them, and now they do rather
deny their Testimony, then suffer by that Law which gives the Priests tithes;
as for Witnesses, most of the baptized people in England have betrayed their
testimony and profession in that thing: And how are you worthy to be called
Saints which bear such a testimony? can this equally be compared with the
testimony of the Saints of old? Did they cry down false worships and false
teachers in words? and did they uphold them by giving them wages? Have you not
herein sinned against light? Did you not once see that they were never sent of
God? And will you now uphold them because you cannot suffer for your testimony?
Is not your paying them wages, and giving them tithes, a greater witness for
them then your preaching them down in words is against them, and may they not
herein rejoice over you? Christ is not herein your example, which for this end
was born, and for this end came into the world, to bear witness to the truth,
and did finish the work which the Father had given him to do, and was made
perfect through sufferings; but such never need suffer who preach down deceit
in words, and hold it up in works. And the Apostles is not your example, for
they were in works that which they declared in words: therefore has God cast
you by, as not fit to be Laborers in his Vineyard: But a people is the Lord
raising up, whom he is giving his holy spirit unto, whose witness to him must
stand as well in works, as in words, who love the truth more then their lives
or liberties, goods or estates, and are valiant for it upon the earth, which
cannot be subject to the powers of darkness, nor the Rulers of the darkness of
this world, but believes that whatsoever they deny for Christ in this life,
they shall receive a hundred sold, and in the world to come life everlasting.
And these are they whom the Father will exercise with his holy spirit, in the
gathering his seed from the ends of the earth, and for the turning of many to
righteousness; and such shall shine as the stars in the firmament of Heaven,
when as the false and deceitful witnesses shall be turned into darkness,
because their testimony is not able to endure the trial; for the Lords House
must be built with tried stones, that the winds of persecutions cannot blow it
down: and upon such will his light arise, who when they are tried, are found
faithful, and who are counted worthy to bear a testimony in this work, though
it be through sufferings, in this day, when the powers of the Earth have set
themselves to wear out the Saints of the most High God, by changing times and
Laws, whereby to restrain the liberty of the Lords people, whose worship stands
in the spirit, and in the truth. Times they have changed by a Law, in making
the first day of the week to be their Sabbath, but that day is more profaned
then any of the seven. And Laws they have changed, to get a ground to stop the
word of the Lord from having free course and free utterance among the people.

These seek to scatter the power of the holy people, and to cast the truth to
the ground by their acts of cruelty, and decrees of unrighteousness, and by a
tollerating cruelty and oppression among a company of Priests, which are worse
then those in Hosea's days, who then were, As a Troop of Robbers that wait for
a man, even so the company of Priests murder in the way by consent, Hos. 6. 9.
and says the Prophet, I have seen a horrible thing in the House of Israel; but
now may we say, We have seen a more horrible thing in the Land of England,
even a company of Priests taking men's Horses from their work, their Corn off
their field, driving away their Oxen and Kine out of their pasture, taking
their wool out of their Barns, taking away their Brass and Pewter out of their
Houses, taking away their Bedding off their Beds, even off the childrens Beds:
Such a horrible thing was never seen in Israel, for the Priests Robbery was not
so great then, as now; for they did never so spoil men's goods, nor destroy
men's Estates, nor imprison men's bodies, as now in England the priests have
done; so that they do not only exceed the false prophets of Israel, but also
all the Robbers both in Israel and in England, has not spoiled so much Goods
and Cattle as they have done within these five years, some without any Law, or
pretense of Laws and others by false oaths and false witnesses, and the Law not
permitting a man to give in a true witness except he will swear, contrary to
Christ's command, who says, Swear not at all: which swearing is as great a sin
as bearing of a false witness. And by these things do they seek to wear out the
Saints of the Most High God, first taking away a man's Goods, and then casting
him into prison; as Christ said to the Saints, so is it come to pass in these
days also amongst us, The Devil shall cast some of you into prison, and you
shall have tribulation ten days: If the Devil now, or his Ministers or
Messengers of Satan, be permitted to cast some into prison, or bring
tribulation upon others, do they therefore think that we will yield to the
devil, or to his Messengers, that we may be free from tribulation and
imprisonment? Nay, that is not the price of our redemption; nor way of
deliverance; for that which was written before-time, was written for our
learning, which through suffering, and patient continuing in well doing, we have
learned; without which we could never have learned nor known Christ's words
fulfilled as they are; therefore happy is that day wherein the everlasting love
of God is broken forth unto us, in bringing us his children, prophets, and holy
apostles, to rejoice over the false prophets, and false teachers, though they
spoil our Goods, and imprison our bodies, yet we can rejoice over them, and
suffer the spoiling of our Goods with joy, knowing that this is for a testimony
against them, by which the reproach which the Lord will bring upon them, will
appear to all men. And this is so far from silencing our testimony against
them, that it does daily renew it; so that if all that which is past were
forgotten, their daily abominations does so increase, that a testimony must be
continued against them; for of them the Scripture is true, which says, Evil
men and deceivers wax worse and worse; for the deceivers in former ages was
never so bad, as by force to take away the goods of those that would not hear
them, and take away their lives by imprisonment, as some have done, because
they could not pay them tithes, as this Record of the unjust sufferings will
make manifest.

Our Brethren the prophets have given their testimony concerning such prophets
and priests which was profane, and that the Lord found folly amongst them, as
Jeremiah says, Ier. 23. he had seen a horrible thing amongst them, they
strengthened the hand of evildoers, that none did return from their inquity;
and it is so now for these reasons.

How can a drunkard return from his drunkenness when he sees his priest drunk?
and how can a swearer return from his swearing when he sees his priest swear,
and hire men to swear falsely, as many have done in this Nation?

And how can a covetous man return from his covetousness when he sees his
priest so covetous that he takes away men's goods by violence, which he has no
right unto, but only through covetousness makes merchandise of people? So how
should any return from such things who are taught by them? and how can a proud
man return from his pride, when he sees his teacher lead him into it by
example? How can an envious man turn from his envy, seeing his teacher
envious, and provoking others to wrath and envy?

So these Reasons proves that the prophet's words are true, that none can
return from their iniquity by following the practice of their Priest; and
Christ's words are fulfilled also, Matthew 23. which says, they lay heavy
burdens upon people, grievous to be born, and devoures Widows Houses, as many
in this Nation can witness, who have their Goods spoiled and taken from them,
as this following Record does make mention, abounding all the cruelty and
wickedness which ever was heard of, or read of; exceeding all the false
prophets in Israel; although they had a price, and preached for hire, yet they
never did use such cruelty for their Hire, as these have done; and exceeding
all the false teachers among the Gentiles, which never was known to sue any at
the Law that would not hear them, muchlesse to take from them seven times the
value of what they demanded; but the Lord does for a time let his children
deeply suffer, to fulfill the testimony of truth in this thing, that it may be
recorded for ages to come, the faithfulness of their testimony, and the cruelty
of their oppressors; and then will the Lord finish the testimony of their
sufferings, and will give them an Inheritance among the Seed which he has
blessed; and all their persecutors shall be ashamed, for God will bring an
everlasting reproach upon them, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be
forgotten, Jer. 23.

Richard Hubberthorne.

THE RECORD OF SUFFERINGS FOR TITHES IN ENGLAND.
Westmorland.
William Hebson for Tythe-Corn of the value of two pound eleven shillings, had
goods taken from him to the value of eight pounds, six shillings, and eight
pence.

William Holme for Tythe-Corn of the value of one pound, fourteen shillings,
and eight pence, had goods taken from him to the va-lue of four pounds fifteen
shillings.

Rowland Smith for Tythe-corn of the value of six shillings, had goods taken
from him to the value of one pound, six shillings and eight pence.

Richard Holme for Tythe-corn of the value of one pound seven shillings, had
goods taken from him to the value of three pounds, four shillings.

Agnes Teasdell for Tythe-corn of the value of one pound, eleven shillings, had
goods taken from her worth five pounds.

Edward Robinson for tithe corn of the value of sixteen shillings and nine
pence, had goods taken from him worth four pounds six shillings and eight pence.

Richard Smith for Tythe-Corn of the value of eight shillings and six pence,
had goods taken from him worth one pound.

These Goods were taken from them upon Warrants from Robert Branthwait and
Francis Sisson Justices, for the use of Peter Mawson of Peureth.

John Sutton for tithe of the value of one pound four shillings, had goods
taken from him worth three pounds, ten shillings.

John Camme for tithe of the value of one pound, eight shillings and six pence,
had goods taken from him worth three pounds.

The same for tithes of the value of about one pound nine shillings, had goods
taken from him worth four pounds.

Margret Camme for tithe worth eight pence, had goods taken worth eight
shillings.

Cumberland.
Richard Robinson of Blencoge, for one pound eight shillings demanded by
William Grainger Priest of Brumfield, had two Oxen taken from him worth four
pounds ten shillings.

Widow Ayket, a poor woman, left in much Debt when her Husband dyed, more then
all his Goods would pay, so that the Creditors both gave time, and abated, had
taken from her for the said merciless priest, (who no way considered her need)
one Milch-Cow, and one Ox, she having no more but one other Cow, and one Ox,
for tythe-corn valued but to one pound eight shillings. So here you may see
that the Widows and Fatherless that were to be maintanied by tithes, are now
robbed of their goods to pay tithes.

John Wilkinson for tythe-corn which his neighbors did prise at two shillings
six pence, had taken from his children upon a Warrant from Thomas Craister and
Cuthbert Studdam, a Mare worth three pounds, for the use of John Forward Priest
of Boulton.

Thomas Porter for tithe prised at two pounds, had taken from him upon the said
Justices VVarrant for the use of the said priest, three Stots worth six pounds.

John Pattison for three shillings, had five pecks of Barley and a Sack, taken
from him for the said priest, worth eight shillings and nine pence.

Tho. Wilson, alias Stumper, for twelve shillings demanded for tithes, had a
Horse taken from him for the use of the said priest, worth two pounds.

Hugh Tickell for six shillings four pence claimed by Percivel Radcliff priest
of Crosthwaite, had goods taken from him by a warrant from Lancelot Fletcher
and John Barwes, worth one pound, one shilling and seven pence.

John Wilson for seven shillings claimed by the said priest, had taken from him
upon the said Justices warrant, goods worth one pound ten shillings.

Christopher Scot for nineteen shillings claimed by the said priest, had goods
taken from him upon the said Justices warrant, worth two pounds.

Anthony Tickell for four shillings demanded by the said priest, had goods
taken from him upon the said Justices warrant, worth fourteen shillings.

John Ardel of Areleby, was sued by Guwen Eglesfield, priest of Plumland, for
tithe, which his servant swore was worth fifteen shillings, and had taken from
him by the Sheriffs Bailiff, one Steer worth one pound seven shillings.

These had their Goods taken from them because they could not pay toward the
repair of the popish Steeplehouses.

John Bouckell in Graystock-parish, for two shillings and eight pence, had
goods taken worth seven shillings.

William Bowman of Lamplough parish, for nine shillings, had goods taken worth
sixteen shillings.

Elinor Dicson for seven shillings and six pence, had goods taken worth nine
shillings.

John Hodgson for two shillings, had goods taken worth four shillings and seven
pence.

Lancelot Fearon for sixteen shillings and three pence, had goods taken worth
eighteen shillings.

VVidow Ayket for ten pence demanded for tithe, had a pot and a pewter dish
taken from her, worth above four shillings.

Henry Lowthet for three shillings four pence for tithe, had taken from him one
Sack and Barley worth six shillings and eight pence.

These had their goods taken away because they could not swear.

At John Dalstons Court at Vldel.
John Fell was fined, and had goods taken worth eight shillings.

Thomas Fell was fined, and had goods taken worth eight shillings and four
pence.

John Caipe was fined, and had goods taken worth nine shillings and six pence.

At the Earl of Northumberlands Court, so called.
John Senhouse was fined, and had a horse taken worth one pound ten shillings.
Henry Lowthet was fined three shillings and four pence, and bad goods taken
worth sixteen shillings.

John Richardson was fined at the Sheriffs County Court, because he could not
swear, and had goods taken from him worth eleven shillings.

Edmund Hunter of Gisbrough in Yorkshire, because he could not swear as a
Jury-man, was fined twenty shillings, for which he had a Cow taken away worth
four pounds.

BEDFORD.
James Tailor of Asply Guyse, about the nineth month, 1656. was arrested upon
an Attachment, prosecuted by Thomas Arkesden priest, for not swearing to his
answer unto a Bill exhibited into the Exchequer by the same priest, against him
for tithes, and thereupon imprisoned in Bedford Goal: Where did ever any of
the Ministers of Christ do so?

CAMBRIDGE.
John Feast, and Edward Wright, of the Isle of Ely, about the third month,
1656. were arrested upon an Attachment prosecuted by William Hunt, priest of
Sutton, for not swearing to their Answers which they tendered to the Barons of
the Exchequer, unto a bill exhibited into the same Court by the said priest,
against them for tithes, and thereupon imprisoned, and Irons put on their legs
in Cambridge Goal.

William Grounds of Sutton, in the Isle of Ely, being summoned to appear at a
Court held there, upon his appearing was fined forty shillings because he could
not swear, and afterward had a Mare worth about five pounds, taken and
distrained, and disposed of for the said fine, to the use of one Haman Ward.

The same William had one Kettle worth ten shillings, taken from him for two
shillings and a penny, which he was taxed to pay toward the reparation of the
Steeplehouse.

Robert Letchworth of Soham, had taken from him two Cowes worth five pounds,
for tithes of the value of twenty shillings, pretended to be due to John Gyles,
priest there; and now is in prison at Ely, for tithes by the same priest.

Stephen Wilson of the same, had taken from him one Cow for tithes of the
value of twelve shillings, for the same priest.

William Crayne of the same, had three stone of Hemp worth eleven shillings and
six pence, taken from him for tithes valued at six shillings, for the same
priest.

Daniel Peachy of the same, had two dozen of Yarn taken from him for tithes, of
the value of two shillings, for the same priest.

Robert Crabb of Littleport in the Isle of Ely, for tithes, or other pretended
dues to Martine Dallamore, priest there, of the value of one shilling and a
penny, had taken from him one Kettle worth seven shillings.

Clement Crabb of the same, for the like pretended dues to the same priest,
valued at seven shillings six pence, had a vessel of Butter taken from him,
worth twenty shillings.

James Vipen sued to the Exchequer by William Hunt, priest o^ Sutton in Ely.

Henry Place of the same, for the like pretended dues to the same priest, to
the value of one shilling and six pence, had taken from him goods to the value
of three shillings.

James Peachy of the same, for the like pretended dues to the same priest, to
the value of twelve shillings, had one Cow taken from him worth forty shillings.

John Love of the same, for the like pretended dues to the same priest, to the
value of fifteen shillings, had one Cow taken from him worth forty shillings.

Samuel Caser of the same, for the like pretended dues to the same priest, to
the value of ten pence, had taken from him one Kettle worth five shillings.

Robert Asplan for the like pretended dues to the same priest, to the value of
eleven shillings six pence, had taken from him one Cow worth thirty shillings.

Thomas Dorman of the same, for the like pretended dues to the same priest, to
the value of one shilling eight pence, had taken from him one brass pot worth
six shillings eight pence.

William Johnson for the like pretended dues to the same priest, to the value
of nine shillings ten pence, had taken from him one vessel of butter worth
three and twenty shillings, and one Kettle worth ten shillings.

The aforenamed Robert Asplan for tithes pretended to be due to the
Impropriator, to the value of three pounds fifteen shillings, had taken from
him five Cows and three Steers, worth fourteen pounds.

The aforementioned Robert Crabb for two Rates of one shilling ten pence toward
the reparation of the Steeple-house, had taken from him goods to the value of
four shillings and ten pence.

The aforementioned Henry Place for one Rate of five pence toward repairation of
the Steeple-house, had goods taken from him to the value of ten pence.

Thomas Hawks of the same, for a Rate of four pence toward repairation of the
Steeplehouse, had taken from him one platter worth four shillings.

The aforementioned John Love for two Rates toward repairation of the
Steeple-house, and for the parish-Clark, in all amounting to one shilling eight
pence, had taken from him one Warming-pan worth six shillings eight pence, and
two platters worth four shillings.

The aforementioned Robert Asplan for one Rate of one shilling four pence toward
the repairation of the Steeple-house, had taken from him goods to the value of
five shillings.

Thomas Jobson, and William Holmes, both of Swasy in the County of Cambridge,
were indicted, fined and imprisoned upon pretense of entertaining Ranters, and
idle wandering persons, at their Houses, but there was not any such thing
proved; but it was only for entertaining Friends, called forth from their own
Countries, as Abraham was from his; and as the Apostles were, to forsake all,
and follow Christ, and preach his Gospel, the glad tidings of peace and
reconciliation. And after about six months imprisonment, were set at liberty;
and for their Fines (being then abated to six pounds, six shillings and eight
pence a piece) took away from them four Horses, Beasts worth eighteen pounds.

Jeremiah Rose, imprisoned in Ely for tithes by Peter Franklin priest of Marry,
after he had taken away more of his goods then the value of the tithe came to.

ESSEX.
Thomas Mumford at the suit of John Cooper of great Sailing, for tithes, which
when he was summoned up to London by Writ, would not suffer him to make his
appearance, but committed him to prison contrary to the Writ.

Anthony Page, junior, at the suite of the said Cooper for tithes, was in like
manner not suffered to make his appearance according to the Writ, but was sent
to prison, and there remains in sufferings, and his Wife and three children
left to suffering, they having been maintained only by his labor.

Francis Marrige at the suit of John Sorell Impropriator, for tithes, was not
suffered to make his appearance according to the Writ, but sent to prison only
because he refused to set an Attorneys Name upon the back of the writ, and so
remains in prison.

Robert Nicholl of Colne-Engaine, for tithes pretended to be due to John Clerk,
priest of the parish, to the value of about nineteen or twenty pounds, for four
years tithe, as was pretended, had judgment given him by Dionicius Wakering,
and William Harleakenden, Justices, for fifty five pounds, nine shillings and
six pence, and upon their warrant had taken from him nine Cows, one Horse, and
two Colts, worth near fifty pounds; and for the rest, when he had taken away
all his goods, threatened to send him to prison, and got a warrant for it.

John Pollard after he had appeared in the Exchequer, was arrested upon an
Attachment at the Suit of Priest Robinson, and now remains a prisoner in
Colchester-Castle.

Robert Adams of Fearing, for some pretended dues to one Purchase a Priest
there; and for damages, and costs allotted: him by some called Justices, all
amounting to sixteen shillings, had taken from him one Horse worth five pounds
ten shillings.

GLOUCESTER.
William Atward sued in the Exchequer for tithes, after he had had a bible and
several other goods taken from him; and after one Philip Langley an
Impropriator had greatly abused him, calling him our of his House, and threw a
great stone at his head, which if he had not kept off, might have slain him.

William Wooley because he could not pay tithes, had a Horse taken from him
(worth about five pounds) by Soldiers.

Samuel Bampton sued in the Exchequer by Robert Dowle Impropriator, for about
two shillings six pence.

John Kathaby had goods taken away by Soldiers to the value of thirty
shillings for an Impropriator, for tithe of a small value, and is also sued
into the Exchequer.

NORFOLK.
William Barker of Gissing, for tithes pretended to be due to Robert Proctor,
priest there, for which the Priest demanded but twenty six shillings, had taken
from him on Horse worth six pounds.

Richard Cosen of Baningham, for tithes demanded by one Thomas Knevet, and for
costs assessed to him by two Justices, Robert Wood, and Henry King, all
amounting to two pounds, seven shillings and six pence, had taken from him a
Mare, and a Colt of two years old, worth three pounds ten shillings.

Benjamin Lines of Bramplingham; for tithes pretended to be due by Jonathan
Clapham priest there, and costs assessed to him, all amounting to two pounds,
three shillings and four pence, had taken from him two Cows worth four pounds.

Robert Jacob, late of Wymondham, aged about eighty years, about the sixth
Month, 1656. being summoned thereunto, to appear before Rob. Ward, Rob.
Wilton, and Thomas VVeeld, called Justices, who informed him he was chosen to
be a Constable, and required him to be sworn to execute the same Office; he
acquainted them of his age and inability to execute the said Office, and said
he was willing to do what service he could; but much could not be expected from
him in respect of his age, and the inability of his body; but he could not
swear at all, it being contrary to the command of Christ; whereupon they
committed him to prison in Norwich Castle, where he continued [not able to put
off and on his own clothes] for about eight weeks, and then was released.

About the third Month, called May, next before his aforementioned
imprisonment; the same Jacob was summoned to appear before the Barons of the
Exchequer at Westminster, being about eighty miles from his outward abode, for
not paying tithes; whereupon he traveled to Westminster, and upon an
Attachment, as for want of an Answer, which would not be accepted without an
Oath, and thereupon was sent to the prison aforementioned, where he continued
until he dyed, bearing a faithful testimony for the Lord against tithes and
swearing.

Thomas Berrier of Vpwell, being summoned by a Warrant from the Steward
Outwell, had a Horse taken from him for tithes of a small value, worth seven
pounds, when he had but one more in his plough, without either appearance or
Judgment.

Peter Gill had taken from him a pewter platter for Clerks wages.

SVFFOLK.
John Smith of Kniten, being summoned to appear before the Barons of the
Exchequer at Westminster for not paying tithes, appeared accordingly, and
tendered his Answer to the Barons, who could not accept thereof unless he would
be sworn thereunto, which for conscience sake he could not do, the Son of God
having commanded his Disciples not to swear at all; whereupon he was arrested,
and imprisoned at Melton Goal, as for not swearing.

Nicholas White of VVestmstie, for tithes pretended to be due to one Austine
Gobbel Priest, and costs and damages assessed him in all, to the value of about
three pounds, had taken from him three Cows worth about twelve pounds.

George Sherwine of K^iten, being twice summoned to appear in the Exchequer at
Westminster, once at the Suit of one Edmund Moure priest another time at the
Suit of one called Lady Gandy for not paying tithes, appeared accordingly, and
tendered his Answers there in several Bills unto the Barons, who refused to
receive them unless he would be sworn thereunto; and thereupon was presented
as for not answering, and afterward arrested and imprisoned at Melton upon an
attachment presented by the said Lady, and remains prisoner.

Anthony Kittel of Edwardston, for a Rate of ten shillings toward repairation
of the Steeplehouse, had several goods taken from him, to the value of about
two pounds, and was also sent to prison.

Tho. Judge for the tithe of one Close of Pasture-ground, was arrested by two
Warrants (at the suit of two Priests of Stainton, John Burrowes, and Gamaliel
Capell) out of the Exhequer, and carried to the prison, where he remains a
close prisoner; and the tithe is claimed for the years 1647. 1648. the Rent of
the Close being yearly nine pounds.

Anthony Kittell was summoned before two Justices, Joseph Brand, and Robert
Gardon, for tithes at the Suit of one priest Pretty; and after they had given
judgment against him for his tithes, they sent him to prison for saying the
Priest was a liar, and told him they had now a Law by which they hoped to curb
the Quakers.

SUSSEX.
Robert Adams being sued in the Exchequer for tithes by John Worthing Priest,
was cast into prison upon an Attachment, because he could not put in Answer
upon Oath, and has remained in Horsam Goal since the first day of the third
Month, 1657.

Richard Adams being sued in the Exchequer for tithes by John Fage, he
appeared, and tendered his Answer, which they would not accept without Oath; but
he was taken by an Attachment and cast into the Goal at Horsam, where he
remains since the twentieth day of the fifth Month, 1657.

Minion Brocket because he could not swear to selve the office of a Constable,
was put in the Common-Goal at Horsam above a year since, where he now remains a
prisoner.

Margery Coulstock was sent to prison upon the first day of the fifth Month,
1657. by one William Freeman Justice, for saying the priests were Hirelings;
and being brought to the Sessions, and there falsely accused by some priests,
she reproved them for it, and that was called a Breach of the Peace, and the
Bench sent her back to the Goal.

KENT.
Edward Noake is imprisoned at the Kings Bench in Southwark London, because he
cannot pay tithes to the priest.

William Bean of Brayburne, near Ashford, had one Hog taken away prised at
thirteen shillings four pence, for the repairing of a Steeplehouse and Bells,
which they sold for ten shillings, and returned nothing again.

Thomas Housigar for ten shillings for repairing the Steeplehouse, they took
from him a Cow worth three pounds.

WARWICK.
George Wyatt lies there imprisoned because he cannot pay tithes.

WILTS.
John Jay of Castlecombe, had taken from him for Roger Flower, Priest of that
parish, by order of two Justices, fourteen Sheep, for the tithe of two Loads of
Hey, and the Wool and Lamb of seventy sheep.

The same John Jay for tythe-corn valued at three pounds four shillings, had
taken from him by the said priest, two Oxen worth twelve pounds.

Roger Haukins for tithes of the value of ten shillings, had a Mare taken from
him for Thomas Pichard, priest of the parish of Ginslington, which was sold for
fifty shillings.

Roger Smart for tithe of the value of eighteen shillings and odd money, had
taken from him for the said priest, two Cows sold for three pounds.

William Player for tithes of the value of nine shillings, had taken from him
for the said priest, eight sheep, and six or seven lambs, worth fifty shillings.

Another man of the said County, and his Tenant, for tithes of the value of
twelve shillings, for William Stump priest of Yeaton-Cavell, had taken from
them eleven sheep worth five shillings a piece, and seventeen shillings from
the Tenant; and the same man lies now in prison at Fisherton, because he cannot
give his Answer to a priests Bill upon Oath.

YORKSHIRE. Liverton.
Robert Parret for tithes valued at forty shillings, had goods taken from him
for Richard Smelt priest of Easington, worth five pounds ten shillings.

The same man for refusing to contribute toward the repair of the popish
Steeplehouse, had goods taken from him worth sixteen shillings.

The same man for not paying five pence, claimed by the parish-Clark for wages,
had goods taken from him worth two shillings.

The same man for refusing to swear, had goods taken from him worth one pound
eight shillings.

William Tiplady for tithes valued at two pounds, two shillings and eight
pence, had taken from him for the aforesaid priest S^ets, Goods worth four
pounds ten shillings.

The same man for refusing to repair the popish Steeplehouse, had goods taken
from him worth twelve shillings.

More for not paying five pence to the parish-Clark, had taken from him Goods
worth two shillings and four pence.

The same man for tithe of the value of two pounds, six shillings and eight
pence, had Goods taken from him for the said priest Smelt, worth eight pounds.

Robert Tiplady for tithes of the value of four pounds, had taken from him for
the said priest Smelt, goods worth fifteen pounds, thirteen shillings and eight
pence.

More for the popish Steeplehouse, goods worth thirteen shillings four pence.

More for ten pence Clarks wages, goods worth twelve shillings ten pence.

Nicholas Tiplady for tithes valued at one pound ten shillings, had goods taken
from him for the said priest Smelt, worth two pounds, thirteen shillings four
pence.

More for the popish Steeplehouse, goods worth twelve shillings.

Robert Stonehouse for tithes valued at three pounds, had goods taken from him
for the said priest Smelt, worth fourteen pounds, four shillings and six pence.

More for the Steeplehouse, goods worth five shillings.

More for not paying five pence Clarks wages, goods worth two shillings and six
pence.

More for refusing to swear, goods worth ten shillings.

James Stonehouse for not paying five pence to the Clark, had goods taken worth
three shillings.

Rowland Thorp for refusing to repair the popish Steeplehouse, had goods taken
from him worth five shillings

More for refusing to sweat, goods worth five shillings.

Elizabeth Carcrost for not paying two pence for Clarks Wages, had goods taken
worth eight pence.

More for the popish Steeplehouse, goods worth one shilling.

This was done by Warrants from Leonard Smelt, Benjamin Norcliffe, George
Marwood, and Matt. Beckwith, orsome of them.

E. ASTRIDING.
Thomas Leemeing of Wighton, was sued in the Weapontack-court by Robert
Musgrave, for tithes of the value of nine shillings, and had taken from him a
Cow worth one pound, thirteen shillings four pence.

Thomas Leemeing for two pounds two shillings demanded for tithes, was sued by
Farmers of the tythe-Corn, and had taken from him by Execution out of the said
Court, two Mares worth seven pounds.

Thomas Leemeing for tithes of the value of fourteen shillings, demanded by
Will. Kidder priest of VVighton, by Execution out of the said Court, had a
Horse taken worth three pounds.

Marmaduke Stephenson for two shillings which the said priest Kidder demanded
for tithes, had taken from him by the bailiff of the said Court, a brass pot,
and other vessels, worth one pound.

Jo. Wilson for six shillings ten pence pretended to be due by John Peables,
priest of Barmeby, for Easter-Reckonings, procured a Warrant from Rich.
Robinson and Rich. Darley, Justices, for eleven shillings ten pence, and sent
two Bailiffs, that took a Cow worth one pound ten shillings.

John Wilson for two pounds four shillings and eleven pence, pretended to be
due for tithes to Jo. Silburne Impropriator, procured a Warrant from the said
two Justices for two pounds, nineteen shillings and eleven pence, and took two
Oxen and one Cow, worth about six pounds ten shillings.

The said Jo. Wilson was fined six shillings eight pence at the Sheriffs Turn,
by Jo. Hewley a Lawyer, because he could not swear; and the bailiffs took from
him for it two Kettles.

Walter Hall for two pounds eleven shillings claimed by Jo. Peables priest, and
Jo. Silburne Impropriator, for tithes and Easter-Reckonings, by Warrant from
the said two Justices, three Cows, one Mare, and two Colts; of which goods they
said they spared one Cow, but never brought her again.

Io. Cook for fifteen shillings claimed by Joseph Picket Impropriator for
tithes, had taken from him upon a Warrant from the said two Justices, two Oxen
worth about four pounds ten shillings.

Christopher Hurdsman for one shilling three pence claimed by priest Cooper of
Fridaythorp, had taken from him a Cow worth two pounds.

Christopher Hutton for one shilling eight pence claimed for repairing the
Steeplehouse, had two pewter Dishes taken from him worth four shillings.

James Turner for five shillings ten pence demanded for repairing the
Steeplehouse, had a Kettle and two pewter dishes taken from him, worth two
pounds fifteen shillings, by Order from the said two Justices.

Christopher Wilson for three shillings four pence demanded for repairing the
Steeplehouse, had a Kettle taken from him worth about ten shillings by the said
Order.

Henry Wilson for ten pence demanded by the Clark, had a brass Pot taken from
him worth four shillings six pence.

Io. Smith for two pounds two shillings demanded for tithes by the
Impropriator, had two Cows and a Sweath-Rake worth three pounds, thirteen
shillings four pence.

Also for four pence demadned of him for repairing the Steeple-house, had taken
from him three Dublers worth four shillings.

Also for ten pence demanded for Clarks wages, they took away from him a brass
pot worth seventeen shillings.

Alexander Harland for three shillings demanded by Priest Stather, had a Mare
taken away worth two pounds ten shillings.

And four bushels of Barley more, worth twelve shillings, for repairing the
Steeplehouse.

Richard Bailey of Wilton for Tythe-wool and Lamb, pretended due to Richard
Darley for about thirty sheep, had taken from him by warrant from the said
Richard Darley and Richard Robinson, six sheep, which they sold.

Christopher Walkinton for six pence demanded for repairing of the
Steeplehouse, had goods taken from him worth one shilling and six pence.

William Losthouse of Hampton for twelve shillings demanded by John Dawson, had
taken from him upon a Warrant from George Smithson, and Io. Waistell, goods
prised to five pounds.

The same William Losthouse for eighteen shillings seven pence, demanded by
Robert Wivall, Impropriator of the parish of Downholm, was sued in the Court at
Midlam, and there judgment was given against him, though they had no Authority
to hold plea of any such matter; and they took a Horse from him worth three
pounds, and since they have taken from him two Dublers for a Tythe-Calse.

YORKSHIRE.
George Robinson because he could not pay tithe to the priest, was turned out
of his House and Land, of which he and his Ancestors had been possessed above
one hundred years, by Charles Cornwallis Landlord.

The said George Robinson for riding to a Meeting four miles off upon a first
day, had a Mare taken from him worth six pounds, and nothing restored back.

William Iackson for tithes of ten shillings value, had sixteen shillings taken
by a judgment in the Weapontage-Court for a scandalous Priest.

Millison Leg, a poor Widow, having five or or six children, was sued in the
said Weapontage-Court by William Baxter a scandalous Priest, fortythes valued
to five shillings, for which the bailiff took eight shillings besides charges
of Court: As soon as the Priest had got it, he went to an Alehouse, and made
himself drunk, staying there above twenty four hours.

Eliz. Whitehead for not paying eighteen pence toward repair of a
Steeplehouse, had a new covering taken from her which cost eight shillings six
pence; a pewter platter worth three shillings; and a Candlestick worth two
shillings six pence; here is for one shilling six pence, taken away fourteen
shillings.

Tho. Tanfeild for not paying one shilling toward repairing of a Steeplehouse,
had taken from him one Ewe and a Lamb worth seven shillings.

John Nickolson for eight shillings demanded for tithes, was sued by Francis
Cobb, and ran to an Outlawry, and had three cowes taken from him worth nine
pounds.

Richard Hancock for two pounds five shillings demanded for tithes, was run to
an Outlawry by the said Fran. Cobb, and had taken from him two Oxen and two
Horses worth fourteen pounds.

John Bird for one shilling demanded by a priests clark, was sued by the clark,
and had a Horse taken from him worth three pounds.

Marmaduke Storr for three shillings nine pence demanded for repair of a
Steeplehouse, had taken from him two Bacon-flitches worth thirty shillings, and
a Weather sheep worth ten shillings.

Michael Simpson of Boythrop, a Farmer in the county of York, sued for tithes
by Charles Reane priest of Foxholes, in the said county; the tithes demanded,
twelve pounds, nineteen shillings and four pence; an Execution was given out
against him for trebble damage, which came to thirty eight pounds, eighteen
shillings, which indeed is trebble principle. One Richard Whitehead came to the
said Michael Simpson's House on the priests behalf, and the said Richard
opened the Stable-doors, and brought forth five Horses; likewise he took
twenty three beasts, six score and eleven old sheep, and forty three young
sheep, and the next morning prised the said goods; Five Horses at ten pounds;
twenty three beasts at a mark a beast; six score and eleven old sheep, at three
shillings a sheep; and the young ones at one shilling a sheep; in all they came
to forty seven pounds, two shillings and eight pence; but they sold them at
Molton for fifty six pounds, twelve shillings and four pence, but were worth
ninety one pounds, seven shillings. Thus in brief, For twelve pounds nineten
shillings four pence, goods was taken away worth ninety one pounds, seven
shillings.

John Hutton in the couny of York, nine pence being demanded of the said John
Hutton for repair of the Steeplehouse, goods taken from him to the value of two
shillings and six pence, and nothing returned.

The said John Hutton for Clarks Wages, one shilling eight pence which they
demanded, had took away a Cow worth two pounds eight shillings

Likewise John Hopper in the foresaid Town and County, for Clarks Wages,
demanded the sum of four pence, had took away a Cow which was worth two pounds.

Tho. Thompson of Maulton, Draper, had taken from him a piece of Cloth, near
four yeards: the sum demanded was two shillings for the repair of the
Steeplehouse, they took away goods worth eight shillings eight pence.

Thomas Aldam of Warmsworth, in the County of York, by the means of Thomas
Rooksby Priest, and Thomas Vincant of the same, Farmer to an Impropriator; the
same Tho. Aldam was cast in prison by their means in York Goal, and there kept
two years and six months, in which time both the said parties sued him at the
Law for not setting forth his tithes, which the Priests party swore to be worth
five pounds ten shillings; and Richard Nudigate Judge gave an Order to the
Priest to take sixteen pounds ten shillings. By this you may know he is a
Deceiver and a false Prophet.

Again in the same year Tho. Vincant Tythemonger, procured his servants, Tho.
Marshal, and Timothy Brigham, to swear the value o Tho. Aldams tithes, to be
worth six pounds two shillings, for which Tho. Vincant had a Judgment from the
said Nudigate, Judge, for eighteen pounds six shillings; and for the said
eighteen pounds six shillings, was taken four Oxen, seven Kine, one Steer, one
Heifer, one Horse, one Mare, valued by Neighbors to be worthsorty two pounds;
distrained by Henry Worrell, bailiff, and sold by the said bailiff, and nothing
returned again to Tho. Aldam, nor by him received.

Again the said Tho. Rooksby Priest of Warmsworth, did sue Tho. Aldam for
tithes, which he pretended to be due unto him in the year 1653. and 1654. and
did get a Judgment from 10. Parker Judge, for twelve pounds out of the Lands
and Goods of Tho. Aldam; upon whose Goods Distress was made by Godfrey Burton,
bailiff, which took fifteen Loads of white Wheat out of Tho. Aldams Chamber,
ready dressed, valued to be worth sixteen shillings six pence a Load, which in
all is thirteen pounds, and nothing was returned again; the spoil of these
goods was taken in the year 1656. If this be not a heavy burden, grievous to be
born, let all of understanding judge, to take from one man seventy one pounds
for that which themselves swore to be but fourteen pounds twelve shillings,
which is above fivefold the value.

John Kilam of Balby had taken from him for the repairing of the Steeplehouse,
by the Order of Richard Bradforth then Mayor, a fat Bullock worth two pounds,
six shillings and eight pence, in the year 1654. Again taken from Tho. Kilam
for repairing of the same Steeplehouse at Doncaster, a Bullock worth one pound
ten shillings by Order from the aforesaid Mayor; the sum demanded was but
seventeen shillings, in the year 1654.

Again, taken from Tho. Kilam of the aforesaid place, half a quarter of Barley
worth thirteen shillings, for the repairing of the aforesaid Steeplehouse, by
John Ward, Will. Patison, John Creakehill, Collectors for the House of their
god, in the year 1656.

SVMMERSET.
Upon the 23. day of the first Month, 1657. late in the Evening, William Amoss,
and John Mead, (called Churchwardens in the parish of Streat) with two men
more, (called Bailiffs) came to the Houses of the persons hereafter mentioned,
and took away their goods (as they said) for the House which they called the
Church; and because for conscience sake we could not repair their Bells, or
uphold their Church, we suffer the spoiling of our goods, as appears by the
Relation following.

From Henry Gundry for ten shillings eleven pence demanded, they took away
thirty one pounds of Bacon, worth six pence the pound; and since the said Henry
Gundry was arrested for non-payment of tithes, and taken by John Midlehem as he
was going with a draught of Oxen the first day of the fourth month, and carried
away forthwith to the Goal at Ivelchester, where he remains prisoner to this
day.

From Jasper Bat they demanded eight shillings nine pence, and they took away a
brass pan, one pewter Flaggon, and two brass. Candlesticks, to the value of
about twenty shillings; and she said Jasper Bat was the 24th. day of the 6th.
month, 1657. arrested by the foresaid bailiff, and carried him four miles
toward the Goal; but the bailiff being very civil toward him, then freed him
on his giving a Note under his hand to appear at the upper-bench at
Westminster, on the day called Saturday next after the morrow of All Souls, (so
called) where he did accordingly appear, and offered a Note to one Judge
Waberton, signifying the cause of his being there; but the Judge said he would
receive nothing from him unless he would put off his Hat; so the said Jasper
Bat went to the upper-Bench-Office in the Inner Temple, and desired to have his
appearance recorded, and he would pay for it, but the men there present refused
to record his Appearance without an Attorney, which he refused to have, and so
left them. He was arrested for non payment of tithes.

From John Pittman they demanded six shillings three pence, and took away four
Dishes worth about twelve shillings; and since the said John Pittman was
summoned to appear at the Exchequer at Westminster in eight days after the day
called St. Martine, in the year 1657. where he did appear accordingly; but
they refused to record his appearance unless he would see an Attorney. His
summons was for non-payment of tithes

From Edward Tailor they demanded one shilling six pence, and took away three
pewter Dishes worth about six shillings and eight pence.

From Agnes Barrat a poor widow, who for her meannesse was never rated to the
poor, although the charge in that parish for the poor is great, yet they
demanded one shilling and six pence of her, and took away a pewter Dish of her
Grandchilds, worth about three shillings four pence: So that they neither spare
poor Widows, nor fatherless children, but devours their Houses, spoils their
Goods, and makes their prey upon them.

Also William Shephard of Walton, in the same County, was summoned to appear
that sixth day of the third month, 1657. at the Exchequer, where he appeared,
and there was nothing charged against him, although he waited several days.

From John Dundo of Hollowtrow in the same County, for seventeen shillings ten
pence demanded for tithes, was taken from him one pound seventeen shillings ten
pence, by Order of John Hippesley and Richard Ioanes, two of those in
Commission to do justice in the same County.

From John Cole of Farrington, for one shilling six pence demanded for mending
of the Steeplehouse, had taken a brass Kettle worth six shillings, in the year
1656.

Likewise Thomas Loscombe for two shillings eight pence demanded of him for the
redairing of the Steeplehouse at Queen Camel, the Church wardens [so called]
took away one brass pan to the value of thirty shillings; and since the said
Thomas Loscombe was committed to prison, because for conscience sake he could
not take an oath when appointed as a Surveyor for the highways in the
foresaid parish of Queen Camel, and has continued a Prisoner near eight
Months, where he remains to this day.

And all these sufferings are sustained by us who cannot be conforformable to
the heathenish customs, and traditional worships of the world, neither can we
give them our gold or silver to repair or uphold the Idols temple, where the
unknown God is ignorantly worshipped by them whose idolatry and superstition is
made manifest to, and denied by the children of Light, whose souls are subject
[for conscience sake] to the higher power.

At Striate in the county of Sommerset, at a court held for John Whitington, in
the year 1657. there were present John Pittman, and Jasper Batt, who are called
Quakers, who for conscience sake could not swear, and also one Will. Amoss,
who is no Quaker, likewise refused to swear; and the said Pittman and Batt were
by the Steward fined twenty shillings a piece, but Will. Amoss was not fined at
all.

Christopher Pittard and George Tailor, riding through Ilchester to a Meeting
to worship the Lord, (about six miles from their dwellings) had their Horses
taken from them.

On the first day of the Week likewise, Thomas Buds wife riding to the
aforesaid Meeting four miles from her dwelling, Rob. Hunt, and John Carry,
called Justices, directed a Warrant for the levying ten shillings by distress
on Tho. Buds goods for riding four miles to the Worship of God.

Hillary Term [so called] the 11th. Month, 1655. I made my personal appearance
at Westminster before tBe Barons of the Exchequer, to answer a Bill exhibited
against me for non-payment of tithes, at the Complaint of Thomas Ladd, Priest
of Salford, in the County of Sommerset. To which Bill I answered; but because I
could not for conscience sake swear, and so return my Answer upon Oath, a Writ
or Warrant was issued forth against me, signed by Robert Hunt, being then high
Sheriff of the County aforesaid; by virtue whereof I was apprehended in a
Meating at Kainsham the 26. day of the first Month, 1656. and so carried to
Ivelchester prison, where I have been kept, and remains a prisoner to this day.

John Doget.

Upon the first day of the fourth Month, 1657. Henry Gundry was committed to
the Goal at Ivelchester, where he now remains a prisoner for non-payment of
tithes at the Complaint of one Josiah Primet, or in the behalf of the priest of
Streate, near Glastonbury in the County of Sommersec: and although the VVarrant
to the keeper [signed by William Helliard Sheriff of the County] expressed that
he the said William Helliard was to have his body before the Protector the
Tuesday three weeks of the Holy Trinity, [so called] yet he remains a Prisoner
in the Common-Goal at Ivelchester.

Likewise Edmund Beackes was committed to the Goal at Ivelchester upon the
first day of the seventh Month, 1657. where he is to remain in safe custody,
as says the VVarrant to the Keeper signed by William Helliard high Sheriff of
the County of Sommerset) so that he may have his body before the Protector
eight days after the time called St. Martines, to answer one Thomas Edwards
Priest of Kingson-Samor, in a common plea of Trespass, which the said priest
have declared to be for non-payment of tithes; and although the VVarrant to the
Keeper expressed that he the said William Helliard was to have his body before
the Protector eight days after St. Martins, yet he remains a prisoner to this
day.

Also William Serjant of Bathford was taken prisoner at Bath the third day of
the eight Month, 1657. and kept prisoner in Bath twelve days, contrary to the
express words of the VVarrant, and afterward sent to the Goal at Ivelchester
at the Complaint of one Philip Elice of Bathford, for non payment of tithes;
and although the VVarrant expressed that he was to be at London within eight
days of St. Martine, [so called] to answer the said Philip Elice in a plea of
Trespass; yet he is kept a prisoner at Ivelchester with the persons
abovementioned unto this day, being the nineth day of the tenth Month, 1657

NORFOLK.
In the year 1656. Jonathan Clapham priest of Wramplingham in Norfolk, summoned
one Benjamin Lines to appear before several Justices in the said County, to
thew the cause why he the said Benjamin did refuse to pay tithes to the said
priest; so he did appear: And the priest brought one John Benton of
Wramplingham, and Thomas Park of Melton, to be his witnesses; and both of them
were so apparently forsworn, that the Justices did not accept of their
testimony; so another witness was examined, and he did testisie the tithes of
the said Benjamin for one Meadow, to the value of twelve shillings, and no
other tithes that he knew due from the said Benjamin: And for that twelve
shillings which this one witness did testify to be due to the said priest,
Ralph VVooliner and one Richard Brown, (two appointed to do Justice in the
County) signed a Judgment for above forty shillings; and the said priest
Clapham went himself with a man or two with him, and fetched out of the said
Benjamin Lynes's ground, two Cows better worth then four pounds; since which
the said John Benton did get into the Steeplehouse at VVramplingham, and there
hanged himself in a Bell-Rope; and after he had so done, the said prieft
Clapham [as diverse that were present have affirmed] did to the Coroner and the
Jury testify upon his Oath, that the said John Benton had been a distracted
man, or not composmentes, for three or four years before, yet the said priest
brought him for his witness, and caused him to be forsworn; so that this
priest Clapbam is not only a false teacher, but a false swearer; for the man
John Benton, was never known to be distracted, but was of a good reputation
amongst his Neighbors, until the priest caused him to forswear himself for his
dishonest gain. Witness,

John Lawrence, and Ben. Lines.

The said priest Clapham summoned John Lawrance to appear before several
Justices, to show the cause why he would not pay tithes: the said Lawrance did
appear according to the summons, and the priest also with two false witnesses,
Matthew Hawke, and John Cornhil, who swore that John Lawrance had more acres of
Corn then he had, as John Lawrance did make appear before the Justices;
nevertheless the Justices, Will. Steward, John Bowrman, Ralph VVolmer, signed
a Judgment against the said Lawrance for five pounds sixteen shillings, which
was eighteen shillings more then the witnesses swore, although they did swear
falsely; and the priest took for the five pounds sixteen shillings, three cowes,
which was better worth then nine pounds.

This priest Clapham has caused four men to forswear themselves, one of which
has since hanged himselfin the priests Steeplehouse in a Bell-Rope, which is
for an example for all false teachers, hirelings, and false swearers.

Witnessed by John Lawrance, and Benjamin Lines.

NORFOLK.
The Farmers of the Impropriation at Shottesham, John Mingay, and Thomas
Bransby, having gotten a warrant from them called Justices, to take of Henry
Halls forty five shillings for tithes, and fifteen shillings for costs, went
the eighth month last to the Family of Henry at Shottesham, and took from them
two cows worth about seven pounds.

SVFFOLK.
Joseph Lawrence at the suit of Sam. Habbargham priest of Silham, for tithes
for the value of two pounds fourteen shillings, did take from him two Kine
worth ten pounds.

James Norton for the value of one pound five shillings demanded as due, had
taken from him three Firkins of Butter worth three pounds eighteen shillings.

John Friar for thirteen shillings four pence demanded as due, had taken away a
cow worth three pounds six shillings.

Again two called Justices of peace, Rob. Knowles, and Justice Elington,
granted out a Judgment against Ia. Norton for seven pounds ten shillings,
besides what charges should be required; whereas the yearly Rent is but
seventeen pounds, six shillings six pence: So for the tithe he has almost half
the prise of the Rent.

Again another Judgment is given out by the same Justices against John Friar
for six pounds ten shillings, besides what charges should be required, and the
yearly Rent of the Farm is but eighteen pounds eight shillings.

Thomas Iudy is imprisoned because he could not swear to the giving in his
Answer at the Exchequer, and so remains a prisoner in Edmundsbury.

Richard White sued by Augustine Gobbit priest, for the value of two pounds ten
shillings for tithes, for which they took away three cows worth twelve pounds.

Tho. Bond being a Soldier in the Garrison at Langardforld-fort, had his corn
taken away off his ground by a Soldier which the priest hired to do so,
contrary to the Law.

Geo. Sherwine is prisoner at Melton in Suffolk, and has been long, because he
could not pay tithes.

Arthur Gorroud was not suffered to make his appearance according to the writ,
but was cast into prison at Ipswich, and there remains, not only without the
transgression of a Law, but also contrary to the Law. And other two is in
prison at Ipswich for denying tithes.

NORFOLK.
Richard Cousius for tithes at the suit of Tho. VVorts priest of Beningham, for
the value of one pound eight shillings, took two Horses, and being not
satisfied, the Constable came again, and took the clothes off a Bed, a
covering, blankets and sheet, two pillowes, and brought them to the house where
the priest was; but the priest being not yet satisfied with two horses, and
bed-clothes, came again the third time, and took another bed-clothes where upon
the children lay, a Covering, two Blankets, and a pair of Sheets, one
boulster, and bid the constable take notice that he took them in his Lord
Protectors Name; and he carried them where the priest was; so for the value of
one pound eight shillings, they took away goods worth eight pounds.

Thomas Palmer at the suite of the same priest for tithes of the value of four
pounds thirteen shillings demanded as due, had taken from him four horses worth
more then twelve pounds.

George Howles of Glaptan in the county of Suffolk, was subpoened up to London
by Richard Rogers, Priest of the same town, for eight pence tithes, and the
said George's wife would have agreed with the priest, and he said he would not
take under nineteen shillings, and she consented to have given him nineteen
shillings; then he said he would not take it unless she would set her hand to
give him nineteen shillings every year; and so denying his unreasonable
demands, the said George came up to London to make his appearance according to
the Subpoena.

Christopher Bisbrown for tithes which was claimed as due, eleven shillings,
they took an Ox worth three pounds five shillings, and restored nothing.

Again for the tithe claimed to be due, which came to one pound thirteen
shillings, they took away a Yoke of Steers, worth threepounds, seven shillings
and six pence.

CHESHIRE.
Great Budworth Parish; Ephraim Elcock Priest.
Thomas Buckley for tithes to the value of twelve shillings, had a Horse taken
from him for the use of the said Priest, worth four pounds.

George Veakin for the value of four pence half penny, which he claimed for
smoke and Easter-Reckonings, had one brass pot taken worth eight shillings.

Likewise George Veakin for the value of six pence, which theydemanded for two
years payment to the priest, had Tools taken from him worth seven shillings.

Runkorn Parish, William Finmoore Priest.
Henry Burtonwood for tithe of the value of five shillings, had one Cow taken
from him worth two pounds thirteen shillings four pence, for the use of the
said Priest.

At another time Henry Burtonwood for tythe-corn to the value of two pounds,
one shilling and a penny, had taken from him two Cows and one Heifer which was
sold for seven pounds, for the use of the said priest.

John Burtonwood for tythe-wool and lamb of the value of eight shillings and
three pence, had taken from him two young beasts, which they sold for one pound
five shillings.

Tho. Boulton for tythe-corn of the value of thirteen shillings, had taken from
him Corn worth five pounds, for the use of Henry Brooks.

Sisley Cleaton had taken from her one Warming-Pan worth six shillings, for
tythe-Flax, and she had none; being sued at the Law, and cast by a false Oath,
for the use of Colonel Brooks.

Widow Royle for tythe-corn of the value of one pound three shillings, had
taken from her one Cow worth three pounds ten shillings, for the use of
Colonel Henry Brooks; likewise she had taken from her one Load of Beans:
Likewise she had one Bed-covering taken for Colonel Brooks.

Fradsham Parish.
Widow Milner for tythe-corn of the value of two pounds ten shillings, had
taken from her one Mare and one Cow worth seven pounds ten shillings. And
likewise for tythe-Oats of the value of eleven shillings, had taken from her
one Cow worth two pounds, besides she lay in prison seven weeks for the same
thing, for the use of the Earl Rivers.

Tho. Hill for tythe-corn of the value of one pound ten shillings, for which he
suffered fourteen weeks imprisonment, had taken from him five Load of Wheat out
of the field worth five pounds; for the use of the Earl Rivers.

James Brown for tythe-corn of the value of one pound ten shillings, had goods
taken from him worth five pounds thirteen shillings four pence by valuation,
for the use of the Earl Rivers.

William Sarrat for tythe-corn of the value of one pound six shillings eight
pence, had goods taken from him worth five pounds ten shillings, and was in
prison for the same seven Weeks.

James Brown for tithe of the value of thirteen shillings four pence (according
to their own valuation) had taken from him one yoke of Oxen worth seven pounds.

Wilinslow Parish; John Brewerton Priest.
Tho. Janney for tythe-corn of the value of seven shillings six pence, had
taken from him one Mare, out of which they took trebble damage.

Tho. Janney for tythe-corn of the value of sixteen shillings six pence, had
taken from him for the said priest two young Cows, better worth then six pounds.

Thomas Janney for tythe-corn of the value of one pound eight shillings, had
taken from him by Justice Writs one young Horse worth four pounds.

Thomas Potts for tythe-corn for the value of one pound six shillings and eight
pence, had taken from him two Heifers which they sold for three pounds ten
shillings.

John Worthington for tythe-corn of the value of three pounds six shillings,
had taken from him one Mare and one young Horse, worth twelve pounds, for the
use of the said priest.

Thomas Burrows in the parish of Budworth, for tithes of the value of one pound
three shillings, had taken from him one Heifer worth three pounds ten shillings.

Richard Burges for tythe-corn of the value of nineteen shillings, had taken
from him two Kine worth five pounds.

Richard Burges for tythe-corn valued by the priests servants to sixteen
shillings, had taken from him one young heifer worth two pounds six shillings
and eight pence.

Lawrence Pearson for tithe of the value of eight shillings, had taken from him
one Horse worth three pounds.

Anne Janny of Handford for tithe of the value of thirteen shillings, had taken
from her one Cow and one Heifer which were worth six pounds.

Most of this cruelty has been done by Writs from two Justices, to wit, Tho.
Standley, and Tho. Brearton, being servants to this Priests lusts.

Moberly Parish, Robert Barlow Priest.
Tho. Heal for tythe-corn of the value of fourteen shillings six pence, valued
by the priests man, had taken from him one Heifer worth one pound thirteen
shillings and four pence.

Hugh Stretten for tythe-corn of the value of eleven shillings and six pence,
had taken from him two Sacks of Oats worth one pound eight shillings.

And the Constable of the town being troubled at it, asked the Priest why he
took so much, seeing he professed not to take trebble damage of any; the priest
answered him, It cost him so much in Justices Dinners, and their men.

CLARKS Wages, and repairing of STEEPLEHOVSES.
Thomas Buckley for seven shillings two pence demanded, had taken from him a
brass pot worth ten shillings.

Thomas Buckley for seventeen shillings demanded, had taken from him eleven
measures of Oats worth one pound two shillings and eight pence.

Henry Burtonwood for two shillings demanded, had goods taken worth five
shillings.

Henry Burtonwood for two shillings six pence, had taken from him four pewter
Dishes worth seven shillings.

Ell. Boulton for three shillings, had taken from him four pewter Dishes and a
Bowl, and one Candle-stick, worth one pound three shillings, which is near
seven times the value, for the House of their God.

Widow Royle had taken from her one brass pan, and one pot, and a
Dripping-pan, worth two pounds ten shillings, for repairing of the Steeplehouse
at Runkorn.

James Brown for two shillings, had taken from him goods worth six shillings.

Thomas Hill for two shillings, had taken from him one pot worth sixteen
shillings.

And at another time he had one pot taken from him worth six shillings, because
he could not pay one shilling.

William Sarret because he could not pay two shillings six pence for the repair
of the Steeplehouse, had taken from him one pot worth twelve shillings.

John for two shillings demanded, had goods taken from him worth five shillings.

Thomas Janny for six pence demanded, had goods taken from him worth five
shillings.

Again the said Janny had taken from him four Joynt-stools worth six shillings
eight pence, for repairing of the Steepleplehouse.

Thomas Pots for two pence, had taken from him a brass pot and a skimmer worth
ten shillings, which is threescore times the damage.

Again Tho. Pots for six shillings nine pence demanded, they took from him his
Coat, which they sold for one pound.

John Worthington for seven shillings demanded, had a brass pan, and two pewter
Dishes taken from him, worth one pound.

John Worthington at another time had taken from him a pair of Cart-wheels
bound with Iron, for repairing the Steeplehouse.

Richard Burgges for three shillings demanded, had one brass pan taken worth
seventeen shillings.

Again Richard Burgges for six shillings, had taken from him a Gun worth ten
shillings.

Robert Milner for two shillings, had taken from him three pewter dishes worth
seven shillings.

At another time Robert Milner for two shillings, had a Gun taken from him
worth nine shillings.

Robert Pearson and his son for two shilling^ six pence, had taken two pewter
dishes worth three shillings four pence.

James Harrison for two shillings eight pence demanded, which were due to be
paid by another man upon their account, had his coat taken from him.

Robert Pearson for three shillings four pence, had taken from him one brass
pan worth twelve shillings.

John Falkner for one shilling four pence, had goods taken from him worth five
shillings.

Thomas Lieuzley for six shillings, had taken from him one pot worth sixteen
shillings.

All these Sums beforementioned, was taken for repairing of the Steeplehouses.

Concerning Swearing.
Thomas Lieuzley because he could not swear, had a Cow taken from him worth two
pounds ten shillings, and suffered six weeks and five days imprisonment for the
same thing.

And likewise seven of these Friends abovementioned, viz. Tho. Ianny, Tho.
Potts, Rich. Burgges, Rob. Milner, Ia. Harrison, and Edw. Elcock, suffered the
spoiling of their Goods to the value of eleven pounds ten shillings, for
passing to a Meeting but two Miles from their own Houses; and this was done by
two Justices, Edw. Hide, and Tho. Stanlay.

A true Relation of a part of the sufferings in WALES for tithes. RADNARSHIRE.
RIchard Morre for the value of ten shillings, pretended to be due for
tythe-corn, by a Warrant from Richard King and John Yardlay, which was executed
by Tho. David, Rees David, and Will. Steven, for Edward Looyd tythe-monger, did
violently come into Richard Morres ground, and drove away a Cow worth two
pounds thirteen shillings and four pence.

Again Richard Morre had taken from him for the same thing, one Mare worth
three pounds eight shillings.

In all, taken for ten shillings, six pounds and four pence, which is twelve
times the value of the tithe.

And again Hugh ap John, and Will. Stephen, did come violently with one Evan
Moras, into Richard Morres field, and carried away his hard Corn, (what they
liked) in the sight of three Witnesses.

John Watson, Tho. Watson, Evan Oliver.

Witnesses hereof,

Margret Watson, a poor Widow, which had no Land but a little piece which was
given her upon a Common by her Neighbors; the said Hugh ap John, and Will.
Stephen, swore that her tithes was worth one shilling four pence, did take away
from her two pewter Dishes worth three shillings four pence.

Likewise the aforesaid idle persons, Hugh ap John, and Will. Stephen, did take
away from John Pearke for six shilling eight pence pretended to be due, a Colt
worth one pound ten shillings.

Likewse the aforesaid idle persons did without a warrant come into Evan
Stevens ground, and for four shillings pretended to be due, took away a Mare
worth two pounds.

Again the said idle persons without a Warrant did go into Oliver Houls ground,
and for five shillings pretended due, took away a Heifer which was worth one
pound, for the use of the said Loyd above said. Witness, Meredith Evens, and
Tho. Watson

Likewise the said idle persons went into John Bevandavids ground where he was
plowing, and for three shillings four pence pretended to be due, did unyoke one
Cow, the best the poor man had for plowing and other uses, among motherlesse
children, which same Cow he had bought of the said Loyd, which was worth two
pounds, thirteen shillings four pence.

Again these five men beforementioned, were summoned up to appear before the
Barons of the Exchequer.

James Miles summoned to appear at the Exchequer at the suit of Evan Daves.

Charles Daves had taken from him for four shillings, pretended due by John
Richards of the County of Radnar, a beast worth one pound ten shillings.

More sufferings in Cumberland by Richard Hutton Priest of Calbeck.
THo. Mark for the value of thirteen shillings six pence, had taken from him by
a Justice Writ for tithes, two Oxen and three Kine worth ten pounds, which is
above fourteen times the value.

William Stalker for the value of nine shillings tithes, had taken from him two
Oxen, and two Kine, worth nine pounds, which is twenty times the value.

Tho. Buly for fourteen shillings tithes, had taken from him one Cow worth two
pounds.

John Nickolson for nine shillings tithes, had taken from him one Ox worth one
pound thirteen shillings six pence.

Rich. Williamson for five shillings nine pence tithe, had taken from him one
Heifer worth one pound fifteen shillings, which was near seven times the value.

John Stricket for ten shillings tithes, had taken from him one Cow worth one
pound ten shillings, which is three times the value.

Mungo Arcock for twelve shillings tithe, had taken from him one Ox worth one
pound six shillings eight pence.

John Pattison for eight shillings four pence, had taken from him one Cow worth
one pound.

John Askue for three shillings ten pence, had taken from him one Cow worth one
pound ten shillings, which is above eight times the value.

Tho. Askue for three shillings five pence, had goods taken from him worth
seven shillings.

John Pattison for sixteen shillings eleven pence, tithe, had taken from him
seven bushels of Oats, and two bushels of Barley, which was worth one pound
five shillings and six pence.

John Stricket for sixteen shillings four pence, had taken from him one Cow
worth three pounds sixteen shillings eight pence, which was above four times
the value.

John Askue for fifteen shillings ten pence, had taken from him Barley and
Sacks worth two pounds four shillings ten pence.

William Stalker for fifteen shillings two pence, had goods taken from him
worth one pound four shillings.

John Nickolson for eighteen shillings four pence, had taken from him one Cow
worth two pounds.

John Peacock for one pound five shillings, had taken from him goods worth one
pound eighteen shillings.

Tho. Buly for thirteen shillings, had taken from him one Cow worth two pounds
ten shillings.

All these suffered by Richard Hutton Priest, who has sued four of them up to
London by a Subpoena, to appear before the Barons of the Exchequer, to answer
for the same thing for which he has sued them in the County Court; and this
Priest has summoned to the County Court at one time twenty three honest
people, as follows.

Thomas Bewly, John Nickolson, John Simson, Widow Peccastom, Richard Nickolson,
William Pearson, Richard Williamson, John Sowerbee, Hugh Peacock, Tho. Mark,
elder. Tho. Mark, younger. John Stricket. Mungo Arcock, Richard Wilson, William
Scot, John Pattison, Tho. Askue, John Askue, elder. John Askue, young. John
Peacock, William Stalker, George Scot, Rich. Scot.
All these have suffered by one Priest whom they do not hear.

The sum demanded is, ten pounds nine shillings and five pence.

The sum taken is, thirty five pounds one shilling and two pence.

Graystock Parish.
Richard Peacock had taken from him one Iron pot, three pans, two pewter
dishes, worth eighteen shillings, for repairing of Graystock Steeplehouse.

Rich. Peacock younger, for repairing of the same House, had taken from him one
pan and three pewter dishes, worth nine shillings.

Deacar Parish.
Edward Walker of Soulby for the value of sixteen shillings six pence,
pretended as due for tithes, had taken from him twenty Weather-sheep worth two
pounds thirteen shillings four pence.

Edw. Walker for the value of six pence for Clarks wages, had taken from him
two pewter Dishes worth five shillings, by Tho. Robinson, Clark.

John Mark for the value of three shillings four pence for the repairing of the
Steeplehouse, had Goods taken from him worth thirteen shillings.

John Todhunter for the value of six shillings eight pence, had taken from him
one pot and two pans, worth twelve shillings and six pence.

John Mark because he could not swear, was fined six shillings eight pence.

Matthew Robinson for the value of three pounds eight shillings eight pence, as
the Farmers themselves did value, and were the witnesses in their own cases,
contrary to Law, had taken from him four Oxen, and they sold them for twelve
pounds two shillings and six pence.

Again this said Matthew Robinson being coming from the Market, Richard Lingard
one of the murtherous Priests did strive to ride over him in the highway, and
caused one that was with him to take away his hat from him, and went away with
it, and never gave him it again, and so caused Matthew Robinson to go
bare-headed home, which is theft according to the Law.

John Head for two shillings ten pence, pretended as due for tithe, had taken
from him one Iron pot and two pewter dishes worth eleven shillings.

John Gill for the value of two pounds ten shillings demanded as due, had taken
from him four beasts worth six pounds.

Henry Johnson for tithe of the value of one pound one shilling, had taken from
him one Cow and Calf worth three pounds two shillings.

Richard Fawcet for the value of one pound one shilling, had taken from him two
beasts worth four pounds.

John Fearon for the value of one pound four shillings and four pence, had
taken from him two Kine worth five pounds.

John Dickson had taken from him one tythe-Hen for the use of the Priest.

Christopher Burket for the value of one pound five shillings, had taken from
him two Beasts worth three pounds fifteen shillings.

A tax for the Parish Church, so called, Goods distrained, as follows.
Robert Swift for two shillings eight pence, had goods taken worth ten
shillings.

Tho. Farnworth for three shillings five pence, had goods taken worth six
shillings.

Tho. Farnworth Senior, for six pence, had goods taken worth four shillings six
pence.

Joan Lamber for four shillings eight pence, had goods taken worth eight
shillings.

Ben. Nickolson for two shillings four pence, had goods taken worth eight
shillings.

Will. Bell for four pence, had goods taken worth four shillings.

For tithes for the Priest of Tixal.
Robert Swift for fifteen shillings, had goods taken worth one pound eighteen
shillings.

Joane Lambart for eight shillings, had goods taken worth one pound ten
shillings,

Ben. Nickolson for four shillings, had goods taken worth sixteen shillings.

Isaac Smith for one pound, had goods taken worth three pounds.

And again, for one pound ten shillings, had good taken worth three pounds.

The total sum demanded, 13 l. 17 s. 1 d

The total sum recovered, 26 l. 13 s. 00.

More in ESSEX.
Giffine Pery for the value of two pounds ten shillings tithes, had taken from
him five Cows worth eighteen pounds.

Moses Davie for the value of six pounds, had taken from him four Mares and
sixteen Ewes, worth above twenty eight pounds.

John Crosier for the value of five pounds, had taken from him for the Earl of
Warwick six Cows, and a Bull, and a Heifer, which was worth twenty three pounds.

And the said John Crosier and Moses Davie is carried to prison for tithes,
notwithstanding all these goods was taken away.

Stephen Davy, Sam. Skillingham, John Child, are sued for tithes in the
Vpper-bench.

John Chopper sued for tithes at the Exchequer.

An Abstract of the sufferings of the innocent mentioned in this Book, for not
paying Tithes, for not repairing Steeplehouses, and not swearing, which gives a
brief view of the sadness of their sufferings, and weight of their oppressions.
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
Value of tithes demanded. Value of goods taken. l. s. d. l. s. d. RObert
Letchworth for 01 00 00 05 00 00 Stephen Wilson for 00 12 0 02 10 00 William
Crane for 00 06 00 00 11 06 Robert Crabb for 00 01 01 00 07 00 Clement Crabb
for 00 07 06 01 00 00 Henry Place for 00 01 06 00 03 00 John Peachy for 00 12
00 02 00 00 Sam. Cater for 00 00 10 00 05 00 Robert Asplan for 00 11 06 01 10
00 Tho. Dorman for 00 01 08 00 06 08 Will. Johnson for 00 09 10 01 13 00 Robert
Asplan for 03 15 00 14 00 00 Robert Crabb for 00 01 10 00 04 10 Henry Place for
00 00 05 00 00 10 Thomas Hawks for 00 00 04 00 04 00 John Love for 00 01 08 00
10 08 Robert Asplan for 00 01 04 00 05 00 Will. Grounds for 00 02 01 00 10 00

ESSEX.
Robert Nicholl for 19 00 00 50 00 00 Robert Adams for 00 16 00 05 10 00

GLOCESTERSHIRE.
William Wooley for 00 00 00 05 00 00 John Cathaby for 00 08 00 01 10 00

NORFOLK.
Villiam Barker for 01 06 00 06 00 00 Richard Cousin for 01 10 00 03 10 00
Benjamin Lines for 01 10 00 04 00 00

SVFFOLK.
Nichol. White for 01 10 00 12 00 00 Antho. Kittel for 00 10 00 02 00 00

KENT.
William Bean for 00 00 00 00 13 04

WILTSHIRE.
John Jay for 03 04 00 12 00 00 Roger Haukins for 00 10 00 02 10 00 Robert
Smart for 00 18 00 03 00 00 Will. Player for 00 09 00 02 10 00

Yorkshire, Liverton.
Robert Parret for 02 00 00 05 10 00 The same man for 00 00 00 00 16 00 The
same man for 00 00 05 00 02 00 William Tiplady for 02 06 08 05 04 04 The same
for 02 06 08 08 00 00 Robert Tilady for 04 00 10 16 19 10 Nichol. Tiplady for
01 10 00 03 05 04 Robert Stonehouse for 03 00 05 14 12 00 James Stonehouse for
00 00 05 00 03 00 Rowland Thorpe for 00 00 00 00 05 00 Eliz. Carcroft for 00 00
02 00 01 08

Eastriding.
Thomas Leeming for 00 09 00 01 13 04 Thomas Leeming for 02 02 00 07 00 00 More
for 00 14 00 03 00 00 Marmaduke Stephenson for 00 02 00 01 00 00 John Wilson
for 00 06 10 01 10 00 More for 02 04 11 06 10 00 Walter Hall for 02 11 00 10 00
00 John Cook for 00 15 00 04 10 00 Christopher Hurdsman for 00 01 03 02 00 00
Christopher Hutton for 00 01 08 00 04 00 James Turner for 00 05 10 02 15 00
Christopher Wilson for 00 03 04 00 10 00 Henry Wilson for 00 00 10 00 04 06
John Smith for 02 03 02 04 14 04 Alexander Harland for 00 03 00 03 02 00
Christopher VValkington for 00 00 06 00 01 06 William Loftus for 00 12 00 05
00 00 More for 00 18 07 03 00 00 William Iackson for 00 10 00 00 16 00
Millison Leg for 00 05 00 00 08 00 Eliz. Whitehead for 00 01 06 00 11 00
Thomas Tanfield for 00 01 00 00 07 00 John Nicholson for 00 08 00 09 00 00
Richard Hawcock for 02 05 00 14 00 00 John Bird for 00 01 00 03 00 00 Marmaduke
Storr for 00 03 00 02 00 00

Westmorland.
William Hebson for 02 11 00 08 06 08 William Holme for 01 14 08 04 15 00
Rowland Smith for 00 06 00 01 06 08 Richard Holme for 01 07 00 03 04 00 Agnes
Teasdell for 01 11 00 05 00 00 Edw. Robinson for 00 16 09 04 06 08 Richard
Smith for 00 08 06 01 00 00 John Sutton for 01 04 00 03 10 00 John Came for 01
08 06 03 00 00 More for 01 09 00 04 00 00 Mabel Camme for 00 00 08 00 08 00

Cumberland.
Richard Robinson for 01 08 00 04 00 00 Widow Ayket for 01 08 00 04 00 00 John
Wilkinson for 00 02 06 03 00 00 Thomas Potter for 02 00 00 06 00 00 John
Pattison for 00 03 00 00 08 09 Thomas Wilson, alias Stamper for 00 12 00 02 00
00 Hugh Tickell for 00 06 04 01 01 07 John Wilson for 00 07 00 01 10 00
Christopher Scot for 00 19 00 02 00 00 Anthony Tickell for 00 04 00 00 14 00
John Ardell for 00 15 00 01 07 00 John Bounskill for 00 02 08 00 07 00 William
Bowman for 00 09 00 00 16 00 Elinor Dixon for 00 01 06 00 09 00 John Hodgson
for 00 02 00 00 04 07 Lancelot Feron for 00 16 03 00 18 00 Widow Ayket for 00
00 10 00 04 00 Henry Lowthet for 00 03 04 00 06 08

Sufferings for not swearing.
ISLE of ELY.
l. s. d. WIlliam Grounds 5 0 0

YORKSHIRE.
Robert Parret 1 8 0 Robert Stonehouse 0 10 0 Rowland Thorp 0 5 0 John Wilson 0
6 8

CUMBERLAND.
John Fell 0 8 0 Thomas Fell 0 8 4 John Caipe 0 9 6 John Senhouse 1 10 0 Henry
Louthaite 0 16 0 John Richardson 0 11 0 11 12 6 Edmond Hunter 4 0 0 The total
sum demanded is, 95 16 10 The total sum recovered is, 366 16 9

Which is almost four times the full value, viz. Fourfold damage.

More sufferings, as follows.
SVFFOLK.
Value of tithes demanded. Value of goods taken. l. s. d. l. s. d. Joseph
Lawrance for 2 14 0 10 0 0 James Norton for 1 5 0 03 18 0 John Friar for 0 13 4
03 6 0 Again, James Nortons Farm being but 17 l. 16 s. 6 d. Rent, for tithes
of which Farm had taken from him -- 7 10 0 John Friar, his Farm being but 18 l.
8 s. has taken from him for the tithe of it, 6 l. 10 s. Richard White for 02
10 00 12 00 00

NORFOLK.
Richard Cousine for 01 08 00 08 00 00 Thomas Palmer for 04 13 00 12 00 00

SOMMERSET.
Henry Gundry for 00 10 11 00 15 06 Jasper ^att for 00 08 09 01 00 00 John
Pittman for 00 06 03 00 12 00 Edward Tailor for 00 01 06 00 06 08 Agnes Bratt
for 00 01 06 00 03 04 John Vando for 00 17 10 01 17 10 John Coll for 00 01 06
00 06 00 Thomas Loscomb for 00 11 08 01 10 00

An Abstract of some of the sufferings of the People of God in scorn called
QUAKERS for tithes, and other things mentioned in another Book formerly printed.
Graystock Parish, Richard Gilpin Priest.
Value of tithes demanded. Value of goods taken. l. s. d. l. s. d. RIchard
Peacock for 00 08 04 02 06 08 John Slay for 00 06 00 00 16 00 The same for 00
14 00 01 02 06 Margret Slay, Widow, And Rich. her son.
for
00 00 00 00 18 00 Agnes Buckbarrow, Thomas Buckbarrow, Richard Buckbarrow,
for
00 16 00 01 16 00 John Mark for 00 06 00 00 11 00 The same for 01 03 00 01 10
00 John Todhunter for 00 01 10 00 10 00 The same for 00 04 00 00 18 00 John
Slay for 00 08 00 00 14 00 John Bewley for 00 19 00 04 10 00 John Sowerby for
00 06 00 00 12 00 John Vdal for 00 04 00 00 13 08 Richard Peacock for 01 00 04
02 00 00 Tho. Barker for 00 14 02 02 00 00 John Goodhowse for 00 09 00 02 00 00

Caldbeck Parish, Richard Hutton Priest.
William Stalker for 00 09 00 08 10 00 Richard Williamson for 00 05 09 01 15 00
Richard Nicholson for 00 10 00 02 10 00 John Nicholson for 00 09 00 01 13 04
Thomas Bewley for 00 14 00 02 00 00 John Stricket for 00 10 00 01 10 00 Mungo
Arcock for 00 10 00 01 06 08 John Pattison for 00 08 04 01 00 00 John Askue for
00 03 10 01 10 00 John Bewley for 00 19 00 02 10 00 Richard Banks for 00 10 00
01 01 00 Thomas Mark for 00 13 00 10 00 00

Bol^on Parish, John Forward Priest.
Thomas Porter for 00 06 08 02 13 04 John Wilkinson for 00 04 00 02 10 00 John
Pattison for 00 06 00 01 18 00 John Wilkinson for 00 11 00 02 00 00

Vidal^ Parish, Henry Fallowseild priest.
William Caipe for 01 05 10 03 00 00 Thomas Fell for 00 10 04 02 05 00 John
Caipe for 00 05 00 00 13 00 Matthew Caipe for 00 17 00 03 00 00 Thomas Fell for
00 16 00 01 10 00 John Fell, elder, for 01 03 00 04 00 00 Thomas Fell for 00 10
00 01 10 00 John Caipe for 00 12 08 01 04 00 George Scott for 00 09 00 00 13 04

Skeleton Parish, George Tiball Priest.
Thomas Harrison for 00 09 01 01 01 06 John Bank for 00 18 00 01 06 08

Priest Jackson of Hutton
Richard Ireland for 00 08 00 02 19 00

The called Lady Fletcher.
Mungo Bewley for 00 14 00 03 00 00

James Steward, priest of Westward:
Henry Louthaite for 00 01 00 00 04 00

Priest Nicholls of Aicton.
James Barn for 00 12 00 01 05 00

Priest Pattison of Kirkbride.
Matthew Kirkbride for 00 01 00 00 12 00 Peter Head for 00 12 00 03 00 00

For Sir George Fletcher, so called.
Widow Head for 01 02 00 06 10 00 Mungo Wilson for 00 07 00 02 00 00 Rich.
Whiney for 00 07 00 01 17 00 William Allison for 00 07 00 01 16 00 Antho.
Scrugham for 00 03 04 01 04 00 James Wilson for 01 02 00 06 10 00

Jo. Salkeld of Threpland.
Alex. Stamper for 02 00 00 05 00 00 Tho Walker for 02 00 00 20 00 00 Leo.
Fisher for 00 05 00 01 00 00 John Fell for 00 00 07 00 05 00 Geo. Rothery for
00 01 09 00 06 00

Priest Egglesfeild of Plumland.
John Iredell for 00 06 08 01 00 00 William Bowman for 00 16 00 02 16 04 Tho.
Head for 01 04 00 10 00 00 William Pearson for 00 02 08 03 00 00 The same for
00 03 00 01 02 00 John Richardson for 00 12 00 02 05 00

Graystock Parish, another year for priest Gilpin.
John Slay for 00 18 00 02 00 00 The same for 00 01 00 00 10 00 10. Mark,
elder, for 00 17 00 04 00 00 10. Mark, younger, for 01 01 04 02 18 04 John
Sowerby for 00 04 00 00 10 06

GRAYSTOCK.
John Todhunter for 00 09 11 01 00 00 VVidow Buckbarrow and her Sons for 00 18
0^ 02 05 00 John Bewley for 00 19 0^ 02 05 00 VVidow Slay, and Rich. Slay for
00 11 02 01 08 00 Thomas Slay for 00 07 00 01 00 00 Cuthbert Hodgson for 00 14
00 01 15 00 John, Sowerby for 00 14 00 04 00 00

Caldbeck parish.
John Strickes for 00 16 00 02 10 00 Rich. Wilson for 00 01 00 00 07 00 Thomas
Haskin for 00 02 04 00 06 08 John Haskin for 00 12 07 02 00 00 John Peacock for
01 02 02 01 17 00 George Scot for 00 15 00 00 18 08 John Relfe for 00 05 03 01
10 00 William Stalker for 00 08 03 01 00 00 Thomas Mark for 01 02 04 02 14 00
John Nicholson for 00 12 08 02 00 00 Richard Scot for 00 04 10 00 07 00 VVidow
Preistman for 00 08 03 01 00 03 Thomas Bewley for 01 08 06 03 06 00 Thomas
Rickaby for 00 00 05 00 02 06

Brigham parish.
William Richardson for 01 10 04 03 10 00 Henry Johnson for 00 13 09 02 13 04
John Gill for 00 13 04 02 10 00

Cockermouth parish.
Richard Nucomb for 00 03 06 02 13 04

Deane parish.
Isabel Head, VVidow, for 01 04 00 11 00 00 Peter Head for 00 12 00 04 00 00
Christopher Manser for 01 04 10 05 00 00

Caldbeck parish, Richard Hutton priest.
Thomas Mark for 00 17 00 02 14 00 The same for 00 16 00 08 00 00 John Pattison
for 00 16 11 01 05 06 Richard Scot for 00 04 04 00 07 04 John Stricket for 00
16 04 03 06 08 Thomas Haskin for 00 03 05 00 07 00 John Haskin, elder, for 00
15 02 02 04 10 William Stalker for 00 15 02 01 04 00 John Nicholson for 00 13
04 02 00 00 John Peacock for 01 00 00 01 10 06

Bolton parish.
John Pattison for 01 02 00 02 10 00 John Wilkinson for 00 04 08 02 15 00

THREE PLAND.
Thomas Walker for 01 03 00 10 00 00 Richard Robinson for 01 10 00 20 00 00

YORKSHIRE.
James Gurnell for 00 05 10 01 07 06 Robert Everat for 01 11 00 03 00 00 John
Iayher for 00 06 06 00 16 04 Alexander Harland for 00 03 00 00 15 00 William
Sharp for 00 16 00 03 06 08 Matthew Maire for 00 14 00 05 00 00 Thomas Agar
for 00 01 01 04 17 00 William Thorpe for 00 01 01 00 15 06 Robert Bell for 00
00 07 00 16 00 George Matthew for 00 02 00 00 19 00 Edward Guy for 00 02 09 00
13 08 Richard Guy for 00 06 04 01 07 00 George Bland for 00 00 02 00 16 00 More
for 00 00 08 00 15 00 Richard Wickinton for 01 14 08 10 00 00 John Wilson for
03 10 00 08 15 00 Walter Hall for 01 13 00 07 00 00 Alexander Harland for 03 10
00 08 10 00 Michael Simpson for the tithe of Land which he farmed for 42 l. per
an. 54 00 00 William Pearson for 10 00 00 33 06 08 Christopher Hutton for 04 12
06 07 00 00 Jeffrey Nicholson for 01 14 00 08 00 00 Richard Simpson for 00 00
01 00 15 00 John Goodrick for 00 00 02 00 15 00 John Pickering for the tithe of
four Calves. 00 04 11 James Cookeson for 00 70 09 02 00 00 William Peart for 01
06 08 03 00 00 Valentine Johnson for 00 05 08 02 00 00 Josias Cookeson for 00
12 09 02 00 00 Thomas Scot for 00 11 06 06 00 00 Thomas Johnson for 01 14 00 02
12 00 John Walker for 00 18 04 01 05 00 Thomas Thurnham for 00 16 00 01 03 00
Richard Thomlinson for 00 01 06 05 00 00

Yorkshire, Sedberge, and thereabouts.
Thomas Aldam for 14 12 00 71 00 00 Thomas Blaikeling for 01 00 03 03 10 00
Edward Atkinson for 00 09 03 04 00 00 Richard Speight for 00 05 11 03 00 00
Antho. Willan for 00 15 00 03 00 00 Tho. Willan for 00 10 03 04 00 00 George
Maison for 00 05 00 02 13 04 Thomas Banks for 00 19 06 04 00 00

Caike parish, James Williamson priest.
Value of tithe demanded. Value of goods taken. l. s. d. l. s. d. Josias
Cookeson for 00 00 0^ 00 10 07 James Cookeson for 00 00 1^ 00 10 10 John Walker
for 00 01 00 00 11 00 Tho. Johnson for 00 04 0^ 00 14 08

Westmorland, Jo. Vaux, priest of great Musgrave.
Edmond Whitwell for 00 00 06 02 18 04 John Sutton for 01 01 00 06 13 04 John
Wilkinson for 01 11 00 20 00 00 John Wilkinson for 01 10 00 05 00 00 Jo.
Fallowfeild for 00 15 00 05 00 00 Henry Laycock for 00 02 00 00 18 00 John
Thompson for 00 16 00 02 10 00 William Hebson for 03 09 04 07 00 00 William
Holme for 01 03 00 02 04 00 Thomas Alexander for 00 01 08 00 05 00 John Smith
for 00 04 06 00 08 00 Thomas Wharton for 00 00 06 00 02 00 Henry Laycock for
01 06 00 03 00 00 More for 00 02 00 01 00 00 Richard Smith for 00 05 06 00 17
00 John Wilkinson for 00 09 03 01 02 00 Alice Wilson for 00 08 00 00 16 00
Edmond VVhitwell for 00 04 06 00 09 00 Agnes Tarne for 00 10 00 01 04 00

Musgrave Parish.
John Williamson for 00 13 00 0 00 00 His son for 01 10 00 20 00 00

LANCASHIRE.
Richard Ashburner for 01 00 00 02 18 04 More for 01 03 04 04 00 00 William
Greenbanke for 06 00 00 22 00 00 Alice VVoodhead for 01 01 00 05 00 00

DVRHAM.
John Richmond for 08 00 00 40 00 00

Clarks Wages, and repair of Steeplehouses.
l. s. d. l. s. d. RIchard Peacock for 00 01 00 00 01 06 Thomas Barker for 00
00 06 00 01 00 John Mark for 00 00 06 00 01 00 John Dixon for 00 10 00 00 16
00 Tho. Fletcher for 00 00 04 00 01 00 John Tison for 00 00 04 00 00 09 John
Pattison for 00 00 00 00 05 06 James Wilson 00 07 00 Mungo Wilson 00 05 00
Richard Whiney 00 03 00 Anthony Scrugham 00 02 03 William Iackson 00 09 00

More Sufferings for not swearing.
l. s. d. EDward Peacock 01 10 00 Michael Nicholson 00 17 00 William Pearson 02
00 00 More 03 00 00 Matthew Kirkbride 01 17 00 John Peacock 01 10 00 John
Stainton 01 06 00 Hugh Tickell 00 14 00 Thomas Pyle 00 10 00 Christopher Manser
03 10 00 William Stamper 03 10 00 John Fell 00 05 00 Thomas Fell 00 06 08 John
Caipe 00 04 00 Thomas Fletcher 01 11 04 The same 00 06 08 The same 01 10 00
John Dixon 00 16 00 George Burden 00 13 00

CHESHIRE.
Value of tithes demanded. Value of goods taken. l. s. d. l. s. d.

Great Budworth parish.
Thomas Buckley for 00 12 00 04 00 00 George Veakine for 00 00 04 00 08 00
George Veakine for 00 0^ 06 00 07 00

Runkorn Parish.
Henry Burtonwood for 00 05 00 02 15 04 Henry Burtonwood for 02 01 01 07 00 00
John Burtonwood for 00 08 03 01 05 00 Tho. Boulton for 00 13 00 05 00 00 Sisley
Cleaton for 00 00 00 00 06 00 Widow Royle for 01 03 00 03 10 00

Frodsome parish.
Widow Milner for 02 07 00 07 10 00 Widow Milner for 00 11 00 02 00 00 Thomas
Hill for 01 10 00 05 00 00 James Brown for 01 10 00 05 13 04 William Sarret for
01 06 08 05 10 00 James Brown for 00 13 04 07 00 00

Wilinslow parish.
Tho. Janney for 00 07 06 01 02 06 Tho. Janney for 00 16 06 06 00 00 Tho.
Janney for 01 08 00 04 00 00 Tho. Potts for 01 06 08 03 10 00 John Worthington
for 03 06 00 12 00 00 Thomas Burrowes for 01 03 00 03 10 00 Richard Burgges for
00 19 00 05 00 00 Richard Burgges for 00 16 00 02 06 08 Lawrance Pearson for 00
08 00 03 00 00 Anne Janney for 00 13 00 06 00 00

Mobberley parish.
Thomas Heal for 00 14 06 01 13 04 Hugh Strettle for 00 11 06 01 08 00

For repairing STEEPLEHOVSES.
l. s. d. l. s. d. THo. Buckley for 00 07 02 00 10 00 Tho. Buckley for 00 17 00
01 02 08 Henry Burtonwood for 00 04 06 00 12 00 Ellihu Boulton for 00 03 00 01
03 00 Widow Royle for 00 10 00 02 10 00 James Brown for 00 02 00 00 06 00
Thomas Hill for 00 02 00 00 16 00 Thomas Hill for 00 01 00 00 06 00 William
Sarret for 00 02 06 00 12 00 John Burtonwood for 00 02 00 00 05 00 Thomas
Janney for 00 00 06 00 11 08 Thomas Pots for 00 00 02 00 10 00 Thomas Pots for
00 06 09 01 00 00 Tho. Worthington for 00 07 00 01 00 00 Richard Burges for 00
09 00 01 07 00 Robert Miller for 00 02 00 00 07 00 Robert Miller for 00 02 00
00 09 00 Robert Pearson for 00 02 06 00 03 04 James Harrison for 00 02 08 00 10
00 Robert Pearson for 00 03 04 00 12 00 John Falkner for 00 01 04 00 05 00 Tho.
Lieuzley for 00 06 00 00 16 00 02 07 09 21 18 00

Concerning swearing.
Tho. Lieuzley 02 10 00 Thomas Janney, Thomas Potts, Richard Burges, Robert
Miller, James Harrison, Edward Allcock,
11 00 00

WALES.
Value of tithes demanded. Value of goods taken. l. s. d. l. s. d. RIchard
Morre for 00 10 00 06 00 00 Margret Waison for 00 01 04 00 03 04 John Pearke
for 00 06 08 01 10 00 Evan Stevans for 00 04 00 02 00 00 Oliver Hold for 00 05
00 01 00 00 John Bevan-david for 00 03 04 02 13 04 Charles Davise for 00 04 00
01 10 00 01 14 04 14 16 08 The sum demandedis, 01 14 04 The sum recovered
is, 14 16 08

Which is fourteen times the value.

The total sum of all demanded, 373 l. 12 s. 00 The total sum recovered,
1568 l. 14 s. 8 d.

More sufferings in Lancashire by Thomas Show Priest of the Parish of Aldingham.
RIchard Myers for the value of three pounds tithe, demanded as due to Priest
Show, was by a Writ cast into prison, and there remained prisoner two years and
five months, and in that time of imprisonment for the same thing was sued up to
London to answer it, and thereupon he had liberty from the Sheriff to go to
make his appearance; and after that he had made his appearance at London, and
was freed from his imprisonment by Order, he was again summoned to appear at
the Assise at Lancaster, to answer to the same thing; and the priest got a
Judgment against him, and for the value of three pounds, took away from him
five Beasts worth fifteen pounds; and the Bailiff for six pence (which he
demanded as due for warning him to the Sessions) took from him a pan worth ten
shillings. So the Priests and Bailiffs, and all Covetous Oppressors agree in
causing the harmless to suffer, who ows no man any thing but love.

Richard Ashburner for two pounds one shilling and three pence, had taken from
him a Horse and a Cow worth six pounds eighteen shillings four pence; and when
they had taken this, they said they wanted seven shillings three pence of their
sum, and for that the priest Show caused the body of Richard Ashburner to be
taken within ten days after, and to be put in close prison, and there to be
kept until he dyed.

Thomas Fell for one pound four shillings, had taken from him two Horses worth
four pounds.

James Chambers for the value of one pound six shillings eight pence, had taken
from him a Horse worth four pounds.

William Simpson for the value of seventeen shillings, had taken from him a
Mare worth four pounds, for the priests use.

Again Thomas Fell by the same priest had his Corn taken away off his ground;
for the priests servants carries peoples corn away upon their backs, and breaks
down their Hedges and Walls like thieves, and yet is not punished; and when
they had taken away his Corn off his ground, they took from him a young Ox
worth two pounds seven shillings.

Again, Tho. Fell had three Sheep taken from him for the same priest, for the
like things.

Edm. Cleoeton (for three shillings six pence demanded as due for tithes) was
summoned to answer at Lancaster, where he cast the priest; and the priest did
again renew the suit, and by the Oath of a false Witness, one Symond Mount, who
did swear to that which he did not see, as was confessed in the Court
afterward; upon which Evan Walls Steward of the County Court, gave out a
Judgment for ten shillings six pence, for which they took a Mare worth six
pounds. So here is six pounds taken for three shillings six pence tithe, which
is thirty four times the value, and more.

Cartmal Parish.
James Tailor, Tho. Atkinson, Richard Britten, Richard Roper, John Barrow,
Alexander Rigge, Lawrance Newton, George Garnet, William Pull, for denying to
pay tithes, was sued up to answer in the Common Pleas, in the year 1655. where
they appeared to bear a true witness for the Lord against them, and their
adversary not bringing in his Bill against them, was by the Court ordered to
pay them four pounds ten shillings, which was brought unto them* but they
denied his money, that so their innocent and clean lives might stand a witness
against their Enemies cruelty. But again the next Term their Enemy (Tho.
Priston of Houlcar, Esquire) sued them again into the Exchequer, and all, excepting
Rich. Roper, for the same thing, where they did appear to give their testimony
against tithes, and also against his lying Declaration against them; but they
were not permitted to give in their true testimony except they would swear, and
so transgress the command of Christ, who says, Swear not at all. And again for
the same tithes in the year 1656. they were sued in the Court in the said
Parish of Cartmal, and there proceeded against them; and from James Tailor took
a Horse, and from Richard Brittan another Horse, and apprehended the bodies of
Thomas Atkinson and John Barrow, by a Warrant from Ioh. Starkey, and so was
cast into prison, and when they were in prison, they took away a cow from John
Barrow; so that he was both imprisoned, and had his goods taken for the same
thing.

Mighaels Parish.
William Brewer for the value of three shillings tithe, had taken from him
goods worth one pound three shillings.

Kellat Parish.
Thomas Leaper for denying to pay tithes, was sued at the County Court at
Lancaster, by William Atkinson, who brought four Witnesses to swear for him,
one of which was Priest Jacques, who was the first priest that swore against
the truth, and the Ministers of it in its appearance in Lancashire, and has
continued in swearing and lying against the truth ever since, and so (as the
Scripture says of evil men) is grown worse and worse and by his Oath, and the
rest that joined with him in the Devils work, viz. to swear, and that falsely,
have caused to be taken from the said Thomas Leaper, four beasts worth fourteen
pounds, and the value of the tithes was but four pounds four shillings.

Robert Walker, Tho. Commin, Geo. Styth, Tho. Green, Richard Weaver, was all
fined ten shillings a piece at a Court holden at Lancaster, by the Mayor and
Bailiffs, because they could not swear, and two of the first had goods taken
from them worth one pound ten shillings;

And thus may all see how they make havoc of the Church.

Tho. Pearson for tithe of the value of one pound thirteen shillings four
pence, had taken from him a Cow worth four pounds.

And again the said Tho. Pearson was summoned to the Court at Kendall by
William Garnet, who brought with him a man for a witness, which swore that Tho.
Pearson had four acres of Corn that year, but afterward confessed in the open
Court that he had sworn falsely, and that T. P. had but two acres and a half;
yet notwithstanding John Archer, and Tho. Brathwaite, called Justices, gave
forth a Judgment to distrain his goods upon this false evidence.

Edw. Harrison for the value of one pound seventeen shillings, had taken from
him a Horse and forniture worth six pounds ten shillings.

Again the said Edward for tithe of the value of sixteen shillings, had taken
from him a Horse worth four pounds seven shillings.

Cros^whaite Parish.
John Pearson for tithes of the value of two shillings, had goods taken from
him worth nine shillings, for the priests use

Tho. Pearson had goods taken from him by the same priest, worth seven
shillings, and they did not tell him what they demanded, nor by what Authority
they took his goods.

Will. Seaman summoned to a Court at Brumswell in Suffolk, and because he
could not swear, had a Mare taken from him worth six pounds, by Order from John
Sayer Steward of the Court.

Saul when he was a persecutor, never made such havoc of the Churches as these
priests do, nor any that we read of did ever so spoil the Saints Goods as these
have done; but this is a time in which the Lord is making them manifest unto
all men, as the Scripture says.

The Priests and Teachers has told people, and persuaded them, and made them
believe they did not make it their end to teach for money and for tithes, for
Easter-Reckonings and Midsummer-Dues; but now they have showed themselves to
all sorts of people, and made manifest themselves to the whole Nation that that
is their end, for preaching for tithes, for money, for Easter-reckonings,
Midsummer-dues, and Offerings; they have long laid covered under that covering,
and covered themselves with that, in saying that that was not their end; but
now have they declared it in the Courts of the Nation in haling people before
Magistrates, and summoning them up to their Courts a hundred or two hundred
miles, and casting them into prison for tithes and maintenance till death; yea,
such as they do not preach to, and do no work for, which the like was never
heard of amongst the false prophets and false apostles since the world began,
driveing away poor men's Cattle, distraining their goods, taking away their
Horses, and Oxen, and Plow-geere, with which they should plow the Land, and
their Cows which should give their children milk, many having not a Cow left to
give their poor children milk for sustenance; and some have had their barns
broken open, and have had their Corn thresht out, and made spoil on at the
Priests pleasure; and others that have had something to kill for the use of
their Families, which the priests have taken away also at their pleasure, and
made havoc of; and such as have a better Horse, Bullock or Cow then ordinary
for their own use, such the priests makes choice of for their spoil, and take
them from people whom they do no work for, at their pleasure, that the good
savor is lost, and their profession and religion is become loath some to all
the sober and moderate people that fears God; that the Teachers of the Nation
are become the greatest troublers of the people in the Courts of the Nation,
and the greatest casters into prison in the Nation for their bellies and
maintenance, such as they do no work for, or for speaking to them; and there is
but a few Magistrates in the Nation that truly fears God, that are brought to
take notice of these things and doings; the Lord open their eyes and
understandings that they may see it, and themselves; for the cry of the
oppressed has long been in our Land; so unlike the Prophets, Christ, and the
Apostles, have the Teachers of this Nation been, that they have turned against
them that have been sound in the life of the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles
Doctrine.

THE END.

