The SPEECH of Ferdinando Huddleston Esquire In the Face of the Country, At the
Election at Baggry in the County of Cumberland, the 27th day of August, 1679.
GENTLEMEN,
MY Oppositions this day in this affair, may be thought strange, yet not more
strange than the joining Opposers; for one that comes here, I may acquiesce as
to his Worthiness; for those that appear now, as the last time, it might be
more seasonable for them to tell the Country of a new Commonwealth in a
disguise, than to put a second Fob upon them. I here declare in the face of the
County, I come here to the assistance of our King and Country, and to uphold
the most glorious Church in the World, settled in this Isle; and withal to speak
my Mind, which I include, and shall seal with my Life and Fortune, in defense
of his Majesty and our Church, as it is now established, against all Opposers.
Knowing the old Fallacy, to profess one thing, and act another, as in the late
Usurpation; to set Cobblers in the places of Kings, and Tinkers as Princes. Now
you have my free sense of what I pray God prevent; take right measures, and
recollect if in those sad Times there was not more insulting from the
Shopboard, which most of those that bore Power came from, than now there is
from the Noblemans Chair. Before a Commonwealth come here, I will loose my Life
and Fortune, choosing rather to extinguish with the Crown, which God forbid,
than survive to see Nothing, as heretofore, come in so high place; which this
Kingdom can never suffer, so long as English Spirits are in being, which the
worst thereof cannot submit to, without a true Head, which now we have, and I
hope of the Line shall never want. I conclude the rest, that God would bless
the King, and continue the present Settlement of our Religion now established,
which with my Blood I will seal. You have your Choice, I my Satisfaction in
discharging my self in this matter, not being given to Change.


