Mystery Babylon the Mother of Harlots DISCOVERED: Her Rise, and when, with
many of her sorceries. With her Merchants of diverse orders, and ranks, and
Merchandise of diverse sorts this many hundred years. Also her last Merchants,
with their delicate merchandise discovered; In answer to a book tituled the
Directory for the public Worship of God through England, Scotland, and
Ireland, which now is the chief traffic her last reformed Merchants trades
with, in all these Nations.

Published by F. H.

And the Merchants of the Earth shall weep and mourn over her, for no man
buyeth her merchandise any more,

Rev. 18.11. And every Ship-Master, and all the company in ships and sailers,
and as many as trade by Sea stood a far off, and they cast dust on their heads,
and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that great City wherein
were made rich all that had ships on the Sea, for in one hour she is made
desolate,

Rev. 18.17.16. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate 1659.

Mystery Babylon, etc.
IN the end of the primitive times, when the Apostles had finished their
Testimony committed unto them, and had gathered many out of the world, and
converted many unto God, and many were established in the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, (which purifieth the heart and gives victory over the world,)
and were led to the beginning, before the world was made, and the Churches
which were in God, which had received the anointing, by which they knew all
things, even the invisible things of God, and the mysteries of his glorious
Kingdom, which God through the Spirit did reveal unto them; which Spirit they
had received, being begotten of God, by which spirit they called him father,
and by which Spirit of truth which was manifest from the ^od of truth in their
hearts, by which Spirit they were led into all truth, and became Sons of God,
and heirs of the promise, and this Spirit was their direction, and led them to
worship ^od aright, to obey and glorify him, and his name which brought
salvation unto them; and into this Spirit they were all baptized by the one
Spirit into one body, and in this one Spirit they met and worshipped God, and
were of one heart and of one mind, and did know their Director near them, and
in them, and the time did come when they worshipped neither at Jerusalem, nor
at Samaria, but in the Spirit, and in the truth, wherein the Father was
glorified, and came to see that fulfilled which the ^rophets bore witness of,
even him in whom all the Prophets ends in; Christ made manifest in them the
hope of glory, whose voice they heard from Heaven, by which they were quickened
and raised from death to life, by the effectual working of the mighty power of
God, which wrought in them that did believe, and they were in the unity of the
Faith, by which all their hearts were purified who held it, which is a mystery
held in a pure Conscience, by which they received an assurance, and were made
partakers of the promises, and became Inheritors of life and light, and
immortality, and heirs of the promise, and Joynt-heirs with Christ, and they
sat together with him in heavenly places, and eat with him, and drank with him
in the Kingdom of God, which stood in power and in righteousness, joy, and
peace, and did not look like the Pharisees, lo here, or there, but first felt
it (as a grain of Mustardseed) in themselves, or as a corn of wheat which
afterward springs up as a blade, or as an ear of wheat to ripeness, to a full
corn, and they did walk from Faith to Faith, from strength to strength, and did
appear before God in Sion, and the Hebr^ws were come to Mount Sion, from whence
God shined out in perfect beauty, who became their satisfaction, and peace, who
had revealed his Son in them, whom God had made unto them Justification and
Sanctification and wisdom; and so they knew one God, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and one Faith, one hope, one baptism, the one Spirit into which
they were all baptized, into which they all did drink by which all that did
believe were sanctified, and did receive the inheritance among the Saints in
light, and this was the Church that was in God, which was begotten by God the
father, and preserved in Christ Jesus, in the lively faith, and in the lively
hope, by which their souls were anchored, and they established in the truth,
that made free, and they had received the spirit of Prophecy, and did speak one
by one, according to the Revelation of the spirit, (which led out of confusion
into order) and they being in the power of God, did walk by its order, in the
order of the Gospel.

And now was the woman clothed with the Sun, who had the Crown of twelve stars
upon her head, and the Moon under her feet, who stood in that which was
unchangeable and immutable, and now was the Man-child brought forth which was
to rule the Nations, and was revealed to the Church which was in God, and he
was the head by which all the members of the body was united together in one,
and reconciled to the Father in one, and by his Obedience, Justification did
come upon all that did believe.

But since the woman fled into the wilderness, and the Man-child was caught up
unto God, the midnight of Darkness came upon the whole world, and the
sincerity was lost, and the image of God lost, the Heir caught up out of the
worlds sight Faith was lost, Hope lost, the Spirit lost, (the Saints rule and
direction) And then the whore appeared, and made all Nations drunk with the
wine of her fornication, and they staggered and reeled to and fro, hither and
thither, having lost the Spirit, became all waters, and unstable, and all the
world wondered after the Beast, which then arose after the primative times, and
after the Apostles days, and admired him, and worsh^pped him, who killed the
Woman's seed, and made war against it.

And then the whore made Decrees, who was gone from the Lawgiver, and she made
confessions of faith, and articles of faith, being out of the power of God, who
is the Author of true faith, being guided by the power of the Dragon, she made
orders of worship, and gave directions for worship, having gotten on the free
woman's attire, the outside, the Scriptures* the form of Godliness, but
afterward became more abominable, having both lost the power and the form,
worshipped the Devils power, and the Dragons power, and came forth in the image
of him, and reached out the cup of fornication, and made the Nations drunk with
her Enchantments and sorceries, and she drunk the blood of the Martyrs, the
blood of the Prophets, and them that kept the testimony of Jesus, the spirit of
Prophecy, and then prescribed forms of worship, forms of prayer, and made
creeds and faiths, and articles of faith, and many faiths; having lost the
order of the Gospel, she made many orders, and sent out many Merchants to carry
abroad her traffic and her merchandise to the Nations, and whole ships were
filled full of it, vessels full of it, which went upon the Sea, and road upon
the waters, upon Kindreds, Tongues, Nations, and Peoples, who received of her
merchandise, and bought of several sorts of merchandise which the several
Merchants traded with, who had several orders prescribed then, (as Popes,
^ardinals, Jesuits, Friars of many orders, and Monks of many orders, Jesuits
of many orders, and all these carried their several wares and traffic, and
many more Tradesmen, many more merchants whom she sent out with her
merchandise, who have been made rich by her merchandise, and other merchants
were Bishops, Archbishops, Deacons, Archdeacons, Pryors, and Covents, Vicars,
Comissaries, Chapters, Chancellors, Vice-Chancellors, Doctors of Divinity,
Batchellors of Divinity, Doctors of Art, Masters of Art, Batchellors of Art,
Priests and Curats) by which they were made rich, and abounded in Treasure.

And the Beast whom all the world wondered after, compelled all to worship him,
both small and great, upon which the whore rides, the scarlet-colored Beast
which has guarded all her Merchants, and made all Nations buy their ware, and
has compelled all People to buy the whores Sorceries, even all the invented
and heathenish trumperies which the whore has patched up; and their Merchants
painted over, which they have patched up, some from the Jews, some from the
Heathen, some from the Saints words mixed with their own imaginations, and
deceit, and has holden forth these as the public worship in the Nations, and
Kindreds, Tongues, and Peoples, their many Creeds, many Confessions of the
Faith, many Catechismes, and many forms of worship; and when the people is
weary of one sort of Merchandise, then brings another in more deceitful and
worse, and the Beast has compelled the Nations to buy it, and to hold it as
the public profession of the Nations, though never so unsound and rotten,
though damnable doctrines, and doctrines of Devils, though invented, and
heretical opinions, invented since the Apostles days; yet cries the Beast, the
Church has ordained it, and the ancient Fathers has agreed upon it, and the
Councels has confirmed it, and the Devines has ratified it, and the Bishops,
and Archbishops, and reverend Fathers has confirmed it, and recommended it for
Orthodox and Authentic.

And therefore says the beast upon which the whore rides, (the false Church)
the mother of Harlots, if you will not agree to it, you are Heretics, for the
Church has power to censure you, to excommunicate you, and to curse you, and to
deliver you up to Satan; and then the beast having made Laws for the sale of
the whores Sorceries, and for the guarding of her Merchants, and their ships,
if you consent not to the Articles of the Faith, and Confessions, you break the
Law of the Nations, and are not subject to Authority; and now you are not
punished for Religion sake, nor for Christ's sake, nor the Gospels sake, but as
evill-doers, and Transgressors of the Laws of our Kingdom or Nation: and thus
the mother of Harlots which got up since the Apostasy, who has drunk the blood
of the Saints, and shed the blood of the Martyrs, and slain the witnesses, and
has put to many cruel deaths, She says, I am clear, we kill none for
Conscience sake, we persecute none for the Gospels sake, nor Christ's sake, nor
for Religions sake; but you suffer as Heretics, and you have transgressed the
law of Kings, Emperors, Councels, and Parliaments, and are enemies to States
and Governments, and Rule, in breaking their wholesome Laws cries the Harlot, who
has lost the savor; and her Merchants, which calls that which stinks and is
corrupt, wholesome, and so says the beast, we persecute you not for Religion,
neither in persons, liberties, or estates, but the Church has recommended this
Doctrine, these Articles of Faith, these Creeds and Pater-nosters, this public
worship, or that Masse-book, or that Common Prayer Book, or this Directory, and
are not they the fittest to judge of Religion, who has the Tongues, and the
Original? and is fittest to give meanings and interpretations of the Scripture?

And therefore we make a Law, that the Masse-book shall be holden out for the
public profession of these Nations, as the Pope, Cardinals, Jesuits, and
Friars think fit, and that the Common Prayer Book be holden forth as the
public worship, which the Bishops, Archbishops, Deacons, Archdeacons has
recommended unto us, as that which is consonant and agreeable to the primitive
times, and to the Church which has been established so many hundred years, and
whosoever will not consent and perform all the Rites and ceremonies, let him be
indicted, and let him be presented, and let him be cited to appear before a
Bishop, and let him imprison him, and fine him, and take away some of his
Estate, and excommunicate him, and then its fit that the Secular power take
notice of him for transgre^sing of their Law, and pillory him, or cut off his
ears, or stigmatize him, and banish him, and let his Estate be confiscate to
the King, or Prince, against whom he has transgressed, for he suffers as an
Evil-doer, and has brought this upon himself, because he would not be subject
to our Church orders, and to the laudable Customs of our Nations or Country.

And says some other of the whores Merchants who are of another order distinct
from the rest, and carries other sorts of ware, and traffiques with other sorts
of Merchandise, and some newer fashion, which is liker to bewitch people; they
cry out to the Rulers of the Earth to propagate their trading and their
merchandise, and says, it were fit that some Doctors and Orthodox men were
called together to consider and consult about their trade, and what sort of
ware or traffic will most bewitch people, and inchant their minds, that so
her Ships may go on the Sea; for if Kindreds, Tongues and People will not buy
her ware; her Ships cannot go, and their trade will go down; if ever Nations
come to the Rock, or people come to some stability, or know the precious
treasure, and the heavenly treasure in the earthen vessels, they will buy no
more of us; if the Sea be dried up that no more a gallant Ship can pass
thereon, nor never a Gally with oars, then we shall all turn bankrupts, and
then may we cry alas, alas, we that have been made rich are now become poor,
therefore what do we do? let us take counsel together, and if any tell that
they have obtained the heavenly treasure, and are come to the durable riches,
and to the treasure that cankers not, and that they have found it in
themselves, then let us cry out its heresy, and damnable Doctrine; and if any
man shall say that they need no man to teach them, but the anointing that
dwells in them, by which they know all things; then let us give our vote with
one consent, that, that's a delusion, and let us frame Arguments and say that
that cannot be, you want Hebrew Greek, and Latin, and the Original, by which
you should expound the Scripture, and know the meaning of it, and therefore you
to conclude that you have received the anointing is dangerous doctrine, let us
pronounce this man as a heretic, for he will infect people.

And furthermore if any say that the Lord is become his teacher, and he needs
no man to teach him, but knows the Lord to be his sheapheard, then let us cry
out of this, as dangerous doctrine, and cry to the rest of the people (that
buys yet our merchandise) that he holds heretical opinions, and d^spises the
Ministry, and the ordinances, and the doctrines of our reformed Churches; or if
any say that the Spirit of the Lord is a sufficient teacher, to lead his people
into all truth without outward means, as natural learning, Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin, and the ancient fathers, and old Authors, and so make void all our arts,
and part, which is the foundation of our Devinity, then let us cry in the ears
of all the people, and in the ears of the Rulers, and the Powers of the earth,
that this is blasphemy and error, and ought to be suppressed.

And furthermore, if any shall say that he believes he shall be made free
from sin in this life by the effectual working of Christ (the mighty power of
God) which condemns sin in the flesh, and destroys the works of the devil,
then let us cry heresy and blasphemy, and let us tell them that the holiest
that ever was upon the earth sinned, and that the body of sin was un-cut down
in them, and let us prove it by Paul's words, he complained of a body ^f sin,
and was never in any other condition while he lived upon the earth, and so it
may be we shall keep them in blindness, that they will continue and trade with
us; and if any say they are come to the baptism of the Spirit, the one
baptism into which all the Saints were baptized, in whom all other baptismes
ends, and so being come to this, denies all the figures, and the baptism of
^nfants, then let us cry out that they are sectaries, and denies the ordinance
of God, Infants baptism, and let us give them some scripture, how that Christ
took up little Children in his arms and blessed them, and how he bid his
Disciples go out into all Nations, and baptize them in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and many be with an inference or two, or two or three
consequences raised from this, and the like Scriptures, we shall make their eye
blind, that we shall put off this counterfeit ware yet a little while.

And if any shall deny our Church or Chapel, and call it an Idols Temple (which
God never commanded to be built) then let us bring some scriptures, how that
God commanded a Temple to be built at Jerusalem, and how the Jews had
Synagogues, and how God commanded storehouses to be built for Gods service and
worship, and it may be such a proof as this will satisfy them, that they will
come to our shop another time, at the hour appointed for the sale of our wares,
when the market-bell rings, and the wares are ready to be set out, and so by
this means we may hold on our Trade a while. And if any shall deny David's
Psalms to be sung in rhyme and meeter, and with Organs and Pipes to be an
Ordinance of God in Gospel Times; then let us bring them some scriptures, and
some fathers, and tell them in the Church of Corinth, that he that had a Psalm
might sing, and it may be, they will know no difference between a Psalm which
was given for^h by the spirit, and the Psalm which is gotten by tradition from
another; and let us bring a proof out of Revelation, that they that were
redeemed from the earth played upon the Harps, and sung a new song, and it may
be they will not see no difference between them that are in the earth, and them
that are redeemed from the earth, and so we may keep up this still as an
ordinance invented by our mother, Mystery Babylon.

And let this be agreed amongst us, now when many of us is assembled together,
whose livelihood and riches stands only in the merchandising of our mother
Church, that in whatsoever place we sail to in our ships, if any be heard to
say that the Spirit of the Lord ought to move first before any Teacher,
Minister, or Believer ought to pray, that so they may pray with the Spirit, and
in the Spirit, in public, and in private, whether with many or few, that so
without the Spirit none can be edified; let us all agree to this, that it be
voted down as an error, and let us do what in us lies to prove from Scripture,
that set-forms of Prayer is lawful, and is an ordinance of God, and let us
bring the Lords-prayer, called by our Mother Church the Paternoster, and see
what that will do, and also Hosea 14.2. take with you words and turn to the
Lord, say unto him, take away our iniquity, and receive us graciously; so with
a deduction from these and the like Scriptures, we may happily prove that a
set-form of words invented by our Church, (or any of us that trades with her
merchandise) that this is an ordinance of God, and ought to be practiced
publicly and privately, and is accepted with God, although the people have not
received the Spirit as they had in the primative times; and if this will not
satisfy, then use some prevalent Arguments, as our reverend Brother, and
Fellow-merchant with us, Mr. Samuel Boulton in the like case in hand used this
forcible Argument, Though you cannot command the wind (said he) yet you may
spread your sails, and see what such an argument as this will do, but if they
will not be content with this (as it may be they will not in Englan^, ^^otland,
and Ireland, Holland, and some other parts, who are more quick-sighted than
some other places where we merchandi^e* if we cannot stand it out against them,
that none can pray to God a right, but he that is come to the Spirit, and knows
by the signification of it what to ask, then let us grant them the thing, if we
cannot help it, if Common Prayer, forms of Prayer will not go off as they use
to do amongst our Customers, then let us agree to them, (but let that be the
last shift) that without Faith, or the Spirit it is impossible to be accepted
or heard of God; yet before this be granted, let us strive as much as in us
lies by forcible arguments from the Scripture (if so be that they will not
allow the authority of ancient Fathers, nor of our ^annon-books) how that there
is a platform laid down in Scripture, and the general heads of true prayer is
laid down in an Orthodox method in Scriptures, that is to say, Confession,
Petition, Intercession, Supplication, with giving of thanks, and if this will
not stave them off from speaking so much of Prayer by the Spirit, and with
understanding (for it will be a grievous thing if we let this ordinance fall,
of set-form of Prayer, which our Mother Mystery-Babylon has allowed so many
years, and ratified and confirmed in several great Councels as Niece, and
Latterar, and diverse others) and if nothing will serve them but prayer by the
same Spirit as was in the primative times (before we lose them quite) let us
grant it them in words, that Prayer by the Spirit it is only acceptable.

And reverend Brethren, let us all agree not to be idle, but diligent, read the
Scriptures, and pack them up together, a deal of exhortations, reprehensions,
admonitions, and prophecies, and read some old Authors, as Ireneus, Ambro^,
Cyprea^, Ierom, Baz^l, Austin, Orige^, Damizin, and its not amiss if we take in
Luther and Calvi^, Memno, Beza; and some other late modern Writers; And so by
much reading and meditation our affections will be whetted up and Quickened, and
those words which we read often will lodge in our memory, so that we shall be
able to pray half an hour ex temp^re, or an hour and an half upon a Fast Day
(for that's the best traffi^ue that goes of such days as those) without
tautologies, or reiterations, and so though we pray several times, and in
several places, as before Kings, or Councels, or a Synod, or Classis, Merchants
of our own order, yet by this means we shall be fitted for all places and
times, to suit the business which we are about, and if any question the thing,
let us say, we pray by the Spirit as it gives us utterance; but now this is the
last and best of our merchandi^e, which is as gold and silver, and precious
stone, and pearl; if this will not go off, as upon the account of the spirit,
or spiritual worship, or a spiritual ordinance, then there is little hope of
driving any more trade, or getting any more sale, with these men, then let us
cry to the Magistrates, they are newfangled and giddy-headed, and delights in
Novelties, and are erroneous schismatics, and heretics, and are factious and
seditious, which if they be let alone, and not be timely checked and reproved,
they will overthrow us merchants called (by our selves Ministers) and not only
us but also both Church and Commonwealth.

And furthermore let us agree reverend Brethren in unity and peace, and strive
all with one consent to be funished with such Merchandi^e as will suit with the
Countries and Regions where we traffi^ue, as Kings, Princes, Protectors,
Parliaments, and Councels, Noblemen, Gentlemen, and also take in the common
people (if happily we can please them all) because that by the last mentioned
we receive many of our subsistence, yet if any of them do not like our
merchandise, it is the least matter of them; for then we have a King, a Prince,
a Protector, or a Parliament to appeal to, and if we can but satisfy them with
merchandise upon petition, they will make us a Law, and set a compass upon
every one of our ships to ride in at sea, and they will command every Parish to
buy our merchandise, and if they will not buy it, at the worst; compel them to
give us our price, whether they receive our merch^ndize or not, or traffic or
not, but if they will not (having a Law to guard us) we can take it from them
whether they will or no, and if at any time any seem obstinate, and refuses to
pay us Easter-reckonings, and Midsummer-dues* which may be comes to the value
of 18 d. or 2 s.) we can take a Pot worth 7 or 8 s. or a Pan or a Kettle, and
if they shall neglect to pay us a Mortuary, which has been an Ordinance
ordained by our mother Mystery-Babylon 7 or 8 hundred years ago or upwards, if
they will seek to disannul such a laudable custom, then we can sue them for it
in a County Court, and get 20 or 30 shillings damage, and if any of the common
people refuse to pay us our ^ythes, which belongs unto us, Church Officers,
which was given unto us by our Mother, who sat upon the scarlet-colored Beast
at the least 13 hundred years ago, that if our tithe come to 40 s. or 3 l. we
can go to a Chapman or two, who resents our commodities, and they will give us
a warrant for treble damages, and then we shall get some Bailiffs who are our
Church Members, and take away a yoke of Oxen worth 8 or 10 pounds; or a Horse
or Cow worth ten or twelve pounds, and if the Tithe come to 5 or 6 pound, then
we can take five or six Cows, and ascore of sheep, and half a score of swine,
and thresh the corn out of his barn, and take it away, and take away the
fether-Beds, and Curtains, Court-cloaths, and Blankets, Rugs, Sheets, Kettles,
Brewing-furnace, or the Raiment which the Family wore; and if we judge it too
little to satisfy our insatiable desires, take Pin-cushions, or if it be but
half a Cheese, as our reverend Brother Alexander Bradley in the Parish of
Elmstone in the County of Ken^ from Robert Minter of the same County and
Parish. And in thus doing there will be little loss or detrement to us; and if
any refuse to give us a Tythe-cock of hay, or a shock of corn, (having the
power of the earth of our side) we can pull down the hedges, and break open the
gates, and fetch away a Wain load or two, or as much as we think fit, as many
of our reverend Brethren of our order have lately done, which are good
precedents to posterity that may come after us, and if any with whom we have
traded (who are Neighbors) do think much at us, we can call them Heretics,
and say they are enemies to the Church and Commonwealth, therefore why do you
pity them?

But reverend ^rethren, it is not with us now in the North Regions of the
World, as it has been in time past, about two or three hundred years ago,
neither as is it with the rest of our fellow-Merchants in Italy, Rome,
Jerusalem, Arabia, Greece, Portugal* Spain* Hungaria, France, and the rest of
the Regions where our Mother sits as a Queen, the people being all as asleep at
midnight, any old, dark, rusty cankered ware will go off there at a good rate,
and for Ave mary's, or Pater-nosters, Te Deum, or a magnificat Anima, or the
like, or some other charm in an unknown Tongue, or a story of St. Damisen, or
St. Benedict about Images, or a story of St. Francis of his converting of
wolves and bears; or speaking an hour from some old fathers, and call it the
word of God, and meddle not with the Scripture at all; for a story of the Lady
of Lauretta, or the image of the Virgin Mary, and of what miracles they have
wrought, which the members of the Mother Church believes for good Doctrine, and
receive these or the like, as Crosses, Crucifixes, Pictures, Beads and Images,
and such other like merchandises of the baser sort, is all bought and received,
without question, as merchandises of great worth, and things belonging to
happiness and felicity; but alas* it is almost day, and the night is far spent,
and the people in these Nothern Regions are come past midnight, some toward
the dawning of the day, and they question our merchandise, and with some the
night is quite over, and they are come to the daybreak, and to the rising of
the sun, and with these there is no hope of trading (though with the best of
all our commodities) though with Cinimon and odours, and ointment, and
frankincense, yet they will buy none of our ware, nor there is no hope of trading
with them any more, for they are come to know the Pearl which is more precious
than rubies, and the heavenly treasure that does not rust, and the word which
is sweeter than the honey and the honey comb, there is no hope of them; but this
is the misery, they will not be content with what they have found, but imparts
it to others, and so begets a dislike in other peoples minds, to the best of
all our Merchandise.

However, them that are gone from us, and denies our mother, and her golden
cup, and denies all her merchants great and small, not only them that trades
in wood, and vessels, and brass, and iron, but even them that trades with the
best merchandise, as gold and silver, precious stones, and pearls, fine linen,
purple, silk and scarlet; however let us excommunicate them, and give them up
to Satan, and let us call to the beast with his seven heads and ten horns, who
is scarlet colored, dreadful and terrible, and let us accuse them of heresy,
schism and blasphemy, and call them seducers and deceivers, and false Prophets,
and let us brand them with names of reproach, as Sectaries, and say they are
seditious and rebellions and mutenous, and they are enemies to Church and
State, and all good government, peace-breakers, factious, and pestilent
fellows, that brings all the Nations into an uproar; and if that will not do,
lets petition to Kings, Princes, Dukes, Parliaments, Protectors and Counsels
that some speedy and effectual course may be taken for suppressing of these
heretics, and for stopping of these blasphemous doctrines, as that the
Steeple-house is not the Church, and sprinckling of Infants no ordinance of
Christ, and singing of Psalms by tradition no part of the true worship of God,
and it may be we shall get some Law or Act of Parliament against them; or call
them vagabonds, and get them whipped abroad, and put in prisons, while we take
away their oxen and goods at home, and so by this means it will stop others
(whom we traffic withal) that they will not dare to hearken unto them; for if
they will not buy our wares and take our measures by a glass, in love to it,
yet because of fear of imprisonment or loss of their goods or estates, they
will be constrained to trade with us.

But alas, it is otherwise with us now then it was in Queen Mary's days, when
mass, mattens and even-songs professionings, Ave-maries, Creeds and
Pater-nosters took up most part of the time, and went off amongst people for
spiritual worship at a good rate; neither is it with us now, as it was in the
days of Bishop Laud our great Metropolitan, and the rest of our mothers
merchants: Then would common prayer translated out of the mass book into the
English, and Creed, Letany, Pater noster, with a Lord have mercy upon us, or we
beseech thee to hear us good Lord, forty times over in a quarter of an hour,
with some of David's Psalms turned into meeter, by Hop^^ns and Srer^hold masters
of music, sung with Organs, with Choristers, and boys, with bowing to the
Altar, and such like merchandise, which then was precious in the eyes of our
mothers children; Then whosoever would not be obedient to all the Rites and
Ceremonies, then we branded them with the name of Puritans and Non-conformists,
and haled them before Sessions, Courts and Magistrates, cited them to appear
before the Bishops, served them up to the High Commission Court, before the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, [falsely so called] and there the flesh was gnawn
to the bone, and ears cut off, stigmatizing and burning with irons,
imprisonment and banishment: Now as people came nearer the day they began to
suspect all this, as not to be the spiritual Worship of God, having no ground
nor footing from the Spirit of Truth, nor example from the Scripture, nor from
the primitive Churches, then them over whom our mother once reigned, began to
question her whether she was the Lambs wife, yea or nay? And whether our
Predecessors and Brethren were the messengers sent out by the true Church, yea
or nay? And whether the Ordinances and Practices were the institution of Christ
and his Apostles, yea or nay in the primitive times? and the day dawning upon
them, and the spirit came to be revealed, and did shine into their hearts, and
they began to search the Scriptures, and to compare the true Church [which was
clothed with the Sun, and crowned with the crown of twelve Stars] with our
mother, mystery Babylon, and they began to compare the Apostles and Ministers
in the primitive times with our Predecessors Babylons merchants, and also
compared the Institutions and Ordinances which were delivered to the true
Church with the Institutions, and Rites and Ceremonies, and inventions of our
mother, mystery Babylon; And so they found all out by the ^evelation of the
Spirit, and by searching of the Scriptures they found out the rise of our
mother, after the woman was fled into the wilderness, and that she sat not as
a Queen upon Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and Peoples, till after the woman did
fly away upon the wings of an Eagle into the wilderness for a time, times and
half a time, and likewise they found out that our predecessors and
fellow-merchants were not like the Ministers of Christ in the primitive times,
neither our Doctrines and Ordinances, like the Ordinances and Doctrines which
were once delivered to the Saints, before ever we merchants set sail or
floated in a ship on the Sea; And so finding our City to be raised up in its
glory, since the glory of God was lost in the earth, and finding our Queen,
mystery Babylon, ruling in our City since the Lambs wife fled, and finding us
merchants to receive her traffic from her City since the faith was lost that
once was delivered to the Saints, and did see our Creeds and Beliefs and
Paternosters, our prayers, and our hymns, that they are quite another thing,
which was part of her traffic, they have concluded (and that upon infallible
grounds) warranted by a cloud of witnesses in the Prophets and Apostles, that
our mother is a whore, and her predecessors are her merchants, and that our
Ordinances are and traffic have been invented by some of our mothers children
which are Apostates, and they have found us out; And now alas! a ship will be
hardly able to ride any more upon the waters, nor the Sea will hardly bear up
our vessels any more, the Nations, the kindreds, the tongues, and the peoples
are almost dried up, especially in the North Regions they will not buy our
Merchandise any more, our ships are like to stand still, and our Merchandise is
like to be all shipwrackt; therefore let us take Council, least all the Sea dry
up, and we all sit down in solitariness, and our song be turned into woe worth
the day, misery, and alas.

Therefore now it behooves us all, reverend Brethren, who are of this last
edition (tything Presbyters) to deny our Mother in her greatest fornication,
and adultery, since she has committed fornication with Kings and Nobles, and
since all Nations have drunk of her cup: But yet let us own her three or four
hundred years after the ascension of Christ, for then though she was inclining
to Adultery, and it lodged in her heart, yet it was not so openly known then,
but only to a few, and then she held part of the form of Godliness, and had
part of the true Churches attire and ornaments on the outside, and so let us
all agree to stick close to her hear, and vindi^ate her then, and her
Merchandise the form of Godliness, for if this traffi^ue will not go off, we
are at an end, for either this must serve in the North Regions of the world, or
we must pull down our sails, and let our ships stand still on dry land; let us
put on resolution, there is some hope that this may serve a while, for that our
Mother was a true Church 3 hundred years after Christ, hardly any in this will
gainsay us, and let us deny all the Popes, Cardinals, Legates, Friars, Monks,
Jesuits, Semenaries, and all their several orders, which are one distinct from
another, and let us deny the rest of our Fellow-Merchants, or rather Fathers,
which did ordain us to be Merchants to trade at Sea, seeing that kind of
Merchandise which they then traded with, which they received from our Mother
will not go off now; for Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and People now will not
buy that kind of merchandise which has not the face of Purity upon it; and
though we were made Ministers by them, yet now when they are grown out of date
(a Parliament having voted them down) its not safe for us to hold them up, nor
none of their worship nor merchandise; so we having a distinct order of our
own, and are ranked into another fellowship, distinct from the Friars and the
Monks, let us keep our fellowship one with another; and so we may set up our
selves, and so may bring honor to our mother, Mystery Babylon, under another
name; and so let Bishops, Archbishops, Archdeacons, Deans and Chapters,
Prelates, Vicars and Curates be denied; and seeing their traditional traffi^ue
before mentioned will not go off, and all the forms of public worship has
been contrary to the Scriptures, and contrary to the primative times, and
seeing we cannot hinder people from seeing of it, therefore we must let it all
pass, and deny both them and it, at least in the hearing of them whom we trade
with therefore let them merchandise with it in some other Country for our
mother, where she has more reputation, and where the beast has more power;
and the time may come, if we can but persuade People, that they cannot
understand the Scriptures, nor come to know the mind of Christ without our
Original, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin; in some time it may be this traffic will
go off, if we can keep People but ignorant enough, that so we may be a means to
bring our mother, and her messengers, that she has sent forth, into more
reputation than they are. Notwithstanding though the day be dawned, and every
man's works made manifest of what sort it is, yet it is well enough that we
receive the maintenance which our mother Mystery Babylon gave unto our former
merchants, as Tithes, Oblations, Obventions and Offerings, Easter-reckonings,
and Midsummerdues, and Mortuaries, twenty shillings for a funeral Sermon, ten
groats at the Grave, twelve pence an hour for ringing of bells, and such other
like commodities that befalls us; and besides all this we have got something
out of Bishops lands, and Deans, and Chapters, and Prebends lands, some good
augmentations out of these; so that all the merchandising and traffic lies in
our hand, and all the wages that our mother gave to other Officers, and
Ambassadors of several orders, which to speak plainly is the very reins and
finews of our Gospel which we preach, and therefore if we cannot keep the
people blind, but they will see our error in most things; yet while we have the
Powers of the Earth to make us a Law, that all may be forced and compelled to
pay that unto us, which our mother the Church gave us, when she was in her
exaltation, while this is kept up, we shall carry about our ships, and
merchandi^e, though the people have no great heart to it, we shall cry out to
the Magistrates to compel them to buy it, or else the people will turn
Atheists, and Barbarians, and however get our price.

Yet now, reverend brethren, seeing we cannot keep the People in ignorance and
darkness, nor hinder the day from dawning, nor the Sun from rising, while it is
but even yet twylight, let us work and carry about our traffic, for the best
sort of merchandise which our mother has, will hardly please now, for now it
comes to that, that nothing but spiritual Ordinances will be accepted among
people now, therefore we, which are of the tything Presbyterian order, though
we have denied our mother in some of her sorceries, and though we have denied
the Bishops, our Fathers, and ordinances, and their established form of
worship, we being heirs apparent to their Inheritance, and Revenues, and wages;
now we being come to maturity, and goes under the name of Reformers, yet let
our mother Mystery Babylons wages stand unalterable as the Law of the Medes and
Persians, and though the professions of public worship have been denied and
abolished, let us persuade the Magistrates, and Rulers, that if they abolish
our tithes, and set wages, then the Gospel will cease to flourish in these
Nations, and though the Mass Book, or book of Common Prayer, and the Lateny
will not go off for Gospel and longer, we shall set something else up in its
stead to be called the Gospel, and because we have not an immediate Spirit, nor
an infallable, neither ever looks to have it; its requisite that we prescribe
some form or Directory of worship to be as a rule of Direction to all of our
order, and if we can get a Parliament to make an ordinance for the
recommendation of it to the Nations, as the public worship of God, then we may
trade yet with out merchandise, and whilst our set wages is not altered, the
matter is of less moment; and though the Directory should be discommended, as
it is recommended, and our form should go down, and another thing should be
established instead of it; yet it were lawful for us to join to another, and
though they should accuse us for time-servers, and men-pleasers, yet we have a
cloud of witnesses, as in Edward the 6. and Henry the 8. how many hundred of
our Fellow-merchants denied driving a trade with the Mass Book, and likewise in
the days of Queen Mary many thousands owned the Mass Book as the public
worship of God, which was then holden out. Again, how many thousands of our
Fellow-merchants denied the Mass Book, our public profession, doctrine and
discipline, and joined to the book of Common Prayer, and the Lateny, as the
public profession of the worship of God, and now of late years we have denied
it our selves, and so we which are of this order can dispense well enough with
this, seeing that we trade with some of our mothers? Merchandise under another
name, and so the matter is less grievous, because the orders and ceremonies
about worship is retained still in our Directory under another habit and guise,
and so having these Witnesses before mentioned for our example, and if any seem
to contend with us, this will take the edge off People, seeing its no new thing
with us to set our sails which way soever the wind blows, and it may be we may
bring them a Scripture or two, and an inference from it, for a Cloak, as to
submit to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, and let every Soul be
subject to the higher Power, so Henry the 8th. while he stood he was the higher
Power and so Mary, Elizab^th, James and Charles they were the higher Power
while they stood, and they did ordain, that sometime the Mass Book should be
the public worship, and sometime the Common Prayer book should be the public
worship; and now the Directory a Platform of public worship; it may be these
and the like Arguments to them that are dim-sighted will take place for
sometime. But there is one thing above all which ought to be considered of by
us, who are allowed to be public Merchants, seeing that we must go under the
name of Reformation, for that is our flag we carry in our Ship, that seeing
that generally people of the most understanding will not allow of any preaching
to be effectual, to the converting of Souls, but that which is ministered by or
from the Spirit, for the reading of old homilies which served in our
Predecessors days will not serve now, or if we should speak some Hebrew or
Greek, or Latin in an unknown Tongue, they will conclude, that is rather the
wisdom of the flesh, and from natural wit, rather then from the Spirit; and
therefore it is not much amiss if we conclude to let some of the Ancient
Fathers pass, and not mention them, because it is holden generally, that they
lived in an Apostatizing time, and so it will not be effectual in the audience
of people: And so for Austin and Cyprin, Jerome and ^ead Origin and Damasen,
their traffic will hardly go off, for they will conclude, its rather by art
and study that we preach, then by the Spirit; and so we being fallen into such
a dangerous time as this is now in the break of day, when men begins to be
quick-sighted, and will not only epsy hills, but also moats; therefore all we
which are Merchants of this order and rank, to our Mother Mystery Babylon, had
need to trade with the best Merchandise, as gold, and silver, and precious
stone, and fine linen, and silk, and scarlet; and so let this be agreed upon
by us all, that we study hard, and read the Scriptures, and other modern
Divines which are Orthodox, that so if need require, every one may preach ex
tempore, for else it will not go upon the account of the Spirit, and so have
words to fit all times, occasions, and seasons; as before Protectors,
Parliaments and Councels, or Noble men, or Classis, or Synods, or the like, and
every one labor by study and art to raise many Doctrines from one Scripture,
and make many uses and trials, and motives, and so carnal peoples minds will be
affected with such dexterity and readiness, so that we shall clear our selves
from clamor, which some of our Merchants have fallen under, because of their
negligence; and if any should accuse us for studying and patching up our
Sermons out of diverse Authors mixed with Scripture, and our inventions, then
bring such a Scripture as that 2 Timothy 2.1^. Study to show thy self approved
unto God; it may be some blind people will take that for a good proof; and such
a word as that, Study to be quiet; and because the word Study is found in
Scripture, therefore with a consequence or two we may prove in the ears of
people, that studying of Sermons is lawful; and if any question our set wages,
and hire, be sure that all with one accord do study to vindicate this, for this
is the life and sinews of the Propagation of our Gospel.

And now Reader, I shall give thee an account of the principal and chief
traffic, which is established for the Public Worship amongst those that are
called Gospel-Professors, the general heads whereof is laid down in a Directory
of the Public Worship in these three Nations of England, Scotland, and
Ireland; and the general heads of that which they purpose to traffic with, is
laid down in their Directory (so called) and what traffic is of less moment,
may be ushered in, time will make manifest, and in their Preface to their Book,
they say as follows.

Directory. That the Liturgy has been a great means to increase an idle
Ministry from putting forth themselves, for putting forth the gift of prayer
which Christ pleases to furnish all his servants with, whom he calls to that
Office.

Answer. So then by this conclusion all their former Fathers and
fellow-Merchants were not sent out by Christ, because they contented themselves
with set forms of others made to their hands; and if all whom Christ called to
this Office be furnished with the gift of prayer, then this must needs follow,
that they that have no gift of prayer, are no officers of Christ: Well, their
part being acted, and the Exit being come, let them go off the Stage, and thou
shall see the gifted men come on next.

Direct. In the assembling of the Congregation together, the direction is, that
the people do reverendly compose themselves to join in the Ordinance of God,
which is then coming in hand; as it is written in the eleventh page of their
Book.

Answ Here they are putting Self to perform the Ordinance of God, which
whosoever comes to perform aright, or joins with the Assembly of the Righteous,
they must deny themselves, and all their own composings.

Direct. The next thing is about reading the Scriprures, and Exposition of
them; and in their Expounding they are to take heed, that Preaching, and other
Ordinances be not straightened.

Answ. As for reading the Scripture, it is a thing so harmless, and honest, and
just, and good, that I wish that all their whole Ordinances (so called) had
been all waved, and given place to this; and if it were read oftener to the
people without adding or diminishing, the understandings of people would be
more opened, then by their cloudy and dark packt up speeches, which is called
preachin^; but preaching I am not against, that is to say, to declare the mind
of God as it is revealed by his Eternal Spirit, to, and in them that speaks;
and why do you pref^r one part of your Worship before another? Was not a Psalm
in the Church of Co^inth acceptable unto God when it was sung in the Spirit,
and with understanding, as good as an Interpretation? And was not Prophecy as
acceptable as speaking with Tongues, if your Expounding (so called of the
Scripture be by the Spirit of God? why should that give way to a sprinkling of
an Infant, till the Spirit cease to speak in him that spoke by it?

Direct. The next pie^e of Merchandise is, of their public prayer before
Sermon, and to pray after this manner, to acknowledge your great sinfulness by
your Original sin, which makes you liable to everlasting damnation, and does
defile your best ^ctions, if it were not re^^roined by Gods grace* as in page
the fift^enth.

Answ. What, is Original sin unwasht away? and is a deprived nature alive, that
poisons all your faculties, and defiles your best actions? What, is not this
taken away yet? then you have confounded your Orthodox Doctrine, or else never
have been bapti^ed when you were Infants: For, did not you use to say, that
when an Infant was sprinkled, that he was regenerate, and born again, and
ingrafted into the body of Christ's Congregation? And furthermore, to give
thanks to God on this wise, we yield thee hearty thanks, that it has pleased
thee to regenerate this Infant, and to receive it for thy own child by
Adoption, and to incorporate this child into thy own Congregation; then seeing
that all that are baptized, are regenerate, as you say, how is it that original
sin, and the guilt is not taken away? and how is it that the best of your
actions is defiled? for Regeneration is a cleansing work, and the actions of
the Regenerate are pure and holy, but your best actions are defiled; then you
are not Regenerate by your own Doctrine; and if Sin be restrained by Gods
grace, then Actions do not defile, for Grace is one, that which restrains, and
that which saves; for its written, by Grace you are saved, and if you are
restrained from Sin, or saved by Grace, then your Actions would not be defiled;
what ^ankered rusty merchandise is this? but I shall proceed to show more of
the like nature.

Direct. The next Doctrine is to conf^ss your actual sins, the sins of your
Magistrates, Ministers, and whole Nation, and how that you have broken all the
holy just ^aws of God, doing that which is forbidden and leaving undone, that
which is enjoined, and not only ignorantly, but presumptuously, against the
light of our minds, and checks of our Consciences, but also despising Gods
forbearance, and standing out against all the offers of Grace in the Gospel.

Answ. Was not the baptized Infant incorporated into a holy Congregation? and
now you confessed you are a sinful Congregation, not only ignorant but
presumptuous also, and have sinned against the light of your minds, and the
light of your Consciences; what, is there any thing in your minds or
consciences worth taking notice of? what, will the light in the Conscience show
sin and reprove for it? then how is it, that you Merchants of this Rank cries
out against it as delusion and heretical Doctrine, when any exhorts them, that
they sin not against the light of their own Consciences; and if you stand out
against all Gods invitations and offers of Grace, then are you none of Christ's
Ministers; And never blame me for calling you Babylons-merchants, for the
Ministers and Disciples of Christ, they came at Christ's invitation, and Peter
and John left their Nets, and followed Christ when he invited them; and they
resisted not the offers of Grace, but received it when it was offered, and were
saved by it; and if you walk so unworthy of him in your selves, then repent and
cease carrying abroad such trumpery as this to deceive the People withal.

Direct. In the sixteen Page, you Reformers say you ought to bewail your
blindness of mind, and hardness of heart, and unbelief, impenitency,
secureness, lukewarmness and barrenness, and not endeavoring mortification,
nor to keep your garments unspotted.

Answ. You had need to bewaill your state indeed if this be it; but see that
you be not Hypocrites, to confess that before the Lord and your Congregation;
and if any say you are hard-hearted and unbelievers, you deny it again, and so
ma^e your lives transgress, and your ^ongues utter forth deceit; what is such a
company of blind minds, and hard-hearted, Impenitent, unbelieving, secure,
lukewarm, barren, whom God will spue out of his mouth, who does not so much as
endeavor after mortification, nor to keep your selves unspotted, and have
broken promises and vows, and covenants; That ever such a company as you should
carry a Ship at Sea, or think in your hearts to give directions to others to
reform, when you are unreformed your selves, and full of unbelief; what people
will take directions at such a company of heart-blind Guides as you? If this be
Reformation, what is Deformity? the wise in heart may judge of this merchandise.

Direct. Yet you say notwithstanding in the 18 th page, let us draw near to the
Throne of Grace, and encourage our selves with hope of a gracious Answer of our
Prayer^.

Answ. He that sits upon the Throne of Grace, before whose face the Heavens and
the Earth shall fly away, he will reject your Offering, notwithstanding all the
encouragement you may take to your selves; and how can you have hope to receive
a gracious Answer? its but the hope of the Hypocrite, you that are blind in
mind and hard in heart, and does not so much as endeavor after mortificaon.
David a messenger of God, said, If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not
hear my Prayers; and you that are so presumptuous, and are so full of vain
hopes, as to think that God will hear your Prayers, who are in unbelief, and
endeavors not after mortification, he will send you empty away.

Direct The next Doctrine is about preaching the word, the subject of his
Sermon is to be some Text of Scripture, suitable to some emergent occasions, and
he may go on in some Chapter or Psalm, as he shall think fit.

Answ. Here, Reader, thou may take notice these Artificers of the last
edition have traffic of diverse sorts, to fit the several places and
occasions; as when they come before some Princes, or Courtiers, or some
Convocations or Councels, then some great swelling words, and new ^oyned
expressions, and rhe^o^ical speeches, and P^ilosophical phrases, this will go
off at a good rate; and by this the Merchant may procure his Discourse to be
printed, which may procure his fame and renown among ignorant people; besides,
it may be he gets profit by printing his Sermon, setting all set-wages, tithes,
salleries aside: but if it be amongst poor Count^y people, or an odd corner of
the Land, then any ordinary traffi^ue, a Sermon, which it may be he has sold
four times over, this will go off among ignorant people, and make them more
ignorant; and as you say a Text out of the ^salms, or any other Scripture as
the Mi^ister shall thinks fit, will serve to treat upon; Reader, thou may
take notice that here is no notice taken of ^he holy Ghost or Spirit, what it
thinks fit; but what he that preaches has ready must go off, and counted as
fit for that people.

Direct. And in the 36 Page your Direction is to the Merchant, not to rest in
general Doctrine, but come to particular application, which is a work of great
diffi^ul^y to himself, requiring prudence and moderation, and to the natural
corrupt man it will be very unpleasant.

Answ. The Doctrines and the Applications of the natural corrupt man will not
be profitable nor powerful at all upon the Hearers, neither will disarm the
thoughts of the heart at all, and you that gives prescriptions to natural
corrupt men what to preach, who sets them about performing the work of God,
that knows it not, are very ignorant; for the natural man understands not the
things of God, and the corrupt man in heart sees not God, and he that
understands not the things of God, must needs preach a devination of his own
brain. Well, let who will take this traffi^ue, the Children of light will have
none of it, it may be such husks as these will satisfy a herd of swine, and so
let them take it.

Direct. And you say, he that preaches, is to be persuaded in his own heart,
that all that he teaches is the truth, and that he is to walk before his flock
as an example.

Answ. How is he like to be persuaded in his own heart, that sins
presumptiously against the checks of his own conscience? And you set examples
indeed, but they are but bad ones; would you have your flock to follow your
example? would you have every one of your flock to have a long Gown, or a long
Robe, and make them all like Cardinals, Princes? Would you have every one to
have a Ring on his finger, and a company of Points at his knees, like a Besom,
and a company of Ribons and Cuffs, like a Fiddler? Or would you have any of your
Flock to come and fetch away a yoke of your oxen, or a couple of your horses,
or take his Teem, and come into your field, break down the hedges, and throw
open the gates, and load his wagon with corn, if one could not pay it him for
conscience sake? Or would you be sewed up two hundred miles into a Court, for a
Tithe Hen worth four pence, or six pence, and thrown into the Fleet a year or
two for four or five shillings? Many such evidences and examples we have from
you, you late Reformers; but to the light in all consciences I leave to judge,
(which you have presumptiously sinned against) what examples you are to your
flocks.

Direct. And now, Reader, I come to prayer after Sermon, and thou shall see
what traffic is there; The Minister is to give thanks for the bl^ssing
received, as Election* V^cation, Adoption, Justification, and hope of glory;
and likewise to turn the heads of his Sermons into some few Petitions, and
after to pray for the preparation for death, and to entreat of God to forgive
the iniquity of your holy things.

Answ. ^ere, Reader, thou may see as bad Merchandi^e as the story of the Lady
of Laureita, or the story of Saint Francis, which the begging Friars, your
fellow-merchants traffic withal. First, you give thanks for Election,
Vocation, ^ustification, and hope of Glory, and afterward to pray for the
forgiveness of the iniquity of your holy things; How are your things holy, when
they are full of iniquity, and sinful? Is that which is holy, iniquity and
sinful? Or is that which is iniquity and sinful, holy? Are they Elected,
Justified, Adopted, and Sanctified, whose sins are not blotted out, whose
iniquities are not forgiven? let the wise in heart judge of this dream. What,
are not they well prepared for death, that are Elected, Adopted, Justified and
Sanctified, but they must needs have your prayers full of iniquity? will that
prepare them better? What ignorance is here? And where learned you this Article
of ^aith, to turn the heads of the Sermon into Petitions? let the wise judge.
Was not Prophecy one thing, and Prayer another? But now Prophecy must be
turned into Prayer, and Prayer into Prophecy, Sermons into Petitions, and
Petitions into Sermons; what mangled traffic is this?

Direct. In the 38. page, this kind of prayer forementioned ended, a Psalm may
be sung, if it be convenient, if some other Ordinance does not follow.

Answ. Then it seems that your Psalm is no Ordinance, but if it be, it must
give way however if the Priest thinks fit; God must have no prayers at that
time; it may be sprinkling of an Infant may serve in stead.

Direct. And now I come to the great Ordinance, Infants Baptism, (falsely so
called.) In the 40. page, the Minister is to use some words touching the
Institution, how that it was instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, that Infants
should be Baptized, and that it is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, and of our
grafting into Christ, and of our union with him, and of remission of sins,
Regeneration, Adoption, and Eternal Life.

Answ. Reader, Take notice Christ never sent them forth as Ministers to tell
lies; as to say, he ordained that which he never did. And furthermore, thou may
take notice, that the Spirit of the Lord is turned out of doors, there is no
place for it; outward water with which the Infant is sprinkled, has taken up
the authority, and the work of the Spirit, the Ministers of Christ declared,
that the Spirit of Promise, and the Spirit of Truth, was the Seal of the
Covenant of Grace, and remission of sins, Regeneration, and Adoption; and that
the Faith, and the Spirit, is the Seals of Eternal Life: But these Reformers
has excluded both, and have set up a beggarly Element in the room; let the
spiritual man judge what kind of traffic this is.

Direct. And in the 42. page, that children by Baptism are received into the
Bosom of the Church, distinguished from the world.

Answ. Now what kind of a Church yours is, and what kind of a bosom your
Church has, distinct from the world, the wise in heart may judge. You have
confessed, that Magistrates, Ministers, and the whole Nation, does not so much
as endeavor after mortification, and a newness of life, and that you are
blind, hard-hearted, full of unbelief, impenitent, secure, and lukewarm, and
have not so much as endeavored to receive Christ into your hearts by Faith, as
in the sixteenth page of your Directory may be seen; and how your Church, and
the bosom of it, is distinct from the world, if your Church be as you have
said, (the understanding may judge;) for you that are impenitent, and full of
unbelief, and have not received Christ into your hearts, you are of the world,
and your bosom full of deceit, and are none of the Church of Christ.

Direct. And moreover, the Minister that baptized the Infant, which is a Popish
invention* and not an Institution of Christ, however he is to press it upon
people as such a one, and to exhort them to look back to their Baptism, and to
repent of their sins against God, and to stir up their faith.

Answ. Said ye not even now, that Baptism with water was an ingrafting into
Christ, and of Regeneration, and of Eternal Life, and he that is baptized, has
the Seal of all this; and yet they are to repent of their sins? and how should
their Faith be stirred up, that has none, which yet has to repent? What blind
Doctrine is this, that these blind merchants of this last edition has given
out for a platform?

Direct. In the 44. page, the Minister is to join prayer with the word of
Institution, for sanctifying the water to this spiritual use.

Answ. Mark, Reader, what Sorcery is here? Was not the water instituted in the
beginning by the word, and gathered together into one place, by the Word? and
then i^ was sanctified, and holy; and how became it unholy again? and how has
the water transgressed, that its become unholy, that it needs sanctifying
again? but in stead of sanctifying it, you abuse it, and would make it serve
for that end which God never ordained, ( viz.) to be a Seal of the Remission of
sins, a Seal of Regeneration, and Eternal Life; all which is contrary to the
Scripture, contrary to the Ministers of Christ, and contrary to the precepts of
the Ministers of Christ, but are indeed institutions of your Mother, mystery
Babylon.

Direct. And now I come to the celebration of your great Sacrament of Bread and
Wine; you say in the 48. page, we judge it convenient to be done after the
Morning Sermon, and that all ignorant and scandalous are not fit to receive
this Sacrament.

Answ. And why after the Morning Sermon, ye great Reformers? If you intend that
Christ's breaking of bread, and giving the Cup to his Disciples, that this must
be your foundation for your Sacrament, that was at Supper in the same night he
was betrayed; and if he had judged it more convenient, why could he not have
given it them after some Morning Sermon? What example have you for so doing? it
may be Saint G^egory, Benedict, or Damasen, or some other of your Mothers
Merchants. And if they be unfit that are ignorant and scandalous, to receive
this Sacrament, (as you call it) then none more unfit then your selves, none
more ignorant and scandalous, which has left that undone which God has
enjoined, and has done that which he never commanded, and that not only out of
ignorance, but also presumptiously against the checks of your own consciences,
and motions of his Holy Spirit; what, not so much as endeavored after
mortification, or newness of life, but are a blind, hard-hearted, unbelieveing,
and impenitent people, witness the sixteenth page of your Directory; and if
such as you be fit to receive this Sacrament, (as you call it) I know none
unfit to receive it.

^irect. In the 50. page, the Minister is to warn all that are ignorant, and
scandalous, and profane, that live in any sin, or offense against their
conscience, that they come not to this Holy Table; and on the other hand to
encourage and assure them of refreshment and strength, by coming to this Table,
if they desire a farther progress in grace.

Answ. Whom do you call ignorant, and profane, and scandalous? Is not he a
scandalous person that sins presumptiously, and against the checks of his own
conscience, and Gods Holy Spirit? and if such be prohibited, all you Reformers
are excluded; and if you do come, you are like to have no refreshment, or
strength here (if your own Doctrine must stand good for refreshment and
strength) you promise to them that has a desire after the progress in grace:
But, say you of your selves, we have no desire after mortification, or
amendment of life, and so you are without hope, come, or not come. Furthermore,
Bread and Wine was a Seal of Eternal Life, before, you said, and now ease,
refreshment, and strength is promised to the weak: I say as the Apostle said to
them who discerned not the Lords Body, but came unworthily, For this cause many
are weak, and many are sick, and many are fallen asleep; and though they have
come to your Table, they have come sick and weakly, and have gone away so, and
has found your promises and assurances of no effect at all.

Dir. And now I come to the Consecration, The Minister is to begin the action,
with blessing the bread and wine, setting them aside for this holy use.

An. I say bread and wine was sanctified by the Word, for that end and use that
God created them; that is to say, for the nourishment of man, and they were
holy and good before ever the Priest touched them; as it is written, Unto you
that believe, are all things clean; but if you set them apart for any such end
or use, as to be a Seal of remission of sins, Regeneration, and Eternal Life,
then you convert them, or rather pervert them to that end which God never
intended. But this is like the rest of your idolatrous merchandise.

Dir. Then after the Sacrament is taken, in the 55 page, The Minister is to put
them in mind of the Grace of God held forth in the Sacrament, and to entreat
for pardon for the defects of the whole service.

An. The Church of Rome, your Mother, says, that the Body and Blood of Christ
is held forth in the Sacrament, and you say, the Grace is held forth in the
Sacrament, and the Seal of Eternal Life. What, do you think to make it, the
Fountain of Life, from whence all good comes? and in the conclusion of all the
whole, a Sacrifice must be offered up for the defects of your whole service;
what pitiful blind Merchandise is this? before it was a Seal of the Vocation
and Election, eternal life, and pledges of Adoption; and by it the Comers
thereunto are not made perfect, but are full of defects, and sinful, and your
whole services full of iniquty, and sin, and defects; will not any, who has
but the least sight abhor your ^ypocritical Sacrifice, and your moldy, rusty,
cankered Traffic? and now their holy Ordinance, and their most holy things is
ended in defect, in sin and iniquity; and these Worshippers the more they offer
the more they sin, and how the rest of their Ordinances will end, thou may
judge before thou pass any further.

Direct. And now I come their sanctification of their sabbath, the whole day,
you say, is to be celibrated as being the Christian Sabbath.

If you intend the first day of the week, where is that called the Christian
Sabbath? the Sabbath, in the first Covenant was given for a sign of the
Christian Sabbath, which was to be revealed when they ceased from their own
works, words, and thoughts, then the rest was to be known, the Christian
Sabath; and whether is a Christian Sabbath a visible or invisible thing? But
stay Sirs, do you keep this day (which you call a Christians Sabbath) holy to
the Lord? is not this your Market day upon which you sell your Traffic, one
or two Glasses for 20 or 30 s. a day, besides what you get for sprinkling of
Infants? do you not speak your own words, nor think your own thoughts, nor work
your own works? If you say you do not, how comes it to pass, that there are all
these defects in your performances, and all this iniquity in your holy things?
I hope you dare not say, that defects is from God, or that iniquity or sin is
of God; and if you have not a male in your flock, let sacrificing or offering
alone, and do not think that God will be pleased with your lame, blind, maimed,
defective sacrifices, neither with your strangled things, nor your swines
flesh; so I say unto you, repent and learn to be reformed your selves, before
you prescribe rules for others, least both you, and them that follow you fall
into the pit; and because the Merchants of this rank and orders does love to be
meddling with every thing, wherein there is hope of any thing to be got, they
will try all kinds of merchandise, and so present they their direction about
marriage to any who will take their ignorant Council.

Direct. They say Marriage is no Sacrament, nor peculiar to the Church of God,
and they say we judge it expedient that it be done by a lawful Minister, and
to be published three times before it be solemnised by the said Minister.

Answ. If you mean by Sacrament a holy thing, then marriage is either holy or
unholy, if unholy, then fit to be done by none; if holy, why is it not proper
and peculiar to the Church of God? if they who are Members of the Church of God
may marry (in the Lord, and in the covenant in which man was made) the male and
the female,; then what has any to do with it, who are not of the Church of
God? and what has the Church of God to do with them that are without? and what
has a Priest to do with this? where was Abraham's and Sarahs Priest when they
were married? and where was the Priest to solemnize the marriage of Isaac and
Rebeccah? and of Sachariah and Elizabeth? and because you say its not peculiar
to the Church of God, whether were these of the Church of God before mentioned?
but what has the Priest to do to publish it three times like a Belman for the
loss of a Horse or Cow through the Market? or rather why ought not the man and
the woman both in the fear of the Lord (if they be moved thereunto by the Lord)
publish their own intentions; And moreover, their joining together in the
Church of God, when the members of the Church of God are present; but this
frustrateth the Priests 5 or 10 s and his Clerk 6 d. or a shilling more or less
as they can get.

Direct. Furthermore, they say it may be done any time of the year, but on a
Fasting-day, or on the Lords day.

Ans. Why are these days prohibited? if marriage be a holy thing, or an
honorable thing, why may it not be done in the fear of God, and the power of
God, why not on any day? was days made for man, or man made for days? your
ignorant Predecessors, the Pharisees judged as you do, that it was not
expedient or convenient, that he should heal a Daughter of Abraham whom Satan
had bound on the Sabbath day; And now they say, that the honorable Estate of
Marriages, is the Covenant of their God; and before they said, it was not
peculiar to the Church of God; if entering into a state of Marriage be the
Covenant of God, and if the Covenant of God be peculiar to the Church of God,
then what is the reason (you Reformers) that Marriage is not peculiar to the
Church of God? And now take their directions (who has a desire to Trade any
more with their Merchandise) concerning the visitation of the sick.

Direct. The party sick is to send for the Minister timely and seasonably
before their understanding fail them, and if the Minister susp^ct the party of
Ignorance, he shall not examine them in the Principles of Religion, especially
touching Repentance and Faith, and to make known unto him the danger of
desering Repentance.

Answ. If he be such a one who is sick, as has traded much with the Priests
Merchandise, if he be capable of understanding, there is some hope he may give
the Priest 5 pound, or ten pound; and it has been high time for the Minister
to have shown him the danger of de^ering Repentance before now, (when he is
like to go out of the body) not to have deferred his exhortation till this
time; and if the party be ignorant, it were more time to inform him about the
Principles of Religion, and Repentance, and Faith, than to have him make
Answers to that which he knows nothing of; and then you conclude, if desired,
the minister shall pray for him to this effect.

Direct. Confessing and bewailing original and actual sin, and the miserable
condition of man by nature, and that God would give him an ev^dence of an
interest in Christ, and the Seal of Eternal Life by Christ.

Answ. In sin you began, and in sin you will end; complaining of original and
actual sin, before you know what it is, and hold on till you come to the grave,
and never depart from it; and what must not the Minister pray except he be
desired? it seems they always must please other men's desires, rather then mind
the Spirits motion in themselves; And what is interest in Christ yet wanting,
and Evidence, and Seal of Eternal Life yet wanting, and it may be the Party 40
or 50 years old? What was not this man baptized when he was an infant; and have
not you said, and in the 48 page and 45 page of your Directory, that
Water Baptism is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, and of being ingrafted into
Christ, and of Regeneration, Adoption, and Eternal Life; and what is the
Evidence and Seal lost now? Uses not this to be the doctrine amongst you, once
in Christ, and ever in Christ, and whom he loves once, he loves to the end? and
has not this man partaken of the Sacrament, and eat the flesh of Christ, and
drank his blood, and a Churchmember? (as you call it) and is his Evidence now
to seek, and the Seal now wanting? utter darkness is your dwelling place.

Direct. And now we come to the Directory, for solemn fasts, that when some
great and not able judgment is inflicted upon some people, or app^rently
evident, or when some special blessing is to be sought, or obtained, then
solemn fasting is a duty that God expects from a Nation or people, an^ they are
to abstain from all food, and from wordly labor, and discourses, and bodily
delights, and rich apparel, and ornaments, and such like, although lawful at
other times, and gorgious attire, and lascivious habits, and if any such things
be, the Minister may reprove them at a Fast.

Answ. To fast unto the Lord, is not to set a day apart by the will of man, but
by being moved thereunto by the Lord, and not to hang down the head for a day
like a Bull-rush, nor to smite with the fists of wickedness, but to loose the
band of wickedness, and let the oppressed go free: And as for gorgious attire,
and rich apparel, and ornaments, its no where found so much as amongst you
(Steeple-house) Fasters; and for delights, and pleasures, and these things,
which you say is lawful at other times, that which so judges will not forsake
them in your set times; and if they be lawful at any time, then the Apostles
exhortation is made void, who said, Not in gold, nor costly array, nor
broidered hair; that which abstains from them one day, and takes them up
another day, is hypocrisy and deceit: And as for your abstinence from one set
meal in a day, and it may be go to a banquet, or a riot, the next day after,
this is abomination to the Lord. And how should the Minister reprove any for
pride, when it may be he has as many Points at his knees as a ^esom, Ribons
and Cuffs, and a long Robe to his heels, and a broad Harband, enough to cover
one, most part down to the wast, if it were spread out; and who do you think
will receive this man's reproof for pride, that is thus gorgiously attired? And
what do you judge this man will have on the Thanksgiving-Day?

Direct. The next comes on the performance of the worship* which is reading,
preaching, with singing of Psalms, fit to quicken the affections, and
es^ecially prayer, wherein sin is to be confessed, with several aggravation^, and
with greater enlargement then at other times.

An. You* that have nothing to quicken your affections, but to turn David's
cryings and tears into a Song; and sing, (you roar for the disqui^tness of your
hearts) and as men distracted, when your hearts are whole, and unrent; and you
that think to be heard for your feigned confessions; and if you speak from your
hearts, (as you say the Minister ought to do) there is no such hypocrisy and
deceit among any people, as amongst you, who does that which is forbidden, and
leaves that undone that is commanded, and presumptiously sins against the light
of your own consciences, as you confess, and does not so much as endeavor to
receive Christ into your hearts, nor so much as endeavor after mortification,
and newness of life: And how can you think for your multitude of words, and
enlargement of words, and seeming importunancy God Will hear you for your much
babbling? Many hypocritical Fasts has been made, which ^ have observed, as well
as some other men, what would be the end thereof, the beginning thereof was
feignedness, and the performance thereof like them that Amos speaks of, that
howled for their corn, and wine, and oil, and mocked God, and drew near with
their lips, but their hearts were far from him.

Direct. But to proceed, such Texts ought to be used for preaching, that may
best work the hearts of the hearers into humiliation, and repentance, and the
Minister is to exhort before they depart, that their Assembly may improve their
whole life to the glory of God, by re-inforcing themselves and their families
in all private resolutions toward God, which they professed in public.

Answ. You that have no other thing to bring people to humility and repentance,
but by a Text (as you call it) of Scripture, which you may judge in your carnal
minds will do it, and pick and choose too, the Scripture where you like: What,
was not the Scripture spoken forth by the Spirit of God, and cannot be broken?
and one Scripture is as good as another, and is as effectual as another, but
none is effectual without the Spirit, which is that which leads to repentance,
and brings down the pride of the transgressor; and except people come to
receive the Spirit, and believe in it, which convinces them of sin, and leads
them to repentance, all your stirring up, and composing, and re-inforcing, will
do no good at all; and so re-inforcing of self began your fast, and there it
will end, without Christ, which who so comes to follow, denies themselves, and
are otherwise taught, then to take the Kingdom by force. And concerning their
humiliatio^ (...) have heard, and may judge, Reader, what their Thank^giving
will be, like the rest.

Dir. The Minister is to make some pithy Narration of Gods deliverances, and
sing some pertinent Psalms, and choose a pertinent text to the occasion.

An. The Thanksgiving does not arise from any sencibility that people feels in
themselves, but it arises from the pithy story, as they call it, of the
Minister, and likewise from his devised Sermon, which has fed the carnal
minds, to re^oyce in words without the life, and then ring the consecrated
Bells, and get Bonfires, and eat and drink, and satisfy the flesh, and these
are the thanksgivings, and the rejoycings that the world makes, over the
Witness in themselves.

Dir. And now I come to the singing Psalms, and their Mass-house, the place of
their Worship, and so I have done with their traffic. First, they say, that
singing of Psalms publicly in a Congregation, with a tuneable voice, is a
Christians duty.

An Where was it enjoined by Christ, or any of his Ministers? I am ignorant,
and yet the Scripture I know, but no where read in it, that singing of
Prophefies, and Prayers, and other men's conditions, turned into Rhyme and Meeter
by Poets, and Masters of Music, in an invented tune (in the same mind which
invents tunes for Ballet-mongers) and to sing such conditions amongst proud,
wanton, and disdainful people, covetous, envious, and such as has not so much
as endeavored after mortification, or newness of life (as generally your
Parochial Congregations are) as you have confessed in your Directory for Public
Worship; this is no way accounted as a Christian duty, for whose souls are not
brought out of death, cannot praise the Lord; and you confess Ministers and
Congregation, that you are blind in mind, and hard in heart, and full of
unbelief, impenitency, luke-warmness, and barrenness, not endeavoring to
receive Christ into your hearts, your state is howling and lamentation, and not
rejoicing, yet singing with the Spirit is owned, and with understanding.

Dir. And now we come to the place of public Worship: They say it is not
unlawful or unconvenient for Christians to meet together in the place which was
dedicated to Idolatry, or consecrated to an idolatrous use, yet we hold it
requisite, that the places of public Worship should be employed, and continued
to that use.

A^. And upon what account do you count it lawful, convenient, and requisite to
meet in an Idols Temple, or a Mass-house? your account will be but slender and
poor, which will be without example from the Saints. Did Josiah or Hezekiah,
when they had broken down the Altars of Baal, and thrown down the high places,
did they say, its requisite and convenient, that our Priests, and the Levites,
and the Congregation, do meet at the Altar of Baal, or at the high places? Or
did the Apostles bid the Gentiles, who did believe, go to their Idols Temple
again, and say it was a convenient place to worship the true God in? And have
you forgotten that exhortation or precept, Abstain from every appearance of
evil? And though some do know that an Idol is nothing in the world, howbeit
there is not in every man that knowledge; and is it not yet called by most of
you yet, The House of God, House of Prayer? But as you did begin, so will you
end to carry no traffic but for your mother, mystery Babylon.

And thus, Reader, I have led thee through many things, from the rise of the
Whore, and through the most of her merchants, and through the most of her
traffic merchants, of diverse orders and ranks; but I find them all to trade
with nothing but Enchantments and Sorceries, which has long bewitched the
Nations; but the time is come, that she is manifest, with her merchandise and
Sorceries, and turned from, by me and many thousands more, which is my
exhortation to thee, that so thou may come to the Church which is in God, and
to the elect assembly, and to know the seed which is heir of the promise, and
of the Life which is without end: Which mystery Babylon, with all her merchants
have sought to destroy, since she got up to ride upon the Beast, who has
compelled all both small and great to worship him, and also all Nations to buy
the Whores merchandise and traffic, which has deceived the Nations, and
bewitched them; but the time is come, that she shall be hated of her Lovers,
and they shall forsake her; and her merchants shall say, Alas! alas! which day
is dawning and dawned, which discovers the Whore the Beast and false Prophet,
with all their sorceries, and the Lamb shall reign, and the holy men of God,
and Prophets shall rejoice over her, when the smoke of her torment ascends up
for ever and ever; which the Lord hasten says my Spirit, Amen.

London, the 12 Month, the 26 day. 1658.
THE END.

