Seasonable Address To both Houses of PARLIAMENT CONCERNING THE SUCCESSION; The
Fears of POPERY, AND ARBITRARY Government.

By a true PROTESTANT, And a Hearty Lover of his COUNTRY.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXXXI.

A Seasonable ADDRESS TO Both Houses of PARLIAMENT, Concerning the Succession,
etc.
IT was the Egyptians practice, before Physic was reduced into Art o^
Profession, to carry forth into the Roads and Highways, the Diseased, and
enquire of all passengers concerning the Causes and Remedies of their
Distempers; out of whose prescriptions their Friends selected, and applied what
they judged most proper.

What was then done for the Natural, is now as necessary for the Body Politic
of this Country, sick, almost unto death, of Fears and Iealousies, the Plots
and Devices of the wicked and ambitious; exposed to all Travelers, among whom
good Nature and Self-preservation have at length, after two years silent
compassion, prevailed upon me to give my opinion of the Causes and Cures of our
Evils; which I will offer without fear or favor of Party or Faction, of Court
or City; enquiring how far our apprehensions of Popery and Arbitrary
Government, that have so long discomposed us at home, and made us contemptible
abroad; are just and reasonable.

Though I confess it is said, There never wa^ Smoke without some Fire, yet at
first sight it seems hard to believe that sober m^n should ever attempt
innovations, seldom or never advantageous, always hurtful, because necessarily
attended with the sad effects of Civil War; a calamity that has so lately
proved fatal to the Kingdom in general, to the Prin^e and to the Subject.
Whence it may be reasonably presumed, when our Passion is over, and we have
fully considered the rise, progress and event of the Last Rebellion* we shall
grow calm and wise, permit the King to enjoy his own Preroga^ives* and content
our selves with our just Right and Privileges. 'Twill be ^^me enough (when
these are invaded, if Religion even then will allow it,) to oppose, or stand
upon our defense; to offer at it sooner is madness and folly, Rebellion and
Impiety*

For the better coming to our point, it is necessary we take a review of the
times preceding Forty One, when from the end of King James's Reign, the people
were, as now, full of murmurings, repinings and distrusts against the
Government. At last the smothered Embers burst forth into a Flame; and after
ten years Violence, War and Confusion, and near as many more of Usurpation and
Tyranny, the Commonwealth was so far from being bettered, by any of the many
changes and expedients, that the recalling our King from his unjust Exile was
found, and unanimously agreed, the only way to prevent its utter Ruin. Our
Gracious Sovereign, merciful beyond example, pardons his Rebellious Subjects,
the Murderers of his Royal Father, and the Usurpers of his own Crown and
Dignity; loads, even among them, with Offices and Honor, such as seemed
penitent, and were capable. He then proceeds, first to the resettlement of the
Religion of the Church of England, like virtue seated in the middle, and
equally endangered by the two extremes of Popery and Presbytery; and after, to
that of the State in peace and quiet, which we enjoyed to the envy of our
Neighbors. This happiness occasioned a War with Holland, France, and Denmark,
to their great Lo^s, and the Renown of England, ending in a League of
friendship and amity, for the general good of Europe. Not long after the King
was advised to grant a toleration for the ease of tender Consciences, and the
advancement of Traffic and Manufacture. This was pressed with arguments, that
the want of it occasioned Venners Insurrection; the Plot in 1662. for which
several suffered at Tyburn; that in 1663* begun in Ireland, and carried on in
England, for which in 1^64 diverse were executed* in Yorkshire, as were others
after in London, April 1666, who confessed at Tyburn a Design of subverting the
Government, seizing the Tower, and Firing of London the September following;
and withal, declaring there were those behind of their Party, that would still
effect that design, which as to that part was too evident* This is notorious
from the historical account pu^lish^d in 80. and confirmed by the Gaz^t; and
therefore I cannot but wonder at the Commons Vote of last January the 10 th.
That it is the opinion of this House, that the City of London was burnt in the
year 1666. by the Papists, designing thereby to introduce arbitrary power and
Popery into this Kingdom* It would be a great satisfaction to the world to
publish the grounds of this opinion, because that otherwise considering they
did not pursue it, nor any reason assigned what should have hindered, it will
hardly gain more credit* than the Philosophers paradox, that Snow was black. I
have read of some, who never wanted opinions, could they but find arguments to
make them p^obable, for which their being at a loss made them ridiculous with
the sober ^art of Mankind.

The King consents, and at the same time declares a War against Holland, whose
insolence and injustice in point of Trade and Honor was become insupportable*
Soon after the Parliament convened, and apprehending the Indulgence might in
time prove destructive to the established Religion, prayed it might be revoked;
the King contrary to the then Minsters advice, an^wer'd their desires. Hereupon
they grow peevish, and thence forward vow and study all the methods of Revenge
and Confusion, though with the hazard of the public. Ever since we have been
continually alarmed with Libels against the Government; at last a discovery is
made of a Popish contrivance, sifted as far as possible by the King in Council,
and after earnestly recommended to the Parliaments further consideration. This
is pursued, but some men laying hold on this, design to d^ive it on to further
purposes, and under pretense of defending the Kings Person and expelling
Popery, set up Presbytery, and pull down the Monarchy. But there being too
strict a bond of mutual love and loyalty between the King and that Parliament,
means are now used, upon a great Ministers being impeached, to have it
dissolved: An Act that answered not his expectations. A new one is called, and
exceeding the bounds of prudence and moderation quickly sent home. A third is
summoned, and the King having to this, as to the former, over and over pressed
the impartial examination of the Plot, the trial of the Lords* and the care of
the established Religion, wherein by all just and lawful ways he often declared
he would not follow, but heartily go along with them* But alas! they intended
no such thing. The Plot must be kept on foot, ^lse they would be defeated. The
King perceiving they still neglected the good of the public, breaks them, and
summons a fourth at Oxford* where I wish they may be inspired, with softness
and prudence* answerable to the designs of the Place, and the needs of the
Kingdom*

After this short account, is it possible to believe these, who insinuate the
King himself is in the Plot, is a Papist, and intends arbitrary G^vernment* Oh!
ridiculous, nonsensical fancy, If ^he Plot be against his Person and
Government, and contrived by Rapists, and among them (as ^edlow has sworn) none
in England but have received the Sacrament upon it, and he be of the number, he
must join with others to cut his own throat, stab, shoot* or poison himself.
But here is foam mystery in this pretty invention; Charles S^uart conspires
against the King; this imitating the Long Parliament in his Fathers time, who
fought for the King, for his politic capacity, against himself, his Natu^al,
his Person. But if he were a Papist, would he have passed into Laws every Bill
tendered him by both Houses, as well before* as since this Plot, in their
disfavour? and yet we know one of the godly Party was lately fined 500 l* for
saying, The Duke of York was a Papist and the King little better; a saying no
longer minced nor whispered, but now loudly and plainly spoken every day. Could
he have been wrought to a change of Religion, in the time of his banishment, he
had not withstood, the offers of foreign Princes and the solicitations of a
fond Mother, to reinstate him in his own Dominions with absolute arbi^rary
power* But he was too much a Christian, and too good a King, not to prefer
continuance in exile, to the designs of enslaving his Subjects, either in their
souls or in their bodies. Must he now, in an Age desirous of rest and quiet, be
up^raided with such purposes, that had resolved against them in the heat of his
youth, the great spur of ambition? Now when to compass this wicked and
ridiculous project is as impossible, as before it was the contrary; when after
his restoration besides foreign assistance, offered at any rate, and to any
purpose, he had an obsequious General, a victorious Fleet and Army, and a
Parliament, whose zeal and devotion seemed in nothing to be bounded but by the
limits of his own pleasure; when to the immense treasure he was possessed of,
bestowed among his people with equal bounty^s it was given, he might have added
vastly by the confiscations of more than half the Estates and Wealth of the
three Kingdoms. But instead of this, he often pressed his Parliament to
expedite the Act of Oblivion, disbanded his Army, and enlarged the Fleet, by
making one Squadron of more value than all three in the time of Queen Eliz.
disabl'd, in all his Dominions, without exception, all Papists, from bearing
any Office Civil or Mititary. Has he not passed the Bill, excl^ding for ever
all Popish Lords out of the House, ^o which his Father could never be
persuaded? Has he not like wise curtayl^d the Royal power by two other Acts,
that of the Habeas Corpus, and against Quartering of Soldiers? Three Statutes,
for which he might have had as many Millions, had he insisted on a bargain, or
known how to distinguish between his own private Interest and that of the
subject, or the truckling way of Bartering, when the g^od of his people was
concerned. Why did he, but for the sake of the Protestant Religion, refuse the
elder Daughter of the Crown to the Dauphin of France, and marry her to the
Prince of Orange? And this without putting his Par^iament to the charge of a
^ortion, or a much greater Sum, which they would have gladly given, had he made
the proposition* And no other could be the motives of recalling his Troops from
France, raising an Army for the defense of the Netherlands, at the expense of
above 200000 l. more than was given, and his prohibiting Trade with that Crown.
These things put a stop to the progress of that victorious King's Arms,
occasion^d his quitting M^ssina, and clapping up a general peace, when he was
just at the point of his proposed Conquest. If our Prince intended an arbitrary
Government, why besides his former neglecting the opportunity, would he disable
himself for the future, by parting with one of the greatest instruments for
that purpose, the Court of wards and Liveries, Tenures in Capite and
Knight Service, purvevance, etc. And what did he receive for this excess of
bounty, for the chiefest and most useful flower of the Crown, but a trifle, a
feather, half the Excise, not above a fourth of the others yearly value. And
after all this, Knaves invent, and Fools believe he is now ^etting up for
Tyranny and Popery, when his years are past the heat of ambition, his Coffers
empty, France disobliged, and his own people alarmed, and bent against it with
all imaginable resolutions of oppsition. Can any man imagine that a person, who
disarms himself, intends to fight?

Besides, What one Illegal Arbitrary Act has he done in his twenty years Reign?
Whom has he defrauded of an Ox or an Ass, of life or possession? Where has he
in any one instance invaded magna charta, our Rights, Properties or Liberties?
What Bill tendered by Parliament, for the security of our Lives or Fortunes,
has he rejected? He passed all without exception. As for the Bill for
intrusting the Parliament with the Militia for a limited time, reason then, and
experience since, has proved it was a needless encroachment on the Royal
Prerogative, without the least prospect of public good; and to have parted
with tha^ power but for a moment, was for so long to unking and divest himself
of a power he could not be certain would be ever restored. As he has freely
passed all Laws, has he not as cheerfully offered to enact any thing that was
agreeable to Justice and Reason for our further security in Religion, Liberty
and Property?

From these considerations, nothing will appear more vain and idle than our
Fear^ and Iealousies, our Factious and Seditious reflections on the Government*
I will not say without great caution, but we may run into those very things we
so much dread, and would avoid, Popery and French Government, or (which is
equally destructive of our Birthrights and Happiness) Presbytery and a
Commonwealth. This will be no groundless surmise* if we look back, and observe
that the Leav'n against the established Constitution both in Church and State
has sowr'd almost the whole lump, the poison of Presbytery, formerly known by
the name of Puritanism, hatched at Fran^ford and Geneva, grown to a head in
Scotland with the Reformation, has infected the generality of the Kingdom, the
common Traders and Dwellers in Cities and Corporations, and the unthinking and
illiterate part of the Gentry, with hatred against Monarchy and the Church of
England. This was certainly the invention of Rome to overthrow us, by thus
sowing Divisio^s* they well foresaw our Kingdom and Church in it self divided
could not long stand* All the Antimonarchical Principles are the same in both,
the one as well as the other deny Supremacy in the King, the Iesui^ will have
the Pope, and the Presbyter Jesus his Head. King-killing and Depo^ing. D^^trine
is disowned by all honest Papists, as the Author even of Pl^t^ Redi^i^^^ doe^
confess, though two or three Jesuits have privately assented the Opinion as
problematical, for which themselves and writings were censured and condemned,
as false and damnable; But it is justified, both by Books and Practice of the
whole Presbyterian party; it is so plain and fresh in our memories, I need not
instance in ^he Authors. St. Peter's Chair is not more Infallible than that of
an Assembly of Presbyters in a National Cla^sis or Synod. Men of these
Antichristian Principles stirred up the Late Rebellion, and being active and
diligent, drew in many unwary honest men beyond the power of retreating. Did
not the Faction here tamper in Scotland, where the promoters of the Covenant,
that Godly Instrument, applied to the Crown of France for protection, as
appears by the Letter found with the Lord Lowdin, therefore sent to the Tower?

But what was the issue of th^s Contrivance, but Confusion and Misery through
the three Kingdoms, the Presbyterian party overpowr'd by the Ind^pend^nts, and
these again by the Army; a Commonwealth set up, and soon after turned into a
perfect Tyranny under Oliver Cromwell; after more money had been illegally
squeezed from the Subjects by Ordinances and Loans, Sequestrations and
Decimations, Excise and other Impositions, than was ever known before or since?
The people weary, call home their Prince, who by an excess of mercy and
clemency, sparing to root up men of these Principles, gave way to their
infecting others with the same humor of discontent. It Is to be observed, that
the year 1535. is remarkable for the Geneva Reformation, and the spawning of
the Jesuits Order, and that our unlucky homebred Divisions we^e fomented, if
not first set on foot, under hand, by directions from the Court of France, as
well as from Rome, the Interest of that State, as well as of the Church,
depending on our Distraction; to which end Richlieu, that great Minister,
employed many Pensioners into Sco^land, as did after his Successor Mazarine in
England. And therefore there is nothing more inconsiderate than to think we are
not now acting and promoting French-Des^g^s; it is their business to divide us,
and yet so to manage the Balance, that they let neither the King nor
Parliament have the ^etter, or ever come to a right understanding: They can no
otherwise obta^n the Western Empi^e, and it is directly against their Interest
ever to suffer England to be either a perfect Monarchy, or an absolute
Commonwealth. Those that roar most against French Councils and Measures,
u^der-hand-bargains and agreements between both the Kings, know they belly their
own Conscience, and that the French have us in the last degree of con^emp^*
Th^s the ^^^^of D^^printed in his own vindication, pe^haps no^ ignorant that
some of their Ministers did, in the year 1677* and 78. before the breaking
for^h of the Plot, de^^are* That Monsieur L. ^ad greater Int^rest and more
friends in England than the D. of Y. That the K. had need be on (...) G^ard,
for he was in a great danger of running the same risque with his Father; when
it was likewise inquired, What Interest among the people two great Peers had,
who have since the Plot been the great Pillars of the Protestant Religion, though
neither was ever reputed to have any, were Ministers and Advisers in 1670. and
71. very good friends to France and Popery, Enemies to the Triple Alliance, and
to Holland, etc. It was also said, That 300000 l. a year bestowed in Scotland
and England, among the Factious and Discontented, would better serv^ the
Interest of France, than any Bargain they could drive with the Ministers. It Is
too well known that the greatest of these two Noblemen made a secret journey
into France, some weeks before the Plot, after some private Transactions here
with others, among whom were Sir E. L. famed for Religion, for Morality, Major
W. and H. N. as notorious for the same perfections and their love of Monarchy,
and hatred of a Commonwealth nor did A. S. want his share in the Consultation,
a stout assertor of Prerogative, witnessed by his and others living out of this
Kingdom, ever since the Kings Restau^ation, until they saw some likelihood of
a change, the one returning about the time the D. of B. and the other Lords
were in the Tower, and the other a few months before the breaking forth of the
Popish Conspiracy; which no sooner came before the Parliament than some of the
great Lords of the Committee for the Examination of the Plot kept their
Consultations, and managed much of that Affair at Wallin^ford-House, Major W.
their Secretary, where they concluded to take hold of this opportunity for the
carrying on some long-hatch'd Designs of their own. Nor is it to be forgotten
that in June before, a Letter was writ by an eminent person of the Faction, and
can be now produced, That v^ry shor^ly som^what would be discovered, that would
prevent our much l^nger walking in the dark; and that one of the greatest Lords
sent to an Astrologer t^ know wh^th^r he was not in a short while to be in the
head of 60000 men. The method^ agreed upon in France, and pursued here, were to
make a Court and Country-party, to sow and disperse Iealousies between both,
and widen the gap with all possible Devices; which resolutions some here were
the ^ooner induced to embrace, upon this consideration, That they should not
l^ve to see the issue, and were unconcerned for what should come after. But yet
I am too charitable to think, if we have any French Agents at home, they are
imposed upon by their own unwariness, and the others cunning, to act rather
against, than with, their knowledge, a part so much contrary to the Interest of
England, and the Duty of a Christian. But however it be, I am morally assured
we are doing their work; and if we are not Knaves and Pensioners, we are
Blockheads or Fools, that are blind and besotted like men prepared for
Destruction. Quos Jupiter perdere vult, hos dementat. If any one talks thus, he
is presently called a Papist and a Tory; every true Son of the Church of
En^land, and Loyal Subject, is branded with Nick names and run down by Noise
and Faction; and he that opposes Popery, if he defends not Presbytery, is but a
Protestant in Masquerade; if he commends Mon^rchy and our Legal Constitutions,
to the discredit of a Commonw^alth, he is a Rascal, a Villain, and a dangerous
Person, not considering that we are made Tools and Instruments for French
purposes, betrayed by their Cunning and Address, to forward and act with our
own hands, our Slavery and Ruin. Shall we be still blind and deaf to reason
and demonstration? Can we not reflect upon the French double-dealing in o^r
late Civil Distractions, and remember what the Lord Keeper Puckering tells the
Parliament in Q. Elizabeth's days, That the Puritans, even at the time of the
Spanish preparations for Invasion, were urging and pressing intestine
C^mmotions* where he largely sets forth their being as dangerous to the Crown
and Mitre as the others, and therefore that both were to be equally suppressed,
Papists and Puritans. I cannot find that either have since altered their
Principles, and consequently cannot but wonder why the Papists should be
persecuted, and the other countenanced, even against Law and former Statutes.
It Is surely very imprudent to expect your House will be warm by shutting a
Window, and se^ting open the Doors. And therefore because in this I can freely
agree with Plato Redivivus, that the fear of Popery is not the cause of our
present disturbances; I shall without regard to Religion, consider the Papists
and Presbyterians as two Factions in the State, like the Arm^nians and
Lov^stein party in Holland; and as such pronounce that both are to be
suppressed, or neither, because by emptying only one of the S^ales, the
Balance is broken, and the Court or Monarchical party is first weakened and
destroyed, and after the whole form of Government altered into that of a
Commonwealth; and I am fully convinced, if that had not been that Authors
Designs, as to an ordinary Reader is past doubt, he would have set down this as
one of the Remedies of our present Evils. But the contrary was his purpose, and
in order to it he c^nningly, to preserve the Monarchy, would set up a plain
Democracy, and for an English King, ob^^ude upon us a Do^g of Venice; for he
tells you at large that the ancient Power of the King is fallen into the hands
of the Commons, and therefore to keep up the former illustrious splendour of the
Crown, he would have all its Jewels taken out, and set about the Speakers
Cha^r, the King made a Cipher, and divested of all Power but the Name, to keep
up the three several and distinct shares in the Government, King, Lords and
Commons. It Is an ingenious way of arguing, but we are not yet, I hope, such
fools to have it p^ss, to venture at play, and not know how to distinguish
false Di^e.

Oh! but says a Factious P^titioner, that takes the House of Commons
(sufficiently proved by the learned Answer to Petyt's Book, to have had no
share in the Legislative power) to be the Parliament; all their Votes, how wild
and unreasonable ^oever, as we have lately as well as formerly seen in print,
to be the sense of the Nation, and have the force of Laws, and yet deny any
Authority to the Kings Proclamation: This Scribler (says he) is Popishly
affected, a French designer, a mere Tory; not considering that there is not
less hazard in splitting upon a rock, than upon a sand-bank; that if I must be
a slave, and forfeit my liberty, 'twere at least as good to do so under a
single person, as more; the tyranny of many is much more intolerable than that
of one. It Is equally destructive of my liberty, whether the King or the House
of Commons, takes away Magna Charta; I am still against arbitrary Government,
ruling according to pleasure, not the Laws and known Constitutions of the Land,
whether assumed by King or Commons, if there be any choice, the odds are
against the latter. And to speak truth, by what has passed since the Plot, any
one in his wits, would believe, the King is invaded, not an invader; that his
frequent Prorogations and Dissolutions have been his legal defensive weapons,
used as much for his Subjects security, as his own honor; that arbitrary power
is a delicious thing, and therefore aimed at by our Demagogues and Tribunes of
the people; bad and to be decry'd, only while in the Sovereign. It Is very
convenient to cry Whore first. Solomon tells us, He that appears first in his
own cause, seems just; but his neighbor comes after and proves him. If the
people in an Island are alarmed that an Invasion is designed, and that only at
one Port, and they become so foolish as for the guard of that, to neglect and
expose all other, they do but make the easier way for their enemies to land and
overcome. Those, who are the Watchmen, the Sentinels of our safety, ought with
Ianus to have two faces, one behind and the other before, and many eyes like
Argus, there being otherwise no security against surprise. I remember in
Thucydides, that the Gretians besieging a strong City, found no means but
stratagem to become Masters, which they thus contrived: After they had puchas'd
within some Pensioners, they kept the besieged awake, and put them into a great
distress by continual false alarms, and, as designed, prepared to believe
nothing more was intended than amusement and distraction. The false Citizens
within taking this advantage, affirmed they ought for the future to make it
death to any Watchman to give the Alarm. This decreed, notice was given to the
enemy, and without the least resistance the besieged were taken and undone,
when and where they least suspected; whereupon this Proverb was taken up.
Amyclas perdidit silentium. I wish we may never run the same fate; the
application is too easy and natural to be dwelt upon.

And yet I cannot but take notice how the late House of Commons have assumed to
themselves a power extraordinary, and by a Vote without proof or conviction,
made eminent men and known Protestants, guilty of Popery and French designs,
made them Advisers and Counselors according to their own (...), imprisoned
several DURING PLEASURE, seized Closets and Writings without Information, and
contrary to Magna Charta, voted Acts of Parliament, made for the preservation
of the established Religion, us^less, and their execution grievous to the
Subject against the Protestant interest, and an encouragement to Popery, etc.
and among these, which is most wonderful, a Law made by the darling Queen Eliz.
who cannot well be supposed to have been a friend to Popery. If these be not
odd and arbitrary proceedings, I know not what are* nor why that should be
tolerable or lawful for them, which is not for any, no not for our Sovereign.
Considering men are afraid the abettors of such practices are not friends to
peace and quiet, but rather factious and dangerous, willing to enslave us to
foreign Invasions or domestic Encroachments, whatever may be said to the
contrary, these actings are but too good grounds for such apprehensions. The
cunningest Whores seem most devout, and inveigh very bitterly against the
lewdness they daily study and commit. Your rooking Gamesters abhor, if you will
believe their shams and oaths, the use of false Dice, and the
un-Gentleman-like-trick of cheating. However, none but Cullies, who want wit or
years to make observation, can be wheedl'd and drawn in by such pretenses.

Before the discovery of the Plot our Ministers were reflected on, as designing
Popery and Arbitrary Government, by many scandalous Pamphlets, and one in
particular called, an Account of the ^rowth of ^opery, etc. as if the people
were to be prepared to believe the whole Court were Popish; that while they
were alarmed against that party, they might be unprovided to defend themselves
against the-other. The Presbyterian true blue, who like Aesop's Ca^, though
transformed into the beautiful shapes of Court-Imployments and Honors, will
still be hankering after the old s^ort of Mousing; they will ever be lovers of
a Commonwealth, and enemies to Monarchy. This is plain from former, as well as
later, proceedings, since the discovery of the Popish Plo^, when ^hey began to
show themselves in their proper colors, when they cry'^ not only the Court, but
the Church was Popish, and all that are for the ^stablish'd Government. You
cannot now be loyal, unless you are factio^s, nor a Protestant, if no
Presbyterian. But pray observe, none tell you this, but the spawn of those
seduced, or concerned in the late Rebellion; men turned ou^, or that would get
into Court-Imployments, that account themselves slighted or disobliged; men of
great Ambition, or of desperate Fortunes, who make all this noise and clutter,
to be taken off. To what purpose else, did the late House of Commons make the
Vote against the bargain or hopes of Court-preferment, but that such a design
was a driving between some leading Members and Courtiers? Can they after such a
discovery pretend zeal for Religion, and the good of their Country? For shame,
let not Faction and private Interest make men forgetful of the public, of the
peace and quiet of the Nation: Let them secure our Constitutions against the
encroachments or invasions of any, whether Presbyter or Papist; and remember
that the most forward in the Long Parliament were soon turned out by others;
and because what is Sauce for a Goose is sauce for a Gander, this of course
will be the fate of those, who now glory in being Ringlead^rs of Faction to
thwart and oppose their Sovereign; Nay, it may possibly be worse, the
Gentlemen, the Knights of the Shires, may be kicked out by Mechanics, by
Citizens and Burgesses; for he that practices Disobedience to his Superiors,
teaches it to his Inferiors. Sir W. I. Sir F. W. Colonel T. etc. all know
were disobliged, and if taken into favor, the Employments and Honors they
covet, would stand up for the Court, as much as now they do against it. Whether
the Petitioning Lords be not of the same temper, will best appear from the
story of every single person. One of them has the humor conveyed with his Blood.
His Father was a Gentleman that appeared zealous in the long Parliament for the
good of his Country, the first that brought in the complaint of Ship Money. But
soon after when he was made a Lord and a Courtier, he changed notes and sung
another song, no man more for the Monarchy, in its defense he lost his l^fe,
and at his death publicly repented his actings against the Earl of Stafford,
His Son was made an Earl upon the Kings retu^n, sent Emba^sador Abroad, and
Lord Lieutenant into Ireland; to get his command he despised not the Courtship
and assistance of Coll. T. though a R. C. and a Creature of his R. H. to whom
he made no slender Professions; not being satisfied with gaining vastly in that
Station five years, he grows peevish in hopes of being sent the second time,
nay rather than fail he is content to be Commissioner of the Treasury, in hopes
that by the Courtship and Interest of some Women, no matter what Religion they
are of, he may come to be Lord Treasurer: But not like to gain the White
Staff, and perhaps not caring to govern an empty Exchequer, he bent his
Thoughts again toward Ireland; slighting the Treasury he is outed, and grows
more discontented; and at last turned out of Council, the next day he repeats a
Speech of E. of S. his making, and unasked presents a piece of Council and
Advice to His Sovereign, pretending as a Peer it was his duty. I am sorry his
zeal made him forget, that Peers have no right of advising the King, but when
he makes them of his Council, or by Writ Summons 'em to Parliament. And what is
very odd, he advises just the contrary to what he and the other Noble E. had
done the year before, when Courtiers. This Noblemans Life would make a Comical
History; he knows how to put on all shapes, and in the late times, was not
ignorant how to make an Apple Tree supply the place of a Pulpit, he knew how to
serve himself in all turns and changes, and has not failed since 1640. to have
been often out and in with the several Higher ^owers. ^o give him his due, he
is a man of extraordinary Parts; but if one of these Lords said true, when he
was a Courtier, and the other newly removed, they are al^ fitted and turned for
confounding and amusing, but not for extricating out of difficulties. He wants
not Wit to hold forth in the House* or in the open Air, upon occasion; nor is
he meanly skilled in the methods of Court-Pleasures, as well as Business. He
must have an ill memory that forgets who advised the breaking the
Triple-League, and making an Alliance with France, and a War with Holland,
pronouncing in the Language of the Beast, Delenda est Carthago, that a Dutch
Commonwealth was too near a Neighbor to an English Monarch; the Shutting up
the Exchequer, the granting Injunctions in the case of the Bankers, and lastly
the sourse of all our present misfortunes, the general Indulgence. These things
being found of ill consequence, and the Ministers removed as designers of
Popery, Presbytery, Atheism, or Irreligion, Arbitrary or French Government;
must any of such Principles as soon as turned out of Court, be received into the
Country, as if these two had different Interests? Whoever say there is more
than one common wealth in both, are Deluders, and Incendiaries, and Betrayers
of the Nation. Those that strive to divide the King and his People, are to be
looked upon as Pensioners of France, and to be most severely punished. There
are that can tell Tales, what Great man since the Plot, offered a
Reconciliation with the D. and for a Restoration to his former Power and
Greatness, would be his Servant to all intents and purposes. But the D. could
not be persuaded, one that had as often changed Parties, as Proteus his Shapes
and the Chamel^on his Colors, could be true to any Interest, b^t his own; and
therefore rejected his many Messages on this subject. Another Peer, whose Son
in the Lower House, is the great Tribune of the People, would have had a
Dukedom added to the Garter, to make both Sing to another Tune. A forth would
fain be a Privy Councellor in Reversion. A fifth not long since at any rate of
purchase, would have been Master of the Horse to the Duke: Strange ^ that a
Protestant Lord should think of serving a supposed Popish Prince, and after
hope, though thus mounted on Horseback, to get to Heaven. 'T would be tedious
to give particular accounts of all; only by the way observe that a Young Lord
newly come to Age, owned himself to His Majesty Disobliged, because after a
Voyage to Tangier, his great Valor there shown, and spending his Youth in his
Prince's Service, (these were his own words to the King) another was preferred
to the Command of the Lord Plymouth's Regiment. I cannot but commend this
Noblemans Ingenuity in owning the true Cause, and not pretending, as others,
Conscience and public good for his motives. But I am sorry he should forget,
not only the obligations of gratitude, which he is under for his Bread and for
his Honor, but also who says, Appear not wise before the King, and give not
Counsel unasked. He has learning enough to understand the meaning of in
consilium non vocatus ne accesseris. It Is to be hoped he may repent, and (...)
wit may be turned into Wisdom.

As for the D. of M, I believe him perfectly drawn in by designing Politicians
for ends of their own, who never intended him more than as an useful Tool,
afterward to be la^d aside. It Is no wonder that one of his Youth and Spirit
should be tempted with the Baits and Allurements of a Crown, the splendour and
gaity of Power has blinded many Elder men's understandings. But that they never
had him in their thoughts for K. appears from the Author of Plato Redivivus;
and indeed if they had they went the wrong way to work. They should not have
engaged him so far, as to deserve his being turned out of his Command as
General; a Post, that would have best enabled him to seize upon and make good
any pretense to the Crown, after the death of his Majesty. I am apt to believe
his Grace is sorry for what is past; I am certain it were his Interest to throw
himself at the Kings Feet, and quit the Counsels of those men, who int^ieg^^ng
for themselves, puff him up with false hopes, and yet sufficiently discover
that nothing is farther from their hearts than his Exaltation, or what is so
much in their mouths, public service to the King and Country. It Is much better
for him to be content with the second place in the Kingdom, than by pretending
to the first* against all manner of reason, and the obligations o^ gratitude,
forfeit all, his Fame and Honor, Life and Fortune*

The Petition being already answered, I will only observe, that His Majesty,
intending to turn them out, sent Mr. Secretary to the E. of E. for a List of
the Papists he mentioned in the Guards; But the Noble Peer had none to give,
but may be supposed to have taken the story upon hear say* from some that had
the malice to invent it. And now must the Nation suffer themselves to be rid by
any Faction, because designing particular advantages, they guild all with the
specious pretenses of Religion and Loyalty, particular respect for the Church
of England, by opening her Doors to all Di^senters, and for the Monarchy, by
clipping the Kings power to prevent the Papists Contrivances against his
Person: Examine whether the zealous sticklers for the Protestant Religion, have
any at all; or if they have, whether it be not as far from that Established by
Law, as Popery? Whether if the King would grant their desires, receive them
into Offices and Power, they would not stand up in justification of the Court
as fiercely as now they do the contrary? What has been before, may well be
expected again. He that considers this, and that malice never spoke well of
any, will give the Factious little credit; especially, when against reason and
sense they would impose upon us, that the King himself is in the Plot* or as
one the Members in a printed Speech tells the House, The Plot is not so much in
the Tower* as in White Hall; there it is to be searched for, and th^^e to be
found* And all (...) no^ unking himself, and put his Crown into their hands,
and against Law, his Coronation Oath, and brotherly affection, pass the Bill of
Exclusion, to the prejudice of himself and the whole Kingdom. This is not a
single or private man's opinion, but the judgment of the Supreme Tribunal of
England, the House of Lords; where upon the first reading it was thrown out,
with the odds of 63 against 31; for which reason their Lordships are called
Masquerading Protestants, Tories, Papists, or their adherents; as if the Lords
must not be allow*d the privilege the Commons take with any of their Bills,
without censure and affront. But why for their Act must His Majesty be loyally
libelled and dispersed? It had been time enough, one would have thought, to
have called him Papist, etc. had he rejected the Bill after it had passed both
Houses. Oh! then who could have doubted, but his doing more against the Papists
than any of his Predecessors, had been promoting their Interest, that his
pardoning no man condemned, nor stopping the execution of any Law against
Recusants, was making it no Plo^, and that passing the Test was letting in
Popery by wholesale. He that can believe these things, is prepared for any
thing, to say a Lobster is a Whale, or a Whale a Lobster; that the Moon is a
Green-Cheese, and the Sun a round Plate of red hot Iron; and then, I presume,
it may not be decided whether we are Fools or Madmen. Let us not idly and
unjustly belly our Consciences, and publish to the Nation and all the World,
that nothing can secure us against Popery, but the shaking and alteration of
the Monarchy, by the Bill of Exclusion; an Act in it self unjust and
impolitick, both for the King and People. No man is to be punished
expost-facto, by the Laws of this and all other Countries. Besides, why should
the Duke, more than any Fanatic of England, be outed his Birthright? The
Scripture says, You must not do ^vil, that good may come of it; And Prudence
will tell us, That this an evil, that must be attended with greater, For the
minute that it passes, the Duke is at liberty to recover his Right by secret or
open Vi^lence, Foreign or Domestic; He is declared an Enemy and a Traitor;
condemned without Trial or Conviction. This piece of injustice must be defended
by an Assotiation or an Army; this Army must be entrusted in the hands of the
King or a General, either may make himself Absolute and Arbitrary; and
therefore if people are now afraid of slavery from the Government, what may
then be their apprehensions? And if they are jealous of the King, what General
will they find to entrust? Those meanly skilled in story, know that Commanders
of Armies have at pleasure subverted Commonwealths and Kingdoms: Agathocles
from being General became Tyrant of Syracusa; Pisistratus of Athens, Sforza of
Millain, the Medici of Florence, the Caesar's of Rome, and not to go so far off,
Cromwell of the three Kingdoms. Most of the Roman Emperors were dethrown'd by
their Generals; and therefore this cannot but make the King as unwilling as the
People, to entrust this great Power in any person. And yet without such a trust
the Act of Exclusion is not woth a straw; nor with it can we be secured against
Slavery, whether the Duke conquer or be overcome. The Duke will still find a
party, at least if he out-lives the King, in the Three Kingdoms to fight his
Quarrel; and if he comes in by Force, he may well use us like a conquered
Nation, break our old, and give us what Laws and Religion he pleases; Whereas
if we attempt no such thing, we shall not run the hazard of a CIVIL WAR, the
King being as likely to outlive, as to be outlived by, His Brother. If he
should chance to succeed peaceably, he cannot be presumed to offer any
alteration in Religion so much against his Interest, and who never forwarded
any in his own Family, suffers his Child^en to continue in the Church of
England, knowing that Christianity forbids compulsion for its propagation. To
say he would be Priest-ridden, is ridiculous; why he more than the French King,
who openly opposes the Popes Usurpation, and assumes to himself the cognizance
even of Church Affairs? This is but a pretense to impose upon the ignorant and
the credulous; if there be not Laws enough already, new ones may be made to
prevent any such intention. When all Offices and Power are in the hands of
Anti-papists, I cannot see where can be our danger.

But this, if granted, would not be all, the Monarchy is hereby made elective,
and the possessor may as well be removed, as the successor debarred. In order
to this, is there not a History of the Succession publih'd, showing that the
Monarchy is rather elective than hereditary? Of which here I will only say,
that the Writer is a notorious Plagiary, and steals all out of a seditious Book
writ on the same Subject by Parsons the Jesuit, under the name of Doleman, in
Queen Elizabeth's time, with design of distracting the people, and making way
for a Spanish Conquest and Inquisition; the Presbyterian Transcriber proves
himself of the same Jesuitical principles, and with equal honestly pursues the
same ends, Usurpation and Slavery. It Is not to be doubted, but that there has
been frequent interruptions of the Succession of the Crown; but no title, but
that of the Sword, was ever put in balance with proximity os blood, and he
that will oppose Fact to Right is very unjust, and argues not upon the
principles of Morality, nor the Laws of Nations. Much such another good
Christian, is the Writer of The Appeal to the City, who tells us, if we set up
a King with none or a cracked title, we shall have the better Laws; and
instances that Richard the 3 d. an Usurper, a Murderer, and a Tyrant, made
excellent Statues. But he might, had he been just, have found the Laws of that
King out done by those of our present Sovereign, whose title none can question.

And yet it is not unreasonable to suspect a design on foot of subverting the
Monarchy, if it be considered that passing the Bill against the Duke, will not
alone satisfy his adversaries, who further expect that all those now firm to
the King be removed, and their trust put into confiding hands; and thus when
they had him in their ow^ power, it would be no hard matter to act their
plea^ure. The Speech disowned by the Protestant Lord, and burnt by the H^ngman
(a fate the Author does certainly deserve) tells us in plain English, We mu^t
have a Ch^nge, and a King we may trust, and well affected Couns^llors, with
much more treasonable and seditious stuff. These things, and the frequent
mentioning the fates of Edw. 2. Rich 2. and Hen. 6. cannot but alarm His
Majesty, and restrain him from ever complying with such persons against his
only Brother. He has so often affirmed the Bill should never pass, that he
cannot now without diminution of his own honor, as well as safety, alter h^s
well-grounded resolution, taken upon the sense of conscience and duty, the
pre^ent and future good of himself and people. An act that would be the highest
violation of Magna Charta, that ordains none should be put by his birthright
and inher^tance, but by the Law of the Land, and legal process. And therefore I
hope, what cannot be supposed, will be granted, will no longer be insisted on,
lest the consequences prove fatal.

One thing I cannot but admire, that the Duke should be absolutely excluded on
supposition of being a Papist, for otherwise he is allowed by all a Prince of
incomparable virtues and endowments, leaving no room for enjoying his righ^, ^n
case he become Protestant. Do they suppose an alteration of opinion impossible?
that is false and foolish. There are instances of men that have changed often,
and to mention no more, the Dukes Grandfather Hen 4. twice altered his opinion.
Besides, it is u^just, and contrary to their own pract^ce, for L. Br. was an
imprisoned Plotter, but as soon as he became a Convert, without further process
or trial he was innocent and acquitted. We do in this exceed the Papists in
France, and condemn our Protestant Ancestors, and all others abroad, who
accused them as Antichristian and Rebellious, for opposing their lawful King
H^n. 4. on the score of Religion; for the Parisians loved his person, and stood
upon no other condition than his turning Papist, to receive him for their
Sovereign; as all the other R. C's. of that Kingdom had done before. And
therefore I very much suspect we are grown weary of Monarchy, and with than
inconstancy natural to Islanders, affect a Change though for the wo^se. To this
I am induced by many Reasons, and nor a little from a Pro^estant Lords Speech,
the last Sessions, That the People of Athens were so fond of good King Codrus,
that they r^solv'd to have none after him. But to attempt this piece of folly
and wickedness, will inevitably embroyl us in a Civil War. And of that the
event is so uncertain, that we ought to dread the loss of all, by striving to
enlarge our present liberties. This madness ordinary prudence will carefully
avoid, because in all probability the King must get the better; his condition
is not like his Father: He has standing Troops, which the other wanted, to
Guard his Person; he has the Militia in his own hands, he has no Scotch nor
Irish Rebellion, to divide or distract his Forces; and above all, he has the
Parliamen^ in his own power, to let them Sit or not Sit, at his pleasure and
their good behavior. And it is happy he has this power, to secure himself from
popular fury, at this time especially, when whatever the Papists have done, we
daily see others run into Clubs and Cabals, distinguishing themselves by Green
Ribbans, by general Committees and Subcommittees, where all Transactions of
Parliament are first designed and hammered, Collections made, a Common Purse
managed, and Agents employed in every County, to prepare and influence the
people, write and disperse false News, Libels against the Government, Addresses
made and sent into every Shire and Borough, and if the Members do not go down
to their Elections, they can Print for them such Speeches as serve their
purpose. Witness one my Lord Vaughan spoke at his Election, though his Lordship
was not out of London, I have not heard before, that Sir Samu^l Morl^nds
Speaking Trumpet could convey a voice a hundred Miles distance. But this is
nothing with our True Protestant Intelligencer B. H. who printed an Address
from the City of Colchester, that never was seen nor presented by any of the
Inhabitants, as by an Instrument under the Town-Clarks hand does plainly
appear. But though Swearing be, Lying is not, against the interest or practice
of the Godly; the Presbyterian, true offspring of the Ignatian Fathers, who
out do them in the Doctrine of Pi^ Frauds, as well as in all other their
immoral and Antimonarkick Principles.

And now considering that none that have any thing to loose, can ever get by a
Rebellion, and that there is no just pretense for one, our Liberties and
Properies not being broken or invaded, the Rich, unless they are mad, will
never begin; and yet with, or without their assistance a Rising of Jack Cade or
Wat Tyler instigated by greater persons, will but enlarge the Regal Power, and
enrich the Crown: And for these and many more reasons I look upon the Threats
or Fears of Rebellion, as idle and vain, as our Jealousies and Apprehensions of
Popery, never possible in England but by a Civil War, since their numbers here
are but as one to 230. and by an exact calculation in the three Kingdoms, the
whole number of Papists is but as one to 205. non- Papists, and their wealth
and possessions is not one to 300. If their power had been so terrible, they
wanted not since the Plot provoca^ions to make us feel, as well as hear on it.
But these noises are like Armies in disguise at Knights-bridge, and Regiments
of Horse hid in Cellars under ground, and blowing up the Thames to drown
London; artifices formerly used to draw in the easy and the credulous. But
it is to be presumed, the same trick will not pass twice upon us in one and the
same Age, while the bleeding wounds of the last are still so fresh in our
memories. To remedy and compose our present madness and distractions, and
prevent future evils, must without doubt be the hearty endeavor of all honest
men, who expect this will be a healing Parliament, that will make up all our
breaches, and unite our divisions, by the methods of prudence and discretion;
weighing the true causes, and applying fit remedies, without regard to faction
or interest, heat or passion* ref^ecting how unreasonable it is, to suspect in
the King or his Ministers any design of introducing Popery and Arbitrary
Government; a malicious and idle invention, set on foot with purpose, to
inflame the Kingdom, by men who were outed, or desirous of Court-Imployments,
disobliged Persons, or French Pensioners* That the Bill of Exclusion is not
like to pass, either the Lords House or the King, because in it self un^ust,
impolitick and dangerous, not only to the Prince, but to the Subject: That all
other legal ways for preventing Popery and Presbytery, are to be taken by
those, who design the preservation of the established Monarchy and Religion:
That this is already, or may with case be secured against the attempts or power
of any Popish Successor: That our fears in this point are groundless, and at
best founded upon accidents, that may never happen: That it is the highest
Imprudence to run into real, present, to avoid possible, future evils* That
innovations of this sort would be against the Princes interest, who having not
a 4 th. part of the Revenue* necessary for the support of the Crown* must be
under a necessity of complying with (...) Parliament* and that his temper*
practice and Declarations, secure us against impositio^ of this nature: That it
be considered, whether the unquiet apprehensions from the Plot, may not be laid
by a speedy and impartial trial and execution of all the accused and convicted,
and the Kings after granting a general pardon* with such exceptions as have
been usual. The doing this will beget a right understanding between the King
and his people* defeat the contrivances of our adversaries, restore us to peace
and quiet at home, and rescue (...) ^^om contempt and danger abroad, and make
the Na^^ of Parliament as famous and renowned, as some Libellers endeavor to
make it base and odious. How this to be compassed, you your selves are
deservedly made the Judges, and therefore I will not like the foolish Orator*
(...) Hannibal the Art of War. -- Fiat Iustitia* ^uat C^l^^*

FINIS.

