AN ANSWER TO A DECLARATION Put forth by the general Consent of the People
called ANABAPTISTS, In and about the CITY of LONDON. Which Declaration does
rather seem a begging of Pardon of the Caveliers, then a Vindication of that
Truth and Cause once Contended for. I seeing so much Wickedness, Confusion,
Fear and Unbelief in so small a thing in Vindication of themselves publicly to
the Nation, it was upon me to Answer something to it; and my end in so doing is
rather to Instruct them, then to Shame them.

From a true lover and owner of the People called Quakers, (above all
Flatterers) because I see they have not bowed their knee to Baal, nor
Worshipped the Power of the Beast under any diverse Color whatsoever, but
walks in that Righteousness which must establish the Nation, RICHARD
HUBBERTHORN.

The Baptists in their Postscript for a Confirmation or a Seal to their
Confusion, they have subscribed these Names following, viz. Henry Jessey John
Tombs Richard Wollaston Henry Tull William Kiffen William Warren John Battee
John Clement Edward Cresset George Gospright John Sowden Benj. Hewlin Edward
Harrison Samuel Tull Edward Green Edward Grainge Richard Dean Edward Roberts
Henry Knollys John Spilsbury John Gosnold Samuel Stanton Thomas Cooper Henry
Hills.


London, Printed for Thomas Simmons, near Aldersgate, 1659.

An Answer to a Declaration put forth by the general Consent of the People
called Anabaptists, in and about the City of LONDON.
FRiends, called Anabaptists, whereas you say, You are misrepresented to the
Nation;

1. As such as are opposite to Magistracy.

2. As such as would destroy the public Ministry of the Nation, who differ
from you in some things about Religion

3. That you do Countenance the People called Quakers in their irregular
practice.

4. That you endeavor a Toleration of all miscarriages in things
Ecclesiastical and Civil, under pretense of Liberty of Conscience.

5. That ye design to murder and destroy those that differ from you in matters
of Religion, thereby endeavoring to make you odious to some people fearing
God; And also to incense the rude Multitude against you, to provoke them (if
possible) to destroy you, etc.

Unto the First of which you say, Though we cannot Answer in justification of
every individual person that is of our Profession in matters of Religion; yet
we can say this, and prove it to all the world, that it has been our
Profession, and is our real practice, to be obedient to Magistracy in all
things Civil; and willing to live peaceably under whatever Government is or
shall be established in this Nation: for we do believe and declare Magistracy
to be an Ordinance of God, and ought to be obeyed in all lawful things.

Answ. For you to give up your selves willingly and peaceably unto whatsoever
Government is or shall be established in this Nation, without any limitation,
and to submit unto any Power or Magistracy that does or shall Rule, as the
Ordinance of God, without any limitation or qualification, is far below that
Spirit which was once in some of you in that Profession, for you have told of
having the Laws regulated according to the Scriptures, and of having Judges as
at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning; and then not to submit to
what Government soever, but that which is according to Equity and Justice. And
what do you bear Arms or Fight for, if not for a Government according to Truth,
and that Righteousness may establish the Nation? Some have judged this to be
the very Design and End of the War and Controversy against many that was
Governors and Magistrates, and was by some called The Ordinance of God, and
the higher Power; And if now you resolve to live peaceably, and submit to
whatever Government shall be established, then your Fighting is at an end: And
if Charles Stuart come, or any other, and Establish Popery, and Govern by
Tyranny, you have begged Pardon by Promising willingly to submit and live
peaceably under it as the Ordinance of God. And if Jereboam come to Reign and
set up Calves to worship, and cause the People to sin, yet you will submit and
live peaceably and quietly under it, accounting it the Ordinance of God. And if
a Pharaoh come to Rule, he that bears Rule must be counted a Magistrate, and a
Magistracy must be accounted the Ordinance of God by you, and peaceably
submitted unto; and whatsoever Government they set up by their Act will be
accounted lawful things, and you must submit to them, else you have proved your
selves all Liars; but some did judge that ye had been of another Spirit.

To the Second you say, As for the Public Ministry of the Nation, who differ
from us in the matter of Baptizing Infants, and some things in Church
Government; we are so far from endeavoring to destroy them, that we judge they
ought to have the Liberty of their Conscience therein; and that it is our duty
to stand by them, and preserve them (so much as in us lies) from all injury and
violence.

Answ. It seems then that there is not so much difference betwixt them and you
as will make them Antichristian and you Christian: and there is a near
Compliance when as it is your duty to stand by them, and preserve them, while
they are Baptizing Infants; But can you stand by them and preserve them, and
not tell them that it is Antichristian, or contrary to the Scriptures? And do
you think that they will do as much for you, as to stand by you while you are
plunging your Members in the Water? And although you do so as you say, is not
this Contradiction to your selves in what you say in the same Paper? For do you
not say, That you will not Tolerate any miscarriages in things Civil or
Religious; and whether is not this a miscarriage in things Religious to baptize
Infants? and whether do you not Tolerate this miscarriage in them, while you
stand by to preserve them in it, as you say from injury and violence? but who
does offer any violence to them which you are their guard against? but the
Priests will hardly believe you, and if they ever have power, that will not
pardon you for so saying, and therefore you had better have been silent, then
have showed your weakness and ignorance for nothing.

To the third you say, Concerning the people called Quakers, it is well known
unto all, (that are not wilfully ignorant) there are none more opposite to
their irregular practices then we are, nor are there any that they have expressed
more contradiction to in matters of Religion then against us, though their
provocation therein has not put us in the least on a desire of depriving them
of their just liberty, while they live morally honest and peaceable in the
Nation.

Answ. Is not this secret smiting without a cause? what irregular practice is
that which you accuse them of and will not mention? is this honestly done? what
are they worse then the Episcopal Priests you mention to them, wherein they
differ from you? and why not to the Quakers? is it enough for any man to
believe that they are irregular, because you say so without any proof? or dare
you not mention wherein you judge it so, least they should disprove you? but
you say, there is not any they have expressed more contradiction to in matters
of Religion, then against you. Answ. That is false, for they have more
contradicted the common Priests of the Nation, as their books and sufferings
will witness, although they have according to truth contradicted you, and also
have more of your contradictions and confusions to declare concerning you,
which is not yet published; but what do you account their irregular practices?
is it because their yea is yea, and their nay is nay in all their
communications (and yours not so?) or is it because they cannot swear at all?
or is it because they cannot have any man's person in admiration because of
advantage, or because they cannot respect the person of the rich, nor honor
the person of the mighty? is it because they do unto others as they would have
others to do unto them, or because they speak the Truth every one to his
neighbor without partiality or hypocrisy? or is it any thing relating to
these things above named, if not, in your next mention in what, or else the
wise in heart will judge you to speak only from your imaginary conceit? but
what is your end in so secret smiting them? do you think to excuse your selves
by accusing them? and who is it that does charge you with countenancing the
Quakers in their practices, either Regular or Irregular? I know none that has
any ground so to charge you, but to men of understanding who can see beyond
words, you rather appear to be begging a pardon of the Episcopal and Presbyter,
and the wild Boys and Apprentices of London, by accusing the Quakers as
hereafter will appear, and that fearfulness and unbelieving is entered into
your hearts, and so your spirits is betrayed into a slavish fear, but if ever
you be accepted or owned of God, you must own that for your strength which the
Quakers live in, and if ever any Rule for God in this Nation, they must own
that light, life and spirit which they are guided by, and then they will not
despise, but have unity with the Quakers.

To the fourth you say, Whereas we are further charged with endeavoring an
Universal Tolleration of all miscarriages both in things Religious and Civil,
under pretense of Liberty of Conscience, it is in both respects notoriously
false. And we do before the Lord, that shall judge both quick and dead, yea,
before Angels and Men, declare our utter detestation of such a Toleration; for
in matters Civil, we desire there may not be the least Tolleration of
miscarriage in any, much less in our selves. Nor do we desire in matters of
Religion that Popery should be Tolerated, the blood of many thousands of the
people of God having been barbarously shed by the Professors thereof, or any
Persons tolerated that worship a false God, nor any that speak contemptuously
and reproachfully of our Lord Jesus Christ, nor any that deny the Holy
Scriptures, contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament, to be the Word
of God; and yet we are not against tolerating of Episcopacy, Presbytery or any
stinted form; provided they do not compel any others to a compliance therewith,
or a conformity thereunto. For whatever composers of any form of worship, may
possibly err, it is derogating from God, and his Holy Word, and injurious to
men to compel any to the Practice thereof.

Answ. What confusion is here, and contradiction both to your selves and to the
example of Christ? as to Religion you will not tolerate Popery, because the
blood of many of the people of God have been barbarously shed by the Professors
thereof, neither will you have any persons tolerated that worship a false God,
nor any that speak contemptuously and reproachfully of the Lord Jesus Christ,
nor any that deny the Holy Scriptures contained in the books of the old and new
Testament to be the Word of God. And yet you are not against tolerating of
Episcopacy, Presbytery or any stinted form; why will you not tolerate Popery as
well as Episcopacie? has not the Professors of Episcopacie murdered and
slain, and do labor to murder and slay the people of God as well as the
Papists? and why will you tolerate the Common Prayer among the Episcopacie, and
not the Mass among the Papists, seeing that the Mass was the substance out of
which the Common Prayer was extracted? hear is nothing but partiality, to
tolerate one thing and not another of the same kind, and why will you not
tolerate the persons of those that worship a false God, nor the persons that
deny the Scriptures to be the word of God, nor the persons of those that speak
contemptuously nor reproachfully of the Lord Jesus Christ.

An. If you will not tolerate their persons, then you will murder or destroy
their persons, and herein you have proved the accusation against you to be
true, that you have a design to murder and destroy those that differ from you
in matters of Religion; as for instance, those that worship a false God, they
differ from you in matters of Religion, and you will not have any of their
persons Tolerated, then their persons must be destroyed for differing from you
in matters of Religion; and they that deny the Scripture (that is the writings)
to be the Word of God (that is to be Christ) whose Name is called the Word of
God, you will not tolerate their persons, then you will destroy them, because
they differ from you in matters of Religion, and those that speak reproachfully
of Jesus Christ, you will not tolerate their persons, then you will destroy
their persons, because they differ from you in matters of Religion; and thus
having contradicted your selves, you have also contradicted the example of
Christ, for he came among those that worshipped false Gods, even Stocks and
Stones, and Graven Images, the works of men's hands, and he was not against
tolerating their persons, neither came he to destroy men's lives because of such
things, but had a Gospel to Preach unto them, whereby they might learn to know
the living God, and turn from dumb Idols, and those that spoke Reproachfully
against him, and said he had a Devil, yet he was not against Tolerating their
Persons, but Preached the Kingdom of God to them, and did bid them seek it and
the Righteousness thereof; and told them that the Kingdom of God was within
them; and he was among such as denied that there was a God, or Christ,
Resurrection, Angel or Spirit; and this is more then to deny the Scriptures to
be the Word of God, which indeed is words and not the Word. And Christ was not
against Tolerating of any of the Persons, as you have expressed your selves to
be, and so showed forth a murdering Spirit; but seeing that you will not have
any Person Tolerated that worships a false god, what must be done with their
Persons? But what difference is there (in the Ground or Cause of Toleration)
between those that Worship a false god, or they which Worship the true God in a
false way? and if the Persons of neither of those should be Tolerated, then the
Toleration would but reach a little Compass: But who must be Judge of that
Blasphemy, Contempt, or Reproach spoken against the Lord Jesus Christ? Was it
not Blasphemy in the Apostles days, for one to say he was a Jew, and was not,
Revelations 2. verse 9. And is it not as great Blasphemy now to say that he is
a Christian, or a Believer, that is not? And must not any person be tolerated
that speak such works? And must not such a Person be tolerated that denies the
Scriptures to be the Word of God? then it appears they must not be tolerated
that faith, in the beginning was the Word, as John 1.4. Nor that say that
Christ is the Word, and that the Scriptures are they which testifies of him,
as Joh. 5. And if we search out your toleration to the bottom, it will be
reduced into this compass, That none shall be tolerated but those that say as
you say, and profess what you profess; and you among your selves are as a
Kingdom divided that cannot stand, and you are not they which are fit to Rule
in the Nation to prescribe Liberty nor give Toleration; but if you had been of
Christ's Spirit, you would have professed Toleration, and not destruction unto
all Persons in matters of Religion, and then they that have the Gospel of
Christ may minister it freely among those that worship a false god, and among
those that worship the true God ignorantly, and minister it among the Papists,
Episcopal and Presbytery, Heathens, Turks and Pagans, which are all out of the
way, and so to convince the gainsayers, so that all the wicked impositions,
cruelty, Persecution and killing one another about Religion would cease, and
then the Gospel of Peace which is the power of God would Rule over deceit, and
Truth and Righteousness would increase and spread over the Nations; but you
have appeared to be of a Spirit of Confusion and Contradiction; for when you
have spoken against Tolerating the Persons before mentioned; Yet you say (in
Contradiction to it) you are not against Tolerating Episcopacie, Presbytery,
or any stinted Form, provided they do not Compel any others to a Compliance
therewith, or Conformity thereunto, etc. Now consider, and let even your own
foolishness correct you; Is not the Papists which ye have excepted against, a
stinted Form? And are not those that worship a false god, a stinted Form? And
are not the Sadduces that deny that there is either God, Christ, Angel,
Resurrection or Spirit, a stinted Form? And is not the Jews a stinted Form
although they speak contempteously of the Lord Jesus Christ, which before you
have said you will not Tolerate their Persons because they speak contempteously
of the Lord Jesus Christ; and now you say you will Tolerate, because they are a
stinted Form: How must the Jews be Converted who have spoken contempteously
and reproachfully of the Lord Jesus Christ, calling him a Deceiver, a
Blasphemer, and that he ^ad a Devil, seeing you will not Tolerate their Persons
until they be Converted? And how shall the Heathens that worship false gods be
Converted, seeing their Persons must not be Tolerated? And what must be done
with those many hundreds of Congregations in England which worship God in the
Spirit, and yet do deny the Scriptures (as Words and Writings) of the Old and
New Testament to be the Word of God, but do confess them to be a Testimony of
the word, and of him who is the Beginning and End of the Words, in whom, and by
whom they all come to be fulfilled to the Saints, What must their Persons be
done with, seeing they must not be Tolerated? But you may say, That those
things was spoken in your haste, or at least in your fear, whereby you were
surprised in the Vproar of the rude Boys and Apprentices of London; but a
little fear entering into the Hypocrisy does try your Spirits, and cause you
to bring forth the intents of your hearts, as in your Paper is manifest.

To the Last you say, Forasmuch as we are Charged to Murder and Destroy those
that Differ from us in matters of RELIGION, We do not only abhor and detest it,
as a cursed practice; but we hope have approved our selves, both in this City
and the Nation to the contrary, notwithstanding the great provocation of some,
who have endeavored our Ruin. For that we desire is just liberty to men, as
men; that every man may be preserved in his own just rights; and that
Christians may be preserved as Christians, though of different Apprehensions in
some things of Religion; in the prosecution whereof, our lives shall not be
dear unto us, when we are thereunto lawfully called: The Designs of our
Adversaries in these Calumnies are to mis-represent us to some People fearing
God; and also to incense the rude Multitude against us, purposely to provoke
them (if possible) to destroy us.

Answ. In what you have before expressed, you have more given then taken away
the occasion of this Charge against you, by your instancing the not Tolerating
of such persons before mentioned; for if you did (as you say) desire the just
Liberty of men as men, then every man without respect to Apprehensions,
Persuasions or Worships, as a man and person should be Tolerated, that those
who are Christians might inform them of the true God when they worship false
gods; and hereby you give great occasion unto those that seek occasion from
you, when you with a general Consent cry against Tolerating the Persons of so
many sorts of People about Differing from you in Religion; and as for some of
them whom ye would accuse as Irregular, many by experience can witness, That
neither Weapon nor Tongue formed against them can prosper; and the time may
come when you may be glad to be upholden with a little of their strength, and
not to Reject those whom God has, does, and will own for his People in the
midst of their Enemies; for God has made them even as Eyes to behold the
Spirits of men, and the Changings of their ways, and to give them a Reproof in
due season when they darken wisdom and confound their matter by words without
knowledge, in false fears and haste when they are out of Patience, and out of
Faith in God, as the Baptists here have done, and the fearful and unbelieving
cannot accomplish the Righteousness of God, neither will he bring forth his
intended Work by them; but such as are of a true Spirit, that looks only at
the Glory of God and setting up of his truth, who are come to the spiritual
weapons, and does not wrestle with flesh and blood, but with the powers of
darkness and with Spiritual wickedness, and such as are not false Accusers of
others, but seeks the good of all men, such will the Lord honor and exalt in
his work, and they shall perfect his praise.

So Friends, You have been hasty to utter words before the Lord, for which his
Reproof justly comes upon you; Therefore let your words be few, and mind the
fear of the Lord God which is the beginning of wisdom, and that will slay your
false fears, from which unsavory and unsound words has proceeded; for your
Religion is vain while your tongue is not bridled, for it is better to be still
and keep silence, then to utter words from the line of Confusion (that is
stretched over you) thereby to get a name in the Earth, which Line all people
walk in, but those who are led by the Spirit of God to speak words that cannot
be condemned, for it is the Spirit of the Lord God and his Power which must
slay the Enmity in you which is the ground of your prejudice and hard Speeches
against the Lambs of Christ, which when that is slain within, then those evil
Fruits of the Lips will cease without, and then the fountain of life will open
in you which brings forth Fruits of another nature; and when the Fruits of your
Lips is Truth, Rightteousness, and Peace, then will you have followship with
the Father and the Son, and with us who walk in his Light.

AND whereas to the said Declaration of the Baptists, something was Written in
Answer to part of it in short by another hand, not knowing the one of the
other, but being found to be both of service as to return their wickedness
upon themselves, it is thought meet that the same also be hereunto annexed; And
here is also something in Answer to some particular Positions drawn up by the
Independants, so called, wherein their folly and weakness is also discovered,
and all may see what enmity lodges in the hearts of all men against the
despised people called QUAKERS.

An Answer to a Declaration of the People called Anabaptists, in and about the
City of London, wherein their weakness and ignorance is discovered under their
own Hands to the City and Nation, as hereby may appear.
FRiends, Whereas your Declaration consists of Five Particulars, four, of
which is not or so much concernment to me to Answer; but as for one of them,
for the Nations sake, and for the Truths sake, and that you may be reproved
even you the heads and Principal men of your congregations, and because you are
such under whose hands your Declaration passes, therefore in that
consideration with many others, this I return as an Answer to you, and to the
City and Nation, in pursuit of yours that has proceeded from a heart of
Unbelief, and unto evil and malicious intents against a despised People whom
the Lord has owned, and will own though you and the whole world do reject them.

And whereas you say, You are misrepresented to the Nation, that you do
countenance the People called Quakers in their Irregular Practice; And to clear
yourselves you say, It is well known to all there are none more opposite to
their Irregular Practices then we are, (say you) nor are there any that they
have expressed more contradiction to then against us, though their provocation
therein has not put us on a desire (say you) of depriving them of their just
Liberty while they live Morally honest and peaceable in the Nation, etc.

Answ. Oh ye Heads and principal men, and ye chief Pastors, Elders, and Members
(so called) of Churches, What have ye done? and wherefore have you thus
proceeded, why have ye renounced an innocent People that never did you harm,
nor ever gave any offense unto you, saving in crying against the deadness of
your forms and traditions, and seeming Religious practices, and reproving evil
in you; Alas for you (ye accounted wise men) do you judge an advantage will be
unto your selves in this thing? Or do you think to work a disadvantage unto us
by your Renouncing and denial of us? I must tell you, we are not troubled
hereat for our own sakes, neither is any part of our hope or confidence
concerning you made void, for we never looked upon some of you to be otherwise
then our enemies in your hearts.

Oh ye Hipocrites whom God will judge because of your hypocrisy, who now so
much as in you lies (if it were in your power) you would leave us to the
mercilesness of cruel men, you would save your selves, and leave us to the
mercy of the Devil; but though you renounce us, yet the Lord has owned us, and
will own us to your grief; and what are you become our accusers? are you become
chargers of us with irregular practice? are you endeavoring to make us more
odious in the eyes of wicked men then we are for righteousness sake? but
wherefore have ye done this? Is it to save your selves from reproaches? Have
you therefore reproached us, and have you sought to make us vile that your
selves might appear free? and have you thought to gain the favor of the
wicked, and to make a peace with your Enemies by reviling of us unto them? Is
this your end, O ye Dissemblers, to reproach us to the Nation and City behind
our backs? You Church Members so called) and Teachers, and Pastors, and
Principal men that would save your selves and gratify the Devil and join in
union with the wicked, and make your selves friends with them by slandering and
renouncing the peaceable people, who are more so then your selves, and none of
them guilty of ^rregularitie as much as some of you; though you would fawn upon
the Nation and City by renouncing of us, as if we were irregular and so and so;
But do you think the Nation and City have not taken notice? or however hereby
they may. What if I say unto them and you, that none of the Quakers ever were
so instrumental by illegal opposition, for the turning out of Parliaments and
changing the Government of this Nation into confusion, like as some of you
Anabaptists have been; and this the City and Nation may take notice of the
irregularitie of some of your selves, who have been instrumental even by
illegal Opposition, and perfect Tyranny in men's account, and Treachery also
to the turning out Parliaments, and thereby wronging the Nation for their own
advantages; so that the practice of some of you has been more unlawful and
con^^^rie to Law then ours has been, and the City and Nation may take notice
of it; as your Declaration is to them, so is this my Answer; never any Quaker
(so called) in Warlike posture has stood in Defiance, and been instruments to
turn out peoples lawful Representatives; Did not some of your brethren, even of
the Anabaptists, take Commission from the late Parliament, and no less then
vowing Fidelity to them, and yet presently rising in opposition to them, and
turning them out of Doors? and was not this treachery and hypocrisy, and
irregularitie? And can the Nation charge any of them called Quakers with any
such work? no they cannot; but some of the Anabaptists they may, even with this
and other the like illegal dealing; And more I might instance, and not only
charge behind your backs falsely as you have done of us, but I may affirm to
your faces, and justly prove these and such things upon you; but why have not
you named what irregular practice the Quakers are guilty of? I charge you you
subscribers against us, and accusers of us to prove your accusation, I say I
charge you before the Lord and this whole Nation and City to prove your
accusation, and to instance what particular practices performed and owned
amongst us, either in Relation to just Government in Church or State that are
irregular, and you shall have a Reply, though you say, There are none more
Opposite to our irregular practice then you are.

Oh how fain would you flatter and fawn upon our Enemies to make peace with the
Devil; how would you creep by craft and join into a League with our and your
Enemies? And how fain would you be at peace with them and leave us even to
their mercilesness if it were in your power? Have we ever dealt thus by you?
Have we ever sought to render you Rebels and Traitors to the Nation as you in
effect have done to us? have we ever sought occasions against you, and to
present you to the Nation as vile as we could for to save our selves, and leave
you to the will of your Enemies? this have you done to us, and we leave you to
be rewarded even by the Lord who will never renounce us, nor cast us out,
though you do in such a time as this, a time of confusion and distraction,
wherein if the Lord did not appear to be our Defense more then men, we should
be swallowed up of our Enemies; and must you, even a Separate People, Members,
Pastors and Ministers of Churches (so called) Renounce us at this season, on
purpose to have us destroyed so much as you may? Well, we have not dealt so
with you, neither do we desire to uncover your nakedness to the Nation, you had
not had thus much if you had not been the occasion of it your selves; and
surely what you have done in this particular, some of your own Members will not
accept it from you with thanks to you; but I shall say more to you, when I have
under all your Hands the particular Practices which you charge to be irregular;
and though there has been and is Contradictions between us and you in matter
of Religion, and difference in particular Practices about Church and Ministry,
and Orders, etc. Yet what is this? This was amongst our selves, though hereof
you have no reason to boast, as of any Victory that you have obtained over us
in any such Controversy, neither has the Spirit of God so appeared in that
Authority among you, as that you have gained any from us to you, but rather the
contrary; but what of these Contentions? we have never so contended with you,
as that we have hated your persons, or sought to betray you into the hands of
devouring mouths, the Lord is our witness in this, though you have done
contrary (even sought to betray our persons in this your work) and I must tell
you dishonestly and undiscreetly have you done in this matter, who never could
unto this day in any contest between us about Religious matters Convince us of
Error or Irregular practices, though now you have accused us to the whole
Nation, and not as in a way of Debate about Religion, but as in matter of State
Irregularity; whereby plainly appears that you seek to betray us, even our
persons into the hands of our merciless enemies, and you would make peace with
them, and deliver us into their merciless hands; and thereby showed hatred, not
unto us as upon the account of Religion only, but even hatred to our persons,
and has accused us as of personal irregularitie; and so has not showed love
to our persons, but rather sought our destruction: Oh ye wicked men to whose
charge God shall lay this iniquity of treachery and unfaithful dealing to us,
even as with brethren, which is the most deceitful iniquity.

And alas for you, what are your desires of depriving us of our just Liberty?
God shall give us Liberty, and from him we shall enjoy it whether you will or
no; and for our just liberty we shall not be beholding to you, though I must
tell you, if our Liberty were in your power it is greatly to be doubted, and
even your own dealing in this your Declaration gives occasion For it, that our
Liberty would be enslaved if it were in your hands, but we bless the Lord it is
in his hand and not in yours; for so much of Treachery toward us has here
appeared, even in giving us up (so much as in you is) to the will of our
Enemies, and the Spirit is in you which would betray Brethren, that for the
time to come we can never Trust you; but we do not give our Power to you to
enjoy our Liberty from you, nor ever shall; And if we walk Moraly honest and
peaceable in the Nation, it is more then you do in this matter, for this your
practice is not Morally honest in Accusing of us behind our backs to the
Nation, and City, and Authorities thereof of Irregularity, etc. though as I
have said never any of us had so great a hand by open opposition tending to
make war in the Nation as some of you in some things I might instance, even for
their sakes to whom you have accused us, and that we are more peaceable then
some of your selves the Nation and City knows; Have we thrust our selves into
Arms, and sought Offices and Places, and Commands as some of you? Have ever any
of us appeared in Actual Arms against Parliament and Nation as some of you?
Have we given the City or the Nation by any visible appearance to fear a war
from us, as you have done? Let the Nation and City, and the witness in all men's
Consciences judge; so that we are known to be peaceable as much or more then
your selves, for we have never sought to you to take up Arms with us, as some
among you have sought to others, which may demonstrate that we are as peaceable
in the Nation, if not more then you; and so you needed not to have premised
such a thing on our behalf. And thus I have in short returned your secret
Treachery upon (...) own heads, and Answered that same part of your Declaration
wherein I and the Truth, and the whole flock of God was any way concerned; and
as for the rest of your Declaration I will not seek Occasions against it,
though in some other things also therein expressed, I might search out your
Hearts, and discover the rottenness of them; and where you say you declare
Magistracy to be an Ordinance; etc. might not I tell the Nation and City that
you are not content with Magistracy, except of your own Sect; And might not I
say, Why were not you contented with that Assembly of men that last Sat? And
wherefore was it that you even some of you Anabaptists were the chief
Instruments with Swords in your Hands to Dissolve them, and so were Instruments
in bringing the Nation into present confusion.

And whereas you speak of the public Ministers of the Nation, you are far from
endeavoring to destroy them (say you) and it is your duty to stand by them and
preserve them from all violence and injury, etc.

To which I answer, What are you about to make a League and a Covenant with
Antichrist? Have you for these many years been opposing them in words, and are
you now recanting of what you have done when you are sensible of a danger upon
you? and will you now bind your selves to stand by them and preserve them from
all injury, and even as they are Ministers too? But let me ask you, Do you look
upon them to be Ministers of Christ, or of Antichrist? If true Ministers of
Christ, wherefore do you oppose them and cry against them in your Pulpits, and
has formerly your selves and some of your Brethren yet do publicly oppose
them both by word and writing, Oh! ye hypocrites. But if they are Ministers of
Antichrist, then how is it that you will stand by them and preserve them as
such, and would bind it upon them as their duty to stand by and preserve you?
Is not this a League with Hell and Death? are you turned backwards into love
and affection toward them again, and so lost your former Principles? And is
your Zeal quite grown cold, or are you now only flattering and dawbing with
the Ministers, because you see danger from them, while you seek but greater
advantage against them? they may indeed tell you they look upon you as not
destroyers of their ways and practices, neither to ease the Nation from any
burden which they have laid upon it; for it is manifest though you deny them
in some particulars some of you, yet you can cry against that in some of them,
and yet uphold the same thing; I may lawfully instance that some of your
Brethren, some in this Nation, and some in Ireland takes or have lately taken
Tithes for Preaching, and have yearly stipends, and so much by the year out of
the States Treasure for Preaching, 100 l. 200 l. and 300 l. a piece by the
year, which indeed does show that you are not intending to destroy their
oppressing and abominable practices, but the rather that you would turn them
out of great Places and Benefits, and turn your selves in; Oh! deceit and
wickedness which I am forced to lay open upon this occasion of your own just
provocation hereunto; and as for their preserving you and you them against such
as do oppose you, they may easily join with you in this, if they could hope in
your faithfulness, for some of you and your Members have showed as much enmity,
have been open Persecutors, even as they and their Members have been, and your
Members have been sending the People of God to Prison, and persecuting them
even as the Common Priests of the Nation: and you appear to be guided by the
same spirit in many things, and if they be Antichristian in their ways and
practices, its sure that you are not of Christ, because you are like unto them
in nature.

And in that you say, you would have none tolerated in their Religion that
deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, but you would tolerate Episcopacy,
Presbytery or a stinted form, etc. say you.

To which I say, I know that spirit which you are of, if it had its full
Authority would tolerate none but your selves, for your spirit in nature
differs not from the spirit of the Church of Rome; And what are you now for
tollerating Episcopacy, who were once your selves (in your Zeal for God, when
your sincerity was not darkened, nor your hearts so much corrupted through
places of honor, and through such things as now they are) Instruments to the
pulling down of Episcopacy, and will you now tolerate it again, and help to
set it up, and build what you have destroyed, as if you recanted of what you
had done, but plainly showing that you are not of the same Spirit that once you
were of, but have lost sincerity, and can embrace Idolatry, for once ye were
the men that did oppose it, and did violently help to pluck it down; but now
you are for tolleration. Oh! unconstant men this is to you, not herein
discovering my Judgment in the case, and if Episcopacy, why may not Popery be
tolerated? seeing they are one and the self same in ground and nature, and not
much different in appearance, and you may agree to tolerate a stinted form in
others, because your selves are in a stinted form also; for what is yours else
but a form, crying up your water and bread and wine, and differing from the
world only in these outward things, when as the City and Nation knows you are
men as covetous, as worldly minded, as ambitious, as self-seeking of honor and
places as any others in the Nation, and your Religion appears to be a ^tinted
form as much as others; Alas poor men, you have discovered your hearts in your
Declaration, and according to the corruption thereof I cannot but answer you;
and there are some that deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and say they
are the Words of God, and a Declaration, and a Treatise of what the Saints
believed and enjoyed; and Christ is the Word of God, that may in time to come
be tolerated in their Religion in this Nation, though you have renounced them:
but while they are owned and regarded of the Lord, they respect not your love
nor hatred who are mortal men, and your breath in your nostrils, and must fall
and perish as the dung in all your beauty, and your profession of Religion,
before the coming of the Son of God.

And in your Postscript you say, you have under your hands sent forth your
Declaration in behalf of your selves, and others of your Judgment; but I must
tell you, I do believe there are some even of those called Anabaptists which
will reject your work, and to them my answer is not, for I spare them: but to
you fearful hypocrites in a time of danger, that have in this juncture of time
renounced us without ground or reason in the sight of God, but for your ends,
as if you would gain the favor of the Nation and City by denial of us, and
looking upon your selves to be reproached because of us, when as you are a
company of unworthy men, even unworthy of our reproaches, and to escape them
have denied us, as seeming to clear your selves, but you are deceived in this
matter, and it shall turn to work against you in the Nation, and in the City;
for we have a more surer witness in their Consciences, even in the Consciences
of all people that we are of God, then you have; for take but away your outward
water, and bread and wine, and some few outward practices, and what do you
differ from the worst sort of men in the Nation; for does not pride and
hypocrisy, and self-love, and covetousness, and the love of this world abound
amongst you, as much as amongst any others? the witness in peoples Consciences
knows it, which shall be a witness for us and against you. You may indeed have
gained League with the worst sort of men in the Nation, but you have not gained
the sincerity in people, and while we have that on our side to witness for us,
take you the rude multitude, for we are not discouraged at all concerning this
thing, but the rather do glory in the Lord though we be denied of all, for
though men forsake us, yet the Lord cares for us; and your own doing shall
return upon your own heads: and thus much is sufficient to the substance of
your Declaration, and if I receive any reply, I shall expect it under the hands
of you all, that I may further search and discover you unto your selves, and to
the Nation.

And whereas there is a Manuscript goes abode, consisting of five Particulars,
which is said that it was delivered in to the Committee of Safety, as Advice
and Council to them: but who the Authors of it are is something uncertain, but
certain it is, that some of the called Independent Ministers and Pastors were
the chief Promotors of it, and in the Copy which was delivered to my hands, it
is said, These five Particulars were the result of a little Synod made up of
Presbyterians, Independants and Anabaptists; but whether it is so or no I leave
that, and would say something to some of the Particulars, and even to the
Committee of Safety and Officers of the Army, and all others of the Nation for
their better information, then the same Paper describes to them.

The third Particular consists about the Magistrates Power in matters of
Faith and Worship, and the Authors say, Though they greatly prize Christian
Liberty, yet they profess utter dislike and abhorrency of an Universal
toleration, as being contrary to the mind of God in his Word.

Answ. It appears the Authors are lovers of themselves, and prizers of their
own Liberty, but not of the Liberty of others, but do utterly dislike and abhor
the Toleration of others, which may indeed be more righteous then themselves,
and this is no less then the very Principle of the Whore of Rome, which
Promotes her own Liberty and makes others slaves, and abhors Toleration to any
but themselves; and they plead Scriptures as well as you for proof of their
Religion, and they will say all that differs from them are contrary to the
Scriptures, even as you say, when as there is very little better foundation in
the Scriptures for your Religion then there is for theirs; and it is doubtful
to many what Religion this day extant is perfectly according to the Scriptures;
but yet thus much may be said, that Church and that Religion which are not in
the same Spirit as gave forth the Scriptures, are not according unto the
Scriptures, and he that can distinguish of this, and who it is that has the
same Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, are only able to Judge what
Religion is according to the Scriptures; But can the Authors show plainly out
of the Scriptures that their Religion is only according thereunto, and all
others the contrary? and until they prove this, why may not the Rulers that are
or may be in this Nation, give Toleration unto other sorts of people as well as
to the Independants the supposed Authors of this Paper?

The fourth Particular consists concerning Tithes, and say they, The taking
away of Tithes for Maintenance of Ministers, until as full a Maintenance be as
equally secured and as legally settled, tends very much to the destruction of
the Ministry, and Preaching of the Gospel in these Nations.

Answ. Alas for you poor ignorant Creatures, ye foolish men, that seems to have
no understanding of the Ministry and Gospel of Christ; Do you indeed think that
the true Ministry of Christ and the Preaching of the Gospel depends upon
Maintenance by Tithes? Oh! ye Robbers of God, who have secretly dishonored him
in your hearts, and publicly disgraced him as much as in you lies to the
Nation, as if he were not able to save his Ministry and the Preaching of his
Gospel from destruction if Tithes be taken away; Surely, you err in your
Judgments, and have no acquaintance with God, nor with his Ministry nor
Gospel; who have thus dishonored him in setting up that Maintenance by the
forcible and unjust oppression of Tithes, to be the preserving of Ministry and
Gospel, and as if Tithes were the upholding of Ministry and Gospel; and you
have thus falsely and wickedly measured God, his Ministry and Gospel, by the
wickedness of your own hearts, who seems to be indeed of those Hirelings that
cheats Souls for money, and runs for the gift like Baalam, and for the lucre
like the evil beasts and slow bellies; and so I do believe that your false
Ministry indeed and your feined pretense of Preaching the Gospel does depend
upon great sums of money and upon large maintenances, and we believe that
indeed is the chief Reason of your Preaching and of your Ministry, and it is
very possible that your Ministry and Preaching may fall which is Antichristian,
when Tithes and Hire is taken away, which Ministry depends thereupon, but the
true Ministry and Preaching of the Gospel will God maintain and uphold (...) of
Tithes being vanquished, and I hope some of the Rulers of this Nation and
officers of the Army will not believe your advice; But yet you seem to be
willing to renounce Tithes if you could have as full a maintenance settled
another way, so that however great maintenance comes, you regard not, so you
can have that, whether by this way of oppression or the other, its your
maintenance you love and follows after, and seeks unto the Powers of the
Earth for that end; and how equally and Legally Tithes have been settled which
you seem to affirm, let all good People judge; given they were, and settled
first in our Nation, by the Popes Authority, to be the maintenance of that
Whores Ministers, and all the Laws which gave them and settled them have been
Antichristian and oppression in the Nation, and there is the guilt of blood and
of cruel unjust sufferings lying upon this Nation in that very cause of Tithes,
and the hand of the Lord is gone out against it, and against all contenders for
it, and God will redeem the Nation from under it, though you be putting your
strength to uphold it through your Hypocritical Prayers and Preaching and
flatteries with God and men.

The fifth particular is, these Authors desire that countenance be not given
unto nor trust reposed in the hands of Quakers, being persons of such
Principles that are destructive to the Gospel and inconsistent with peace and
civil society.

Answ. Here your wickedness and the malice of your hearts is let forth against
the despised People, for their righteousness sake; and this spirit of yours
would not only discountenance them but destroy them from the face of the
earth, if it were in your hands, and you are worse then Baalam ever was, and
far more blind then he, for you are as it were seeking enchantments against the
People of God for money, and you see not the goodly tents of Jacob as he did,
nor the People that are altogether blessed; Oh! ye envious persons that are
even a preparing as much as in you is the destruction of a peaceable People,
and that would keep them in slaverie under you, and you would have the
countenance of the Powers of the earth, but they must not, and you would
monopolize all the places of trust for advantage to your selves, and you would
hardly allow the People of God a place on the ground; Oh! ye sinful hypocrites
and flatterers and slanderers of the just, but what need you have made such
preparation against them, do they seek places of honor among you, do they
delight in great places among men? do they love to be great in this world? nay
their Kingdom is from above, and they reject the countenance of the Beasts
Authority, and they reject any confidence that the dragon and unjust powers can
repose in them, and you need not have been afraid in this matter, and thereupon
slandered us, and have back-bited us to the Powers of the earth; what do you
fear? Even the thing which you fear will God in a Judgment bring upon you, and
there is a Government to be set up in this Nation, even that which is of the
Lamb; and your Antichristian Monarchy the Beast with all his Heads and Horns
shall fall to the ground, and the Lord may bring your fear upon you to your
utter confusion, though you are making defenses all that you can for your
selves and your Kingdom, and this seems to be a day wherein every man's heart is
tried, and every man and sort of People is pouring forth the malitiousness of
their hearts against the poor People in scorn called Quakers; what say the
Papists and Episcopal men? Quakers are a new Sect and deceivers, etc. and what
say the Presbyterians and the Independants of them? Oh! they are Seducers, they
are Witches, they are false prophets, they are Vagabonds not worthy of
countenance, etc. nor any place of trust in the Nation, etc. What say the
Anabaptists of them? O they are Blasphemers and Heretics and irregular Persons
and distructive to Gospel, etc. This and such like is the cry of these and all
sorts of People against the poor despised People whom the Eternal God has made
dreadful unto them all, who shall be the Rod in his hand to break them and
confound them, and utterly to destroy their Antichristian Kingdom; for they are
beloved of the Lord though hated of all men, and though the whole body of the
Beast and Antichrist and every Horn of his Head do set themselves to War
against the Lamb and his followers, and though all these sorts of People
mentioned and some others do at this very day pour out their fury and malice
against this People, yet shall they not be confounded, for their trust is in
the living God, and as sure as the Lord lives, the fear that People have of the
prosperity of this People shall come upon them, and without Weapon or Arm of
flesh, or the multitude of an Host of men will their God dash their Enemies to
pieces; and all ye Sects whatsoever that are risen in opposition against us,
what do we regard your fury and madness against us? What do we fear your
revilings, you uncircumcised Philistines, we mock at your terror, and we
reject your strength as the strength of a straw, we despise your Authority
which is not of God, as the Authority of so many Briars and Thorns, we can
glory over you in the Lord, what are you, and from whence did you come, is not
Babylon your City? and is not the great Whore your Mother, and the Mother of
Harlots your Nurse? And what is your growth but even like the grass of a
Summers growth that is soon cut down and withered, and like the leaf of a Summer
tree that utterly perishes in Winter? The mighty day of the Lord is at your
door, confusion is begun amongst you, and the sword of one may destroy another,
and the strength of one shall rear another, and the remnant that is left shall
be destroyed, and we must overcome them without Sword or carnal Weapon, and
this shall come to pass in a day; and the eye that is yet blind shall see it,
and the child that is yet undelivered shall be a Conqueror over the Beast, and
over his Image, and over all you false Sects, and over every Horn that is risen
up in envy against the Lamb and his followers, the time of the Lambs Kingdom is
at hand, behold, behold ye mountains of the earth, the sentence of Eternal
vengeance will pass upon you, ye Hypocritical Professors; ye Pastors, Elders,
Members and Ministers of Churches (so called) the Decree of the Almighty is
coming out against you, you have provoked him by your wickedness toward him
and his People, even to the destruction of your own selves; wherefore tremble
before the Lord, for his dread and the weight of his hand shall be upon your
Consciences.

Oh Nation, mourn over thy iniquities which have provoked God against thee, and
if men turn not unto him, his sore Judgment will be upon thee, we are not for
this party or the other, neither do we justify one side in opposition to
another, for we see the earth is corrupted, and all sorts of men that are this
day striving one sort, against another, are in a wrong way and in a wrong
spirit, and we cannot side with any of them, but we rather mourn over the
Nation who is torn in pieces by the Ambitious spirit of her pretended Rulers,
and we desire the repentance of all, and not the destruction of any, and we are
for Gods part and not for men.

E. BVRROVGH.

THE END.

