TO THE CAMP OF The Lord, IN ENGLAND.
TO all you called, chosen, elected and beloved of the Lord, who are of the
circumcision made without hands, of the feed of Abraham: who are Jews indeed
nor after the flesh but in the spirit; unto whom belongs the everlasting
promise and covenant, whom God has and is fulfilling in you, so establishing
with you: We your fellow-Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem which is the mother
of us all; and of the same body, and of the same seed, and same birth, begotten
and brought forth by the immortal word of life which lives for ever, do send
greeting, and do embrace you in the arms of our beloved, who is and is to come
God blessed for ever; you who are called Quakers: who are so not only in word
nor in show, but in life and in power: whom God has called and chosen to place
his name in, and to take up his habitation among: above all the families of the
Earth the Tabernacle of God is with you, and his dewlling place is among you,
and only among you is God known, and his name is great in your Assemblies.

We who are of the same root and offspring, does bring in our witness, and
does set to our seal, That God of a truth is with you and among you: and he is
the God of the living that answers by fire: he is I am, and there is none
besides him: the first and the last, the beginning and the end of all things.

Praise him for ever ye redeemed of him: lift up your heads your Redeemer is
come: clap your hands and shout for joy, and let the everlasting praises of God
be in your mouths for ever and ever. Exalt ye his name above all Gods, and
glorify him in the sight of all the Heathen and let his mavelous works stand
upon Record from generation to generation.

Wonderful has his work been among you, and that my soul knows right well:
You that were scattered in thecloudy and dark day, and were a prey for the wild
beasts of the Forest, and were driven away as lost sheep in the wilderness,
has God gathered into the fould, to lay down by the springs of living water in
fat pastures for evermore.

Your bread is sure* and your waters never fails: a feast of fat things is
made unto you, of wines well refined: the Lord is become the Lot of your
inheritance, and the portion of your Cup for ever:

Your Crowns have you laid down at the feet of the Lamb: and your lives and
liberties have not been dear unto you: and let this never repent you, for now
the Lord will exalt you and Crown you with immortal glory The everlasting day
star is risen among you, which gives light unto the Nations: and the light of
the Sun is as the light of seven days: and there is no need of a candle in
your dwelling, but the Lamb is the light thereof; fair as the Sun, and clear
as the Moon: yea it is he which was dead, and is alive, and behold he lives for
evermore. Praise him all ye people, praise ye him ye holy Host, let all that
has breath praise him for ever. Who can express his Noble acts? and who can
declare his wondrous works? Oh my soul is ravished, and my heart is overcome;
let me speak that I may be refreshed, and let me declare his wonders among all
people.

The Lord is our King, our Judge, and our Lawgiver, and our Rock of defense;
Just is he in his Judgments, who has avenged us of our Enemies: Mercy and
Judgment meet, righteousness and peace does embrace each other: Rejoice for
evermore ye Saints of the most High, and tell it to your Children, that they
may tell it to another Generation, what has the Lord wrought among you, and
what has his hand brought to pass. Salvation is come, and plenteous
Redemption, and the dead has heard the voice of the Son of God and lives.

Let sorrow and mourning, fly away, and be ye comforted ye that have mourned,
and be ye refreshed ye that have been weary; for God has opened the
everlasting fountain, and the streams runs pleasantly, which refreshes the
City of our God. He is come and his reward is with him, even he for whom we
have waited, this is he who is our life, our peace and our exceeding great
reward; the light of the world our Savior, but the worlds condemner; our peace
but the worlds torment: glad tidings, glad tidings, the acceptable year is
come: praise ye the Lord ye Sons and daughters of Sion, beautiful is your
dwelling place, and abounds with pleasant fruit, for you are dug and
pruned and enclosed a Garden of lovely branches: let the wonders of the Lord
never be forgotten, nor his works never pass out of your remembrance, for he
has wounded and healed, killed and made alive, raised the dead and slain the
living, brought out of captivity and bound with chains, gathered and scattered,
brought low and exalted, saved, and condemned; all this has your eye seen, and
your ear heard: and the Heavens and the Earth has been burned as a scroule,
and the indignation of the Lord you have born: But the winter is past, and the
summer is come, and the Turtle dove, and the singing of Birds is heard in our
Land. O magnify his name for ever; you are made vessels of honor wherein the
everlasting treasure abides, which never waxes old: the voice of the
Bridegroom is heard among you, and how can you have any more sorrow: instead of
weeping rejoicing, and instead of heaviness of heart fullness of everlasting
joy: the Lord has fulfilled his promise, and made good his word, and his Law
and Covenant is with you: and from you does the Law go forth* and the
powerful word of life, and death sounds out of your dwelling, and you are
Gods only witnesses to testify of him in the presence of all Nations, some of
you by suffering, and some by declaring: Oh endless love, and life, and riches,
an eternal Crown is upon your heads, and your suffering (which has not been a
little) is not worthy to be compared with the glory that is and shall be
revealed. I speak to you who has an ear, to hear, my soul and heart is
comforted in you, in the midst of my burdens and sufferings, who is separated
from you outwardly, yet joined and united to you by the Spirit which is
unlimited, which all Nations does comprehend: yea I behold your beauty a far
off and my heart is ravished withit, and I am sick of love: let his works
praise him for ever, which he has wrought, for his dwelling is with you in
the light unto which no mortal eye can approach.

The new Jerusalem is come down from Heaven, and no unclean can enter: but you
are made white with the blood of the Lamb, and purged as silver, and purified
as gold in the burning and unto you an entrance is given, and the way is
prepared, and the marriage of the Lamb is come and his wife has made her self
ready, and the way of the Lord is pleasant to you, and his commands are not
grievous; no unclean thing can pass over, nor no Lions whelps can tread
therein, but it is called the way of holiness, where only the ransomed of the
Lord do walk; even your mountain is established upon the top of all hills, and
all Nations shall flow unto it. Sing praises for ever, for the kingdom of
endless peace is come, which passes understaning, and of glory, which no
mortal eye can behold, and of life which no flesh can live in. Oh my beloved,
come up hither and I will show you what God has done for you, he has rebuked
the Sea and driven back the floods of waters which compassed you about, and he
has scattered your enemies with a whirlwind and he has given you to feed upon
the flesh of Kings, and of Captains. Can you call to mind the doings of your
God, and his mavelous works brought to pass, and not cry out in praises for
evermore; O drink and be refreshed, and eat and be satisfied for ever, and let
your soul delight it self in fatness; the planting of the Lord you are, and his
own purchased possession, he has separated you from the womb, and has called
you out of kindreds, and ye are the Royal seed, of the offspring of the Lord
Almighty, and all Nations shall call you blessed,

And O thou North of England, who art counted as desolate and barren, and
reckoned the least of the Nations, yet out of thee did the branch spring, and
the Star arise which gives light unto all the Regions round about; in thee the
Son of Righteousness appeared, with wounding and with healing: and out of thee
the terror of the Lord proceeded, which makes the earth to tremble and be
removed: out of thee Kings, Princes and Prophets did come forth in the name and
power of the most High, which uttered their voices as thunders, and laid their
swords on the neck of their enemies and never returned empty from the
slaughter. Though I be as by the waters of Babylon, in a strange land; and as a
Pilgrim and Stranger destitute, but not forsaken; as dying, but behold I live:
yet if I forget thee let my right hand forget her cunning, and let my name be
blotted out of the book of life. O how I love the holy seed which in my eye is
precious! no man can hinder my boasting of thee, for I am sealed among you in
the Record of eternal life, to be read among you in the light where I am known
to you, and where my unity stands with you in the love and life, which never
changes, and you are my mother and my brother and sister who does the will of
my Father. Our God is a consuming fire, and his habitation is compast about
with dread and terror. The Heathen shall see and fear, and the inhabitants of
the earth shall tremble; our God is everlasting burnings, and it is tempestuous
round about his throne, and he reigns for evermore; and though thou be
despised and set at naught and counted as the offscouring of all things, and
the scorn of the Heathen, yet thy King reigns upon Mount Sion, and if he utter
his voice all flesh shall tremble, and before him thy adversaries shall fall,
and thy persecutors shall be confounded, for thou shall never be forgotten of
thy God, but with his arm will he defend thee, and compass thee about, and thy
seed shall be increased, and thou Jerusalem shall be made the praise of the
whole earth, for among you is laid the sure foundation, and the tried stone,
Christ Jesus the light of the world, upon whom you have believed, which unto
the Nations is a stumbling stone; but unto you precious: bring in your
testimony, and set to your seal; is there salvation in any other, but in him
who is the light of the world? nay there is no redemption wrought but by him,
nor no deliverance but through him; his is the Kingdom, the Power and the
glory, and he is become all in all; and you are no more of this world, but are
of the chosen generation, and of the royal Priesthood, a people, Redeemed, unto
whom there is none like among the thousands of Israel and Judah, whose God is
the Lord, whose Savior is the Prince of Righteousness, who covers your heads
in the day of Battle; and smites your enemies in the hinder parts; and wounds
them in the forehead.

And now my beloved, let his name be had in remembrance for evermore, and let
his praises be declared throughout Ages to come, and walk you worthy of his
everlasting love, wherewith he has loved you more then your brethren; let his
name be exalted by righteousness, by purity, and by a blameless life, and bring
forth the fruits of righteousness and peace, and let yout light shine forth
into the world, and your good works abound plentifully, for you are as a City
set on a hill, and as a lighted candle to shine abroad; and are created unto
good works. Let faith, hope, love and unity be increased among you; and let
mercy and judgment and equity flow down and be established for ever; never to
be removed. Let joy, and long-suffering and meekness and temperance spring out;
and be you perfect as your heavenly father is perfect.

Stand upon your watch Tower and be not shaken nor dr^w (...) aside to follow
any other Gods, nor to bow to any (...) Image, nor join your selves to
strangers, and mingle not your seed with the adulterous generation, nor take
not nor give not in marriage with them; but keep your selves from the Idols of
the heathen, be not defiled with them; but abide in your strength, you know
where it lies, by which you may work good, and be preserved from evil; and you
need not that any man teach you, for you are taught of God, and are far from
oppression.

Ye children of light, worship your God for ever, who is light, and in him is
no darkness at all, who is the same and changes not, whose mercy endures for
ever. Be followers of the Lamb as undefiled Virgins, and let your soul scorn
the glory of Babylon and Egypt for ever; for you are not your own, but are
bought with a price, no more to serve your selves, but the Lord of Israel for
ever.

Put on your Armor, and gird on your Sword, and lay hold on the spear, and
march into the field, and prepare your selves to battle, for the Nations does
defy our God, and says in their heart, Who is the God of the Quakers, that we
should fear him, and obey his voice? Arise, arise, and sound forth the
everlasting word of war and judgment in the ears of all Nations; sound an
Alarm, and make their ears to tingle. Our Enemies are whole Nations, and
multitudes in number, of a rebellious people that will not come under our law,
which arises up against us, and will not have our King to reign, but tramples
his honor under foot, and despises his law and his statutes, and counts his
subjects as slaves and bondmen. Stand upon your feet, and appear in your
terror as an Army with banners, and let the nations know your power, and the
stroke of your hand: cut down on the right hand, and slay on the left, and let
not your eye pity, nor your hand spare, but wound the lofty, and under foot
the honorable of the Earth, and give unto the great Whore double, and give her
no rest day nor night, but as she has done, so let it be done unto her; and
give her double into her bosom: as she has loved blood, so give her blood,
and dash her children against the stones, and let none of the Heathen nations,
nor their Gods escape out of your hands, nor their images nor idols, but lay
waste the fenced Cities, and tread down the high Walls; for we have proclaimed
open War betwixt Michael our Prince, and the Dragon. Your Captains are mighty
men, and your leaders are skilled to handle the sword, and they are riding on
before you. Arise worm Jacob, and fear not, but thresh the mountains to dust;
for God has given thee the power of thy enemies to tread upon, and they shall
fly before thee, and shall fall by thy sword; there is none too strong for
thee, nor no enchantment against thee; but thou art blessed, blessed world
without end. Therefore all ye Lambs of my Father, and ye Camp of the Lords
Host, wait upon him to fulfill his Will, for he has put into your hearts to
make war in righteousness against the beast and the false Prophet; and cursed
be every one that rises not up to the help of the Lord against the mighty: the
Beast is mighty; and the false Prophet is great; and they keep the Nations
under their power. But O thou Beast, and thou false Prophet, you shall be
tormented together: thou Beast, upon which the false Prophet sits, whom thou
upholds by thy Law, and defends by thy unrighteous power, thy power is limited,
and it shall betaken from thee, and thou shall be overcome, and the Lamb shall
get the victory, and into the pit and lake of fire shall you be turned to have
your resting place.

And thou false Prophet which has deceived the Nations, and scattered the
inhabitants thereof, and builded by fraud, and daubed with untempered mortar;
thy Judgment is past upon thy head already, and the Decree of our God is sealed
against thee; thy smoke shall ascend for ever and ever; and of thy sin there is
no forgiveness, nor of thy torment no remission. Over you do we (and shall for
ever) rejoice and sing, and over your God and your King, the Dragon that old
Serpent; cursed be he, and his memorial for ever.

Ye Lambs of the true Shepherds fold, with whom my soul rests, whether ever
I behold you outwardly, yet my heart is with you, and I am one of your fold,
and I lie down with you under the shadow of the rock, upon the Mountain which
the beast cannot touch, where we are safe from all our enemies, and am to you
well known, to be read in your hearts, in the Record of the Lambs Book of Life,
and known only to the world by the name of

Edward Borough.
Written at Dublin City in Ireland.
To the Camp of the Lord in England.
TO all the seed of Abraham, who are Jews indeed, and Israelites in whom is no
guile; who are of the true circumcision, made without hands: Who are of the
offspring of David, and of the Church of the firstborn; who are the first
fruits unto God: Ye royal offspring of the Rock of Ages, who have come out of
the everlasting washing; My dear Brethren, called Quakers, who have eaten your
bread with fear and trembling, whom your Brethren has cast out, Oh how I love
you; my soul is knit unto you, my heart and life breaths after you; I am one
with you in suffering, and in joy; ye are the choicest of the Flock, ye are the
fairest of all the children which is brought forth, Oh my beloved ones, though
I be among the Tents of Kedar, as without, where the Voice of the Lord has
neither been heard nor known, it you I forget not, if I do, let the tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth, and let me never speak more in the Name of the
Lord, who is my life, and the portion of my cup for ever. Oh! what shall I say
unto you? none knows your beauty, nor innocence, nor glory, but them who are
redeemed out of Kindreds, and Nations, and Tongues, and People, and Countries,
who follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. For the name of my God and your God,
who is living and lives for evermore, is in your foreheads; you are his
offspring, and the fruit that came out of the Eternal Womb, begotten by the
Eternal Word of life which lives for ever; and are nourished at the eternal
Table, in the everlasting Mansion House of my Father which is in Heaven. None
so fair; none so beautiful; none so glorious, none so rich; you are crowned
with love for ever; you are clothed with righteousness for ever; you eat of the
Tree of life which heals the nations, and of the bread of life that nourishes
you up for ever; and drinks of the living Waters, which runs fresh, beautiful,
and cool, in it you are bathed and suppled, and made white; you are builded
upon a Rock, storms cannot move you, tempests cannot make you afraid; in this
you have been, and are like to be tried: Your Armor is righteousness on the
right hand, and on the left your City is free: The Gates stand open day and
night; and a Wolf, nor Lion, nor any beast can enter; no, not so much as a
flying-Fowle. Oh how goodly is thy Tents, O thou seed of Jacob. the Elect whom
he has chosen! O how pleasant is your situation! The Tower of David, Mount
Sion stands sure, and cannot be moved. Oh! who is a people like unto you, saved
by our God that lives for ever! His love is large; he is kind; he is
long-suffering; he is faithful and keeps covenant, and his Promises are Yea:
Yea: He is the Amen, the first and the last. Come forth my dear brethren, set
forth his praise, declare his name among the heathen; publish his name among
the Congregations; let the earth be filled with his love and power, that his
Judgments may be declared, and his Statutes, that they sound in the ears of
generations to come.

O ye that are convinced of the truth of our God, wait in that which does
convince, and keep your minds to it, and love it, and follow it whither it
leads you, and it will lead you to know the gift of God, which leads to
repentance from dead works to serve the living God, who dwells in the immortal
Light: and take heed of looking back at the pleasures of sin you have formerly
lived in, but wait upon the pure light of Christ Jesus in patience, that so you
may see the enmity which is against God, and it slain in you daily; that so you
may see him that is the Savior of the soul: and take heed of rebelling against
the Lord, who has given you a measure of his true light, to lead you from sin
if you love it unto righteousness, from whence it comes, even from the
righteous Judge of all the world; who judges every man out of the book of his
conscience: and so prize the everlasting love of God to your souls, that you
may see him who lives for ever.

And all Babes who are born again, who have suffered the pangs of death, and
know the indignation of the Lord against sin, and the terror of the Lord
against the man of sin; who have roared for the disquietness of your-hearts;
who have born the indignation of the Lord, and are come to the giving forth of
the Law, where there is thundering, and Earthquakes, and terror, and great
hail, and fire, and smoke, even such as was not since the beginning, in so much
that you could not hear his Voice and live, nor see his face and live.

Stand still in patience, and let it have its perfect work in you, and bear the
indignation, ye that are in it; if you endure the tribulation with patience,
hope you will see, and a time of refreshment will come: endure the cross that
the mortal, and earthly, and carnal may be judged, and the ground shaken and
taken away, and that you may see the living hope to stay your minds upon.

And ye who are enliuened, and does witness the Law of righteousness set up in
you, which is a Schoolmaster, and keeps in the fear, stand in it, and keep in
the fear low, in soberness and calmness; and then you will see your hearts
purified daily, and the cursed nature judged, which is out of its course, and
it bridled and subjected: and the Law which is pure, and holy and eternal,
which stands for ever in power and force against the transgressor, to judge all
Righteousness: and so wait that you may see the Lion tamed, and the wild
Heifer yoked, and the yoke of Christ born: and the wild colt tamed by him,
upon which never man sat before: then; and not till then is Hosanna sung.

And all wait in your measures, dear Babes, that the milk of the Word you may
see, and be nourished by it, and grow up as living branches about the Table of
the Lord.

And all you young men and Virgins, that know Virginity, keep your Virgin, you
in whom the Prince of this world is judged and cast out: and the righteous law
of God revealed and given forth, in which you stand and walk and has peace
from him who is the Lawgiver and Judge; who has saved you from your
iniquities, and blotted out your sins for his own Name sake: You who knows the
living Water and Spirit, of which you are born again, and witnesses the birth
which enters into the Kingdom of God, where no mortal or unclean beast can
come. Keep in the life and power of God, which limits all, and chains all
under, that the life of the Son of God may live and speak in you, and be bold:
In the dread of God stand, and that which leads into slavery keep out.

And now being made partakers of his everlasting love, walk worthy of his love,
and of the high calling whereunto you are called; who has created you in
Christ Jesus, unto holiness and righteousness for ever; that to the praise of
his grace which you are saved by, by which you have obtained the remission of
sins, and an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified: So wait in the
living Hope, and the living Faith, in which God is well pleased, in which you
ask and receive of him, and are accepted of our heavenly Father. And this Faith
ye know, which is a present power, and a shield against all temptations, and a
Helmet, and as a Fortress by which you are preserved, safe standing in it, and
putting it on in the day of trial.

My dear Brethren of the everlasting Kindred, and Heirs of the everlasting
Promise; wait all in patience, having received an earnest of the inheritance
that never fades away; to the end abide in the Fathers counsel, and at Wisdom's
gate. Ye know what I say I write not unto you because you know not the truth,
but because you know and are made free in your measures by him who is the Truth
and the Way; in which all our fathers, and you also have obtained a good
Report, even of all the household of Faith: and take heed of the glory of the
World, and look not at hardship; for verily all the suffering is nor worthy to
be compared to that glory which is revealed, and to be revealed unto all that
wait and abide in patience and faithfulness unto the end; but be ye as good
soldiers, endure hardship, that you may receive the end of your hope, and the
everlasting prize, and the purchased possession, and the Crown of glory, which
God will give unto you in his own day; which is coming on toward you, if you
continue in the hope, in the faith, and in the love unfeigned, which thinks no
ill: by which, and in which love we have Victory over the Grave, Sin and Death;
which he has freely shedabroad in our hearts, unto whom be everlasting Praise
for ever and ever: To him which was dead, and is alive, and lives for evermore,
the Mediator of the new Gouenant of life and peace, in which we have access
freely to the Throne of grace, and are accepted in him who is the condemnation
of all the World, who hate the light; but your life the light of the world; God
blessed for ever and ever.

And all you Fathers, and Elders, and honorable Women, who are not a few, whose
bones and sinews are filled with marrow and fatness, who wait at the Altar of
the Lord, and knows the Merey-seat, which has ouershadowed you; and the golden
Vessel in which is the hidden Manna, by which all the children of the Lord are
fed round the Table of the Lord, out of the everlasting treasure-house of my
Father.

Watch over the Flock of Christ Jesus in every place, and region and quarter
where the Lord has set you, and govern them in all wisdom and righteousness,
that the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ may be adorned. And take care of them
willingly, knowing this the Lord requires of you, and has called you unto; and
to nourish the plants, and the young ones, and the babes: and that every one
may know their place, and watch and instruct in all wisdom, and correct and
reprove in the name and power of our Lord Jesus, that no rebellious nor
sloathfull may grow up nor be harbored among you; but all in diligence may be
kept in the fear of the Lord in their places, that the Gospel of Christ Jesus
be not evil spoken of, nor the heathen blaspheme.

And therefore my dear brethren, be diligent in the work of the Lord, so much
the more as you see the day is approached: and the Harvest is great, and the
Vineyard of the Lord is great and large, and but few laborers: yea, the Lord
is enlarging his borders, and spreading forth his everlasting truth, and
stretching forth his eternal arm over the Nations, and opening the treasures of
Heaven, and bringing rain out of his Treasury, to water the earth that has
been parched and dry, and to make his plants to grow.

And so all wait, that you may see the power and presence of the Lord in all
your assemblies: and see that there be no strife, nor contention, nor
exaltation amongst you, but all in meekness, and quietness, and long-suffering,
and forbearance, even as the Lord has spared and forborne you: one submitting
unto another, even as you have heard and received when the word of the Lord
came first unto you: and he that will be the greatest shall be the least: but
all in meekness and lowliness of mind serve one another, in love even as you
have received: and the everlasting God of life and power be with you all, and
make you grow in the living power and virtue of God: to order all things in his
wisdom, as good Stewards of the manifold mercies of the Lord which you are made
partakers of; that he alone may be glorified throughout all the Churches of
Christ Jesus every where.

And to you my dear brethren and fellow laborers, unto whom the word of
Reconciliation is committed, and are in the work and Ministry of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and are made partakers of the everlasting Gospel of peace, which unto
you is given to declare. Lift up your voices, blow the Trumpet, sound an alarm
out of the holy mountain; proclaim the acceptable year, and the day of
vengeance of our God. Gird on your sword upon your loins, put on the tried
Armor; and follow him for ever who rides upon the white Horse, and is clothed
with the same, who makes war in righteousness: Ride on, ride on my beloved
brethren and fellow soldiers; make all plain before you: thresh on with the
new threshing instrument which has teeth beat the mountains to dust, and let
the breath of the Lord scatter it: make the heathen tremble, and the
uncircumcised fall by the sword: the Lord of hosts is with us, and goes before
us.

Spare none, neither Ox nor Ass; neither old nor young; kill; cut off; destroy;
bath your sword in the blood of Amaleck and all the Egyptians and Philistines,
and all the uncircumcised, and hew Agag to pieces: break the Rocks, cut down
the Cedars and strong Oaks, make the Devils subject; cast out the unclean
spirits; raise the dead: shut up in prison, bring out of prison: cast in your
nets, lanch into the deep, divide the fish, gather the good into vessels, cast
the bad away: bind the Tares in bundles, cast them into the fire: the Angel
with his sharp sickle is come, the Angel of the everlasting Covenant is come:
thrust in your sickles, reap the earth, the word of God is come, that divides,
let all flesh keep silence, divide the Word rightly, feed the Lambs and Babes,
fill the hungry, stop the Lions mouths: feed the fat and the strong with
plagues and judgments: declare his name, publish his eternal truth which shall
stand for ever.

Eternal life is come, glory to him for ever. Silence all disputers and
diviners for ever: trample upon all the chaff and dung, and mire for ever,
which all the wisdom of the World feeds upon, Greater is he that is in us, then
he that is in the World.

Oh my beloved ones! although I am the lowest and weakest among many of my
brethren, yet the eternal power of God is my shield for ever, the Lord of hosts
is with us. There is a Crown which none can take away, to all who have denied
all: yea, it is on your heads: the dread of God is with us: and truly dear
brethren, we cannot say that we fished and catched nothing, for many vessels
are sull: nor we have not traveled and labored and brought forth wind, as
the false Prophets do: for we have the seals of our Ministry, which shall be
witnesses for the Lord in generations to come. Not unto us O Lord, but to thy
name be glory for ever: who has done, and does all for us, and in us: who is
our strength, our glory, our Crown of rejoicing all the day long; for his
hidden treasure is brought forth and made manifest in earthen vessels: unto him
be eternal living praises for ever.

And so all dear brethren, members of the same body of Christ Jesus, by which
we are set free from sin in the liberty, life and power in which you are made
free, stand as witnesses for the Lamb, and for the holy Nation, for the royal
Seed of the true Israel of God, that it may be brought out of captivity, to
serve the Lord in the land of the living, and the eternal God of power and
life, of endless rich love and mercy, be with you all, and prosper his own work
in your hands, that he alone may be glorified: unto whom be eternal, insinite
praises, who is our life; our King, God blessed for ever and ever.

And to you all my dear brethren and sisters, who suffers in bonds, and
prisons, and dens, and holes, and suffers the Enemy to plow long surrows upon
your backs, in patience; and suffers stocking, whipping, buffetting, beating,
and cruel mocking and stripes, and chains, and fetters, whom the world is not
worthy of: even as they did unto our Master of whom we bear witness of, and
has the witness in our selves; even so do they unto us: But the servant is not
greater then his Lord, and therefore we that are baptized for the dead, and
stand in jeopardy of our lives often; we have a cloud of witnesses which
endured the same: and therefore the same baptism and the same cup must be drunk
by all that follow him. Well my dear brethren, your sufferings I know, and I
know he of whom you bear witdess, bears up your heads, who has called you
thereunto; above all that which is done unto you, as you stand in his will and
counsel; well as dear brethren and companions in the same tribulation, and
kingdom, and patience of the Saints, as witnesses of the same faith as they
were which are gone before you; you are made partakers of the same: it is made
manifest and revealed in you by the same God in which faith they had power, and
you have power, and endures as they did, and as he did, even the contradiction
of sinners.

Well our God is on our side, and takes our part, and therefore my own bowels
in patience endure, God will bring forth your righteousness as the Sun, and
your Enemies shall be ashamed: and I know, and you also know it is for the
advantage and the furtherance of the Gospel of Christ; and endure in patience
and long-suffering, and look not out; and the Lord in due time will enlarge
your border. And the eternal God of power be with you chosen ones, for the
Lords work you shall have your reward; Nay he is come, and his reward is with
him: I know you have it, and witness his power and his presence with you: so my
dear ones, in that which limits all, and chains all, and keeps under all
deceit, dwell and abide for ever in the living power which makes the strong man
bow down, and the Devils tremble, and the unclean spirits roar; and the power
you know, where is your life, that all the powers of death cannot reach; and
therefore does the potsheards of the earth strive in vain to set briars and
thorns in battle against him, in vain do they rage; for notwithstanding all
that, God has set and will set his own Son upon the holy hill of Sion, glory
unto him for ever; shout out for joy oh ye sufferers for him; who are set free
by him, and your freedom can none take away: for he is greater then all, even
him in whom ye have believed, standing in his power, wisdom and council, who is
near you, that none is able to pluck you out of his hand: for he has the keys
of David, who opens and none shuts, and binds and none can loose: even he who
rebukes the winds and seas, and they obey him, and causes a great calm: and
causes the waters to abate, nay to stand of a heap: and dries up the tongue of
the Egyptian Sea, that his ransomed ones may go over into the rest, and he that
has and does believe in him, is entered into the rest, where we all meet in one
in him who is the Judge of all the world; the light of the world; and our life;
who believe in his name; but the condemnation of all the world who walk in
unrighteousnes for ever and ever.

For with the pure and upright he dwells, and his throne is established in
righteousness for ever and ever: and unto our God who lives for ever shall all
the powers of the earth bow; to whom be glory and eternal praise of all his
redeemed ones for ever and ever.

F. H.

O All ye Sons of Sion, and ye daughters of the King, who is glorious within,
who have waited for the Bridegroom; Oh my beloved ones! you who have long
sitten in a solitary place, and have been as a silly Dove without a heart, and
has bin as a widow desolate, and as a par ched heath: you that has wandered up
and down in the long night of darkness and knew no rest, but were as one cast
off by all, and all that passed by you laughed at your sorrow: you have been as
a hissing and as a proverb to all, and as a mark to shoot at by all: your faces
have been as the tents of Kedar parched, and your skin withered for want of
refreshment, and as a dead tree that bears no fruit. Oh ye who have come
through great tribulation! and have suffered the loss of all; the spoiling of
all, even the greatest riches; the chiefest Jewels! who have lost all your
knowledge and wisdom and become fools for Christ's sake; and has parted with
all; and has suffered the indignation of the Lord to pass over all; and has
drunk of the cup of fury at the hand of the Lord: who have suffered hunger
famine pestilence and earthquakes; and the darkning of the Sun, and the Moon
lost her light; and the stars have fallen and the pillars of heaven hathbeen
shaken: the Earth has been removed out of its place as a cottage, and you have
cried out in the midst of all this, he has forgotten to be gracious, and his
mercy come to an end. The womb has been shut up, desolation and sorrow, loss
of children, and widowhood in a day came upon you.

Oh ye tossed, afflicted, and not comforted, that have been as Eunuchs, dry and
barren as in the drought of summer, that have been as Pelicanes and as Doves,
who have sorrowed for the loss of her Mate; and as one in sorrow for the loss
of her firstborn; who have been in bitterness, and none could comfort you: I
am one with you, your state I know, I love you eternally: yea, ye are my
brethren and Sisters for ever, sealed in my heart, and engrrveu to be read for
ever. I see you, I behold you, I kiss you, and embrace you with an holy kiss of
everlasting love, which overcomes death and hell; which love thinks no ill: ye
that are made partakers of this love, knows what I say: Ye that have waited for
him, and wait and suffer the spoiling of all; I am married unto you, I came
forth of the same womb, which is eternity free for ever: freeborn, not in
bondage, because the Prince of this world is judged and cast out, and the glory
of the Lord revealed.

Come forth ye sons and daughters of Jerusalem which is free from above: utter
forth your voice, sing aloud, the Bridegroom is come and is coming, and ye that
have suffered the spoiling of all, rejoice for evermore: lift up your Voices as
Trumpets. He is come, he is covered with righteousness as with a robe; his
countenance is as the morning, his eyes is brighter then the sun, his voice is
life eternal, salvation is round about him, he dwells in eternal life, life is
in his right hand, and joy is in his presence, and peace for evermore: he is a
tried stone, he is a rock which the righteous flies to, he hides his under his
wings, and covers them with his feathers. Beauty beauty, glory glory, eternity
eternity ness Almightiness, power, riches, honor, dignity and dominion,
strength, wisdom and goodness, fullness, satisfaction, eternal treasure, durable
riches, infiniteness is his Name for ever: unexpressible I am filled with his
love and power: he opens the windows of heaven, he rains his showers as silver
drops, and as fine Myrrh, as sweet odours; he nourishes the young, he carries
the Lambs in his arms of love: he drives gently them that are with young; he is
true and faithful for ever; he keeps covenant; he is long-suffering and kind,
who can declare his power? I am lost in the incomprehensible being of eternal
love.

Oh my dear ones, come up hither, fellow-Citizens of Jerusalem which is from
above, who is our Mother, which few know, but you who are written in the Lambs
book of life: sound forth his praise, trumpet forth his power, declare his Name
among the people, that it may sound into the ears of Generations to come this
is he we have waited for; this is he who has begotten us to himself to reign
with him the Lamb upon Mount Sion; as Kings, and Priests, and Judges of the
Prince of darkness, death and hell for ever; salvation, honor and glory be to
him for ever, eternal infinite Praises; Praises to him for ever, who was dead
and is alive, and lives for evermore; King of kings for ever; majesty glory and
power and eternal renown is in his right hand for ever: his redeemed ones lives
for ever; dwells follows lives in him for ever: no beast can touch the mountain
where he dwells but he dies for ever.

Come away my beloved ones, drink abundantly and be refreshed, and praise his
names for ever; eternally I am shed and spilt among you; never so as now never
to be separated out of the eternal oneness: sound forth his praise; declare his
word; let it go forth as thunder; let the Heathen bow, let the Princes of this
world fall, and the kings worship at his feet for ever; let the disputers
tongue cleave to the roof of his mouth for ever; let all flesh keep silence for
ever. Babylon is fallen, and become the habitation of Devils for ever; the
judge of all the world has confounded and cursed her language for ever: God is
risen and sits upon his Throne, eternal wisdom is come, and the Ancient of
days, all carnal shall be confounded: stop all mouths in the dust for ever.
Eternity shall speak and judge for ever: whom he binds is bound for ever, whom
he loses he loses for ever: whom he remits are remitted, the Devil is
chained, the grave gives up her dead, and the sea and hell, all is judged by
him that lives for ever.

O beloved ones, who are the children of my eternal father, who have eaten at
his Table, and drunken of the new wine in the Kingdom of God, who are
nourished and dandled upon ^he lap of everlasting love, who suck at the breasts
of everlasting consolation: your beauty is comely I am ravished I am filled,
Iam filled with love to you all, I am sick of love: your beauty has ravished
my heart: come sit down my dear Lambs together in the fold where no wolf can
come, and let us rejoice together, and sound forth his praise who has washed
us and cleansed us and covered us, and made us worthy to enter into the fold
the Bride-chamber, to eat with him of the bread of life for ever, at the
eternal Table of life; the Bridegroom is come friends, of him I know you
rejoice greatly because of his voice. And now my deer beloved ones, follow him
for evermore in the eternal light and life where we were bred, brought forth
and nourished, and are unknown to all the world; but me you know, and I know
you in one who is the condemnation of the world, and in him I meet you and
leave you in his arms I lie down with you in the bosom of eternal love, life,
peace, joy and rest for ever, where none can make us afraid

Bandon in Ireland, the 7th month, 1655. My name ye know, my voice ye know,
this is to all my beloved [brethren, who are redeemed from ye earth. Francis
Howgill.


