A SERMON PREACHED On the First of January, School. IN THE Parish Church of St.
Nicholas Cole-Abby. BEING A New-Years-Gift To the Society of Christians united
there, to Worship God in a more Solemn manner, after the way of the Church of
England.

By Robert Howson Lecturer there; Rector of Stanford-Deanly in the County of
Berks, and Chaplain to the truly Honorable, The Lady Dowager Seymore, Baroness
of Trowbridge.

LONDON, Printed by W. Downing in Bartholomew-Close, for the Author.

To the Stewards, Collectors, and the rest of the Members of the Society of St.
Nicholas Cole-Abby, in the City of London.
Dear Friends,
THE ensuing Sermon came to the Pulpit by your Desire, and by the same it comes
from the Press, with no Variation, and but with very little Addition.

Fine Cadencies of Speech, well clinched Periods, and harangues of Rhetoric,
were never my Talent; or if they had, I would have Napkin'd it in the Pulpit,
that the Faith of Christians, should not be thought to stand in Words of Man's
Wisdom, but in the Power of God: For which purpose, that most excellent Prelate
and Gospel Preacher, Archbishop Usher, laid aside all his Learning, in
Preaching the Gospel, as appears by his plain and practical Discourses yet
Extant. And (as I have heard) gave it always in charge to such, on whom he laid
Hands to Preach, to be sure to remember the Alleys, by suiting their Sermons to
the Capacities of their Hearers. A course that for Thirty Years past, I have
always found most conducing to the great end of Preaching, viz. Turning Men
from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power to God. And therefore shall
continue in it, till I am convinced that plain Preachers, and plain Hearers,
shall be as much decried in another World as they are in this.

Gentlemen, in this Respect your Lines are fallen in a pleasant place, you have a
goodly Heritage, even the Blessing of a learned, pious, practical, and savory
Ministry: May it be therefore a Savor of Life unto Life, unto every one of
you, and not of Death unto Death unto any, (for it will certainly be one or the
other) is, and ever shall be, the Prayer of

Your Affectionate Friend, And Faithful Servant In the Greatest Work, ROBERT
HOWSON.

John XIII. Ver. 34. A New Commandment I give unto you, That you Love one
another.


THere is nothing that does more conduce to the Good of Mankind, in general,
than being good to, and doing good one for another, in particular.

This engages the Affections, and excites the Endeavors of all: This
monopolizeth all the Strength and Powers of Men, not only for one another, but
also for the public Communities and Societies of which they are Members.

This answers the End of men's Being in this lower World, and glorifies that
Eternal Goodness, that is their Being in this Life, and will for ever be their
Blessedness in another.

On the contrary, There is nothing does more directly tend to destroy the Souls
and Bodies, the Liberties and Properties of Men, in particular, and the Good of
public Societies, in general, than Selfishness, Pride, and Covetousness: This
ham-strings all just Powers, weakens Authority, cuts all the Ligaments of the
Body Politic, makes every part loose and independent one upon another, like
Bones wier'd in an Anatomy: And therefore, our Blessed Savior foreseeing how
necessary this would be in all the Churches of God, to the End of the World,
injoins this great Catholic and Christian Duty, To Love one another; which He
calls, A New Commandment; that is, the Old Commandment that God gave by Moses,
( Levit. 19.18.) renewed under the Gospel Dispensation, for which he proposes
himself as an excellent Pattern, saying, As I have Loved you.

In speaking to which, I shall show, I. What it is to Love another. II. What are
the good Effects of Loving one another, in the Hearts and Lives of good Men.
III. How it makes Men easy in and to themselves, to the Government, and
Communion they are Members of in this World. And, IV. How it fits them for the
Communion and Blessed Society of the glorified Saints in Heaven.


By Loving one another, understand that Brotherly Love that the Apostle
commends, Heb. 13.1. which is such a Love as Brothers have, or ought to have,
one toward another in Nature, who have the same Father, and the same Mother,
from whom they derive their Natural Lives.

Brethren, we have all the same Father, which is God; and the same Mother,
which is our Church; and from them we derive our vital Principle of Spiritual
Life: And therefore, as they that are Born after the Flesh, do love one another
in a Natural manner; so we that are Born after the Spirit, should love one
another in a Spiritual manner: For Spirits have their Spiritual Actings and
Motions one toward another, as well as Bodies.

Where the Appearance is of God's Holiness in the Hearts and Lives of good Men,
it draws out a Spiritual Love to, and delight in them, one toward another. O
my Soul, thou have said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord: my Goodness extends
not unto thee; But to the Saints, and to the Excellent that are in the Earth,
in whom is all my delight, Psalm. 16.2, 3.

And as the appearance of Goodness, in good Men, draws them one to another in
holy Delight and Love; so the Light of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus,
draws them all to Christ: Because of the savor of thy good Ointments, thy Name
is poured forth: therefore do the Virgins love thee: Cant. 1.3. Draw me, and we
will run after thee. Therefore, says our Blessed Savior, No Man can come unto
me, except the Father draw him, and the Father draws (and never drives) by the
Cords of a Man, by the Bands of Love, Hosea 11.4. displaying the Riches of
Gospel Grace, viz. the height, and depth, the length, and breadth, of the Love
of God in Christ: Love in all dimensions, and all dimensions in their Abstract;
so that as many as look unto Jesus, till they love Him, and love Him so as to
obey Him, purely from a Principle of Divine Love implanted in them, by the
Ministration of the Gospel, shall be Saved by Him.

Now, as natural Motion is a sure sign of natural Life, so these spiritual
Motions of Holy Souls, to desire after and delight in good Men as such, are
infallible symptoms of Spiritual Life: For by this we know that we are passed
from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren, Joh. 1.3, 4. In which words,
by (the Brethren) I humbly conceive such, and all such, and none but such, as
have received the Faith of the Gospel, and did publicly profess, and piously
practice it, according as they had received from the Apostles, how they ought
to walk and to please God; and so were Disciples of the Crucified Jesus,
abstractedly considered, without any relation to their being of Paul, or
Apollo, or Cephas, according as some did most uncharitably and factiously
discriminate themselves, 1 Cor. 3.4. which Love to the Brethren, as such was
then, is now, and for ever will be an infallible sign of passing from Death to
Life.

Now, may the God of Life and Love, which brought again our Lord Jesus Christ
from the Dead, (out of his boundless Love to his Church) persuade us all in
this divided Age, to be like-minded one toward another, and toward all that
fear God, and work Righteousness, of what Opinion soever we are, in lesser
Points of Christianity: But while one judges, another despieth; while one
says and swaggereth, I am of Apollo, another I am of Paul, another I am of
Cephas, we are all carnal, and talk and walk as Men; For the Kingdom of God is
not in these things, but in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost, To. 14.17. And the same Apostle tells us, as plainly as words can speak,
That Circumcision is nothing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature: And that
as many as walk according to that Rule, viz. that do not make Christianity to
be in one or the other, but in the Change and turn of the whole man to God,
which (as that Holy Man of God, Archbishop Usher, has long since told us) is
the new Creature: Peace shall be to them, even that Peace (which our Church
teaches us to pray for in one of her excellent Collects) which the World
cannot give, even the Peace of God, which passes all Understanding.

Moreover, this vital Principle of Spiritual life and love, is that only, that
makes us Christians indeed; For if any Man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his, To. 8.9.

This does not only incline the Soul to God, and to good Men, who bear the
Reflections of his Holy Nature, but likewise to the sincere Obedience of his
Will and Law; invigorating all the Powers and Faculties of their Minds, in all
their Operations and Motions; inlightning their Understandings, by turning them
from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power to God; delightfully inclining
their Wills to Goodness; turning their natural enmity into love; fulfilling
that Prophetical Gospel-Promise, To make his People a willing People in the Day
of his Power, Psalm. 110.3. and according as our Savior in his most Heavenly
form has taught us to Pray, Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven,
even with that Readiness and Alacrity, that Delight and Complacency, that the
Angels and glorified Saints do it with in Heaven, and as He did it when he was
in the World, Whose Meat and Drink it was to do the Will of him that sent him.

This divine Principle brings the Soul into a divine frame, and Gospel Temper,
making it to be in some good measure of that Heavenly Spirit that our Blessed
Redeemer was of when he was upon Earth. And therefore he tells his Disciples,
Ye are not of the World, but I have taken you out of the World: If you were of
the World, the World would love its own; but because you are not of the World,
therefore the World hates you, Joh. 15.19. Ye are not of the Temper and Spirit
of the World: The first Man is of the Earth, earthy, and speaks of the Earth;
but the second Man is the Lord from Heaven, heavenly, and as is the Heavenly,
such are they also that are Heavenly; their Conversations are in Heaven, and
their Hearts are where their Treasures are; they look and live above.
Invisibles are to them the greatest Realities; they antedate the Joys of
Heaven: Faith is (to them) the Substance of things hoped for, the Evidence of
things not seen, Heb. 11.1. They persevere, as having a respect to the
recompense of the Reward, and as seeing him that is Invisible, whom having not
seen (as the Apostle says) with their bodily eyes, yet believing on him, are
filled with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

This makes Men easy to themselves, in bringing forth the fruits of the Spirit,
which are Meekness and Temperance, Love, and Joy, and Peace, Long Suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, and Faith; against such there is no Law, Gal. 5.22.
having by the power of the divine Spirit overcome the corruptions of their
Nature, which made them mighty uneasy to themselves; but now, where the Spirit
of divine Life and Love dwells, there are these divine and blessed Fruits,
which make Men easy in, and to themselves, by giving them the Victory over all
their turbulent and disquieting Passions, setting up the Intellectual and
Rational power in its due place, reducing the Man to himself, and unto God,
which is a mighty point when obtained. Fortior est qui se, quam qui tutissima
vincit
Moenia. --
which, to Translate the Poet by the Prophet, is, He that overcomes his own
Spirit, is as he that takes a City.

So much have our Corruptions and Passions got the ascendant of our Reasons, in
this our lapsed State, that the Prophet calls such the Beast of the People: And
it is not improbable that they were such Beasts with whom St. Paul fought at
Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15. which he in another place, calls unreasonable Men.

Finally, Brethren, pray for us, that we may be delivered from unreasonable and
wicked Men, 2 These. 3.1, 2. where unreasonable and wicked Men are put together,
because all Wickedness is unreasonable, it is the very extremity of Madness and
Folly.

And this does not only make Men easy to themselves, but to all others: How
easily are such Men Governed by the Laws of Civil Government, (which are all
grounded upon Reason) who make their own Reason to govern themselves? To them
(as the Apostle calls the moral Law) the Law may be as a Schoolmaster to
instruct, and now and then to correct some mistakes that must be allowed for
the Frailty of human Nature, but it can never be a Judge to Condemn them; for,
as where there is no Law, there is no Transgression; so where there is no
Transgression, there can be no Punishment: There is therefore, says St. Paul,
No Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit; for the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus has
made me free from the Law of Sin and Death.

This Spirit of holy Life and Love, makes all good Men, fit for all humane
Conversation in this World.

All the Commotions and Troubles, not only within our Selves, but within our
Houses, our Towns and Cities, our Kingdom and our Church, proceed from our
unsubdu'd Corruptions, our Pride and Covetousness, our Revenge and Malice, and
the like. From whence come Warrings and Fightings among you? Come they not from
hence, even from your Lusts, that War in your Members? For ye Lust, and have
not; ye Kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain, Jam. 4.1, 2. As much as if
St. James had said, By these rampant and reigning Lusts of yours, you make all
the mischief in the World, and when you have done all, you get nothing by it.

And then, how fit these good Men are for all humane Societies and Government,
who have, by the power of divine Grace, mortified these Lusts of their Members,
which make all the Troubles and Confusions in the lower World, you may easily
Judge: And therefore, let Brotherly love continue among us, (my Dear Friends)
that we may be what we are all Born for, viz. a Blessing to our selves, and to
the best of Governments we live under, and the best of Churches we are Members
of.

This is the very Spirit and Life of Christian Religion, which as St. James
says, chap. 3. ver. 15. Is not earthly, sensual, and devilish, but the
contrary, divine, heavenly, and spiritual, coming from above: A Religion, or
Wisdom, which is all one, (for Religion is the highest Wisdom) that has
infinite Love for its Author and End, that gives Spiritual Laws to govern the
Hearts and Spirits of Men. Men's Words and Actions fall under the Cognizance of
human Laws, these are things, as Job says, To be tried by the Judge; but the
thoughts, and imaginations of the Heart, fall under the cognizance of the
Spiritual Law of the God of Spirits, who will Judge the secrets of all Men
according to his Gospel.

A Religion that exalts and perfects Man's Nature, that gives him true
Understanding, Power and Goodness; and that, as Sin has rased out and defaced
the Image of God, impressed upon his Divinely created Soul, this reprints it
there, and restores him again in some good measure to his pure and Paradisiacal
State; According as his divine Power has given unto us all things that pertain
unto Life and Godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us to
Glory and Virtue; whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
Promises, that by these you might be partakers of the divine Nature, having
escaped the Corruption that is in the World through Lust, 2 Pet. chap. 1. verse.
3, 4.

This is the fulfilling of the whole Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Might. This is the first
and great Commandment, and the second is like unto it, Thou shall Love thy
Neighbor as thy self. On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the
Prophets, Mat. 22.37, 38, 39, 40. Love works all Obedience to God, and
sincere Obedience is the greatest demonstration of our Love to him: If you love
me, keep my Commandments.

He that loves God with all his Heart, will never own another God besides him;
much less will he make to himself any graven Image, or the likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven or Earth; For, whereunto will you liken me says the
Lord?

He that loves God truly, will worship him in Truth and Spirit; for he is an
infinite, glorious, and incomprehensible Spirit; and therefore he will be
Worshipped in Spirit and Truth, Joh. 4.24. All Worship that is not Spiritual, of
what Mode or Scheme soever it is, is no more than the cuting off a Dog's Neck,
or the offering of Swines Blood: nay, though it be such as God himself has
commanded, as to the matter of it: To what purpose is the multitude of your
Sacrifices to me, says the Lord: I am full of the Burnt Offerings of Rams, and
the fat of fed Beasts, and I delight not in the blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs,
or of He-Goats, etc. When you come to appear before me, who has required this
at your hand to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an
abomination unto me, the New Mons and Sabbaths, (though I have bid you
remember to keep them Holy) are abomination to me, the calling of the
Assemblies, I cannot away with, it is Iniquity, even the solemn Meeting. The
New Moons, and your appointed Feasts, my Soul hates; (speaking after the
manner of Men) they are a Trouble to me, I am weary to bear them, Isai. 1.11,
12, 13, 14.

He that worships God truly, thinks it highly reasonable to give Him a Worship
suitable to his own blessed Nature; not only as to the matter, but also as to
the manner of his Worship: And therefore he strives, and wrastles; he fights,
and runs; he is Fervent in Siprit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.11.

He that loves God truly, will never lightly use or Profane his Great Name,
neither any of his Divine Attributes, which are himself, nor his Word or Works.

He that loves God truly, will honor every thing that has any relation to,
or bears any reflection of his Holiness, especially his Holy Day, which
because of the extraordinary Holiness that God has impressed upon it, is
Prefac'd with a Remember; Remember to keep Holy the Sabbath Day; not only in
the external performance of external Worship, but in secret Prayer, Meditation,
Self-Examination, Holy Conferences, and Spiritual Anhelations, in which, the
Souls of good Men have a most Heavenly Communion, and Fellowship with God the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: That which we have seen and heard
declare we unto you, that you also may have Fellowship with us: And truly our
Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. The moral part of
this Precept is, to keep one Day in seven in this Heavenly Work; and where this
is done, it kindles such a sacred fire upon the Altar of the Heart, that burns
from Sabbath to Sabbath, which was lively typified by the Fire upon the Altar,
under the Jewish Economy, and is always attended with all the Blessings of
this Life: If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy Pleasure
on my Holy Day, and call the Sabbath a Delight, the Holy of the Lord,
Honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own Ways, nor finding thine
own Pleasure, nor speaking thine own Words: Then shall thou delight thy self in
the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the Earth, and
feed thee with the Heritage of Jacob thy Father, Isa. 58.13, 14. The Glory of
our Law, and of his Day too, Sir Matthew Hales tells us, in his Meditations,
That when he had been careful in the Work of this day, he did observe that all
his Business the Week following did well succeed; but when he had made a fault
in this, he soon found it in that.

He that loves his Neighbor, cannot but love his Father and Mother, in the
first place, and give unto all Men, especially to the King, and all that be in
Authority, that Duty and Obedience, that is due to them in their several places
and relations; giving Honor, to whom Honor; Fear, to whom Fear is due.

He that loves his Neighbor as himself, can never have or harbor any Malice
or Hatred in his heart against him; much less will he defile his Bed, or
defraud him in his Estate, or go beyond him in any matter.

And he that loves God with all his Heart, and his Neighbor as himself, does
good to himself too; for all Goodness and Virtue reflects it self upon him that
has it; like an Echo, bringing back the Voice to the ear of him that spoke it.
Every good Work that a good Man does gives him that inward Comfort of Mind that
the World knows nothing of, and strangers do not meddle with, whereby he
receives much more good than he does: In keeping of thy Commandments there is
great reward, Psalm. 19.11. Were there no such thing as a Heaven, to reward good
Men; or a Hell, to punish bad, it were still worth while to live well, and to
do good, to have the present comfort of it in this World; for, all the ways of
Wisdom are Peace, and her Paths are Pleasantness, which all good Men do
experience, better than they can express it. No Man can tell, so well as he can
taste, how sweet Honey is; therefore, says the Psalmist, Thy Commandments are
sweeter to me than the Honey, and the Honey Comb, Psalm. 19.10. Come, taste, and
see how good the Lord is: Truth leaves a Spiritual gust upon the Understanding,
which does mightily influence and incline the Will to every thing that is good;
and as Truth is the Object of the one, so Goodness is the Object of the other,
both which do most directly conduce to the Comfort and Happiness of a rational
Being in this World, as well as in that which is to come.

Hereby the Love of God is manifested to, and perfected in this good Man. Whosoever
keeps my Word, in him is the Love of God perfected; that is, he surely loves
God, and is loved of God. Hereby we know that we are in God; For God is Love,
and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. Hereby we dwell
in light: He that dwells in Love, dwells in light, 1 John 2.5, 10. He
dwells in the light of God's Favor; And in his Favor is Life, Psalm. 30. And
in another place it is said, That his Favor is better than Life, and infinitely
better than all the Blessings of the lower World. There be many that say, Who
will show us any good? Lord, lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance upon us.
Thou have put Gladness in my Heart, more than in the time when their Corn and
their Wine increased, Psalm. 4.6, 7.

This only fits the Soul for the heavenly Light: Epaphras declaring the Love of
the Spirit which was in the Church of Coloss, Col. 1.7, 8. Blessed be God,
(says St. Paul) who has made us meet to he partakers of the inheritance of
the Saints in Light, ver. 12. Where the Soul is joined to the Church of the
first born, to an in ^^^rable company of Angels, to the general Assembly of the
Saints, to the Souls of Just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator: All
which are joining in their uncessant and uninterrupted Songs of Praise, Singing
Hallelujah, Hallelujah, Hallelujah, to God, and to the Lamb that sits upon the
Throne, and are filled with all the fullness of God, and do for ever admire
those Treasures of Light that are beyond them.

And as it fits the Soul for the Heavenly World, so it fills it with Bowels of
Love and Pity to our poor Brethren; for if this be not in us, the Love of God
is not in us: If any Man say he loves God and hates his Brother, he is a
Liar: For he that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, How can he love
God, whom he has not seen? And this Commandment have we from him, that he who
loves God, love his Brother also, 1. Joh. 4.21, 22.

How kindly does our Blessed Savior take what is done to his poor Members,
Matthew. 25.34. Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you, from the Foundation of the World: For I was Hungry, and you gave me Meat;
I was Thirsty, and you gave me Drink, etc. Then shall the Righteous say, Lord,
when saw we thee Hungry, and fed thee; Thirsty, and gave thee Drink, etc. Then
shall the King say unto them, Verily I say unto you, in as much as you have
done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, you have done it unto me.
And therefore, let me beseech you, my Brethren, to give to Him in his Members,
who gave Himself for you, not his Name only, nor his Body, but his Soul too,
for that was made An Offering for Sin, Isa. 53.10. Which was the greatest Gift
that God could give, or the World could receive, and who is now Praying for you
at the Right hand of his Father, to give you a Crown, a Kingdom, and a weight
of Glory.

And if we act like Men, possessed by true Charity, suiting with the Spirit of
Christianity, our Hearts and Hands must be always open to our poor Brothers
Necessities; our Souls must take pleasure in doing Good, and being Kind: And if
we are not able to redress their Grievances, or relieve their Wants, by our
Wealth, or Interest, we must ease them by our Compassion, comfort them by Holy
Advice and Example, and succor them by our Prayers.

These are the Treasures which good Men lay up in Heaven, Where neither Moths
nor Rust does Corrupt, nor Thieves break through, nor Steal; For this purpose,
says our Savior, you have the Poor always with you, and whatsoever you will
you may do unto them, and in so doing, you will well and truly observe those
Feasts of Charity St. Jude speaks of, ver. 12.

Finally, Brethren, be all of one Mind, having Compassion one of another: Love
as Brethren, be Pitiful, be Courteous, be of good Comfort, live in Peace; And
the God of Love and Peace shall be with you all. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
WHereas there was lately Published an Erroneous Book, by one Zachary Housell,
who being Christianly taken notice of, and presented by the Grand Jury of
Middlesex, as an Author of a most detestable Doctrine: And whereas the Author
of this Sermon has been most maliciously reported by many, and may possibly be
believed by some, to be the same.

The Author hereof, to cashier the said malicious and scandalous Report, does
hereby declare, That he is not the same Man, neither did he ever believe any
such Doctrine as is therein maintained, nor any other, either different from,
or contrary to, The Articles of the Church of England, as by Law Established:
Which said Articles, the Author does Weekly Explain to his Society, to keep
them steady in this giddy Age.


