THE Commonwealth's REMEMBRANCER FOR DISCOVERY OF THE Disturbers of her Peace.

WITH A loving Reproof to such Offenders. AND A Caveat to others to beware of
them.

By a Friend to Peace, with Truth, and true Liberty, R. H.

LONDON Printed for G. Calvert, and are to be sold at the Black-spread-Eagle,
near the West end of Paul's, 1659.

The Commonwealth's Remembrancer, for discovery of the Disturbers of her PEACE.
FRiends and People, you have diverse years been under the Rod, chastised by the
Almighty for amendment, and many of you seen his Great and Mavelous Works
done amongst you, even in the view of some that remain as Brands plucked out of
the Fire, and have need of Monitors to remember them of their Leader therein,
and there-thorow, least matters of less moment cause him to slip out of their
minds.

But I am here chiefly (by way of Queries) to put you in remembrance how to
consider of, and find out the Enemies of your Peace, Rights, and true
Liberties, with their End^ therein, (as manifested by their Actions) yet only
so, as if it concerned some other persons, (and not your selves) least you
should be misguided thereby, and not rightly discern between persons and things
that differ, nor the Designs of such as lie in wait to deceive; wherein all
plainness is (in love and a public way) used for their Reproof, Repentance,
and Amendment, and your Care and Caution to prevent the like for the future,
when truly sensible of what is but in part past; and herein also take heed of
being hasty to censure, least you miss of the Authors meaning, and the benefit
hereby intended you, and take offense before you know by whom the offense
comes, and what that is in you that is so offended; for Offenses do come, and
the Woe is to them by whom they come, not to him that in love mentions them for
amendment and, caution to others therein concerned.

Are not such to be considered who spend a great part of the yearly increase of
your Lands, Stock and Labors, (in riotous living) as they can contrive to get
it from you, either by force or fraud, to uphold themselves in Authority over
your Souls, Bodies and Estates, so as not to suffer you to come or go, buy or
sell, dwell or abide in Peace, unless you give them what they ask, fall own and
worship before them, and (at their pleasures) bea^, (...)e forth of your
Meetings, stone, impris^^, (...) otherwise abuse persons that (for conscience
sake toward God) (...) (...) (...), but declare against them as evil doers,
the great Enemies of Peace, Christ's Righteousness, and your Souls, former^y
called P^^sons, V^c(...)s, ^urates, Priests, Clarks, etc. (...) themselves
Ministers, or Presbyters; but how like Ministers ((...), servants) diverse of
them have behaved themselves (toward God or man) in former times, Histories
show; and in ^atter times, your own Memories (even woeful experience) may be to
you a true Testimony; Assuming to themselves the sa^d Title of Presbyter, with
Authority to (...) and ordain others by laying their fleshly hands upon such
other persons heads; and saying some invented forms or Words over them, all by
a carnal Commandment at (...) Head of their Church cut off, the Root extirpate^
because bad and bitter? and are the Branches sweet, and the Fruit good Food for
nourishment? Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Now let all such as
feel themselves truly touched and pinched by that of God in their consciences,
(...) in their minds, and wait diligently on him that the^e smites them and
shows them their deeds of what sort they a^e, and would cleanse them from all
unrighteousness; but if such harden their hearts, and endeavor to excuse
themselves by accusing others, then own Rod vv^ll be their ruin.

The ensuing Queries (I suppose) concern not all alike, but some more, some
less; some in many, and some but in few of the ensuing particulars, and so to
be remembered and soberly considered, the Great Contrivances having always been
by a few leading Priests, and then afterward carried on by a more general
Consent, Concurrance and Activity of others, with some contradict^on amongst
themselves, and that being p^st, soon (like Herod and Pilate) they became
friends to p(...)e ^^e the Righteous Seed and Son of God in his innocent and
beloved Lambs, their main business being to supp^ess the Power of godliness,
and every thing of conscience contrary to their humane Inventions and
Constitutions, thereby to keep you in darksome ignorance, and a superstitious,
awful reverence of persons, places and things, ever to take advantage against
you, and put Chains and Fetters upon those that have the true zeal of God in
some things above others, striving by all means to break that zeal, and bring
under that Spirit in the Lords Servants (what ever it cost them) least they
should (by that) be discovered and made manifest, and therefore ever seeking to
keep under and out of Authority all such persons and men of sober, serious, and
public spirits, strict lives and manners, and to get preferred into Authority
others of servile spirits, that have a mixture of ambition and vain glory, with
other Vices fit to serve and support them and their Authority over men of
tender consciences, and cause the faithful upright, and just, to be derided,
scorned, abused and vilified, as in former and latter times is most manifest to
all persons whose minds are not dark, troubled, and blinded by their deceivable
inventions.

1. Whether the said men are taught by, and come to you in the Wisdom, Will,
Power and Authority of God, or of man? And what Rule have they to walk by, save
only Interpretations, Inventions, Meanings, and Conclusions, raised and
composed (by themselves and others) as out of, and from the Scriptures, to
justify their Doctrines, Precepts, Practices, and Conversations? And do they
agree with the Servants of Christ, or one with another, (all speaking the same
things?) Or are they not therein contrary, and one contrary to another, and
different, according to the times, occasions, and respective Governments, one
while praying, preaching, and contending for a Religion, Way or T^in^, and at
other times, otherwise, or against the same, frequently intermedling with
Affairs of Civil Government, and other men's private Concernments and
Conditions, thereby occasioning strife and debate amongst you.

Who, or what was it that confounded your understandings, disquieted your
minds, and exasperated your spirits (so exceedingly) one against another in the
beginning and continuance of these late Wars and Troubles, (the sad effects
whereof you yet in part feel) as to begin with those sports and pastimes
whereof they had Books, which they generally read and published in their
Meeting Houses, (called Churches) about the latter part of King James's his
Reign, for Encouragement of Minstrels, Dancings, Revellings, May-Games,
Stage Plays, Morris-Dancers, and such like Exercises to be frequently performed
on the first Days of the Week, (called Sabbath Days) to the high dishonor of
God, (whom they those days also would seem especially to Worship and serve) and
grief of the persons then scornfully called Puritans, and others the sober
minded amongst you, which then were by that means cruelly mocked, contemned,
scorned, despitefully used and abused, because they ran not with others into
the same excess of riot; and (those of you that remembers these things)
consider who the profane, the then irreligious and vicious persons did applaud
and rejoice in, for publishing, encouraging, and joining with the said
Exercises they then called lawful sports and pastimes.

2. From whence, and by whose Ordination, Concurrence and Agreement (in the
late Kings reign) were the then Altars? and by whose Practice, Example, and
Commands, the frequent bowings thereto, and at such distinct distances and
differnt manners, with other the Inventions and Actions then and there
performed with so great zeal for their new high places, Rails, Garments, and
other Innovations? And who were they that in those performances, and in
visiting Crosses, Wells, and other places, in Preambulations, singing the
Letany, etc. were adorned with Canonical Coats, Girdles, Surplices, Rockets,
Tippits, Hoods, and the like, besides the great reverence said to be due to
their persons, Office and Ministry, which (their Followers) were directed to
manifest by distinct Bowings, standings up, and kneelings down before them,
when, and as they pleased to teach, order, and command to be performed in their
Meeting Houses and elsewhere?

4. Who were they that (as the aforesaid services were increased) flockt to
London, Westminster, and Lambeth, to have their Wages also increased to ten
Groats* or at least eight Groats out of each pound of every man's Lands, Stock,
and Labors, and a part of poor servants Wages, not then esteeming Tithes,
G^ebe-Land, and other their Offerings, Incombs, and several plurallities, a
competent or sufficient maintenance; but they (being over hasty therein, and
the time not judged seasonable) failed in that particular, and then what
frequent Counsels and Consultations held those men in the several Count^es and
corners of the Land (under color of Lectures, Em^er-Week-^asts, and otherwise)
to consider of, consult, and find out s^nse other way for Augmentation to their
Authority and Maintenance?

4. Who were they that began and continued such, and so many vexations Suits in
Law with their Patrons, Parishioners, and others, wherewith the Courts at
Westminster, the Great Assizes in Counties, and other Inferior Courts were even
pestered (as Records may manifest) besides their frequent Suits and Summons
before, and in the then Bishope Courts, sometimes for small Tithes, working
upon some Popish Holy Days, (though but in repairing a Fence to save Corn, and
preserve peace amongst Neighbors) for not g^ving them timely notice when
Tithes were to be set forth to them; for going from some of them to hear in
other Parishes; for Meetings (by them called Conventicles) or for not allowing
Servants to join in the before mentioned sports and pastimes, and often times
obtaining Excommunications therefore, and speedily turning them into Writs, and
thereby causing men's bodies to be attached and imprisoned, whereby many
conscientious persons were (in a manner necessitated to leave their dwellings,
and this Land, to seek peaceable Habitations elsewhere, which diverse of the
said active persons made use of as an encouragement to their then design, some
boasting thereof, and that they hoped to have another Authority before it were
long, wherein their labors have not been lacking, neither at their then High
Commission Court, nor other places, as has notably appeared to all that have
been willing to see it.

Who served, assisted, and encouraged the late Bishops in making the Cannons,
Liturgy, and Service Book, (little differing from the Mass Book) to be imposed
upon Scotland, and preached against the Scots, (when that Book was refused by
them, endeavoring to make them, their Religion and practice seem odious, and
their own (new-invented) Altar Worships, forms and bown^, acceptable services
to God, thereby then obtaining a Declaration against the Scots, whereby (with
great zeal) they proclaimed them Rebels; and after that a Form of Prayer
against them, which diverse of the said men as zealously read and seemed to pray
in their said Meeting Houses. And who (after that) preached up an Army of
Londoners and others, to enforce the said Book upou the Scots; and for the
maintenance of those Forces, did the like to have Ship-Mony paid by you; as
also concerning Grants to Pattentees, and pleading for such and other
Monopolies and Arbitrary Inventions, all oppressive to tender consciences?
Besides the many Articles (the Bishops and they) then set forth, so numerous
and contradictory that they could not be performed by the Churchwardens (so
called) whom they caused (or rather forced) to swear to present men by; nor
could others find how to escape the Snares thereby laid for them.

6. Who, or what sort of men continued the Convocation-House ut Westminster
about the year 1640. (after the then Parliament was dissolved) by a Commission
obtained of the then King, (under the Name or Title of a Synod) and thereat
made new Constitutions, Canons, etc. Armed with Censures, Deprivations, and
Excommunications, whereat was the then new Oath made for establishing their
usurpations, and to justify their Altar-Worships, Inventions and Innovations?
And who of them there imposed that great Tax upon themselves in general, and on
diverse others, for the raising of more Forces (as an Additional-army) to go
against the Scots, and procured diverse of their Creatures to go, and send forth
men Horses and Arms, to carry on that their Design, all contrary to Law, and
your Rights and Liberries, and (for the raising of those differences) so far
prevailed, as to obtain the discountenancing and putting out of favor, trust
and office in the Commonwealth, diverse of the most conscientious, sober,
discreet, and fit persons for those services, and thereupon procuring others
(that they knew would comply with them) to be settled in such Offices and
Employments, thereby uniting a sort of the Nobility and Gentry to themselves,
as also the generality of the profane, ignorant and negligent professors; but
these then called Puritans they found themselves unable to seduce. Have I need
to remember you, or ask you concerning the charge of those Forces, what, or how
many hundred thousand pounds was paid the said Scots afterward, or who paid
it; or of those other Matters of dangerous consequence, (by the said
Convocation or Synod contrived) whereof all other sorts of persons (besides
themselves) have sufficiently tasted? Or how they so continued acting until the
next Parliament called them to account, and punished some few of them, but the
generallity escaped, and ever since have stood in the way of, and endeavored
to prevent all just proceedings tending to your Rights and Liberties? Was not
your fire hereby kindled, unto which the Authors have ever since been adding
Fuel of one kind or other, to this very day? Were they not of this sort of men
that made Libels against the Parliament in the year 1642. imputing it as a
crime that the King was not then believed, and those with him trusted, several
ways charging them, and provoking the people to disobey that Authority,
supposing to carry on their design by interrupting and preventing the
Parliaments proceedings in order to your Rights and Liberties.

7. Who were they that seeing they could not be advanced by means of the
Bishops, preached against, railed on, and earnestly endeavored to have them
suppressed, (whom but little before they prayed for, as their Right Reverend
Fathers) saying, The Bishops did them wrong by taking upon them as they did;
that as Presbyters they (the said men) ought to have been authorized and called
for to join in the choice and ordination of Ministers? Did it not thereupon
generally ring in their Sermons, That Presbytery is the true Clergy, and the
Church of Scotland a true Church; then contending for the Scots and Scottish
Religion (which but a little before they cried outagainst, and also proclaimed
the Scots Rebels, and prayed against them) because that then seemed their
hopeful way of rising into the like Authority as the Bishops had, each to be at
least a Master, Bishop, or Presbyter in his Parish, and the chief men there,
his Lay Elders; and yet herein they did not then very well agree amongst
themselves.

8. What sort of men, and who were they that divided themselves (as nncertain
whether by the help of Rome or Scoeland, might be their readiest way of rising
into Authority and Estates) into several Parties, and by Writing, Praying,
Preaching, and pressing Arguments, persuading you to go forth from your
dwellings, some to fight ^or the King, some for the Parliament, others taking
all advantages in their Parish-Meetings, and elsewhere, to stir up discontents
and enmity in your spirits one against another, thereby hasting you into a
bloody and desperate War one party against another? And what was this for, but
the obtaining of their ends by the first Way of Rome, or the other of Scotland?
Either of which (it seemed) would have served their turns to maintain them
(their Wives and Children in ease, pride and idleness) with Authority to punish
all such as should presume to contradict them, or deny what they would have by
way of tithes or otherwise, or impose any public Charges on them: Thus
prevailing with you to enlist your selves into two great Bodies or Armies one
against another, and by several inventions and execrations against those that
were afraid or unfree to go forth in Arms to shed the blood of their
Neighbors, Brethren, Fathers, etc. one party of the said men crying, Come
forth, fight for God and your King, the Lords anointed, and the Protestant
Religion; come forth willingly, you fear not God unless you serve and honor
your King. The fearful shall have their portion in the Lake, etc. (said another
party.) Come forth, fight for Christ, your Religion, Laws, and Liberties, etc.
And a third party so on both sides by Preaching, Praying and Writing, as they
stood affected, and as either Army came near their beings: I say, Was not this
the means used? And who were those men that then took this way to beget and
increase your enmity and hatred one against another, so between nearest
Relations as is scarce to be found or named amongst sober men, (such as some
call Heathens, that have but natural affections) to the end that through these
storms they might find out an easy way to their desired Haven, wherein to
sport themselves, and rant it over other persons souls, bodies, and estates,
and this all under color and vizard of Religion, duty to God, and your good;
so must the King (by some of these men) be persuaded to take Oaths and
Protestations, and set forth Declarations that all he did was for the
Protestant Religion and your Liberties, thereby to strengthen his Party, and
persuade you to believe it; and also persuaded him to seem to comply in several
Treaties with the Parliament, even to the very last at the Isle of Wight, etc.
Shall I need to ask, or remember you how active some of these men were in
plundering on each side, and encouraging Officers and Soldiers thereto, under
pretense of weakening that party they set themselves against? Or of the
Contrivances, Means and Friends, many of them made use of to get into each
others Livings or Benefices (if greater then they had before) of some, thereby
so entering into two or three such Benefices? Or how diverse of these men strove
to give content to both Armies, to pray for, preach for, and sometimes give
thanks on either side, as they come near the places of such men's residence, and
either had prevailed in any storm or Victory, or did but say so: Were not some
then so forward as to commend any killing of English men on the one side or
other, for exrellent service, and thereupon rejoice and give thanks (as they
called it) in so much that sometimes there has been such Thanksgivings and
Rejoicings on both sides for one and the same Victory? Or shall I need to
remember you of their Railings, Revilings, and evil^ speakings against those
they called Antinomians, Anabaptists, Arminians, Sectaries, Schismatics,
Heretics, etc. Or some of these men's petitioning against such sundry times,
blowing the Coals on both sides the fire, as they got room, and still adding
Fuel thereto, for their design sake, when a fit opportunity might serve, the
particulars whereof (when collected) may swell to a very great Volume; which
Work (its like) may be by some other more diligent observer thereof, their Ways
and Deeds of darkness being not easily discerned, and therefore I mention some
most obvious, least they should think them altogether buried in oblivion, and
continue impenitent, and you in security. Let me here add this also, (not to be
forgotten) that the Parliament were necessitated for your, and their own
safeties, rights, and liberties, to call upon you to enlist and maintain each
other in a defensive way, when the late King had set up his Standard, and
proclaimed a War in his own Land, amongst, and against his own Subjects, was
not this the real difference between his Case, and their endeavors for you;
but how far that will justify any the aforesaid men's designs, I leave to you
to consider of, and them to the light of Christ in the conscience, etc. Which
of these parties of this sort of men are your Ministers of Christ? Or did he or
his Ministers at any time so seek to destroy men's lives?

9. When many of the aforesaid sort of men saw they were not like to obtain
their desires by the King in the way of Rome, What Art, Industry, and Diligence
did they use in their next design to have the help of their said Brethren of
Scotland, which they saw could not be plausibly carried on and established to
their Wills without some consultations about it, and therefore would needs have
it by an Assembly of themselves, which they called a Synod or Assembly of
Divines, scarce taking rest until they were so owned, (though called together
upon their entreaties, only to offer their humble Advice to the Parliament) and
how Authoritatively did they then act, (as if they had been again in
Convocation as, and with Bishops) and as if no man were to doubt of their
Determinations, or question their contrivances, some Writing, and others
speaking as in Acts 15. that it might be said of their proceedings, It has
seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to them, to order, direct, etc. so that
every man should receive rules from them in all things pertaining to the
Worship and Service of God: But he that sits in Heaven laughs them to scorn. It
is (also) like many of you may remember what great have they then made to have
their Decrees established accordingly, and bow they took their opportunities
for it, when diverse Members of Parliament were employed in the Country and
Army, their favorites (for the most part) being then in the House, thereby to
settle themselves so, as to be able (with assistance of their Lay Elders they
would choose) sufficiently to Master, and deal with all Sectaries and other
persons that should prove refractory, or any way disobedient to them or their
Decrees, either by their Parochial; Classical, Provincial, or National
Inquisition, or High Commission Courts.

10. Is it here requisite to be remembered what Charge that Synod was to you at
4. s. per. diem each man, and large Benefices, besides the Allowances given to
some of them by the Committee they obtained, called, The Committee for
plundered Mi^isters, when few of them were plundered; and in case some one of
many did lose that way, he must be speedily and sufficiently repaired out of
your moneys, or else that would serve for a railing Theme, to fill up diverse of
their Hour-Sermons. Are not these persons the now great Plunderers in all parts
of the Commonwealth, forcibly taking (and causing to be taken) away men's Corn,
Cattle, and other Goods, what, and when they please, under color of their
Office and Ministry, and nevertheless now prevailed to have their said
Committee revived as for plundered Ministers, whiles thousands of poor,
(whereof diverse have been plundered, and remain without any relief) not only
want Bread, but Employments whereby to labor for the relieving of
themselves, Wives and Children.

But what at last did the said Assembly or Synod bring forth but a National
Covenant, a Chatechize, and a dead Directory for the living God to be
worshipped by, with their establishing themselves as rightly ordained before by
the Bishops, and a new Way, Method, and Manner of ordaining others, wherein
their Brother Calamy led them to begin with seven young men in his
Meeting House at Aldermanbury in London, for an introduction into that new
devised Way and Worship, (wherein the Lord God is not so mocked, however they
deceive themselves and others:) but as for any Benefit, Commodity, or Advantage
unto you concerning your souls or bodies, that seemed not their business;
neither would they willingly then (nor since) suffer other persons to do their
duties therein, and deal plainly with you concerning your souls, (when they
could or can prevent it) lest they should thereby lose their praise with men,
their Fame, and fat Benefices; for they well know that when you shall withdraw
your breath from them, they presently wither, dye, and become as empty Idols,
so that all men will then see whereof they are made; but while you put into
their mouths, (what they would have) fit your selves in gay and gaudy Apparel,
and so fall down and worship before them, own them (because of their
Book-Learning) to be the only persons to speak to you from God, and to God for
you, give your Honors, Wisdoms, Wealth and strength (that the Lord God has
given you for his service) to them for the service of their lusts, (and
excessive pride of their Wives and Children) and pay all Military Taxes and
other-like Charges for them; and they have the Gleab-Lands, Tithes, Stocks,
Estates and Incombs (they get from you) altogether free to maintain them in
ease and idleness, (without working with their hands (the thing that is good)
and eating their own Bread) when many of the poor amongst you (laboring and
toiling hard) must pay Contributions and Taxes over and above what may, or can
be well spared from the thin backs, and hungery bellies of their Wives and
Children; I say, While you thus do, no wonder if you continue in blindness,
errors, and ignorance, without the knowledge of God (to your shame) and neither
see, nor desire to be free from these afflictions they bring upon you, which on
you are just that so uphold and maintain the Enemies of Christ, of your own
souls, and the Nations peace. Need I yet further remember you how some of them
have strugled for, and got Augmentations to their former Benefices? How diverse
also have got fifty pounds each man to carry them for Ireland, and when there
100. l. or 200. l. by the year, and some more for preaching, or rather
deceiving that people with their lying Inventions, and causing punishments to
be inflicted upon those that shall therein contradict them, whereby it is
evident that whosoever has gained by these times of Trouble, they have not
lost theereby, nor their favorites failed them therein, though it is, or may
be clearly seen, that far greater things have been expected by them.

11. You may not forget the said Solemn League and Covenant, nor need I further
tell you who brought forth that birth, and gave it that Name, as also sometimes
calling it the Oath of God, and National Covenant, (as their Brethren of
Scotland had) but so cunningly contrived of ambiguous Words and Terms, to
answer all the Authors ends, as no Antinomian, Independen, Anabaptist, Seeker,
or other Sectary (by them so called) or person (in any kind or sort differing
from them) might find a way to escape out of their net, with full confidence
also that they (the said Authors) should be the only Interpretors thereof,
whereby they might turn the sense and meaning, any way at any time, or on any
occasion to serve their turns, and teach their younger Brethren to do the
like, assuring themselves that none they called Lay persons ought or would
presume to interpret or give the Meaning of any part of so Excellent a Piece of
their workmanship; and then how highly did they extol that new Idol (their
Covenant) and preached it up, as a thing so absolutely necessary that none
ought to refuse it, remaining as restless until they had prevailed with most
of the Members of Parliament to lift up their hands to it, and subscribe it,
and therewith got the stamp of Authority upon it, That all men in the Nation
should be called, to lift up their hands to the most high God, before that
Covenant, and swear etc, and then how was the sound of that solemn League and
Covenant in every man's ears (of Cities, Town, Country and Army) by the makers
thereof, and their younger Brethren riding and running from place to place,
from one part of the Army to another, in all have to surprise men thereby,
eagerly pressing, and earnestly persuading men speedily to take that solemn
Oath; and many that could not be so brought under their yoke must be enforced
thereto, some by loss of Estates or liberty, others by loss of their Places,
Offices and Employments, and all refusers thereof styled Malignants and enemies
to the Common Wealth (though many such refusers were then with their Swords and
lives as in their hands for the Parliament and your Liberties) whereby diverse
of your friends and faithful servants were displaced and rejected as
Offenders, and then under this Cloak and Mask (of naming the most high God and
that Covenant) all other their inventions must be sheltered, ushered in, and
carried on, and the greatest part of their Sermons be of the excellency of your
so entering into Covenant (as they said) with God, and of the benefits thereby
accruing to them that so did, and the danger of refusing such an opportunity so
to do; and this being thus carried on to the height, in the next place they
could tell you how the Oath of God was upon you, how you had lifted up your
hands to God, and of the great Danger of breaking Covenant with him, with their
then new sense and Meaning thereof (according to the then occasion) to be
observed upon the highest penalties, although it may be boldly asserted, and
let that of God in every man's Conscience answer him, whether themselves that
made it (taking them severally and jointly) or any other persons (that took it)
then did, or yet do understand it, so as to say positively, this and no other
is the meaning of any one of the six branches thereof, the interpretations
thereupon may be, and are so particularly various: Neither is it to be supposed
that the Contrivers thereof ever intended it should be understood by any man,
but that all should admire it, and be satisfied with their respective meanings
thereupon, however differing therein, not only one from another at one and the
same time, but on all occasions using the same as a Ladder to climb up into
Authority over your souls, bodies and estates, (more generally and Tyrannically
then the later Bishops exercised) could they have gotten up to their intended
height. And were not some of these the men that stirred up discontents in the
Citizens of London against diverse faithful men there entrusted with the
Militia, persuading that none were fit to have to do with the Militia in that
City, that were then of the Parliaments Army (they called Sectaries) or
disaffected to the ends of their said Covenant, holding forth this Covenant to
make way for them in all their Designs, new Canons, Constitutions, Directorie,
etc. whereby their Congregationall, Classical, Provincial and National
Courts were to take their Rise, and be established to enslave and vex you with
continual suits and attendance from one of their said Courts to another, and
all under the specious pretense of Religion, Rules and Ordinances for the
worship and service of God, and good of his Church?

12. When the faithful servants of the Commonwealth (in the Army and
elsewhere) were discouraged, and diverse of them displaced (as aforesaid) where,
or what sort of men procured also the bringing into these places many loose,
profane, and disorderly persons that could complie, take Oaths and Covenants
as directed?

And were not the Parliaments then three Armies thereby speedily brought into a
kind of Confusion amongst themselves, and rendered unfit for your service, and
on the other hand the King not only became Master of the considerable
Garrisons, but also of the field it self and was it not (even then) many of
these men's great cry: that God was against the Armies* and they prospered not,
because their Covenant was not generally taken, and strictly observed, and that
the Government of the Church was not established (as they advised and directed)
whereupon the Parliament was necessitated to take notice of the approaching
danger to themselves and (you the Lord in mercy directing) then drew forth of
those three Armies one entire Army, and therein again employed these faithful
and valiant men (that before were so put forth) and others like faithful
persons were therewith joined, and united hearts and hands together, under
their then truly noble, faithful and self denying General, their Lieutenant
General, and Major General, and other like Officers, and obedient valiant
Soldiers, to the great and general dissatisfaction of those Covenant Makers;
yet still they press to have their Covenant enforced upon that Army also, as
knowing no other way to break it, and that at such time when (under God) the
very safety and external welfare of this Commonwealth lay at the stake upon
that Armies Proceedings, and here none else to stand in the gap, etc. and when
some of the said Covenant-Makers (and others of that sort) had by their
endeavors (as was then said) prevailed with the Scots Officers and other old
Soldiers to withdraw themselves from, and leave that Army, as designed for
destruction, (whereof the Lord of Hosts was pleased to make another manner of
use contrary to their expectations) and when that Design took not, how
shamelesly did diverse of those men rail against, revile and asperse that Army,
laboring by all means to bring an Odium upon it, by false Reports and
slanders; and who were they that then prevailed with the said Scottish Officers
and others to wait in London and Westminster until they should see the
destruction of that Army they called the inconsiderable number of Rawheads new
Noddle, etc. whom (said some) the Kings Party will soon make an end of, and
then the said Officers would be sought to, might make their own conditions, and
be employed according to their desires. What should I say more of the railing
accusations then brought against that Army they called Sectaries, prophesying
the ruin of the whole, etc. in case these men were continued in Arms, thereby
to weaken all hands in the time of the Parliaments greatest weakness, how many
of these troubles, did manifest their grief and sorrow of heart when they
understood the King prevailed not against that army (they called sectaries) at
Naseby fight; (much taken notice of, in, and about the said Cities at that
time,) whereby it is evident that these (of that sort of men) with the King,
and others from him, were then indifferently agreed any way to do their own
business, as has appeared since, to your sorrow, sad sufferings, and loss.

13. Who were they that held correspondence one with another, and employed
spies in all parts of the land under color of getting intelligence of errors
and heresies, held (as they said) by some Officers and others of that Army,
which one called Dr. Edwards (a Priest then in London did especially manage;
and what strange things had they thereby invented to charge that Army with, and
which were then put into print in several books (one after another) by the
said Edwards, called his Gangreens, stuffed with Mistakes, forged inventions, and
filthy lies, still pressing their Covenant to prevent Errors and Heresies, as
they said, and laboring with the Parliament for an Ordinance to inhibit private
Meetings, (they called Conventicles, as the late Bishops had done) which they
had often before sought for, when the former Armies were at a distance from
London and they supposed the time seasonable, but as often prevented by some
considerable losses in the Army or forces, when in any measure the Parliament
incline to such persons therein.

And who (about the same time) stirred up those called the Clubmen in many
parts of the Land (and some priests with them) under color of defending
themselves, and estates from plunderers, even when this sort of men saw the
Parliament like to prevail, and their ends not accomplished?

14. Whose design was it to have the late King carried to the Scots, when the
whole Nation was even brought (almost) into obedience of the Parliament, and
great hopes of a speedy settlement (As supposing themselves sure that way to
make their own market by and with him?) and who were they that so earnestly
persuaded to have the said Army speedily Disbanded, (when the King was bought
and brought, back again from the Scots, and nothing else seemed to stand in
their way) persuading there was then noe need of that Army, and noe way would
serve to Disband it, but by troops and companies, apart one from another,
before due satisfaction given them, or any satisfaction of them in what they
had done, or any the Rights and liberties, (for which so much blood had been
spilt, and Treasure spent) so much as ascertained, much less settled and
established, unto you and them, arguing that the great Taxes might then be much
abated, bloody Ireland relieved by these that should after be enlisted under
other Commanders for that Service; some soldiers go back to their former
employments, and others (of their choosing) be employed here by this means to
have broken all in pieces, and set one party against another, rather then to
fail of their intendments, further pleading how dangerous it was to continue
that army, or to send them together for Ireland under their own Officers, how
soon they would so conquer Ireland, and fill that land with sectaries, and then
how should they be dealt with here at that armies return, when their doctrine
should likewise further spread over England; some saying (though they could not
but confess that God had manifestly appeared in, and by them, and they had done
great services) they were not to be continued, and therefore nothing could
satisfy but such a disbanding as might disperse, and discourage them etc.
whereupon some officers of the said Army, and soldiers, having notice of the
design, the designers prevalency, and evil consequences thereof to the whole
Nation, advised together how to draw up a Petition to their then General for
satisfaction in a few particulars, whereof some of the said persons got
intelligence, and without any certain knowledge what the said Officers
intended to Petition for, first had an Order got to suppress the said Petition,
and thereupon a Theme to preach of, and cry out of dangerous principles in the
Army, and designs to oppose the covenant, laboring to have the Petitioners
censured as enemies to the State; and how then, and by whom did the slanderous
libels and Pamphlets fly abroad, diverse Officers of the Army imprisoned, and
after released without being told the cause of their commitment; and when (in
much mercy to this Nation) they were prevented therein, how did some prevail
with diverse Londoners to prepare a Remonstrance against the army, and then
stirred up Refarmado Officers and others, to enlist men, and there got up
another Army, and prevaild so far as to have the Militia there taken out of the
hands of faithful men, and put into other hands to carry on their design by
heading forces against the Army, and set on foot a new war which might have
proved more bloody, and terrible, then that before; but the Lord of all the
earth pleased to turn their counsels (like that of Achitophels) into
foolishness, and direct the Army (in obedience to the Parliament) to do their
duties soberly, so as that (in a mild way of prevention) things were brought
back into their former condition of peace, and the said Militia again into
safe hands.

15. Who in the next place procured the said Reformado Officers, (whereof some
had been disbanded, some cashiered, and some served the King,) with diverse
Londoners to force the Parliament to pass several votes, etc. which was so
great a breach upon the privileges of Parliament, as that the Speakers and
members of both the then houses were necessitated to repair to their said Army
for safety, and when returned (at their then next free sitting to recall these
votes so by these pastwhile under that force, and also dispersed these Offisers
(so made use of to put that force upon them) but the many Contrivers and
Abettors escaped, though much then spoken of, because of the State of affairs
at that time; but rested they here? or did they not rather wait for other
oppertunities wherein the Lord by his wise providence prevented them sundry
times? yet for all this they were not willing to see his hand stretched out
against them, and turn to him, neither do they yet seem willing: now all you
that in any measure are turned into the light, brought into the fear of the
Lord, and did see his mercy and marvelous works in these times, forget not all
his benefits, his deliverances (in your low estates) from intended deaths, when
that Army was so despised and railed on (by scorners that often sought their
lives to take them away) low and weak in their own esteem, then did the Lord
strengthen and put courage into his servants that truly trusted in him, and
believed his salvation, cleaving unto him, and one to another with all their
hearts; Yea truly then blessed were they, while many others before mentioned
were exercised in cursing them, and sorrowing at their safeties, and successes,
and when the Lord enabled ten to chase hundred, and a hundred to put a 1000. to
flight, for that was the Lords doing, and marvelous in the eyes of many
beholders, being in order to the great war (manifestly begun) between Michael
and his Angels, and the Dragon and his Angels, in this day of God almighty, to
the terror and amazemen of all enemies that would not Christ should reign over
them, but stand in the enmity, equally fearing, and hating the goodniss,
wisdom, and mighty power pf God in his sons and daughters.

16. Who, and what men were they that in the heat and height of these Military
affairs, and taxes upon you, were so restless, until they obtained an
ordinance for tithes, (with trebble damages, or value for non-payment) fo far
prevailing, that those who had not wherewith to pay should be imprisoned etc.
he that remembers these things need not be farther advertised of that sort of
men's practices, or prevalency that could obtain such an ordinance (never
before heard of) at such a time, in such a manner, and only upon their bare
words, that tithes are due to them, that they are the Ministers of Christ, or
that tithes are ordained by him for their maintenance, etc. being a task they
never could, nor now (by Scriptures) dare take upon them to prove, but they can
tell you one while that they are due to them by Divine right, another while by
some authority of man (though noe act of man makes them due; but supposing them
due did order the setting forth thereof) that their predecessors received
tithes of their parishoners for many generations; that tithes are not now to be
questioned; that several Parliaments have Judged them due, and ordered payment
accordingly; that the Israelites paid tithes by special command from God, and
would you (now under the Gospel) pay less to Christ's ministers? that Gleab
lands and tithes are their free-holds etc. while all is but deceit and
covetousness; for they have no color to demand any thing, but as Officers or
servants for performing service, and that from the Persons they serve, and
during such respective times as allowed, and therein continued; but as for
Christ's work or wages, they neither know the one, nor will be contented with
the other.

17. Who were they that encouraged the raising of forces in London, and the
adjacent counties, as also in Wales, and other parts, and that then took and
caused Oaths to be taken (with him they called Lord Capel, and other Officers
for the King) and gave their assistance therewith against the Parliament
accordingly, and about the same time held correspondency with them of the Kirk,
or Clergy of Scotland, whereupon an Army of Scots were raised and came (under
command of Duke Hambleton) to join with others here, and invade this Land,
hasting so far^ toward London, as Staffordshire, before the Parliaments
Forces could meet with them by the then directions given therein; and what, or
who occasioned the long dispute between the Nobility and said Kirk of Scotland,
whether should appoint a Commander in chief of that Army, some of that sort of
men here being not ashamed to say, that Duke Hambleton died a Martyr? (It is is
like they meant for that intended service) and who were they that deluded the
late King by their Sermons, and otherwise seem to accomplish, but not to
consent to several things proposed to him by the Parliament; some telling him
it stood not with his honor as a King, so to yield to his Parliament; asking
him whether he would make himself a Subject, etc. and at other times so
craftily acting and advising between both (for their own ends) until he was
thereby brought to his last gasp? and who in like manner lulled asleep, and
misled the Parliament several times, until, etc? And who since have prevailed
with, and misled their late Great Benefactor and Protector, and those with him,
until he also fell? and so shall all such Builders of Babylon, and upholders
of her Merchants, even they that help, and they that are helped, shall speedily
fall together.

18. Who were they that preached up the aforesaid Covenant in opposition to the
Engagement, To be true and faithful to the Commonwealth, as established,
without a King or house of Lords) both in the year 1648. and 1649. etc? Who
sent Letters and books into the English Army (when going against the Scots) to
discourage and divide them, and thereby to disable that Army and prevent their
Proceedings, and all whose charge, pains, and diligence was that correspondency
held between the Presbyters in England, and Sco^land, in and about the yea 1650
and 1651, and who so generally then preached up the Scots religion,
Church Government, Worship and discipline, here in England, and likewise in
Ireland, and all the time the Kirk of Scotland were carrying on their Design
with ^harls Stuart, whom they afterward crowned there, and (then with all
their might) hasted to bring him into his late Fathers Throne (by way of
Conquest) with that potent Army of Scots, and others here prepared to assist
therein; and how sad and unquiet were this sort of men (in all the three
Nations) upon the defeating and routing of the said Army at Worcester? and who
were here the chief Actors therein, that sent intelligence and timely notice of
the fittest season and way of that Armies so coming for which some (of the most
notorious) were called to account, and (its like) one or two suffered, but the
generality of them remain the same to this day, as they can find out
opport^nities in like manner to act for their own ends, whether by such
correspondency with any like men in Holland, or else where? And who caused the
Turkish Alcaron to be Printed in English after the Parliament inhibited the so
Printing thereof and to what end, and who are the men subject to changes, and
alter and change those they call Religions (in all ages) when, and as they see
it may be most pleasing to Kings, Queens, or Rulers, and profitable to
themselves, and augment their Authority over the bodies and Estates of others,
and (upon such changes) Preach that for the Word of God, and true Gospel, which
seems to lead to their preferments, by taking best with such Authority; and in
Authorities greatest weakness, and Distempers to take advantages over and
against it, as who is able to make mention of the many factious Sermons in the
times of your late troubles preached before authority, for which (they were so
cunning therein) they rendered thanks, seldom reproofs; but have they not often
thereby hindered business of importance, because not suitable to their
intentions?

19 Who were they of the Presbiters Kirk of Scotland that acted and contrived
their Intendments so mysteriously during all the time of Englands troubles,
bookingin all interests with their like Brethren here, as also in Ireland, Hell
and Hagu^, and other parts for the carrying on of their designs; Their railing
accusations and slanders, so often raised against the English Army while here; As
also, when at Glascoe, or other parts of Scotland, their occasioning the poor
people there to hide their goods in the earth, and their bodies also, by
persuading them that the English Army of Sectaries would kill them, and take
what they had; the said sort of men exalting themselves against the Civil
Authority there in matters of the greatest moment: their raising of Forces,
giving Comm^ssions in the name of the Kirk and Kingdom, their inviting young
Charles Stuart to them, putting him to take their Covenant upon his own
Constructions, and then Crowning him to strengthen their Party and Cause: their
disagreements amongst themselves about him and his, and otherwise their seeking
assistance from France; their treacherery against the English Army by their
Kirk Army at Dunbar, and other parts, etc. yet could they not have much harmed
or troubled you (what ever they intended) had not many of their said like
Brethren here fomented Differences and assisted them for the more easy
accomplishment of their Kirk-Design in a general way.

20. To pass by the Popish Clergy (so called) in Ireland, with the cruel
Murders, and bloody Massacres by their instigations committed in that Land,
during that late, horrid Rebellion, Call to mind and remember who they were,
that (about the tenth year of the late King before the said Rebellion brake
forth) assembled in Dublin, Composed an Instrument, and thereby raised a
Subsidy, called a free Subsidy of four shillings out of each pound of all their
promotions and Spiritual Livings (so called) in order to a War, that had such
an inordinate desire to bear Rule, and exercise Authority, thereby to maintain
and support their new sound Altar-Worships, Bowings and other their then then
Inventions, their frequent Disturbances by meddling with matters of Civil
Government, so by writing, preaching, and otherwise, of what they liked or
disliked in Magistrates or others, the several Inventions and Designings in
the time of the said Rebellion, the solemn Oath many took and preached up, and
which many of the people there did take in the latter end of the year 1648. to
be true and faithful to him they called their young King Charles the second,
how they would fight for him, assist him, etc. Who were they that before and
about that time, Preached for, extolled and encouraged, those they called their
Excellent and Right Honorable Lords ( Ormond and Inchequin) to make Leagues
and Cessations, and join in amity with the said Popish Priests, and Irish
Rebels, and that about the same time in 1648. Composed and set forth in Print
certain Prayers (so called) for their said young King, and therein such
execrations and expressions against the said Parliament and their Armies, as I
find not freedom here to name, then and in these times frequently read in
their Congregations; and yet since how forward and prevalent have some been in
preferring their friends and favorites (several that assessed them in those
their former actings) into employments of public trust, by having diverse
faithful servants of the Commonwealth, put out of such employments to make
room for them, and because of not complying to do such unfit things, as some of
that sort of men desired, whereby Justice has been turned into wormwood and
gall, and of such persons (so brought into Authority) have they several times
prevailed (by letters, preaching, and otherwise) to have men chosen as Members
to serve in Parliaments, there also to carry on their Designs. Not to say much
how the said sort of men have been enabled to do such things by their large
Salaries, or how frequently diverse of them have caused the Public Peace to be
broken by the rude people, in and near their Meeting Houses, in beating,
stoning, and abusing sober persons that did but tell (or offer to tell) them
plainly of their Deceits and lying inventions (in love and for amendment) that
the people might cease from these that so beguile unstable Souls; the time
being come that Christ Jesus will have all spirits to bow and bend to his
spirit, which is, if they were acquainted with, they would not only favorably
resent, but lovingly entertain such discoveries and Counsels as tend to their
own, and the peoples knowledge of him, of whom many have as yet got but a sound
of words, not knowing whereof they affirm.

1. Ob. But diverse of the before mentioned men would not have so taught,
encouraged, or done the things they did in the Bishops days, but that they
were then under the Bishops Commands, and liable to their Censures, so that
they durst not disobey them, lest they should be silenced and lose their
Benefices, whereby themselves, Wives, and Children might have come to want, and
they ought to provide for their Families; he denies the faith, and is worse
then an Infidel, which does not that, and the like may be said in the beginning
and time of the Wars, some of them dwelling under the Kings Power, and others
where the Parliament had power, and likewise where both Armies came upon
occasions; and further, that their affections led them, some to encourage and
assist the one side and the other as they could have opportunities, etc. which
I take to be their strongest Reasons; for I suppose none of them will now say,
their Altar-Worships were done for Conscience sake, much less will they say,
they so labored to set men to kill one another for Conscience sake, or thereby
to exalt themselves into greater Authority and Estates, and therefore briefly
answer.

An. It was Christ's meat and drink to do the will of his Father, (who came not
to destroy men's lives, but to save them) and his love in all his Ministers
constrains them to be obedient to him, and labor even so to walk as he walked,
in all things seeking the good of others that they might be saved, but never
did, taught, or allowed the doing of such things as these in any Nation, or
amongst any people upon any accouunt whatsoever, much less for a worldly
maintenance, Wives, Children, or like affections to any man or thing; and they
that are such lovers of their own selves, fear outward wants, or so please men,
cannot be the servants of Christ, his Ministers were never such, and therefore
let no man deceive you so any more with vain words -- Besides this, who, or
what enforced any such men so to preach or incite men to Wars on the one side,
or on the other? or who occasioned such sidings, making Parties, and causing
enmity in each against other? surely this Parliament did it not, for that it
was begun some years before they sat; besides they were necessitated to make
use of all means and helps they had or could conveniently have for their own
and your safeties, and preservations, when the then King would not be persuaded
to Peace, but raised a War (by means of many of these men) in his own Land,
with and against his own Subjects; and yet where, or when did the Parliament so
much as imprison any of these men, because they would not preach in their names
for Wars, provided they sat quiet, and meddled not against them.

2. Ob. But the Priests or Ministers are not to be blamed in such cases,
because what they do, is for the good of the peoples Souls, to have them of an
uniform Religion, whereby to prevent Sects, Schisms, Heresies, and all sorts
of Divisions amongst them, wherein the Magistratate is to take the said men's
Advice, and they to assist and help the Magistrate therein, they being so
useful in Government for support of Authority, that all would fall into
confusion without them, it being their duties to satisfy men's Consciences,
that all Governments are of God, and to direct their minds to Obedience and
Subjection to every Ordinance of man in every change of Government, and
Governors, and to help therein by inciting to Wars or otherwise, as they shall
see occasion.

An. Instead of doing good to your Souls or bodies, have they not done the
contrary on all occasions, pretending to be Christ's Ministers, to Preach the
Gospel of Peace, when they stirred up strife, and prepared for War, and in
stead of assisting in Government; been the disquieters of men's minds,
disturbers of public Peace, hinderers of Rulers in the making and due
execution of Righteous Laws; have not this sort of men been the causers of
Sects, Schisms, Heresies and Divisions, and the means whereby Governors and
Governments have been changed, (with great hazard, charge and trouble to you)
when not suitable to their dispositions and intentions? and is not this their
compliance with, and pretending to assist Magistrates, and do good to peoples
Souls, their great Engine of Deceit, whereby they invent and contrive your
Troubles, and carry on their subtle and crafty Designs, under specious
pretenses, solemn formalities and ceremonies without spirit or life? Now let
the wise in heart judge who in Authority or otherwise have received any good by
them or their Counsels; and whence else should your troubles have had their
Rise, the King have so raised his Army, or came by his Fall as he did, and
(others in) somewhat a different manner) before and since? and contrarily, what
peace and concord was in the Parliaments faithful and unanimous Army (in scorn
called New Noddle) when this sort of men had least to do therein, and most
employed themselves in railings thereat? Does the Lord God change? or do
changes in Governors or Governments alter his mind, or the way of his Worship
and Service? or is his fear truly taught by the Precepts of men, or are his
Ministers subject to changes, as Governments change? from Popery to Prelacy,
from Prelacy again to Popery, to Protestanisme, Presbytery, Independency, etc.
hurrying people (as it were) headlong, sometimes one way, and sometimes
another, thereby driving all as into confusion, and causing such to become sad
sufferers that follow them not therein. Consider whether these will be
sufficient Arguments to justify before the Lord Jesus Christ at his appearing
in his glory and pure power to render to every man according to his Deeds; it
is most manifest, that Christ's Ministers would have rather suffered, (and do
willingly suffer at this day) the spoiling of their goods, imprisonments, and
bodily death, rather then yield to any such vile affections in themselves or
others.

Consider also who enforced any of this sort of men, or what necessitated them
to become such violent persecutors of conscientious men by the names of
Puritans, Precisians, Separatists non-Conformists, Brownists, Anabaptists,
Seekers, Quakers, etc. to commence and prosecute such and so many vexatious
suits against their Patrons, Parishioners, and others, to have so earnestly
into each others livings, and turning Wives and children forth of doors, to get
augmentations unto their former Benefices, to run from a less, to a greater
Benefice, to seek and take Pluralities, to entrap men by Oaths and Covenants;
to revile and speak evil of persons in Authority, to force men's goods from them
without consideration, or such contract made with them, or such men's owning
them in their deceitful practices, to cause such and so many disturbances in
the Nations, or to become so Nabal-like, that a man may not speak to them; what
Rules or directions, are to be found in Scriptures (which they say is their
Rule) for these things, etc?

The restraining of this sort of men, from making disturbances by meddling with
State matters, or otherwise; from a forcible taking of men's goods (that for
Conscience sake) disapprove of their practices, and leaving the said men in
equal condition with others, to prove their Doctrines by their deeds,
according-to the Scriptures, as also clearly ascertaining your other Rights and
Liberties, and securing you therein, might be a safe, speedy, and honorable
way of proceeding in the cure of the yet unhealed wounds, Ruptures and
distempers of this Commonwealth.

And now to your Omen herein (about others) concerned, consider soberly of your
respective ways and workings to accomplish your own ends, what your aims are,
and how evilly you have required the Lord God and this people of these Nations
for all the good things done for you, your Wives, and Children; for I deal
plainly with you in love to your souls and bodies, and desire to manifest that
I have no hatred to any man's person, nor can be free to let sin lie upon your
souls, but put you and others in mind of your former miscarriages, and reprove
you soberly, as the only Lord God (the righteous Judge of all the earth) has
commanded me, who is now shaking, not the earth only, but the heavens also,
that the things which cannot be shaken, may remain; wherefore deal plainly,
truly and faithfully with him and your souls, be willing at last to hearken to
the voice of Christ in his true light in your Consciences; bring all your deeds
to that light, which never did, does, or can deceive you in any thing, but (as
diligent heed is taken thereto) will show you plainly all your deeds (done in
your mortal bodies) of what sort they have been, and are, with all your most
secret thoughts thereupon, and intentions therein, with what you should do, and
what you ought not to do; for that would bring you to true Repentance not to be
repented of, teach you to walk honestly, as in the day, to put on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof, etc. Hearken to that voice of the wel-beloved Son, and wait for his
appearance, that he may hearken unto you, and receive you graciously, before
the door of Mercy be shut against you, sorrow, shame, and sadness overtake
you, and so seize upon you, that you find no place for repentance, though you
may seek it diligently with tears; for there is such a day of black and thick
darkness hasting upon many evil doers that harden their hearts against Christ,
and would not he should reign over them, though that of him in all Consciences
shows how to come to him, and learn of him who was lowly, and meek, holy, and
harmless, which is your duties in an especial manner, lest (after so many his
warnings) he leaves you to your hardness and hearts lusts, and say, why should
they be smitten any more; they are turned to Idols, let them alone; and then
you justify your selves, and Act yet greater and greater abomination, in
fighting against God, stirring up strife amongst the people, and belying the
Lords Servants, his truth and true Church, that is, without spot, blemish,
wrinckle, or any such thing; and what will you do in the end thereof? There
has been a time of ignorance which the Lord God has seemed to wink at, but
now calls upon all men every where to repent and believe in his only begotten
Son, whose Gospel never came in word only, but in plain demonstration of his
spirit and of power; nor does the faith of Gods Elect stand (at all) in the
Wisdom of man, but in the pure power of God; as Abraham believed God, and
followed him, not knowing whither he went, so do they that are of the same
faith, (Children of Abraham) at this day, being led by his spirit, and fitted
with wisdom and great Power for his spiritual work in this his notable day,
wherein his Angels appear spirits, and his true Ministers a flame of fire in
all Lands, thereby reproving the world of sin, righteousness and judgment,
gathering the Wheat into his Garner, and burning the chafe with unquenchable
fire; even his day wherein the armies of heaven follow him, crushing down, and
breaking in pieces every high thought, lofty look, and deceitful thing, that
exalts it self against the Kingdom of Christ, and cannot worship you, nor
any Idols that you set up (be they never so fair or well-favoured) but (as
Christ's sheep) should greatly rejoice to hear his voice in any of you; but your
strange voice they may not hear, nor can own your Pharisaicall holiness, your
mock-fasts for strife and debate; your railing accusations, cursing those that
came in the name of the Lord, or other abominable practices, which you exercise
your selves in (without any respect or Reverence to truth) because contrary to
what is strained through your muddy brains, wherewith you have so defiled the
Nations, that the workers of iniquity have no more knowledge, but to run
violently (at your becks) upon the Lords people, to devour them as a man would
eat bread, to condemn and kill the just that resist not, even the able
Ministers of the new Testament, not of the Letter, but of the spirit (though
some otherwise unlearned men) whereby they approve themselves to every man's
Conscience in the sight of God, in Afflictions, Tumults, Stripes,
Imprisonments, Labors, etc. Do not your hearts smart within you in thinking on
the doleful and deadly Kne^s you have rung, and caused others to ring over
this Commonwealth, and yet do, ever seeking to put the people upon Acts of
violence one against another, thereby taking peace from the earth, under color
of advising some to take heed of being deceived by others? when that of God in
your Consciences will tell you that it is by your Inventions they are deceived,
that you do or say therein, being not for very love to God and their souls, but
for other ends then his Service; and how instead of being a sweet savor to
God, as also in them that believe, and to them that perish you are become an
evil savor, and stinch upon the face of the earth, in so much that it is sore
burdened with you; and can you be so blind, as not to see it, or not to think
it high time for you to live quietly, as sober minded men, work with your
hands, and eat your own bread, and permit others to do so likewise, or the
Magistrate to prevent such Acts of violence, as many of you have, and yet do
occasion, that those who have not yielded obedience to the light and Law
within, are to be governed by a Law without, and they that observe the Royal
Law, and live of the Gospel, freely (in all places) to preach the Gospel.

Would you have all people to believe, that as you buy Learning, Languages and
Arts for money at Schools, that so (therewith also) you receive the Gift of the
Holy Ghost, and after that (having laid your hands one upon another, and are
placed in Parishes) what you have, or shall find out, invent and compose, as
from books, and so take money to tell of, or teach others, is the Word of God to
them for salvation of their souls? or would you have it believed that you have
any rule for what you do and teach, save only your own, or other men's meanings
and interpretations of the Words and Writings of the Prophets, Christ, and his
Disciples, as recorded in the Scriptures, which you make use of as the chief
instrument of your Trade or Craft, to get money by, therewith beguiling unstable
Souls, that cannot cease from Sin; I pray you consider what else does it
avail you to Read, Hear, Study, Invent, Compose, and contend about words, while
you abide in the Enmity against God, and Wrathfulnesse of the Earthly Nature,
Will and Wisdom, even of that spirit which led Gain to slay his brother (
Because his own deeds were evil, and his brothers good) the Jews to crucify
Christ, and stone Stephen, and all the bloody persecutors (in the Antichristian
state) to torment? slay, burn and massacre the bodies of all the Martyrs, and
that only for the word of God, the testimony of Jesus; and those persecutors
not being able to resist the wisdom of the Holy Spirit by which they spoke, it
being the very same spirit in you that has occasioned some of you to cause
such and so many vile things to be done, as would make a man's ears even tingle
to hear tell of, which is the cause why you are generally in so great
confusion, so ignorant of your duties to God and man, and of the people that
are the Worlds Scorn, that bear the vessels and name of the Lord at this day;
and why you conclude your selves and others are to continue in your sins, be of
an erroneous and fallible spirit, while in these Bodies of flesh, etc.

Must you indeed contiuue in sin, remain sinners of the Gentiles, or worse,
for (as it is written) He that commits sin is of the Devil; whhile so, what
ground, Rule or Reason have you to suppose people should believe you, or
hearken to your Talk, or Methodicall Forms of words, more then unto others? can
that be good and pleasing to God that is mixed with sin, and performed by
sinners, that take part with the evil one, Gods enemy. Does any unclean thing
come near his dwelling? or did not Christ Jesus come to destroy the works of
the Devil, and bring in an eversasting Rrighteousnesse? Be not always slow of
heart to believe what is written; these your inventions shall certainly and
speedily come to an end; Babylon shall fall and never rise again; and therefore
come out of her, make have, tarry not, nor say within your selves, Shall we
confess our ignorance of what we have so long labored about, preached and
contendded for, as the Gospel of Christ, and for which we have received so
great yearly Incomes from the people? Shall we bring so great a shame upon our
selves, our Office and Ministry, as to say, we have been so long deceived, and
deluded and deceived so many peoples Souls that trusted to us and ou Doctrine;
and thereby occasion every one to slight, contemn, and despise us. Must we
lose all, part with all, or not be Christ's Disciples? Learn to labor, and live
like other men; This is an hard saying, who can bear it? etc.

Now at your perils be it, whether you hear or forbear, you have been plainly
dealt with; and if for all this, you remain obstinate, not willing to become
fools for Christ's sake, that you may become wise unto him; not willing to set
aside all your ornaments of Learning, Arts, and natural part, and stand single
unto him, that he may know what to do to you for your good, but will indeed
have your portions in this present evil world, you shall not only have
leanness in your Souls, but these things (wherein you take delight, and which
your hearts lust after) shall be dead comforts, but living torments to you, and
your blood be upon your own heads; when Christ shall say, Depart from me, I
knew you not, ye are workers of iniquity: Go to the gods that you have served,
and to the men and things that you have trusted in, etc.

And now, all you people, I say again, hearken to the voice of Christ in your
Consciences, wait, and watch there, that you may come to see how far you have
been guilty against God, and occasioners of your own troubles, and sufferings,
as evildoers; for it is written, that God moved David to number the people,
because he had a purpose to destroy them, even so were the able men amongst you
numbered before the late Wars; and when so, God will find out instruments,
though such may be employed by the evil one to their own ruin. These things
before mentioned, were not all done in a corner, nor you remembered thereof to
disquiet your minds, or to raise displeasure in you against any person, but as
before is said for their admonition, and your satisfaction, and future caution,
wherein take diligent heed at all times, and stand clear of these men; for you
may be like to meet with tentations, such as you are not yet aware of; here is
the true cause of your troubles and trialls, for you to make the right use of,
and as any of you become diligent observers of your duty, to God, you will
discern things rightly, savor the things God, and fee them as they are, and
use them as you ought, and then shall no man need to say to such, Depart from
the Tents and Warehouses of such wicked men, or enter not into the Idols
Temples, lest you defile the Temple of God; For if any man desile the Temple of
God, him will God destroy. There is now no serving two Masters, no partaking of
the Table of the Lord, and the Table of Devils: Stand therefore in the daily
Cross unto that, and in that, which is contrary to man's own will, desires,
affections, Reasonings, and words of Wisdom, and so abide faithful unto him
that has so called, who will also do it, etc. but then look to be made a
byword amongst others, a derision to them that are round about you, and it is
also like the Devil may cast some of you into Prison, and tribulation you may
have, which (according to the integrity of your hearts, and cleanness of your
hand^) shall be to your spiritual advantages, whereby to become wiser then
your enemies, as continually refreshed and strengthened in the inner man, by
the everspringing fountain of Life and love that runs through the earth, to
accomplish that for which it is sent, which many of you yet see not, because
your eyes are shut; Christ Jesus came to open the blind eyes, and right blessed
are their eyes that see, and receive the inheritance amongst them that are
sanctified through faith in him, though derided, falsely accused, and set at
naught (as the good way of the Lord, his service and servants have been and
are) cruelly persecuted and said to be troubles (as Elijah was) even by many of
those men that often have, and yet do strive to trouble and overtop the whole
Commonwealth, as others (of that sort of men) before them, though in somewhat
a different manner, etc. Have not some such men done more mischief in a few
weeks or days, then could be amended in much longer time (besides your sad
sufferings thereby) by causing (as it were) the foundations of the earth to be
turned out of course, occasioning changes in Governments and Governors? and is
it not evident, that they who can so far prevail, as to have set up again, and
pulled down? (at their pleasures) can also throw the same down again (by like
means) when that serves not their ends, whereof not only histories, but your
own experience, do (in part) make manifest and discover? by whom, and in what
way confusions of men's minds and manners, changes of Religion, Laws, and
states, as also was, spilling the blood of the Saints, and other miseries to
mankind, have come in all ages of Antichrist.

Some speaking in your cases, will say that the late Bishops were an
inconsiderable number of men, had not many more assisted, and led on others
also, as the multitude, to act and carry on their Designs; And as for the late
King, he was but one person, and therefore his evil Council and assistants were
all along chiefly charged rather then he; and will also say, that you (the
people) desired peace (rather then War) and a quiet living, until incited,
stirred up and provoked to strife, and Intestine Wars, one part against
another; and therefore certainly there be yet some men justly to be esteemed
great offenders therein, the guiltiness of whose cause and Consciences cannot
be separated, and yet have so (fox like) lurked in their dens under the shelter
of one Authority after another, as that they have escaped the hand of Justice,
and not been dealt with, if discovered, although at some times crying out
against Authority, and at other times to authority to help them and defend them
from but being soberly spoken to: It is not here said, what such men deserved,
or do deserve for all these their sundry sorts of services (when particularly
discovered with their respective deeds) nor what is become of the Magistrates,
that hitherto have taken such for their Counselors, and patronized them.
These are things that the righteous Judge of all the earth will yet further
call to account, who has looked down from the habitation of his holiness and
glory, and taken his peoples cause into his own hands, and appears therein,
with affection to them, (as being afflicted in all their afflictions) and
indignation against his enemies, who (if they so continue but a little while
shall become like Bell and the Dragon, Empty Idols, (seem they now never so
great in this world) so that all others sh(...) see whereof they are made; for
the Lord God of Glory will speedily ^read down Satan under the feet of his
Saints that art dear and precious in his sight, what ever others deem of them.

The fourth Mo^^h. 1659.
THE END.

