A SERMON Preached At Worcester, On the 18th. of April, 1686. being the SECOND
Sunday after Easter.

By H. H. S. J.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Turner, near Turn-Style in Holbourn, 1686.

THE PREFACE.
WHosoever reads the following Discourse, will see, by the beginning of it,
that it was not made for the Press; but it having had the same hard fortune,
that many have now adays, to be generally condemned without being known, it
was judged convenient it should show it self in Print; to the end, that those
who think and speak Ill of it, may see what it is they Blame. For my part, as I
do not know its Crime, so I cannot undertake to Defend it; therefore I deliver
it up to the judgment of the Reader, without any thing, but its own Innocence,
to protect it against a Censure; only one favor I beg at his hands, which is,
that he would not presently upon sight of the Text (as many have done at the
Hearing it) cry out, without proceeding any further, Here must needs be a
Bloody Sermon; for this is tacitly, either to condemn the Word of GOD, as
being the principle of ill Doctrine; or to say, that the Preacher has Quoted it
to a Malicious purpose. The former of which, would be a Blasphemy; the latter,
a rash Judgment. Therefore let him read it over first, and then let him freely
Condemn whatsoever he finds Amiss.

Now, in confidence that no Immorality will be found in it, I entreat those
that find themselves deceived in the Opinion they have had of it, to reflect,
that perchance the same Popular Report, that has Misinformed them in This, does
also Abuse them in a matter of greater Importance; and make them condemn a
Religion, which would be their Salvation, if they Understood it.

To avoid this Inconvenience, they would do well to follow the advice of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Do not judge before the time; i. e. Before your self have
examined and seen what you condemn: If this counsel were followed, I confide,
that, by God's Grace, we should soon be United here in Faith and Charity, and
in Eternal Happiness in the next Life. Which is the Hearty wish of, etc.

Transite per Civitatem -- and percutite; non parcat oculus vester, neque
miseriamini. Senem, adolescentulum and virginem, parvulum and mulieres,
interficite usque ad internecionem: omnem autem super quem videritis Thau, ne
occidatis. Ezec. 9. v. 5, 6.
Pass through the City -- and strike; let not your Eye spare, nor have ye
mercy: The Old, the Young man, and the Virgin, the little One, and the Women,
kill to utter destruction; But every one upon whom you shall see Thau, kill you
not. Ezech. 9. v. 5, 6.
IN my former Catechismes I explicated to you, as well as I could, the two
principal Mysteries of our Faith, viz. the Unity and Trinity of Almighty God;
and the Incarnation and Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ. I call these the
principal Mysteries of our Faith; and that you may understand why, I must
desire you to reflect, that there be two things in this life which it mainly
concerns a man to know, viz. the last end whether he is going, where all his
desires are to be accomplished, where he is to rest for ever: And the way or
means to attain to it. Our end is God, in him we are to find our eternal
repose; and out of him, there is no true repose: Our hearts were made for him,
and they can never be at quiet, says St* Augustine, till they rest in him.

The means to attain to this end, is our Savior Christ, as he says himself,
John 14. v. 6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: i. e. the Way by my
Example, the Truth by my Doctrine, and the Life by my Grace. No body comes to
the Father (i. e. to the beatifical vision of God in Heaven) but by me: i. e.
by imitating my Life and Conversation, by observing my Doctrine and
Commandments, and by the assistance of that Grace which I purchased at the
price of my Blood.

This is the reason why these are called the principal mysteries of our Faith,
viz. because in these two consists our whole Happiness; the one being
Happiness it self, the other the Way to it; he that knows these two Mysteries,
as he ought, knows enough, though he knows nothing else; because he knows all
that is requisite to make him Happy: and he that knows not these, knows
nothing; though he knows all things besides; though he knows all Philosophy, though
he knows how to heap together Mountains of Riches, though he knows how to Conquer
Kingdoms: because he does not know, that which only concerns him to know, i. e.
wherein consists his Eternal Welfare.

A Christian should have always two things in his mind, viz. God and Jesus
Christ: God in whom, and Jesus Christ by whom he is to be Happy; God who is his
end, and Christ who is his way. The knowledge and due consideration of these two
Points, is the source of life everlasting, as our Savior tells us, John 17. v.
3. This is life everlasting, that they know thee the only true God, and whom
thou have sent, Jesus Christ. On the contrary, the want of this knowledge; or,
which is the same, the want of a true reflection upon it, is the cause of
perdition to all those that perish. Travelers must needs lose themselves, that
neither know their end, nor their way. These two Mysteries do contain, the
greatest part of the Creed, whether we regard the importance of the matter, or
the number of Articles; for of the Twelve, as I told you before, these are
Eight. Therefore at present we will put an end to the declaration of the Creed,
and pass to another part of the Christian Doctrine: but first, I have one thing
to do, and that shall fill up the time we have left for this days
entertainment; It is to tell you, how we may keep a perpetual memory of these
two great Mysteries, which it so much imports us never to forget: It is by
making the Sign of the Cross; a thing so much practiced by Catholics, and with
so much reason, as, by Gods help, I will make appear presently: For the sign of
the Cross, is a short abridgment of all that we are taught in the Symbol of
the Apostles concerning the Unity and Trinity, with the Incarnation and Death
of God the Son. Observe a little, and you shall see how, When I make the sign
of the Cross, I put my hand first to my head, and say, In the name of the
Father; then under the breast, saying, And of the Son; then to the right and
left shoulder, saying, And of the Holy Ghost. First I say singularly, In the
name; that is to say, power and authority: Then I say plurally, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost; by which I signify that all Three have but one Name; that is,
Power and Authority, and consequently one Essence and Divine Nature; here is
Unity and Trinity. Now, the figure of the Cross does represent the Death of our
Savior, who died upon it; but because it was impossible for God to dye but in
mortal flesh, therefore this Sign, by a necessary consequence, does represent
his Manhood or Incarnation, together with his Death. And by this you may see,
that the Sign of the Cross, which does so scandalize the world, is nothing but
a profession of our belief in a Trinity, and a Crucified Redeemer. It Is a sign
by which we discern our selves from Jews and Turks, who pretend to believe in
one God as well as we; but neither believe a Trinity of Persons, nor the
Incarnation of the Second. Give me leave to detain you a little longer upon
this Subject; First, to tell you the Reasons why we make so much use of the
Sign of the Cross: In the second place, I will say what disposition of mind is
required, to the end it may be beneficial to those that make it. But to begin
with due order, let us beg the assistance of him that died on the Cross, by
her intercession of whom he took that Flesh in which he suffered for us, Ave
Maria.

Fides a nobis exigit duplex officium, cordis, and linguae: i. e. faith, says
St. Augustine, lays two obligations upon us, viz. one of the Heart, and another
of the Tongue: the duty of the Heart, is to Believe; that of the Tongue, is to
Profess: this latter is as necessary as the former, Nequae enim salui esse
possumus, nisi fidem ore profiteamur, quam cord gerimus: i. e. we cannot be
saved, says the same holy Doctor, unless we profess with our mouth, what we
believe in our hearts. This doctrine of St. Augustine is taken out of St. Paul,
Romans 10. c. Cord creditur ad justitiam, ore autem confessio fit ad salutem: i.
e. to obtain true justice, we must first believe in our hearts, for faith, as
we are taught by the Council of Trent, is the beginning of happiness, the root
and foundation of all virtue and good life; without which, as the Apostle tells
us in Heb. c. 11. it is impossible to do any thing pleasing to God, or to be
admitted into the society of his Elect Children. But this is not enough: to
attain Eternal Salvation, faith must flow from the heart to the mouth, Ore
confessio fit ad salutem, i. e. whoever will be saved, must be ready to make an
open Profession of his Faith before men, whenever a just cause requires it.

There be two things in this matter most certain; first, that it is never
lawful to betray the true Faith, either by a direct denial, or by professing
any thing contrary to it. He that denies me before men, says our Lord, Mat.
10. v. 23. I will deny him before my Father who is in Heaven. St. Luke has it
thus, He that is ashamed of me and my words, the Son of man will be ashamed of
him, when he comes in his Majesty, and of his Father, and the Majesty of the
Angels, c. 9. v. 26. The other thing is, that sometimes, under pain of being
disowned by Christ at the latter day, we are obliged to manifest our Faith to
the world: I said sometimes, viz. when Charity exacts it, and Prudence tells us
it ought to be done: at other times it is lawful to conceal our Faith by
silence; but never with a denial.

Now this profession of Faith, may be made two ways, viz. either by Words, or
by Signs; it is not the Tongue alone we speak with; we speak by the clothes we
wear, by the company we keep, by the Places we haunt; we speak sometimes by
silence it self. I know what Religion you are of by the Assemblies you
frequent, as well as if you made a profession of it with your Mouth: I know
what Master you belong to by the Livery you wear, though you speak not a word:
Now to come to our purpose, the Sign of the Cross is the Livery of Jesus
Christ; I know by this Sign, that a man believes in one God and Three Persons;
the second of which, was Nailed to a Cross, as well as by the plainest words
that can be spoken with a Tongue: when I see a man Sign himself with the Cross,
I know he is neither Jew, nor Turk, nor Heathen; I know he is a Christian, tho
he says nothing to me: for he would not make that Sign, unless he believed
what no Infidel will believe, viz. One God, who is Three Persons; the second of
which, was made Man, and Crucified for us. I say it over again, that for a man
to make the Sign of the Cross, and to say I am a Christian, is the same thing.
And now you have one Reason of this Catholic practice, viz. of making the Sign
of the Cross, It is as I said before, a profession of our Faith. it is the
Livery by which we show our selves to be the servants of Jesus Christ; it is a
distinguishing mark by which we discriminate our selves from all sorts of
unbelievers. Now I will give you another Reason.

Blessed is the man, says the Prophet David, Psalm. 39. v. 5. Whose hope is in
the Name of the Lord, i. e. who puts all his confidence in God, who expects no
happiness but from him; neither in this world, nor in the next; who hopes for
no success in his affairs, but from his assisting hand: and this hope he
grounds in the Merits of Christ, by whom, as the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 2. v.
18. We have access to the Father; and without whom, there is no access to him,
nor any possibility of obtaining any favor of him: for a token of this
confidence grounded in Christ, we make the Sign of the Cross before every thing
we do: we make it when we lie down to sleep; hoping, that for the merits of him
that died upon it, God will protect us that night from the Prince of darkness,
and from all nocturnal fears, Psalm. 90. we make it when we rise again, begging
by the same means to be preserved that day from all evil, and that all may
prosper that we undertake for the honor of God; we make it before Prayer, to
testify that we expect not to be heard but by him that was Crucified for us; we
make use of it in the most holy Sacrifice of the Mass; in all our Sacraments,
in the Benedictions of Water, of Candles, of Bread, etc. because we believe,
that all Blessings and Consecrations receive their force and efficacy from the
Death and Passion of our Lord and Savior. In fine, we make no Oblation to the
eternal Father, but what we sign with the Cross; knowing that he accepts no
Offering, and receives no Request, unless it be stamped with the Seal of his
only beloved Son. This was the Custom of the primitive Christians, who, as
Tertullian, an Author that lived not long after our Saviors Ascension into
Heaven, does testify, did; to speak in his Phrase, wear out their Foreheads, by
making the sign of the Cross at their going out, at their coming in again; at
putting on their Clothes, at the washing of their Hands, and the lighting of
Candles; at their going to Bed; in a word, at whatsoever action they employed
themselves in, Quaecunque nos conversatio exercet. This is the second Reason of
our respect to the sign of the Cross; it is a tacit invocation of the most
blessed Trinity, by the Merits of our Crucified Redeemer: It is to testify,
that we believe that no favor can be obtained of God, but by him, and for him.

Before I give you a Third Reason, I must put you in mind, that Almighty God,
as he is a most liberal Giver, so is also a severe exacter of Thanks: we may
see this by his proceedings with the Children of Israel in the Old Testament:
He never did them any notable Favor, but he commanded a Monument to be Erected
to preserve the memory of it, and to transmit to Posterity the Obligation of
giving Thanks for it; for Example, he freed them out of Captivity, by Killing
every Firstborn of the Egyptians in one night; for a memorial of this benefit,
he commanded them to keep a solemn Feast called the Passover, and to mark the
Posts of their Doors with the Blood of the Lamb; to the end, their Children
might learn, That the destroying Angel, when he killed every firstborn in the
houses of the Egyptians, passed over the houses of the Hebrews without doing
Them any harm, Exodus 12. v. 27. He fed them in the Desert with a Bread from
Heaven, called Manna; for a remembrance of this, he would have a Gomer, i. e. a
certain measure to be filled with it, and to be kept in the Ark of the
Covenant, that future Ages might know the Bread with which he had nourished
them in the Wilderness, Exodus 16. v. 32. He made them a Passage through the River
of Jordan, as he had done before through the Red Sea; That this might not be
forgotten in subsequent times, he bid them take twelve Stones out of the bottom
of the dry Channel, and place them upon the Bank; that after wards, Fathers
might tell their Children why these Stones were laid there; and so make them
know their obligation, of thanking Almighty God for the favor done them, Josh.
4. v. 22, 23. In fine, all their Festival-days, all their Ceremonies and
Sacrifices, were so many Remembrances of their delivery out of Egypt, and
bringing them into the Land of Promise. Read Deuteronomy. 6. v. 20, etc. The same duty
of thanksgiving, he exacts of Christians, with so much more reason, as it is a
greater favor, to be delivered out of Hell fire, than out of Egypt; and to be
brought to the Kingdom of Heaven, than to Palestine: and therefore we have our
Monuments, to put us in mind of our Redemption as well as they; our Christmas,
our Goodfriday, our Easter, our Ascension-day, our Whitsontide; all the Feasts
of the Year are to put us in mind of some benefit received from God; the most
dreadful Sacrifice it self, what is it, but a Memorial of his Death and
Passion? Do this in remembrance of me, Luke 22. v. 19. Now amongst other
industries we make use of to keep up the memory of our Redemption, One, and
that a very proper one, is the Sign of the Cross; the Cross is a Monument of
Christ's Victory over the Devil; a testimony of his Love toward Mankind, and a
Sign of our delivery from the thraldom of Sin: by the Cross, says St.
Chrysostom, he broke down the gates of Hell, and loosed the Souls of the Just
that were imprisoned there; he unlockt Heaven, and made us a free passage in
thither; by the Cross, he reconciled God to Man, and restored Man to the
fellowship of the Angels: by the Cross, says the same holy Doctor, death was
turned into a sleep; and that which was the destruction of life, is made an
entry into life Eternal; that which was the Punishment of sin, is become the
Crown of Martyrs. When we look upon the Heavens, we remember the greatness of
him that made them: and when we make the Sign of the Cross, we call to mind the
Goodness of him that dyed upon it. God Almighty in the Old Testament, Deuteronomy. 6.
commanded the Jews to have his Laws and Ceremonies before their eyes
continually; to meditate upon them day and night, in their houses, and in the
highways; at their lying down to sleep, and at their rising again: because, as
it is there said, they were memorials of their delivery from Bondage: the Cross
is a memorial of our delivery out of a worse Bondage than that of Egypt; and
from a heavier Yoke than that of Pharaoh; therefore with greater reason, we
ought to think of it day and night; at home and abroad, at our lying down, and
at our rising up again. To this end the ancient Christians, as St John
Chrysostom witnesses, did erect Crosses in all places, viz. in the Churches,
in the Markets, in the Towns, in the Fields, in the Highways, and upon the
tops of Mountains; that wheresoever they went, wheresoever they turned
themselves, they might have before them, the sign of Gods Love, and their own
Redemption. And here is the Third Reason for the Sign of the Cross; it is to
put us in mind of the Victory Christ gained over the Devil, and of our own
delivery out of Hellfire.

One Argument more, and I have done: St. Paul, in his Epistle to the
Colossians, c. 2. v. 14, 15. says, That our Savior Crucified, did carry the
Devil in triumph, and made him a spectacle to God and his Angels. It Is a remark
of Origin upon this place, that as Christ was Crucified visibly, so the Devil
was Crucified invisibly: Our Lord, by suffering himself to be Crucified, you
know, did deprive himself of the use of his Arms for a time; so the Devil, by
the Cross, lost the use of his Arms, i. e. of his power over mankind for ever,
and therefore was Crucified invisibly more than Christ was visibly. For this
cause he is afraid of the Cross, as a Malefactor is afraid of the Gallows; or
as a Dog is afraid of a Stick with which he has been beaten: Metuunt illud
signum, in quo Salvator, aeris expolians potestates, eas fecit ostentui; the
infernal Spirits, says St. Anthony, in his life written by St. Athanasius,
fear that Sign, by which our Savior triumphed over them, and made them the
scorn of Heaven and Earth. Those two great terrors of the Devils, Anthony and
Hillarion, as we read in their Authentic Histories written by St. Athanasius
abovesaid; and St. Hierome, did always make use of the Sign of the Cross as
the most efficacious Weapon against them. Nay, which is wonderful, it has not
this force only upon the Foreheads of Saints, but sometimes also, (if so
pleasing God for the clearer demonstration of the efficacy of it) when it is
made use of even by wicked men. We read in the Church History written by
Eusebius Caesariensis, that Julian the Apostate, so called, because he revolted
from the Faith he had been brought up in, and attempted by a sacrilegious
vanity to wash out of his Soul the indelible Character of Baptism, by washing
his body in the blood of Heathen Sacrifices: we read (I say) that this* wicked
man, by making the Sign of the Cross, though inconsideratly, and by force of a
custom he had been inured to in the time of his Christanity, did put to flight
those wicked spirits which had caused to be raised by Art-Magick, to learn of
them the success of his future affairs. In virtue of this Sign appearing in the
Air, Constantine the Great, our Countryman and first Christian-Emperour, was
made Victorious over all his Enemies, (...), i. e. In this thou shall Overcome.
And now you have the Fourth and last Argument for the Use of the Cross; It Is
the Terror of the Devils, it is our Protection against them; by this all their
attempts are made ineffectual; at the sight of this they run away.

On the contrary, those that will not make use of it, those that bear no
respect to it, not even for his sake that Redeemed us by it, how they disarm
themselves, and lay themselves open to be wounded by their ghostly enemies, may
be gathered out of those words of Ezekiel, which I have taken for my Text. This
Prophet saw in a Vision, six men enter into the Temple, each of them with an
instrument of Death in his Hand; to those Command was given, to go through the
City, and to Kill without Mercy, and without distinction of Age, Condition or
Sex; all they met with, excepting only those, whom another Man, sent before to
that purpose, had marked with the Tau upon their Foreheads. Such another Vision
was Revealed to St. John Apocalypse 7. in which he saw four Angels, with power
to execute the Divine Justice upon all that had not the Sign of the Living GOD.
What is meant by Ezekiels Tau, and what by the Sign of the Living God in the
Apocalypse, I have not authority to define: But certain it is, First, that both
the one and the other shall be a Mark of Distinction between the Elect and the
Reprobate at the great discerning Day. Secondly, it is no less certain, that the
Holy Fathers do take them both for the Sign of the Cross; and Reason persuades
into this belief; otherwise I think no reason can be given, why this Sign
should have the name of Tau; a letter which at that time the Prophet writ, did
represent the Cross, as our Capital T does at present: And what Sign peculiar
to the Living GOD besides the sign of the Cross, and why it should be upon the
Foreheads of those that are to be Saved by it, unless it be a Cross, I think no
body can determine. Hence I conclude, That all that are found Marked with the
Cross at the great Day, shall be under the protection of Almighty GOD. But
those that are found without it, Shall they be abandoned to the fury of the
Sword? Shall they be left a prey to the Devils? God forbid, that Souls Redeemed
by Christ, should be left a prey to them! But now I must desire you not to
mistake me: I do not say, that the bare Sign of the Cross, separated from
Faith, and other Pious dispositions of the mind, shall be a protection to any
body in the day of Revenge: And therefore, to perform what I promised in the
Second place; I must tell you what disposition of mind is requisite, to the end
the Sign of the Cross may prove Beneficial to those that make Use of it.

St. Paul, Romans 2. blaming the Jews for putting too much confidence in the
outward Circumcision of their flesh, as if it were sufficient to save them
without the observation of the Commandments: tells them, it is not the external
Circumcision of the body that makes them children of Abraham, but the inward
Circumcision of the mind, i. e. cutting away all vicious affections from their
Souls. The same I say in our case; the outward sign of the Cross upon our
foreheads, does not make us Christians, i. e. Children of God, and Heirs of
Heaven; but the inward sign of the Cross in our Souls. No body, as a learned
Father anciently said, obtains any favor of God, by making the sign of the
Cross upon his forehead with his hand, unless at the same time he make it
inwardly in his heart, by Faith. Circumcision says the Apostle, ibid. is a
profitable thing if you observe the Commandments; otherwise Circumcision is no
better than Gentility. So the Cross upon the forehead is good, if it be joined
with a Cross in the heart; if not, we are but Heathens under the mark of
Christanity. But what is it you will say, to make the sign of the Cross in our
hearts? It is to have in our hearts the virtues which Christ exercised upon the
Cross; of which the outward Cross is a sign, and without which that outward
sign can benefit nothing at all. For example sake: The sign of the Cross is a
sign of Humility; a sign of humility in Christ that dyed upon it, and a sign of
humility in those that make it; now, as I said, it will benefit us nothing to
carry the sign of humility without, if we have a proud heart within. It Is a
sign of Patience; it will do us no good to have the sign of Patience upon our
foreheads, whilst our minds are full of Anger and Revenge. It is a sign of
Charity; What will it avail us under the mark of Mercy and Love, to have a
heart replenished with Hatred toward our Neighbor, and void of pity and
compassion toward the Poor? It Is a sign of Suffering; To what purpose should
we make profession of Suffering, whilst we welter in Pleasures? It Is a sign of
Victory; we should be ashamed to wear the Laurel, having never yet fought
against sin, and being yet fettered with the Chains of the Devil. In fine, all
making the sign of the Cross, all coming to Mass, all saying of Prayers, and
hearing of Sermons, all outward signs of Christianity, are but lies, and do but
make us Hypocrites, unless we have inwardly the Virtues we profess outwardly by
these signs.

But to weary your patience no longer, I will collect into a short sum, all I
have said, that every one may carry something away. I have given Four Reasons
why we make the sign of the Cross; First, because it is a profession of our
belief in one God, who is Three Persons, and in our Redeemer who dyed for us
upon a Cross: It Is the Badg of a Christian, and the Livery of our Lord and
Master Jesus Christ: Therefore we must not despise it now, for fear he despise
us another day. It is a tacit invocation of the most blessed Trinity by the
Merits of Christ. It Is the Seal of God the Son: We must mark all our actions
with it, lest for want of it they be rejected by the Eternal Father. It is a
memorial of Christ's conquest, and our redemption: let us carry it about us,
that we do not fall into oblivion of so great a benefit, and by oblivion incurr
the crime of ingratitude. Fourthly, it is an Armor of defense that will shield
us against all the strokes of our Ghostly enemies; if we cast it away, we
expose our selves to their mortal wounds. Finally, whilst we carry the mark of
Christian upon our foreheads, let us endeavor to have Christian Virtues in our
hearts.

Amen.
FINIS.

