A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE EARL OF BERKLEY,
GOVERNOR, AND THE Company of Merchants Of ENGLAND Trading in the Levant Seas.

At St. Peter's Church in Broadstreet, Nov. 18. 1683.

By JOHN HVGHES, A. M. and Fellow of Baliol College in Oxon, and Chaplain to
his Excellency the Lord Chandois, Ambassador at Constantinople.

LONDON, Printed for Fincham Gardner, at the White-Horse in Ludgate Street,
1683.

TO THE Right Honorable GEORGE Earl of BERKLEY, Governor; and to the Company
of Turkey Merchants.
Right Honorable, etc.
THE Subject of the ensuing Discourse was of your Appointment, and the Sermon
is now published at your Command: So that, if the Text gave you no Title to it,
yet you have made it yours by approving it. And therefore lest the Faults of it
should reflect upon you, I think my self bound to declare this truth by way of
Apology for them: That 'twas made in a hurry of other business, and amidst the
distractions of a man going into another World. I don't tell you this; because
you knew it before, and for that reason, and for the sake of some things in it
well meant, I presume gave the whole a favorable acceptance, though it be far
from a correct piece. Neither should I have told it others, who may possibly
throw away so much time as to read this Discourse, but that I am more concerned
for the reputation of your Candor, than of mine own Judgment. For I could be
well content to publish my weakness without an Apology, when it is the best
means, I can use for the discharge of a necessary duty: And gives me an
opportunity to testify my gratitude both for that general, and unanimous
consent whereby you entitled me to the honor of your service, and the
particular favors, and great civilities which, though a stranger, yet as a
Clergyman I have received from you.

And since the acknowledgment of Benefits is one branch of the Virtue of
Gratitude, I hope you will think it my duty and nothing else makes me say,
that, that part of this Sermon which treats of the advantages of Shipping to
this Island, does more eminently concern your selves: And that the obligations
you have laid upon me, before mentioned, do infinitely fall short of those I
lie under, as an English man, to the Eastern traffic which you manage. For
most of the useful Arts amongst us owe their Original to Asia the Less, or
Greece, from whence they were derived to us and some, before the Roman
Conquest: And by the best account that History can give us, we first received
the Christian Religion immediately from Syria. So that, not to speak of the
Benefits we at present enjoy from the Levant trade, the merits of its past
services have been so incomparably great to the whole Nation, that I doubt not,
but they will be an Argument to Authority to continue the protection, and
encouragement of it; as they ought to be, to all English men to wish, and pray
for its prosperity. Amongst whom, as more particularly bound, your happiness in
every kind, and degree of it, shall be the constant subject of the Prayers of

Right Honorable, etc. Your most Obliged and most Obedient Servant John Hughes.

Psalm. CVII. 23, 24. They that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do business in
great Waters:

These see the Works of the Lord, and his Wonders in the Deep.


IT IS an Observation, as true as common, That men are generally more affected
with the Novelty of things, than with their Excellency; that the same Object
which at first raised their Admiration, or charmed their Affections, upon a
short continuance in the same Circumstances, or a frequent intercourse with it,
makes but very slight impressions on them. And this is equally true, with
respect either to the Wisdom or Goodness of God, which appears stamped on his
Works. For, does not the commonness of his Mercies make them seem little, if
not unobserved? Do not the choicest pieces of his Creation, which we are
acquainted, and daily conversant with, meet with a kind of coldness and
indifferency of thought about them? The number and magnitude, The Regular
Motion, and excellent Order of the Heavenly Bodies: The constant returns of Day
and Night: and the several vicissitudes of Seasons, which are so many standing
Miracles, and repeated Confutations of Atheism, are less regarded than some
single, and, in comparison, slight Occurrences, if extraordinary. Whereas there
is really more reason of Surprisal and devout Admiration, at the Natures* and
constant and orderly Revolutions of these, than at any of those unusual and
supernatural Events, which are styled Miracles: It being a much greater, and
more glorious work to make this World, and to keep every thing in that just
order it is: Than sometimes to restrain the natural force of a Creature, or
make it exert it self beyond its natural Power. For this is but a short and
transient, the other a permanent and continual Miracle.

But even those, that are properly Miracles, though the most surprising things
imaginable, lose very much of their Efficacy on the minds of Men, when frequent
and customary. Thus the Israelites, when they had been for some time fed with
Quails and Manna from Heaven, despised and loathed them. And after their
deliverance from Egypt had been wrought, by a long Series of Miracles, which
accompanied them throughout their whole Journey into Canaan; so that they
scarce eat, or drank, or slept, or walked without a Miracle; yet so faint
impressions did they leave on them, that the Psalmist tells us, Ps. 78.11.
They forgot his works and his wonders that he had shown them. The commonness
of them made them look like the rest of Gods Works; and partake of the same
Fate with them, to be little regarded.

And therefore, if any of those wonderful works of God, which the Royal Prophet
has respect to in my Text, do fall under the like neglect, because they are not
new; since by the long use of Navigation, men are now made acquainted and
familiar with them: It is to be resolved into the same common Cause, the
weakness and inconstancy of men's minds, which will not long be deeply affected
with any thing, be it ever so surprising or excellent.

For though the Wisdom and Goodness of God be so admirably displayed throughout
all his works* that no place is unfurnished with great variety of Objects, to
entertain and ravish the devout Contemplator, yet certainly it may be said of
those that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do business in great Waters,
better than of any sort of Men in the world, That these see the works of the
Lord, and his wonders: For none of the Works of God, either of his Creation, or
especially of his Providence, are greater or more admirable, than those which
are beheld on the Sea, or some way or other concern Navigation.

Now, in speaking to the Text, though the former part of it (Those that go down
to the Sea in Ships: that do business in great Waters) might give an occasion
for a Discourse of the Art of Sailing, and of Merchandise; yet, I hope, it is
not expected I should read a Lecture of these here: For besides that, this
would be to go off from the principal scope of my Text, and I think not
suitable to the business of this place: 'Twould also be a very undecent
undertaking, with respect to the Audience, and look like the Vanity of the
Roman Orator, who made a Formal speech of the Art of War before Hannibal, a
great and experienced Captain. I shall therefore keep my self within the verge
of my Profession; and if in treating of the present Subject, as a Divine, my
Discourse be not interlarded with the terms of either of the formentioned Arts;
I hope 'twill not be esteemed a Fault; because 'twill have less of Ostentation
in it. It being a very easy thing for any one to pick up some Phrases of a
Science, and strut with a few terms of an Art, that he has no competent
knowledge of.

And so not to hold you longer with Prelimenaries, or a needless Explication of
a plain Text, I shall immediately fall upon the matter of it, and reduce my
following Discourse under these Three Heads.

I. I shall observe to you the Original of Navigation. Or how it came to pass
that men went down into the Sea with Ships; and who first attempted it. II. I
shall consider the excellent ends and uses it serves to, or what that business
is which is done in great Waters. III. Give a particular Enumeration of some of
the most remarkable works and wonders of God in the deep.
I. I shall observe to you the Original of Navigation. This I could not pass
over, because singular and extraordinary, the Original of Shipping being the
work of God, not as concurring with Humane Wit in finding it out, in which
sense the invention of every Lawful Art may be ascribed to him; but in a
peculiar manner, and by a special Revelation.

For the First attempt of this nature was occasioned by his express command to
Noah; and the Vessel built by particular instructions from him. As we find in
Genesis 6. where God directs him in the proportions of it, as of what height and
length, and breadth it should be, that it might receive a good Burden without
sinking, and hold out tight against the violent agitations of the Waves: And
then to preserve the Wood from Putrefaction, and to keep out the Waters at the
joyntings and closings of the Timber, he both shows him the right material, and
how to apply it. Thou shall pitch it within and without with pitch, v. 14.

And thus the Divine Wisdom having taught this Art for the substance of it, he
left the more easy additions, and ways of expeditious sailing to the search of
Humane Wit and Industry.

So that setting aside the Benefits of Navigation, which no Humane Art can
pretend to equal, it has much the pre-eminence over other useful Inventions, in
respect of its Original, as the honor of a Divine Revelation can give it. And
indeed if we rightly consider, what almost infinite dangers, and to our first
and natural apprehensions of things insuperable difficulties attend it, a
supernatural Discovery of this Art will seem but necessary.

The Poet styled him (audax nimium) too bold and daring a Man, who first
adventured to Sea; because a small Bark (he thought) so unequal a match for the
Fury of the Winds, and rage and violence of the Waves. But his ignorance of the
Original of Shipping made him ascribe too much to Humane Courage, which
probably would have looked upon it, as too hardy an undertaking, ever to have
engaged in, had not some of the early Posterity of Noah, been emboldned by his
Example and Success, to take at first short Voyages, creeping by the Shoars;
and so encouraged succeeding Ages to farther Adventures and Improvements.

For, besides the danger of the Rocks, many of which being seen on the Shore,
could not but make Men suspect more; before they were convinced by woeful
experience; and the irresistible force of the Winds, which would often shape
their Course, in spite of their Skill, contrary to what they intended, and so
might drive them on a Rock, and certain ruin: Besides these dangers, what
reason had they to fear lest their poor Vessel should be swallowed up by the
furious Ocean; when Mountains of Water would sometimes come over her, and so
cover her, that it can scarce be known for a time, whether she sinks or swims:
Who could promise the first Adventurers, that ever she should emerge out of
those dangerous deeps, and mount upon the backs of those proud Waves, that
immediately before threatened her Destruction? And then of how many parts does a
Ship consist, which though fastened together with Bolts of Iron, yet if one
Plank springs, or Bolt gives way, all may be lost? And in a great stress of
Weather, when every part works with such a violence, and the foaming Billows
give them such dreadful strokes, that none should start out, no seam open, is a
wonderful mercy of Providence; and what the unexperienced could not in reason
have expected. Upon the whole then we may reasonably conclude; That thus to
commit their safety to the Winds and Waves, and to live some days and weeks
within four or five Inches of Death, was a work too difficult and desperate for
the Wit and Courage of Men, with ordinary assistance, to have attempted; nor
would any of the Posterity of Noah have set upon it, but in confidence of his
Example: Nor would Noah himself ventured, unless he had been first taught, and
encouraged by God.

But then from the Divine Original of this Art, we may make this useful, and
comfortable observation against the dangers that attend it, viz. That the same
infinite Wisdom, and Goodness, that was pleased at first to reveal it, will
continue in an especial manner to be propitious to it; and employ his Power in
the Protection, and Deliverance of those, that use it in pursuance of just, and
honest Designs.

This is a Conclusion necessarily flowing from what was said before, and the
Notices we have of the Divine Nature. For God having made Man after his own
Image, we must judge of his Inclinations to things by our own; provided, we
bring none of our foolish Humors, or viler Lusts, into the Comparison: And
therefore, since men naturally favor their own Inventions, we cannot suppose
the Divine Nature to have a less care, and concern for his: And whereas, in the
ordinary course of his Providence he protects and assists Men; and blesses
their honest endeavurs in every Art he approves, we have reason to believe he
exercises a more immediate Care, and a peculiar Providence about that, which in
a distinguishing, singular way, himself was the Author of. But the Interest it
has in Providence, will farther appear (both upon the account of Gods Wisdom,
which proportions his Care to the worth of things; and as he is a lover of the
good of Mankind) from what is to be considered in the next place.

II. The excellent ends and uses it serves too.

Which in general are, to administer to the Necessities and Convenience of
Humane Life, by supplying the wants of every Country, out of the abundance of
others: and that in a way, to some places of absolute necessity, to all of a
much easier Conveyance, than otherwise can be contrived: And thereby making the
Blessings of our bountiful Creator as diffusive, as he intended them.

In which respect, and by way of allusion, the Philosophers Notion of the Sea
may be allowed, when he styled it the Blood of the World. For, as the Blood
Communicates life and nourishment, and vigor to all the parts of our Bodies;
so does the Sea, by the help of Navigation, convey to each part of the World,
not only the Nourishment, the Wealth, and Commodities; but the Life and Spirit,
the Manners, Arts, and Policies of other Countries; so that no Nation, be the
gifts of Heaven dealt out to them in their own Soil with ever so scanty an
Hand, can yet be destitute of the Conveniences, and Delights of Life; unless
through their own supine Negligence, and Sloth.

For by this means the most barren parts of the Earth, have been made fruitful,
and enriched: The most rude and barbarous People Civilized. Thus came the dry,
and parched Sands, and once Savage Inhabitants of Africa, to flourish formerly
with the Treasures, Learning, and Civility of the East; with the Wealth of
Asia, and the Arts of Rome: And thus at this day with the same, do the once
Barbarous, and scarce Habitable parts of Europe flourish.

But the usefulness of this excellent Art is not confined to the needy, but
reaches those Countries to whom Nature is kindest.

For as the more Honorable Members of the Natural Body stand in need of those
that are less Honorable: And in Civil Societies, the Rich are obliged to the
Poor for their Labor, as well as the Poor to the Rich for their Bounty. So in
the great Economy of the World, by the Wisdom of Providence, to encourage
Industry, and promote a mutual Intercourse, and good Correspondence amongst
Mankind, those parts that abound most, and with the noblest Productions, do yet
as much want some of the Commodities of less fruitful Countries, as these do
the best of theirs, and are glad to exchange Gold for Iron, or Lead, or Tin;
and Silk, for Wool.

So Public, so Universal a Good is Shipping. Not sought out only for the
Benefit of a Family, or a City, or a Kingdom, but of the whole World; without
which some places would want many of the Conveniences of Life, and all places
would want some.

It Is that which has opened the way for Conversation, and brought Mankind
acquainted with one another; that has discovered new Regions, and Peopled the
Earth, and made great Nations; that has made the World one, by uniting the
remotest Countries, even those which Nature seemed to have cut off from the
rest, and barred up from any Communication with them. Whereas without it,
probably several parts of the Continent, but to be sure every Island, would to
this day have continued so many lonesome, unknown Worlds: And have been left to
struggle with the necessities of Nature in their own single Strength. Because,
though a Communication between other places, might be maintained with great
Difficulty and Expense; yet it is impossible to find out another way for Islands
to have an intercourse with one another, or with the rest of the World. And
therefore it is absolutely necessary to the well being of them: and
consequently under the guidance of a wise, and good Providence, we are
beholding to it for a great measure of our present happiness. That the Roman
Poets character of us does not hold true in a worse sense, Divisos orb
Britannos: And we are not cut off from the rest of the World, in a
participation of the blessings thereof, as well as in our Situation.

Certainly; there is no people under Heaven more indebted to the goodness of
God, than our selves, for the invention of Shipping; which is not only our
support, and ornament, but our impregnable Fortress too. That brings home to us
the Treasures of the World, and unloads them at our Doors; and then secures us
in the possession of them, from the violence of our Neighbors.

It Is this makes Gold and Silver so plentiful in our Streets, that we come not
much short of Israel in her Glory, in the Reign of Solomon: That our Land flows
with Oil and Wine, and we abound with the Spices and Drugs of the East, and
rich Furs of the North. That all Nations in effect pay us tribute, whilst
Africa, and America are embowell'd for us: and pick out their choicest goods to
present us yearly: and besides the natural product of their respective Soyls,
we are served with the sweat, and labors of Europe, and Asia, in the best of
their Manufactures. So that we are a people wanting nothing, but the knowledge,
and due sense of our own happiness: More thankful hearts toward God, and more
grateful resentments toward his Vicegerent, under the influences of whose
Wise, and Gentle Government, so many Blessings are heaped upon us.

But these, though very valuable Benefits, are yet the least we have received
from Navigation. For what is wealth or plenty without the skill to use it? And
what would it have signified to us, if all those things we need, and now fetch
from foreign Countries, did grow in our Native Soil, ( a) had we still
continued in our first rudeness, and barbarity, without the knowledge of such
Arts as fit, and apply those materials to the ends, and purposes of Life; For
there is scarce a difference between the not having, and the not using a theng.
So that in respect of usefulness, Arts, and Plenty seem to be equal; for Arts
must starve without Plenty, and Plenty cannot be decently managed or scarce at
all used without Arts: But then these have deservedly had the pre-eminence in
the esteem of the wiser part of mankind, because they have this advantage of
the other, that they immediately fine, and polish the minds of men, and are the
Ornaments of Humane Nature. For which reason we are more obliged for the
introduction of these amongst us, than of plenty.

But then how came useful Arts first amongst the old Britains? Was it not by
their Traffic with the Phoenicians, and other Easterly Nations? And was not
this Island first brought to a tolerable pitch of civility by the Roman
Conquest? It Is to Shipping then that we owe not only our wealth, and plenty:
But our Learning, and good Manners, and most of our Handicrafts too. That our
buildings vie with Italy in Goodliness, and Magnificence: and the discipline of
our Camp exceeds that of Sparta, or Rome: That our Schools flourish with the
wisdom, our Towns and Country with the civility of the old Greeks and Romans.
That Babylon in all her Pride, did not outdo us in Merchandise, nor Tire in
the number of Artificers.

It Is this furnishes us with most of our Medicines, and first brought us the
art of healing. It Is this acquaints us with the present state of the World, and
with the Histories of past Ages: not only such as relate to foreign Kingdoms,
but to our own also: of which we should otherwise have known nothing, but what
had been imperfectly delivered down to us by Oral Tradition. For unto this Art,
we owe that, without which no ingenuous Science can be understood, or scarce
any good Trade managed, I mean the knowledge of our Alphabet, and Spelling; and
that any of us are able to Write, or Read.

Because the use of Letters, being first found out in Phoenicia, or Chaldaea,
it was naturally impossible that the knowledge of them should have been conveyed
to us, but by the help of Navigation.

But the top and Crown of its Glory is, that it was a necessary instrument of
planting Christianity amongst us, which ought to be infinitely dearer to us
than wealth, or learning, or any thing besides. For it gave Joseph of
Arimathea, and other Apostlical men, the first Preachers of the Gospel here, an
access to us; and without it, unless by a Miracle, the Knowledge of our Savior
could never have reached our Isle. So that, speaking as Men, but for this Art,
instead of presenting our selves now before the Lord in his Holy Temple; that
God, who made the Heavens and the Earth, and us, and all things else; we might
at this time have been worshipping some little, Impotent, Divinities of our own
making, which can neither help their Worshippers, nor hurt those that profane
them. Or, it may be, with a little more Discretion, might have been falling
down to the Sun, or Moon, or some of the Host of Heaven, that are the immediate
indeed, but second and subordinate Causes, of a great deal of good to Mankind.
We had not only continued a rude and needy People; but without Shipping, we had
been without God in the World.

Thus I have prosecuted this very large Subject, I confess, with some general
hints only; because, if the Text had obliged me to speak to nothing besides;
yet the straitness of an hour w'ont admit of a full and particular Discourse,
of that business which is done in great Waters. I come therefore to the
remaining part of the Text, and in the last place to

III. Reckon up some of the most remarkable works and wonders of God in the
deep. And the first I shall mention is, That the Sea being higher than the
Earth, does not overflow it! When the Text says, Those that go down to the Sea
in Ships, it is to be understood of the part only that is next the Shore: Eor
in other places, that it is higher, is evident, both from the nature of a Globe,
which the Sea and Land could not otherwise make; and also from ocular
Demonstration; because at a distance on the Main, you first see Masts of a Ship
coming toward you, before you see the Body of it, or the Ship it self; which
being so much the fairer Object of Sight, must necessarily be seen first, if
the Ocean were a level. But now, that the Waters being above the Earth, and in
continual Motion, Ebbing, or Flowing, do not fall down upon it, and cover it;
but contrary to the Nature of a Fluid Body, keep themselves in heaps, within
their proper place, is unaccountable to Reason, and can only be resolved into
the Virtue of that Almighty word, Genesis 1.9. And God said, let the Waters under
the Heavens be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry Land appear,
and it was so.

Next to the miraculous confinement of the Sea within its proper bounds, we may
place this, that it is Navigable. That so loose and yielding a body as Water is,
should support the load of a Ship, and of so many thousand weight in it, when
it cannot bear up a grain of Lead, or the least Stone. Here the Wisdom and
Goodness of God can never be sufficiently admired, who knowing how necessary
Navigation was to the good of Mankind, has provided them all the requisites
thereto; as, materials for their Ships and their Tackle, the Magnet for their
Compass, the steady, and parallel direction of the Axis of the Earth, for their
Cynosura; and which is the Foundation of all, created Timber, with the natural
Disposition of floating, and to enable the Sea the better to bear it up, has
infused a Salt thickness into it; which last is the more observable, because it
excellently suits with the end of carrying Ships, and can serve none other,
that we know of.

But then the Sea being thus fitted for Ships, and their Burden: A new Scene
opens for the Divine Glory to display it self, in making this cold and thick
Element, administer to vital warmth, and perspiration: And so a fit Receptacle
for an innumerable company of living Creatures.

Which Fertility of the Waters, does as much illustrate the Wisdom and Goodness
of God, as any of his Works on Earth. His Goodness, in the maintenance of many
thousand Families by the Fishing-Trade. His Wisdom in the Natures of those
Animals. Many of them for strength, and goodly proportions being inferior to
none on the Land. But I shall not be tedious in giving particular Descriptions of
these; only observe, That when Almighty God himself would magnify his Wisdom,
and Power before Job, he picks out the Leviathan of the Sea, for the chief
subject of his Triumph. And having described his strength, and proportions,
with respect to them, leaves us this supereminent Character of him. Upon the
Earth there is not his like: he is a King over all the Children of Pride.

But besides the wonderful works of Creation, which I think come fairly within
the sense of my Text: It Is evident from the following Verses, which describe a
deliverance from a Storm, that the Text does more especially respect the Acts
of Divine Providence, as employed about Sea-fairing men. And here his Goodness
is to be admired, 1. In preserving their Ships at Sea, and in Storms and
Tempests.

Except the Lord build the House, the Workman labors but in vain, and except
he supports it when built, it cannot stand. But how many more accidents do
hourly threaten the ruin of a Ship at Sea, than an house at Land? The decays of
a House may be repaired, and the breaches made up, when a leake in a Ship
cannot be stopped. In a Tempest, an house has only the Wind to contend with,
which is commonly gentler at Land; but a Ship must endure the violent
Concussions of the Waves too. An Earthquake does now and then swallow up an
House; but how many more Eddies are there, to suck in a Ship? In a calm it is as
liable to the Common accidents of Firing, and Dissolution, by a decay of some
of its parts, as an House: But in a storm, how many more Dangers it is subject
to, and consequently how much more endearing that Providence is which preserves
it, only he can tell, that can count the number of Billows, and the Shelves,
and the Quicksands; for any one of either of these may ruin a Ship.

But there are also some particular Circumstances, that do very much aggravate
their Dangers: For how often do they ride at Anchor near Rocks or Sands; and if
the Cable breaks, or the Anchor comes home to them, they are stranded on the
one, or dashed to pieces against the other? And what is a Cable against the
force of the Waves, but like the Philistines new Cords against the strength of
Sampson? How often are they driven out of their Course they know not whither,
and are kept out of it for several days, without being able to make any
Observation? yet when they have thus lain at the Mercy of the Winds and Waves,
when no Anchor could hold, no Compass direct them; how often has he who sits on
the Floods, and holds the Winds in the hollow of his hand, steered their Course
for them, and made them weather the Rocks, assuaged the Storm, and brought them
to their desired Haven?

But if it be a great work to preserve a Ship at Sea in a storm: it is a greater
to preserve a Man there without a Ship. And how many Instances are there of
these Deliveranees? When God has permitted their Ships to be broken, or to sink
under them, and the ordinary means of preservation have been cut off.

He that out of the eater can bring forth meat, has often made the Instruments
of their threatened ruin, the means of their escape, and saved their Lives by
those Rocks that split their Vessels. And how wonderfully has he supported many
thereon, till a full deliverance has been wrought for them. To some, who like
the Widow of Sarepta, with her handful of Meal, and a little Oil, thought they
should have eaten but once and died, he has blessed the small Provision they
saved in the wreck to their sustenance, till he has sent a Vessel to carry them
off. And others, who had saved nothing to keep themselves from starving; he,
who heard Isreal's cry in the Wilderness, and made the dry stones give them
drink, has pitied in their distress, and fed them out of the hard Rocks; with
a few Muscles, and Birds Eggs, they have found there, till they have been
safely brought off the same way.

But his most common, and no less admirable, Method of delivering Shipwrackt
men is, by wafting them to shore, in a small Boat, or on a part of the Wreck.
An Almighty Power who can save with a few as well as with many, by the most
contemptible means, or without any, as well as with the best, making a slight
Skiff, or part of a broken Plank or a piece of a torn Sail, a defense for them
against the Fury of the Waves, when a stately Pinace, and Castle of Wood, could
not protect them.

Lo, these are part of his ways, Job 26.14.
but how little a portion have we heard of him!

Yet the present Discourse, though very narrow, in respect of its Subject, may
serve to show us our great Obligations to thankfulness, and the praises of God.
Which is a Tribute the least of his Mercies justly challenge from us, and is
all he expects for the greatest. Which the Nature of our present Subject, the
benefits we receive from Navigation, and the numberless Acts of a wise and good
Providence about it, do in a special manner call for; and which too is the end
of the Psalmist here in my Text, as appears from v. 31.

Oh! that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the Children of men.

Upon how many Scores we are indebted to him, and consequently, what reason we
have to bless his Name for the invention and use of this Art, having shown but
now, I shall not repeat here. And because the ways of expressing our
thankfulness for it, are the same that are required for every other Benefit; as
to acknowledge it, first in our words, but chiefly in a Religious, Just, and
Charitable, and sober Comportment in our Lives; I shall wave the enlargment on
them. And since I don't know what special obligations any that hear me may lie
under, for deliverances in their Persons, or Estates: I can only in general,
beseech them, if there be such, to comply with the ends thereof, and suffer
that Goodness to lead them to Repentance, and a Life of Gratitude toward their
Benefactors.

Instead of farther insisting therefore on this point of Thankfulness, and
Praise, I shall Conclude all with exhorting you to pure and fervent Addresses
unto God, for the perpetuating and Augmenting these his Favors toward us.
Which I think very seasonable, and also within the scope of the Psalmist here;
since both the Divine will, and the Nature of our weak and dependant Condition,
do as much oblige us to pray for what we want, and for the continuance of what
we enjoy, as to be thankful for what we have received.

Let us therefore humbly pray unto God, that he would be pleased to continue
these his Mercies toward our Country; that our Shipping may still be our
Wealth, our Ornament, and Defense: and not ours alone, but our Posterity's
after us.

Let us pray likewise for all those that are employed in it, or that Travel by
Water, that they, more immediately depending on his Providence than other men,
may find the benefit of it in every Exigence, and Danger, and never forget
their mighty Deliverer.

But especially let us beg, and be reverently importunate with him, to bless
this Art with success, in the noblest and highest Ends it is capable of
serving; the promoting the Interest of Religion and his Church. That he would
make it, as he has formerly, the happy Instrument of enlightening the dark
Corners of the Earth, and of giving his Son the Nations that know him not for
his Inheritance. In order whereunto we must earnestly implore his Gracious
Influences on all those that go abroad; that by their just and honest dealings,
their innocent and holy Lives, they may adorn the Profession of the Gospel, and
win over strangers to the love of it; or at least make them ashamed to
blaspheme it.

And then because our God gives liberally and upbraideth not: because he is
good, and does good, and delights to do good, and never does one kindness, to
particular Persons or to a Nation, but is ready to do them more: Let us be
encouraged from the abundance of the Blessings we enjoy, to beg not only a
continuance, but an increase of them too. That he would preserve what we have,
and add still to the number of our Shipping: And to our prosperity here, by
influencing, and promoting our Traffic abroad. And the rather let us be
encouraged to ask this for our Affairs abroad, from the late experience of his
wonderful Goodness to us at home. Who appeared in our rescue, and saved us from
sinking, when the Floodgates of Faction and Sedition brake open upon us, and
the deep Waters of the Proud came even over our souls.

Since the Mercies of God are never bestowed singly, and one does but make way
for others: Let us trust that he who has miraculously supported our
Governments, will make our Trade to flourish still more and more. That he who
has quieted our storms on Land, will prevent them on the Sea, or the mischiefs
we might receive from them. But let us thus join the remembrance of the one in
our Prayers for the other; because they are so equally the glory of his
Providence, to still the noise of the Waves, and to restrain the madness of the
People. And let us beseech him to continue to do both for us, because they are
so necessary to our own good, and to the honor and interest of his Church.
That peace may still be within our Walls, and plenteousness within our Palaces:
And to Crown our happiness, Righteousness and Truth may for ever flourish
amongst us. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.

