THE Spirit of Prophecy. A TREATISE To prove (by the ways formerly in use
among the Jews, in the Trial of Pretenders to a Prophetic Spirit) That Christ
and his Apostles were Prophet^: Together with the DIVINE AUTHORITY OF Christian
Religion And the HOLY SCRIPTURES, The Insufficiency of HUMANE REASON, And the
Reasonableness of the Christian Faith, Hope, and Practice, deduced therefrom,
and asserted against Mr. HOBBS, and the Treatise of HVMANE REASON. By W. H.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, MDCLXXIX.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God PETER Lord Bishop of ELY.
My Lord,
WHen the Gospel was first promulgated by the Preaching of Christ and his
Apostles, the Scribes and Pharisees among the Jews, the Philosophers and
Disputers of this World among the Gentiles, i. e. the Wits of that Age were
some of the most eminent Opposers and Rejecters of it; the one required 1 Cor.
1. 22.
a Sign, the other sought after Wisdom; the one would have Signs and Mi^^^les
wrought at their Demand, the other would have Philosophical Reasons drawn from
Natural Causes to make them believe: and for lack of these (as it seems they
pretended) Christ crucified was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the
Greeks foolishness: and that for the same Reasons (such as they are) he seem^
to be so still to some of the Wits of these Times, I am assured by the W^itings
of such Persons as want neither opportunities of Converse with Men, nor ability
to understand their Principles and Pretenses. Some there are that have heard,
and perhaps have read a little of the things called Miracles and
Demonstrations, and for want of these, they seem to despise and contemn the
Gospel. But the truth is, could these Brisk and Airy, these Talkative and
Dogmatical men, obtain leave of themselves to be s^^ious so long as to consider
the nature of the Gospel, and the Demonstration of the Spirit, they might
perhaps find themselves somewhat like those in the Primitive Romans 1. 22.
times, who professing themselves to be Wise, became Fools: Nor have they any
reason to look on this as a reproachful Suggestion; for since Life and
Immortality are brought to light by the Gospel, upon either of these Pretenses
(and they can have no better) to reject it, is but to play the fool very
wisely, and to run mad with a reason for it: and that not only because the
Gospel acquaints us with matters of the highest and best importance that can be
unto us, but also because which of these ways soever they choose to palliate
their Infidelity, it will at length lead them to deplorable absurdity.

For the Semeiotical or Jewish Postulatum, is a very manif^st and malepe^t
piece of Folly: not only because the Gospel was at first abundantly confi^med
by Miracles, uncont^ollably attested; but also because if that were constituted
the way of demonstrating the truth of Divine Revelation, it would lead men to
the impudence of prescribing to the Most High, and setting bounds to the
Almighty, of expecting alterations in the course of Nature, and of having
Preachers (like Juglers) to show tricks at the demand of every petulant
Requirer. Instances hereof we have diverse in the Holy Scripture, but few I
think so p^egnant as that of the Pharisees seeking of Christ Mark 8. 11.
a Sign from Heaven, tempting him. They had no mind to be his Disciples,, but
to make trial of his Skill and ability, and therefore they demand a Sign, and
that presently, upon the spot; and this Sign must be, not that which he had
given them but the day before, by feeding four thousand with seven Loaves and a
few small Fishes; this did not please their Pallats: but they must have a Sign
of their own choosing, and that not from the Earth, the Wind, or the Sea, but
from Heaven: from thence it must come in all haste to satisfy their wanton
Curiosity* And was not this to expect that the Powers of Heaven and Earth
should dance attendance on them at their senseless and impudent demand? It is
plain then, that Insolence and Impiety, Folly and asinine Stupidity are the
Brood that this Postulatum brings forth. And if this be the way of proving the
Gospel to be of God, how shall future Ages be secured against it? Are men more
wise and modest now than they were then? I doubt it; because there are some
(even in our Nation) that are fallen into such as this Absurdity: Whence else
is it that they require a Miracle to prove that Miracles have been done? but
would they stand a little, and consider whither they are going, they might
perhaps perceive, that he who put them into this way, has no extraordinary Wit
as is pretended.

And they that think to excuse their Infidelity or Neutrality by the Grecanick
Postulatum, seem not to me to be much wiser: because they hanker after such
Proof as the nature of the thing will not admit, and reject that that is most
p^oper: for, the Gospel we know contains matters of Faith, and these matters of
Faith (especially those of them that are most excepted against) are contained
either in Historical Narrations or Doctrinal Propositions: the former having
received their Being from Free Agents, not from Causes Necessary, or of their
own nature determined to the doing of that that is be Believed, cannot admit of
strict and rigorous Demonstration, but are capable of proof only by Testimony:
and this we have for matters merely Historical in the Gospel, as fully as for
any other of the same, or (as I think) of a far lesser distance: for, not only
all Christians of the remotest Regions, but Jews and Pagans, Heathens and
Infidels of all sorts have received them for true, and confirmed them Vi^ Grot*
de V^rit. Relig. lib. 2.. 21
unto us. This is all the Proof we either have, or can reasonably desire of
these things, because their nature will admit of no other.

And if they are not, much less are the Doctrinal Propositions (containing mere
matters of Divine Faith) capable of Demonstration, because they are a Mystery
concerning God, his Nature, Essence or Operations: and one would think that men
of Wit and Parts should not betray so much Folly, Ignorance, and want of
Learning, as to expect Philosophical Demonstration for things of that nature:
for such Demonstration, must be either a priori or a posteriori: a priori it
cannot be, because that supposes causes precedent to the First, viz. God
himself, and so implies a Contradiction. Nor can it be a posteriori, because
the Gospel Col 1. 26.
is the mystery which has been hid from Ages and from Generations: if it be
not, whence was it that all the Learned as well as the Vulgar among the Jews
and Gentiles were ignorant of it, till Christ and his Apostles made it
manif^st? it seems therefore, the Faith of the Gospel is a sort of Supernatural
Doctrine, which cannot possibly be demonstrated by the Light of Nature, and for
that reason (were there no other) it is unreasonable to demand it, and senseless
to reject the Gospel for lack of it: such Doctrine can admit of no
demonstration but that of the Spirit: and this indeed is made a posteriori, yet
not from the constant and ordinary Phenomenon of Nature, but from things Novel
and Anomalous (such as Predictions and Miracles) purposely designed for that
end: and this is the way of proving the Gospel to be Divine, far more decent
and proper than any other, because it becomes the Majesty of God, and
conciliates Authority to his Word, by making ^ Cor. 2. 4, 5.
our Faith to stand not in the Wisdom of men, but on the Power of God.

Now to show that this Demonstration was abundantly made by the Spirit in
Christ and his Apostles, is the great design of this Treatise: which being
written on an occasion of a Command laid on me by your Lordship, was by me
humbly offered to the Honor of your Lordships view: and having attained
thereunto, your Lordship it seems was pleased to condescend so far as to read
over as much as your Lordships time would give leave, and then to return it
with many thanks to me for my good pains (as your Lordship was pleased to call
them,) wisely placed on so worthy a Theme; together with such other expressions
of your Lordships Approbation, as neither I did expect, nor (as I fear) does
the Treatise D^serve. But I submit to your Lordships Judgm^nt, and had I not so
done, this Treatise had been buried in obscurity with its Author: but having
that encouragement, I thought my self sufficiently armed against all elation or
dejection of mind, at the various censures that may possibly be passed upon it,
if it should come abroad; because I neither know, nor am like to m^et with any
more able to judge of such matters, or impartial in Judging, than your
Lordship. Hereupon I gave my consent to its being made ^ublick: and for its
freer passage among men, in this declining age of Christianity, I am humbly
bold to let the World know, that your Lordship is thus far concerned therein*
and forasmuch as it contends for that Faith which was once delivered to the
Saints, which is at this day (God be thanked) most excellently established and
most mercifully preserved in the Church of England, whereof also your Lordship
(very deservedly) is one of the Chief Ministers, with all humble confidence I
persuade my self, that for so doing, your Lordship will either not be offended
at, or will easily pardon

Your Lordships very much obliged in all Duty and humble Observance W. H.

TO THE READER.
IN this Treatise you will find Christ and his Apostles put together in one
Proposition: the meaning whereof is not, either that our blessed Lord Jesus was
no more, nor no other than a Prophet, or that the Humane Nature of Christ had
no higher a degree than the Apostles had of immediate Illumination: for, being
Hypostatically united to the Divine, it is reasonable to believe, it had such
communications of Knowledge therefrom, as are vouchsased to no other man
whatever. But the meaning is, that the Eternal Son of God, having graciously
been pleased to take our Nature upon him, made of a Woman made under the Law,
to redeem them that were under the Law, found it expedient (in order to this
end) for him to execute the Office of a Prophet, and to inspire his Apostles
with the Spirit of Prophecy.

That so he did, lies we know at the bottom of our Christian Faith: whoever
believes the Gospel to be of God, does (in a sort) suppose it, and take it for
granted: for whatever Religion is Divine, must needs be either Natural or
Revealed: if Revealed, then the first Preachers of it were Prophets, because
Prophecy is the only way whereby revealed Truth either is or can be dispensed
unto us: for very evident it is, that the Positive Truths of God, besides, or
above what is Natural, can no way be made known unto us, but by a free influx
of the Divine mind upon ours: since therefore (as all agree that) though
Christianity does most highly befriend Natural Theology, yet it self (if it be
of God) is Revealed, it must be concluded, that Christ (the Author of our
Faith) and his Apostles (the first Preachers of it) were Prophets. Yet among
the many good Books that have either heretofore or lately been written to prove
the Truth of Christianity, I have neither seen, nor ever heard of any purposely
written, and directly designed to make good this Principle: I could not but
somewhat wonder at it, and wish it were well done; and this my desire, did at
length vent it self in a Sermon on the Text you find prefixed to this Treatise:
and this Sermon I resolved (on an occasion given me by a Person of great
Learning and Authority in the Church) to transcribe and enlarge in that method
which is there proposed, and you will find here observed: from this
undertaking, the slenderness of mine acquaintance with Oriental Language and
Learning, did a long time deterr me; but considering that (besides mine own
satisfaction, and diversion from less pleasing Employments) I wrote it only for
his Lordships perusal (who I knew had goodness enough to pardon my Defects, as
well as Learning to discover them) I reassumed my former resolution: and in
order to the performance of it, I looked more narrowly than formerly I had done
into those Books which I had that were likely to acquaint me with the customs
and methods of the Jews in the trial of Prophets; and by so doing, have, I
hope, found and pitched upon the principal Means and Methods observed by that
People in that Affair: and this way of procedure (even before I had that Idea
of it which you will find in this Treatise) I did conjecture must needs be very
rational, because it was not only projected but practiced (and that, as far as
we find, without control) for many Ages among God's peculiar People: and that
I was not mistaken in this Conjecture, the fifth Chapter of this Treatise does,
I hope, make manifest, by showing the strength and force of the preceding
Arguments to prove that Christ and his Apostles were Prophets.

Now if any man ask what degree of Prophecy it is which I ascribe unto them, he
may be pleased to know, his curiosity exceeds mine, yet for an answer I referr
him to that Prophecy of Moses, wherein he told the Jews, that the Lord thy God
will raise up unto thee a Pro^het from the midst of thee of thy brethren, like
Deuteronomy. 18. 5.
unto me, unto him shall you hearken. This Act. 3. 22.
Prophecy I find by St. Peter applied to our Blessed Savior in particular; and
by St. Stephen Act. 7. 37.
to the Evangelical state in general: and from thence perhaps we may gather,
not only that this Prediction did more especially pertain to the days of the
Messiah, but also that it speaks not of one single Person only, but of an Order
of Prophets like unto Moses: and therefore, though it were most eminently
fulfilled in Christ, yet was it also accomplished in those that he sent, as the
Father had sent him, viz. the Joh. 20. 21.
Apostles. Whether or no this Collection be Logical, it is not material to
dispute; because the Spirit of Prophecy not only in Christ, but also in his
Apostles, does it self declare the truth of it. For easy it is to observe,
that those Prerogatives which the Jews ascribe to the Prophecy of Moses, their
Master, are very discernable in theirs, as will appear by a Transcript De fund.
L^g* cap. 7.
of them out of Maimonides, who tells us, (1) That all the other Prophets
prophesied in a Dream or a Vision, but Moses our Master beheld and stood while
he was awake, according to that that is said, When Moses was gone into the
Tabernacle of the Congregation to speak with him, (i. e. God) then he heard the
Voice of one speaking unto him: which Numb* 7. 89.
Text is so interpreted by the Jews, as that it seems among the Talmudists it
was a Rule, that Moses had never any Prophecy in the Night, i. e. in a Dream,
or Vision of the Night, as the other Prophets had, but when he was awake, and
in the full vigor of his Senses, then the word of Prophecy came unto him. (2)
All the other Prophets prophesied by the help or ministry of an Angel, and
therefore whatever they saw, they beheld it in Riddle and Similitude: but Moses
our Master prophesied without the intervention of an Angel, as it is said, With
him will I speak mouth to mouth. Thus again Numb. 12. 8.
it is said, The Lord spoke unto Moses Face to Face; it is also said, The
Similitude of the Exodus 33. 11. Numb. 12. 8.
Lord shall he behold; to show, not that there was any Similitude there, but
that he saw clearly, without a Riddle or Parable: which also the Law there
testifies concerning him: even apparently, and not in dark speeches: because he
prophesied not in a Riddle, but he perspicuously beheld the matter in Vision.
(3) All the other Prophets were horribly afraid and astonished, and became
faint; but Moses our Master was not so, and this the Scripture says, as Exodus
33. 1 ^.
a man speaks to his Friend: as if it had been said, as one is not afraid to
hear the speech of his Companion, so could the mind of Moses our Master
understand the words of Prophecy, and remain in its perfect Constancy. (4) None
of the other Prophets could Prophecy when they would: it was not so with Moses
our Master; but at what time soever he would, he was clothed with the Holy
Spirit, and Prophecy did abide upon him; neither had he need to dispose or
prepare his mind for it; for he was always disposed, and in a readiness, as a
ministering Angel, at what time therefore he would, he could Prophecy;
according to that which is said, Stand ye here, that I may hear what the Lord
will Numb. 9. 8.
command concerning you: and herein his considence was placed in God, as it is
said, Go say to them, get you into your Tents, but Deuteronomy. 5. 30, 31.
as for thee, stand thou here by me. Thus Maimonides, concerning the difference
between the Prophecy of Moses and of the other Prophets. I will not pass my
word (how little soever it may signify) either for the truth of all that he
says, or yet for its consistence either with the Holy Scripture, or the
Writings of other Hebrew Masters, or of himself: yet supposing it to be all
true, we may thence gather, that in the Mosaical degree of Prophecy, i. e. the
highest among the Jews, imagination had nothing to do, Divine Truth was
represented immediately to the Understanding, the Characters of it were clearly
and plainly written on the Mind it self, and therein the Prophet might read it
without the Hieroglyphics of Material Phantasms: a soft and gentle irradiation
did so enlighten his Understanding, as that he might know the mind of God,
without either Study or Teaching from Men or Angels, Dreams or Visions, panick
Fears or Passions; and this degree of Prophecy was in him, not as the transient
Effect of a sudden act upon the Patient, but rather as an Intellectual habit,
whose acts he might elicit when he pleased. This is that degree of Prophecy,
which Maimonides and his Adherents attribute to Moses their Master, and we
Christians may do it (I think with greater truth) to Christ and his Apostles.

For certainly, the Soul of our Savior had whatever knowledge was convenient
for it to have in order to his being able to save to the uttermost them that
come to God by him: and forasmuch as even in the days of his Flesh he was (as
well as he now is) the Captain of our Salvation, it seems convenient for him
Heb. 2. 10*
even then, to have had no less knowledge than that wherein it does consist:
the reason is, because that that is only in a possibility of being, must be
brought into actual Existence by that that actually is: And forasmuch as men in
this World being only in a possibility of attaining to the knowledge of the
Blessed, are, and ever were to be actually brought unto it by the Man Christ
Jesus, it follows, that He, even in his sta^e of Humiliation, had that
knowledge of Vision, whereunto he then did, and still does conduct them: and
this Knowledge, I suppose, will be granted to exceed all that ever Moses or the
Prophets, or any other Mortals whatever either did or could attain to. But we
need not fly so high in Speculation, because it was foretold of him, that the
Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Knowledge Isa.
11. 2.
should rest upon him. These four (says Aquinas) comprehend all things
whatever can be known; for the knowledge of things Divine and Immaterial,
pertains to the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding: and the knowledge of all
Practical and Speculative Conclusions to the Spirit of Counsel and Knowledge. 3
Q. 11. ^. 1.
Since therefore the Spirit of these things did (in an extraordinary manner, or
rather without measure) rest upon our Messiah, it is to be concluded, that
whatever Gifts the Holy Ghost does embellish the Souls of men withal, were most
eminently shed forth on the Soul of our Lord Jesus, and consequently that of
Prophecy, far beyond the degree of Moses, or all other Mortals put together:
and if so it were, then doubtless he could elicit the acts of a Prophetic
Spirit, without either previous Dispositions or Preparations, Dreams or
Visions, Angels or Consternations, and that when he would, in a manner far
superior to that of Moses.

And then for the Apostles; it seems not that the Spirit of Prophecy in them
was in any point inferior to that of Moses, but rather more excellent: for the
Spirit of Truth did guide them into all Truth, and show them Joh. 16. 13.
things to come: and this he did in such a manner, as that they knew the mind
of God without Dreams or Visions, or Angels to teach them; and the Knowledge
they had of Divine Truth, it is evident they received without those
discomposures of Soul, and terrible shakings of Body, which usually befell the
old Prophets. Evident also it is by the Sermons and Discourses that they
uttered upon all occasions, that the Knowledge they had they could always
impart; they were clothed with the Holy Spirit, neither did they need to
prepare themselves to prophecy, but were always disposed, and in a readiness
to deliver such Truths of God as could no way be known, but by the free Influx
of the Divine Mind upon theirs: i. e. by Prophecy* had not all this been true,
it would be very hard to conceive how without any premeditation they could
possibly have had a Mouth and Wisdom, which all their Adversaries were not able
to Luke 21. 14, 15.
gainsay nor resist: had not the Divine Spirit been always present with them,
it had been impossible for them on all occasions, even before Kings and other
Rulers, so to speak, as that all their Adversaries could not (with any show of
truth) make any opposition against it: and had it not been true that so they
did, it is altogether unlikely that their Adversaries would have burst out into
such Rage and Passion, such Cruelty and Inhumanity, as we find they often did
against them: it seems therefore the degree they had of Prophecy was no whit
inserior to that of Moses.

But whether it were or no, is a Question that I am not solicitous about. From
what I have Chap. 1.
discoursed concerning the Nature of Prophecy in general, it may not obscurely
be collected, that if Christ and his Apostles were men, who by immediate
influence from God upon their Minds and Faculties, did attain to such knowledge
of his Mind, as by their Natural Abilities would be unattainable, it is as much
as I mean and contend for in the word Prophet. Now that such Knowledge they
had, together with Commission from God to teach it, it is the primary design of
this Treatise to prove.

Yet that is not mine ultimate aim therein; but besides that, I have done mine
endeavor (as much as I could within the bounds of the proposed method) to
conciliate our most excellent Religion to our Reason, and to settle it (as much
as in me lies) upon its true foundations. In order to this end, I have in the
fourth Chapter discoursed somewhat more largely than perhaps otherwise was
requisite, about the transcendent Wisdom of Christianity; and have added the
sixth Chapter almost on purpose to shake the sandy Foundation of bare Humane
Authority, whereon Mr. Hobbs and his Accomplices would have it wholly to depend.
I do most freely acknowledge, that the Authority of the Civil Magistrate is
very great about matters of Religion, and that the Church of God is exceedingly
obliged to those Christian Princes, who by good and wholesome Laws are become its
Nursing Fathers: yet can I not believe, there is nothing of obligation in
Christianity, besides what it receives extrinsecally from the Laws of Civil
Sovereigns: the reasons the Leviathan gives of this position, I endeavor to
ans^er and expose. To this undertaking it is, I hope, nothing but a just
resen^ment of the Affronts Mr. Hobbs has cast, and Injuries he has done to
our Religion thereby. I can hardly think any man worthy the name of a good
Christian, much less of a Minister of Christ, that can read such pernicious
Principles and perverse disputings against the Honor of his Religion, without
something of Indignation: for, to make Religion so to truckle under Civil
Sovereigns, as in and of it self to have nothing of obligation, what is it less
than to clip the wings of all true Devotion toward God, and render it unable
to fly higher than the Thrones and Scepters on Earth; yea also, and to null the
Authority of the Lord that bought us. For though all Power be given to him in
Heaven and in Earth, yet this opinion makes him so far from being the Prince of
the Kings of Rev. 1. 5.
the Earth, as that he is at best but their Counselor, modestly proposing his
Advice: which it seems they are not bound to take, because that neither he nor
his Apostles had a Kingdom, and so could make no Laws; for which reason, (such
as it is) the Leviathan affirms, that the Commands of the Gospel are but
Precepts, or Invitations of men to receive it; and Invitations, we know, we may
accept of or refuse, as we think fit, and yet without sin: so that our
Acceptance is an act of Civility rather than of Duty, and our Refusal an act of
Unkindness, and not at all of Disobedience. Had not Civil Sovereigns done
Christianity the kindness to imbody it into their Laws, we had been under no
obligation to be Christians; We might have been Turks or Jews, Pagans or
Atheists, and yet without Sin, and what would a Laodicean desire more? How
kindly does it cajole his Lukewarmness, and how fairly does it promise him
security from danger, by being against Christ in his Heart and Life, as long as
he is with him in his Profession? Thus does it turn Christianity into
Hypocrisy, and makes us to serve God for fear of Men.

But if we are not so berest of Reason, as to think that God borrows his
Authority from his Lieutenants, then the Philosophical Rudiments of that
Epi^urean (whereof the Author of the late Reflections on Philosophy, says
Thomas Hobbs, is one of the boldest Part. 4.. 9.
of these last Ages) have taken care to corrupt our Religion another way, and
that is by persuading us to think, that the obligation of yielding God
obedience lies upon us by reason of our weakness. This converts Religion into
Superstition, for it makes us to serve God not out of love to his Goodness, but
only for fear of his Greatness: if we could resist him, and escape harmless, it
were no matter it seems if we did; but since we cannot, we must obey. Thus are
we dragged to Obedience by the force of mere Omnipotence, and when we are so,
it is evident we are acted by such dreadful and terrible Apprehensions of the
Deity, as debauch our Religion, and make it a mere slavery; utterly
incons^stent with that Charity or Love of God, without which the most liberal
Alms-deeds and Martyrdom it self (much less inferior acts of Wors^^p) will
find no Acceptance; this therefore I look on as another most pernicious
Principle; and for that cause I have made a long digression to prove that Gods
Dominion is not founded in his sole irresistible Power, but that he has a
right to Rule us from his great Mercy and Goodnes^ to us in his works of
Creation, Providence, and Redemption: and forasmuch as it is requisite for all
Christians, rightly to understand this latter, which was at first made known
unto us by the Spirit of Proph^^y in Christ and his Apostles, I have s^ ^ar
enlarged the Digression, as to gi^e an account of it, that from thence we may
see what obligations ^herefrom do arise upon us to ke^p the Comm^nds of the
Gospel: and therew^^h I put an end to this Treatise.

Wherein, perhaps, the Reader may find a coin^id^nce of expression, and, it may
be, of Matter also: if he be inquisitive after the occasion of it, he may
please to know, that it was written temporibus successivis, which often were so
far apart, as that not only the E^pressions which dropped from my Pen, but
sometimes also the very Argument of Discourse was utterly fled my Memory: I
cannot therefore but suspect, there may be some ungrateful (but I hope not
nauseous) repetitions in it: and the truth is, my design not being auram
captare, but (if not to convince Gainsayers, whereof I fear this Age has more
than some former have had, yet) to make the weak steadfast in Faith, and joyful
through Hope, rooted in Charity, and resolute in Obedience, I was not very
sollicitous to avoid them; but my chief care was to speak as clearly, and to
argue as strongly as I could: and if by so doing, I have done any thing that
may be (not injurious) but serviceable to the truth of the Gospel, as it was
received in the Primitive Church (and that I have much reason to believe was,
as it still is in ours:) if, I say, I have cast but two mites into this Corban,
I trust that God and all good men will accept of it; and therefore I think I
need no Apology, at least shall make none for writing this Treatise.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. IT is certain the Mind does assent, and that to Testimony: the
Testimony of Jesus what: why so called: the Nature of Prophecy, what: the
Spirit of Prophecy, what: that Christ and his Apostles were Prophets, proved by
Scripture: the method of proving it otherwise proposed. Chap. II. Of the Notion
of a Prophet, and that there were Prophets among the Jews. The Notion of a
Prophet deduced from the Definition of Prophecy, assented to by Mr. Hobbs: it
is agreeable to Reason, and all m^n receive it: that Moses was a Prophet,
proved by the Testimony of Heathens: He promised in his Law that there should
be Prophets among the Jews, proved by Deuteronomy. 18. 15. the certainty that there
were so, thence deduced. Chap. III. The Trial of Prophets among the Jews. Of
the Conditions on which men were admitted to a Trial. Maimonides: the first of
them impertinent to our purpose; the second excepted against: the original of
Oral Tradition: the Improbability of it: the Falsehood of it. Concerning
Alterations to be made in the written Law of Moses: it was not Immutable: an
Objection out of Maimonides: another Objection: Moses himself and the Prophets
taught that it should be changed: an Objection. The Antecedents or Concomitants
of a Prophetic Spirit. Jews Maxim, That Prophecy rests on none but the Wise,
the Strong, and the Rich; we Christians may well except against: it is not
Universally true by their own Concessions: yet may it be admitted on two
conditions: the Prophets Wisdom consisted not in Humane Learning, acquired by
Study, but in Prudence and Knowledge supernatural: their Strength consisted in
Courage or Fortitude: and their Riches in Contentment and all Probity of
Manners. Of Prophetic Predictions. Jews had thereby to make trial of men's
Pretenses to the Spirit of Prophecy: the difficulty thereof from Jer. 18. 7,
etc. how unfolded: the Jews sense of Jer. 23, 28. the vanity of Astrology. Of
Miracles. Jews were not to expect them from all the Prophets: that Moses and
other of the Prophets wrought Miracles to confirm their Prophecies, is both
denied and granted by Maimonides: proved by Scripture.
Chap. IV. The Application of the foregoing Discourse to Christ and his
Apostles. Jews only were obliged to observe the Letter of the Law of Moses: yet
Christ and his Apostles (as to the design and meaning of it) did most
excellently establish it among the Gentiles, demonstrated out of Maimonides and
Abravanels account of it, compared with Christian Doctrine: they themselves
conformed to the Letter of the Law of Moses, and taught the Jews so to do. Of
their Wisdom. Jews in the Trial of Prophets: that Christ and his Apostles had
such Knowledge, in respect of the manner of it: and also in respect of its
degree or measure: Christian Theology more excellent than that of the Jews: and
that in a threefold reference, viz. (1) to Faith; the object whereof is more
clearly revealed by Chri^tianity than it was by Judaisme: (2) to Hope: (3) to
Practice: the burdensomness of the Jewish Religion: the Excellency of the Moral
Law, which was fulfilled by Christ: an Objection from the Impossibility of
k^eping that Law so filled up, proposed: the mitigation of the Law by the
Gospel, in four particulars: the motives we have to obey the Gospel: the
assistance it gives us in well-doing: from all which the Excellency of
Christianity to Judaisme is concluded: much more does it excel the Philosophy
of the Gentiles, and that in respect (1) of the General Nature: (2) of the
Object: (3) of ehe End and Scope of Wisdom: from all which the transcendent
Wisdom of Christ and his Apostles is demonstrated. Of their Fortitude. Jews:
their preposterous Zeal for their Religion: their Malice against all that
observed not their Traditions: Christ detected the shortness and vanity
thereof: the horridness of the Gentiles condition: the Fortitude of the
Apostles thence deduced. Of the Prophetic Riches of Christ and his Apostles.
Of the Predictions of Christ and his Apostles. Jerusalem, the Predictions of
its forerunners, and of its approach and consummation; all exactly
accomplished: the calling of the Gentiles foretold, accomplished: Errors and
Divisions among Christians foretold, and apparently accomplished: yea, the
Means and manner of their Production, viz. the Addiction and Designs, the
Artifices and Cunning of Seducers, together with the nature of their Doctrine,
and speciousness of their Pretenses: all foretold and fulfilled, proved at
large. Of the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles. (1) by Reason: (2) by
Tradition of the Church: the great Credibility of this Tradition: (3) by the
testimony of Adversaries of all sorts: an Objection: the Answer: they were not
done by Enchantment, proved (1) by Reason: (2) by the continuance of Miracles
in the Church for several Ages, attested by the Fathers: the evident certainty
both that Christ and his Apostles wrought Miracles, and that not by
Enchantment, thence deduced: an Objection out of Hobbs against the Credibility
of Miracles: Ans* (1) that Miracles have been done, may be believed upon
testimony: (2) it is needless to demand the doing of Miracles, to prove that
there have been some done: (3) it is wicked and absurd so to do: the Tradition
of the Church as convincing as the sight of our own Eyes.
Chap. V. The strength and force of the preceding Arguments. (1) They remove
all suspicion that Christ and his Apostles were not Prophets; for thereby it
appears (1) that they pretended to the Spirit of Prophecy: (2) that they
therein were not deceived: (3) they had no design to deceive others: (2) they
give positive evidence that they were Prophets: (1) from their Fortitude: (2)
from their Wisdom: (3) from their Predictions: (4) from their Miracles: here to
show the force of this Argument, it is observed, (1) that Christ and his
Apostles wrought their Miracles on purpose to confirm their Doctrine: (2)
Miracles were always look^d on as demonstrative proofs of Divine Authority in
them that did them: (3) the Reasons for which the Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles deserve to be so accounted: (1) from their Nature: (2) from their
Number: (3) from their Greatness: (4) from their Goodness: thereby they
conferred on men, (1) the goods of Fortune (2) of the Body: (3) of the Soul.
Chap. VI. Some use that may be made of this Doctrine. Of the Divine Authority
of Christian Religion. Leviathan denies it: the first reason of this opinion
answered: the second reason answered. The Divine Authority of Holy Scripture.
Mark, and St. Luke, and the Acts; these Books had the approbation of the
Apostles: an Objection out of the Leviathan: Object. 2. Object. 3. The
Insufficiency of Humane Reason. Pelagius did to free will: it evacuates the
necessity of our Saviors and his Apostles Prophetic Office: the impiety of
it: Reason it self condemns it: an Objection out of that Treatise. The
Reasonableness of the Christian Faith. do not make it incredible: but are apt
to strengthen our Faith The Reasonableness of Christian Hope. The
Reasonableness of Obedience. (1) not from our weakness: (2) not from Gods sole
irresistible Power: the nature of Divine Sovereignty: Gods right of it: a view
of our state by Nature: the way that God has chosen for our Redemption: Christ
conquered the Devil at all those weapons whereby he overcame our first Parents
and their Posterity: we are therefore his by right of Conquest: Christ made
satisfaction for us: Christ now in Heaven is able to succor us when we are
tempted: a Question: another Question: the nature of an Obligation, which is
twofold: the Redemption of Christ obliges us by both to keep his
Commandments, (1) by that of Authority: (2) by that ad (...), the Nature of it:
the Reasons of it: (1) the benefit we receive by Redemption, (2) the
satisfactoriness of it to our Reason: (3) the incomparable encouragement that
it gives us to keep the Commandments: the Conclusion.

REV. 19. 10. The Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy.
CHAP. I.
THat We have a power of Assenting, is so manifest, as that Skepticism it self
cannot doubt it; for that it is very apparently built on Assent to this
Proposition, There is nothing certain. Who can be of that Persuasion without
Assent? It seems therefore certain, that the Mind assents: and this it does to
Testimony as well as Reason; for the latter cannot be (at least improved)
without the former; because there is no Reasoning without Words, and Words
without Testimony signify nothing. Were it not for Testimony, the wisest of
Words, and the most inarticulate of Sounds would be to us equally significant:
so that not only Religion, but also all Arts and Sciences are beholding Vid.
Theodoret Ser. d^ Fide p. 16*
to Testimony: they are (if not founded on it* yet) unattainable without it. It
seems therefore, those who ^raduce our Religion as fond Credulity, because it
depends on Testimony, are therein very disingenuously Partial and irrational,
especially considering, The Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Proph^cy.

Which Words are an entire Proposition, not so difficult, but that it may be
understood, nor yet so plain, but that both the Subject and the Predicate will
need some Explication. In order whereunto it will not be amiss to observe, that
in all probability, the Testimony of Jesus is either that which he himself
gave, or else that which his Witnesses did bear of him: of the former, Joh. 3.
32, 33.
St. John speaks in his Gospel; of the latter, in his Revelations, here in my
Text: which to me seems evident by the Scope and Design of the whole Verse, the
drift whereof is to prove, that the Angel (whose words they are to St. John)
was Fellow Servants with him and the rest of the Apostles. St. John fell at the
Angel's feet to Worship him, but the Angel said unto him, See thou do it not:
of which Prohibition he gives this reason, because (says he) I am thy
fellow servants, and of thy Brethren, that have the testimony of Jesus: And who
were they that had the testimony of Jesus? Surely, they were those whom Jesus
himself had chosen to be his Witnesses, viz. the Acts 1. 8.
Apostles: Of these men then the Angel was Fellow Servants; to prove that he was
so, he alleges my Text, For the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy.

Which words can be no way Argumentative, unless the Testimony of Jesus be
understood to signify, not that which Jesus himself gave, but that which his
Apostles did give of him; but being thus taken, they import a twofold
Argument, viz. ad hominem, and ad rem. St. John we know was (as all the other
Apostles) a Jew by birth, one of that Nation, wherein it was a received
opinion, that there were ten degrees or Orders of Angels, the lowest whereof
were called Ischim: by the Intervention and Ministry of this sort of Angels
they say (whether truly or falsely I affirm R. M. Maimonides de fund. Legis. c.
2. Sect. 8. cum Vorstii not. Idem c. 7. Sect. 2.
not) that Prophecies were communicated unto Men. These Angels (as we are told)
were chiefly employed to Prophecy, and when the Spirit of Prophecy rested on
any here on Earth, his Soul was ^ixt with, and advanced to this Order of Angels
in Heaven, and was enrolled among them. If then this were a Vulgar opinion of
the Jews at the time of St. John*s Revelations, it is apparent enough, that my
Text contains an Argument ad hominem. But the truth is, the force of the Angels
Argument does not lie so much in St. John's opinion* as in his own employment
at that time, which was to prophecy concerning things pertaining to the Church
of Christ, as appears by the preceding Verses: let us then but cast the Argument
into this form, and the strength of it will be evident: Those whom God employes
to prophecy are Fellow servants: But you and your brethren the Apostles, as
well as I, God employes to prophecy; therefore we are Fellow Servants. St.
John could make a doubt of nothing in this Argument, but the Assumption,
whether he and the rest of the Apostles were sent to prophecy? Yes (says the
Angel) that you are, for the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy.
Hereby to me it seems apparent, that the Testimony of Jesus here signifies that
which the Apostles gave unto him: and would you know why this is called the
Testimony of Jesus, not of the Apostle^ concerning him, then observe that this
Testimony of Jesus may be considered two ways, viz. Strictly, or Largely: if
abstractly or strictly in it self, then it is little or nothing else but the
Record they gave of Christ, or the Doctrine they taught concerning him: and
this is said to be the Testimony of Jesus, because he is the principal thing it
treats of: but if it be considered largely, it comprehends not only the
Doctrine of the Apostles concerning Christ, but also the Strength, Power, and
Authority whereby they taught it. Thus considered, it is the Testimony of
Jesus, not only because they gave it to him, but also because they received it
from him. For he gave them not only Command Mar. 16. 15.
to bear this witness of him, i. e. to go into all the World, and to preach the
Gospel to every creature: but also Strength and Power so to do: for he first
Luke 24. 45.
opened their Understandings, that they should understand the Scriptures, and
afterward he e^dued them with Power from on high, by sending the Promise of
the Father, i. e. the Spirit, upon them, to lead them into all Truth, and
enable them to speak it to all Nations whatsoever: and this was done so Act.
25. 6.
eff^ctually, as that men of every Nation under Heaven heard them speak in
their own Language: and this surely in it self considered, was no small matter
of Testimony to our Jesus. The Apostles we know were ignorant and unlearned
men, that understood but little of Scripture, less of Foreign Languages, yet
hereby on a sudden they were enabled exquisitely to understand the one, and to
speak the other of all sorts: and does it not surpass the Power of Nature to
make so stupendous a change as this was? What Creatures can make Men Wise,
Holy, and Learned in an instant? It is a work of Wonder that falls within the
compass of little less than Omnipotent Power and Wisdom: Surely therefore the
Author of it was God, and if so, then Jesus (to whom the Apostles were thereby
enabled to give Testimony) was at least a Man approved of him. On that account
therefore their Doctrine, or rather their Preaching, or Promulgation of the
Gospel by it, may well be called the Testimony of Jesus.

And this Testimony of Jesus (my Text tells us) is the Spirit of Prophecy. The
truth and Essence of Prophecy (says Maimonides) is nothing else but an
Influence from God, by the Mediation of the active Intellect, operating first
upon the Rational, afterward More N^voc. p. 2. cap. 36.
on the Imaginable Faculty. This Definition is thought somewhat too scanty and
obscure to express the nature of Prophecy in its full Latitude* it is therefore
conceived, that by a little alteration of its Definition by another Rabbi, we
may have a more adequate and clear conception of its nature, viz. that it is an
Influence from God upon the Rational Faculty, either by the Mediation of the
Fancy or otherwise: and by this Influence (whether by the Ministry of an Angel
or otherwise) a man attains to such knowledge, as by his Natural Abilities
would be unattainable* In these Definitions of Prophecy we Vid. Smiths Dis^. of
Prophecy* cap. 2.
have nothing at present to observe, but that wherein they both do agree:
namely, the general Nature of it, which they make to consist in Influence from
God* Prophecy is not an Ignis fatuus of a disturbed Fancy, but an Impression of
Divine Light: thence perhaps it was, that in old time the Prophets were called
Seers, not because (or at least not so Properly because) of their Foresight of
things Future, as of their Visions, those Images or Appearances of things as
Visible, which by Divine Influence, were represented on the stage of their
Fancy, to the sight of their Understandings. And afterward the Prophets were
called Men of God, because God was pleased immediately to reveal himself Vid.
Rob. Steph. and Job. Buxtorf. Lex. in voce (...) 2 Pet. 1. 20. (...), to let
loose.
unto them: and so the word rendered Prophet denotes one that receives what he
says, from God. It seems then that all Prophecy, truly so called, has its
descent from Above; it is not of any Private interpretation, or rather of a
man's own starting or suggestion; for it comes not by the Will of Man, but Holy
Men of God did thereby speak as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. We Nic.
Creed 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10. Apol. 2.
Christians therefore believe, the Holy Ghost spoke by the Prophets, and that
Prophecy is a Gift of the Spirit. For which cause, no doubt, it was, that
Justin Martyr intitles him the Spirit of Prophecy. But when we consider, that
the Spirit of Prophecy, as in my Text, is affirmed of the Testimony of Jesus,
it seems most probable, that it therein signifies not his Person, but his Gift,
not his Essence or Subsistence, but an Effect produced by him, which is here
called by his Name. Thus the Spirit of a sound Mind, the Spirit of Wisdom and
Meckness, the Spirit of Knowledge, the Spirit of Grace, and the Spirit of
Prayer, signify Effects, Works, or Gifts, which the Spirit of God produces in
the Souls of Men. So here in my Text, the Spirit of Prophecy (by an ordinary
Metonymy of the Cause for the Effect) is put for the Gift or Ability to
prophecy, which the Holy Ghost wrought in some of Gods Ministers. This Gift
the Angel had when he spoke to St. John, and so, says he, had St. John too,
and the rest of the Apostles, in their Testimony of Jesus; i. e. in the Record
they gave of Christ, or in the promulgation of the Doctrine they taught
concerning him: from whence it apparently follows, that the Angel here speaking
and they were Fellow Servants. But it is not this their Association with Angels
which I now intend to discourse of, but the Reason and Cause of it, viz. their
Gift of Prophecy. It is we see here avouched by an Angel, that the Apostles in
the Promulgation of the Gospel, were endued with the Gift of Prophecy; or, in
short, that they were Prophets: and if they, in their Testimony of Jesus, were
Prophets, much more was He himself (by whose Spirit they gave it to him) a
Prophet; all then that remains for me to do will be to prove, that Christ and
his Apostles were Prophets.

Hereof, methinks, none can doubt, but those that are slow of heart to believe
the Holy Scriptures: for therein we first find it foretold to the Jews, that
Deuteronomy. 18. 18.
God would raise them up a Prophet from among their Brethren, like unto Moses:
which Promise Petrus Galatinus De Arcanis cath. verit. l. 8. c. 7. Acts 3. 22.
proves the ancient Jews themselves understood to speak of the M^ssiah: and in
the Acts of the Apostles, St. Peter affirms, that our Jesus is that Prophet.
And Christ himself gave such evidence of it, as that his Disciples thought him
a Prophet mighty Luke 24. 19.
in deed and word before God and all the people: i. e. that God did
demonstrate, and the People did confess, that he was a great Prophet: and that
they did so is manifest, for the Jews themselves, whose hearts were not subdued
to his Doctrine, did yet believe that of a truth he was that Prophet that
should Jo^. 6. 14.
come into the world. The Samaritan woman also perceived that he was a Prophet,
and the men of Samaria J^^. 4. 19.
believed and knew as much, namely, that indeed he was the Christ, the Savior
of the World: a part v. 42. v. 2^.
of whose Office (as they thought) was, to tell them all things, and so to be a
Prophet. And then for the Apostles, we do not only read that God by his Spirit
1 Cor. 2. 10
revealed things unto them; but moreover we find it recorded that he did it in
this manner: Our blessed Lord Jesus Christ promised his Disciples to send them
a Comforter, and that when He the Spirit of Joh. 16. 7, 13.
Truth should come, he would guide them into all Truth: which it seems fell out
accordingly, for when the day of Pentecost was fully come, the Apos^les were
all with one accord in one place, and suddenly there came a sound from Heaven
as of a rushing mighty Wind, and it filled all the House where they were
sitting, and there appeared to them cloven Tongues, like as of Fire, and it sat
upon each of them: and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to
speak with other Tongues, Act. 2. 1. etc.
as the Spirit gave them utterance.

Nor did they then receive only the Gift of Tongues, but that also of Prophecy.
For the promise of God by the Prophet Joel, that He would pour out his Spirit
upon all Flesh, and that their Sons Joel 2. 28.
and Daughters should Prophecy etc. The Importance of which Promise is, that
in the days a little before the Destruction of the Jewish Nation, there should
be so great and unusual an effusion of his Spirit upon Persons of all sorts, as
that those who were not brought up in the Schools of Prophets should yet be
endued with the Spirit or Gift of Prophecy. This Prediction of Joel was
fulfilled in the Apostles by the most auspicious Descent of the Holy Ghost upon
them; for St. Peter affirms, this is that Act. 2. 16.
which was spoken by the Prophet Joel. It seems then the Mystery of Christ,
which in other Ages was not made known unto the Sons of men, as now it is, was
revealed unto his Holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit. ^ph^s. 3. 4 5.
It is therefore manifest, there can be no doubt made of our Assertion, if the
Holy Scripture be thought sufficient to prove it. On this account I suppose it
is, that among those who believe the Scripture, it seems an Hypothesis rather
taken for granted, than otherwise proved by any. But because our Age is
inquisitive, and somewhat too apt to derogate from the Authority of the sacred
Pandects, because also since those parts thereof which make mention of Christ
and his Apostles, did drop from Their Mouths and Pens, to allege Texts from
thence is but to produce their own Testimony concerning themselves, and
therefore whatever Truth there may be, there certainly is but little Force in
that way of arguing, unless it be to those that already are well persuaded of
their Authority. For these Reasons I shall at present ascribe no more Authority
to the Holy Scripture than is usually given to other Writings far inferior,
and argue only from Reason and Testimony that cannot be suspected of
Partiality: by the help thereof (together with Gods blessing) I doubt not to
prove these five Particulars: 1. That the Notion of a Prophet is very agreeable
to Reason. 2. That there were Prophets among the Jews. 3. That for the Trial of
Pretenders to the Gift of Prophecy, they had certain Rules, Notes, and Signs
whereby to judge of them. 4. that if Christ and his Apostles be tried thereby,
it will be found that they were Prophets. 5. That this way of proving they were
so, is very sufficient and rational.

CHAP. II. Of the Notion of a Prophet, and that there were Prophets among the
Jews.
THE Notion of a Prophet may certainly best be learned from the Nature of
Prophecy, before defined: from which Definitions of Prophecy we may gather this
of a Prophet, viz. that He is a person, who by the Influence of God upon his
Rational Faculty, does attain to such knowledge, as by his Natural Abilities
would in one respect or other be unattainable. In which Description, it
concerns us at present to observe only, that it is not Prediction, but
Influence from God, which constitutes a Prophet, at least such an one as we are
now speaking of. And that this is no new Notion, adapted to our present
Undertaking, is evident enough by the words of a late Author, whose Principles
are thought most unluckily of any to undermine such Foundations as we are now
laying; yet he expresses himself in these words: Although there be many
significations in Scripture, of the word Prophet; yet is that the most frequent
in which it is taken for him to whom God speaks immediately, that which the
Prophet is to say from him, to some other man, or to the People. Gods speaking
to men immediately, he himself says, is to be interpreted, Hobb^s Leviat^an p.
3. ^*36.
that way (whatsoever it be, I suppose he means without the Ministry of man) by
which God makes them to understand his Will. Hereby it is evident that in his
Judgment, as well as ours, a Prophet was a Person on whose Understanding God
had immediate Influence: how else is it possible, he should make him
immediately to understand his Will? and sure it cannot seem strange to any,
that there have or might have been such men in the World; the Power and Wisdom
of God, together with the Capacities of Men's Souls, are enough to remove all
suspicion of Its impossibility. He that made the Mind, shall not He be able to
teach men knowledge? and he that was made on purpose to know God, and give him
the Glory of his Handiwork, shall not he be thought capable of learning from
such a Teacher? There is therefore no show of Reason to doubt the Possibility
of Prophecy, especially considering, that all sorts of men (how wide soever
their differences are in other matters, do yet) agree in this, viz. that there
are or have been such Prophets in the World. This is so manifest and vulgarly
known to be the Belief of Christians, Jews, and Turks, as that (among all that
have heard of Christ, Moses, or Mahomet) all necessity of proving it is
perfectly fore-stalled: and that the Heathens also were of the same opinion, is
evident by what they have reported of some of their Lawgivers, viz. that they
received their Laws from the Gods: as Numa Pompilius from Egeria, Minos from
Jupiter, Lycurgus Luc. Flor.
from Apollo, Zaleucus Locrus from Minerva. Clem. Alex. Stro. lib. 1. idem
ibid. Alex. ab Alex. genesis dier. lib. 4. c. 17. id. lib. 3. cap. 16. Plutarch de
plac. Phil. l. 5. c. 1. Maimon. Mor. Nov^ch p. 3. cap. 29.
Jupiter also and Lachesis had their distinct Prophets: and Prophetesses there
were as well as Prophets, as appears by the Reputation of Sibyls among them:
and that their Philosophers had such a Notion as ours is of Prophecy, appears
by the Opinion of Pla* to concerning Divination, wherein he agrees with the
Stoics, who held it an effect of Divine Instinct and Inflation: and long I
think it was before them, that the Zabians believed, Men had this gift of
Prophecy. From all this it is manifest, that the Noti^^ of a Prophet was
entertained by Heathens, as well as Jews, Turks, and Christians; and therefore
surely (since all own it) it is very consonant to Reason. If any of our Modern
Scoffers think otherwise, I desire them to know that the Seat of the Scornful
is no Infallible Chair, there is no reason to think them wiser than all the
World besides; especially considering our second Assertion:

That there actually were Prophets among the Jews. Which Assertion appears more
than probable, not by the Jews only, but by the opinions of the Heathens
concerning Moses, whom the Egyptians thought to Josephus Stra. Apion lib. 1.
be A man Wonderful and Divine. And good reason they had for so thinking, as
was manifest by his Conquest of Jannes and Jambres (their most renowned
Magicians) and also by the Plagues, which, according to His word, were brought
upon Egypt; all Eusebius. de praepar. Evang. lib. 9. c. 8.
which are attested by Eumenius. Nor do the Hea thens represent him as the Jews
do Michael, to have been the Minister of Gods Justice only, but they also speak
of him as those do of Gabriel, that he was the Minister of Gods Mercy to them.
For they tell us, that Moses was author of so many useful Inventions among the
Egyptians, as that he gained not only the love of the People, but also the
Worship of the Artapanus apud Eusebius. lib. cod. c. 27.
Priests; for they named him Mercury, and gave him equal honor with their
gods. Which Testimony is the more credible, because Diodorus (among many other
high Commendations of Moses, which he professes to have had from the Egyptian
Priests) expressly tells us, that he was called God: Not that Just. Martyr. ad
Graec. corhor^.
Moses pretended to be so, but because (says he) men thought his Mind was
wholly Admirable and Divine. All which, methinks, can amount to no less than a
competent evidence, their thoughts are well enough expressed by Chalcidius his
words of Moses, viz. That He was most wise, as being enlivened not with man's
Wisdom, but (as it is reported) with Divine Inspiration. Grot. de verit. Rel.
Christian. lib. 1. annot. d** ad Sec. 1^.
And if so, then surely Moses was they thought him) at least a Prophet, and in
this their Judgment of him, it is very notorious, that the Jews, Christians,
and Mahometans do concur with them: so that in effect we have all Mankind
giving its Suffrage to this Truth: insomuch that if any please to deny it, they
seem to undermine their own Credit, as well as Reason; for (unless they have a
Charter of Credibility peculiarly granted to them) there is no Reason to
believe them wherein they make all men else Fools or Liars: We shall therefore
take it for granted, that Moses was a Prophet.

Next then we are to observe, that this Moses the Prophet, was the Jews
Lawgiver. Hereof I know none that makes a doubt; if there be, they may easily
Vid. Jos. Stra. Apion, lib. 1. Clem. Alex. stro. be lib. 1. Eusebius. de Praep.
Evang. l. 9. Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
be satisfied by a multitude of Witnesses from among the Gentiles to prove it.
All then that remains to be farther observed, is, that this Moses the Prophet
did promise in his Law, that there should be Prophets among the Jews, The Lord
thy God (says he) will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of
thy brethren, like unto me. Which promise, I confess, was most completely
fulfilled in Christ (the supreme Prophet of the Church) yet that hinders not
its being first to be fulfilled by some other Prophet, or rather Order of
Prophets, who (before the coming of Messiah) was shortly to succeed Moses in
the Prophetic part of his Office: whoever, methinks, considers all
Circumstances, must needs conceive that it was so; for it was at first given,
and afterward renewed on such occasions as required its speedy accomplishment.
For Moses having conducted the Israelites almost to the Land of Canaan, was
commanded to gather the People together in Horeb: and they came near and stood
under the Mountain, and the Mountain burnt with Fire Deuteronomy. 4. 11.
unto the midst of Heaven, with Darkness, Clouds, and thick Darkness: and all
the People saw the Thunderings and Lightenings, and the noise of the Trumpet,
and the Mountain smoking: and when the People saw it, they removed and stood
afar off. And they said unto Moses, Exodus 20. 18, 19.
speak Thou with us and we will hear, but let not God speak with us, lest we
dye. Whereby it is plain, they requested, that God would speak no more
immediately, at least not so terribly unto them, but that for the future he
would please to use the Ministry of Moses Deuteronomy. 18. 17.
and such like Prophets, in revealing his Will unto them: this their request
the Lord approves of; and condescending to their Infirmity he gave this Promise
in answer to it, viz. That He would raise them up a Prophet from among their
Brethren like unto Moses, and would put his words in his Mouth, and he v. 18.
should speak unto them all that the Lord should command him. This was the
first occasion of this Promise, afterward Moses admonished them to beware of
learning v. 9.
to do after the Abominations of those Nations, which were cast out to let them
in: among which Abominations, v. 14.
hearkening to Observers of Times, and to Diviners was one: this then was
forbidden to the Jews. By which Prohibition, doubtless there was so great a
restraint laid upon their Curiosity and Desire of knowing future contingences
(which is very great almost in all men) as that, without something in lieu of
Divination, etc. it would have Vid. Orig. contr. Cells. lib. 1.
been almost impossible to have kept them within the Bounds of due Obedience to
their Law: but either they would have thought there was nothing Divine in it,
or else they would have fallen into some heathenish Abomination, or else they
would have instituted something else somewhat like it among themselves. Now to
show them there was no need of so doing, Moses calls to mind the Promise that
God had made them to raise them up a Prophet like unto him. Unto which Promise
he subjoyns the Means of trying the Truth of Pretensions to the Gift of
Prophecy. v. 22.
Now to me it seems strange, that this Promise at first made and afterward
renewed on those solemn and important Occasions, and attended with these
circumstances, should have no reference at all to some Prophet or Order of
Prophets that should shortly succeed Moses. When the People were afraid they
should dye, and begged (as it were for their Lives) that God would speak no
more immediately unto them, but that he would use the Ministry of Moses, is it
likely that God giving this Promise in answer, should mean only that he would
raise up a Prophet about two thousand years after? and as unlikely it is, that
a Promise of a Prophet to arise so long after, should keep them from Heathenish
Abominations in the mean time: nor is it likely that the Rules then given for
the trial of Prophets should be of no use till Then. These and some such other
Considerations incline me to Confidence, that this Promise (though in its
Extent and Latitude it reaches to Christ, in whom it was most completely
fulfilled, yet) in its primary Sense and Meaning it has reference to some
Prophets which God would raise up to succeed Moses among the Jews: and from
hence, the Inference is both easy and certain, there where Prophets among
them. Hereunto it is apparent that both Jews and Christians give Testimony; nor
can the Heathens deny it; for from their Assertions or at least Concessions
that Moses was a Prophet, by a good Consequence it follows that this his
Promise was fulfilled. For it is morally impossible, that so important a
Promise given on so solemn Occasions, by so illustrious a Prophet, should ever
fall to the Ground. Can God lie, or his Prophet prevaricate? Our Reason says
no: it is therefore most rational to conclude, there were Prophets among the
Jews.

CHAP. III. The Trial of Prophets among the Jews.
Sect. 1.
AND by them doubtless they had much advantage; chiefly because by Their
Ministry the Oracles of God were committed to them. Yet, since wheresoever God
employes men to sow the Seed of his Word, there will certainly be some to
scatter the Devils Darnel, the Jews (even while they had the Happiness of
Direction from true Prophets) were in some danger of Seduction, from false
ones; for which cause their Law did authorize them to make trial of Pretenders
Gift of Prophecy, and gave them Rules for so doing; of which Rules I shall give
an account, not of mine own, but of the Jewish Rabbines collecting, especially
Maimonides: by whom they are digested into two sorts, whereof the first
concerns the conditions of a man's Admission to a trial; the other contains the
(...), Notes, or Marks whereby they made it.

In Ser. Zer.
Concerning the first, M^imonides says, Those who lay claim to the Gift of
Prophecy, are distinguished into two sorts; namely, those that prophecy in the
name of an Idol, and those that prophecy in the name of the Lord. Prophecy in
the name of an Idol is again twofold. (1.) When a Prophet that rises up shall
say, such a Star, by its spiritual influx upon me, has said, Worship me in
this manner, or in this manner call upon me: and also when he inviteth to the
Worship of some Idol or Tel^sman, saying, This has it showed me, this has it
told me, or commanded me, that I should command the Worship of it in such a
manner, as the Prophets of Baal and the Prophets of the Wood were wont to do.
The second sort of Prophets in the name of an Idol were, when one said, There
came a Revelation from God unto me, that such an Idol is to be worshipped, or
that any spiritual Influx is drawn forth in such a manner This also is to be
reckoned an Idolatrous Prophet: for that Name comprehends not only those that
say, an Idol commanded its own Worship, or any thing else; but also those who
say, the Lord commanded the Worship of any Creature. When therefore we have
heard any one in ^ither of these manners boasting himself to be a Prophet, and
it be manifestly proved of him, he ought to be put to death by st^angling; as
God says, but that Prophet or dreamer Deuteronomy. 13. 5.
of dreams shall be put to death. Thus far we agree with him* or at least, we
put in no Exception against what he says, because he has sufficient Reason
and Authority for it: and we need say no more of it, because it is no way
pertinent to our present purpose: for manifest it is, that Christ and his
Apostles did equal the Jews (if not exceed them) in the Abhorrence of Idols:
that therefore that concerns the Trial of Idolatrous Prophets, is no way
pertinent unto theirs, but that which our Author says concerning those that
Prophesied in the Name of the Lord, it concerns us to Consider and examine; and
to prevent all suspicion of Partiality in this our Disquisition, I shall take
the pains to transcribe it at large out of him.

Moreover, (says he) Those that proph^sie in the Name of the Lord are likewise
of two sorts, (1) When one prophesying in the Name of the Lord, allures men
unto him, and incites them to Worship him, saying, God has added a Command to
his Precepts, or has detracted some Precept from the number of those contained
in the Book of the Law. Nor is the matter much, whether he add or take from it,
either in those things which are in the Text of the Law, or in the Explication
thereof received by Tradition. As for Example, If one should add unto, or
detract from those things which are in the Text, in this manner: God has said
unto me, the time wherein Fruits shall be uncircumcised is but two years, after
which it is lawful to eat of the Fruits that have been planted: or if he shall
say, the Lord has said unto me, it shall be unlawful to eat of them for four
years, whereas the Lord has said, three years shall they be ^^vit. 19. 23.
uncircumcised unto you: and thus in other matters of the same nature. Thus
also if he shall make any change whatever it be in the Tradition, yea, though
the letter of the Text favor him: As for Example; If he says that saying in
the Law, and thou shall cut off her hand, thine eye shall not spare her, is to
be understood of a real and true abscission, but not of some mulct, so
constituted as to make her ashamed, as by Tradition it is received, and gives
out he received it by Prophecy, saying, The Lord has said unto me, that saying
of his, and D^ut. ^5. 12.
thou shall cut off her hand, is to be understood as it sounds, this man also
is to be strangled, because he is a lying Prophet, f^igning that of God which
God never spoke unto him, nor is he to be regarded, no not for a Sign or a
Miracle done by him; because that Prophet, who astonished the whole World with
his Miracles, whom also God has fastened it in our hearts to believe and have
Faith in, (God himself affirming it, when he said, and they shall believe thee
for ever) has now beforehand told us, there was no other Law but his to come
from God, and this is it that he says, It is not Deuteronomy. 30. 12. v. 14*
in the Heavens that thou should say, Who shall ascend into Heaven for us,
etc? and when he says, In thine heart, and in thy mouth, he insinu^tes, either
Sentences delivered by the Mouth, or else Conclusions drawn forth by
Speculation, and the Powers of the Heart, which also he has forbidden to make
Addition to, or Diminution from, saying, Thou shall neither add unto Deuteronomy. 4.
2. and 12. 32.
it, nor diminish from it: and therefore our Ancestou^s (with whom be Peace)
have said, from that time it is not granted to a Prophet to change any thing:
When therefore we know him, (the Prophet) in that which he claims to himself,
to lie against God, and to feign that of Him which He never said unto him, we
are necessitated to kill him, according to what the Holy Scripture de^lar^th,
while it says, The Prophet that Deuteronomy. 18. 20.
shall have added, etc. even that Prophet shall dye.

The second sort of Prophets in the Name of the Lord, was, When one invites men
to Worship God, and incites them to keep his Commandment, and declares they
should observe the Law, and that without Addition or Diminution, (as the last
of them has said, Remember Mal. 4. 4*
the Law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all
Israel, with the Statutes and Judgments) promising good to him that shall keep,
and threatening punishment to him that shall break this Law, as Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the rest of them did* in the mean time commanding and
forbidding things different from those of the Law: As for Example sake, if he
should say, Drive out now that Country, or this Faction, as Samuel of old
commanded Saul, that he should destroy Amalek: or if he prohibits the putting
one to death, as Eli^ha forbad Jehoram to vanquish the host of Hazael, which
had entered Samaria, (as it is known) and as Isaiah forbad water to be conveyed
within the Walls, and as J^remiah forbad the Israelites tp go out of Jerusalem,
and other such like things. When therefore a Prophet does claim to himself the
Gift of Proph^cy, so as that he neither ascribes it to any Idol, nor adds to,
or diminishes ought from the Law, but walks in other ways, in that manner we
have explained, then our next work is to try him.

Thus far M^imenides, concerning those conditions on which Pretenders to
Prophecy were to be admitted to a Trial; and thereby we see, that (according to
him) admitted they were not but on these two conditions; (1) that they
prophesied in the Name of the Lord; this we have already granted: (2) that they
make no alteration either in the written Law of Moses, or in the Explication of
it received by Tradition. This Rule (how confidently soever it be given, yet)
must not be received without Exceptions. For, first, The Explication of the Law
therein mentioned, certainly had no such Authority as is thereby pretended: and
to the end we may the more fully see what that was, together with the
improbability of it, I shall show you the pretended Original of this
Explication, as it is recorded by our lib. cod.
Author, who would have us to know, That all the Prophets of the Law, which
came from God to Moses, came to him, together with their Inte^pretation. First,
God spoke the Text unto him, and then the Explication, or Interpretation of it,
and what the Authentic Text it self comprehended: and the manner of teaching
them to Israel was such as I am now about to describe unto thee. Moses being
gone into his Tent, the first that came unto him was Aaron, to whom he told the
Text which was given him from God, and taught him the Interpretation of it.
Afterward, he, having placed himself at the right hand of Moses, Eleazar and
Ithamar, his Sons, came in, to whom also Moses told the same he had told to
Aaron: they then rose and went, one to the left hand of Moses our Master, the
other to the right hand of Aaron: afterward the seventy Elders came in, whom
also Moses taught in the same manner that he had taught Aaron and his Sons:
after them, a promiscuous Assembly of the People, viz. Every one that sought
the Lord, came in, to him also he repeated the same, till they all had heard it
from him. And now Aaron had heard the Text four times from Moses, his Sons
twice, the Elders twice, the rest of the Assembly once. Then Moses went out
from them, and the Text which Aaron had heard four times from Moses, he
repeated to all that were present; so that now his Sons as well as himself had
heard it four times, thrice from Moses, and once from him: and then he himself
also withdrew: and Eleaz^r and Ithamar repeated the same Text which they had so
heard, to the whole Assembly, and they rose up from teaching: and by these
means the seventy Elders also had now heard the Text four times, twice from
Moses, once from Aaron, and once from his Sons; then they also repeated it once
to the People, and so all heard it four times: first, from Moses, secondly from
Aaron, thirdly, from his Sons, and fourthly from the seventy Elders, who then
departing some taught some, and some, others, that which they had received from
Gods messenger. The Text they writ in Volumes: then the chief of the people
dispersed themselves throughout all Israel to teach and instruct them, until
they remembered the Text, and could read it in writing: afterward they taught
them also the Interpretation of the Text it self which came from God, which
Interpretation contained the universal sense and meaning of it. The Text they
committed to writing, but the tradition to memory.

And had they not all good memories to retain so much? yes surely. For Moses
(they say) brought no l^ss then 613 Precepts together with their
Interpretations from mount Sinai; of nec^ssity (we know) the Comment must be
larger than the Text, and was it not a wonder that he at once, and they at four
times hearing should be able to repeat it? yet (if you will believe him) they
did it so exactly as that neither the Text, nor its Interpretation, lost any
thing of their Perfection or Authority: for not the Text only, but the
Interpretation too had the Nature of a Law; and thus (as our Author informs as)
say the wise men, the Law that is written, and the Law that is delivered by
ibid.
word of mouth. It seems then that they (just as the Papists do now) did
receive and venerate the Council. Trider. Dec. 1. 4. Sess.
Holy Scripture and tradition with equal affection of Pi^ty and Reverence. But
was not this tradition more liable to the Corruptions of men and the Injuries
of Time than the Text was? yes surely: for Maimonides himself insinuates, that
even in the days of Joshua, there was some small dissension about it; but that
being appeased by the consent of the greater part, he commended it to the
Elders, that overlived him, and they to the Prophets, and the Prophets
delivered it one to another, till at length it came to the great Synagogue, at
which time there was such a stir, as that that Council was fain to make
Decrees and Constitutions about it: nor was it then safe. And therefore Rabbenu
Hakkadosh (about 18 generations afterward) gathered together the Sentences and
Sayings thereof and composed the Mishna, which Contains the Explication of all
those vid. lib. ^und. p. 33. 34, 35, 36, 37. etc.
Precepts, which are written in the Law. And why was this Comment committed to
writing as well as the Text, but because there was no preserving it entire
without it. Why then should it be set cheek by jole with the Text it self? Was
Rabbie Judah a Prophet as well as Moses? no: He lived a long time after the
Spirit of Prophecy was ceased among them; his writings therefore ought in all
reason to truckle under the Scripture which was given by Inspiration of God,
and although the matters contained in them (as is pretended) came together with
those of Holy Scripture from God Almighty, yet having been for many hundreds of
years, most easiely subject to Corruptions, Changes and Depravations (for the
prevention whereof he committed them to writing) there can be but little or no
certainty, and consequently no knowledge of such Authority as is pretended to be
in them, and if not after, much less before he wrote them. For by committing
them to writing, without all doubt he did rather add unto then diminish their
Authority: and truly it seems probable, that He devised the fable of their
descent from God Almighty: for had there been such an Explication (as they say)
delivered by God to Moses, by Moses to Aaron and his sons, by them to the
seventy Elders, by them to Joshu^, by him to the surviving Elders, by them to
the succeeding Prophets, who delivered it from one to another through at least
a thousand years: had this I say been true, it is very strange that in all that
time they did not drop one word from their pens about it; although certainly
they had frequent occasions of so doing* for a great part of their Office was
to uphold the practice of the Law in the Purity and Integrity of it, which they
could no way have done better, than by reducing Transgresso^s to that
authentic Interpretation of it, yet we find not a word of it: but that that
falls out most unluckily is, that this traditional Interpretation of the Law
does thwrat and contradict the Exposition thereof by the Prophets: this
wretch^d Tr^dition restrained the sense of the Law to the letter of it, Mat. 5.
and taught men to believe it forbad no more than it expressed; but the
Prophets surely taught them otherwise, Jer 4. 14.
whence ^lse was it, that they r^proved them Hos. 7. 6.
for the thoughts of their hearts, as well as the Works of their hands. Thus
did the Comment make void the Text, and this Tradition made the Commandments of
none ^ff^ct. It is therefore most manif^st that they came not from the same
hand. Can infinite Wisdom speak contradictions, or destroy what it builds? it
is blasphemy to say it can. Since then this Tradition explodes the Law instead
of expounding it, we are sure it came not from God. Was it then likely that the
Divine Majesty (as our Author often calls the Spirit of Prophecy) should be
made to hold up its hand at the Bar of this Tradition which perhaps was made
worse by its keepers vid. V^is de Leg. div. cap* 9.
than it was in it self? It was always imprisoned in a Consistory, where no
man knows what usage it had, or how it might be dressed up to serve the
emergent exigence of Prophecy; were tried by Tradition, and that Tradition
known only in a Consistory, and that Consistory consisted of men subject (as
doubtless they were) to Error and Corruptions, the Ark was more like to fall
before Dagon, than Dagon before the Ark; I mean, the Truth of God to be
repelled by Vice and Wickedness, oftener than they corrected by the Truth of
God. How easy was it for Vice to pretend to this Tradition, and for Wickedness
to plead Prescription by this Oral Law for its Protection? And if they dwelt in
the Consistory, (as too often they did) or could make some friends there (as no
doubt they might) they would certainly be more mindful of their concerns, than
to neglect so fair an Advantage: and then if the Consistory declared that
Tradition was for them, that Prophet must die who presumed to speak against
them. But is it possible, that the God of Holiness should make a Law so apt to
establish wickedness? no: it borders upon Blasphemy to say he did. Piety
therefore as well as Reason inclines us to look on this Tradition as a mere
Fiction, at first invented to uphold the tottering Reputation of their
Magisterial Rabbis, and afterward improved and used to patronize their
Infidelity and justify their barbarous Proceedings against Our Blessed Lord
Jesus and all that adhered to him. This therefore we do utterly reject.

But the other part of Maimonides his assertion (viz. That Pretenders to the
Spirit of Prophecy were not admitted to a Trial unless they made no alteration
in the written Law of Moses) is something more probable; for doubtless an
attempt to null the Obligation of a Law, which God himself has established, if
he that makes it gives little or no Evidence of Gods Intention by him to do it,
is a strong presumption, yea a sufficient argument, that he therein is a false
Prophet. But if God has constituted a Law which in it self is mutable, and
withal has declared that it shall be changed, if the Pretender to Prophecy
gives as great or greater Evidence of Gods Intention by him to do it, then he
did at first to establish it, there is no more Reason to reject him than there
was Moses: and if so, the Jews were certainly very rude and barbarous, if they
would not vouchsafe him a Trial, but forthwith put him to Death without it.
What Law therefore of the Jews it was wherein (our Author says) this Rule was
contained, is yet unknown to us; however assured we are, that though it might
be of theirs, yet it was no part of Gods Law, because it inflicts Death on
them, who bring the broad Seal of Heaven to avouch their Authority to speak
what they do in his Name. I suppose therefore the Rule is seldom or never true
but in case either of Immutability in the Law it self, or want of sufficient
Evidence of Gods Intention by the pretender to change it: and that neither of
these is the case now under debate will be evident by considering these two
things.

1. That the Law of Moses (as to the Ceremonial and Judicial parts of it) was
not immutable, for it was founded upon no immutable Reasons: this methinks
Maimonides himself must needs have confessed, if he had considered what he
himself has elsewhere told us, viz. That the first intention of our Law is, to
take away Idolatry, to blot out the memory of it, and of all things that adhere
to it, or give occasion of it. And then, after some digression, he returns to
his purpose, and says, the Reasons and Causes of many of our Laws became known
to me, through the knowledge of the Faith, Rites, and Worship of the Zabians,
the knowledge of their Opinions and Sciences is a great Gate (i. e. it serves
much) to let in the sight of the Causes of the Precepts; for the very
foundation of our whole Law, and the book whereon it turns, is to raze those
Opinions out of men's heart^, and to extirpate their memory. This also is the
primary and principal Intention of all our whole Law, as our Wise men have
taught us, in saying, Whosoever confesses Idolatry, is accounted to deny the
whole Law, but whosoever denies Idolatry, is reckoned to confess it. If Mor
Nev^ p. 3. cap^ 29.
then this were the Foundation, and primary Intention of their Law, how was it
immutable? The Opinions Rites and Worship of the Zabians were not unchangeable;
if they were, how came it to pass the Law was designed to raze them out of men's
Hearts, and to blot out their Memory? if then they were changeable, how can
that be immutable which was founded and hanged on them? how can those Laws be
immutable whose Reason and Foundation are subject to Vicissitudes and Changes?
the Intention and Reason of a Law is the Law, rather than the Words of it.
Since then in these Laws, the particular Things intended, and the Reasons as
well as the Words of them may be altered, so methinks may they. Especially
considering, that while they were in greatest force diverse of them were
occasionally suspended and transgressed, yet without offense to God, yea with
his Liking and Approbation; as for Instance, that of offering Sacrifice only in
the place Deuteronomy. 12. 13, 14. 1 King. 18.
which the Lord should choose, was violated by Elijah when he offered Sacrifice
upon mount Carmel; yet was it accepted, as appeared by the Fire that fell from
the Lord and consumed it. The command to v. 38.
keep the passover in the month Abib, was transgressed Exodus 13. 4, 5.
by the good King Hezekiah and his Subjects, 2 Chronicles. 30. 2. 15.
who kept it in the second Month, yet was this no unacceptable Sacrifice, for
the Lord harkened to Hezekiah's v. 20.
Prayer and healed the People: and when the Priests blessed the People their
Voice was heard, ^. 27.
and their Prayer came up to his Holy dwelling Place, even to Heaven: whereby
it is evident, that when men did prepare their Hearts to seek God, he himself
did dispense with the strict Observation of the Ceremonial Law. Yea God himself
has declared, that he desired Mercy and not Sacrifice, and the Knowledge ^os.
6. 6.
of God more than burnt Offerings. whereby it is plain, that God preferred the
Duti^s of Morality, for before all Ceremonial Performances, and consequently
when they stand in Competition, the latter was to yield and give place unto the
former: it seems then that in such cases the Ceremonial Law was suspended by
the moral; and if so, then certainly it was not immutable: and that that admits
of a temporal Suspension is not in its own Nature u^terly incapable of a total
Abolition: that which may be made void for a time may certainly be made so for
ever: it is not repugnant to its Nature.

Obj. But Moses has told us, there was no other Law to come from God, but that
which he gave unto us, and this is it that he says, it is not in the Heavens,
that thou should say who shall ascend into Heaven for us, etc. but it is in
thine Heart and in thy Mouth.

Ans. But was this it that M^ses there says? no surely: for whoever considers
the Series of his Discourse will easily find, that he is not speaking of the
Duration of his Law whither long or short, but requiring Obedience to it: the
Reason of his so doing is because the Commandment is not hidden, neither is it
far off. It is not in Heaven that thou should say, who shall go up to Heaven
for us and bring it unto us, that we may hear and do it? Neither is it beyond
the Sea, that thou should say who shall go over the Sea for us, and bring it
to us, that we may hear and do it? But the Word is very nigh unto th^e, in thy
Mo^th and in thy Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14.
Heart, that thou may do it. But what is this to the pretended Eternity of
the Law? because the Law was neither hidden nor far off, so that they need not
to send either to Heaven or beyond Sea to fetch it, was it therefore Eternal?
either this argument is wholly impertinent, or else I do not understand it.

De fund. Leg. c. 9* ^. 1.
Obj. 2. But it is (says our Author) expounded and declared in our Law, that
the Precept is ^ixt for ever, that it shall not be obnoxious to variations,
neither Diminution nor Addition. Every Word that Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
I command you, you shall keep, that you may do it: thou shall neither add
unto it, nor diminish from it. And therefore our Ancestors have said, it is
not granted to a Prophet to change any thing.

Have they so? but what Authority had they for so saying? for diverse of their
Rabbis (disputing against the pretended Eternity of their Law) tell us, the
Holy Scripture admonishes none but Us, that we should not for our pleasure, or
according to our own judgment, add unto the Precepts, or diminish ought from
them; but what hinders, why the blessed God himself may not add unto the Law,
or diminish from it, as his Wisdom shall appoint? Nay, it seems that R. Albo
(whom the Jews call the Divine Philosopher, and adorn with more than a little
praise) restrains the place now cited, to Idolatry, and understands it to speak
of Idolatrous Additions and Diminutions from the Manner or Form of Gods Worship
constituted by the Law. And this, says he, may rightly be gathered from the
Context: for in the two preceding Verses, the People are dehorted from the
horrible Worship of the Gentiles, and the Oblation of their Vid. Vorst. ad
Maim. de fund. Leg. c. 9. Not. 2.
Children: whereunto this Admonition is immediately subjoyned. If then this be
the meaning of the place (as R. Moses Nachman also thought it was) it puts in
no Caveats against those that (for ought appears) by the Spirit of Prophecy
teach a variation in other matters from the Law of Moses. Of which Law, we are
to observe

2. That Moses himself declared, there should be a Change and Abrogation of it;
for he foretold such a state of things as was utterly Inconsistent with its
Observation in all particulars. Evident it is by his Writings, that long before
the Promulgation of his Law, God had a purpose to communicate his Grace and
Goodness to all Nations: for he it was that Genesis 22. 18.
recorded Gods Promise to Abraham, that in his Seed should all the Nations of
the Earth be blessed. And Genesis 49. 10.
afterward old Jacob foretold, that the gathering of the People should be to
Shiloh. But shall all Nations be blessed at Jerusalem? must they all resort
thither De Resar. Mor. 1. 3. c. 2.
to Shiloh? All Nations (says Menasse^ Ben Israel) with unanimous consent
shall adhere to the God of Jacob and Isaac, and embracing his Doctrine, with
one and the same Worship they shall serve him. But shall the Worship of God be
then confined (as it is by the Law of Moses) to the place which the Lord shall
choose D^nt. 12. 13, 14.
in one of the Trib^s of Israel? But if that were possible, will the Aaronical
Pri^^thood be sufficient to attend at the Temple for all Nations? It is
impossible that all People should be gathered together in the Land of Canaan,
much more in one of the Tribes of Israel: Impossible it is also that the Tribe
of Levi should be numerous enough to find Priests to offer all their
Sacri^ices: there must therefore of necessity be a Change made both in the
Place of Worship and also in the Priesthood.

And this which we have thus deduced from the Predictions of Moses, was more
fully revealed by succeeding Prophets, viz. That it should come to pass in the
last Days, that the Mountain of the Lords house should be established on the
top of the Mountains, and should be exalted above the Hills, and all Nations
Isai. 2. 2*
should flow unto it. The Prophet here teaches, that not only temporal Good
things, but also Spiritual shall be given unto men of all Nations, when the
Messiah shall come: says the last cited Author. I have no Pleasure ^b. s^p*
in you (the Priests of the Jews) says the Lord of hosts, neither will I
accept an offering at your Hand. For from the rising of the Sun, even unto the
going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every
place Incense shall be offered unto my Name a pure Offering; for my Name shall
be great among the Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts. But who shall then Mal. ^.
10, 11*
be Priests to offer this Incense and Pure offering? why it shall come to pass
says the Lord, that I will gather all Nations and Tongues, and they shall come
and see my Glory, and I will also take of them for Priests, and for Levites,
says the Lord. Whereby it is plain, Isai. 66. 18, 21*
that there should be a Priesthood taken out of all Nations and Tongues. And
these Priests surely were to be subject to him to whom the Lord had sworn, Thou
art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek; for this Priest was to
judge (i. e. to Reign and Rule) among the Heathen, and to wound the heads (of
those that oppose him) over many Countries; and Psalm. 110. 4, 6.
that in the opinion of the Jews, as well as of us Christians, this Priest was
their expected Messiah, Petrus Galatinus makes evident by diverse of their most
De Arc. Fid. Cath. 1. 8. c. 24.
Ancient and Authentic Writings. From these Premises they might have inferred,
that there was to be a Priesthood (subject to the Mess^as) not after the Order
of Aaron, but taken out of all Nations: and concerning the promised Messiah the
Jews were expressly taught to believe, not only that he should confirm the
Covenant (viz. which God made with Abraham Dan. 9. 27.
etc.) but also that he shall cause the S^crifice and Oblation to cease. On
this account it is like it was, that many Masters in Isra^l have said as much,
viz. That all the Feasts and Oblations, besides that of Consession or giving of
Thanks, shall ceas^ in the future Age: Yea, that the Holy Blessed one now
re^ts, and considers of a new Law which ^e will give by the h^nd of Vid. Vorst.
Not. ad Abr. de cap. ^id. cap. 13.
the Messiah: and that God shall make a new Covenant with him: and surely not
with him only, but in him with them also; for, Behold, the day's ^ome, says
the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with
the house of Juda^: not according to the Covenant which I made with their
Fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand, to bring them out of the land
of Egypt; but this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel* after those days says the Lord, I will put my Law, in their inward
Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33.
parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be
my People: In that he says a New Covenant, he mak^th the first Old: and in
that Heb. 8. 13.
he says, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, he clearly teaches, that this New Covenant was to be a more Spiritual
Dispensation than the former. The first had multifarious Ordinances of Divine
Service, and Pandects of Laws, enjoining such things as were not good in
themselves, but only because they were commanded: but the New Covenant has
Laws, agreeable to the dictates of Right Reason, and Natural Morality written
in our hearts: and these shall be those, whereby men in this Covenant shall
have the Lord to be their God, and they his People. By all which it is evident,
not only that the Law of Moses was in it self mutable, but also that it should
be actually changed, another more Divine and Spiritual Dispensation was to be
substituted in the room of it; and if so, it is very unlikely that by Gods
Authority any were denied admittance to a trial of their pretended Gift of
Prophecy, barely for want of strict Conformity to the Law of Moses, especially
if they gave evidence of Gods intention by them to repeal either the whole or
any part of it. The reason is manifest, because God not intending it to b^
perpetual, did not certainly ty^ himself up to send no Prophets but such as
should in no case teach an abrogation of it; nay, by declaring that it should
be changed, he has evidently reserved to himself a Power of so doing. And of
this we are assured by Maimonides his own concessions, viz. That a Prophet had
Power to command the omission of an Affirmative Precept, and to enjoin the
doing of what was forbidden by a Negative, except only in case of Idolatry; and
this, says he, was the opinion of the Wise men in their Talmud, where they
say, In all things, In Sed. Zer.
except Idolatry, if a Prophet shall say unto thee, transgr^ss the Law, thou
art bound to obey him. And is it likely that God should endue men with Power to
Suspend his Laws, and yet give order, that they should be put to death for
offering to do it? It is unworthy of God to think so of him.

Obj. Aye bu^, says our Author, This power was granted not to Candidates for
the Prophetic Office, but only to those, of whom it was certainly known, they
were called unto it, as Samuel, Elias, etc.

Answ. But where, I pray, has God declared, he will not do it by any other?
but if he has not, why may not one but newly ^ndued with the Spirit of
Prophecy give sufficient and certain evidence of it? and if he does, it is
unreasonable to reject him, rebellicus against God to r^fuse him, and barbarous
murder to kill him. In this case therefore (and doubtless this was the case of
Christ and his Apostles) they ought not so to do, but to allow him a fair
Trial. And so I come to consider

Sect. 2. The Ant^^^dents or Concomitants of a Prophe^ick Spirit.
The Jewish Rabbis inform us, there were certain Qualifications antecedently
or concomitantly useful to sit a man for the Spirit of Proph^cy, or rather for
the Office of a Prophet: all which (according to their Recension of them)
Vorstius has reduced to these six Heads, viz. 1. Good Constitution of Body,
even from the very Conception. 2. Endowment with Goods both of Wit and Fortune.
3. Sequestration from the common and profane manner of living. 4. Convenience
of Place, and that they make proper to their own land. 5. Seasonableness of
time, because (say they) all times are not equally apt for the reception of
Prophecy. Ad Maim^n. de fund. Leg. c. 7. S. 1. not. 1.
6. Divine Disposition, or the free Gift and Suggestion of God. The nece^sity
of all these is deservedly questioned, not only by Christians, but also by some
of the Jews themselves: insomuth that (as far as I can find) there is no one of
them that has spoken distinctly of them all as Requisites to Prophecy. Yet one
Maxim there is (pertinent to this Subject) whereunto they all seem to yield
Assent, and that is, That Prophecy rest^th on none but the Wise, the Strong,
and the Mai^. in Sed. Zer.
Rich. This saying, among the Jews, is perhaps thought worthy of all
acceptance, yet by some Christians it is est^^med more wo^thy of rej^ction;
not only because the Holy Ghost has not tied his Gifts to such requisites, but
also because it s^ems to savor of a design to k^ep People in unb^lief of
Christianity. Such we know is the m^lice of the Jews against the Son of God, as
that their Rabbis labor what they can to hinder the growth of our Christian
Faith: to that end they have taught such Principl^s, and Magisterially dictated
such Sayings and Rules to the People, as are apt to prepossess their Minds, and
fortify their unbelieving Hearts with such Pr^judices, as make them
impregnable, by all the Weapons and Strength of our Christian Warfare. Such as
these are those Fundamental Articles of their Faith, concerning the Perpetuity
and Immutability of the Law of Moses, and the time of the coming of the
M^ss^as: which Opinions seem formed almost on purpose to hinder the Faith of
Christ, and to stop its Course among Men. And in mine appr^hension, the Rule
now under debate may be thought like unto them; for while men believe that
Prophecy rests on none but the Wise, the Strong, and the Rich, how hard is it
for them to believe that Christ and his Apostles were Prophets? The reason is,
because in their Birth and Bodies, their Education and Fortunes, th^re seems
little or nothing that may d^nominate them so qualified, but much otherwise.
For this reason (were there no other) we Christians have just cause to qu^stion
this Rule of their Rabbis: but moreover we are sure, that it is not
universally true: and indeed the Jews themselves confess as much, for they
except Moses and Samuel, Amos and Jonas from it: whereunto they might have
added Deborah and Elisha: Judge. 4. 4.
whereof the former, although a Prophetess, yet being one of the Weaker Sex,
surely was not so strong as this R^le would have the Prophets; and 1 King. 19.
19.
Elisha was called from following the Plough; and so not likely to have been so
Wise and Learned as this Rule pret^nds the Prophets should. And then as for
Riches, we may well say with Vorstius, there is nothing more foolish and
unsavory, than to join matt^r of Money with the Prophetic Office or Spirit.
His reason is manifest, because it is certainly appar^nt, that many, if not most
of the Prophets, were sometimes reduced to such Pove^ty, as that they endur^d
hunger (yea perhaps, cold and nakedness) through their Want and pentoy, yet
still the Spirit of Pr^phecy rested on them. By these their conc^ssions and
Observations it plainly appears, that this their Rule (according to the most
common acceptance of the words among the Vulgar) is not universally true,
there is no indispensible nec^ssity of those things, which that se^ms to make
requisite for the R^ception of Prophecy. I am therefore inclined to think, that
that Opinion concerning the Election of Prophets, which M^imenides ascribes to
the Vulgar, Mor N^^och p. 2. cap. 32. Thesau. Phil. l^b. 2. c. 3.. 4.
is the only true one; namely, that God chooses and sends whom he pleases,
without regarding whether they be wise and learned, ignorant, young or old: and
if so, then we may conclude with Hottinger, that this Rule is not worth a
nut-shell: or else we must find out some s^nse wherein it may be admitted: but
admit it I think we may not, unless it be on these two conditions; 1. That the
Prophet's Wisdom (distinct from that they had by Rev^lation) be not thought
always to consist in humane Learning, acquir^d by s^udy, but in their natural
Sagacity or Prudence, improved by Experience or otherwise; and that their
Strength was not always that of the Body, but the Fortitude of the Mind: and
lastly, that their Riches be not those of the World; but of Virtue and probity
of Manners. 2. That these things, even thus understood, be not made necessary
Antecedents of Prophecy, but concomitant Attendants on it: they are not
necessary for the Gift of Prophecy, but convenient for the Office of a Prophet:
In this sense, and this only, the Jews perhaps may justify their Rule, and we
may allow it some measure of Admittance, and in this sense we are not
unwilling, that the Spirit or Gift of Prophecy which we assert to have been in
Christ and his Apostles, should be tried by it: in order whereunto it will not
be amiss to take a distinct Survey of the Prophets Wisdom, Strength, and
Riches.

By the Prophets Wisdom, Maimonides understands humane Learning and Knowledge
acquired by Study: This therefore (says he) is our foundation, without without
Study and Perfection no man can Prophecy, and Mo^. N^vo^^ (...) c. 32.
that the possibility of it depends thereon. But was Samuel perfect in his
Childhood? had Elisha and Amos been so studious as to arrive at Perfection,
before God took the one from holding the Plough, and the other from following
the Flock? It seems not: although Amos 7. 15.
therefore Maimonides was a Master Builder in Israel, yet he laid his
Foundation in the Sand, otherwise it could not have been so easily shaken. We
are not of his mind, that Fools and Sons of the Earth can possibly Prophecy,
no more than an Ass or a Frog, or the possibility of Prophecy has a dependence
on Study, and Perfection acquired by it: We dare not so to limit the Almighty,
or set bounds to Omnipotence, yet we think it becoming the excellency of
Prophecy, and convenient for the Office of a Prophet, that the Person inspired
should be one of no contemptible Natural Parts and Prudence. Not that Natural
Sagacity or any acquired Endowments could conduce by way of Efficiency to the
Gift of Prophecy, but yet they might and did by way of Anticipation, although
they were not absolutely needful in order to the Production or Reception of the
Spirit of Prophecy, yet they were convenient to anticipate and prevent the
Prejudices which otherwise would arise against the Persons of the Prophets. How
hard a thing was it, (especially if their age were such as ours) to make men
believe, that the God of Infinite Wisdom would Inspire men of shallow
Intellectuals and incompetent Apprehensions? Prophecy is one of the highest
degrees of Perfection, whereof in this Life our humane Nature is capable: and
how hardly are we persuaded, that so good and perfect a Gift should be
congruously bestowed by the most Wise Disposer of all things. But if they were
so successful as to convince men of their Calling, yet how could they perform
their Office without Discretion and Prudence? By their Office (as we may gather
from the use of 2 Timothy 3. 16.
their Scripture) the Prophets were to teach, reprove, correct, and instruct
men in righteousness, to declare what they ought to know and believe, to
convince them in Falsehood and Error, to reform and amend their Lives, to build
them up, and carry them on unto Perfection, in all Virtue and Holiness of
living: without Discretion and Prudence who were sufficient for these things?
Can Ignorance teach, or Folly reprove? Can Weakness of Judgment demolish the
Strong Holds of Error, or discover the Fallacies of Falsehood? Can Shallow
Apprehensions fathom the Depths of Sin, or detect the Mysteries of Iniquity?
Can Idiots make men Wise, or Fools Instruct others in Righteousness? Yet so
they must, unless the rational Faculties of the People rather than of the
Prophets, were almost wholly absorpt by the Spirit of Prophecy, and so their
Wisdom and Holiness were increased by a strange antiperistasis of Folly and
Ignorance, than which there was nothing more unlikely and ridiculous. It must
therefore be granted to the Jews, that Gods Prophets were (though it may be not
always Learned in Languages, Arts and Sciences etc. yet) Wise and Prudent Men:
and this their Prudence dwelt with such knowledge, as was unattainable without
Revelation, and that in one or more of these three respects. Either, first, in
respect of the nature of the things known, as in their Predictions of Future
Contingences, (of which hereafter.) Or, secondly, in respect of the manner of
their Knowledge; my meaning is, that those things which of their own nature
were such as might have been known by the power of our Natural Abilities, were
sometimes made known to the Prophets by immediate Revelation. Thus the Prophet
Samuel knew where Saul's Asses were: and 1 Samuel 9.
thus Elisha knew whither his Servant Gehazi was gone, and what he did, when he
followed Naaman, 2 King. 5. 26.
and had overtook him. In the Nature of the Things, and the Measure of their
Knowledge, th^re was nothing Extraordinary, but the Things themselves being
remote from these Prophets, and they not being informed by any Creature
concerning them, it is evident, that the manner of their Knowle^ge, or the
means whereby they attained unto it, were Supernatural. Thirdly, the Prophets
knowledge of some things was Supernatural in respect of the Measure of it; as
is evident by their clearing up the Principles of Natural Theology: and this
they have done so Apol. c. 47.
successfully, as that Tertullian offers to prove to the Gentiles, that not
only their Poets and their Sophisters drank out of the Prophets Fountain, but
also their Philosophers quenched the thirst of their Wit therefrom. They all
were Plagiaries, and stole the choicest of their Notions from the Revelations
made to the Prophets. How partial then are we in counting the Philosophers
Wise, unless we also reckon that the Prophets did excel them in Wisdom, if not
in respect of that which they themselves acquired, yet in respect of that which
was revealed unto them. And this their Wisdom was far more excellent than that
of the Philosophers, not only in respect of the Matter, Manner, or Measure of
it, but also in respect of the Effect or Operation of it in them: and this
brings me to the second thing enquired after by the Jews in the Trial of
Prophets, ^amely, their Strength, or Fortitude.

So Servile and Pusillanimous were the Heathen Philosophers (even Plato
himself) as that for fear Vid. Theodoret. S^^. 3* ad Graec.
of Men they concealed Truths of greatest importance. Thus may men do by
acquired Knowledge, but not with Infused, at least not so easily: that which
they get by Study, they may stifle, but what they have by Prophecy they can
hardly conceal. Is not my Word like as Fire, says the Lord, and like an J^r.
23. 29.
Hammer that breaks the Rock in pieces. The word of Proph^cy can hardly be
imprisoned in Unrighteousness: the Prophets must ^ither burn or break unless
they utter it. Hence no doubt it was, that when the Prophet Jeremiah was so
passionate and petti^h as to say, I will not make mention of the Lord, nor
speak any more in his Name; he thought (no doubt) it had b^^n in his power to
have concealed Gods Word, and he it seems resolved so to do; but (says he) his
word was in mine heart, as a burning Fire shut up Jer. 20. ^*
in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. Such was
the strength of the Prophetic Impression, and such the Energy of its Power in
the Souls of the Prophets, as that (like a Fire burning in their bones) it
would force its way out, or else consume them. This I presume was a great cause
of that admirable Fortitude and Magnanimity, which made them despise the
terrors of Men, and the threats of wicked Princes; neither the indocible
temper of the People, nor the ruggedness of their behavior, neither the power
of Monarchs, nor the menaces of Rulers, could ever deterr them from uttering
their Prophecies. Of this we have a pregnant instance in Moses, who, with
nothing but his Staff went boldly to Pharaoh, and (notwithstanding his Power
and Tyranny) undauntedly told him, the Lord God of Israel would have him to let
his People go. Exodus 5. 1.
And because Pharaoh hardened his heart, and would not hearken, Moses threatened
him to his face, that the Waters in the River should be turned into Blood,
Exodus 7. 17. 8, 2. etc.
and that all his borders should be smitten with Frogs, etc. Thus did he
prevail against a mighty King, and retrieve a whole Nation out of bondage. Nor
was this Courage peculiar to the Mosaic d^gree of Prophecy, but common
therewith to others: as appears by Nathan's application of his Parable to
David; 2 Samuel 12. 17. 1 Kings 18.
Elijah's reprehension of Ahab; Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the rest of the
Prophets, most Faithful and courageous discharge of their Office: they all
therein had, and discovered such Prowess and Fortitude, such Magnanimity and
nobleness of Resolution, as cannot be paralleled by the Examples of the most
heroic Teachers of Wisdom and Virtue among the Gentiles. That therefore in
respect of this their Fortitude and Courage in the Execution of their Office,
the Prophets were always strong, will easily be granted:

But that they were always rich in respect of Worldly Wealth, may justly be
denied; and since the Jews give us no reason for their confidence in Affirming
it, we need give them none for our denying it. Yet since the Rabbis were
oftentimes pleased to speak mystically in other things, it is possible they did
so in this; and if they did so, who knows but that the word rich may be taken
in them as it Eccles. 10. 6.
once is in Solomon, viz. for one that is rich, not so much Money and Earthly
Possessions, as in Prudence and Moral Virtues. Which Conjecture seems somewhat
strengthened by Maimonides his Expositions of the Rule now debated: for he
therein makes no mention at all of Riches, but of Learning, Religion,
Continence, Understanding, and all probity of Manners. And in Sed. Zer.
elsewhere he tells us, that Prophecy falls on none but the excellently Wise,
one that is able to rule his Affections, and cast off the dominion of Worldly
Concupiscence; one whose Reason rules his Appetite, and is endued with De fund.
Leg. cap. 7.. 1.
large and very well disposed Intellectuals. Not one word of Wealth or Worldly
Riches; and is it not somewhat strange, that when he professedly Expounds this
Rule, he should so utterly forget the third part of its Contents, if they had
so been, or he had thought them so? Surely he did not, for in another place of
his Writings he tells us, that in this Rule the word Wise without doubt
comprehends Intellectual Virtues, but the words Strong and Rich import Morals;
the former denotes Fortitude, the latter Contentment: for his words are these;
Gihbor [Strong] is of the Moral Virtues, viz, He who does moderate and rule the
Powers of his Soul according to right Reason: and this is it which they say,
when they ask who is strong? and answer, he that subjugates his own
Concupiscence. And so also Ashir [Rich] is of the Moral Virtues, viz. the
virtue of a contented mind; for he that is contented with his portion, they
call Rich: this is it they say, when describing a rich man they ask, who is
rich? and return answer, He that rejoices in his own portion. i. e. He that is
content with what the time present affords him, and does not grieve at what it
denies him. By all this it is very in Pirk Aboth cap. 7.
plain, that if he has given us the true meaning of this Rule, the Jews
thereby understood no more than that the Prophets were Excellent men, in
respect both of Intellectual and Moral Virtues, especially Fortitude and
Contentment; and in this sense we affirm as well as they, that generally they
were Strong and Rich, namely, in Virtue and Probity of Manners, in good Works
and all Holiness of living, especially in Courage and Magnanimity, in
Contentment and well-pleasedness with their Condition; and we will not
contradict our Authors saying, there never was any one hitherto who would have
it, that God made his Divine Majesty (so he calls the Spirit of Prophecy) Mor.
Nevoch. p. 2. c. 32.
to dwell in a wicked man: for a man of a more Excellent Spirit than he has
told us, they were holy men of God that in old time spoke as they were 2 Pet.
1. 21. Jast. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph.
moved by the Holy Ghost. They were blessed and just, Lovers of God, and
beloved of him. And it was need full for them so to be, for being by their
Office obliged to pull the Motes out of the Eyes of others, it highly concerned
them to have no Beams in their own: so base a thing is Vice, that it villifies
the authority of Instruction, and abates the credit of Predictions by them that
are Vicious; and on the contrary, an holy Magnanimity and Contempt of the
World, accompanied with all other probity of Manners, do conciliate Authority,
and facilitate Belief. Since then the Prophets were Men of Gods own immediate
choosing, and that on purpose to propagate his Holiness to others, and infuse it
into them, it is more than probable that they themselves had a great share of
it. Concerning these things then, (viz. Wisdom, Strength and Holiness, but
especially Fortitude and Contentment) when the Jews were satisfied, they had at
least some probable Arguments, that the Pretenders to Prophecy were indeed
endued with it. For the Spirit of Prophecy and the Office of a Prophet, had so
little of Secular advantage to allure men's Affections, and so much of
likelihood to expose them to all manner of hardships, yea, perhaps to Death it
self, as that it was altogether improbable that a Wise and Prudent man would
undertake it without a Call, or Necessity laid upon him to do it: much more
unlikely is it, that he should be Courageous and Resolute in it, when in his
Conscience he knew, he had nothing to do (and so might be put to death, and
damned for meddling) with it. Nor was it at all likely, that any Holy man,
content and well-pleased with his Condition, should lie so horridly, and
prevaricate so prodigiously in a matter of this nature. If then the Pretenders
to Prophephecy were found to be Wise, Strong, and Rich, i. e. Eminently endued
both with Intellectual and Moral Virtues, especially Fortitude and Contentment,
the Jews had great reason to believe them, or at least, to proceed to some
farther Trial of them

Of Prophetic Predictions. Sect. 3.
For the performance whereof, they had yet another kind of ordinary Means,
which in their esteem was most certain and demonstrative: viz. the
accomplishment of Predictions. These they enquired after, and sufficient
warrant they had for so doing: for Moses having told them, that by the
non-accomplishment of Prediction, they might know the word which Deuteronomy. 18. 21,
22.
the Lord had not spoken, it was easy and Logical from thence to infer, that
by the accomplishment of Predictions, they might know the Prophet did not speak
presumptuously. Yet forasmuch as most (if not all) Predictions were either
Promises of some future Good, or Comminations of Evil to come, and the Lord had
declared that the conditions of both J^r. 18. 7. to 10.
were mutable, there was certainly no small difficulty in trying the truth of a
Pretension to Prophecy by the success of Prediction. It seems therefore the
Rabbis have taken some pains to extricate themselves and others out of this
Labyrinth. We need not take notice of their unsuccessful attempts to do it: it
suffices us they seem all agreed in this: that the full and exact
accomplishments of Predictions (whether Promises or Comminations) were sure and
certain signs of a Prophetic Spirit. They expected, that not so much as a
tittle of what the Prophets foretold should ever fail, or fall to the ground,
but that all should be fulfilled and accompli^hed by the Event. And this they
pretend to have learned from the words of Jehu to the Rulers of Jesreel, there
shall fall unto 2 Kings 10. 10.
the Earth nothing of the word of the Lord. Which also, as they think the Lord
himself insinuates, when he says, the Prophet that has a dream, let him tell
a dream; and he that has my Word, let him speak my Word faithfully; what is
the Chaff to the Wheat, says Jer. 23. 28.
the Lord? In which words (says M^im^nides) there are some persons reprehended
for taking their Dreams to be prophetic, and divulging them for such, and
themselves for Prophets: although the Lord allows them to tell their Dreams,
yet he approves not their doing it for Revelations: however, he that has his
Word may say that he has so, provided he do it faithfully, i. e. without
Addition or Diminution: and this surely (says the Lord) will be disc^rnable
from Dreams: for what is the chaff to the wheat? The sense of which Question,
our Author says, their Wise men have rendered to be this; That all Indications
of things Future, whether by Dreams or otherwise (besides those of Prophecy)
are like to Chaff: for as in that there may be some few grains of Wheat, so say
they, perhaps there is in these some small measure of Truth mixed with much
more Mistake and Falsehood, but Prophecy is a thing pure, having no more mixture
than Wheat well in Sed. Zer.
winnowed has with Chaff. Hereby then they distinguished the Predictions of
Prophets from those of Soothsayers, Astrologers, etc. whose Prognostications
were very much unlike the Predictions of true ub. sup.
Prophets: for of necessity (says mine Author) they had falsehood as well as
truth in them: this we always see, and they themselves that profess these Arts
confirm it to us: because they make it matt^r of glory to themselves, that
their Lies were not so many as another of the same Profession, but that any
one of them should speak truth in each of his Predictions is impossible: nor
indeed do the skilful therein arrogate that to themselves: for when something
comes to pass, which looks but like an accomplishment, they account the
Foreteller excellent, and enroll him among men of illustrious Fame, whom
Histories celebrate: and this is the sense of what Isaiah says to Isa. 47. 13.
Babylon: Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the Monthly Prognosticators
stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee. Let them
try if they can foretell these things, that thou may escape from them. The
challenge implies that they cannot: and R. Albo it seems gives the reason of
it: viz. because Vid. Vorst. not. ad Maim. de ^und. Leg. cap. 16. Sect. 3.
all such Arts (or whatsoever else some are pleased to call them) are founded
in Fancy: they are Creatures of Imagination, that have a Being in nothing but
men's Conceits, they are founded on no demonstrable Hypotheses, and are
therefore vanity; as is also abundantly demonstrated by a Learned Writer Dr.
Hen. More, Mystery of Godliness, lib. 7. c. 15, 16, 17.
of our own. And truly the things from whence these Foretellers pretend to
deduce their Judgments, are certainly so remote, intricate and various, as that
it seems impossible for any to arrive at perfect knowledge of them: how then is
it possible for their Prognostications to be certain Predictions: they can be
but Conjectures, and Conjectures we know (especially in such cases) are very
often wholly false, very rarely (if ever) wholly true: but the Promises of the
Prophets (says our Author) were very much otherwise, viz. always true, but
never false: it cannot be found throughout all Ages, that ever any thing,
either much or little of the Word of the Lord by the Prophets, (unless the
Conditions were altered) ever yet fell to the ground. But the ibid.
Predictions of Gods Prophets were fully answered by the Event: and thereby the
Jews knew that they were endued with the Spirit of Prophecy, because such
certain foreknowledge of Future Contingences was no way attainable without it;
and for this cause ('it is like it was, that) among all the ordinary means of
trying Prophets, this was accounted the most demonstrative.

Of Miracles. Sect. 4.
But besides these Ordinary, the Jews had some Extraordinary means of
discerning the truth of men's Pretensions to the Spirit of Prophecy, viz.
Miracles. Not only the Vulgar, but more than a few of the Better sort among the
Jews, were of opinion, they were not to believe any Pretender to Prophecy, till
he had done a Miracle, equal to some of those of Moses, or had disturbed the
ordinary course of Nature, as Elijah did in raising the Widows Son: but In Sed.
Zer.
this rule (says Maimonides) has nothing of truth in it. And indeed we are
apt to think it has not much: the reason is, because the Order of Prophets was
at first founded by Miracles: for evident it is, that Moses (the first of that
Order) was endued with a power of working Miracles, on purpose to Exodus 4. 1.
to 9.
convince the Children of Israel, that the Lord God of their Fathers had
appeared unto him. Yet that great R. Maimonides (out of design, I suppose, to
derogate from the belief of Chri^tianity) was not ashamed De fund. Leg. cap. 8.
s. 1.
to say, The Israelites did not believe Moses our Master, because of the
Miracles he wrought. And elsewhere he tells us, that, Elias, Elisha, and the
rest of the Prophets, did not their Miracles to confirm their in Sed. Zer.
Prophecies, but to supply their own and others necessity. But it seems at
another time he was of another mind: for he expressly affirms, that a Prophet
may be sent to the common People, or to the Inhabitants of a City or Kingdom,
to prepare, and warn them what shall be done unto them, or to dehort them from
the wicked works that are in their hands: but when God so sends him, He gives
him a Sign or a Wonder, that the People De fund. Leg. c. 7.. 11.
may know God has truly sent him. And in the next Section he says, But we
believe not every one that shows a Sign, or does a Miracle, to be a Prophet,
unless from the beginning we have known him to be sit for Prophecy, that in his
Wisdom and his Works he has excelled his Contemporaries, and has walked in
the ways of Prophecy, in Holiness and separation from others: then if such an
one should come, and do a Sign or a Wond^r, and should s^y that God had sent
him, then it is commanded that we should hear him, as it is said, ye shall hear
him. These his conc^ssions (although Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
they speak him somewhat unconstant to himself, yet) we have no great reason to
thank him for, because the evidence of Truth in Holy Scripture did extort them
from him. Thus the Prophet that was sent to Bethel gave them a Sign, that his
word was what the Lord had spoken. Thus in the 1 Kin. 13. 3.
Fire-ordeal trial between Elijah and the Prophets of Baal, Elijah obtained
Fire to fall upon the Sacrifice 1 Kin. 18. 2 King. 2. 14.
and consume it. Thus also Elisha, to demonstrate his calling to succeed
Elijah, divides the Waters of Jordan with Elijah's mantle: by which Examples we
learn, that though among the Jews the ordinary Trial of Prophets was made by
Predictions, yet in some cases extraordinary, they were by Miracles to make
proof of their Mission to teach, and do what they did.

CHAP. IV. The Application of the foregoing Discourse to Christ and his
Apostles.
Sect. 1.
HAving thus cleared the Ground, and laid the Foundation, We are next to erect
the Superstructure; i. e. to show, that by all these means of Probation, viz.
both by the probable and demonstrative Arguments, both Ordinary and
Extraordinary, it may be proved, that Christ and his Apostles were Prophets. We
are to take them as they lie in order, and so to begin with the Conditions,
whereon, among the Jews, Pretenders to Prophecy were admitted to a Trial.

By what we have already discussed out of Maimonides, it appears, that
Pretenders to Prophecy (even in the Name of the Lord) were not admitted to a
Trial, but upon condition of conformity to the Law of Moses: they were in no
point allowed to teach a perpetual variation from it, unless they gave as great
or greater Evidence of Gods intention by them to change it, as Moses at first
did to establish it. Whether or no Christ and his Apostles on the account
hereof were justly denied the benefit of a fair Trial, we our selves may
perceive by these following Observations.

1. There are two things considerable in the Law of Moses, viz. the External,
and the Internal parts of of it. The former is the Letter, or the Words wh^rein
it is expressed; the latter is the Sense and Meaning, the Scope, Design, and
End of it: the one is the Shell, the other the Kernel: in respect of the one,
it was Civil or Positive; in respect of the other, Natural. As Positive, it
could oblige only that People to whom it was given: and therefore the literal
Observation of it among the Gen^iles, was no way necessary; nor was it so
esteemed by the Jews' th^mselves, as appears by the Proselytes of their Gates,
who were neither circumcised, nor did they conform to the Rites and Ordinances
of that Law, according to the letter of it: the seven Precepts of No^h were
thought sufficient for them, they were oblig^d to no more. If th^n Christ and
his Apostles in posed no more than these upon the Gentiles, and dissuaded not
the Jews from literal Obedience to the Law of Moses, they could not be judged
false Prophets, on the account of subverting it. Next then observe,

2. That Christ and his Apostles were so far from d^troying the Law, as that
they did most excellently fulfill and establish it among the Gentiles, as to
the Sense and Meaning, the Scope, Design, and End of it. What was natural in
the Law (says Irenaeus) Lib. 4. c. 27.
the Lord bath extended and fulfilled. And again, All the Natural Precepts are
common to us with them (viz. the Jews) among them they had their beginning, and
their rise, among us they receive their increase and adimpletion: so that the
whole Law, as to the End and Design of it, if that be Moral and purely Natural)
is not only not Abolished, but Extended and Improved by the Doctrine of Christ
among us Gentiles. In order to the demonstration hereof, it will not be amiss
to observe out of M^imonides, That the general intention of the Law is a double
(...), or Well-being Mor. ^^^och p. 3.
viz. of the Body and of the Soul: all and every of the Precepts tends either
to the one or to the other: to demonstrate cap. 23.
the truth whereof, he reduces the Precepts cap. 35.
of their whole Law to 14 Classes, and then renders the r^asons of each one
distinctly: by which account of his we shall find, that the designed end of a
Class. 1. b Class. 9. c Class. 8. 10, 11, 12. d Cl. 2. e Cl. 14. f Cl. 3. 13. g
Cl. 4. h Cl. 7. i Cl. 6.
the whole Law was, to teach sound Doctrine, a to establish Religion, both the
inward Grace, b and the outward Exercise of it, c and together herewith, a
great part of its design was to cohibit Idolatry, d to extirpate Vice, e to
promote Virtue, f especially Charity g and Justice, both commutative h and
distributive i. By the promotion of these things, it taught and directed men
toward the attainment of that (...), or Well-being both of Body and Soul,
whereunto it was ultimately designed and intended. Now wh^th^r or no Christ and
his Apostles did not at least pretend by the same means to direct men to the
obtainment of the same end? I dare leave to any ingenuous J^w to judge. I am
confidently persuaded that whoever does impartially consider the nature of
their Doctrine, and the excellency of their Precepts, will think it reasonable
to conclude, that the Gospel of Christ does establish the Law of Moses, as to
the Scope and End of it but now mentioned. For the foundations of that Law, or
the Articles of the Jewish Faith (according to Abravanels recension of them)
are thirteen in number, viz. the Existence and Unity, the Spirituality,
Eternity, and Omnisci^nce of God; that He only is to be worshipped; the Being
of Prophecy, and the Excellency of the Prophecy of Moses; that his Law was from
Heaven, and was never to be extirpated; Gods future Judgment; the days of the
Messiah, and the Resurrection of De cap. Fid. cap. 1.
the Dead. Now manifest it is, that the Being and Attributes of God, that He
only is to be worshipped, his f^ture Judgm^nt, the days of the Messiah, and
the Resurrection of the Dead, are more clearly revealed by the Gospel than they
were by the Law: yea, the Being of Prophecy and the Precedence of Moses to all
the other Prophets, the descent of his Law from Heaven, and its
non-extirpation, as to the End and Scope of it, are at least as plainly
asserted by Christ and his Apostles, as ever they were by Moses or the
succeeding Prophets: the Jews therefore could not deny but that they taught
sound Doctrine. And then for the Religion that they have establish^d among us,
it apparently is (as one says) An excellent Hi^ronymus O^orius de Reg. Instit.
1. 6. c. 238.
endowment of mind, continually flourishing from due Piety toward God, with an
ardent study of the Eternal Beauty, and an imitation of it. And this it is, not
only in the Inward Operations, but also in the Outward Exercise of it; for the
Christian Worship of God tends to nothing so much as his Glory, by making us
like unto him. It consists not in Mystical Oblations, Sacrifices, and
Purifications, but in Direct and strenuous Striving after that Holiness and
Purity which, perhaps, was shadowed thereby: that pure and Spiritual Devotion,
which was hardly discernable in the Carnal Ordinances of the Law, is openly and
clearly proposed unto us by the Institutions of the Gospel: insomuch that among
Christians, there are hardly any* so ignorant as not to know, they ought to
pursue it in all the parts of Divine Worship. And together herewith, it does
not only (as the Law) restrain men from Idolatry, but it utterly destroys it.
And what can be more effectual to extirpate Vice and promote Virtue than such a
Religion? And besides that, the Gospel gives us the severest Precepts and
strongest Motives that can be, to avoid all Vice and Wickedness of Living, and
to follow Holiness in all manner of Conversation: and above all things, it
asserts the highest necessity of Charity, which will certainly uphold Justice
and Equity, and indeed the most elevated Virtue of all sorts. Apparent
therefore it is, that the Gospel does most highly establish the Law, as to the
general Intention of it, viz. the (...), or Well-being both of the Souls and
Bodies of men, in their respective Societies. What then, though Christ and his
Apostles were not so zealous for Obedience to the letter of the Law, as to the
End and Scope of it? Were they therefore transgr^ssours of the Law? No, surely;
for they therein had the Example of the Prophets to warrant them in so being:
sor which of them was there, that had not more regard to the Sense and Meaning
than to the Letter of the Law of M^s^s? How severely did they reprehend the
Moral Vices forbidden, and constantly inculcate the Duties of Morality that lay
hidden under it? yea, so contemptuously did they seem to speak of obedi^nce to
the Letter, without conformity to the Scope of it, as would even tempt one to
think it was a part of their Office to contradict and null the Law of Moses. An
instance of this we have in Isaiah, who brings in the Lord thus speaking to his
formal People; I^^. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14.
To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrisices unto me? I am full of the
burnt-offerings of Rams, and the fat of s^d Beasts, and I delight not in the
blood of Bullocks* or os Lambs, or of He-goats. When you come to app^ar before
me, who ^^th required this at your b^nd to tre^d my Courts? Bring no more vain
obl^tions, Incense is an abomination unto me, the new Moons and Sabbaths, the
calling of Assembli^s I cannot away with, it is iniquity, even the Solemn
meeting. Your new Moons, and your app^inted Fe^sts my Soul hates, they a^e a
trouble to me, I am weary to bear them. And elsewhere, (to express his
detestation of their formal hypocrisy) he tells them, He that kills an Ox,
is as if he slew a Man: he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs
neck: he that offers an Oblation, as if he offered Swines blood: he that
burns Incense, as if he blessed an Idol. But why so? Were not Isa. 66. 3.
Sacrifices and Burnt-offerings, Oblations and Incense, the New Moons and
Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies and Solemn meetings, some of Gods own
Ordinances in the Law of Moses? Yes: but whence then was it that they were thus
abominable and loathsome? Why it arose from the Peoples neglect of, and
disrespect to the End and Scope of those Precepts: they, it is true, conformed
themselves to the Letter of the Law, but regarded not that real Holiness and
Moral Goodness whereunto it tended. Thence it was, that not only Isaiah, but
others also of the Prophets reproved Jer. 7. 4.
them, as a Nation that did not rightcousness, but forsook the Ordinance of
their God; even while they sought him daily, and delighted to know his ways:
even while they asked of him the Ordinances of Justice, and took delight in
approaching to Isa. 58. 2.
God; yet even then, when they seemed to be most obedient, because they
neglected the Scope of the Law, they chose their own ways, and their Soul
delighted Isa. 66. 3.
in their abominations. And the Prophets we see did as sharply reprove them for
it, as if they had had no respect at all to the Law of their God among them:
whence it is plain, that they did prefer Obedience to the Intention of the Law,
far before that to the Letter of it: the latter they looked on as a thing of no
value, yea, detestable and odious, without the former. If then Christ and his
Apostles did so likewise, they were not for that cause worthy of Rejection, but
rather of all Acceptance, because they thereby gave evidence of a truly
Prophetic Spirit in them; by making the Scope of the Law the Rule and Standard
of their Doctrine, they did most excellently ful^ill it: and by so doing they
cast a greater honor upon Moses and his Law, than ev^r they received from the
greatest Bigots among the Jews: for the Fame of the one, and the Worth of the
other is hereby p^^pagated to all Nations. How rash then and ignorant was their
Zeal? how absurd the fierceness of their Devotion in rejecting them? especially
considering

3. That as the Prophets of old, so Christ and his Apostles were strict
Observers of the Law, even according to the Letter of it: they were not only
circumcised the eighth day, but in their Lives they discharged the Obligations
of their Circumcision by their literal Observance of the whole Law, as well the
Statutes as the Judgments of it, i. e. those Precepts whose Reasons were not
vulgarly known, as well as those that were Vid. Maimon M^r. Nevo^^, p. 3. c. 26.
. So that, touching the Righteousness which is in the Law, they were as
blameless as any other Jews whatever: yea, though they did not put the necks of
the Gentiles under the yoke of Literal obedience to the Law of Moses, yet they
never taught the Jews to withdraw theirs, but rather to keep them under, and
submit unto it: for Jesus spoke to the multitude, and to his Disciples, saying,
the Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Mos^s seat: all therefore whatsoever they
bid you observe, that Mat. 23. 1, 2, 3.
observe and do. Nor did the Apostles ever teach them otherwise: it is true
indeed, it was once reported of St. Paul, that he taught ^he Jews which were
among the Gentiles, to forsake Moses, saying, that they ought not to Circumcise
t^eir Children, neither to walk after the Customs: the rest of the Apostles and
Elders were so concerned at this News, as that (to wipe off the scandal) they
advised him by all means to purify himself with four men that had the
Nazarites vow Numb. 6. 13, 14, 15
upon them, and to be at charges with them to provide such Sacrifices for them
as the Law prescribed: this they would have him to do, that all might know,
that those things, whereof they were informed concerning ^im, were nothing, but
that he himself also walked orderly and kept the Law. Thus careful were they,
Act. 21. 23, 24.
that they th^mselves and others should keep the Law, and give none offense by
breaking it. It Is true indeed, as touching the Gentiles which believed they
wrote and concluded, they were obliged to observe no such thing. Nor had the
Jews any reason to take it ill that they did so: for Christ and they gave as
great or greater evidence of Gods intention to accept the Gentiles without the
Law, as ever Moses gave of his Purpose to guide the Jews to Salvation by the
Law. That so they did is manifest by their Miracles, which were so far from
being inferior to those of Moses as that they did f^^ ^xceed them both in
Number and Nature as we (...) see hereafter. And if so, then thereby evident it
was, that they gave far greater Evidence of their Mission from God than Moses
did of his. How unreasonable than was it in the Jews to deny them Audience? How
brutish to reject them, and barbarous to kill them, for I know not what
nonconformity to their Law. Whereof (by what we have (...) it appears) they
were only supposed, and that very fal^ly to be guilty: they were so far from
making void the Law, as that they fulfilled it, and that both according to the
intention and the letter of it. And this they constantly did by their Doctrine
as well as Practice, and therefore they deserved not to have been rejected as
false Prophets, but to be received as true; which will yet farther appear, if
we consider the Antecedents or Concomitants of a Prophetic Spirit. The first
whereof is

Wisdom. Sect. 2.
And these we have already granted were Wisdom, Fortitude, and Probity of
Manners, especially Contentment. The Method proposed leads me to begin with the
first of these, viz. Wisdom: which being an intellectual Virtue is without
doubt (in the preceding rule of the Rabbis) put to signify those excellent
endowments of mind, whereof the Prophets usually were Partakers: and these it is
confessed were sometimes those useful Ornaments of Arts and Sciences, but more
frequently if not always those of Intelligence and Prudence, somewhat above
the ordinary rate of others: the Spirit of Prophecy seldom or never rested on
any, but those whose minds were very capable of first principles, and able to
guide their actions with Judgment and Discretion.

Now that Christ and his Apostles were so, is a thing whereof it seems needless
to make proof: because among all the Enemies of Christianity I can find none
that ever had the Impudence to say that its Founders were Fools: but rather
they acknowledge, it is such a cunningly devised Fable or so subtle a
Contrivance as that they are forced to confess, the Authors of it were men of
excellent Intellectuals: Even Atheists themselves by saying that our Religion
is an humane Invention (allowed of and defended by Princes) to keep men in
Subjection, do declare plainly, that its Authors or first Founders (who in all
appearance were Christ and his Apostles) were men of no shallow apprehension,
but rather of deep judgment and profound Ratiocination. The whole Christian
World must be thought to consist of these Fools, if those that have given these
Laws to it, were not wise. Yet evident it is, whoever says so, deserves to be
reckoned one of that number or worse. However it see^s the first Opponents of
Christ and his Apostl^s (although they were extremely malicious, yet) were not
so far transported with the madness of Pride, as to say any such thing of them;
but contrariwise they admired and marvelled at them: insomuch that not only the
People were astonished at the Doctrine Mat. 22. 33. Matt. 13. 54. Luke 2. 47.
of Christ, and his countrymen at his Wisdom; but also the very Doctors
themselves at his Understandings and Answers, when he was but twelve year old;
and afterward being come to Maturity never man spoke like this man. Insomuch
that the wicked Joh. 7. 46.
Hearts of many among them prompted them to think he had a Devil, but others
said (and gave a good reason Joh. 10. 20. v. 21.
for it too) that his were not the words of one that had a devil, if we lay
both togeth^r we may from thence gather, that his discourse was extraordinary,
so far above the pitch of the hearers, as that it gave Evidence of transcendent
Wisdom in the Speaker. Which also in some measure discovered it self in his
Apostles; for the Elders of Israel marvelled, and Sergius Act. 4. 13. Act. 13.
12.
Paulus (a prudent man) was astonished, at what they heard from them: and wise
men we know use not to admire and marvel at the Rhapsodies of Fools: if
therefore the People or yet their Rulers were wise, it must be concluded, that
Christ and his Apostles were such, because (in despite of Malice) they were
forced to admire them for so being. But in this point the confessions of our
modern Scoffers have given me a Supersedeas from the trouble of saying any
more: for though they will sometimes shoot their bolts at some Parts of our
Religion, divided from the rest; yet they dare not say but that the Whole is so
consistent with it self and subservient to the End whereunto they say it is
designed, as that they presume to disgrace it only with sly Insinuations that
it savours more of Subtilty and Guile than of Honesty; of Craft and Cunning,
than of the thing called Conscience. Were this as great a Truth as it is a
Slander, yet this might we learn from it, namely that the Author of our Faith
and Founders of our Religion were very intelligent Persons, men so far from
Defects in their Understandings, as that they had very large Intellectuals and
comprehensive Capacities: can Naturals befool the World and make it dance after
their Pipe? no surely: it must therefore be concluded that Christ and his
Apostles were men of Parts and Prudence; of Profound Judgment and deep
Intentions. And in that Respect they were such as the preceding Rule of the
Rabbis style Wise.

But this sort of Wisdom (not being peculiar to Prophets) was not I suppose so
much inquired after in the Trial of those that pretended to the gift of
Prophecy as that that was supernatural; namely, that Knowledge which without
Revelation was utterly unattainable, and that in respect either of the Matter,
Manner, or Measure of it. That Knowledge ledg or Wisdom which in one or other of
these respects was supernatural, was I think, principally enquired after in the
Trial of Pretenders to Prophecy: the Reason of this my Conjecture is, not only
because the Nature of the thing requires that it should be so, but because the
contumelious carriage of the Jews toward our blessed Savior seems to intimate
that it was so: for when they had blind-folded him, they stroke him on the face
and asked him, saying, Prophecy, who is it that smote thee. It seems far more
probable Luke 22. 64.
to me, that this their usage of Christ should referr to a Custom of their own,
rather than to a sport called (...) amongst the Grecian Children, or
Blind-mansbuff among our own: if this sport were of use among the Jews also,
yet I do not think their Malice was then so gamesome and childish; it seems a
more solemn jeer, allusive to some Custom or Enquiry that wont to be made in
the Trial of Prophets: and if so it were, then is it most probable, that in
this affair, the Jews required evidence of some supernatural Knowledge in him
that pretended to the Spirit of Prophecy. and such Knowledge as this we have
already observed the old Prophets had, in respect either of the Matter, Manner,
or Measure of their Knowledge; and that Christ and his Apostles had so as well
as they, is the thing which we are now to demonstrate.

Foreknowledge of future Contingencies, the Jews very justly held to be
Supernatural, in respect of the Matter of it. That Christ and his Apostles were
endued therewith, will hereafter appear by the account we are to give of their
Predictions: at present therefore I shall wave that, and observe, that they, as
well as the Prophets before them, had a sort of knowledge which was truly
Supernatural, in respect of the Manner of it; i. e. those things which of their
own nature were such as might have been known by the power of men's Natural
Faculties, were sometimes made known to them by immediate Revelation, as
appears not only by Jesus his knowledge of Nathaneel, Joh. 1. 47, 48. Joh. 2.
24. Act. 5.
and of all other men, but also by the Discovery which the Apostles made of
Ananias and Sapphira's sacrilege. Neither in the Nature of the thing known,
nor yet in the Measure of their Knowledge, does there seem any thing
extraordinary; yet not being informed concerning it, it is evident the manner of
their Knowledge, or the means whereby they attained to it, were Supernatural;
they received it by Inspiration or Revelation of the Spirit; and that is the v.
3. v. 4.
reason why St. Peter told Ananias, that he had not lied unto Men, but to the
Holy Ghost: i. e. to God himself. But of this I shall say no more, because I
would here speak somewhat largely of the third sort of Supernatural Knowledge,
viz. that that is so in respect of its Degree or Measure.

The Spirit of Prophecy did not only Reveal those things, all knowledge whereof
was utterly unattainable by the Light of Nature; but moreover, it did oft-times
illustrate those things whereof men had some obscure Conceptions without it.
Thus the Being and Attributes of God, although they may in some measure be
understood by the things that are made, yet much more clearly by those that are
Revealed. Now that Knowledge which does clear up and elucidate the Principles
of Natural Theology, beyond the possibility of Study and Industry, is that
which I mean by Divine and Supernatural Knowledge, in respect of its Degree or
measure: and this is that Knowledge which ought in all reason among the Jews to
have been honored with the name of Wisdom: if they were so prodigal of that
honorable Drus. praetor. in 2 Pet. 1. 16.
Title, as to bestow it on the puny Arts of Arithmetic, Astrology, and the
like, in Justice, methinks, they ought much rather to have given it to
Theology: and so indeed we find that they did; for among Hottin. Thesaur. Phil.
c. 2.. 1.
them it was better known almost by no name than that of Divine Wisdom. And
well might it be so called, because not only the Object, but also the Teachers
of it were Divine; for they were the Men of God, or the Prophets from whom they
first learned it. Probable therefore it is, that in the Trial of Pretenders to
the Gift of Prophecy, especial s^arch was made after this Wisdom: and for this
cause it will now be my business to enquire, whether or no on the account of
this Wisdom, Christ and his Apostles were not worthy to be thought wise? this
Question it is true was denied by many in the days of their Flesh, and seems
hardly believed by more than a few now in ours; and among those that affirm* it
in their words, there are many that deny it in their deeds, as if there were
Wisdom in the Profession, but Foolishness in the Practice of our Religion. I
fear therefore it will be no needless or unseasonable (...) to demonstrate
their superlative Wisdom in this kind. Which it seems was so transcendent, as
that Justine Martyr after all his hard Study and Travel in almost all sorts of
humane Learning found Christianity to be the only sure and useful Philosophy.
Dyal. cum Try.
We cannot except against his Judgment, as that of a Party, because this was
his Experience before his Conversion: yet because those that are wise in their
own eyes will not see with his, we shall submit our cause to a Trial at the bar
of its Adversaries, Jews and Heathens.

The Jews we know rested in the Law, and made their boast of God, that they
knew his Will, and approved the things that are more excellent, being
instructed out of the Law: on this account they were confident, that they were
Guides of the Blind, Lights of them which are in Darkness, Instructers of the
Foolish, and Teachers Romans 2.
of Babes. And although their Theology was grievously corrupted by their
Traditions, yet those that were Learned in their Law, were on that account so
Conceited and Insolent, as that they did almost wholly ingross the name of Wise
men to themselves: this they did with such a matchle^s Pride and Contempt of
others, as would even tempt one to think that (at least in their opinion) there
was ^^arce any Wisdom in any thing but Theology. Methinks then (if they had
understood it) they could not have been so disingenuously partial, as to have
denied the title of Wisdom to Christianity: the reason is, because it is a sort
of Theology far more excellent than their own, and that in a threefold
reference; namely, to our Faith, our Hope, and our Practice. For,

The Object of Faith is more clearly revealed by Christ and his Apostles, than
by Moses and the Prophets: For very evident it is, that not only the Trinity of
Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence, the Person and Office of the
Messiah, are more fully discovered, but also the very Attributes of God are
most auspiciously asserted and illustrated by the Doctrine of the Gospel. No
man has seen God at any Joh. 1. 18.
time; the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him. Our minds may apprehend God, but our eyes cannot see him: We can
therefore have no knowledge of him, but by Ratiocination or Revelation: the
former we have by the Light of Nature, the latter by the Spirit of Prophecy;
which surely is apt and able to advance our knowledge, above the highest pitch
of mere Nature: for to that end (among the Jews) it spoke by the Prophets, and
after them by Christ and his Apostles: for they have blessed the World with the
greatest Illustration Vorst. ad Maim. de fund. Leg. c. 6. not. 5.
that ever yet was made of the Divine Attributes; which (it seems, according to
the Jews) are distinguished into two sorts, viz. Fundamental and Practical: the
former are those whose foundation is laid in the very Essence of God it self,
such as Power, Wisdom, Holiness, etc. the latter are such as have relation and
reference to the Works of God, in and about his Creatures, such as Mercy,
Goodness, Truth, etc. Whether this Distinction be Orthodox and Adaequate, I
will not now enquire: but sure I am, that Divine Attributes of both sorts are
most evidently illustrated by the Gospel: for its Doctrine does not only teach
us to b^lieve that God is Powerful, Wise and Holy, Merciful, Just and true; but
the Work of Redemption (therein made known) does demonstrate that he is so.
Where can we find so magnificent a demonstration of infinite Power and Wisdom,
as in the Incarnation of the Son of God, and his Resurrection from the Dead?
wherein are Gods Holiness and Mercy, his Justice and Goodness so conspicuous,
as in the Death and Sufferings of Christ? and where do Divine Truth and
Veracity shine so brightly as in the Completion of Prophecies in and by our
Savior, from his Birth to his Burial, yea, from his Conception to his
Ascension? It seems then the Object of Faith (as to the greatest part of it) is
not only more clearly revealed by Christ and his Apostles, than by Moses and
the Prophets, but also that part thereof wherein they were most distinct and
clear, is illustriously demonstrated by the Gospel.

Nor have they therein provided worse for our Hope than they have for our
Faith; but as in the Object of that, so also of this, the Gospel far excels the
Divinity of the Jews; for their Master Moses in the Institution of their
Religion, either promised them nothing beyond the good things of this Life, or
if he did, it was covered with such Clouds, and wrapped up in such Obscurity,
as that none but the most piercing eyes could see it. Thence it was, that Vid.
Grot. de verit. Rel Christ. lib. 2.. 9.
a great and learned part of his followers (viz. the Sadduces) did reject all
hope of any good after this Life was ended. But the Founders of our Faith
obtained a more Excellent Ministry, in that they preached and made known a
better Covenant, established upon better Promises; for Life and Immortality are
2 Timothy 1. 10.
brought to light through the Gospel: they are thereby so clearly revealed, as
that among those who believe that, there can be no doubt of them. As all the
lesser Rivers of the Earth do at length empty themselves into the Sea, so all
the other Promises of the Gospel (although exceeding great and precious, yet)
do bend their course toward the Ocean of Immortal Glory in the World to come:
even those that concern this Life, teach us to look beyond it. We are indeed
assured, that all these things shall be added to us, but it is upon condition,
that we seek Mat. 6. 33.
first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness. Our Temporal Interests and
Eternal Glory, the Wisdom and Goodness of the Gospel have so twisted together,
as we best mind the one by seeking the other. And indeed, the Gospel does
Strengthen our hopes of Salvation as well as Raise them: for it shows us an
inestimable Price paid for it, and assures us that (if we are not wanting to
our selves) we shall be raised up unto it, and by Eternal Judgment bidden to
take possession of it. And forasmuch as in this Life we are at a Distance from
it, the Gospel has given us Tokens and Pledges to assure us of it. To De coen.
Dom.
this end (says St. Bernard) were the Sacraments ordained, viz. that the
Invisible Grace of our Lord might be assured by some Visible Sign unto us.
Hence no doubt it was, that one of the most Ancient Fathers called the
Eucharist the Physic, another the Food of Immortality: Ignat. ad Ephesians. Cypr.
de coen.
because they thought it apt to purge out Despair, and to cherish our Hopes of
Eternal Life. And what so good as Life? and what Life so long as that that is
eternal? and what Eternity so desirable as that in the Kingdom of Glory? yet
this has the Gospel most clearly revealed, and firmly promised to us.

And in order to the obtainment thereof, Christ and his Apostles have given us
far better Rules than any among the Jews, for the guidance of our Lives and
Actions. Besides the Moral Law, Moses we know required obedi^nce to a great
number of positive Precepts, enjoining such things as were not good in
themselves, but barely because they were Commanded, or else for some other
Reason wholly extrinsick to Moral Goodness, (as we have already seen by
Maimonides his account of the first End and intention, the Causes and Reasons
of their Law) and these positive p. 39.
Precepts were so exceeding burdensome and uneasy, as that St. Peter calls
them a Yoke which neither Act. 15. 10.
our Fathers nor we were able to bear. Let not the Jews be offended, that one
of our Apostles gives their Law no better Language; for a Learned Rabbi of
their own has said as much or more, viz. that the written Law which God gave
to Moses, and Moses to the Israelites from Mount Sinai, is both obscure and
difficult: first, because it speaks Contradictions, and secondly, because it is
imperfect. It Is well he was a Jew, and a R. M Mikkotzi ap. Buxtorf. de Syn.
Jud. c. 1.
Rabbi too; had he been a Christian, it is like they would have accused him of
Blasphemy, and perhaps justly: for what greater Disparagement can easily be
cast upon Divine Wisdom, than to say it speaks Contradictions? To that
therefore we cannot assent, but to the Imperfection of the Law we may, because
a man of a more Excellent Spirit than he has Heb. 10. 7.
taught us, that it could never make the comers thereunto Heb. 7. 9.
perfect, yea, that it made nothing perfect: but also because the Jews
themselves insinuate as much by their zeal for Traditions; all which derive
their Authority from that one beforementioned, viz. the pretended Exposition
which they say God gave of his Law to Moses, that from him by Oral Tradition it
might be transmitted to Posterity. The pretense of this fictitious Exposition
was founded in Necessity, and this Necessity in the Obscurity and Imperfection
of the Law without it: which (they say) are so great, as that without the Oral
Law, the whole Written Law would be in the dark: for many things (they tell us)
there are in the Scripture so repugnant each to other, as that we can neither
depend upon, or reconcile Vid. Maimon in Sed. Zer. Hotting. The. Phil. lib. 2.
c. 3. 3. Buxt. Syn. Jud. cap. 1.
them, without the Oral Law which Moses received from Sinai. It seems then, for
the Guidance of their Lives and Actions, the Jews had a vast number of External
Directions; for (as was before observed) the Precepts of the Written Law were
no fewer than 613. concerning each one whereof (as to the manner of its
performances etc.) it is not unlikely that their pretended Exposition contained
diverse particular Canons: and so it seems it did, for they say, that Moses in
his sorrow utterly forgot no less than three thousand of Josh. 15. 17. Vid.
Vorst. ad May. de fun. Leg. cap. 9. not. 13.
these Constitutions; but afterward Othniel the Son of Kenaz by the sharpness
of his wit, retrieved seventeen hundred of them: and these all (and it may be
as many more) were no less to be regarded than the Written Law it self: because
(as they say) of equal Authority therewith. Was it not then an uneasy Yoke,
and an heavy burden that they lived under? how could it be other? for it was as
hard to learn and remember their Rules of Living, as it was to live by the
Essential Rules of Holiness: and yet when they had done all, they did but
escape the Vices, especially the Idolatries of the Gentiles, or at best,
prepare themselves for some higher enjoyments in the time of the Messiah, for
the Law was a Schoolmaster to b^ing men Gal. 3. 24*
to Christ. Churches and Kingdoms as well as Men have their distinct Ages:
that of the Jews under the Law was but a sort of Childhood, a time of Minority;
to this Imperfect State the Temporary or Imperfect Authority of a Schoolmaster
or Guardian was most fitly proportioned: this Office the Law did them, for it
restrained them from the more grievous Vices of the Gentiles, and gave them
some little knowledge of Christ; and by so doing, it did prepare them for his
sublimer Truths, and more elevated Rules of Holy living: which are chiefly
comprised in the Precepts of the Moral Law, according to his Interpretation of
it. The Excellency of which Law appears by the matter about which it is
conversant, viz. those things which are Good or Evil in themselves; namely,
those wherein the Image of God does consist, and those that are repugnant to
it. Since therefore God made Man after his own Image, there can be no Law so
Excellent as this, in respect either of its Agreeableness to the Reason of Man,
or its Subservience to the Glory of God. What so Rational as to preserve the
glory of our Nature, viz. the Image of God in us? And how can we Glorify God
so much as by strenuous Endeavors to resemble him? Thou shall not honor God
(says Hierocles) by giving any thing unto him, but by making In Aur. C^r.
thy self fit to receive from him: for the Pythagoreans say, thou shall best
honor God, when thou make thy mind like unto him. If so, it is evident,
there can be no Law so subservient to the Glory of God as the Moral Law is, and
consequently none so Good and Excellent as that is, because none so apt to
promote the Supreme End of all Laws whatever, viz. the Glory of the Lawgiver,
and the Good of the Subjects.

Yet so brutishly wicked were the Jewish Rabbis, as that they made it void,
and of none effect: not only its Precepts were neglected and slighted, in
comparison with their Ceremonial Performances, but its very Native Sense and
Meaning were almost wholly Clouded and Eclipsed by their false Glosses, vain
Interpretations and Traditions: wherefore one end of Christ his coming into the
World, it seems Mat. ^. 17.
was, to ^ulsill the Law. i. e. not only to do, but also to teach and declare
what the Law required. Wh^t was natural in the Law (as was before observed out
of Iren^eus) the Lord bath not only destroyed, but also extended and ^illed up.
Those that desire to know wherein this Extension, or Adimpletion of the Law
does con^ist, may learn it from the same Father, who tells Lib. 4. ^. 27.
us, it is in r^quiring abstinence, not only from all evil Works, but also from
the very Desire of them. It seems then, the Moral Law (as it is now constituted
the Rule of our Obedience) is so Pure and Spiritual, as that it reaches the
Faculties of our Souls as well as the Works, Words, and Gestures of our B^dies;
s^rictly forbidding the Thoughts or Assent of our Minds, and the very feeblest
In^linations of our Wills and Affections to Sin, as well as the outward
Perpetrations of it. And how much this exceeds the Righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, i. e. of the s^rictest Professors among the Jews, our Savior
Mat. 5.
himself has d^monstrated in diverse instances. The Prohibition of Murder, they
restrained to Shedding v. 31. 33.
of Blood, but Christ ^xtended even to immoderate Anger: that of Adultery, they
restrained to the External commission of Folly, but Christ extended even to the
very eructation of Concupiscence: the Prohibition v. 27, 28.
of taking Gods Name in vain, they restrained to Perjury, but Christ extended
to all manner of Vain and False Swearing, etc. There is therefore nothing v.
33. 34.
more evident, than that the Moral Law (as established by the Gospel) is far
more Pure and Spiritual, more Extended and Comprehensive than it was, as
expounded by the Jewish Traditions and Rabbis: and indeed they did rather
Explode the Law than Expound it. For if the Being of Sin consists in Consent
(as it apparently does in most cases) a man might be guilty almost of all Sins,
and yet (according to Them) be no Sinner, because no Transgressor of the Law,
according to their Exposition of it. But as Christ has now restored it to its
primitive Sense and Meaning, it is (we see) so transcendently Holy, and
immaculately Pure, as that the Ways of our H^arts, as well as Works of our
Hands, and Words of our Mouths, are, or may be Unclean and Impure before it.
This then is the Prime Rule of our Practice; hereunto the Gospel requires most
absolutely Perfect, Unsinning Obedience, insomuch that we ought to be humble
for our Imperfections, as well as penitent for our more grievous
Transgressions: and all this must spring from Faith that work^th by Love; for
without Faith it is impossible Gal. 5. 6. Heb. 11. 6. 1 Cor. 13. 2*
to please God, and without Charity Faith is nothing worth.

Obj. But here perhaps it may be objected: that it is impossible to keep the
Law thus expounded: it is rather fit for Adam in Innocence, than for any of his
Fallen Posterity: Were there no depravity in our Nature, or ^emptations in the
World to do wickedly, it might perh^ps with Justice and equity be imposed on
us: but since (as Christ and his Apostles themselves teach) we all have si^ned,
and cannot live without Sin, it is rather apt to increase our Damnation, than
to promote our Salvation: it is therefore very unbecoming that Wisdom and
Goodness whereunto they pretended in the Promulgation of the Gospel: it speaks
more Zeal than Wisdom to r^quire Imp^ssibilities.

Answ. This Objection (having something of Truth and Reason in it) even tempts
me to wish, it were found in the mouths only of humble and ^ober Enquirers
after Truth; but Experience has taught me, that our Semi-Atheists think to
serve their Lusts by it; for since gradually perfect Obedience is impossible,
and no man is obliged to Impossibilities, they say (and perhaps will swear it
too) it is senseless Folly and brutish Inadvertency to trouble our heads about
it, either by repenting what we have not done according to the Law, or by
taking care for the future to walk by it.

But let them not be too ha^^y in their Conclusion, or too confident in the
strength of their Argument; for it is but a piece of Sophistry: it divides
what ought to be joined, viz. the Law, and its Exposition, from the Mitigation
of it by the Gospel; take in this, and the Argument will be found very
inconclusive on their part, but demonstrative on ours. For though it be
conf^ssed, we find the Law Extended, and far more comprehensively Expounded by
Christ and his Apostles, than for ought we know it ever was by Moses or the
Proph^ts, much more by the Jewish Doct^rs and Rabbi^s; yet withal we find it
so qualified and mitigated, its Rigor and Severity so allayed, as that the
Evangelical Constitution of it is far more eligible than the Legal: it
d^monstrat^s far great^r Wisdom and Goodness than ever it did, either in the
time of man's Innocence or afterward under the Mosaical Dispensation. For

First, Evident it is, that the Law is not now established as a Covenant of
Works, as at first it was in the time of man's Innocence; nor is it now yoked
with a great number of positive Precepts, as it was by the Law of Moses. For
(besides Faith in Christ and the due use of his Sacraments) it is not easy to
think of any thing enjoined by the Gospel but what is reducible to the moral
Law: which Law being capable of a twofold use* viz. either as a Rule of Life or
also as a Covenant of Works, is both established and abolished by the Gospel,
for although as a Rule of Life and Manners the Gospel is so far from making
void the Law, as that there is no Religion in the World does so apparently
establish it, yet as a Covenant of Works, whereby to obtain Salvation, the
Gospel does abolish it* for in that it establishes a new Covenant, it makes
the first old. Insomuch Heb. 8. 13.
that that complete and gradual perfect Obedience, which in the Covenant of
Works (to Adam in Innocence) was absolutely necessary to eternal Life, although
it be our Duty, yet it is not an indispensable Condition of our Salvation. For

Secondly, Though the Gospel requires Perfect Ob^dience, yet it accepts
Sincere; which is such as makes us with David to have respect to All Gods
Commandments, and careful to keep them as well as we can. Although (for the
Glory of God and Honor of his Laws, for the patefaction of his most Holy
Nature and most Just Dominion over us) I say that although for these and such
like great ends, the Gospel has made the most perfect unsinning Obedience to
be our Duty, yet not that, but only sincere Obedience is indispensably
necessary in order to our Salvation. For

Thirdly, Those Sins which are really inavoidable, the Gospel does not impute
to us for our Condemnation. I would not be mistaken; that that I say is, that
though according to the Rigor and Severity of the Law as a Covenant of Works
the wages of every Sin be death, yet such is the Mercy of God in the Gospel of
Christ, as that those Sins which to us are really and truly inavoidable, shall
not be imputed to us for our Condemnation. Hereof one Reason is, because the
Gospel puts us into a state of Trial and Probation in this Life, in reference
to another after it, Surely therefore there is no inavoidable guilt thereby
charged upon us to our eternal Condemnation: it is not imaginable it should so
Tantali^e us with hopes of Heaven in the Confines and Power of Hell. However
evident it is

Fourthly, That the Gospel does promise, that our known Sins as well as others,
how heinous soever they be either in their Nature or their Aggravations, yet,
if they are timely retracted by true Repentance and Humiliation, Contrition and
Confession, change of Mind and amendment of Life, they shall be forgiven us. No
man's Sins are either so many in Number or so heinous in their Quality, but on
these terms they may be forgiven: insomuch that to me it seems most probable,
that the Sin against the Holy Ghost is impardonable, not for want of Grace in
the Gospel, but for want of repentance in the Sinner.

Let then our modern Scoffers add these things (as they ought) to that against
which they level their Objection; and then let them tell us what Impossibility
there is in obeying the Gospel, so far forth as is necessary to Salvation. Is
it impossible to do what we can, or to repent when we have done amiss? I
suppose not, esp^cially while we have those Motives and Assist^nces which the
Gospel gives us to keep the Commandments. Since the nature of reasonable
Crea^ures is to be drawn by the Alliciency of those Pro^it^r^icks that present
themselves to it, we may well wond^r at our own Disobedience. For so many and
so great are the Motives the Gospel gives to keep its Commandments, as that
there is no active Virtue in us, but may receive the highest Incitement
therefrom. What entertainment so fit for the Mind as Truth? and what Truth so
sweet as that that is eternal? What so desirable to the Will as Goodness? And
what Goodness so great as that that is Infinite? And where can you find Eternal
Truth and Infinite Goodness so clearly revealed as they are in the Gospel?
Where can the Affections have the like Motives to set us a doing? Has not the
Rule of our Life the highest Majesty and Authority instamped on it? Are we not
promised the greatest Reward that can be desired in case we walk by it? And are
we not threatened with the greatest evil that can be feared, in case we neglect
it? Are we not assured of a su^^iciency of Temporal Blessings and Spiritual
Graces in this World, if we will seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness i. e, for Glory and Honor and Immortality in the other? Is it
not then strange that being thus besieged with Motives to do well we should be
so prone to do ill? Although we know very well the Commandments are such, as
that it is not more our Duty, than our Interest to do them: we promote our own
Good as much as Gods Glory by Obedience to them; for they are apt not only to
enlighten our Minds, and perfect our Understandings, to refine our Natures and
sublimate our gross Affections, to amend our Lives and purify our
Conversations; but also to pr^serve our Estates and advance our Fortunes, to
secure our Reputation and promote our Honor, and that in all Conditions and
Capacities whatever; insomuch that their own Goodness might be their own
Eternal obligation. How admirable then are that Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness,
which impose them on us and require Obedience of us?

Especially considering the Assistance provided for us to have in well-doing:
and truly, it is more than a little we do or should receive in our Childhood, by
being brought up in the nurture and admo^ition of Ephesians. 6. 4.
the Lord: for a Child being led by little of it self but a Chain of
Imaginations, Education has the force of a Natural Agent rather than a Moral:
hence it is that Children of the same Parents are sometimes Plutarch de
Insti^ut. Lib.
like Lycurgus his Whelps of the same litter, whereas one ran to his dish, the
other after the Hare, because he had brought them up so to do: which Experiment
he made in the sight of his Subjects, on purpose to teach them to train their
Children in the way they should go, and that when they were old Pro. 22. 6.
they would not depart from it. But if they do, the Gospel has sufficiently
provided for their reduction, for it does not only encourage brotherly
Admonition, and oblige us to pray for each other, but it has also ordained a
Sacred Function for the per^ecting of the S^ints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the
Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
stature of the fullness of Christ. Now not only Men on Earth, but also the
Angels of Heaven, are obliged to afford us their assistance: Are they not all
ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of
Salvation? And besides the assistance of Heb. 1. 4*
Angels, we may have that of the Eternal Spirit also to help us. For the
Fathers of Flesh here on Earth are not so ready to give good Gifts unto their
Children, as our Heavenly Father is to give the Holy Spirit to them that ask
him: and this it seems he does Luke 11* 13. 2 Cor. 3* 6. 8.
so abundantly in the days of the Gospel, as that it is called by his Name,
and the ministration of the Spirit, and the law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, which makes men free from the Law of Sin and Death. Whereby it seems,
that though the History Romans 8. 2*
and Outward Communicatio^s of the Gospel be to us in Scriptis, yet we are not
to look upon it as a mere piece of Book-learning, but as a Vital quickening
thing, able to give Life to those that are Dead in Trespasses and Sins, to
beget them again in Christ Jesus, and to form divine Goodness in the Souls of
Men; and by so doing to help their Infirmities. Yea not only the Spirit but
also the Son of God himself (notwithstanding his Exaltation now in Heaven)
humbles himself to sympathize with us here on earth: for we have not an high
Priest, which cannot be touched with a feeling of our Infirmities: but was in
all Points tempted like as we are, yet without Sin: if therefore we come boldly
to the Throne of Grace, we may obtain Mercy and find Grace to help in time of
Need. And if Heb. 4. 15. 16.
we may have Mercy and Grace for coming for it, I hope we have no cause (be our
Duty what it will) to complain of hard usage.

Let Us then lay all these Things together, viz. that the Object of our Faith is
most ^l^arly revealed by the Gospel: that that of our hope is most fully
d^clared to be most excellent and certain: and that the Rule of our Lives is
most becoming the Attributes of God, and agreeable to the Reason of man, and
withal is so completely suited to his Ability, as that no other Law can
possibly be so good for him in his present State of Nature, Morality and
Imperfection. Lets I say lay all these things together, and then methinks we
must needs see something of that Stupendous Wisdom and Goodness, whereby
Christ and his Apostles were guided in the Economy of the Gospel: far more
excellent than the Wisdom of Moses and the Prophets in the Institution of the
Law.

And if they did excel the Jews in Wisdom, much more the Gentiles: for since
by the Ministry of Moses and the Prophets they were taught of God, it is
evident, they had more excellent Wisdom, not than the vulgar only, but than
those also that seemed to be Philosophers. Origin. con. Cells. lib. 5.
Yet at the bar of their Judgment we are willing to try the Truth as it is in
Jesus, viz. Whether it be real and true Wisdom yea or no? Whereof we shall need
no longer to doubt, if we consider what the most famous Philosophers have told
us concerning the Nature, the Object, and the End of Wisdom.

As for its Nature in general, it seems the common concession of them all, that
Wisdom is one of the best, if not absolutely the most excellent kind of
Knowledge: they therefore define it by (...), which with them seems to denote
more than a bare Perception of things, viz. some knowledge of them by undeniable
necessary Arguments, such as Command Assent rather than Beg it. Now that
Christianity is a sort of Knowledge founded on such Arguments, I hope you will
find in the end of this Treatise, the design whereof is, to prove that it is
so. At present therefore, I shall say no more of its general Nature, but observe

That the Object of Christian Doctrine, as well as its Nature, does highly
justify its Claim to the Title of Wisdom: for what I pray is it that Wisdom
treats of? about what is it conversant? the first Anonym. de ejus vi^.
Causes, says Pythagoras; the best things, or the things that are most
honorable, says Aristotle: and which are those? All men (except Atheists)
will answer, they are God, and the things that approach nearest unto, and
partake most of his Nature: otherwise Anaxagoras, Thales, and such like, would
not have had a Reputation for Wisdom (as the Philosopher last mentioned reports
they had) because they knew matters of Divinity. And where shall we find the
greatest Ethic. ad. Nic. lib. 6.
knowledge of these things? Is it in the Wisdom of the Gentiles? No verily,
their Philosophy is here dumb, or worse. Simonides (though a Learned and Wise
man in their esteem) could give no account of the Divine Essence: and those of
the Heathens that undertook to do it, had better been as sparing and modest as
he was, as is more than probable by the accounts that Plutarch and Cic^ro give
of their Sentiments De Phil. plac. de not. Deor. lib. 1.
in this particular: they were so weak and obscure, so absurd and irrational,
so unworthy of God, and unbecoming the Deity, as that the Orator says of them,
they were almost not the Judgments of Philosophers, but the Dreams of Madmen.
We see then, that ibid.
men of great and excellent Wit, after all their hard study and travel to find
out the Truth, have yet lost their labor and their Industry: but blessed be
God, Vid. Lactantius. divin. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 1.
who (pitying it seems the Ignorance and Weakness of Humane Nature) has sent
his only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, and he has
declared him: both his Being and his Nature, his Attributes and his Will, he
has more fully declared, than either was, or could be known without it: and
that which most highly commends the Revelation of God, by the Gospel of Christ
is, that it is so far from contradicting those prime Notions of a Deity,
wherewith Nature has endued us, as that it does exceedingly advance and
improve them; it becomes the Majesty of God, and accords with the Reason of
Man. Hereof Origin was so confident, as that he doubted not to bid Celsus see
whether it were not the agreeableness of our Faith with the common sense of men
from the beginning, which made it so effectual, as to work the Conversion of
its candid and Cont. Cells. lib. 3.
ingenuous Hearers. How rash and ill-advised had he been in thus appealing to
his subtle Adversary, if he had not been well assured, that Christianity opens
and offers nothing but what is worthy of Heaven, to those that embrace it here
on Earth; that here we may see the Express Image of that solid Wisdom and
Felicity, which the Jews in their Talmudical Rhapsodies, and the Gentiles too
in their Philosophy have hitherto sought in vain.

Hereof also we are assured by the designed End and Scope of it: which in
effect is the same with that which was pretended by the Heathen Philosophers:
And what was that? Let Porphyrius answer for Pythagoras, who (as he tells us)
professed a sort of Philosophy, the Scope whereof was, to snatch and deliver
the mind that is in us from Sensual Impediments De Vit. Pyth.
and Fetters. But to wave the trouble of many Quotations, it seems by Maximus
Tyrius, that the pretended End of all sorts of Philosophy was, to direct men to
true Happiness. They all agreed in the End, but were miserably divided in the
choice of the Means. We need not wonder at either, for (as that Philosopher
says) the Desire of Good, God has kindled as a spark in the minds of Men, but
the Finding of it he has hid from them. Thence it was, that one sent his
Scholars to one thing, another to another to find it; Pythagoras to Music,
Thales to Astron^my, Heraclitus to Solitude, Socrates to Love, Carne^des to
Ch^stity, Diogenes to Labor, Epicurus to Pleasures. They all aimed at
Happiness, but Epicurus dissert. 19.
was thought to have missed the mark so grossly, as that the Romans and
Messenians did banish and expel his followers from their respective Dominions;
calling them (because of their softness and impiety) the Pests of Youth and
Spots of Philosophy. They were therefore commanded to depart the Messenian
Territories, and being so thrust out, the Priests by Sacrifices purged their
Temples, and the Magistrates their City. It is also reported, that some of the
Epicureans (being looked on as Inventors of an esseminate degenerate and filthy
sort of Wisdom, odious to the Gods) were by a Law (written in the vulgar
Tongue) driven out of Lyctos a City of Crete: by which Law it was provided,
that if any one of them should presume to come thither, he should be bound and
put naked into a Cage near the Senate, and be anointed with milk and honey for
twenty days together, that Bees and Flies the mean while might devour him; but
if he survived this Torment, then was he clothed in Women's apparel and cast
headlong from a Rock. By this their reproachful Suidas in voc. Epicurus.
Severity, they declared plainly, what was the end of Philosophy, or at least
what they expected from it, viz. that it should be so far from debauching Men's
Manners, as that it should purify their Souls and sublimate their Affections,
destroy their Vices and promote Virtue. Sen^ca therefore tells Lucilius that
Wisdom forms the Mind and builds it, disposes the Life and rules the Actions,
sh^ws what is to be done, and demonstrates what is to be omitted: it is to us as
a Rudder to a Ship, it directs the course of them that Epist. 16.
fluctuate and waver in uncertainties. If then this be the designed Work and
end of Wisdom, there is no Doctrine in the World can lay so just a claim as
that of Christ and his Apostles to that Title. For the design of it is not to
fill men's heads with Notions or to teach them Systems of Opinions, but to
furnish their Minds with encouragements to Virtue, to mortify their Passions
and Self-wills, in order to the Love of the Eternal Beauty and an Imitation of
it: that so in a sort they might anticipate Heaven by a Resemblance of God here
on Earth: for our Savior has taught us to be Perfect as our Father in Heaven
Mat. 5. 48.
is Perfect. To this end both the Precepts and the Promises of the Gospel are
so exquisitly adapted as that they do not only most effectually forestall all
those Vices, which the wisest of men's Laws and Instructions have but in vain
attempted to destroy, but they do also promote such exact and elevated Virtue,
as is apt to make us as like to our Maker as in this Life is possible. For the
exceeding great and precious Promises of the Gospel are given us to this 2 P^t.
1. 4.
end, That by them we might be Partakers of the Divine Nature: and the end of
the Commandment is Charity out of a pure Heart and of a good Conscience and of
1 Timothy 1. 5.
Faith unfeigned. Faith unfeigned begets a good Conscience, a good Conscience a
pure Heart, and a pure Heart Charity: and Charity we know must Joh. Clin. Stal.
pard. grad. 30.
needs be as one calls it (...), a likeness to God or resemblance of him, for
God is Love; an Eternal and Immutable, an Omniscient and Almighty Goodness: to
the Imitation hereof the Gospel does allure and direct us, to this end it is
intended and designed: its efficacy in order thereunto St. Paul insinuates when
he calls it the Ministration of Righteousness and 2 Cor. 3. 9.
the Power of God unto Salvation. It is a thing more Romans 1. 16.
Divine than any Demonstration; it has heat to quicken and enliven our
Affections, as well as Light to guide them. It so forms Christ in the Souls of
Believers, as that it inclines them to say of him and his Word as the Priests
of Mercury did in eating Sacrifices, Truth is sweet: and when once it is so and
well digested it will so transform them by the renewing of their Minds, as that
they may prove what is that Good and Acceptable and Perfect Will of God. And by
so doing it will dispose them to such a cheerful Compliance therewith, as that
they shall be Followers of God, as dear Children. And this (as Seneca
insinuates) is the ultimate End and Design, the utmost Scope and Tendency of
Wisdom* ut D^um ub. sup.
sequaris. Since therefore the Gospel of Christ gives better Rules and affords
greater Helps for so doing, than any there are, either in the Theology of the
Jews or the Philosophy of the Gentiles, most manifest it is, that it does most
highly deserve not only to be called Wisdom, but also to be accounted
Supernatural and Divine, because it excels all former Revelations of God, as
well as the Wisdom of men; and it that be such excellent Wisdom, most evident
it is that Christ and his Apostles were most excellently Wise, endued with a
sort of Knowledge, which was utterly unattainable without Inspiration of God;
because if otherwise, it would have be^n impossible that they should have been
Authors of such an excellent Production.

Sect. 3. Of Christ and his Apostles Fortitude.
And that this their Wisdom dwelt with Fortitude: i. e. such Courage and
Magnanimity as the Prophets had in the di^charge of their Office, is the next
thing to be considered and demonstrated; and this it may be from the greatness
and strangeness of their Undertaking: which we know was to reform the Jews, and
to convert the Gentiles. In prosecution of this Design, their Actions and their
Sufferings declared the Greatness of their Minds.

For the Jews, (although They only of all people worshipped the true God, and
had the knowledge of his Laws, yet) were very corrupt and degenerate both in
Doctrine and Practice: which Corruption seems introduced by their Traditions,
(the Spawn of that pretended Interpretation of their Law beforementioned,) for
in process of time the Comment made void the Text; Traditions were so much
regarded, as that the Text was little minded: the Commandments of Men were
taught for Doctrine, and the Commandments of God were made of none effect by
their Traditions: Vid. Buxtors. Syn. Jud. cap. 1.
Not only their Faith was founded thereon, but a Path was thereby paved for all
Israelites (though never so bad) to go to Heaven in. For so absurdly Partial
and Indulgent were they to their own Nation, as that it was a most Authentic
Opinion of their Doctors, that every Israelite Tract. Sanh. cap. 10. p. 76.
shall have a portion in the World to come. Whosoever believes the thirteen
Fundamentals of the Jewish Law, (beforementioned) is admitted (says
Maimonides) into the number of Israelites: and so surely he obtains as great a
Right as any has, to receive Benefit by this their grand Charter for Heaven:
and this Right he holds, unless he be so unhappy as to fall into the number of
those that are exempted therefrom: but there is no great danger of that,
because there were but six Sorts of Offenses, whereby the men of Israel might
forfeit this their inestimable Privilege: and truly those Offenses were such as
they might easily withstand all Temptations to commit: for one half of them
concerned matters of Faith, and therefore might be avoided, with little
Displeasure to the Flesh, and less Intrenchment upon worldly Interests: the
other half concerned such petty trivial Matters of Practice, as that no man
well in his Wits, would endanger so great a loss for so small Pleasure or
Profit as seem to be had thereby. For in the Tract but now mentioned we find,
that those only of the Israelites, who deny the Resurrection, or the Descent of
their Law from God, or the Being of a Deity: or those that read Heretical
Books, or pretend to cure Diseases by Enchantment, or expound the name Jehovah
Vid. Maim* Tract. praed. and Abravanel de cap. fid. cap. 24.
in the vulgar Language, these I say and these only of all the Israelites
should be excluded from eternal Life. And were not the people very much obliged
to their Rabbis for removing the Cherubims and flaming Sword, which kept the
Way of the Tree of Life against all other unhallowed Sinners? yes verily, that
they were; especially considering, that if any of them were so ill-advised as
to hazard this their Right to Heaven yet had they no cause to despair of its
recovery: for either by Repentance in this life, or by a twelve Months Penance
in Purgatory, and the Prayers of Survivors the Exemption Bux^orf. ubi. sup.
might be taken ^ff, and they recover their Portion in the World to come. And
what more likely than these Traditions to evacuate the Commandments? When a
Rewa^d is s^^ured to All, who will work? When Eternal Happiness is entailed
upon All, who will regard the Necessity of Holiness, or take Care to follow it?
It Is true indeed Antigonus Socensis forbad his Discipl^s to serve God on
Condition of receiving Reward, and required them to do it without any such
Exp^ctation: *it is also true that for this he was applauded by diverse of their
Seraphick Rabbis* yet the effect of it was fatal to the Truth in some, and of
no Force on the Practice of most of the Jews: and for that Reason diverse of
their Wise men that liked his Opinion, yet blamed the Publication of it: they
therefore thought it better to permit the vulgar to enjoy their Opinion, that
Good was to be done for Hope of a Reward, and evil to be M^im. ad Pe^^k C^e^^^
eschewed for fear of Punishm^nt. But since they were assured of a Portion in
Heaven, they had not much Reason to fear the Torments of Hell. For (if their
Traditions were true) it was a very easy Matter for them to keep the Law: the
Pr^c^pts whereof they distinguished into two Sorts, whereof they called the one
Commands the other P^^hibitions. The Commands they say a^e two hundr^d forty
eight, just so many as (according to the Anatomy of the Rabbis) there are
Members in a man's Body: but the Prohibitions are three hundred sixty five, viz.
as many as there are days in the Year, or as they say there are Veins in the
Body of a man: and therefore say they, if any one Member of a man's Body does
every day fulfill one of the Commands, and omit one of the things prohibited,
it will thence come to pass, that not only the Decalogue, but the whole Law of
Moses shall be by them most excellently kept every Year throughout all Ages.
Though perhaps we Christians Buxtorf. lib. ^od. ibid.
may laugh at and despise this their Obedience, yet it seems they thereby did
supererrogate as well as obey; for Abravanel assures us, it was an approved
Opinion of their Wise men, that Whosoever (of the Israelites) did any one
Precept of the Law which is in his Power, he should th^reby merit the chief
Reward, i. e. The Life of the World to come. ub. sup.
And what more apt than such a Persuasion to make men partial and languid in
the Practice of Moral Virtue? And so indeed we find them, for the Religion of
the most Devout and Strictest Sects among them, did either degenerate into
Formality, or else evaporate in Hypocrisy. It was dry and sapless, dead and
lifeless* a mere Contexture of Ceremonies and External Performances, a
Sceleton, or at best, but a Carcass, without any heat or Life of Divine Love in
it, a form of Godliness without the Power, a show of Piety, a Device to seem
religious without being so, a mere bodily kind of Drudgery and Servility; yet
were they as confident of its Goodness and as fondly proud of the Advantages
they thought they had thereby, as if in very Deed, it had been that which was
required by God and confirmed by Miracles, supported by Prophets and professed
by their Forefathers throughout all preceding Generations: and so obstinately
did they adhere to it, as that the severest calamities of War could not make
them cease from it: for Josephus reports, that when Pompey was got into their
City, and Aristobulus his Faction had took Sanctuary in the Temple, with a
Resolution to defend it, they would not oppose his raising of Bulwarks or
Towers or planting his Engines against it on the Sabbath day: because (as they
thought) their Law allowed them not to resist an Enemy upon the Sabbath day,
unless he were actually ^^ghting against them: the most imminent and
th^eatening Preparations for War, were not (in their Judgment) sufficient to
warrant their Work or Acts of Hostility on that day. Yea such was their Zeal
for their Tradi^iona^y Religion, as that when the Romans had taken the Temple
and were killing whomsoever they met therein, yet (it being one of their days
of Fasting) Survivors would not desist from the exercise of it; neither the
Fear of Death nor the Dreadful fight of dead and dying Multitudes, could
affright them from Acts of Divine Worship, but judging it better to die than to
forsake their Altars, or omit any thing prescribed by their Laws, they were
ready to suffer Antiq. Jud. lib. 14. c. 8.
whatever the Conquerours thought fit to inflict* And again afterward, when
Pontius Pilate had brought the Effigies of Caesar into the City, they grew so
troublesome with their Importunity to have it removed, as that Pilate
threatened them with Death, if they would not depart and be quiet; whereupon
(casting themselv^s down before him, and making bare their Throats) they say^d
unto him, they could sooner endure Death with Pleasure than dare to suffer the
Wisdom of their Laws to be I^. lib. 18. cap. 4.
sc^ssed at. Since then their Zeal for their Religion was thus preposterous and
servent, it seems to me more than probable that they were apt thereby to be
transported into Fury and Madness at Reasons and D^monstrations (made by
private men) of its Shortness and Vanity; yea, that they could not with
Patience bear those that did but so much as gently suggest it: as appears yet
more probable by the Explication their Gemara giv^s of Epicures, viz. That they
are those who contemn the Disciples of their Wise men, and for that cause (if
they are Israelites) they shall lose their Portion in the World to come. Vid.
Abravantl de cap. fid. cap. 24.
What then, think ye, thought they of those who had the courage to cast
Contempt on the Dogmata and Traditions of the Wise men themselves? were they
not looked on as Blasphemers o^ God, and Enemies to the Law of Moses? Yes
doubtless that they were: for since the Jews were thoroughly instructed not only
to attribute a Divine Original and Authority to the Traditions of their Elders,
but also to believe that it was a more heinous sin to transgress them, than the
Written Law; yea that whosoever dissents from his Teacher does as much as if he
dissented from the Divine Majesty, and sinned against the Holy Ghost, and for
that Cause was guilty of Death, viz. by the Scourge of Rebellion, Vid. Hotting
These. Philol. lib. 2. c. 3. 3. Vorst. ad May. de sund. Leg. c. 6. not. 4.
which was a sort of Punishment by cudgelling, inflicted for the Breach and
Contempt of Traditions. Since I say they had these and many other such
prodigiously wicked and cruel Inventions to uphold the Authority of their
Traditions and Dictatorship, it is no marvel, if they proceeded against those
that spoke lightly of them, as if Malice were the fittest Affection, Vengeance,
and Cruelty, the best Behavior toward them. Yet evident it is, that Christ
did not spare them; but as the Prophets of old, so did he detect the Hypocrisy
and sharply reprove the faults of their Elders: He did demonstrate the Vanity
of their Righteousness, and expose the cunning Wickedness of their Traditions:
He discovered the impiety of their Magisterial Dictates and freely unfolded the
Mysteries of their Iniquity: He pulled off the Guilding and Paint of their
seeming Devotion, and uncovered the Rottenness and P^trefaction of their
Hearts: He despised the Pageants of a Pompous Formality and set at naught the
Ceremonies of their External Performances, without inward and real Goodness.
Though the People did rage and the Rulers take Council together against him,
yet he did constantly affirm, that God had sent him, and (as the Prophets
before him, so did he) undauntedly show the People their Transgressions and the
House of Jacob their Sins. And in so doing he strived to retrive the Law and
the Prophets, to rescue them from false Glosses and Misconstructions; to
discover the Insufficiency of Traditions and Pharisaical Righteousness: to
inculcate the necessity of Morality, and so to reduce the Jews to the Practice
of Piety in all Holiness of Living and Fervours of divine Worship in Spirit and
in Truth, without their numerous Ceremonies, or at least, their mighty
Confidence in their Privileges and Performances; which both he and his
Apostles taught them to place in our Lord Jesus (a stumbling Block and Rock of
Offense unto them;) and was not this a great and strange Undertaking? Such as
loudly speaks the Greatness of their Minds and the Bravery of their Courage?
Which was not in the least abated, but rather increased by Opposition: in their
Lives it did assist them to bear all Sorts of Afflictions and to endure the
rudest Contradictions of Sinners against them: and at their Deaths, it did not
forsake them: for though (after some solemn Mockeries of Justice, enough to
move ones Indignation) they were cruelly Murdered and barbarously Butchered,
yet their Patience and Charity (those truest Signs of M^gnanimity in
Sufferings) were conspicuous and admirable: insomuch that They only of all
Teachers may be compared with the Prophets, or rather preferred before them,
for Fortitude.

Whereof also the Apostles gave abundant evidence among the Gentiles, whom they
found dead in Trespasses and sins, prone to nothing so much as the Lust of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, i. e. Sensual Pleasures,
Riches and Honors; these things they did not only love, and live in, but (in a
sort) adore and dei^ie: for not only Gods Creatures, and Men that were famous
in their Lives, nor only the Fancies and Fictions of Poets, but their own Lusts
and Passions (called by other names) were also enrolled among their Gods. Venus
and Cupid, Mars and Baccbus were the Names of deified Concupiscence, Wrath and
Drunkenness: although they forbad these Vices, and made Laws against them, yet
their Causes (as Theodoret Ser. 3. ad Graec.
tells them) they saluted as heavenly Gods, and gave divine Worship unto them.
And was it not a sad and direful Apotheosis, whereby Enmity against God was
advanced to his Throne, the grossest Superstition and Un^leanness established
for Religion? for in their Festivals and Solemn Ceremonies of divine Worship,
all manner of Vice and Wickedness was appointed to be committed; such
filthiness as the most salacious would almost blush at in a Closet, was
committed Vid. Theod. Ser. 7. dc Sac.
in open Pomp and Ostentation: insomuch that almost all the Sacred Games (but
especially the Bacchanals) were (as one calls them) the Cause and Seed-plots of
the greatest Wickednesses. If the Alex. ab Alex. Genesis dier. lib. 6. c. 19.
Ethiopian may change his skin, and the Leopard his as soon as those do good
who are accustomed Jer. 13. 23.
to do evil, although their Religion teach them to do the one, and eschew the
other, how hard is it for those to do good, who have been not only accustomed,
but taught to do evil, and that under pain of Transgression against Conscience,
or at least, the Laws and Customs of their Country, if they omit it? Especially
considering their most wicked and filthy Practice could plead Prescription in
the Examples of their Forefathers, and Noble Heroes; yea also it had the Power
and Policy, the Stratagems and Devices of the Devil, the Cunning, Guile, and
Craft of his Agents, the Force and Authority of Civil Powers to countenance and
uphold it, in despite of all Opposition: Was it not then an hard thing for any
(much more for a few private men and strangers, such as the Apostles) to turn
them from Darkness unto Light, from the Power of Satan unto God? yet they
undertook to do it, and pursued it all their days, although they very well
knew, that not only Labors, travels, and hardships of diverse kinds, but also
Bonds and Afflictions of all sorts and degrees, stripes and Imprisonments, yea,
and Death it self would abide them in so doing. Yet none of these things could
trouble their Minds, nor discourage their Attempt; nothing could make them
retract their Resolution, or abate their Endeavors (as they were able) to
promote it: which to me seems a demonstration of Prophetic Fortitude, viz.
that that same Courage and Magnanimity whereby the Prophets were acted in the
discharge of their Office, did assist them in promulgating the Gospel.

Of the Prophetic Riches of Christ and his Apostles. Sect. 4.
And as in Wisdom and Fortitude, so also in the Riches of the Prophets; i. e.
in all Moral Virtues, but especially Contentment, Christ and his Apostles were
equal, yea superiors unto them. Hereof we need no other demonstration than the
designed End of their Doctrine; which (as we before saw) was the Promotion and
Establishment of the most Elevated Virtue and Immaculate Purity; but if any
farther proof of it be desired, we may find it in St. Paul, by whom we learn,
that the Grace of God which brings Salvation (which words are but a
Periphrasis of the Gospel) teaches us, that denying all ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, we should live sob^rly, righteously, and godly in this present
World. Tit. 2. 11, 12.
To this end, both the Precepts and Institutions, the Promises and the Threats
of the Gospel are so extraordinary subservient, as that they loudly speak the
Holiness as well as Wisdom of its first Teachers. It is no way probable, that
Lovers of Vice should so study the promotion of Virtue, especially when they
were so far from having any Worldly Temptation to do it, as that they had all
imaginable Discouragements from it. Who but Lovers of God, and beloved of him,
in such a case, would so strenuously propugnate his Glory, by the Extirpation
of Vice, and Plantation of Virtue and Holiness of living? Is it likely that
Workers of Wickedness should be Planters of Holiness, and that with design to
have it spread universally, and continue perpetually? Yet such we know were
Christ and his Apostles, and so zealous were they in it, as that their Labor
and Industry did far out-^trip that of the most admired Teachers of Virtue
among the Gentiles: for they did not only despise their Family-concerns, and
renounce all sinful Pleasures whatever, but they endured the utmost Malice of
Men, and the rudest Contradictions of Sinners, in the Defense of Truth, and
Propagation of Virtue: the one they Signed, the other they Sealed with their
Blood: Was it then possible they should be no Lovers of it? Greater Love than
this we know has no man, that he lays down his Life for the Beloved: and the
Object of strong Love is like the green Poplar that Jacob set before the Flocks
of Laban, it makes the Lover bring forth something that is like it self: it
always has a kind of plastic Power, whereby it is able to form its own
Image, and work its own likeness in the Souls and Lives of the Lovers: and thus
it seems the Love of God and his Righteousness wrought in Christ and his
Apostles.

As was apparent by their Deportment and Conversation among Men, which was so
highly becoming the Gospel, as that That Heroic Virtue, which in others was a
mere Phantasm, in them was real. The Life of Christ was so unbl^mished a
pattern of Piety and transcendent Virtue, as that he John 8. 46.
challenged his Enemies to convince him of Sin. What he himself did to the
Jews, his Followers have since done to the Gentiles: thus Arnobius upbraids the
partiality of their Judgment and behavior toward the Deceased. Those (says
he) that in their Lives were prodigio^sly profligate and l^scivious, after
their Death you admire and extol to the skies in your praises, you repose
their memoirs in the safest places of Libraries, you reward them with Chariots
and Statues: and, as much as in you lies, you endow them with a kind of
Eternity, by the testification of immortal Titles: only Christ, if you could,
you would tear and mangle into pieces, yea, him only (were it lawful) you would
chew (like savage Beasts) with bloody mouths, and devour all with bruised
bones. But for what Cause, I beseech you? speak; what Sin, what Fault is it
for? what was there that he did which swerved from the Rule of Righteousness,
or might stir you up to your sharp hatred against him? Thus Advers. Gent. l. 1.
also Origin tells Celsus, diverse of their reputed Gods were stained with the
Vices of Men, but of our Jesus there is nothing reported that he did
intemperately; for those that lay in wait, and sought false witnesses against
him, would certainly have found something of probability to have put into the
evidence, that so for that Intemperance they might (the more plausibly) have
drawn up their accusation against him. But nothing of that nature could with
any show of probability be alleged against him: for the truth hereof, he
refers Celsus to some Histories which it seems they then had of him: and if by
Lib. 3.
them or any other means, either Origin or Arnobius could have been found
Liars, how rash and illadvised had they been in thus appealing to their
Adversaries, who wanted neither Wit nor Malice to have done it, if they could:
but since they left it unattempted, it is more than probable, that they (as
well as Pontius Pilate) could find no evil that Luke 23. 22.
our Savior did.

Nay, so far was he from it, as that in some of their esteem (as well as ours)
he was infinitely above it, for they thought him a God: thus Chalcidius, a
Platonist mentions the Star that conduced the Eastern Sages to Christ, and
says of it, it did not presage Diseases or Mortality, but the Baron. An. 1.
Morn. de ver. Rel. Christian. c. 34.
descent of a venerable God to converse with men and settle the affairs of
Mortals. Apollophanes and his friend Dionysius it seems were of the same
Opinion; for being together at Heliopolis in Egypt, and contemplating the
supernatural Eclipse of the Sun at our Saviors Passion, O good Dionysius (said
Apollophanes) things Divine now have their turn to suffer, and Dionysius
thought so too, for he replied, Suidas in voc. Dionysius Fran. Zeph. ad Tert.
Apol. c. 21.
either God himself suffers, or Sympathizeth with him that does. Afterward
Pontius Pilate gave such an account of Christ to Tiberius, as that (in
Tertullians judgment) Pilate himself in his Conscience was a Christian: yea and
Tiberius thought him a God, and would have had the S^nate declared that he was
so, but the Senators (because Pilate did not give them the first Notice of it)
were pleased to refuse him. However C^^sar continued in his Opinion and did
threaten those that should presume to accuse the Christians. And so much Reason
it seems there was for this his Opinion, as that his Successors would have
believed in Christ, if the Apol. c. 5. and 21.
Caesar's had not then been necessary, or if they could have been Christians and
Caesar's too. Had these things been false or doubtful, or capable of being
proved so, Tertullian had much better have spared his Apology, than sent it: to
tell fals^ tales of such importance concerning Emperors, and that in Writing,
to their Successors, was much more likely to betray his own Folly and
Impudence, than to obtain their Belief and Clemency, to enrage their Anger than
to acquire their Favor: but whoever reads his Works will ^ind Cause enough to
think Tertullian much more wise and learned than to be so bad an Advocate, yea
so rash and impudent a Liar, as he must needs have been, if these things had
not been true; we have therefore much Reason to believe, and none to doubt that
they were so: and consequently that in the esteem of the Gentiles, as well as
of us Christians, our Savior was holy, harmless, and undefiled with Sin, and
fully satisfied in the enjoyment of himself; for Holiness, Self-sufficiency,
and perfect Happiness are such essential Attributes of the Deity, as that
whoever owns the one, confesses the other.

And for the Apostles, though they themselves confessed, they did not live
without Sin, yet surely they were in Holiness that which Saul was in Stature,
viz. higher than others by the Head and Shoulders. By their Doctrine they
taught men to abstain from the very appearance of Evil, and to follow Holiness
in all manner of Conversation: and for their help in so doing they made no
doubt of propounding their own Example to their Imitation; most unlik^ly
therefore it is that that did enervate their Doctrine: especially considering
the multitudes of their Followers and the science of their Adversaries.

Although our Nature be corrupt and depraved, yet not so degenerate from all
Virtue, as to put no brand of Infamy upon Vice: for of all the things in the
World there is hardly any but That shameful; at least not so apt to blast the
Reputation of men and lessen their credit among others: is it then likely the
Apostles could have drawn the World after them by their Doctrine, if they had
been stained with moral Vices in their Practice? Was the World so weary of it is
old Religion as to change it for a new one, taught them by a few persons, that
had neither any Authority from man to oblige them, nor Eloquence to allure
them, and withal were so inconsistent with themselves, as that their lives gave
their mouths the Lie? There is nothing more unlikely: it is therefore beyond a
Probability, that the Apostles were burning and shining Lights in their lives
as well as Doctrine. Hereof methinks the silence of their Adversaries gives
occasion of Confidence, for the Heathens exclaimed against the Christians as
their common Enemies, that had a design to shake and unsettle all things, both
sacred and civil, and (to use their own Language) (...). All common calamities
they accounted Vid. Cypr. cont. Demet.
effects of the gods anger because of them, the reason of it was because they
believed in Christ, whose coming had almost driven the Rabble of their gods out
of the World: nor was that all, but they affirmed their Doctrine was apt to
extinguish all Humanity, and to introduce the grossest barbarity that could be;
and is it not remarkable, that among all this, a great deal more filth, which
they scraped together against Christianity, they could find no dirt to cast at
the Apostles? yet surely so it was, for it is hard to find any of the Gentiles
charging them with any Immorality; except such as shamefully begs the Question,
or betrays the slanderous humor of the Accuser. Thus Hierocles (if it be he
of whom Lactantius says) he railed against the Disciples (especially St. Paul
and Peter) as sowers of De Justitia lib. 5. cap. 2.
Deceit. Whom also Porphyrius slaundered, as if they contended each against
other in a childish manner: yea that Paul grew hot with envy at Peter's
Virtues, and writ those things vaingloriously, which he either never did, or if
he did, it was sa^cily done of him, and all this he gathers (no man knows
Hieronymus Augustino Epist. 89. Gal. 2. 11.
how) from St. Paul's withstanding St. Peter to his Face: but this is so
frivolous and withal so groundless an Accusation, as that it loudly speaks the
Authors malice and the Apostles innocence in their case, such accusations of
Adversaries were much more demonstrative, than the testimony of Friends that
they were holy.

And if they were holy in their Lives, then certainly they were contented with
their present Portion: they were so far satisfied with what the time present
did afford them, as that they did not sinfully grieve at or labor after what
it denied them: for contentment is at least an integral, if not an essential
part of Holiness: if it be possible to be holy* yet not entirely so without
contentment; you lose a limb, if not the Life of Holiness without it. Since
therefore the Apostles were eminently holy, it is more than probable that they
were also contented. Which likewise Lactantius proves not by consequence from
their Holiness, but by the cohererence of their Doctrine. Such (says he) is
the Nature of Lies, as that they cannot agree, but the Tradition (or Doctrine)
of the Apostles, because it is true, quadrates on every side, and agrees with
it self in all things, and therefore it persuades, because it is stayed up with
constant reason: they did not therefore devise this Religion for the sake of
gain or any earthly convenience: for both in their Precepts and their Practice
they led such a life, as was void of Pleasure and despised Profits: they did
not only dye for the Faith, but they also both knew and foretold that so they
should, yea also that whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
Persecution. Yet evident it is by their enterprise de Justitia lib. 5. cap. 3.
^^d travails, that they forsook their Houses and Habitations, their Estates
and Callings, their Kindred and Relations, and whatsoever else had a
subservience to Wealth, Pleasure, or Honor in the World, and relied wholly
upon the immediate Provisions of Providence. Think ye then that they did hunger
after Riches or thirst after Pleasures? It is evident they did not, and
therefore they were contented with their present Portion of earthly enjoyments,
and so were Rich, in the sense before mentioned.

Thus have we passed through the prerequisites to Prophecy, or rather the
concomitant attendents on it, and have found that in respect of them, Christ
and his Apostles (as well as the foregoing Prophets) were Wise, Strong, and
Rich i. e. endowed with all those intellectual and moral Virtues, which the
Jews thought needful to expect in their Prophets. the force hereof to prove
that they also were such, I reserve for another place, where (God willing) I
shall join it with that of the more demonstrative evidence of their prophetic
Spirit: and this is it that comes next to be considered.

Sect. 5. Of the predictions of Christ and his Apostles.
It was before observed that the evidence of a prophetic Spirit (which the
Jews esteemed certain and demonstrative) was twofold; viz. either ordinary or
extraordinary, each one evacuating the necessity of the other: for when divine
Providence afforded the ordinary marks of Prophecy, the Jews had no more need
of extraordinary, than Elijah had the Ravens should feed him while he sat at
his own Table in Gilead: and when men made proof of the prophetic Spirit in
them, by the extraordinary signs of it, the necessity of the ordinary was as
eminently superseded, as the same Prophets want of his ordinary provision was
by the extraordinary Supply thereof at the brook Cherith. Since therefore
Christ and his Apostles did abundantly demonstrate their Mission from God by
extraordinary proof of it (as we shall see hereafter) there certainly was the
less need of the ordinary: but God, willing more abundantly to show to the
Heirs of his promise the unquestionable certainty of their Mission, confirmed
it by both: our design it is to make it appear that he did so; and our method
requires us to begin with that, which among the Jews by Gods appointment was
ordinarily expected, viz. predictions fully and exactly accomplished.

And surely those that are acquainted with matters of Fact, and have read the
New Testament, cannot be ignorant that Christ and his Apostles gave this
evidence of the prophetic Spirit in them, as well as in any of the Jewish
Prophets before them: for the destruction of the Jews, their City and the
Temple, we therein find by them so plainly foretold, and by divine wrath and
vengeance so notoriously fulfilled, as that all the World (I presume) knows it.
Yet since particular Demonstrations are far more convincing than general
Assertions, it will perhaps be worth the while to take a brief Survey of it, as
it lies both in Prophecy and in History.

That the Apostles foretold it, is so manifest, as that there is hardly any
one of their Epistles but makes mention of it; Yea Lactantius informs, us, they
spoke of it in their Sermons as well as Justitut. lib 4. cap. 21.
wrote of it in their Epistles. but it will be sufficient to take a view of it
as it lies, not in theirs but our Saviors predictions; wherein (that he might
forewarn his Disciples) he describes the Forerunners approach and perfection
of it. The Forerunners Mat. 24. 5.
of it were false Christ's; some Pseudo-pretenders to redeem Israel (which
indeed was the Work of the true Messiah, but not as the Jews hoped) out of
subjection to the Romans: by which pretension they caused Wars and rumor of
Wars in diverse v. 6.
Places: and after these or rather together with them great afflictions and
persecutions were to befall the Christians. The accomplishment hereof v. 9.
Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 2.
we may learn from Jos^phus, who tells us, that when Cuspius Fadus was
Procurator of Jud^a there arose one Theudas a false Prophet, of whom he affirms
(as Christ foretold of those that would come in his name) that he deceived
many. And a little after he says, that Jud^a was full of Impostures, who
seduced multitudes into the Wilderness to see the signs and wonders which they
promised to show them from God. One of these Deceivers was that Lib. eod. cap.
6. Act. 21. 38.
Aegyp^ian the chief Captain speaks of to St. Paul: such another as these was
that Samaritan Dositheus, who affirmed expressly, that he was the Christ of
Origin. contra Celsum lib. 1.
whom Moses proph^sied. By these and other such Incendiaries, the Jews (who
were oppressed by diverse of the Roman Procurators, especially by Florus) were
incited to Sedition and Rebellion, which occasioned bloody Wars and great
slaughter in diverse Vid. Joseph. u^. sup. et lib. 2. de bello Jud.
places of Judea. About the same time Ananus (or Ananias, or Annas) the second
High Priest of that name, having called a Council of Judges, convented James
the Brother of Jesus Christ, and him (together with some others) he accused as
a transgressor of their Law, and delivered to be stoned: which fact of his,
although it highly displeased all the most sober men in the City, together with
the most learned in their Law, yet it did not abate his Reputation with the
vulgar, for this notwithstanding he grew greater and dearer daily to the
People, and indeed he was honored by all for his Liberality: being thus great
in Authority and Reputation too, and withal bold and fierce by Nature, and
Sadducee by Sect, (who above all other Jews Id. Antiq. lib. 20.^. 8.
were observed to be most severe in judging) he was no doubt willing to proceed
farther in persecuting the Christians, and the Jews (being Admirers of him)
without question were willing to join with him in so doing. This in all
probability was one great occasion of the persecution of Christians, in
Jerusalem and other Places of their Country. Wherein also our Savior foretold
there should be Famines and P^stilences: and accordingly so there Mat. 24. 7.
were: viz. so great a Famine in the City, as that Multitudes p^rished for lack
of Food, although Queen Helen and her Son bought vast quantities of Provision
for them: and Pestilence we know was I^. lib. ^od. c. 2. and 3.
ever observed so closely to follow Famine, as that (...) after Famine
Pestilence, was almost proverbial among the Greeks. Much about the same time
(according to Prediction) there were Earthqu ^kes in diverse Places: namely in
Crete, Smyrna, Miletus, Chins, Sam^s, Laodicea, Hierapolis Grot. ad Mat. 24. 7.
and Colosse. Nor were these all the Forerunners of that Destruction, but
besides them (as Christ also foretold) there were fearful Sights and great
Signs from Heaven: viz. a star in form of a Sword L^^. 21* 11.
hanging very low over the City: the Light about the Temple, which turned the
Night into Day for half an hour together: the Cow which brough forth a Lamb: a
Gate of the Temple (which wa almost twenty men's Work to shut it, yet) opened of
it self: the Chariots and armed Legions, that before Sunset appeared in the
Clouds encircling the City: the Voice in the Temple saying, let us go hence;
but a more horrible Prodigy than any of these, was that of the ignorant
Country-fellow, who would not by any means either fair or foul, be prevailed
with to desist from going Night and Day about the City, especially at the time
of their Feasts for above seven years together crying, Woe, Joseph. de bello
Jud. lib. 7. cap. 12.
Woe to Jerusalem, and the Temple, and to all the People. Thus did divine
Vengeance abundantly fulfill our Saviors Predictions concerning the
Forerunners of that fatal Desolation.

No less remarkable were the accomplishments of those concerning its Approach
and consummation. Christ admonished his Disciples to know, that when Mark. 13.
14. Luke 21. 20. v. 28.
they should see the abomination of D^solation stand where it ought not, i. e.
Armies compassing Jerusal^m, the desolation thereof, but their Redemption drew
nigh; and in order thereunto, he warned them (when v. ^1.
they should see it so) to flee unto the Mountains: neither did his compassions
extend only to his Dis^iples: for even in the midst of their joyful
Acclamations, when the stones themselves could scarce forbear speaking his
Praises, yet even then when the Heart of others would have leapt for Joy, his
was cast down with sorrow for his Enemies; for he beheld the City and wept over
it; saying, if thou had known, even thou at least in this thy Day, the things
which belong to thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine Eyes: for the Days
shall come upon thee that thine Enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and
compass thee round and keep thee in on every side, and shall l^y thee even with
the Ground, and thy Children within Luke 19. 41, 42, 43, 44.
thee: and they shall not leave in thee one Stone upon another that shall not
be thrown down. Not one of these Words passed away unfulfilled* for when
Cestius besieged the City, it seems he did it not so closely but that many fled
out of it, as if it would have been immediately taken: and who they were that
did so, Joseph de bell. Jud. lib. 2. cap. 24.
is not hard to guess, if we consider that our Savior warned his Disciples
(when they should see the City in that Condition) to fly out of it: and that
Eusebius and Epiphanius assure us that so they did, into a City beyond Jordan
called Pella: where they Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 5. Epip^. lib. 1. Tom. 2.
and Ebion.
possessed their Souls in Patience. Thus were the days of Vengeance to the
unbelieving Jews, a time of Redemption to sincere Christians; who being thus
escaped out of the City and the Country too, Jerusalem (not very long after)
was more closely b^sieged by Titus, whose puissant Armies cast such a Trench
about it, as that they could not only plant their Engines against it is Walls,
but also lay hands on them that brake out, and as well with Earth as Arrows,
drive back those that stood on the Walls: yea they kept them in so closely, as
that they had no way to esc^pe, no not so much as through those Mines or Vaults
under the Walls, made for the conveyance of Water into the City; all which
(says Dio) did Titus obstruct, afterward the Walls being broken down, and the
Temple set on Fire, some cast themselves on the Swords of the Romans, others
destroyed each other, others murdered themselves, and others leaped into the
Flames, accounting it not an overthrow, but a kind of Victory, Health and
Happiness, that they perished together with the Dio Cassius Hist. Romans lib. 66.
Temple. But whatever they thought of it, our Savior foretold it should be
great Tribulation, such Mat. 24. 21.
as was not since the beginning of the World, till that time: and such it seems
it was, for Josephus thought verily that the Calamities of the Jews did for
exceed Prol. in. lib. de bello Judaico.
all those of former Ages. Nor was he without Reason to think so. For there
were (according to his Computation) no less than an eleven hundred thousand
that died by Pestilence and Famine, Fire and Lib. 7. c. 17
Sword during the Siege. Thus were Jerusalem's Children laid on the Ground
within her, and it was but a few days that she her self stood after; for ninety
seven thousand being reserved for Captives the enraged Soldiers had no more to
kill, nor any thing else to do, whereupon Titus commanded them to pluck up the
very Foundations of the City and the Temple; and accordingly they laid them so
even with the Ground, as that Travelers could scarce have Faith enough to
believe the City was ever inhabited, or the Temple ever standing: for the
Foundations of it Turnus Rufus tore up with a Plough-share. Thus punctual was
Providence in fulfilling our Saviors Predictions concerning the Destruction of
the Jews.

Who being thus rejected, the next thing in the economy of the Gospel was, the
calling of the Gentiles: this also was foretold by Christ, if not likewise by
his Apostles. But to me it seems unreasonable to expect Records of such
Predictions by them: because both the History of their Acts and also their
Epistles were all written to Persons so little concerned in it and on occasions
so remote from it (if not also at times after it) as that they had scarce any
at all to make mention of it: yet we therein read St. Peter had a Vision on
purpose to teach him that he should not call any man common or unclean i. e.
that he should make no difference between Jews and Gentiles, but that he should
converse with and preach freely to the one as well as to the other, and
therefore should make no scruple of going to Cornelius at Coesarea: St. Paul
also in one Vision was Act. 10. Act. 22. 21. Act. 16. 9, 10.
sent to the Gentiles, in another he was called to help the Macedonians: hereby
they assuredly gathered, that the Lord had called them to preach to the
Gentiles: and if so, then surely they had some certain foreknowledge of good
success in so doing; and that the rest of them had so too, is manifest by their
undertaking to do it. Had they not had this assurance, it would be hard to
imagine that men so Wise and Rich as they were in all Virtues both intellectual
and moral, should also be so strong i. e. so careless of their own easy and
unmindful of their worldly Concerns, so resolute and courageous in pursuit of a
Project so dangerous and grievous to Flesh and Blood in the Prosecution, and
withal so unlikely (in the Eye of humane Reason) to take ^ffect as theirs was:
it is therefore most rational to conclude, they had some assured foreknowledge
of good Success in their Labor: and this certain Foreknowledge (however
discovered, whether by Prediction or otherwise) was a sure sign of a prophetic
Spirit, because it is above the Power of Art or Ability of any Creature to
impart it to another and Predictions themselves are no otherwise proofs of the
Spirit of Prophecy, than as they make evidence of such Foreknowledge: if then
the Apostles were endued with this, the matter was not much whether or no they
were Authors of those; especially in the thing now under Consideration: because
Christ had foretold it before them, and sent to fulfill it: and this he did so
plainly in his Parables Mat. 22. 2. etc. Mat. 21. 33, etc. v. 45.
(viz. that of the King which made a marriage for his Son, and that of the
Householder that planted a Vineyard etc.) as that the chief Priests and
Pharisees perceived, he spoke of them, and were much offended, because they
found they were not in his esteem, as they were in their own, viz. such
Favorites of Heaven as still to keep the keys of God's Kingdom, which (as he
plainly told them) should be taken from them and given to a Nation bringing
forth ^. 43.
the fruits of it; i. e. the Gospel and Privilege of being the only Church and
People of God, should be taken from the Jews and given to the Gentiles, who
would be persuaded not only to believe, but also to receive it, and in their
Practice to pursue the end and design of it, viz. all Virtue and Holiness of
living, and this bl^ssed Efficacy of the Gospel, he illustrates by the
Similitudes of Mustard Seed and Leaven; whereof the one (though the least of
all Seeds, yet) grows to so great a bigness, as that the Birds of the Air may
lodge in the Branches of it: and the other (though little also in Quantity,
yet) is apt to diffuse it self and give a tincture to all the meal about it. So
it seems the Gospel (being sown by the Apostles preaching) should so
exceedingly grow and prosper among the Gentiles, as that they should fly unto
it and lodge their Souls under it; and then by its secret invisible influence
upon them, it should change and affect their Hearts and Actions that flow from
them. Which certainly fell out accordingly; for such were the Apostles Pains
and Travails, Industry and Success in Preaching, as that their sound went out
into all the Earth, Romans 10. 18.
and their Words to the end of the World: which Words of St. Paul were perhaps
literally true of the Apostles only in reference to the Jews, yet without any
very great Hyperbole are also applicable to the Gentiles: for whosoever will
take the pains to follow the Apostles whithersoever they went, will find they
travailed almost all the known World over; insomuch that there was scarce any
Region on earth but by them was showed the way to Heaven: and that they were so
successful as to convert almost all Nations, is methinks manifest, by those
appeals the ancient Fathers made to the Enemies of Christ and his Kingdom.
Irenaeus affirms that in his time (which surely was in the early Days of the
Gospel, for St. Hierom writes he was In. vit. Ir.
the Disciple of Polycarp, and it is thought that Polycarp was the Disciple of
St. John the Apostle) the Church was dispersed all the World over, and as the
Sun the Creature of God is one and the same in all the World, so also the
Preaching of one and the same Truth every where shines and enlightens them that
are willing to come to the Knowledge of it. And Origin tells Celsus, Lib. 1. 13.
the Gospel of Christ is preached in every Nation under Heaven; to the Greeks
and to the Barbarians, to the Wise and to the Foolish; for the Word spoken with
Power has overcome the Nature of all men, insomuch that there is no sort of
men whatever to be seen, among whom the Doctrine of Jesus is not received. And
to Lib. 2.
those places spoken of in the Holy Scripture, Tertullian adds the mention of
so many more, large and vast Regions, together with so many Provinces and
Islands, almost hid and unknown before, besides others innumerable, as that he
concludes, though the most flourishing and largest Kingdoms on earth had their
Limits, yet the Kingdom and Name of Christ spread every where, was every where
believed, all Nations every where worshipped it and submitted to it: it was every
where adored, and to all every adv. Jud. cap. 7.
where equally distributed without respect to persons* Christ to all is equal,
to all he is King and Judge, to all he is God and Lord. Not long after him
Arnobius asked the Gentiles, whence it was, that in so short a time the whole
World was filled with Christian Religion. Lib. 1.
But in this case methinks we have not much need of appealing to Antiquity:
for, for ought I know the very being of Christianity at this day among the
Gentiles is a Demonstration, that the Predictions which went before of their
Conversion to the Faith of Christ are evidently fulfilled. What therefore
Tertullian said to the Jews, may well enough be said to any one that doubts it:
what we see done, thou may avouch with Confidence and believe without
Hesitance.

The like may we do concerning another sort of Predictions, viz. of those about
the being of Heresies and Divisions among Christians: whereof our Savior gave
more than an intimation by his Description of false Prophets and his Cautions
against Mat. 7. 15. etc.
them: and the Apostles also of our Lord Jesus Christ spoke before and told us,
there should be Mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own
ungodly Jude 18, 19.
Lusts; these are they who separate themselves. Mockers and Separatists they
could not be without Heresy and Division: manifest therefore it is, the
Apostles foretold the being thereof among Christians; and there are scarce any
called by that name but can bear witness to the Accomplishment of it. Yea the
very enemies of Christianity (as Celsus for instance) Orig. lib. 3.
took notice of it. Though it is confessed they did it to disgrace Christianity,
yet unawares they did thereby somewhat confirm it, because the Founders
foretold, that so it should be in after ages: and that in very deed it was and
is so, both ancient and modern Heresies together with our present Divisions,
are so sad and evident a demonstration, as that all necessity of proving it is
perfectly superseded.

Obj. Yet here perhaps an Observation which Origin long since alleged in
behalf of Christianity, may ibid.
be objected against it or the Founders of it. viz. That there never was any
thing of great use and estimation among men, but there arose Divisions and
Diversities of Opinions and Sects about it. As for example Physic* it is and
ever was held to be good and useful to mankind, yet it is confessed that among
the Greeks (perhaps also among the Barbarians that gave their minds to the
Study of it) there were not only many Questions but diverse Sects and Sorts of
Physicians. Thus also Philosophy that promises the Knowledge of the Truth and
directions for a good Life, it is well known there were diverse Sects about it,
some more some less famous. Yea and Judaisme it self, though acknowledged to be
of divine Origin, yet gave occasion to Sects and Divisions among those that
owned it so to be. From hence it follows, that though it be granted, Christ and
his Apostles did foresee and foretell, there would be Divisions among their
Followers, yet this does not argue they were endued with the Spirit of
Prophecy; because wise men (by comparing things past with things present) may
guess at things future, yea by the strength of Ratiocination, they may be so
verily persuaded concerning their future Existence, as that with some
Confidence and good Success they may foretell it.

Ans. It seems then it is granted, that Christ and his Apostles were wise men,
otherwise they could not have been Authors of such Conjectures: but that their
Wisdom was herein more than rational Conjecture, viz. supernatural Foreknowledg
of future contingences, will appear, if we consider that they Mat. 18. 7. 1 Cor
11. 19.
foretold not only that there must be Offenses and Heresies, but also the means
and manner of their Production, viz. the Addiction and Designs, the Artifices
and cunning of Seducers, together with the Nature of their Doctrine and
speciousness of their Pretenses: all which I say were plainly foretold by
Christ and his Apostles. For our Savior gave caution against them, because
inwardly they Mat. 7. 15.
were ravening Wolves, and St. Paul knew that after his departing, should
grievous Wolves enter in among the Act. 20. 29.
Elders of Ephesus, not sparing the Flock. Whereby it is plain that they would
be men of an avaritious rapacious humor, making Advantages to themselves out
of others Expenses and Destruction. And their Design would be very suitable to
this their Addiction; for it was to be, to draw away Disciples v. 30.
after them, and that not only for Ostentation and vain Glory, but for their
own more real profit and Advantage, for through covetousness they would make 2
Pet. 2. 3.
merchandise of them; to this end (it seems by predictions) both their Doctrine
and Pretenses were to be very subservient: for though by their Doctrine 2 Timothy
4. 4.
men were turned unto Fables, yet these Fables (as St. Peter insinuates) were
cunningly devised, not to make sport and laughter, but to suit the humors of
men, that they might privily bring in damnable 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them. But for these Fables and
Heresies, they first prepared the minds of men by specious pretenses, either to
the Spirit of Prophecy, or the ^xcellency of Virtue, or the gift of working
Miracles, for they were to come Mat. 7. 15.
in Sheeps clothing, i. e. either wearing Sheeps-skins (as the Prophets
sometimes did, and so they pretended to partake of their Spirit, and are
therefore here cautioned against under their name) or else at their first
coming they made show of great Innocence and meekness, Patience and Humility
etc. but it was but the sleight of men and cunning craftiness Ephesians. 4. 4
whereby they lie in wait to deceive. To which end their coming was attended,
not only with all deceiveableness of Unrighteousness, but also with the working
of Satan with all Power and Signs and lying Wonders; insomuch that (if it were
possible) they 2 These. 2. 9. 10. Mat. 24. 24.
would deceive the very Elect. These things we find foretold of Seducers; and
every eye sees they are in their Nature as contingent, and hidden as deeply as
any thing the World affords from humane Conjecture; if then we can make it
appear that these Predictions were punctually fulfilled, it will clear our Way
to the designed Conclusion.

Know therefore that even in the Apostles times, when the Mystery of Iniquity
first began to work, they themselves discerned the accomplishment of these
Predictions: for the primitive Seducers were men of so profligate a Conscience
and lewd an Addiction, as that they served not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own Belly; though they professed friendship; Romans 16. 18.
yet they were enemies to the cross of Christ, their God was their Belly, their
Glory was in their shame and they did mind earthly things. Whereby it is plain,
Phil. 3. 18. 19.
they were (as it was foretold they would be, viz.) Men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the Truth supposing that Gain is Godliness. And this their
perverse 1 ^im. 6. ^.
Supposition did doubtless dispose them to make merchandise of other
Christians; insomuch that they sought not them but theirs, not their spiritual
Good and Welfare, but their worldly Wealth and temporal Interests, that so they
might make advantage to themselves thereby. This was their design.

In order hereunto, they seem wisely to have considered, that their Power being
only persuasive, not coercive, it would be their best way to adapt a Religion
to the Humors and Vices of men: accordingly we find, that the contemplative
and studious they allured with great swelling Words of Vanity about no man
knows what (...) or Ages, which Iren. lib. 1. cap. 1.
they divided into an Ogdoad: a Decad, and a Dodecad: wherein there were (as
the Apostle says) Fables and endless Genealogies, which minister questions 1 Timothy 1. 4. Ir^n. lib. 2. c^p. 13. 19.
rather than godly edifying, which is in Faith: the Fiction of which Fables and
Genealogies, they stole out of Antiphanes his Theogony. So likewise they did
diverse of their Precepts out of heathen Philosophy: for their practical
Divinity consisted in the Rudiments of the World, the Commandments and
Doctrines Col. 2. 20.
of men, touch not, (...) not, handle not: Tertullian therefore says of the
Heretics, that they had brought forth a Stoical, Platoni^al and Dialectical
Praescrip. adv. Haer. cap. 8.
Christianity. Herewith they entertained the studious; but they being but few
in number in comparison with the more ignorant and vicious, they found it
expedient to allow of the Vices, as well as the Learning of the Gentiles, and
accordingly so Iren. lib. 1. cap. 23.
they did: for they held the use of all Lust indifferent: and herein their
Practice was agreeable to their Opinion, for it is a Shame even to speak of
those things Epbes. 5. 12.
which were done of them in secret, and so infectiously wicked it seems they
were, as that they persuaded others to be as bad as themselves: thence it was
that the Ephesians were in some danger of being deceived with vain Words into
an Opinion, that Fornication and all Uncleanness, Avarice and Filthiness,
obscene and foolish talking and jesting were things v. 3. 4. 6*
lawful, or at most but venial Sins.

Yet for all this (to allure the minds of the rigorous and austere) they
pretended to great Mortification and Severity of living: other Christians
indulged themselves the use of Marriage and all manner of Meats without
distinction, but these were more mortifyed than so; they did forbid to marry
and commanded to abstain from meats. The Appetites of 1 Timothy 4. 3*
the Flesh were so hateful and impure in their Sight, as that they thought
marriage and the better ^orts of meats too great an Indulgence to them, y^a,
such was their zeal against them, as that some of them said* marriage was of
the Devil: and many of them abstained from all living Creatures, and by this
pretense of perfect continence, they seduced many. And no wonder, Iren. lib. 1.
c^p. ^3.
since they were such morti^ied men, who would not take them for Saints? with
these baits did these cunning Anglers fish for Christians from among the
Gentiles, almost of all Sorts and all Inclinations.

The Jewish Christians (who were yet Zealous of Act. 21* 20.
the Law) they enticed by asserting a necessity of Circumcision and keeping
their Law. For they taught the Brethren and said, except ye be circumcised
after the manner of Moses, and keep the Law, ye cannot be saved. By this part
of their Doctrine they Act. 15. 1. 24.
did conciliate the obstinate Jews and insinuate themselves into those that
believed, who partly for fear of Prosecution from their unbelieving Countrymen,
and partly out of Love to their old Religion, were very apt to swallow their
Poison: whereunto also they added several Ingredients of most damnable Heresy.
For even in St. John's time, many deceivers were entered into the World, who
confessed not that Jesus Christ was come in the Flesh. But because 2 Epist. 7.
Vid. Iren. lib. 1. cap. 30.
others thought he was, they made an high Profession of him, that by the
sweetness of his Name they might reach out this their bitter poison unto them.

Which Poison they sweetened with Pretenses, it was very wholesome and useful
to purge the Soul from the dreggs of Ignorance and Error, to enlighten the
Mind, and inform the Understanding: for their profane and vain Bablings they
had the Confidence 1 Timothy 6. 20. 21.
to call Science, and to make Profession of it. and from a pretended excellency
of Knowledge they laid peculiar claim to the Title of Gnostics (knowing men)
as if none, no not St. Paul or St. Peter or any other of the Apostles could
plead an ^quality to the greatness of their Knowledge, for they boasted that
Iren. lib. 1. cap. 9.
they knew more than all men else. And Knowledge we know is a thing so
inviting, as that it has no Enemies but the Ignorant, and scarce any so
sottish as not to desire it, insomuch that it was a Temptation even to Eve in
Innocence, when doubtless her Knowledge was completely suited to her Innocence:
yet even then ^he judged the forbidden Genesis 3. 6.
Fruit desirable, because it would make one Wise: We it is true have lost her
Innocence, but not the Desire after Knowledge; no marvel then if with this
pretense they allured many.

Especially considering, that though their Wisdom was Earthly, Sensual,
devilish, yet they pretended it was from above, it came not of Blood or of the
Will of the Flesh or of the Will of Man, but of God. For as the Devil in
tempting our blessed Savior hid his Lies under Texts of Holy Scripture, so
(says Irenaeus) do all Heretics: what though (as Polycarp. observed) they
wrested the Word of lib. 5. Epist ad phil.
God according to their own Lusts, yet it appeared thereby, they fathered their
Lies upon the God of Truth: from whom also (as they pretended) their Fables
sometimes descended by Tradition, and sometimes by Revelation.

When they were urged and baffled out of the Holy Scriptures, they fell foul
upon them, and accused them of such depravations, insufficiences, varieties and
obscurities, as that the Truth could not therein be found by any that knew not
Tradition, and by Tradition they understood not (as others did) that which
every where, always, and by all Christians Vinc. Lirin. cap. 3.
is believed, but a more secret delivery of Truth down from one to another, not
by Writing, but by Iren. lib. 3. cap. 2.
word of mouth. Thus it seems they pretended to have received their Doctrine,
not from the Apostles, but from the mouth of Christ himself; and therefore in
the Church of Corinth they were neither for Paul nor Apollo, no, nor yet for
Cephas, but for 1 Cor. 1. 12.
Christ; as if Christ had transmitted such Doctrine to them as he withheld from
others; or at least, such Doctrines as were but obscurely revealed to others by
Holy Scriptures were plainly made known to them by Tradition.

But besides the Holy Scriptures and Tradition, they, (or at least some of
them) pretended Revelation in behalf of their idle Fables, as Irenaeus makes
evident by the example of one Marcus and other Gnostics, who (as they gave
out) did not only prophecy themselves, but had power to communicate the gift
thereof to others, and accordingly (as they boasted and their Disciples
believed) so they did to diverse, especially of the weaker Sex; and by this
pretense they deceived and drew many after them: Lib. 1. c. 9*
and no wonder if they did so, for all men took Prophets to be holy Men of God,
who spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost: and who so profligate from all
Religion, as to think that they were such, and yet refuse to be led by, or
partake of their Spirit? by this pretense therefore (how false and fabulous
soever their Doctrine was) the foundation of Faith in it, and of Obedience to
it, was laid in the Consciences of men; and this Foundation is of all others
the most firm and immovable, able to bear whatever superstructure shall be
laid upon it; yea also, and to beat off whatever assaults shall be made against
it; as appears by the improbability of some Doctrines, and severity of some
Orders, still received and defended, because at first founded on the credit of
pretended Visions and Revelations, all the difficulty was in the choice of the
ground wherein to lay this Foundation, the minds of men that were of sharp,
deep, and strong Discourse, were not apt to receive it, but men of shallow
apprehensions and weak intellectuals were fittest and most prepared for it:
this those builders of Babel, the primitive Seducers seem wisely to have
considered, for S. Peter insinuates, they were unstable Souls whom they
beguiled, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Romans 16. 18. 2 Timothy 3. 6.
and S. Paul more expressly says, they were the Simple whose hearts they
deceived, they crept into houses and led captive silly women laden with sins,
and led away with diverse lusts; thus those in the Apostles days: and Irenaeus
tells us of others, who a little after them, were most busy with women,
especially those that were of greatest Quality, and most famous for worldly
Lib. eod.
Grandieur and Riches: these they most frequently sought to impose upon and
allure by flatteries.

But lest their deceiveableness of unrighteousness, viz. their Artifices of
deceit should not be sufficient to secure the Foundation, they came also (as it
was foretold they would) with the working of Satan, with all Power and Signs
and lying Wonders; for we read of Simon the Samaritan (the Founder of Heresies
and Father Iren. lib. 1. cap. 30.
of Heretics) that he used Sorcery and bewitched the People of Samaria, giving
out that he himself was some great one; to whom they all gave heed from the
least to the greatest, saying, this man is the great Power of God. Act. 8. 9.
10.
Yet as great as he was, he at length was in some measure subdued by a greater
Power than his, for he believed and was baptized: yet, his heart not being v.
13. v. 21.
right in the Sight of God, but supposing the Apostles to be greater Magicians
than himself, he greedily contended against them, that he might seem more
glorious than they; to this end he desisted not from the study of Magic, but
made such farther progress in it, as that he provoked many to amazement by it,
for Claudius Caesar erected a Statue in Honor of him for it. After him the
Carpocratians Iren. lib. 1. cap. 20.
were much addicted to Magic and Enchantments, that they might entice others
to love them: yea and they drew Devils to their assistance, that by many
Delusions it might be in their Power to be Lord and Master of whom they
pleased. Thus also it is reported Epitaph. lib. 1. To. 2. H^^r. 27.
of the before mentioned Marcus, that he was a very great Proficient in Magical
Imposture, whereby he deceived many, both Men and Women. the like Iren. lib. 1.
cap. 8.
might I observe concerning others, but this may suffice to show, that in this
respect (as well as others) the primitive Seducers did exactly fulfill the
Prophecies that went before of them: and from thence it is easy to infer,
that they who uttered them viz. Christ and his Apostles were Prophets; because
the only ordinary and certain Mark of a Prophetic Spirit (viz. Predictions
exactly accomplished) is manifestly found in them.

But forasmuch as the Predictions of Christ and his Apostles concerning
Seducers, are of use not only to confirm the Faith, but also to direct the
Judgment in the choice of what Teachers men ought to follow and adhere to, it
would not be unuseful for us to make Trial of our Modern Teachers thereby:
which if we should do impartially, I doubt not but we should find, that the
Copy which was set by the false Teachers in the Apostles times, is too fairly
transcribed by too many, especially the Papists in ours and consequently we
need not search the Records of Antiquity, our own age will afford us too sure
and sad accomplishment of these Predictions* the demonstration hereof I did
once intend, but finding I should thereby grasp at matter more sit for a Volume
than a Section, I shall not so far digress; but proceed to speak

Sect. 6. Concerning the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles.
And here my business will be to prove, that they really wrought many and great
Miracles. The Truth and certainty of which Proposition, (because Miracles were
matters of Fact) is most properly demonstrable only by Testimony: yet Reason
(methinks) proves it probable, or somewhat more: for granted it is on all sides
that our Blessed Savior himself (in regard of his Manhood) was but mean in the
World: his Parents were no Persons of Honor, and he himself had but a mean
Reception at his Birth, nor was he by the Jews much set by in his Life. He grew
up as a root out of a dry Ground, they thought there was no Form, Comeliness,
or Beauty in him, that they should desire him. They would see no such blossoms
in his Youth, as promised any extraordinary Fruit in his riper age: wherein
also he was despised and rejected of men, a man of Sorrows and acquainted with
Grief, a Rock of Offense and Stone of Stumbling, set at naught by the
Master Builders of Israel, rejected by the chief of his own Nation, pursued by
his Enemies, betrayed by one of his pretended Friends, denied by another, and
suspected by all: pursued and apprehended, bound and buffetted, arraigned and
spit on, condemned and crucified by his own Countrymen, as one of the worst of
Malefactors: was this man's Name like to become great in Israel and famous among
the Gentiles? yet this was he that sent forth his Apostles; and who were They?
why men as mean as himself, persons of obscure Parentage, of no Reputation for
Wealth or Wisdom, Honor or Authority in their own Country: yea so far from it,
as that the chief of them was a Fisherman, and others as rude and illiterate as
the meanest Mechanics: and when they came abroad among the Gentiles, they were
looked on as foolish Bablers, and were made as the Filth of the World, and
offscouring of all Things. Were these men likely to out wit the wise ones and
to baffle the Philosophers? to be too cunning for the Devil and too strong for
the Powers of Darkness? was their bare Word likely to pull down the strong
Holds of Sin and Satan, and to convert the World from the Errors of its Ways?
and that by a sort of Doctrine which in diverse points seemed Foolishness to the
Wise, direct opposition and contrariety to the carnal; and this delivered not
with enticeing words of man's Wisdom, but in the plainest simplicity of speech,
nakedly representing what they believed, had seen and heard. Were these men
likely by such Doctrine so delivered without Miracles to take down the Gates of
Brass, and break the Bars of Iron in sunder? to reform the World in spite of
all Opposition? yet so they did: for by their preaching, men's beloved Lusts
were divorced, the Devils Oracles were put to silence, his Prophets struck
dumb, and Soothsayers were unconsulted: Temples were laid wast, and Altars
demolished: the Wise were confounded by the Foolish, the Mighty by the Weak;
the base and despised things of the World, yea and things that were not,
brought to naught the things that were; although they were favored and
patronized by the Love and Liking, the greatest Power and Polity of Men and
Devils, of Earth and Hell, all which took Council together and stood up against
them. Yet such was the Efficacy of their Doctrine, as that though the Grecian
and Roman Lawgivers (notwithstanding their Authority and Reputation for Wisdom
and Power, and their Pretenses to Inspiration from the Gods then worshipped)
could not persuade even their next Neighbors, but only their own immediate
Subjects to embrace their Laws; yet the Apostles drew not only them, but all
barbarous Vid. Theodor. Ser. de Legibus.
Nations to the Love of the Law of Christ; and that not by the force of Arms
and Weapons but against it; insomuch that they and their Followers in all
Places were begirt with Reproaches, and encircled with great Dangers, both to
their Lives and Fortunes: yet all Mankind and all Nations they persuaded to
embrace the Faith and Laws of our crucified Jesus: and think ye, men were then
so mortifyed to the Flesh, and crucified to the World, as that they would
hazard their Ease and Pleasure, Wealth and Honor, Relations and Lives and all
that was dear to them, upon the bare word of a few private persons preaching
one Jesus crucified at Jerusalem? think ye that that could have done it without
the Demonstration of the Spirit and the power of the Almighty, working Miracles
to induce and persuade men to it? Surely all Nations could not be allured by
naked Asseverations, or induced with vain Hopes to jeopard their lives, when
they saw no such thing as a Miracle to invite them to Arnob. lib. 1.
this their new Worship. It Is hardly imaginable that this could be: how much
more rational therefore is it to conclude, that God by them did work Wonders
and many Miracles among the Jews and Heathens.

Of which conclusion we are also assured by the Tradition of the Church, which
in this case is so august and illustrious, as that there is nothing wanting to
make it most absolutely complete and perfect: it has Universality, Antiquity,
and Consent of all Christians to avouch its Authority and credibility: it was
every where, always, and by all believed, that Christ and his Apostles wrought
Miracles to confirm their Doctrine. Was there ever any Nation on Earth where
the Gospel was planted, but this was believed of them? and what Age has ever
passed since their time without transmitting the same Belief to Posterity? men
of all Qualities and Countries, of remotest Regions and different Customs,
Languages and Persuasions in other matters, do all and ever did agree in this
Assertion: thence is it that Arnobius with great reason asked the Gentiles,
what we shall say of the men of that time (viz. wherein the Gospel was first
preached) were they so vain and false, so foolish and brutish as to feign
themselves to have seen those things they never saw? and so by false witness
and childish asseverations to avouch those things that never were: and that
when they did not only lose the sweets of Unanimity and peaceable converse with
their old Acquaintance, but also freely became so odious unto them, as that
their very name was execrable: if the History of these things be false, whence
was it, that the whole world in so short a time became Christian? or that
Nations of the farthest distant Regions, driven, as it were, with the wind and
convexions of Heaven, should yet come ^ib. ^od.
together in this one mind? was it possible they should be all deceived, or
have a design to deceive others? was the world so sottish as that it could be
so imimposed on? or was it so knavish as that it would so impose on all others?
yet among so many Myriads both of Deceivers and deceived, there should be none
able and willing to discover the Cheat? that was impossible; and so it will
appear, if we consider the circumstances of that testimony wherein the Belief
and Tradition of the Church seem founded, viz. the Times and Places wherein,
and the Confidence wherewith it was given.

As for the time wherein it was first reported, that Christ and his Apostles
wrought Miracles, it was not (as we know other reports have been raised, viz.)
long after the Fact was done, but in that Age wherein the Doers lived, yea in
those Years, Months, and Days, wherein the Facts (supposed to be Miracles)
were done: while all men were musing in their hearts concerning the Wonders
they saw and heard, and consequently while Interest in some, and Curiosity in
others, did prompt them to make enquiry into the Truth of the Report, and while
if false, it might most easily have been found to be so; yet then did the first
Witnesses of these things, with all ^oldness give evidence thereof.

And that not in places far remote and distant from those wherein they were
done, but even in them: where certainly if there had been any fraud, it might
best and would effectually have been discovered: for the persons that found the
effects, those also that opposed the design of these Miracles, viz. those on
whom they were wrought, and those who were enemies to the belief of them, were
then and there living, when and where the Report was first spread of them: and
without all doubt in those times and places wherein Christianity was a Sect
that was every where spoken against, there wanted not Acts. 28. 22.
those, who had both Wit and vigilance enough to have discovered the Cheat and
falsehood, if there had been any to be found, either in the pretended Miracles
or the Testimony that was given of them; and is it not very strange, that in
such times and places there were none that would undertake to detect the
Forgery? in such a case, the silence of Adversaries seems more demonstrative
than the Testimony of Friends. Especially considering, they had not only the
advantages of time and place, but also provocations to have done it if they
could: for such was the Confidence and noble Magnanimity of those that first
avouched it, as that though they were stripped of all Succor and Support from
other men, and exposed to Contempt and Scorn, Curses and Execrations,
Persecutions and Afflictions, Stripes and Imprisonments; in short, to all
manner of hardships and Death it self in giving this Testimony, yet were they
not moved with fear, or diverted from it, but they did constantly avouch it,
and often appeal to the Consciences of their implacable Enemies concerning the
Truth of it. Thus St. Peter (as it were in the name of all the Apostles) tells
the men of Israel, That Jesus of Nazareth was a man approved of God among them
by Miracles, Wonders and Signs, which God did by him in the midst of them, as
Acts 2. 22.
(says he) you your selves also know. The Jews therefore could not, and
Arnobius tells the Gentiles that they dare not attempt to convince it of
Falsehood: Lib. 1.
the reason I suppose was, because (as Origin tells Celsus) it was not possible
to deny, that the Miracles Lib. 2.
(reported of Christ and his Apostles were done. In this case wherein the
Christians had all imaginable motives to be silent, and their Enemies to speak,
yet that none of them, either Jews or Gentiles, should be able to contradict
their Testimony: how strange is it? how clearly and plainly does it speak the
truth of their Testimony, and vindicate them from all shadow of Suspicion, they
had a design to cheat the World into belief of Lies? how evidently does it show
the triumphant force of Truth and Energy of Conviction, that Christ and his
Apostles wrought Miracles?

Which Energy of Conviction discovered it self by Concessions, as well as by
forced Silence; for so apparently true was the Churches Tradition in this
particular, as that some of his Enemies have added their suffrages to hers,
that Christ and his Apostles wrought Miracles. The Jews it seems do openly
confess it in their Jerusalem-Talmud and their Midras Cohele, where, they tell
us, that the Grandson of R. Jehosua the Son of Levi, having swallowed Poison,
was recovered from danger of death thereby, through the Invocation of the Name
of Jesus; but the Father understanding by what means his son was cured, was so
maliciously ungrateful as to say, it had been better for him to have Avodazara.
died, than to be so cured, whereupon his ingratitude was presently avenged by
the Death of his Son. To this Story they add another, the sum whereof is, that
R. Elazar the Son of Duma, being bit with a Serpent, was healed by St. James.
Among the Pet. Gala^ de Arcan. Fid. Cath. lib. 8. cap.
Gentiles, the very bitterest of the Christians Adversaries did acknowledge as
much: for Celsus protested himself to believe the Stories of Christ's miraculous
Cures o^ the Sick, and raising the Dead, and feeding the Multitudes with a few
Loaves, and the Fragments that remained: all these things and whatever else the
Disciples reported (as he thought) to amplify the greatness of his Miracles,
he professes to believe were true, and grants we may believe they were done.
It seems also that Julian did acknowledge, Orig. lib. 1.
the Lame and the Blind were healed, and those that were possessed with Devils
received help in Bethsaida and Bethanie: and to enrage others against Cyrillus
lib. 6.
Christ and his followers, Porphyrius undertook to tell them the reason why the
City was so long afflicted with sickness: and that in his judgment was,
because neither Aesculapius nor any other of the gods could have access unto
it: for (says he) since the time that Jesus was worshipped, no man can get any
public help from the gods. And from that Theodoret Ser. 12.
Gallimalfry of nonsense and errors, viz. the Alcoran we may gather this
Truth, that Messiah Jesus the Son of Mary gave sight to the Blind, healed the
Leprous, raised the Dead, and taught the Living, and that the Apostles did the
same in his absence. If then cap. 3.
Reason or Tradition, the testimony of Friends, or the Writings of Enemies will
satisfy, we have (one would think) enough of all sorts, and that when some
were vomiting Lies and belching Blasphemies against Christ, his Person and his
Doctrine, yet even then they confess, that He and his Apostles did those things
which we take to be Mir^cles.

Obj. But here perhaps it will be said, that we are mistaken: it was of old
objected, they were not real and true Miracles, but lying Wonders, Delusions of
Satan and Effects of Magic: thus the Scribes and Pharisees Mat. 9. 24. Mark.
3. 22. Arnob. lib. 1.
among the Jews, and thus also many among the Gentiles: and this was thought so
apparent, as that Celsus himself, although he had formerly written many books
against Magic, was yet in a sort constrained to retract his Opinion, and
confess that it had a Being in the things that were done by Christ and his
Followers: for having granted the Truth of the Report, that such and such
Wonders were indeed done by them, he immediately subjoyns a comparison between
them and the sleights of Juglers, who promise greater matters and more
wonderful, yet are they but such as they learned from the Egyptians, and for a
few Farthings will show in the midst of Markets: boasting that by their Arts
they can cast out Devils, heal Diseases, recall the Souls of the Dead, prepare
Tables sumptuously furnished with all manner of Dainties, and raise Ghosts that
seem to move, though in truth they are void of all motion.

Origin. lib. 1.
Ans. And so is this odious comparison of all Truth and Probability: for what
communion has Substance with Shadows? What agreement have substantial Changes
with bare Appearances? Could Celsus have proved, that the Miracles of Christ
and his Apostles were merely Phenomenon of Fancy (as he calls these impostures
of Juglers which he basely compares therewith) he had said something to the
Purpose: but he had not the imp^dence to affirm that, nor so little wit as to
attempt the Proo^ ^f it: this therefore (as Origin justly tells him) is not the
part of a Disputant, but of the unlearned Vulgar; an effect of Passion unworthy
of a Philosopher, whom it becomes (not impertinently to rail at, but) heartily
to examine a matter that lies before him: which if Celsus had done impartially,
he would without doubt have found, that swe^t Wa^^r and bitter might be sent
forth from the same Fountain, as well as the Miracles of Christ and the
Delusions of Inchanters from the same Cause, viz. the Devils Malice. For so
evident it is to the Reason of all men, as that it was almost Vid. Grot. in
Mat. 12* 25, 26.
a Proverb among the Greeks and Romans as well as Jews, that every Kingdom
divided against it self is brought to Desolation, and every City or House
divided against it self shall not stand: and manifest it is that if Satan cast
out Satan he is divided against himself; how then shall his Kingdom stand? It Is
true indeed, we are not ignorant of his Devices, among which perhaps it was
sometimes one, at the Word of Inchanters to recede a while, as an Army may
feign a slight thereby to get a greater advantage of the Enemy: but to weaken
his Kingdom, much more to destroy it, is undoubtedly none of Satan's
contrivance: is he such a Fool as to cast himself out of Possession? no surely,
the common Sentiments of all men concerning him abhor it; well then, those
Miracles the scope and tendency whereof is to disposess him and destroy his
Works, cannot be the Products of his Power. No Inchanter or Jugler by any thing
that he does (as Origin well observes) ever calls his Spectatours to the
Correction of their manners, nor do such Sights ever instruct those that are
endued with the fear of God; nor does any Jugler ever so much as attempt ^o
persuade beholders so to live as those whom God will judge. Inchanters do none
of these things, because they neither can nor will have any thing to do with
the amendment of men's lives, for they themselves are full of the foulest Vices,
and guilty of the contra Cells. lib. 1.
most detestable Wickedness. Their Sights and Shows served for no other Purpose
but to raise Wonder and Admiration, to beget astonishment, and amaze the
Multitudes: but the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles were not done with vain
Ostentation to display their own Power or Cunning, but that hard hearted men
and incredulous might know that what they avouched was not false, and from the
Goodness of the Works might learn more Arnob. ib. 1.
thoroughly to conjeciure what the true God is. So that they by their Miracles
did not only confirm their Doctrine (the Scope and Design whereof is to
extirpate Vice, and Implant the choicest Virtue of all sor^s) but also they
thereby gave the highest instances thereof, by declaring the Power and
Goodnessof the divine Nature. Their healing the Sick, of all Diseases, their
making the Lame to walk, the Blind to see, the Dea^ to hear, and the Dumb to
speak, together with their cleansing of Lepers, and feeding the Hungry, raising
the Dead, and casting out Devils; what incomparable Mercies in God and
Kindnesses in them were they to the afflicted, as well as Wonders to all? how
evidently did they demonstrate Gods Goodness and their Charity, as well as
their Mission from God and their Zeal for him? and what can be more directly
opposite to Satan, or destructive to his Kingdom than such Miracles? they
chased away evil Spirits, and imposed silence on their Prophets: they made
Soothsayers unconsulted and frustrated the Actions of arrogant Magicians, not
by the horror of the name of Jesus, but by the license of its greater Power. So
that Christ and his Apostles Idem ibid.
by their Miracles did in a manner wage open War with Satan, and declare
themselves his utter Enemies. How than could the Power whereby they did them
(since they used it against him) be derived from him? Satan we know is subtle,
and his subtilty directs the Establishment of his Kingdom, not it is Eversion:
think ye then that he would enable men to destroy it, to release his Captives
and set free his Vassals, to turn him out of Possession and so to beat him with
his own Weapons? this is impossible: impossible therefore it is that the
Miracles of Christ and his Apostles should be his Delusions: what then were
they but real and true Miracles, Works that God did by them above the Power of
Nature ordained in the Creation?

Hereof also we are yet f^rther assured by the continuance of Miracles in the
Church for several Ages after the Death of Christ and all his Apostles. And of
this we are assured by very credible Testimony of the Ancient Fathers; who
herein cannot be suspected of Falsehood or Forgery; because if so, it might
easily (as they gave it) and would certainly have been detected by their
Adversaries, to whom (for the most part) they alleged it. Thus Justin Martyr
told Trypho the Jew, that the Devils do fear and tremble at the name of our
Redeemer. For, to this very day (says he) being adjured by the Name of Jesus
Christ crucified under Pontius Pilate, Governor of Judaea, they obey: that
thence also it may be manifest to all, that the Father has given him such
Power, as that Devils are subject to his Name, Dial. page 247. Ed. par.
and the economy of his Passion. Wherefore also by his Name (says Irenaeus)
those that are truly his Disciples, receiving Grace from him, confer benefits
on other men, according to the Gift which each one has received from him. For
some do assuredly and truly cast out Devils, that they who are cleansed from
Evil Spirits may believe, and be in the Church, as they are most frequently:
Others have the knowledge of future Contingences, Visions, and the Word of
Prophecy: Others, by the Impos^tion of hands cure the Sick, and make them
sound: Yea also in this Age, the Dead have risen, and continued with us many
years: and what shall I say more? I cannot reckon the benefits, which the
Church throughout all the World, receiving from God, does every day confer on
the Gentiles in the name of Christ Jesus, crucified under Pontius Pilate: and
this she does, neither seducing any man, nor taking his Money from him: but as
she has received freely from God, so freely she gives: Neither does she any
thing by Invocation of Angels, nor by Enchantments, or any kind of wicked
Curiosity, but purely, and sincerely, and manifestly directing her Prayers to
the Lord, who has made all things, and exalted the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ in great Power, Lib. 2. cap. 58.
for the profit of men, and not for their seduction.

Not long after him, Tertullian sent a bold and daring Challenge to the
Governors of the Roman Empire, wherein, to prove that their Gods were Devils,
he offers them to make an Experiment in this manner: Let there (says he) he a
man brought before your Tribunals, of whom it is evident that he is possessed
with a Devil; that Spirit being commanded by any Christian to speak, shall
there (of a truth) confess himself to be a Devil, as well as elsewhere falsely,
to be a god. Let there also be another produced, of whom it is thought that he
is under the force of Divine Asslations, namely, one of those, who attending
the Altars, suck in Divinity from the smell, or of those who are cured by the
belching of the Priests, or of those that foretell by the difficulty of their
breathing: Yea, the caelestial Virgin her self that promiser of rain,
Aesculapius that Demonstrator of Medicines, or otherwise the Dispenser of
Scordium Denatium Vid. Frau. Jun. Not.
and Asclepiadoton to the dying: unless they confess themselves Devils, not
daring to lie unto a Christian, there shed you the blood of that shameless
Christian. Than this Work what more manifest? than this Proof what more
faithful? the sincerity of Truth is conspicuous; its virtue assists it, there
will be no color for suspicion, that it was done by Magic or any the like
Fallacy. Like unto this is that Appeal of Minutius Felix to other Heathens.
Most of you Apol. c. 23.
know that they themselves confess themselves Devils, as often as by the Torments
of Adjuration or Flames of Devotion we cast them out of possession; even
Saturn, Serapis, and Jupiter himself, and whatever other Devils ye worship,
being overcome with grief, speak what they are; neither lie they for the
advantage of their Villainy, as they do to some, especially of you that
Patronize their Cause; confessing the truth of themselves, believe that they
are Devils, themselves being witnesses: for being adjured by the true and only
God* they unwillingly either cling to the miserable bodies of the possessed, or
else they forthwith forsake them, ^r else they vanish by degrees, according to
the (...) edit. Ox. 1^36.
Faith of the Patient* or the Grace of the Physician. About the same time
Origin told Celsus, that to that ^ry ^ib 2.
day Cures were wrought by the Name of Jesus. And again afterward he says, We
can show innumerable multitudes both of Greeks and Barbarians, that confess the
Faith of Jesus: for the sake of which Faith, some of them have received
something miraculous, the signs whereof they show by Curing the Sick: on whom
they use no other means of Recovery, but calling on the God of all, and the
Name of Jesus, together with the History of him; for by these means we our
selves h^ve seen many rescued from grievous Evils, Distractions and Madness,
and many other Diseases, which neither Men nor Devils were Lib. 3.
able to cure. And that the Christians of that Age wrought not these Cures by
the Power of the Devil, he farther yet makes evident, by their Ejection of him
wherever they found him: the Power of Christ did so triumph over him, as that
almost the meanest Christians could dispossess him: For, More than a few of
them were able to drive him away from them that suffered by him; and that
without any curious magical or poisonous thing, but only by Prayer and pure
Invocations, such as a simple Lib. 7.
man may make. For, private Christians most frequently do it, the Grace of
Christ in his Word thereby discovering the contemptibleness and weakn^ss of the
Devil's that in order to their Ejection from the Soul and Body of a man, there
was no need so much as of a Wise man, or one that was mighty in rational
Demonstrations of the Faith. To the same Purpose St. Cyprian wishes that the
Proconsul of Africa (a great Persecutour of the Christians would hear and see
(the Devils whom he worshipped as Gods.) When (says he) we adjure and vex them
with spiritual Scourges, and when by the torments of Words we cast them out of
possessed Bodies, when at the Word of Man by the Power of God as it were
feeling Stripes and Scourges they cry out and groan and confess there is a
Judgment to come. Come and know that what we say is true. And because thou
say, thou so worshipest the Gods, either believe those whom thou do
worship, or if thou will, b^lieve thy self; he that has now besieged thy
breast and blind^d thy mind with a night of Ignorance, shall sp^^k i^ ^hy
h^^ring concerning thy self: thou shall see that we are entreated by those, of
whom thou art afraid and adorest: thou shall see them s^and bound under our
hands, and tremble b^ing Captives, whom thou do honor and ven^rate as Lords.
And Con^r^ Dem^trianum.
after him La^tantius testified, that they fly from the Just, and tremble;
because when they possess the Bodies of men and vex their Souls, being by them
adjured, the Name of the true God chaseth them away. For, having heard it, they
tremble, cry out, and testify that they are burnt and scourged: and being
asked who they are, when when they came, and how they entered into a man, they
confess; being thus constrained and tortured, by the virtue of Gods Name, they
are banished; because of these lashes and threatenings, they have always hated
holy and just men; and because by themselves they cannot hurt them, those whom
they feel grievous to them, they pursue with public hatred, and exercise
Cruelty as violently as they can, either that by grief they might diminish
their Faith, or (if they cannot effect that) that they might utterly take them
De Justitia, lib. 5. cap. 22.
from the Earth, le^t they should survive to restrain their wickedness. Now
than this, what is there more demonstrative, that Christian Miracles were not
wrought by the Power of Satan? Since they bound and scourged him, took him
captive, and thr^w him out of possession, it is manifest the Power that did
them was greater than his, and contrary to it: and can he give greater Power
than he himself has? No surely. Nor will he, neither indeed can he change
himself into an Angel of Light to destroy, but only to uphold the Kingdom of
darkn^ss; and if that be impossible, much more so was it for him to have given
Power to one, that at the Invocation of his Name by others, not only all
Diseas^s should be healed, but also he himself ^ormented and ejected. This
Power, (Arnobius observes) that Jupiter C^pitolinus himself scarce granted to
any Moral, no not to his own chief Pri^^^. I will not demand (says he) that he
should r^ise the Dead, or restore light unto the Blind, or give Strength and
Beauty to the Lame and deformed* but that either by the command of his Voice or
touch of his Hand he should so much as suppr^ss a Pimple a ^l^ft from the Nail
or Wheal of the Skin. And since so trivial a Power as this was not conferred by
the chief of the Gods, he might well (as he does) with Confidence challenge the
Gentiles to summon the most renowned Magicians from all Quarters, to give to
one of the people Power ^o make the Dumb to speak* the Deaf to hear, the
born-blind to see, to restore Sense and Motion to members long cold and
withered. Or if that be an hard matter, such as they cannot give Power of doing
unto others, let them do it themselves, and that with their Rites too; whatever
poisonous Herbs the Bosoms of the Earth do nourish, whatever force there is in
their rumbling of Words and the adjoined Causality of Verses, we envy it not,
let them gather it. It likes us to try and know whether they with their Gods
can do that which Country Christians can by their naked commands. lib. 1.


And it seems by St. Austin, that this Power of working Miracles continued in
the Church (though not so conspicuously) a long time after; for he testifies,
that even in his time (viz. in the fourth Century) Miracles were done in the
name of Christ, either by his Sacraments or by Prayers at the Monuments of his
Saints. And for Proof hereof he relates the stories of diverse, whereof De
Civit. Dei Lib. 22. cap. 8.
he himself had been an Eyewitness. Thus apparent it is and much more
abundantly evident, might it be made, that the Disciples of Christ for several
Ages after his Death, wrought Miracles in his name, and cast out Devils: and
surely, these Miracles of theirs do conciliate Authority to the Churches
Tradition concerning those of Christ himself and his Apostles. For it is not
possible that he who granted this Power to his Disciples should want it
himself; and next to an Impossibility it is, that in his Circumstances he
should never make use of it; nor is it at all probable, that he would confer it
on his meanest Disciples in private capacities, and that when his Gospel was
every where planted, and deny or withhold it from the chief of his Followers,
those whom he chose to be his Witnesses and Founders of his Faith throughout
all Nations. That this should be the economy of his dispensations, it is an
astonishment to Reason to imagine, but that it was not, is most highly
agreeable; insomuch that with Confidence we may conclude, there is no matter of
Fact whatever (although of a far less distance) of whose Truth we have more or
indeed so much reason to be persuaded, as we have of the Churches Tradition,
that Christ and his Apostles wrought many and great Miracles.

Yet (if we may believe St. Austin,) that he who still requires Prodigies that
he may believe, is himself ^ib. sup.
a great Prodigy, it is to be feared there are more than a few such Prodigies
in our Age: for an admired Author asks the Question: How can one that says
those things he says or teach^th were confirmed by Miracles be believed,
unless that he also himself has done a Miracle? The reason of this Question
(such as it is) he subjoyns in another: For if a private man be to be believed
without a Miracle, why among those Hobbs de Hom. cap. 14. Sect. 3.
that teach diverse things is one to be believed rather than another.

Because there are other Motives of Credibility besides Miracles: why else
should this unlucky Author be believed in any thing he says, that is different
from others? but whether it be fit he should or no, I shall not now enquire,
but only observe.

First, That Miracles have been done, may be believed upon the Credit of
Testimony, without the doing of any Miracle to confirm it. The possibility of
Miracles I now take for granted, and so also I might this Observation, had it
not been for this Authors sly insinuation, that without the doing of a Miracle,
it cannot appear credible that ever there were any. But why so? is there any
thing in the Nature of a Miracle that renders the Attestation of it incredible?
It seems not: for the same Author else where defines a Miracle to be a Work of
God (besides his Operation by the way of Nature, ordained in the Creation) done
for the making manifest to his elect, the Mission of an extraordinary Minister
for their Salvation. Leviathan p. 3. c. 37.
Whether a Miracle be a Work of God only besides and not also above his
Operation by the way of Nature ordained in the Creation; and what precious ones
this Authors Elect are, it does not at present concern me to enquire: but only
to observe, that whosoever they are, the designed end of a Miracle (according
to him) is to make manifest unto them, the Mission of some extraordinary
Minister for their Salvation. Be it so, that this (as in Part at least it
undoubtedly) is the End and Scope of real and true Miracl^s: I would fain know
of this Author how a thing that is incredible can make manifest a thing that is
not? The Mission of an extraordinary Minister (although not hastily to be
b^lieved, yet) is not incredible, but a Miracle it seems is, how then can it
make it manifest? But if this be impossible or unintelligible, whence comes it
to pass, that God makes choice of such a thing to make manifest another? does
this Author think the Wisdom of God so short, or his Power so weak as to lay
and effect his Designs no better? if so, he may change apprehensions with
Epicurus Pil. ^ud. c. 15.. 14.
(as wretched as he thinks his) and yet be no looser by the bargain. But
whatever he thinks of God, I cannot think him so void of Reason as to deny,
that that which makes manifest, must it self be more manifest than that which
it makes so: manifest therefore I take it to be, that if the end of Miracles be
to make manifest, they themselves must needs be so; and if manifest, then
credible, and if credible why may they not be done before credible Witnesses?
And why may not those Witnesses report them truly to other credible Persons?
And why may not this Report be transmitted to Posterity? And why may not
Posterity b^lieve it, as well as it does those concerning Alexander, Julius
C^^sar etc? What Impossibility, Immorality or Imprudence is there in so doing?
If there be none, then,

Secondly, It is needless to demand the doing of Miracles to prove that there
have been some done: the Reason is manifest; because this Assent may be built
upon another foundation, viz. Testimony of credible Witnesses, transmitted or
delivered down throughout all Ages to Posterity: the sufficiency of this
foundation to bear that Superstructure, will be evident, by the firm Assent
that men build upon less credible Testimony: whereof they give evidence in
almost all affairs of humane Life. The Nobleman claims his Peerage, the
Gentleman his Estate, the Merchant ventures his money, and the Traveller takes
his Journey, the honest Lawyer Pleads, and the just Judge pronounces Sentence
upon the credit of Testimony: and such is the necessity of Testimony, as that
the Child cannot learn his Letters, nor the Scholar attain his knowledge in the
Sciences, nor the Mechanic skill in his Trade, nor indeed can we our selves
know our own Names, without assenting to Testimony: yet so firm an Assent do we
yield unto it, as that there is nothing more ridiculous, and hardly
accomplished, than persuasion of us out of our Names. Most firm Assent
therefore we see is yielded to Testimony, and that such as is not more, perhaps
less credible, than that whereby the knowledge of Christ's Miracles is conveyed
unto us; for it has not Antiquity, Universality, and Consent of all Parties
(as this has) to avouch its Credibility: most firm Assent therefore may, and
(in reason) ought to be given to it: for, where there is certain Credibility in
the matter propounded, and also in the Testimony that propounds it, there does
arise upon men an obligation to believe: as appears by the Law of Nature
concerning Converse, which would serve to very little or no purpose, if the
motives of Credibility do not induce an obligation to believe. It seems
therefore, that the Testimony or Tradition whereby we understand that Christ
and his Apostles did many and great Miracles, we not only may, but also we
ought to believe: because there is a certainty of Credibility, both in the
Matter propounded, and also in the manner of its proposition to our
consideration: and if this renders it a Duty to believe, then,

Thirdly, It is both wicked and absurd to demand a Miracle to induce our Assent
unto it. It is wicked, because it not only hinders the performance of our Duty,
but also merely to gratify an unreasonable Humor, it importunes Almighty
Power and Wisdom (without any necessity) to change the course of Nature, or at
least to act besides it: and what affront more petulant and saucy can we easily
offer to Divine Majesty? It is also absurd as well as wicked: for, suppose a
man in this Age should really work a Miracle; if the Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles may not be received on Testimony; then neither may that, how then
shall the knowledge of it be conveyed to all that are concerned in it? why they
themselves must both see it done, and use all means possible to consider,
whether it be such as no man can do the like by his Natural Power, but that it
requires the immediate hand of God. L^viathan. part 3. cap. 37.
It seems then, if what one says was confirmed by Miracles, be of concern (as
Christian Religion is) to all People in all Ages and places of the World; there
must be almost as many Miracles wrought to confirm this saying, as there are
single Persons; how else should each Person concerned therein see one done? and
then Miracles would be no Wonders, they would change their Nature, and lose
their Efficacy: and besides that, every one must then be a diligent searcher
into Nature; how else can he use all means possible to consider, whether the
pretended Miracle be such as no man can do the like by his Natural Power? No
(says the Author) that is needless: Herein also they must have recourse to
Gods Lieutenant. It seems then at last ibid.
they must be assured by Testimony: but why may not the Testimony or Tradition
of the Holy Ca^holick Church (strengthened by the concessions and suffrages of
its Enemies) be believed, as well* as the word of Gods Lieutenant? but I shall
say no more; hereby it is plain enough, that this Author and his Followers seek
not for Truth and Certainty, but to palliate their Atheism or Infidelity. And,
pity it is, that their suggestions should disturb any ones reliance on the
Pillar and ground of Truth, the House and Church of the Living God: by whose
Testimony and Tradition we are so very well assured of the truth of our Savior
and his Apostles Miracles, as that we have little or no reason to envy either
the Jews or Gentiles whose eyes were blessed with the sight of them: For, to
what purpose did their eyes then serve them? Was it not to convey those their
Credentials to their Understandings? Yes, doubtless; they therein had little
other benefit by the use of them. And is not this abundantly supplied unto us
by the Tradition of the Church? Which (if well considered) will be found as
incapable of Deception as our Senses. For ought I know, mine Eyes may as soon
be deceived in an Object of Sight, as the whole Church in this its Tradition:
however, if Christ and his Apostles did not do Miracles, it certainly is a
Miracle that the World should receive their report without them, and a lying
Wonder (much more incredible than what we plead for) that the whole Church
throughout all Ages should so confidently believe and teach that they did them.
Although therefore the sight of Miracles might perhaps make deeper Impressions
on the Fancy and Affections; yet the Tradition of the Church is full out as
convincing to our Reason and Judgment, that Christ and his Apostles wrought
many and great Miracles.

CHAP. V. The Strength and Force of the Preceding Arguments.
NOthing now therefore r^mains of my promise, but the last Part, which is, to
show that this way of proving Christ and his Apostles were Prophets, is very
sufficient and Rational. And this it will appear to be on the account both of
its Removal of all suspicion, that they were not, and of its positive Evidence
that they were.

All just Suspicion that they were no Prophets, must be Founded on a
Probability, either that they pretended not to the Spirit of Prophecy; or if
they did, that they therein were deceived; or else that they had a design to
deceive others: but by the preceding Arguments, it is manifest that neither of
these is true. For,

1. It is hardly possible for men to have the Antecedents, or Concomitants and
Consequents of Prophecy, and to use them (as they did,) ^n Order to the
Propagation of Doctrine, and yet not pretend to the Spirit of it. Had their
mouths been perfectly silent, their Actions would have declared plainly to what
they pretended; Their Doctrine they Taught, to be the Word of God, and not of
man: In the Propagation of it they made Evidence of that Wisdom, Fortitude and
Virtue* which attended the Prophets in the discharge of their Function; and for
the Demonstration of their Mission to Teach it, they Foretold Future
Contingences, and wrought many and great Miracles* And how could all this be
without a pretense to the Spirit of Prophecy and the Office of Prophets? and if
this be Evident by their Actions without their Words, much more so is it in
conjunction with them; for as a man's Actions may either Enervate or strengthen
the credibility of his protestations and pretensions, so his Words
protestations or Declarations, may very much Illustrate the purport of his
Actions; they remove all doubt that otherwise might be made concerning them.
Since then Christ and his Apostles did not only take upon them to do the Work
of the prophetic Office; but did also say that they were Prophets, Matt. 13.
57. Luke 13. 33. Act. 2. Eph^s. 3. 4, 5.
it is very Evident that they took themselves, or at least pretended to be so.

2. And that they were not deceived in taking themselves to be Prophets will
hence also be Evident, if we consider, that this was hardly possible without
Enthusiasme, the Spirit of Divination, or some such other Fantastic delusions:
but Enthusiasts or Diviners it is Evident they were not, because they were
wise, Men of sound minds, and discerning Intellects, which were so great
preservatives against the delusions of Enthusiasme and De Orac. defec.
Divination, as that in the Opinion of Plutarch, prudence does Repel and
oftentimes Extinguish them: hereof he insinuates a reason, viz. Because
Prudence does cherish that modesty and sobriety which are destructive to those
Calentures and In^lammations, which are requisite to the Being of them. And
these usually were therein so great and fervent, as that during the prevalence
of Enthusiasme or Divination, Men had not the use of reason, nor indeed could
they: because these things being in themselves such as partake not of reason,
they could rise no higher than the fancy, where (dwelling like storms and
tempe^^s in the middle Region of the Air,) they did disturb and disorder the
Phantasmes, and present them tumultuously to the Understanding, and by so doing
they did Eclipse its Light and hinder its influence, in so much that either (as
Maimonides says,) nothing Mor. Neu^* par. 2* c. 37.
of the rational Faculty could pass f^rth into Art; or else at least it could
pass no true Judgment on things so represented to it. Hence no doubt it is,
that all sorts of Writers concerning them, (viz. Vid. Smiths Disc. of Prophecy*
cap. 4.
Heathens and Jews, as well as Christians) have observed, that they were always
accompanied with Alienations and Abreptions of mind. But that the Testimony of
Jesus was so in Christ and his Apostles, who so absurd, as well as impudent to
affirm? In pretending to the Spirit of Prophecy therein, how then can it be
Thought that they were deceived by Enthusiasme, or the Spirit of Divination?
What madness or Phrensy? What Alienations or Abreptions of mind can impartial
Reason charge upon them? where can we find such admirable Wisdom, so becoming
the Attributes of God, and agreeable to the Reason of Man, so Transcendent to
others and Coherent with it self as in their Doctrine? and where was Wisdom
ever Taught with so great temper and Moderation, calmness of Spirit and
presence of mind as in their delivery of it? What shadow than of Enthusiasme,
or of any other such Delusion can there be found in them? and if not by such
Delusion, much less probable (if possible) is it, they should have been
deceived into a conceit that they were Prophets, by the persuasions of others.
It seems no^ in the power of any, merely by Mo^al suasion (as this was if any
way, because opposed by all the Powers and the fury of the people then in
being,) to beat it into the heads of wise Men, or the hearts of good ones so to
believe that they themselves were Prophets, as to Jeopard their lives in
pursuit of the others suggestions, and that under the Notion of Divine
Revelations can Wisdom be seduced into such folly, or Holiness be guilty of
such lies and wickedness? since therefore they were Wise, Strong and Rich in
contentment and all Virtue, it is (at least Morally) impossible they should be
so deceived by any such sly insinuations.

3. Hence also it follows, that they had no design to deceive others, for how
was it possible for wise Men that feared God and eschewed Evil ever to consent
to, and prosecute so wicked and improbable an undertaking? It is no way likely
that Men whose rejoicing was this, the Testimony of their Conscience, that in
simplicity and Godly sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the grace of
God they had had their Conversation in this world: it is, I say very unlikely
(if not impossible) that such Men as these should be Impostors in the main Work
of their lives: had they bin Men of Artifice and fineness, of Lewd lives and
dissolute examples, that followed cunningly devised Fables of Fleshly Wisdom,
it might have been suspected that they contrived a story: but such was the
plainness of their Speech and openness of their Carriage among Men, as that
they not only Preached, but lived down deceit and forgery: and was it possible
for such Men to lay out their Lives against their Conscience, and all in
pursuance of a Cheat, and to begin it at Jerusalem, where if there had been any
Fraud, it best might and certainly would have been discovered? Yea, and there
to be so confident and daring, as to Challenge their enemies to convince them
of Sin, and Appeal to them concerning the Truth of what they avouched. How
Foolish and Mad had they been in so doing, beyond all Example, if they had not
been far from a design of Threatening the World out of its Old Religion, into a
New One of their own devising! But by the Wisdom and Prudence we before
observed to be in them, it appears without Shadow of probability, that they
would have Engaged in a design so dangerous in the attempt, and so unlikely to
take Effect, unless they had had Divine Warrant and Command for it. No prudent
Man contented with his condition, Studies his own death and Misery: it is hope
of obtaining some Good, or avoiding some Evil which makes Men expose themselves
to danger: but Christ and his Apostles being stripped of all manner of Defense
and Succor from Wealth, Friends, or Honor, whence could they hope for any
such thing? what Gain or Glory, what Ease or Pl^asure, what Safety or any thing
else that Allures the minds of Men were they like to get? Yea, rather what
losses and poverty, what infamy and disgrace, what Hardships and Labors, what
Perils and Evils of all Sorts did they not For^see were like to befall them in
their Enterprise? Yet were they not moved with Fear, or diverted from it; but
all their days they pursued it, even to the effusion of their Blood: which one
thing to an impartial considerer ought in all Reason to persuade him, that
(since they were Wise and sober Men, no ways misled by the D^lusions of
Enthusiasm, or any other Phanaticism) it was the force of Conviction and Energy
of the Prophetic Spirit, that wrought in them so mightily. What else could
possibly be the cause or reason of their admirable Fortitude and Magnanimity in
the Propagation of the Gospel? for how is it imaginable that Wise, Sober and
prudent Men, (whose understandings were perfected and advanced beyond examples
both of Former and Latter Ages,) how I say can it be imagined, that these Men
(continuing such) should be so rash and Brutish as to live contradictious to
the propensities of Nature and Injunctions of their own Doctrine? among the
Phenomenon of Nature, there is none more manifest than that it dictates its own
preservation so far as Lawfully it may: and among the Articles of our Faith
there is scarce any more plainly Taught Romans 9. 5. Romans 8. 31.
us, than that though Christ be over all, God blessed for ever, yet He was sent
in the likeness of sinful Flesh. Not that he so took the likeness of sinful
flesh, as if he had assumed only the Image not the Truth of a body, but by the
likeness of sinful flesh the Apostle is to be thought to mean, that that very
Flesh which Christ assumed, although in Him it was innocent, yet was it like to
that which in Tertull. de carne Christi cap. 16.
us is sinful, like it in the kind, not in the Vice of Adam: and consequently
that it had all the Parts, Properties and general Infirmities (Sin only
excepted) of our mortal bodies; surely, therefore he had as we have, a Natural
appetite to Meat and Drink, and other supports of human Nature in this its
Estate of Mortality and imperfection: and that his Apostles were men of the
like necessities, appetites and passions, there is none that make a Question:
how then was it possible, but that Nature should prompt them to put some esteem
on those persons things and callings, which were most likely to supply their
Natural n^cessities? and there is nothing in their Doctrine that teaches a
neglect of them, but much otherwise; for it 1 Cor. 7. 20.
obliges every man to abide in the same calling wherein he was called; and
prohibits those to eat that will not Work, and declares that they walk
disorderly, 2 Thessal. 3. 6, 10, 11.
and are therefore to be withdrawn from. Now it is no way probable, that wise
Men (laboring under the natural necessities* and common infirmitiesof human
Nature,) should Abandon all their worldly interests and concerns, disoblige
their Friends and forsake their Callings, throw away the Staff of Life, and
neglect their own Bodies to promote a ^iction of their own or others fancies,
that (if such) could have assured them of nothing, but contradicton and
gainsaying, yea, the worst of usage from all sorts of men that were otherwise
minded; yet, herein to take unparalled pains and travails, to undergo the
greatest miseries and perils, tortures and death it self, how wonderful was
their constancy, how admirable their resolution? whereunto can it rationally be
imputed; but to the Spirit of Prophecy? Which being in their hearts, as a
burning fire shut up in their Bones, made them weary with forbearing, and
unable to hold speaking.

Of which Spirit in them, we are yet farther assured by the Nature of the
Wisdom, which was peculairly Theirs: for we have found it to excel not only
that of the Gentiles, but of the Jews also: and surely 'twas impossible for
them without Revelation, to have Taught a sort of Wisdom, more excellent than
that that was revealed: can Man be Wiser than his Maker, or his Wisdom more
excellent than that of his Creator? That Is impossible. Or is not the
Foolishness of God (i^ I may so call the most imperfect of his Revelations)
wiser than Men? Yes surely, that it is; Why else was it made known unto them?
since then the Wisdom discovered by Christ and his Apostles, is more excellent
than that Revealed by Moses and the Prophets, they could not have attained unto
it, but by Revelation. Whence else was it possible that these Men should have
this Wisdom? surely, 'twas neither from Themselves nor any other Creatures;
They themselves in the Eye of the World were very unlikely to be Authors of
Ac^. 4. 13.
so Excellent a Production: for they were ignorant, and unlearned men, their
Education had not raised them above the Vulgar, nor their Callings
distinguished them from the common sort. (For, to say nothing of our Savior,)
his Apostles were Fishers, Artificers and Rus^icks, or such like unlearned men:
and were these Men likely of themselves to bless the World with a sort of
Wisdom, more excellent than that both of Jews, and Gentiles? no surely, it is
therefore evident they had it not of themselves; no, nor yet of other
Creatures, either Men, or Angels, good or bad: not from other good Men, or
Angels, for these neither would, ^or could (without loss of their goodness)
devise a Religion, and impose it on the World for Divine, so Fathering their
Lies on God himself; much less could they have it from bad Men, or yet from the
Fiends of darkness: it is utterly inconsistent with their Lusts and Interests,
to be Authors of so much Glory to God, and Good to Men, or of such Destruction
to themselves, and their Impiety, as we find designed and effected by the
Gospel of Christ and his Apostles. If then these men had not this Wisdom from
any Creatures, we must conclude with St. Paul, that God 1 Cor. 2. 10*
revealed it to them by his Spirit.

But that Christ and his Apostles were prophets, we have yet greater evidence
than that of the Antecedents, or concomitant Attendants on the Spirit of
Prophecy: Namely, that of their Predictions and Miracles.

That the exact accomplishment of Predictions, concerniug future Contingencies
were looked on as Infallible Proofs of a Prophetic Spirit; and that Christ and
his Apostles were Authors of such Predictions, we have already seen: All
therefore that now remains, will be to show the reason of the Consequence, viz.
Why, from thence we conclude them to be Prophets, what strength or force is
there in the accomplishment of such Predictions to show that the Authors of
them were Divinely inspired? What cause or reason is there on that account to
conclude that they were Prophets?

Hereto I Answer, the reason is, Because thereby it appears, they were
entrusted with some knowledge of Gods Secret purpose, concerning future
Contingents. To discover the force of this Reason, it will be needful to
observe, that Contingents are twofold, viz. either such as happen (as we call
it) by Chance: Namely, such as have their Being from the concourse of diverse
natural causes, in some sort hindering, as well as helping one another, or else
such as come to pass according to the purpose and intention of some free Agent.
There is no natural n^^^ssity of their Production in such a manner: the Ability
of their cause might otherwise have produced its effect, there is no necessary
connection between them and the Series of natural causes; their Vid. Amitus
Con^entinus de Deo uno et trino: Disp. 12. Sec. 3. n. 53.
Being depends wholly (as to their Contingency) on the will either of God
himself* or of his reasonable Creatures. These things are most properly
contingent; and if so, then evident it is, that the fore knowledge of them
cannot come within the compas^ of any art or Science whatever, because all Arts
and Sciences, being habits of doing or demonstrating from things natural and
necessary, they neither do nor can reach those that have no necesary connection
with them or dependence on them. Yet by the Predictions concerning them evident
it is that God foreknows them. If not, how could he foretell them? I may
therefore say with Tertullian Adv. Martion lib. 2. cap. 5.
that Gods foreknowledge has as many and great Witnesses as he has made
Prophets. Now this his foreknowledge must needs be, though not the efficient,
yet the directive cause of all future contingents, otherwise there would some
things come to pass, which neither of themselves, nor yet by any
superintendence of Providence would have any subservience to the Supreme end of
all things, viz. The Glory of their Maker: But this is absurd and unworthy of
God. For it is not credible, that the infinitely Wise and Almighty Creator, who
at first made, and still upholds all things in their Being, and virtues for his
own glory should suffer any thing to come to pass, that neither of it self, nor
by his direction is subservient thereunto. For Providence being the reason of
the Order of things, as well as the actual gubernation of them, in reference
Aq^inas 1. q. 22. Ar. 1.
to their end, especially the last, it must needs belong to the perfection of
it, to dir^ct all things, as well contingents as others to the glory of God,
and for this cause it is necessary, that of all the contingencies within the
vast Circuit of Possibility, those that come to pass should be, if not
predefined i. e. absolutely willed, yet (as I may say) pre-permitted. i. e. in
the prescience Vid. Amic. Consenting Disp. 14. ^. 5.
and eternal Order of all things in the Divine Intellect, allowed to come to
pass in their respective seasons. Which it is evident they cannot be, without
some secret purpose concerning them: of which secret purpose, it is as evident
by the exact accomplishment of Predictions, that the Prophets had some
foreknowledge; but whence I pray had these men this knowledge? Were their
souls themselves without Revelation able to attain unto it? No surely, for
though the mind of man walks in all the Paths of Arts and Sciences, as well
those that lie d^ep in reason, as those that are usual and beaten; and though
it compasses Sea and Land, and finds out the Nature of things contained in
them: And then lifting it self up from things below, it soars aloft; and so the
Air and its affections considered* it flies higher even to the Sky, and rides
the Circuits of Heaven, and bending its course with that of ^ the Wandering and
fixed Stars in their dance after the Music of the Sph^res, it follows the Love
of Wisdom, as its Leader: And when it has raised it self above every nature
that is apt to move the Senses, it is led with a desire of coming to that which
Reason only can perceive; and when in that it contemplates the Examples and
fair Forms of those things, which here fall under our Senses, being (as men
inflamed with Fury) even brought asleep by a kind of modest Drunkenness, and
filled with another desire and better Love, it partakes of Divine Afflations;
thence its intelligence being raised to the Supreme Globe of things perceived,
it seems to have arrived at the great and omnipotent King himself; yet while it
covets to see him, the pure and immixed Rays of Divine light, as of a Torrent,
are so poured forth, as that through their Clarity and Brightness (as if it
were overspread with Darkness) the very sharpness of its sight waxes dull, and
dim. De fabric. Mandi. ex interpret. Jo. Xophorson.
Thus elegantly does Platonizing Philo display the Powers of the Soul in
reference to its attainment of knowledge: and thereby we learn that though the
mind of man be able to discern much of the nature of all Creatures, yet when it
pries into the secrets of their Maker, it is struck with Blindness, and can see
nothing of them: think ye then that Creatures of a far Inferior Nature are
acquainted with them? Has the Eternal King Almighty, constituted the Hosts of
Heaven to be his Secretaries? And are the Planets so treacherous as by their
Conjunctions and Oppositions, to reveal the Arcana Imperii to Astrologers? Or
is the Firmament so untrusty as by its spangles to make them known to
Star-Gazers? Or is the Moon so unfaithful as by her course or countenance to
declare them to Monthly Prognosticators? Or are they committed to the custody
of Beasts, that the Aruspices may read them in their Intrals? Or are they so
little set by as to be laid on the Wings, put into the mouths, or trampled
under the Feet of Birds, that the Augures might know them by their flying,
noise, or sitting? How fondly, ridiculous is it to fancy that the Secrets of
Heaven are entrusted with any of these things, while they are hid from the mind
of man? Which as it far exceeds them in the nobleness of its Nature, so also in
dearness to its Maker: For man in his Creation was allied to God; a Creature so
nearly conjoined unto him and so gracious with him, as that in a sort all
things else were prepared for him. How strange then is it and incredible, that
they should be able to tell him such things as his most bountiful and indulgent
Creator thought fit to conceal from him? If then this be not likely, it is
certainly the dictate of Reason, that that knowledge, which at any time any man
at first has of them ought to be resolved into immediate Revelation: and for
that cause it is likely Predictions ever were (and still deserve to be) accounted
Infallible Proofs of a Prophetic Spirit; since then Christ and his Apostles
were Authors of Predictions exactly accomplished, it is not to be doubted but
they were Prophets.

Hereof, also we have yet another and greater Evidence, viz. Their Miracles:
that they really wrought many and great miracles, we have already asserted: all
therefore that now remains, will be to show the Force of that Argument. In
order whereunto it will not be amiss to observe, (1.) That Christ and his
Apostles, wrought their Miracles on purpose to confirm their Doctrine, or their
Mission from God to teach it. (2.) That Miracles were always looked on as
undeniable, or Demonstrative proofs of Divine Authority. (3.) The Reasons for
which those of Christ and his Apostles deserve to be so accounted.

1. That Christ and his Apostles wrought their Miracles on purpose to Confirm
their Doctrine, or Demonstrate their Mission from God to teach it. It Is true
indeed each one of their Miracles considered singly, and apart from the rest of
its Fellows, may seem to be wrought on some other occasion, and to other
purpose: but considered in the whole and in conjunction with the rest, it will
be easy to observe that the Ultimate End, Scope, and Design of it, was to
Demonstrate the truth of their Doctrine, and the reallity of their Mission from
God to teach it. Hereof methinks it is no trivial argument that may be drawn
from the time of them: and this was not before, but presently after our
Saviors Inauguration into his Office of Preaching the Gospel: that He himself
could have done, and enabled others to do Miracles before that, is firmly
believed among Christians, yet* we find not that he did it till after his
Baptism, and Consecration to the Sacred and solemn Office of Preaching. Hereof
surely, there can no Reason so probably be given, as that, because he wrought
his Miracles to confirm his Doctrine. But if this suffice not, pray observe
what he himself said to the Nobleman of Capernaum; Except Joh. 4. 48.
ye see signs and wonders, y^ will not believe: whereby it is plain not only
that Miracles are great inducements of Assent, but also that Christ wrought his
on purpose to be so; thence sur^ly, it was that he required belief, if not on
the Authority of his Word, yet, on the account of his Works: If (says he to
the Jews) I do not the Works of my Father: i. e. Such as God only can do,
namely Miracles, then believe me not, on this supposition he Christens
Infidelity unblameable: but again, he says, if I do the Works of my Father,
though Job. 10. 37, 38.
you believe not me, i. e. My words for my sake, yet believe the Works, viz.
The purport of them, that ye may know and believe, that the Father is in Me,
and I in Him: viz. either by Identity of Nature, or else at least by the Energy
of his Spirit working in Me, and most perfectly obeyed by me; this it seems, in
his Judgment they might have known by the Works that he did, for they being the
Works that the Father had given him to Job. 5. 36.
finish, they did bear witness of him, that the Father had sent him. And that
He was the Christ, the anointed of God, as appeared by his doing them Joh. 10.
25.
in his Name: for it is an astonishment to Reason, a thing altogether
incredible, that God would give Power to an Impostor to do such works in his
Name. On this account it is most likely that our most Blessed Savior upbraided
the Cities wherein Matt. 11. 20.
most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not; and said to his
Disciples, if I had not done among them the works which none other man did,
Joh. 15. 24.
they had not had sin; but now have they both seen, and hated both me and my
Father. So convincing did he account his Miracles, as that he imputes their
unbeli^f to Malice and enmity against God and himself: all which, or any thing
whereof he could not have done, unless he had wrought his Miracles to consirm
his Doctrine, or attest his Mission from God to teach it. To this End also it is
evident the Miracles of the Apostles were designed: for they went forth and
Preached every where, the Mark 16. 20.
Lord working with them, and consirming the word with s^gns following. It is
the dictate of Nature as well as of Scripture, that God cannot lie, or avouch a
Fal^hood; therefore surely, the word of his Grace is Truth, for we find that he
gave Testimony to it and this he did, by granting signs Act. 14. 3.
and wonders to be done by the hands of the Apostles. The salvation the Gospel
proposes, first began to be spoken of by the Lord, and was consirmed unto the
first Christians by them that heard him, i. e. By the Apostles; but lest their
Testimony should be Heb. 2* 3, 4.
suspected, God did bear them witn^ss with signs and wonders, and with diverse
Miracles. Hereby then it is manifest, not only that their Doctrine was true,
but also that the Wisdom of Providence did design the Miracles of the Apostles
to the confirmation of it: and so doubtless did they themselves, for their
Embassy to the Jews and Gentiles, being somewhat like that of Moses unto
Pharaoh, viz. unlikely to be believed among them, they found it expedient to
have some Letters of Credence from the King of Heaven, and hereupon they prayed
God to stretch forth his hand to heal: and to grant, that signs and wonders
might be done by the Name of Act. 4. 29. 30.
his holy child Jesus; and this they desired to the end that with all boldness
they might speak his word; and having obtained their request by the grant of
signs and wonders to be done by their hands, They ct. A14. 3*
speak boldly in the Lord. Neither the malice of the unbelieving Jews, nor the
ill affected minds of the seduced Gentiles could deterr them from speaking
Boldly the truth, as it is in Jesus: it seems, then the Testimony of God, to
that word by the Miracles of their Works was the Ground of their confidence in
preaching the Gospel: but this it could never have been without their
intendment thereof to the confirmation of their Doctrine: for without this they
could neither pretend, nor indeed believe their Miracles were the Testimony of
God to the word of his Grace: how could they look on them as such, unless that
they also themselves did use and intend them to this end? Manifest therefore I
take it to be, that they wrought them on purpose to confirm their Doctrine, or
demonstrate their Mission from God to teach it: and much Reason there was for
their doing them to this end. For,

2. Miracles were always looked on as indisputable, or demonstrative Proofs of
Divine Power, or Authority in them that did them. To deny this is little less
than to charge God foolishly: for He endued Moses, with power of doing
Miracles, to the End that the Israelites might believe that the Exodus 4. 5.
Lord God of their Fathers had appeared unto him: a charge also he had to do
all his wonders before V. 21.
Pharaoh: and although his heart was hardened, yet being done in the siglit of
the people, they believed and bowed their heads and worshipped: and V* 30, 31.
after them it seems, the Magicians were almost of the same persuasion, for
they said unto Pharaoh, this is the finger of God: by this their grant of
Exodus 8. 19.
the Premises, they drew on themselves a necessity of confessing the
conclusion: for if the Miracles of Moses were done by the finger of God, then
had God appeared unto him, or sent him. Thus almost in the Morning of the
world, we find both the Children of Israel, and the Wisest of the Egyptians,
confessing the force of Miracles to induce belief: and that not as a probable
argument, but Demonstrative, such as rather Commands Assent than Begs it: for
when Elijah sojourned with the Widow of Zarephath, by his raising her Son to
life She knew that He was a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in his
mouth was Truth. And 1 Kings 17. 24.
when the Prophets of Jericho, saw that Elisha divided the waters of Jordan
with Elijahs Mantle, they said, the Spirit of Eiljah does rest on Elisha;
hereof it seems they were thereby so convinced, as that though they themselves
were Prophets, (partakers in some measure of the same Spirit,) yet they met him
and bowed themselves to the ground 2 K 2. 1^
before him, as to the Father of the Prophets and the chief of Their Order: and
not only they (who had their Education in the Schools of the Prophets, and
therefore perhaps are thought Apt to have ascribed somewhat too much to Their
Miracles;) but also Naaman a Syrian, an Alien from the Commonwealth of Israel,
being (at the appointment of the same Prophet,) Miraculously Cured of His
Leprosy, was so convinced of the 2 Kings 5. 15.
True God, as that He returned to the man of God: and said, Behold, now I know
that there is no God in all the earth, but in Israel: His mind was cleansed
from the grosness of Idolatry, as w^ll as his Body from the Loathsomness of his
Leprosy. But to draw our Discourse a little nearer the business in hand, we
may observe in the New Testament, that among the Jews, many that Adhered not to
Christ, did yet believe that He came from God, when they saw His Miracles: Thus
when He was in Jerusalem at the Passover, many believed in his Name, Joh. 2.
23.
when the saw the miracles which he did. These many believers, surely, were not
Disciples, for V. 24, 25.
Jesus did not commit Himself unto them, or entrust Himself with Them, as well
affected to him, because, He knew all men and what was in them. He searched
their hearts and dived into the hidden secrets of their Souls, and by so doing
He found, that though these men's Understandings were convinced by His Miracles,
yet their Wills were not subdued to His Doctrine: and after them many of Joh.
7. 31.
the people believed on him, and said, When Christ comes, will be do more
Miracles than these which this man has done? To them it seemed Improbable,
that when their expected Messiah should come, he either would or could do more,
or greater Miracles than our Jesus did: considering therefore his Works and his
saying, they peremptorily concluded that of a truth this is the Prophet, viz.
Foretold V* 4^.
by Moses, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. And believed by them to be different from the Messiah:
but other^ said, this is the Christ: but when the Pharisees heard that the V.
41.
people murmured such things concerning him, they and the Chief Priests sent
Officers to take him: But the V. 32.
Officers being ast^nished at his Doctrine, returned without him, whereupon
they Expostulate with them, and in a Scornful manner asked him, have any of the
Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? V. 48.
and presuming that none had, they haughtily censure the People who know not,
or professedly Study not the Law, as if these poor Sergeants were a
Demonstration that they are Curs^d. But this V. 49.
their Pride and confidence were mounted upon Ignorance, for Nicodemus a man of
the Phar^s^es, and a Ruler as well as themselves; He though fearful of giving
Offense and incurring the Censures of the Sanhedrim, yet for his farther
satisfaction went to Jesus by Night, and said unto him, Joh. 3. 2.
Rabbi, we know that thou art a Teacher come from God: for no man can do these
miracles which thou do, except God be with him. Although he was not fully
persuaded that J^^us was the Messiah, or that Prophet whom they expected to
come before him, yet faith he, we know, we do not conjecture, but it is evident
and certain to us, that thou art a Teacher come from God: hereof he was
c^nvinced by the Miracles he did: they in his esteem were arguments so
Demonstrative and necessary* as vanquished all objections and made that his
conclusion but a just Trophe of their victory. So that not only the common
people or the vulgar Rabble that knew not the Law, but also the most Wise and
Learned among them did account Miracles, undeniable arguments of Divine
Authority in them that did them. On this Score it was, that the Man who was
born Blind urged his miraculous Cure with great evidence of Truth before the
Pharisees, to whom he declares that this Miracle had such an Influence upon
him, as that he thought Joh. 9. 17.
Him that did it a Prophet; but they not willing to think so too, would not
believe that He had ever V. 18.
been Blind, whereupon they call his Parents and ask Them three Questions, viz.
1. Whether that were their Son? 2. Whether he was born Blind? 3. Whether They
knew how this pretended Cure V. 19.
was wrought, or by Whom? To the two First they answered directly, We know that
this is our V. 20.
Son, and that he was born blind: But for an answer to the Third, they referred
them to him; Who V. 21, 22, 23.
being again called in, was by the Pharisees Instructed to give God the praise:
and not to look on Him that did it with any Veneration, or to think him a
Prophet as he had said he did: No, say they, V. 24.
far be that from Thee, for we know that this man is a sinner, i. e. (Surely,
as they would have it) an Impostor: for afterward they Institute a comparison
V. 29.
between Him and Moses: as for this Latter, They say, We know that God spoke
unto him, but as for this Fellow, we know not from whence he is: of any
Commission he has from God, as Moses had, we know nothing. Hereat the man
marvails, as well he might, for it was a common Principle known and allowed
among them, that Vid. Maim. de fund. Leg. ca. 7. 5. 12.
if a man had the requisites to a Propheti^k Spirit, and did a Miracle to show
that God had sent him, then it was the command of God, that men should hear and
believe him, and good Reason too, for (says he,) we know; i. e. You and I
agree in t his persw^sion, that God hears not sinners, viz. Such Impes^ors
asi m^ortune Heaven to Seal their Lies with Miracles, but He whose prayers of
that Nature he hears, is a Worshipper of God and does V. 31.
his Will: he is on ethat is no Idolater, but a Faithful Servant of God, that
comes to do his Will: if not, then must it be granted, that God Works Miracles
to assist Impostors: but what Wretch so Profligate as not to abhor such a
Position? since then since the World began, it was never heard, that any Man
opened the Eyes of onethat was born Blind, it must be concluded that This Man
who has opened mine, is of God, Sent and Empowered by Him, o*herwise h^ could
do nothing of this Nature. This V. 32. 33.
conclusion being clearly deduced from their Own approved Principles, they had
nothing to object against it, as appears by their base supplying the defect* of
their Reason, and Impotent opinion, by the Scorns of Insolence and Rage of
Malice, for they answered and said, thou wast altogether born in sins, and V.
34.
do Thou teach us? and they cast him out. A clear sign of a baffled prejudice
and a strong (though stifled Conviction, that Miracles were a Demonstration of
Divine Power and Commission. And had not the Gentiles been of the same opinion
Antiquity had been extremely Senseless and Sottish, in feigning Miracles* (as I
am told it often did) in some Men's arrival at Crowns and Scepters, that thence
they might seem preserved from Danger, and advanced to the Royal Dignity, not
by chance and Alex. ab Alex. Genesis Dier. lib. ^. cap. 31.
fortune, but by the Majesty and care of the Gods. If men among the Gentiles
as well as Jews, had not then generally looked on Miracles as Demonstrations of
Divine Authority, the Authors of these Fictions must have been thought Brutes
in the shape of Men, rather than partakers of a Reasonable Nature* Nor could
Vespasi^n have obtained the accession of Authority and Majesty (as Suetonius
says, he did) by his Miraculous Cures, Lib. 8.. 7.
(or rather the Fiction of them) at Alexandria. Thus then we see that all men
every where, Jews and Egyptians, Greeks and Romans and all other Gentiles, yea,
that God himself esteemed Miracles undeniable or Demonstrative Proofs of Divine
Authority in them by whom, or for whose sake they were done. All therefore that
now Remains, will be to show.

3. The Reasons for which the miracles of Christ and His Apostles deserve (as
well, yea, better than any,) to be accounted: and that this they do, will be
made apparent by a brief Survey of their Nature and their Number, their
Greatness and their Goodness.

A Miracle (as to its general Nature) is defined H^bbes Leviathan, pa. 3. ca.
37.
(by a Mod^rn Author,) to be a Work of God besides his operation by the way of
Nature ordained in the Creation. This perhaps may pass without exception, but
then it must be understood with Aquinas his distinction, that to the being of a
Miracle it is not sufficient that something be done beside the Order of Nature,
in some one particular: for if so it were, then the production of Mules and
Monsters, yea, the very casting of a Stone upwards would be a Miracle; because
each of these Things in some one particular is besides the Order of Nature,
yet, is it ridiculous to say, that it is Miraculous* the Schoolman therefore
^^. Q. 110. Ar. 4.
concludes, that a Miracle is besides the Order of the whole Created Nature,
and consequently above it. Now that the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles
were such Works, is so apparent; as that there is ^o need of recourse to Gods
Lieutenant (as the Leviathan directs) to know the Truth of it: for this was so
far from being a doubtful Case, as that by their ejection of Devils it was
evident to every man's Reason. The Power of the Air is by all owned to be as
great, if not Superior to all other Power in Nature, yet they by their Power of
doing Miracles cast out the Prince of that Power. Who then but the obstinate
(for whose Cure God himself affords no Remedy,) can doubt, whither their Power
were the Power of God? If the Prince of the Power of the Air, be (as Aquinas
probably conjectures) the Supreme of all the Angels 1a. Q. 63. Ar. 7.
that ever God Created, it is manifest his Power is inferior to none in the
whole Order of the created Nature; however for ought I know, it ever was, and
still is so accounted among all Jews and Christians, except those (if there be
any) that deny his being; and as for the Heathens, it is Apparent that they
thought it Divine, and inferior to none, yet, (as we have already abundantly
proved) it was over matched and conquered by the Power of Christ and his
Apostles: what baslled and self condemned Wretches then must those needs be,
who will not own it to be the Power of God, beside the Order of the whole
Created Nature? and if so, then were their Miracles the Seals of Heaven to
Ratify their Mission from then^, and so to prove that they were Prophets.

Their number also as well as their Nature speaks them Worthy to be so
accounted: for doubtless it did far exce^d that of those Wrought by Moses and
the Prophets. The Jews no doubt for the honor of Moses their Master, and of
their own approved Prophets, were so Zealous, as that they would rather enlarge
than diminish the Number of their Miracles, yet, after their utmost diligences,
they could find but 76. for Moses their Master, and but 74 for all the Rest of
the Prophets: and the Records they find so many in are not only unknown to us,
but also liable to suspicion of Falsehood: for we cannot think them their Bible,
because the Number therein contained, after the greatest improvement that we
can make will fall very short of that Account that they give of it: but suppose
it does not, what are they to those of Christ and his Apostles? could an exact
account be taken of All that they did, I dare say, the Number of those wrought
by Christ only, would be found greater than that of Moses and all the Prophets
put together. For they were so many as that the Jews themselves (as we have
already observed,) made Joh. 7. 31.
it a question, whether Christ (the Messiah) When he comes, would do more
miracles than these which this man has done? Nothing but amazement at their
extraordinary Multitude could Raise such a question among them: Which
Facilitates belief of St. John's assertion, there are also many other things,
which Jesus did; (besides those Recorded Joh. 21. 25.
in the New Testament,) the which is they should be written every one, I
suppose that even the World it self could not contain the Books which should be
written. His supposition is an Hyperbole, the plain meaning whereof I take to
be, that those Works of Christ, whose memory, the Apostle in this His History
had committed to Writing, were to be looked on as a small part of what Jesus
did, as that if a full account of them all should be exactly taken and
described in Writing, the World would be over-stock't and oppressed with Books
on that Subject. If then to the Miracles of Christ, we add those of His
Apostles, we shall find Reason to conclude them almost innumerable, for since
their Sound went into all the Earth, and They themselves into almost all the
known Parts of the World, Converting men by their Miracles to their Doctrine,
how can it be Imagined that they were but few in Number? The Devil being then
in possession, Ruled without control in the Children of Disobedience, and the
World was Then asleep, yea, dead in Trespasses and sins; and think ye that a
few Miracles would suffice to Cast out the one, and to awake and raise the
other? it is much more Rational to think that they were many, yea, so exceeding
many as to admit of no Comparison with those of others in point of Number: and
all these being done in one Generation; (for Christ and his Apostles were
Contemporaries) how strongly do they prove, and how clearly do they Declare the
Divine Authority of Them that did Them? If Judaisine were Credible, because in
the space of above 3000 years Moses and the Prophets wrought 150 Miracles to
confirm it, how much more Credible is Christianity, because fewer Persons in
the space of less than an hundred years, wrought incomparably more to
Demonstrate the Truth of it? If the Jews had Reason to believe that They were
Prophets, much more have we, that Christ and his Apostles were so well as they.
Especially considering,

That the Greatness of their Miracles does as justly claim our Assent
thereunto, as their Number. It is true indeed all Miracles being Works of God,
besides the whole Order of the Created Nature, in respect of His Power they are
all equal: yet, in respect of the Power of Nature one may be greater, because
remoter from it, or farther above it than another: for (as Aquinas well
observes) these Works of God, viz. Miracles, may Three ways exceed the Power of
Nature; either First in respect of the substance of the Fact, when it is above
the Power of Nature by any means to do that which is done, as that the Sun
should go back, or that a Man's Body should be Glorified: these are Things that
Nature cannot do. Again secondly, other Miracles there are that exceed the
Power of Nature, not in respect of that which is done, but in respect of that
wherein it is so: as the Raising of the Dead and giving Sight unto the Blind,
Nature may be the Cause of Life, but not in one that is dead, and Nature may
give Sight* but not to one that was born Blind. Lastly, another sort of
Miracles there is which do indeed exceed the Power of Nature, but neither in
the substance of the Fact, nor in that werein it is done, but only ^a. Q. 105.
Ar. 8.
in the Manner of doing: as when one on a sudden by the Divine Power without
the use of Physic, or accustomed Process of Nature in such Cases, is Cured of
a Fever. Of these Three sorts of Miracles, the First is greater than the
Second, the Second than the Third, because it farther exceeds the Power of
Nature, yet, so as that each Sort have diverse Degrees of advance above it, so
that one Miracle may be greater than another, not only of another, but also of
the same sort. However, sure we are, that among the Miracles of our Blessed
Savior, it is no hard matter to find Instances of the First and Second, as
well as the Third Magnitude; witness His feeding the Multitudes in the
Wilderness, his Casting out of Devils, His raising the Dead and giving Sight
unto the Blind, etc. Insomuch that since the World began it was never heard
that any Man did the like: and this takes away all Color of Pretense for
Unbelief: for since the Jews had Reason to believe Moses their Master for his
Miracles, much more had they to believe Christ for His, because the Latter did
exceed the Former as much almost as they did Nature. It Is true iudeed had
Christ fallen short of Moses either in the Number, or the Quality of his
Miracles the Jews had not had sin, at most not so great as They had: but since
He did among them the Works which no other Man did; their unbelief could not be
Imputed to any want of Rational evidence of Truth in him, but to want of good
Will, to hatred in them: and so must it be in us* because the knowledge of his
Miracles is as Infallibly transmitted to us by Tradition, as it was to them by
their Senses: since therefore such were his Works and his promise to his
Disciples of doing the same, or greater, was Joh. 14. 12.
undoubtedly fulfilled in his Apostles, we have abundant more reason to believe
that He and they were Prophets, than the Jews had to think so of Moses and his
Successors. In which persuasion we may be yet, farther confirmed by considering

That the Goodness of their Miracles did bear a full proportion with their
Greatness. It Is true indeed they were not such as the Jews expected, nor was it
requisite that they should, for they being Sick of their Forefathers Disease,
(whose Low and uninstructed minds could rise no higher in their Conceptions of
the promised Messiah, than of a King exceeding all Mortals in the Majestic
Goodliness of his presence and Lovelyness of his Personage, in the Wisdom of
his Conduct and Victorious valor of his Battles, putting to flight the Armies
of the Aliens and Restoring the Kingdom and Glory to Israel;) They I say, being
Sick of this Disease, dreamed of, and looked for Signs from Heaven,
unprofitable Amazements, apt only to feed their Eyes and affect their Fancies
with Strange Shows and Pompous representations: but there being none such
Foretold by the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles were no way obliged so to
humor the Extravagance of their Fancies, as to fulfill their ungrounded
expectations. And although Christ and his Apostles had as high an esteem for
Moses, as could be kept within the bounds of Sobriety, and really did Him and
his Law more honor than the most zealous Jews themselves, yet did they not
take his Miracles for Patterns of theirs: for we find no such affrighting and
hurtful things, as Serpents* Rivers of Blood, or Plagues among them; but
Christ being surety, and his Apostles Witnesses of a better Testament, their
Miracles were (as it was fit they should be) of a more Benign and better
Nature. The Son of Man came not to destroy men's Lives, but to save them, and
his Gospel brought glad Tidings of great Joy that should be to all Nations. How
Suitable then and Decent was it, that the Seals and Confirmations of it should
bear the Impressions, not of Wrath and Judgment, but of Mercy and Goodness? and
accordingly so we find did their Miracles; for they were like a Flock of Sheep,
whereof there was none Barren among them, but rather every one did bear Twins,
viz. Instruction or assurance of Salvation for the Souls of Men, and
Inestimable good and great benefit to their Bodies; for very easy it is to
discern, that the Three sorts of good things, viz. of Fortune, Body and Soul,
which all Mankind by the light of Nature perceived requisite to Happiness, were
conferred by our Saviors Miracles.

The Goods of Fortune, being not desirable in themselves, but only in Order to
those of the Body or the Soul, we do not indeed find that Christ ever made the
needy exceeding Rich in Worldly Wealth and Grandeur, yet, his own and others
necessities he sometimes supplied by his Miracles: Such was the Nobleness and
Generosity of his Temper, as that though he had no visible Estate, nor any
Employment to get one, yet He never was so burdensome as to ask a Gratitude
from any to whom He had been a Benefactor by his Miracles, but His necessities
he supplied by doing others: Thus when Tribute was demanded, he sent St. Peter
a Fishing, and made him so lucky an Angler* as that he Caught a Fish with Money
in its Mouth, sufficient to pay the Pole-Tax, both for his Master and Himself:
this showed his Goodness as well as Loyalty, for though this Money was sent to
Rome with the rest, yet was there not a Penny the less Injury, no Man was the
poorer, and Caesar was somewhat the Richer for him But the benefit of this
Miracle was far Inferior to that of others; for we read that many Thousands of
the people followed him into the Wilderness, where they sometimes Fasted so long
as that they were ready to Faint, in this their necessitous condition (although
Jesus very well knew that the greater part of them had no sincere affection to
him, yet) He had compassion on them, and Fed at one time about Five Thousand,
at another Four, besides Women and Children; and Feed them he did, not barely
to the support of Nature, but even to a Satiety; for the Remains of his
entertainment were far Greater than the Provision for them; Twelve Joh. 6. 13.
bask^ts full of fragments remained of five Barley Matt. 15. 37.
loaves, at one time, and seven of seven and a few small Fishes at another: and
since the broken Meat was not lost, it is most probable that many an hungry
B^lly besides was filled therewith; however Manifest it is, that these his
plentiful entertainments in the Wilderness did no way lessen, but rather
increase Provisions in Adjacent Towns and Villages. Nor did His bounty display
it self only in Cases of necessity, but also in matters of Delight and Decency,
for, to grace the Marriage at Cana in Galilee, He turned Water into Wine, and
that such as surpassed what ever they had had before, in Goodness. Thus did He
(in great mercy and compassion, kindness and urbanity) furnish many Thousands
with the Goods of fortune, and that without the least injury, yea, with
advantage to others: this was a sort of Bounty that far exceeds the
Magnificence of the greatest Princes.

And yet this is but a small part of the goodness in the Miracles of Christ and
his Apostles, for the good they thereby did to men's Bodies was far more
exceeding: they Cast out Devils and cleansed Lepers, they made the Deaf to hear
and the Blind to see, the Dumb to speak and the Lame to walk, they Cured the
Sick and Raised the Dead: and what good so great as these to the Body? what
benefit could the torn and distorted Bodies of the possessed receive greater,
than the ejection of their Tormentors? what so acceptable to poor Lepers as the
cleansing of their loathsome and perhaps loathed Bodies? what so gladsome to
the Deaf as Hearing, or so joyful to the Blind as Sight? what so proper for the
Lame as Strength, or for the Dumb as Speech? and what so beneficial to the Sick
as Health, or to the Dead as Life? could each one of These afflicted have made
his own Option, it is great odds, but He would have Chosen what they thereby
gave him. How transcendent then was the goodness of these Miracles? how
beneficial to their Bodies, and obliging to ingenuous Spirits? and that not of
them only on whom they were wrought, but of all their Friends, yea, of all in
the like Condition throughout the Vicinage: for they being no Select company,
but a Promiscuous Multitude of Foes as well as Friends, on whom it pleased
Christ and his Apostles to do these Miracles, it was thereby made known unto
all, that all Men every where that were so, or otherwise afflicted in Body,
might be relieved, if either they themselves or others in their behalf would
have made their due Addresses. How Admirable then and Divine were these
Miracles? they did not only do good to the Bodies of many Thousands, but
proclaimed it to all that needed or desired it: what a lively resemblance
therefore were they of God, whose mercy is over all his Works?

Nor was the goodness of these Miracles, confined to Men's Bodies, for doubtless
their Souls were thereby instructed, not only to make a better Use than
formerly they had done of Gods Mercies, but also in and by whom to seek for
Salvation: for thereby they might clearly perceive, that He who did them or in
whose Name they were done, being a Teacher must needs be come from God, and so
had the Words of Eternal life abiding with him: to whom then should they go but
to Him for it? But if they were so slow of understanding as not to get this
good to their Souls, by the Miracles wrought upon their Bodi^s, yet doubtless
there were some that did. The (...) in the Catalogue of Miracles, which our
Savior Matt. 11. 5.
returned in Answer to St. John Baptists question, were doubtless such poor as
took the Stamp and received the impression of the Gospel, and were thereby as
really wrought upon, transformed and altered in their Souls, as the Blind or
the Lame, the Deaf or the Dead werein their Bodies. The Verb (...), some, it
seems have here rendered Actively, as if the meaning of our Saviors Words Vid.
Syn. Crit.
were, that the poor,) Viz. his Apostles) Preach the Gospel: but this is so far
from a Miracle, as that it seems a Lesson too trivial for so great a Master as
our Savior so Solemnly to Teach, or so great a Scholar as St. John, so
Solemnly to Learn, as it is here proposed: here therefore (as well as else
where) it is to be taken passively: and observable it is that Verbs passive
often import a Real passion or true Change in the Person, or thing spoken of,
as well as one merely Grammatical: thus (...) Tit. 3. 11.
is one that not only is persuaded, but also effectually wrought upon and
corrupted by Gal. 6. 1.
Seducers: and thus (...), to be tempted and Mat. 11. 6.
(...) to be offended, signify not barely to have a Temptation o^ a Scandal
cast before one, but to be wrought upon by the Temptation, and to be really
discouraged in the ways of Godliness by the Scandal: thus here the Verb (...)
to be Evangelized, is not barely to have the Gosp^l Preached to the Poor, but
moreover to be Really Wrought upon, Transformed and Changed by the Preaching of
it: their Understandings were Englightned by the Gospel, and their Hearts
subdued unto it; their Natures were renewed* and their whole Souls, or all
their Faculties changed for the better by it: and in them that our Savior
makes mention of, this Ch^nge seems to have been made almost as sudd^nly and
conspicuously as that in Readiness heart after his Unction to be King over Israel:
as when Jesus walking 1 Samuel 10. 9.
by the Sea of Galilce called Peter and Andrew, James and John, and immediately
upon His call they forsook their Ships and their Nets, their Father Matt. ^^
and All and followed Him: what a strange and wonderful Change was there on a
Sudden wrought in them? how else was it possible, that by a Word or two
speaking* they should be prevailed with to quit their worldly Interests.
Relations and Callings, to follow a private Person, whom it is likely they had
not seen, perhaps never so much as heard of before? they therefore undoubtedly
were Evangelized on a sudden, and so I conceive were the poor our Savior
speaks of in His Answer to St. John's Question: and if so they were, then well
may this be Ranked among Miracles, for indeed it is the greatest in all the
Catalogue: If not in regard of its Advance above the Power of Nature, yet of
its Goodness to the Souls of them on whom 'twas done: for before it, they seem
if not to have been oppressed with the insupportable burdens of a Wounded
Spirit, yet to have walked in some Darkness as to their greatest, i. e. Their
Eternal concerns: and to such benighted Souls, what so good as Light? to such
lost wanderers, what so welcome as a Guide? for such dejected broken hearts,
what so proper as Comfort? to wounded troubled Spirits, what so gracious as
Refreshment? and what Light is there so clear as that of the Sun of
Righteousness? what Guide so sufficient as that of Christ his Precepts and
Example? what Comfort so great as that of his Promises? and what Refreshment so
reviving as that of his Spirit? and these Goods of the Soul (being Adapted to
and sufficient for its faculties, as large and capacious as they are,) ought in
all Reason to be preferred as far before the Goods of the Body, as that exceeds
them. If then the poor were Evangelized by our Saviors Miracles, they thereby
received the greatest good whereof in this life they were capable.

However, though perhaps we have not Evidence enough to be confident, that the
poor our Savior speaks of were suddenly and Miraculously Evangelized, yet this
we are, or may be sufficiently assured of, Namely, that the Ultimate End and
Scope of all His and his Apostles Miracles was, that They and We should be so:
and since so it was, they certainly* wereas good and gracious to Men's Souls in
their Tend^ncy, as they were to their Bodies in the Performance: the Reason
hereof is, because (as has already been in part, and may hereafter more fully
be Demon^^rated,) Christianity affords such supplies for the Wants and objects
for the Faculties of our Souls, as are not to be found in any one or in all
other Religions whatever. Now to the end that our Wants might be supplied
thereby, and our Souls possessed thereof, Christ and his Apostles have
abundantly confirmed it unto us by their Miracles: How great then is their
goodness! nothing but the incapaci^y of the Subject hinders it from bearing a
full proportion with the Power that did them* For it extends it self to all Men
every where throughout all generations. Those that did or do live in the
remotest Regions, and that in these Latter Ages may have heard of Christ and
his Miracles: and the Design ^f them being *confirming his Doctrine) to convey
the most excellent Religion into their Souls, it is their fault if they do not
receive benefit by them. The Miracles of Christ and his Apostles are so
sufficiently attested, as that were it not for Prejudice or Laziness,
Inadvertence or one such Vice or other, I verily think there neither is nor
ever was any considering Man in the World, but either he was or might thereby
have been c^nvinced of the Truth of their Doctrine: and so blessed by the
excellencies of their Religion, as that his mind should no longer be blinded
with Superstition, or Fluctuate in Uncertainties, but should know assuredly
where to have the most perfecting Objects of all His faculties. How great then
I say, is the goodness of these Miracl^s, that confirm such a ^reasure unto us?
how plainly does it show their descent from the Essential and Eternal Goodness,
viz. God Himself? For who but an Almighty Goodness can be Author of such
Productions? Such unparalleled Instances of Love and Kindness, such inimitable
Beneficence, so Immense and immixt a Goodness from whom can it come but from
God, who is Love and Goodness it self? In mine apprehension therefore the
Goodness of these Miracles show as plainly that they were the Works of God in
Testimony to His Word, as the Image and Superscription on the Money did that
the Coin was Cesars.

Let Us then Lay all these things together, viz* That Christ and his Apo^^les
did take upon them the Office of Prophets, and that having the Antecedents to,
or Concomitant Attendents on the Prophetic Spirit, they therein neither were
deceived, nor had a design to deceive others; and by their Predictions exactly
accomplished it appears, that they had such certain Foreknowledge, as no Man,
by any Art or Science whatever, could possibly have of Gods Eternal Purpose
concerning future Contingences. And besides this Supernatural knowledge, to
confirm their Doctrine or Demonstrate their Mission from God to Teach it, they
wrought such Miracles, as in the Truth and Reallity of their Nature, and the
incomparableness of their Number, greatness and goodness did most Evid^ntly and
Eminently appear to be the Works of God; and consequently Christ and his
Apostles who did them, (being Teachers of such an excellent Wisdom as the World
knew not before) were therein inspired by God, and so Prophets.

CHAP. VI. Some Use that may be made of this Doctrine.
THUS have we passed through the several parts of the proposed M^thod, and in
so doing have, I hope, found the Truth of our Assertion sufficiently evinced;
And if so it be, then thence surely we may see the Divine Authority of
Christian Religion, and of the Holy Scripture; the insufficiency of Humane
Reason, and the Reasonableness of Christian Faith, Hope and Practice.

Sect. 1.
1. The Divine Authority of Christian Religion. It is not of so base and low an
Extraction as to spring from an Opinion of Ghosts, or ignorance of Leviathan,
pa. 1. c. 12.
second Causes, Devotion toward what Men fear, or the mistake of things Casual
for Prognostics: but it is an Heaven-born thing; it descends from the Father
of Lights; it derives its Pedigree from God Himself, and has the Image not
only of his Wisdom and Goodness, but likewise of his Dominion and Lordship
instampt upon it* in so much that it brings its own Obligation along with it,
and makes it not only convenient, but n^cessary, not only Prudence in us, but
Duty to receive it, for Christ and his Apostles being Prophets did not only
Teach it by Gods commandment and direrection, Idem ibid.
but also in so doing they laid the highest Obligation that can be, on all to
receive it. God we know is the Supreme Lord; the Fountain of all just Authority
is in Him: as therefore Wat^rs drink sweetest out of a Fountain, so those Laws
that come (as the word of prophecy does) immedi^tly from God, have the highest
Majesty and Authority Instampt upon them. For this Cause the Jews when they
were Assured of any man's Calling to the Prophetic Office, thought Themselves
obliged and bound to obey him in all things except Idola^ry, yea though he
required the omission of the Affirmative, or the doing of the Negative Precepts
of their Law. Notwithstanding their mighty zeal for their Law, and the profound
Reverence they had for Moses their Master, yet they Judged it their
indispensable Duty in all things to obey the Prophets: and whosoever would not,
they held Worthy and Guilty of Death, by the immediate hand of Heaven. This is
the opinion of their Wise men in the Talmud, where they say, in all things
(except Idolatry) if a Prophet Maimon. in ^ed. Z^r.
say unto thee, transgress the Law, thou shall obey him: and good Reason too*
for a Prophet being Leviathan, cap. 36.
Gods spokes-man to the people, his Herald to Proclaim his Laws, there is good
Reason he should be heard and attended to, whosoever else be neglected* the
Reason is, because the word of Prophecy coming immediately from God, is
clothed with his Authority; and if where the word of a King is, there be
Power* much more methinks is there, where the Word of Him is, by whom Kings
Reign: had not this been the dictate of Natural Reason Numa Pompilius and other
ancient Lawgivers among the Heathens, had been very Foolish as well as False in
pretending to have received their Laws from the gods: but Men's Natural Reason
telling them, that the Highest Authority of Man is far inferior to that of God,
this Politic pretense was thought a very effectual Engine to make Men obedient
to their Laws: and this Engine we see was to stand upon the ground, That God,
above all, is to be obeyed: Since then Christ and his Apostles were Prophets,
those are no good subjects unto God, yea, they are worse than Jews or Heathens,
that deny the Religion that they have Taught us to have Power of binding us to
receive it.

Obj.
Yet the Leviathan, would have it, in and of it self to have none; for it faith
expressly, the Prece^ts Repent; be Baptized; keep the Commandments; believe the
Gospel; come unto Me, Sell all that Thou have, give it to the Poor and follow
Me; are not Commands, but Invitations and Callings of M^n to Christianity; like
that of Esaias, Ho, every man Isai. 55. 1
that thirsts, come ye to the waters, come, and Part. 3. cap. 42.
buy Wine, and Milk without money.

Ans.
The difference between Precepts and Commands, (especially in point of
Obligation,) I am hardly so subtle as to understand. I have Read indeed that
the Jews put a difference between Laws, Statutes and Judgments, but hardly ever
that either they, o^ the Gentiles found any between Precepts and Commands: but
this is a matter too trivial to be debated; whether therefore it be a profound
pi^ce of Subtilty or a Contradiction* I shall not now take upon Me to
determine: but letting it pass as a Specimen of that Extraordinary Wit, which
the Treatise of Hum^ne Reason observes in that Author, we shall enquire why he
^aith so? viz. Why he ^aith that the Precepts of the Gospel, or its callings of
Men to Christianity, have not the Obligations of Commands in them? his Reasons
are two:

1. Because the Apostles Power was no other than that of Our Savior, to invite
men to embrace the Kingdom of God, which they themselves acknowledged for a
Kingdom (not present, but) to come, and Ibid.
They that have no Kingdom, can make no Laws.

It is very true, They that have no Kingdom, Ans*
can make no Laws, yet since, (as the same Page tells us,) God is the Sovereign
of all the World, they that have no Kingdom may Proclaim his Laws: and this was
the Office of the Apostles, as Prophets, or men Inspired by God and sent to
Preach the Gospel. Their calling of M^n to Christianity derived not its
Authority Originally from them, but from God that sent them; and send them he
did, not barely to invite Men unto it, but also in His Name to Command them to
receive it: for now A^^. 17. 30.
God Comm^^deth all Men every where to repent: and this is his Commandment,
that we should believe on 1 Jo^. 3. ^3.
the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. Under these two heads of Repentance toward
God, and of Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, St. Paul comprehends all
Invitations that can be to Christianity: and since they both are thus plainly
and Emphatically Act. 20. 21.
commanded, it is a strange over^ight, or worse, to say, the Prec^pts of the
Gospel are no Commands. And yet more strange and worse than so it is to say.

2. We read not any where, that they who received Obj. 2.
not the Doctrine of Christ, did therein sin; but that they died in their sins;
that is, that their sins against the Laws to which they owed obedience, were
not pardoned. And therefore of Infidels, St. John ^aith not, the wr^th of God
shall come upon them, Job. 3. 3^.
but the wrath of God remains upon them; and not that they shall be
condemned; but that they are condemned. Nor can it be conceived, that the
benefit of Faith, is Remission of sins, unless we conceive Jo^. 3. 18.
withal, that the damage of In^idelity, is the Retention of the same sins.

Ans.
But do we not read, that when Christ sent forth His Disciples by two and two,
He gave them Order that in whatever House or City, they were not received and
heard, they should shake off the dust under their feet, for a ^estimony against
them; and withal Mark. 6. 11.
assuring them, that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom, and G^m^r^^a in the
day of Judgment, than for that city? And do we not read of Jerusalem, whose
Houses were le^t desolate, because the Inhabitants would not be gathered unto
Him? and do Matt. 23. 37, 38.
we not read that This is the cond^mnation, that light is come into the world,
and men love Darkness, rather than light? and do we not read that he who
believes Jo^. 3. 19. Mark. 16. 16.
not shall be Damned? and do we not read, that the Lord Jesus, shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in fl^ming fire, taking vengeance
on them that know not God and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ? and
do we not read 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8.
of the Comforter, who was to come and reprove the world of sin, because they
believe not Jo^. 16. 8. 9.
on him? It is well known that if we turn to our Bibles, we may read all these
things*therein: how strange then is it and horrid to say we read not any where
that they who received not the Doctrine of Christ did therein sin? Is that no
Sin which will make Eternal Judgment more severe and intolerable to otherwise
the best of Cities, than to Sodom and Gomorr^a? is that no Sin for which God
destroyed Jerusalem, and cast off the ^eed of Abraham his Friend, and the
Children of Jacob his chosen? Is that no Sin, for which above all things the
World is condemned? Is that no Sin, for which Men shall be damned? Is that no
Sin, for which they shall suffer the vengeance of Eternal fire? Is that no Sin,
for which the Holy Ghost reproves the World of Sin? Who so blind in his
apprehension or so perverse in his judgment as to think it is not? even he that
writ it, I verily think, did it with but at best a trembling Assent unto it.
His Allegations of Scripture and Reason to prove it, are so impertinent and
insufficient, as that they rather conclude the contrary. For what though St.
John speaks in the present Tense, and faith not, the Wrath of God shall come,
but that it abides upon him that believes not, and that he is condemned
already? Does it thence follow that Infidelity is no sin? who would not rather
thence conclude that it is, yea, and that so great an one, as that the
Unbeliever shall as certainly be punished for it, as if Gods Wrath were
actually Inflicted, or Eternal Condemnation had actually passed upon him? this
Construction of the Evangelists words, is certainly far more probable than the
other, because He there assigns the Reason of the Unbelievers Condemnation,
which is not because he had sinned against the Laws of Nature, and the Civil
Laws of State, but, because he has not believed in the Name of the Jo^. 3. 18.
only begotten Son of God. Since then this is the moving Cause, or Reason of
his Condemnation, it is here evident that this is his sin. Nor does the Reason
that the Leviathan alleges to the contrary, enforce any other conclusion: for
it cannot be conceived that the Retention of sin is the damage of Infidelity,
unless we conceive withal that Infidelity does displease God, nor can we
conceive it to displease Him, unless withal we conceive it to be a Sin. And
indeed when we well consider it, we cannot possibly methinks conceive it to be
any other: for very evident it is, that Christ Crucified, is either a Rock of
Offense or Foolishness unto it; it sets at naught the Counsel of God in
contriving, and despises the Riches of His Grace in effecting the Redemption
of the World by Him; it counts the Blood of the Covenant an Unholy, or Trivial
thing, not worth minding; and does despite unto, or at least resists the Spirit
of Grace; it makes God a Lier, and all the Witnesses to Christianity it
impudently charge with Falsehood; in short, it frustrates the whole Gospel,
and breaks the Commandment of God, and therefore it is a great sin. Nor indeed
can it possibly be otherwise, because it is a Notorious transgression of the
Gospel, and the Gospel is a Law, Namely, the Law of the Spirit of Life, and the
perfect Law of Liberty: Romans 8. 2. James 1. 25.
Nor can it be thought that these Apostles do improperly style the Gospel a
Law: for a Law being little or nothing else, but an Ordinance and Preception
Promulgated for the common Good by Him that has the Care of the Community, it
is very easy to discern that the Gospel has in it the Nature of a Law, because
all the parts of its Definition Aquin. 1. 2. Q: 90. Art. 4.
are very agreeable thereto* it concerns Me at present to take Notice only of
its Obligation: and this is so inseparable from a Law, as that it receives its
Name therefrom: and indeed the most Essential difference of a Law from Advice
or Counsel consists in Obligation: for the Latter does only direct Lex a
ligando.
to the doing of what is thought fit to be done; but the Former does moreover
oblige and bind them to whom it is given to the doing of it: thus also does the
Gospel (and that very severely) to them to whom it is Preached; for the Author
and Finisher of our Faith in it, viz. Christ Jesus our Lord is He of whom Moses
said unto the Fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of
your brethren, like unto me, Him shall you ^ear in all things whatsoever He
shall say unto you: and it shall come to pass that every Soul which will not
^ear Act. 3. 22, 23.
that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people. We ought therefore to
give the more earnest heed to the things that we have heard, l^^t at any time
^e should let them slip: for if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and
every transgression and d^sobedience received a just recompense of reward, How
shall H^^. 2. 1, 2, 3.
we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? Obliged then (it seems) we are by
the Gospel, much more severely than the Jews were by the Law: because the
Gospel first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them
that heard him; God also bearing them witness both with signs and V. 3, 4.
wonders, and with diverse Miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to
his own. So that this its Obligation is primarily derived, not from the Laws of
Civil Sovereigns in favor of it, but from the Lords speaking it; its Authority
therefore is Divine.

Sect. 2.
So also is that of the Holy Scriptures. That those Books of the New Testament,
which bear the Apostles Names did drop from their pens, we have as great
assurance as any can be given of a matter of that Nature. Affirmative
Demonstration that Homer wrote the Poems, Plato or A^istotle, Cicero or
Plutarch the Books that are Extant under their Names, is impossible:
uncontrolled Tradition is all the Proof, whereof this matter is capable: and
this we have in behalf of those Books that bear the Apostles Names, as fully as
of any other whatsoever. The Skeptical Heretics in Tertulli^ns time, who it
seems made a Question of it, he therefore thus bespeaks. Go to now thou that
would exercise thy Curiosity in matters of thy Salvation, betake thy self to
the Apostolic Churches, where thou may find the very Chairs of the
Apostles, yet abiding in their proper places, wherein also their very
Authentic Epistles, as it were Sounding each ones voice, and representing his
face are still recited. If Achaia be nighest thee, thou have Corinth; if
Macedonia be not Praescrip. ad ver. Haeret. cap. 36.
far from the, thou have the Philippian and Thessalonians. If thou can go
into Asia, there thou have Ephesus. But if thou art near Italy, thou have Rome.
From these and other Apo^^olical Churches, Copies of the Apostles writings were
undoubtedly dispersed among the Primitive Christians, who received and
delivered them as theirs: and this their Tradition has run throughout all Ages
down to ours, and that without any contradiction: for those that either in the
Primitive or Latter times have thought fit to oppose Christianity, yet did it
not under the pretense that these Books were Spurious; neither ^ews nor
Heathens, ever had the confidence to make that objection, but rather they have
yielded their suffrages to the Testimony of the Church, that they were written
by the Apostles. it is true indeed, that some few particular and private
persons have both of late and heretofore, either out of their Error rejected,
or out of their Curiosity (more than befitted them) debated, the Canonical
Authority of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Hebrews, the Epistle of St. James,
the second Epistle of St. Peter, the second and third of St. John, the Epistle
of St. Jude, and the Apocalypse, beside some other lesser parts of the Gospel;
yet can it never be showed, that any entire Church, nor that any National or
Provincial Council, nor that any multitude of men in their Confessions or
Catechisms, or other such public writings have rejected them, or made any
doubt at all Vid. Bishop Cousin Scholastic. Hist. cap. 1. 5, 9.
of them; so that the Scruples that some few have raised about them, should no
more weaken the Credit of such an universal Tradition, than the Opinion of
Atheists overthrows the Faith of all the World besides: for very evident it is,
that such Conjectures are at best but Negative probabilities against the
Affirmative deposition of all the Christian World beside; and forasmuch as
Negatives (especially in such competition) prove n^thing, were they embraced by
Ten Thousand times more than they are or ever were, they would not amount to a
Proof against (and therefore ^ught not in Reason to derogate from the
Credibility of) the Churches Tradition, that they were written by those
Apostles: concerning these therefore and those other Books of the New
Testament, which bear the Names of Apostles, we have no Reason to doubt: and
that they wrote them in prosecution of their Apostolic Office, the Books
themselves declare. And for this cause, since the Apo^^les were Prophets,
concerning them it must be concluded, that they are given by inspiration of
God; and if these be so, then so also are the Books of the Old Testament,
because they are therein said expressly 2 Timothy 3. 16. 2 Pet. 1. 19.
to be so: and impossible it is for Scripture given by Divine Inspiration to
testify a Falsehood: and indeed, had not the Scriptures of the Old Testament
been so expressly called the word of Prophecy, and said to have been given by
Inspiration of God, as we find they are in the New; yet, because the Apos^les
in their writings found their Disputations upon them, and prove their Doctrines
by them, as the word and Truth of God, from whence there lies no Appeal; it
would be very Evident that they ascribed Divine Authority to them: and this
their Testimony (being given by the Spirit of Prophecy) is beyond the reach of
a Doubt about the Truth of it.

All the doubt therefore that can be raised, will be about those Books of the
New Testament which the Apostles themselves did not write, viz. the Gospels of
St. Mark, and St. Luke, together with His History of their Acts: But for the
removal hereof from all besides Scepticks, it may methinks suffice, that these
Books also had the approbation of the Apos^les. For the Gospels of these
Evangelists do not only agree with the other two; but they themselves (after
the death and Resurrection of our Blessed Savior,) conversed with and adhered
to the Apostles; and forasmuch as they were eminent Fellow Laborers with the
Apostles, it is not to be doubted but they received the Holy Ghost, (perhaps at
the day of Pent^cost) as well as others. After which time we know that the
Apostles dispersed themselves into their respective Provinces: and certain it
is (by all Antiquity) that St. Mark did accompany St. Peter, and St. Luke St.
Paul, in almost all his Travels: it is therefore very unlikely that these
Evangelists should write without their knowledge and approbation: especially
considering that Tertullian faith, S. Marks Gospel may be affirmed to be St.
Peter's, and St. Lukes the Apostolical Churches are wont to Ascribe Adv.
Martion. l. 4. c. 5
unto St. Paul: insomuch that St. Hierom, it seems affirms, that this is the
Gospel which St. Romans 2. 16.
Paul calls His. What shadow of Probability had Vid. Baron. ad An. Christi 58.
there been in these assertions, if these Evangelists had not had (at least)
the Approbation of these Apostles in their Writings? and Approved (it seems)
they were by St. John as well as them: for Eusebius (reporting the Tradition of
the Church) informs us, that when the Writings of these Evangelists were come
unto him, He approved of them, and gave them His testimony to their truth: only
^e d^sired that in these Writings there ^ad been an account given of those
things which Christ did when He first began to Preach. And that that is said is
true: for it may be disc^rned, that these thr^^ Evangelists, viz. St. Matthew,
St. Mark and St. Luke, have committed to writing only th^se things which our
Savior did (in the space of a year) after the imprisonment and Capti^ity of
St. John the Baptist. They say theref^re that St. John the Apostle bath
delivered in his Gospel Hist^r. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 24.
the things which our Savior did in that space of time which the former
Evangelists ^ad pass^d over in silence, the time (namely) before the
Imprisonment of the Baptist. An Observation not unworthy of our Notice; but at
present we have no use for any part of it, but only the beginning, viz. That
St. John the Apostle did not only approve of, but added his Authority to the
Gospels of St. Mark and St. Luke, which testimony of Eusebius, or rather of the
Church by him, is so much the more Credible, because Justin Martyr in many
places of his Works, calls these (as well as the other Gospels) (...) the
Commemorations Apol. 2. and Dial. cum Tryph. ^ap^uscule.
or Narrations of the Apo^^les: but this they could not be, unless (as
Tertullian faith) the Evangelical instrument ^ad for its Auth^rs the Apostles,
on whom the Lord imposed the Office of Promulgating the Gospel: or if
Apostolical men had any hand in it, yet not alone, but with the Apostles and
after the Apostles; because the Preaching of the Disciples might be suspected
of vain Glory, if it had not ^ad the Authority of the Masters, yea of Christ
Adv. Mar. lib. 4. ca. 2.
who made the Apostles Masters, to assist it. And having the assistance of
their Authority* it is very evident, that since they were Prophets* the Truth
and Authority of these Writings mu^^ needs be Divine; Hom. in prooem. Lucae.
the Authors of them wrote (as Origin faith,) by Inspiration: and so clear has
this argument heretofore been thought by its own light, as that among the Jews
it was a Rule, That of whomsoever a Prophet bears witness that he is a Proph^t,
Maimon. de fund. Leg. c. 10. sect. 9.
he shall be received as a Prophet, neither shall there any farther Trial be
made of him. Since then the Apostles were Prophets, and did either write or
approve of, and Authorize all the Books of the New Testament, wherein also they
give Testimony to those of the Old, that they are the Word of God; we ought to
acquiesce, and ceasing from making a doubt of it, should conclude, that the
Authority of the whole Bible is Divine. Obj. 1.


But it is Manifest, (faith the Leviathan,) that none can know the Scriptures
are Gods Word, (though all true Christians believe it,) but those Part. 3. cap.
33.
to whom God Himself ^ath revealed it Supernaturally.

An^.
It is Manifest, yes, that it is; very good: But I pray what makes it so? why
the sole Authority of the Leviathan. And let me tell you, you will never be fit
to be his Disciple, unless he has Power enough over you to make you think so:
for he is ^o Auth^ntick a Teacher, as that he often suggetts such Principles as
this upon his bare Word; and this you must take, although perhaps you have good
Reason to the contrary. If you are so ill Natured as to deny him this little
Postulatum, you spoil all, and leave no hope that ever you will be of his
Opinion. For an Instance of this you need not seek far, there is one before
you. For what is knowledge but a firm, certain and evident Assent to the Truth
of a Proposition? and our assent to that under debate, viz. That the Holy
Scriptures are the word of God, seems to have all these degrees of perfection
in it: for it is firm, because without Hesitation and doubting: it is certain,
because Built upon such sure and solid Foundations as cannot be made unable to
bear it: and it is evident, because it is evidently and plainly deduced from
the next and immediate cause of any Scriptures being the Word of God, Namely,
the Spirit of Prophecy. But whether or no (according to the strict and rigorous
definitions of Philosophers) it be Knowledge properly so called, it is not
material to enquire, because it is not necessary that so it should be: for as
in all Arts and Sciences, firm Assent to first Principles (by what means soever
it be attained,) is sufficient for Learners, so here: the chief design of Holy
Scripture being to Teach us knowledge of things Supernatural, and our Assent to
the Divinity of its Authority, being one of the first premises requisite to our
attainment of that Knowledge* it had need only to be firm* because firmness of
Assent thereunto is of it self sufficient to make us learn, believe and obey
the Scripture as the Word of God: as is evident by the example of all those
Pious and Good men, who although illiterate, do yet take heed thereunto, as to
the Rule that God has given them both of their Faith and Practice: this they
do, although they can give no other Reason why they think the Scriptures to be
so, than because they are generally received as such, and Vogued to be the Word
of God: these Men it is confessed do not know, but only believe that they are
so, yet their Faith being steadfast, i. e. their Assent firm, they (we see) do
Learn, Believe and Obey them as the Word of God.

Obj. 2*
But this is more than they need to do; for He to whom God has not
Supernaturally revealed that they are his, nor that those that published them
were sent by Him, is not obliged to obey them, by any Authority, but His, whose
commands have already the force of Laws; that is to say, by any other Authority
than that of the Common Wealth, residing in Ibid.
the Sovereign, who only has the Legislative Power.

The Postulatum before mentioned, was obtrud^d upon us because it was big with
this Monster; Ans*
which the Leviathan has Midwif'd into the World with its unhallowed Mouth
against Heaven, absolving (as much as in that lies) all Men living from
Obedience to the Word of their Maker unless the Common wealth requires it. This
puts me in mind of the Roman Senates Decree, and Tertullians irrision of it,
that unless God please Man, he shall not be God: so here, Man must be merciful
unto Apol. ca. 5.
God or else there shall be no Power in His Word: for those Books only are
Canonical, that is, Law in every Nation, which are established for such by the
Sovereign Authority. It is true that God is the Sovereign of all Sovereigns*
and therefore, when He speaks of any Subject, He ought to be obeyed, whatsoever
any earthly Potentate commanded to the contrary. But the question is not of
Obedience to God, but of when and what God has said; which to Subjects that
have no supernatural Revelation* cannot be known, but by that Natural Reason,
which guided them for the obtaining of Peace and Justice, to obey the Authority
of their several Common Wealths, Cap. ^od.
that is to say, of their Lawful Soverei^^s. It seems then by Natural Reason it
may be known that the Scriptures are the Word of God: but that a thing which
none can know but those to whom God has revealed it supernaturally, may yet be
known by natural Reason, is so gross a contradiction as may perhaps puzzle his
extraordinary Wit to reconcile. But whether it do or no, it is no matter: it
suffices me that since bot^ parts of it are the Spawn of the Leviathan, he
has granted, that it may be known by Natural Reason: but by what means I pray
does Natural Reason attain to this knowledge? by its guidance of Men to
obedience to the Authority of their several Commonwealths, i. e. of their
Lawful Sovereigns. And how does Natural Reason know what Books those are which
Lawful Sovereigns have commanded to be acknowledged for Canonical? how I say,
does Natural Reason know this, but by the Promulgation of their Laws? and what
is Promulgation, but a Proclamation or public Attestation or Testimony that
they are the Sovereigns Laws? and hereupon we know that Subjects yield their
Assent that they are so: but Assent that is built upon Testimony, is Faith, not
knowledge; yet upon this the King requires Obedience, and all good Subjects
think themselves bound to ob^y: Faith therefore obliges to obedience as well
as Knowledge: if not, then evident it is that the Leviathan robs the King of
his Scepter, as well as Gods Word of Authority: and i^ so, I cannot but recover
some hope, that one time or other, this writing of his, may fall i^to the hands
of a Sovereign, who will consider it him self, and by the exercise of entire
Sover^ignty, in protec^ing the public, not teaching, but burning of it,
convert it into Ashes. But if Faith, i. e. Assent unto Testimony I eviathan* p.
2. ca. ^1.
do oblige un^o Obedience in reference to the King, why not also in reference
to God Almighty? If there be no reason (as surely there is none) why it should
not, then supposing we do not know, but only believe the Scriptures are Gods
Word, yet we are thereby obliged to obey them.

Obj. 3.
All that the Leviathan has farther to say against it, is, that if it be not
the Legislative Authority of the Commonwealth, that gives them the force of
Laws, it must be some other Authority derived from God, either private or
public: if private, it obliges only him, to whom in particular God has been
pleased to reveal it. I^ public, it is the Authority Pa. 3 c. 33.
of the Commonwealth, or of the Church.

Ans.
But suppose we should d^ny his Dil^mma, and say it is not the Authority either
of the Commonwealth or of the Church, but of God himself immediately sending
his Ministers and Messengers, his Heralds, viz. the Apostles to proclaim his
Gracious Law: and if they gave Evidence (as we have abundantly proved that they
did) of this their immediate Mission from Him, then are these his Laws so
sufficiently publish^d, as that no Man can excuse himself by saying* he knew
not or could not know, they were his: and sin^e they are so sufficiently
published, (according to the Leviathans own conc^ssion,) they a e Laws t^ Ib^d.
them to whom they are so: and thus we see they are without the Authority
eit^er of the Church, or Commonwealth to make them so: and therefore their
Authority is Divine.

Sect. 3.
But leaving him a while and his dangerous Positions. Let Us look a little into
the Treatise of humane Reason; wherein we find Pelagianisme in a Disguise, or
Free will in Maskerade: for, one of the Errors of Pelagius was, Quod satis ad
propriam possit confer salutem
Arbitra libertas, etiamsi Gratia desit.


Vid. Voss. Hist. Pelag. lib. 3. p. 2. Th^s. 1.
That a Man's own Free Will even without Grace is sufficient for his Salvation.
And so says this Treatise is humane Reason: for it informs us that a long and
serious Debate about the choice of a Guide to Happiness, could bring the Author
thereof no other but his own Reason: which (says he,) if it take such
Directions as it ought, and may do before it sets forth, and pursue those
Directions with care and constancy, though it may possibly lead me into Error,
yet will bring me at last even through them to the purposed end of my Journey,
which is Page 2.
Happiness: and letting us know that this is no peculiar excellency of his
Reason. The next Page tells us; this is the only North Star which God has given
us for the right Steering of our Course. And afterward, it says, that every
Man's particular Reason, if well followed, i. e. With Constancy, Dilig^nce and
Sobriety, will Infallibly carry him at Page 28.
last (though perhaps, through many tedious and troublesome Wanderings) to his
Eternal Happiness. This is there aff^^med of Reason in contradistinction to
wh^^soever other Guide you pitch on, whether it be the Scriptures, Spirit,
Church past or present, or any thing else imaginable. It is therefore somewhat
more than probable, that our Reason (in some kind of opposition to Revelation)
is that which that Treatise would have us take for our Infallible Guide to
Happiness: But if this be our Guide, whence is it that it may, and ought to
take Directions before it sets forth? What? a Guide and take Directions? This
is such a Solecisme as evacuates all pretense to the ability of a Guide, and
speaks it a Stranger in the way, or at least not well acquainted with it. Since
then Reason may and ought to take Directions before it sets forth, it is but a
Traveller, (not a Guide, unless it be a Blind one) in the way to Happiness. And
indeed, if it were not so, what need had Men of any other? And if no need of
another, to what End were Christ and his Apostles Prophets? Whence was it that
through the tender Mercy of our Luke 1. 78, 79.
God, the Dayspring from on High has visited us, to give light to them that
sit in darkness, and to Guide our Feet into the way of peace? if Men could have
seen this way by the Light of humane Reason, what Necessity was there that the
Dayspring from on High should visit them on purpose to Guide their Feet into
it? But since so it did, we must either charge God foolishly and set his tender
Mercy at naught, or else we must confess, that Reason alone could not find it.
And unreasonable methinks it is, that any Man (much more a Christian) should be
shie of making this Confession. For, what an astonishment to Reason is it, that
a Person of the ever Blessed and Glorious Trinity should in a sort lessen
Himself, and lay aside his Glory, leave his Heaven and come down to Earth, take
upon Him our Nature, together with the Infirmities and Servile condition of it,
and herein should take incomparable pains in Preaching good Tidings to the
meek, and should send his Apostles by enducing them with Power from on High to
do the like to all Nations, and to confirm their Word with signs following, and
all this on little or no Necessity! This is such a Kindness as no Romance ever
fancved! But since the measures of Friendship are usually taken not only from
the good things it bestows but also from the need we have of them, it is
altogether unlikely, that infinite Wisdom would be so lavish of its Favors to
little or no purpose. Into which absurdity (if not Blasphemy) we cannot avoid
falling, if we think our own Reason sufficient (as this Treatise says it is)
to carry us at last infall^bly to Eternal Happiness: if this be true, what need
is there of Revelation? What can that do more? it cannot surely carry us to
Heaven before we come at the last here on Earth; nor can the certainty of its
doing it then be greater than Infallibility: but all this we had before by our
own Reason; wherein then are we or can we be beholden to Rev^lation? thus
manifestly does this Opinion evacuate the necessity of Revelation, and derogate
extremely from the Mercy and Goodness of God in Blessing the World with
knowledge of his Gospel. It imputes the folly of a needless Labor to the Son
of God, and vilisies the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, that enabled his Apostles to
Preach it to all Nations: it sets at naught the Labors of Men in the Word and
Doctrine, and puffs up Sciolists with such a conceit of their own Reason, as
makes them swell and burstinto contempt of all supernatural Knowledge: it opens
a door to Divisions, and le^s in the Wind of any false Doctrine that conceited
Opinionists shall think reasonable. Piety therefore and the love of Peace
prompt us to abhor it: and indeed Reason it self cannot choose but speak against
and condemn it.

For it must confess, that Life and Immortality, viz* Eternal Happiness, is
brought to light through the Gospel: without the Revelation thereof thereby
Reason can but surmise and conjecture at it. Contemplating the Works of
Creation, it finds that all Creatures (besides what they are in themselves)
receive ^xternally some perfection from other things; for there is not a
Creature in the World but may be what it is not: hence it is, that there is a
kind of appetite or desire in all things, whereby they incline to somewhat,
which they are not, that when they have attained it, they may be perfecter than
they are without it. This inclination shows it self in no Creature more than
Man, who being capable of, propends unto a perfection beyond all that in this
life is attainable: hence indeed Reason concludes, that there is a state of
Eternal Happiness provided for humane Nature: but this its conclusion leaves
the Mind altogether in the dark as to the nature of its beatifick Object. The
Objects provided for the satisfaction of other Creatures, Reason (by the
information of the Senses for the most part) perceives: but what there is
provided for its own, it cannot conceive; somewhat it seeks, but what that
is, it directly knows not: but being verily persuaded that God has made
nothing in vain, and perceiving that all seize in this world will not
satisfy the appetites of our reasonable Nature, it concludes there is
something else provided for i^* that exceeds all things else that it knows of,
in goodness, but what that is, it cannot tell. Now from this its ignorance of
the End, arises so thick a cloud of darkness about the Means conducing to it,
as that it knows not what to do, or which way to go to attain it. All that it
can possibly direct us to do, is to work: but when it well considers the
happiness it seeks for, it can give no account of its being attainable by our
works: for it being something beyond or above the power of Nature ordained in
the Creation, it cannot be the natural effect or product of our Works: to
imagine this, is to think our works effectual beyond their proper strength and
power; yea it is to make God inferior in power unto men; it gives them the rule
over him, and supposes them able to attain to happiness whether he will give
it them or no, and so (without a Metaphor) to take the Kingdom of Heav^n by
force, and to commit a Rape upon the Almighty: but this is so gross an
absurdity* as that every man's par^icular Reason abhors it: the supr^me
perfection of our Nature, if any way attainable by our works, must therefore be
the reward of them: but then Reason perceives, that a Reward is twofold, viz.
either of debt or of gift: the former is such as is due to the Receiver upon
the account of something, that he (of his own accord, without any obligation on
him) has done, which in justice or equity is worthy of it. But who so void of
Reason, as (after a just and impartial examination of his works) to think them
worthy of Eternal Life: humane Reason surely is not so silly as to think that
they are so meritorious and beneficial unto God, as to deserve it at his hands.
A Reward therefore Reason cannot conclude it to be of Debt, but of Gift: and
this is such as may become due to the Receiver, but not for the merit or by
virtue of his Works, but by the undeserved Promise of the Giver. But without
Revelation, where will Humane Reason find a Promise of Eternal Happiness to Man
in his present fallen Condition? The Fall of Man is so discernable by the light
of Nature, as that scarce any sort of Philosophers was wholly ignorant of it;
but the Pythagoreans were more especially troubled about it. There was a time
(says Porphyrius) when we were intellectual, purged from the dreggs of Sense
and Irrationality, and so we still are, in respect of our Essence; but now by
reason of our inability perpetually to converse with Intellectual and Eternal
Objec^s, and through our proneness to those of Sense, we have wrapped and folded
our selves up in them: for the Soul not remaining in its primitive intellectual
state, all its powers being actuated by the Senses of the body, are so hurt and
maimed, as that like ground not well manured, they bring forth Tares instead of
Corn, although good seed be thrown into them: and all this comes to pass
through the Soul's improbitie, which though it does not corrupt the Essence of
it, yet it fetters it to that which is fading, and draggs it down from its
first and proper state to another far inferior. Hereby it is evident, that the
de Abstin. lib. 1. ^. 30.
Light of Nature discovers our fallen condition: Herein I say, where can Reason
(without Revelation) find a promise of eternal happiness made unto us? The vast
Volumes of the Creation do not afford it, the Book of Nature does not contain
it. Where then will it look for it, or can it possibly find it? Here then this
supposed Infallible Guide is at a stand, it cannot carry us one step farther,
it is at such a loss, as that it cannot tell us what to do, or which way to go,
that we may g^t within the compass of a Promise of Salvation, without which we
walk in darkness and at all adventures, and so our wanderings are like to be
very tedious and troublesome indeed.

Object.
But what if they be? the matter is not much: for, those who commit themselves
to the guidance of their own Understandings, if they do commit themselves
wholly to it, are as safe on the left hand as on the right; as secure of
happiness in their Errors, as others are, who Treat. of Hum. Reason. p. 65.
are otherwise guided, even in the Truth which they happen to fall into.

Behold h^re the power of Reason! how broad it makes the way to Heaven, and how
wide its gate! it throws it open, and takes it on every side! no matter with
what it approach^th it; Error as well as Truth (if it be the dictate of our own
understanding) will let us into it. What scrupulous Coxcombs then are those who
ask with the trembling Jaylour, Sirs, What must we do to be saved? Can they not
wholly commit themselves to their own Understandings, and then they would be
saved right or wrong. What though we be Turks, Jews, Heathens, or Atheists, in
our persuasion, it is no matter; if we therein wholly commit our selves to the
guidance of our own Understandings, we are as secure of happiness in our
Errors, as others are who are guided, even in the Ibid.
Truths which they happen to fall into. For there is no danger of perishing but
from Disobedience, without which every man may often err, the Commandment of
God being not to find out truth (especially every particular one) but to
Endeavor the finding it: He commands no more but to search, and ye shall find,
says be, not every particular Truth, for experience teaches us that cannot be
the interpretation: but whether you find or no the Truth which you search for,
you shall find the Page 66.
Reward of searching, which is Happiness. So that if your Understanding search,
and you do commit your selves wholly to the guidance o^ it, there is no danger
of perishing from disobedience to the Laws even of God himself, much less from
Error. Well, little did we think what an amulet we carry about with us, and
little did we know, (till this Treatise told us) that such is the force and
virtue of our Understanding, as that, if it does what it may, the most venomous
error cannot hurt us; if it does but search, we shall be sure to find the
reward of searching, which is Happiness.

This indeed is a very comfortable Speculation; but it falls out somewhat
unluckily, that He who acquainted us with it (as it is to be feared) spoke
without-book: for the Promise is not made to searching, but to seeking; i. e.
to Prayer and Devotion, Matt. 7. 7.
not to Study and Enquiry after Truth in Opinion. It does therefore give us no
reason to think, either that Happiness is the reward of such searching, or that
we shall ever find it thereby; no, though we commit our selves wholly to the
guidance of our Understanding therein: for if on those Terms men may attain to
Salvation, I cannot understand that St. Paul the Apostle was e're a whit
securer of happiness, than Saul the Persecutor: for he verily thought with
himself that he ought Act. 26. 9.
to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus. This was the guidance of his
Understanding: and he wholly committed himself to it, for even then he lived in
all good Conscience. Why then was Act. 23. 1.
not he as safe on the left hand, as on the right? i. e. while a Pesecutor, as
when an eminent Believer. If he were, why does he magnify the Mercy 1 Timothy 1.
13, etc.
of God in his Conversion? If he were not, what reason have we to believe the
now controverted and grand Assertion in this Treatise? That therefore
notwithstanding, we conclude, That since Christ and his Apostles were Prophets,
it is unreasonable to think our own Reason a sufficient Guide to Eternal
Happiness.

Sect. 4.
Hence also it follows, That it is very reasonable for us to believe whatsoever
Christ and his Apostles have undoubtedly taught us. The reason of the
consequence most manifestly is, because they 2 P^t. 1. 21.
were Prophets, and being Prophets they spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost; and forasmuch as God cannot lie, the truth of their doctrine must needs
be beyond all question. For such is the certainty of the Word of Prophecy as
that St. Peter prefers it before the voice, which he himself heard V. 19.
from Heaven when he was with Jesus in the holy Mount. But can any thing be
more sure than such a Voice? No, not in it self considered absolutely, but unto
us. God is Truth, and in him there is no Possibility of lying, or Shadow of
falsehood: all things therefore that come from him must needs be equally sure
and certain, infallible and true in themselves: yet for all that, one thing may
have greater evidence of its descent, and more apparent credentials of its
Mission from him than another has. As for example, St. John the Baptist and
our Blessed Savior were both sent from God, but both did not give equal
evidence of their Mission from him. St. John did no Miracle but our Savior
Joh. 5. 36.
wrought many, and the Works that he did, did bear witness of him, that the
Father sent him. And as it is in Persons, so may it be in several ways of
Revelation: and so I conceive it is in those that now lie before us, a Voice
from Heaven, and a Word of Prophecy: The Question is not which is most true,
considered as in it self, for so there can be no comparison between them: but
which of the two is most sure as to us, i. e. which of them gives us the
fairest Credentials of its coming from God? St. Peter decides the question; the
Word of Prophecy: And for this his decision, he had the authority of the Jews,
among whom it seems that in those days it was, and perhaps still is a received
Opinion, That the Bath Kol, filia vocis (such as St. Peter speaks of) was
inferior to the very lowest degree of Prophecy; not in its truth as in it self
considered, but in motives of credibility to others: hereof Maimonides
insinuates this reason, viz. because it Mor. Nevoch. p. 2. c^p. 42.
may happen to such as are not prepared for Prophecy, there were (as we have
showed) diverse qualifications antecedently or concomitantly necessary to fit
men for the Spirit of Prophecy: and these qualifications (as we have also seen)
took away all cause of suspicion, that the Prophets either were deceived, or
had a design to deceive others in their Prophecies: And besides that, either by
Predictions or Miracles) they gave such evidence of a Prophetic spirit, as
could possibly come from none but God: and therefore in Motives of credibility,
a Word of Prophecy does far exceed a Voice from Heaven; because (for ought we
know) the Prince of the power of the Air may deceive us with something like it;
or the pretended hearers of it were, it may be, themselves deceived, or had a
design to deceive others. Since then Christ and his Apostles (as we have
largely proved) were a sort of Prophets, that most eminently had all the
qualifications requisite to the spirit of Prophecy, and both by Predictions and
Miracles gave the clearest evidence, that ever the World had of it we have the
highest reason (whereof a Revelation is capable) most firmly to believe the
doctrine that they have taught us.

What though the mystery of Godliness be (as without controversy it is) very
great, yet the Theists of our Age have no reason on that account to disbelieve
it: for though, pe^haps, it is reasonable to expect that our Religion should
befriend our Reason, yet not so far as to make it the Rule and measure of
Divine Revelation; the reason is, because the divine Intellect is infinite, and
ours finite: although therefore without an experiment or other demons^ration,
there seems to be no obligation on us firmly to ass^nt to any thing in
Philosophy, yet are we not permitted to be such Virtuos^ in Religion. The
reason is, because things (in themselves incapable of a demonstration) are
revealed with a command to beli^ve; and we ought not to make them a r^mor^ to
our Belief: for as after all our Searches into Nature, and greatest Discoveries
of things therein, we are forced to confess there may be more in her dark
bosom than we can discover, and we on that account have no reason to deny the
Being of Nature: so also in things revealed, if after all our hardest study we
cannot comprehend them, we thereupon have no reason to deny the Being of them,
because God who has made, may also reveal things that pass our Understanding:
if therefore there be evidence sufficient to convince the Understanding (as in
the case now before us there is) that the Revelation came from God, there is no
reason (on the account of its mysteries) to reject it.

And indeed, the mysteries of Christianity are so far from giving just occasion
of Unbelief, as that they are apt to strengthen our Faith in it: for the Gospel
teaching us to glorify God in 1 Cor. 6. 20.
our Spirits as well as Bodies; it is very reasonable and convenient, that it
should require us to honor Him by the Submission of our Understandings to
indemonstrab^e Revelations, as well as by the Obedience of our Hearts and Lives
unto his Laws: and therefore as it is fitting for us to obey the divine Law,
though our Wills reluct never so much against it, so also is it for us to
believe whatever God has revealed, though^ never so improbable, to our
Understandings: for unless we do so, we shall undoubtedly fall short of our
Duty, which in this Case without dispute is to tread in the steps of our Father
Abraham, who gave Glory to God by being so strong in Faith, as to believe that
That was impossible in Nature, and therefore incredible unto Reason. If we will
believe no more than what we can demonstrate to be true, our Assent is not
Faith, but Science; for it is not built upon the Foundation of Gods Testimony*
but on Demonstrations from the Nature of the things testified, and so it
honors not God at all; because it receives not the Truth for His sake, but Him
for the Truths sake; and so it pays no respect to his Word, but only to our own
Ratiocination. But forasmuch as the mind assents to Testimony as well as
Reason, and the divine Prerogative extends it self to the whole Man, that
Religion that becomes God and it is suitable to Man, must have something in it
to exercise this his innate Power about; and for this Cause, the Mysteries of
Christianity ought to be looked on as a Motive to believe, rather than to
reject it: for were there no Mysteries in it, we should have some Reason to
entertain a Temptation to think that it is not of God, because whatsoever else
we are assured there is, has something in it that exceeds the reach of our
Reason, yea and Conjecture too: for if we contemplate the Works of Creation,
things that we daily see and handle, which ^eem to lie level with our
Understandings, yet after our most accurate Researches into their nature, we
shall find, that the most piercing Judgment or profoundest Reason is not able
to solve all the Phenomenon, or attain to a perfect knowledge of them. And who
is there that observes well the Dispensations of divine Providence, but may
therein find such Riddles as his Reason cannot unfold? Such Mysteries as baffle
his Understanding and confound his Curiosity in his enquiring after the cause
of them. The Ends and Reasons of Gods proceedings with Men, although always
most Just and Righteous, yet very often are so secret and hidden, as that they
convince us, his Judgments are unsearchable and his ways past finding out. And
from the Works of Creation and Providence results a Natural Religion; the chief
Principle whereof we know is, That there is a Being Infinite in all
Perfections: this is the Dictate of Reason as well as Conscience; yet Reason
cannot f^thome the depth of it, for it has only a Negative conception of
Infinity, and whatever there is that it has no Conception of, does undoubtedly
surpass its reach and Comprehension: so that Natural Theology, as well as
revealed, has its Mysteries: if therefore Christianity had none, how unlike
would it be to all things else in the world that have God for their Author?
How just a prejudice would this be to the reception of it as divine Truth and
Revelation? Who would believe it to be of God, when he sees nothing that
surpasses Man in it? How decent then and useful are the Mysteries of
Christianity? Since they make it like to all things else of Gods making, they
beautify and adorn it with fairer Characters than otherwise it would have of
Gods Image on it: and the fairer the Characters of His Image are upon it, the
more Legible is his Truth in it: for infiniteness of Truth is inseparable from
right Reasons Idea of Deity: and where there is infiniteness of Truth, there is
no possibility of a Lie, Mistake or Deceit, and where these are excluded, there
is no room for Hesitance or doubting, but the strongest Reason imaginable to
believe. Since therefore our Chri^^ian Faith has the impression of Gods Image
on it, and the Word of Prophecy revealed it, it is most highly reasonable to
believe it.

Sect. 5.
And since such is the Reason that we have, most firmly to believe the Doctrine
that Christ and his Apostles have taught us, such also we have most steadfastly
to hope in the Promises that they have made us, for Hope being the expectation
and waiting of Faith, arises out of it and has it^ growth with it, although
the Object of Hope be some difficultly attainable future good thing, yet Faith
(receiving the promises of it) puts us upon expecting and waiting for it: if
therefore it be reasonable for us to believe the Promises of the Gospel, it is
also Reasonable for us to hope for the Accomplishment of them. The Hope of a
Christian is not like our Golden Dreams which vanish when we awake, but it is
such an expectation of good things not seen, as will endure the Test of the
severest Reason; for it is founded on the Promises of the Gospel: and these
Promises (made by the Spirit of Prophecy in Christ and his Apostles) are little
or nothing else, but Declarations of what God will do for the Good of Men; and
since they declare his purpose, they open to us a part of that external Law,
which he himself has set for himself to work by; they therefore are and must
needs be as immutable as that Law, and that Law is as immutable as God himself,
because it is his external Wisdom; and herein there can be no Variableness or
Shadow of turning, because 2 Timothy 2. 13.
his Understanding is infinite. On this account I suppose it is, that St. Paul
insinuates it as possible for God to deny Himself, as to fail of performing his
Promises: in them therefore we may have Hope without despair, and Confidence
without diffidence.

Obj.
But hereunto some perhaps suspend their Assent, because (as they think) their
Experience confutes the Christian Faith. The Apostle teaches us, that 1 Timothy
4. 8.
Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that ^ow
is, and of that which is to come. But we find that all things come alike to
all, there is no more care taken of the most Pious Christian, than of the
lewdest among men: we cannot therefore believe the Promis^s of the Gospel, or
think it safe to put our trust in them: if they deceive our expectation in
things that fall within the compass of our Experience, what Reason have we to
give credit, or to take heed unto them in those that do not?

An^.
If our expectations have been deceived, it is most rational as well as pious
to resolve the d^ceit (not into Gods Promises, but) into our own
Misunderstanding of them: but such usually is the peevish Worldly-mindedness of
those that are used to make such as this Objection, as that they take the dirt
of their own Ignorance and misapprehensions and throw it in the face of Gods
Promises: for very easy it is to observe, that this and all such like
Objections, are founded upon an Opinion, that Gods promises concerning the life
that now is, do import that those who perform the conditions of them, shall
enjoy such an uninterrupted Series of Worldly prosperity, as that they shall
not be afflicted like other Folk. But this certainly is a great mistake; for
Afflictions and troubles are so inseparably Annexed to Christian Piety, as that
if any Man will Mat. 16. 24. Luke 14. 27.
come after Christ, he must deny himself and take up his Cross and follow Him;
and unless he do so, he cannot be His Disciple: it seems, therefore that those
grim Duties of Self-denial and mature resolution of bearing the Cross, are so
essentially united to the other parts of Christianity, as there is no being a
Good Christian without them: impossible therefore it is that the promises of
the Gospel should be designed to evacuate the Necessity, or frustrate the Use
of these Essential parts of Christianity. And for this Cause it is most
probable, if not certain, that the importance of its Promises concerning things
Temporal is, that they who seek those that are Eternal, shall have no just
cause of such destracting Cares about the things of this World, as render them
unable acceptably to mind the concerns of the other. That this is the Design
and Scope of them, we have methinks a Demonstration in that grand Promise of
our Savior, that all these things shall Mat. 6. 33.
be added to them that seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness:
for being a part of his Sermon on the Mount (wherein he gives his Disciples an
abstract of Christian Philosophy) it is to be looked on as a Standard, whereby
we are to take the measures of other Promises of the like nature, in our
Interpretations of them: and if so, then the Design and in^endment of them all
must needs be, not to raise our Hopes to an expectation of Freedom from
Affliction, but to keep our Souls from sinking into Dispondence and distrust of
Gods Providence in providing for us: for this manifestly is the Scope of our
Saviors Promise now under Consideration, and that being as ample as any or all
the rest* and pronounced by our Lords own Mouth, when He was delivering the Sum
and substance of his practical Doctrine, may most justly be thought to show us
their importance. And if it be granted so to do, I dare Appeal to the
experience of good Christians, concerning the Truth of them; what though they
are sometimes reduced to such Straits and Difficulties, as a Natural Man can
see no way out of; yet, even then their Trust in the Promises does buoy up
their Hope, that they shall find away to escape: and I dare, I say, appeal to
their Experience, whether or no divine Providence (if on an Impartial Scrutiny
they cannot find, that they themselves have omitted the Conditions of the
Promises) have not so far fulfilled them, as to let them see, that God so cares
for them as in due time to do it. And if they cannot say, but that (though in
this Sea of troubles Gods Promises of Temporal Blessings do not keep them from
Storms, yet) they cast out such an Anchour o^ Hope unto them, as secures them
from being overwhelmed with Billows of Sorrow, or split upon the Rocks of
Desparation, it must be confessed that they sufficiently do the Work for which
they are intended: and if so they do, there certainly is no Reason to stagger
at the Promises of God through Unbelief, but much rather to give Him Glory by
being therein strong in Faith.

Especially considering moreover, that the greatest Inducements we have to
believe the Gospel, viz* the Miracles that were wrought to confirm it, do also
assure us of the Infallible Truth and Certainty of its Promises: for,
Blessedness we know is the Sum and substance of all that they can Import, or we
can hope to enjoy; and that this we shall have if we be not offended in Christ,
is his own Inference from his Miracles: and that the Premises will very well
bear the Conclusion, will be evident to any one who Impartially considers, that
the Miracles of Christ (or at least some of them) did as far exceed the power
of Nature, as the Donation of Blessedness or any thing else contained in the
Promises; by them therefore it appears, that all things requisite thereunto,
are in the Power of Him by whom, or in whose Name they were done: and the
Goodness of his Miracles declare Him as Willing as Able to bestow them on us:
and where both Power and Will do concur to make men Blessed, it is very
evident, there is no place left for Diff^^ence or room for Despair: Since then
the Miracles of Christ do Demonstrate both his Ability and Willingness to make
us Blessed, and all the Promises of the Gospel do empty themselves into
Blessedness, it thence follows, that on that account we may and in Reason we
ought to have st^ong confidence in the Promises.

But here perhaps some will say, no* because the performance Obj.
of them in Order to the acquisition of Blessedn^ss, includes a general
Resurrection from the Dead; which is impossible, because if some Men have not
been nourished by feeding on the Flesh of others, yet surely Fish eat Men, and
Men eat those Fish, so that That which formerly was the Flesh of one Man, is
frequently taken into the substance of another body: and because it cannot be
that the same numerical matter should constitute diverse bodies, it seems
impossible that these men should have a Resurrection.

Ans.
Be it so, that a general Resurrection seems incredible, yet ought not that to
prejudice our Hope any more than the Mysteries of Christianity do our Faith:
because that He who made and revealed things that pass our comprehension, may
propose the like to our Hope; and forasmuch as it is our duty to honor him by
the submission of our irascible faculties as well as rational, it ought not to
seem strange that so he should. But why should it be thought impossible for God
to raise the dead? If the Loadstone can so extract the filings of Steel out of
dust, as that nothing thereof shall be lost, why should it be thought
impossible for God to gather together and raise up every the least Particle of
each man's body, wheresoever hid or intermingled with others? and there is no
fear of a Contention at thee Rsurrection, among the Canibals or others for
their respective bodies; for it seems to me more than probable, that Infinite
Wisdom, Power and Justice will so order the matter a^, that humane flesh which
men have devoured De Civit. Dei. li* 22. cap. 20.
shall be (as St. Austine faith) restored unto them, in whom it first began to
be man's flesh: and they from whose Bodies the restitution is made, shall have
no cause to be troubled at it; for as the Imperf^ctions, or the defects of
strength and Nature in the bodies of Infants at their decease, shall (by the
Almighty Power and Wisdom) be supplied at the Resurrection, so may, and so I
believe shall theirs: N^r does this Supply make them cease any more to be the
same Bodies* than the cure of an old Ulcer in the Leg mak^s it cease to be the
same Leg; although in order thereunto the putrefied flesh be removed, that
sound may be restored. In all this there is nothing impossible; and since
Christianity does so clearly assert a future Resurrection, and we have so much
Reason to believe it, it is not only possible, but probable, that so it shall
be. However, since so it may be, there is no truth or force in the Objection to
make our Christian Hope unreasonable: but since it grasps at nothing that is
really impossible, and withal is so well founded on Promises, of whose Truth
and certainty we are so abundantly assured, it must be concluded to be very
rational.

Sect. 6*
Lastly, since it is thus reasonable to believe the Doctrine, and to hope in
the Promises of Christianity, it is also very reasonable for us to keep its
Commandments. Faith and Hope are so great Engines of Action, as that in Natural
and Civil affairs scarce any man omits doing of any thing, whereby he believes
and hopes to obtain some good, or to avoid some evil: and if in those Affairs
all the World think it reasonable for Faith and Hope to set us on doing, why is
it not so also in Religious? Since therefore in these affairs, we have (as we
have seen) very fair ground to plant these Engines on, it is very reasonable to
set them on work in keeping the Commandments. And not for this cause only* but
especially because Christ and his Apostles (who revealed them to us, and
imposed them on us) being Prophets, it is thence manifest, that they have no
less than divine Authority instampt upon them: and so indisputably evident and
transcendently great is this Authority, as that the whole Earth (Heathens and
Turks as well as Jews and Christians) acknowledge an obligation to obey it: and
since Gods Commands have so confessed an obligation in them, it is certainly a
part of the Synteresis or habit of pr^ctical Principles, wherewith Nature has
endued all men's Consciences, that God is to be obeyed. Since then, because
Christ and his Apostles were Prophets, the Precepts of that Religion that they
have taught us, must needs be the Commands of God, we are selfcondemned
Wretches, perhaps worse than Infidels, if we do not obey them.

But here (to demonstrate at once both the nature and the greatness of our
obligations to Obedience) it will not be amiss, (though it may seem a
Digression) to enquire, Whence our obligation to obey God does arise? If we
consult the Philosophical Rudiments concerning Government and Civil Society,
for an Answer to this Question, we shall there find it affirmed, that the
obligation of yielding God ob^dience, Chap. 15. Art. 7.
lies on men by reason of their weakness. If this shall seem hard to any man,
the Author in his Annotation, desires him with a silent thought to consider, if
there were two Omnipotents, whether were bound to obey. And well may it seem
hard, since it admits of no proof without the supposition of an Impossibility,
viz. that there may be two Omnipotents; which cannot be, because the one is, or
it is not able to destroy the other; if it be, then the other is not
Omnipotent, because it is not able to resist it; if it be not, then is it not
Omnipotent, because there is something which it cannot do; so that the Being of
two Omnipotents is impossible. Let a man therefore consider his arguing with
never so silent a thought, he shall find but little or no force in it. And
truly though our Savior admonishing Paul, (who at that time was an enemy to
the Church) that he should not kick against the pricks, seems to require
obedience from him for this cause, because he had not power enough to resist,
yet does it not thence follow, that his Weakness was the formal reason of his
obligation to yield Obedience: because there may be many motives to obey,
besides the basis and radix of our obligation so to do. In the advice of a
Friend there is no obligation at all, yet there may be great reason to take it;
and since the Command of a Superior, (much more of God) may equal it in
goodness, there certainly may be some reason to obey it, besides the Power it
has of obliging to Obedience: and this was Readiness case: his Duty undoubtedly
it was to desist from Persecution; to induce or persuade him hereunto, our
Blessed Savior told him, It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks, i. e.
thou will expose thy self to danger by persisting in thy way, therefore desist
from it.

But the Assertion now under consideration being a deduction from another
Position, sends us back to the fifth Article, where we find it affirmed, that
God has a Right to rule and to punish those who break his Laws, from his sole
irresistible Power: and that God Almighty derives his Right of Sovereignty from
the Power it self. To say that the Right of Sovereignty in the Sovereign of all
Sovereigns is derived, is certainly somewhat incongruous; but letting that
pass, it is plain, his meaning is, that God is our Sovereign Lord, because his
Power is irresistible; so that his Dominion arises from his Cap. 38. 4.
Power. For proof hereof he alleges a place or Cap. 42. 7.
two out of Job; but how much they are to the purpose, will best be seen by
abridging the Analysis of the Disputation between Job and his Friends,
occasioned by his afflictions. The Question discussed was, Whether the
right^ousness or unrighteousn^ss, the sincerity or hypocrisy of a person
pretending to serve God, may be judged of* by Gods outward Dispensations of
prosperity or adversity unto him? This Question is s^iffly affirmed by Eliphaz,
Bildad and Zophar the Opponents, and as vehemently denied by Job the
Respondent; and so they join Issue: in the management of this Dispute, although
Job was in the right, yet it must be confessed, that sometimes (being chafed
into Passion either by the sharpness of his Sufferings, ^or the bitterness of
his Opponents invectives) he spoke unadvisedly and rashly Cap. 13. 20. to 28.
and ^lsewhere. Verse. 22.
even of God himself: whom he daringly challenged either to call and he would
answer, or to let him speak and God should answer: h^reupon God having heard
both him and them, (for the vindication of his own Honor, and for the
satisfaction and humiliation of his servant Job) was pleased to answer him out
of the Whirlwind, and said, Cap. 38. 4. to cap. 40. 1.
Where wast thou when I laid the foundation of the Earth, etc. Hereupon Job was
so far convinced of the folly and evil, the irreverence and rashness of Cap.
40. 4.
his Challenge and expostulations with God; as that he confessed his own
vileness, and laid his hand upon his mouth: After this it pleased God to Cap
42. 6.
^nlarge his Answer so far, as that Job abhorred himself, and did r^pent in
dust and Ashes: the Lord then ceasing to speak any more unto Job, was pleased
directly to determine the Question disputed on between him and his Opponents:
This he did by saying unto ^^^phaz, My wrath is kindled against Cap. 42. 7.
thee, and ag^^nst ^hy two Friends; for ye have not spoken of me the thing that
is right, as my Servant Job bath. How these Texts do prove, that God has his
Right of Sovereignty from his sole irresistible Power, He must have other Eyes
than I that can see.

Agreeable to this is his arguing from that speech of our Savior, in the man's
case who was born blind, when his Disciples asking him, whether he or his
Parents had sinned, that he was born blind; he answered, Neither has this man
sinned nor his Parents, Joh. 9. 3.
but that the Works of God should be manifest in him. For though it be said,
that Death entered into* the Romans 5. 12.
World by sin, it follows not but that God by his Right might have made men
subject unto Diseases and Phil. Rud. Cap. 15. Art. 6.
Death, although they had never sinned, even as he has made the oeher Animals
mortal and sickly, although they cannot sin. But what of all this? be it true
or false, how I wonder does it prove, that God has Right to rule from his sole
irresistible Power? If it has any relation at all to it, or connection with
it, it seems rather to conclude the contrary, viz. that Gods irresistible Power
arises from his Right of Sovereignty, or at l^ast is (as I may say) warranted
thereby: for all that this argument amounts to, is but this, that God might
have done otherwise than he did, or he may do whatsoever he will do: To say
that he has this power from his Sovereignty or Dominion, is good sense, and
agreeable to reason; but to say that he has this Power from his sole
irresistible Power, is to say it is so, because it is so: This Argument
therefore (as well as the other) I look on as so far fetched and unworthy of a
Philosopher, as that a modest man may blush to have made use of it: but this
Author (either knowing or conceiting himself to be thought some body) seems to
have presumed that from him, it would pass (as perhaps it does among his
credulous Disciples) for a Demonstration, although therein be scarce so much as
the shadow of a probability: for it is very hard, if not impossible to discern
wherein the force of it lies: and since there can no other estimate be made of
things that appear not, than there is of those that are no^, the Laws of
Civility will scarce forbid us to say, it is a piece either of mysterious
Nonsense, or of grave Impertinence to prove his incongruous Assertion, That
God Almighty derives his ^ight of Sovereignty from his sole irresistible Power.

The truth or falsehood of which Position will best appear by a few
Observations, manifest almost by their own light: as First, that Sovereignty,
Dominion or Lordship, is an essential Attribute of the Deity; for, a Being
infinitely perfect, it is evident there cannot be without it* the prime Basis
o^ Foundation therefore of this (as of all the other Attributes) is laid in the
Divine Essence it self. Yet manifest it is Secondly, that this Sovereignty
cannot be brought into Act or Exercise, without the existence of something else
besides God: for he is not a Sovereign over himself, but over or unto other
Things or Persons. It must therefore be concluded Thirdly, that this Attribute
is relative, i. e. it includes a relation or reference which God has to the
Persons or Things whereof he is the Sovereign: and forasmuch as Parties related
have not their Being as such, the one before the other, but both together, it
follows, that in this Relation between God and us, we are as old as he; and for
this cause, the next and immediate Right of his Sovereignty cannot arise from
his sole irresistible Power, because that is positive and eternal, it was long
before us, and is no emanative cause of a Relation to us; but it must arise
from something else, by the intervention whereof God stands related to us, and
we to him: That Act therefore or those Acts of God, whereby this relation is
produced, I ^ake to be his next and immediate right of Sove^eignty over us: for
Right in general being little or nothing else but that which is just, or the
Object of Justice, viz. that Equity which Justice does constitute and preserve,
the Right of Sovereignty mu^t arise immediately from that, whereby the
Sovereign does justly acqui^e that Relation to his Subjects: for this cause
also God's Right of Sovereignty cannot arise merely and immediately from his
sole irresistible Power, absolutely considered; because as such, it neither
causes a relation between us, nor confers any such benefits upon us, as make
it just and equal either for him to claim, or for us to yield him such
sovereign authority over us. If therefore we should admit the Ru^iments strange
Supposition, viz. That there had been a man, who so far Chap. 15. Ar. 5.
exceeded the rest in Power, as that all of them with joined forces could not
have resisted him, yet by this excess of Power (without any overt-acts or
exercise of it for the general good of others) Nature would perhaps have given
him ability, but no more Right to rule the rest, than Highway men have to my
Money by their force, which I am not able to resist. The Conclusi^n therefore
is, That though by reason of the Supereminence of the divine Nature, it is
impossible for God to do any wrong, yet the next and immediate Right of his
Sovereignty, is something whereby he does most justly acquire that Relation to
us. And what can we imagine this to be, but his Incomparable Goodness, and
inestimable Bounty to us in our Creation, Preservation and Redemption? A
relation to God it is manifest we have from these Acts of his toward us; and
that That of Subjects to him as Sovereign does result th^refrom, is so evident
to every man's Reason, as that the whole World (as it were with one mouth) does
confess it: for every man (much more has God) has power over the work of his
own hands, and every man ought to obey him by L^viath. part. 2. cap. 20. p. 102.
whom he is preserved; and much more methinks ought he so to do, if also he be
by him redeemed: It is therefore most Just and equal, that the first Author of
our Being, Preservation and Redemption, should have the pre-eminence of Rule
over us. From hence then it is that God has his Right to Rule and to Punish
those that break his Laws: and from hence it follows, that whatsoever there is
in Creation, Providence or Redemption, to oblige us, That there is in Gods
Commandments to bind us to Obedience. Here then I might be very large, but
because the Province that I have undertaken reaches no farther than the
Gospel, I shall only show, That by the Redemption thereby made known unto us,
God has renewed his Right to rule us, together with the Obligations that
thence arise upon us to keep his Commandments.

In order to a distinct and clear Declaration hereof, it will be requisite to
take a brief view of our state by Nature, without the Grace of God in the
Gospel of his Son. And this I suppose most Christians know to have been a state
of Sin against God, and of Vassallage or Subjection to the Devil. Such it seems
was the malicious Pride of the fallen Angels, as that soon after the Creation,
they shook off Obedience to God, and chose to contend with Him for the
^upremacy and Government of all his other Creatures: wh^reupon (Man being the
Lord under God of all the lower World) the Serpent tempted him to transgress
and rebel (as he himself had done) against his Maker: in this Temptation he
was (we know) so unhappily successf^l, as that Man revolted from God his
Natural Lord and Sovereign, and became subject unto Satan. Not that Adam did
avowedly renounce his Duty unto God, but that (as Ireneus says,) Li. 3. ca* 3^*
he became the first Vessel of the Devils possession, and he held him under his
power: Insomuch that he could not recover his Primitive Innocence and
Immortality, but was nec^ssitated to involve himself and his posterity* yet
farther in the grief of Sin and the Snares of Death: for by this Fall, it came
to pass that, the Nature of every Man that is Naturally engendered of the
offspring of Adam is very far gone from Original Righteousness, and is of it
self inclined unto Evil, so that the Flesh lusts against Vid. Art. 9th of the
39 Arti.
the Spirit, and therefore in every person born into the World, it deserves
Gods Wrath and D^m^^tion: and this Degeneracy or Corruption of our humane
Nature, does certainly give the Devil so great an advantage over us, as that he
will surely detain us in his Service: for he having overcome our First Parents
by his temptations, seems to have claimed them for his, by a kind of Right by
Conquest over them, and all Men in their su^cessive Generations (being
descended from them after their Revolt and Apostasy from God) seem in a sort
to be born in his subjection, and are certainly less able than they were to
withstand his t^mptations: and forasmuch as he neither ever did, nor ever will
neglect therewith to assault them, and that (if need be) to the utmost of his
power, it is manifest, that in the state of Nature (without the Grace of God in
the Gospel of his Son) we either wholly surrender our s^lves to the s^ductions
of the Devil, or ^lse we make too feeble a resistance, o^ too weak an
opposition against them. Since Satan conquered our first Par^nts while there
was nothing in them of an evil inclination, certain it is to our Reason, that
since of our own Nature we are inclined unto evil, he will undoubtedly keep us
in his subjection: eith^r by his fraud or by his force, by his sub^il^y or his
strength he will make the tendency of our hearts, lives and actions, more to
his pernicious designs than to God^ glory; and thus it ever would have been
without an Almighty Arm to help us: and al^hough in this universal Monarchy,
the Devil was a Tyrant and Usurper, He^. 2. 10.
yet because it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things,
in bringing many Sons unto gl^ry, to mak^ the Captain of their Salvation
perfect through suff^r^^gs, In^inite Wisd^me did not think fit to rescue us out
of the hand of Satan by the Almighty force of mere Omnipot^nce, but was pleased
to choose another, a fairer and more noble way for our Redemption; and that was
to raise up one in our Nature, who should not only conquer Satan at his own
weapons, and so dissolve his seeming Right of Conque^t over us, but also should
make aton^ment and satisfaction to God for our offeue^s, and should aft^rwards
be able to succor them that are tempted. Now all these three parts of
Redemption were undertaken and are most happily accompli^hed by our Bles^ed
Lord Jesus partly in his Temptations and Sufferings for us and partly in his
state of Exaltation far above us.

In order to making manifest the truth hereof* it will not be amiss to observe,
That the whole World is a kind of Armory, from whence the Devil takes weapons
of his warfare, viz instruments of Temptation; and though these w^apons are
many in number, yet St. John has reduced them to three sorts, namely the lust
of the flesh, the lust of the 1 John 2. 16.
eye, and the pride of life: And observable it is, that with all these three*
the Devil set upon our Savior in the Wilderness: for first he assaulted him
with a lust of the flesh* i. e. temptation to an inordinate appetite and
endeavor after food to sustain Nature, to support and gratify the appetite of
his flesh: If thou be the S^n of God, command that th^se Matih 4. 3.
stones be made bread. That we may see the Devil's dexterity in the management
of this weapon, observe, that the Son of God being now to enter upon his
Ministry, and to be cons^crated for his everlasting Priesthood, was led up of
the Spirit into V. 1, 2.
the Wilderness, and there he fasted forty days and forty nights. Why he made
choice of this number of days for his Fast, I am not at present concerned to
enquire: but only to observe, that after this Fast, the Evangelist says He was
an hungered: which is not to be understood of an ordinary hunger, such as
healthy men frequently feel before they eat their daily bread; but the meaning
is, that he was then so pinched and bit with hunger, as that Nature was not
well able to endure it any longer: it was such an hunger as did much weaken his
body, and breed great grievance and molestation to Nature: Now in the throws
and bitter pains of this hunger the Devil assaults him with a temptation to
command that the stones be made bread. Never was Temptation more cunningly
timed than this: when Nature did not only begin to crave some Supply, but was
almost ready to faint for lack of it; when natural heat had so wrought upon
former nourishm^nt, as that it was almost ready to commit a rape upon his
unspotted life, then to put him in a way how to get bread, and that with ease
(as he might have done by letting this C^mmand go forth) how great, how subtle*
how insnaring was this t^mptation? especially considering it was somewh^t hard
to discern a fin in it, but ^a^e to perceive there was (at least seemingly)
very great n^^d of it. To supply the nec^s^^ti^s of others, our Savi^ur
frequently wrought M^racles, and here the Devil advises him to work one to
supply his owr: and s^ems it not very reasonable and ^^tting that so he should?
yes doubtless, so it would have s^^med to low and uninstructed minds, insomuch
that no lust of the Flesh could be greater* or inde^d so great as this
temptation: but our Savior perceived that this smooth and well*wrought Dart of
the wicked One was dipped in the poison of distr^st of Gods Providence in
general, and of his Love to and Care of him in particular; and was also
feathered with Vainglory and Intemperance, as well as undecent compliance with
the Devil, all which Sins that cunning Archer would have shot into him by the
seeming nec^ssity, Easiness and Ex^edi^nce of his advice: but ^^r Savior, I
say, p^rceiving the design of it, quenched this fiery ^^art by the Shield of
Faith, V. 4.
Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that procee^eth out of
the mouth ^f ^od. He^eby he restrained his flesh, and convinced the Devil there
was nothing in him whereon he might fasten a Temptation to a fleshly lust.

Whereupon Satan assaulted him with another of his Weapons, viz. the pride of
life; in order hereunto he took him up into the Holy City, and set him on a
Pinnacle of the Temple: and having here placed V. 5.
him* He said unto him, If thou be the Son of God* cast thy self down; Show thy
self in the Temple, and that not to me, but to the Jews, who frequently r^sort
unto it, that they may believe, or at lea^t that thou may show that in very
deed thou art the Son of God, supported and upheld in all dangers by his
especial Providence: and for this thou V. 6*
ha t sufficient warrant, for it is written, He shall give his Angels charge
concerning thee, and in their hands shall they bear thee up, lest at any time
thou dash thy foot against a st^ne: Having so plain a warrant, and so great
assurance of safety, cast thy self down, show thy power unto the Jews, that
they may know that thou art their Messiah* because God has given his Angels
such charge concerning thee. Had there been any thing of Pride or Ambition,
Ostentation, or Vain glory in our Blessed Savior, what could have been so
great a glozing, so luscious and grateful to him as this temptation? for it is
(we see) ushered in with a sly insinuation of subservience to the end of his
coming, viz convenience to make the Jews believe, that he was the Son of God:
and is seconded with a plain and pregnant Text of Psalm. 91. 11, 12.
Scripture: yet this Weapon also (though thus steeled and pointed) could do hi^
^o hurt, because he turned it aside by the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of
God, it is writt^n, Thou shall not tempt V. ^.
the Lord thy God* A S^n that few live without, though none have so great
temptations to commit it: yet here we see, that to avoid it, our Savior would
not convince the Jews, that he was the Son of God, by displaying his Power
before them: hereby therefore the Devil found by experience, that no Pride of
life whatever would prevail upon him.

Hereupon the Devil betook himself to the other sort of his Weapons, viz. the
lust of the Eye, or the Riches of the World; herewith he used to be most
successful; and to the end that he might so be in this his Encounter with our
Blessed Savior, He laid on his blows with all his Might. Experience had taught
him that it must be some extraordinary great matter, that could move him whom
he then assailed, from s^rict Obedience to God; whereupon (it seems) he thought
it to no purpose to bid low for his Disobedience; and therefore he offered all
(perhaps more than) he had to give, viz. All the V. 8, 9.
Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them* Had th^re been any thing of
Avarice or love of the World in our Lord Jesus* this Temptation could not have
failed to kindle and inflame it, yet was it resisted with such admirable
Fortitude and Magnanimity, expressed by those words of indgnation, V* 10.
Get th^e h^nce Satan* as convinced the Devil, there was no unlawful love of
the World neither could any be raised in him. He found that all the Wealth and
Plenty, all the Palaces and Possessions in the World would not tempt him to any
the least dimi^ution of his Innocence and Holiness. Thus we see that (...)
Blessed Savior foiled the Devil at th^se weapons wherewith he had overcome our
first Par^nts, and all their Posterity ever since: And thus also we see, that
in all points of allurement or enticement unto Sin, He was tempted like as we
are, vet without it.

But besides Allurements and enticements unto Sin, the Devil sometimes (by
especial permission from God) has other ways of provoking men thereunto. And
this he has power to do, by bringing afflictions, perhaps the ^orest pains
both of Loss and Sense that possibly he can upon them: Thus we read of Gods
Servant Job, whom he tempted by great and grievous afflictions in his Person,
Goods and Kindred: And thus it pleased God to permit him to do by our Blessed
Savior. It was we know at first foretold, that the Seed of Ge^. 3. 1^*
the Woman should bruise the Serpents head, and the Serpent should bruise his
heel; i. e. that the Messiah should destroy the power and authority of the
Devil, and the Devil should sorely but not irrecoverably wound the Messia^: Now
in order hereunto there was to be a time wherein the Devil was to be permitted
to do his utmost against him; this bitter Conflict with the Devil, it is
thought our Savior apprehended at his triumphant Ingress into Jerusalem, three
days or more before he entered upon it: This seems it he spoke of when he said,
Now is my Soul tr^ubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour:
No, this he himself (upon a little deliberation) seems to disapprove, because
for this cause says he) came I to this hour: he resolved therefore to say,
Father, glorify thy Jo^. 12. 27, 28.
Name. Hereby he commits himself to his Father's disposal, and prays him to
make the Contest glorious unto Him. A little while after Jesus knowing that
this hour was come, said unto his Disciples, hereafter I will not talk much
with you, f^r the J^^. 14. 1^.
Prince of the World comes: Satan it seems would again try his strength upon
him, and that (not as before with subtilty and snares, but) with greater force
and violence than formerly had been permitted to him; and accordingly so it
seems he did in his Agony and Bloody Sweat: at which time (says T. Jackson.
Humil. of ^he Son of God, cap. 4.
a great Divine) his Father permitted Satan to exercise the utmost of his power
against him: only over his Soul or Life he had no power. Yet doubtless during
this Agony he suff^red pains more than natural, such as neither the Prophets
before him, nor the Apostles or Martyrs after him, either felt or could endure;
the pains of Hell they could not be, because (the Prince of the World having
nothing in him) he was not a Patient rightly disposed to endure those pains:
yet doubtless, as the glory of our Savior Idem. ibib.
Christ is now much greater than the glory of all his S^ints which have been,
or shall be hereafter: so no doubt his Sufferings did far exceed the sufferings
of all his Martyrs. But what they were, is it seems best expressed in the
ancient Greek Liturgies by (...), unknown Sufferings. Hereby the Devil tempted
him to Impatience or some other obliquity in one kind or other: but his design
was frustrate: Heb. 5. 7.
for when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and
tears unto him that was able to save him from death, he was heard in that he
feared. The Paroxysme was over, the sharpness of the pain was abated, if not
quite extinguished: by t^ese means at this assault, in this battle also the
Devil was beaten; he ceased therefore from farther attempts by way of single
Duel.

But the Contest b^^ng for no less than the Crown and Empire of the whole
World, Satan resolv^d not so to leave him, but once again to attaque him; and
it should be in that manner wherein throughout all Ages he had found himself
most successful in doing mischief: and that is not by himself alone and
immediately, but by his wicked Instruments. Men being left to the freedom of
their own Wills, are not under so strict a restraint as the Devil is* ^ereupon
he has tempted them to be executioners of his Malice, and they at his
suggestions have often acted greater cruelties than were permitted to him to do
by himself immediately: Judas therefore and the Jews he most e^fectually
t^mpted to the most barbarous and unnatural cruelty that they could possibly
execute on the Holy One of Israel: Thence was it that when he was apprehended,
He said unto them that took him, This is your hour and the power of Luke 22* 53.
darkness: whereby it is plain, not only that at that time our Dear Lord was
delivered into their hands to do what they would with him, but also though the
Devil did not appear, yet he was the greatest Actour in all the Scenes of that
sad Tragedy: from the Apprehension to the Crucitixion of our Lord Jesus, his
Darkness was in its power: his Will was then done, his Pleasure was ful^illed:
The Outrages and Barbarisms that men then committed upon him, were but the
Venom which that Old Serpent spit at him* and by so doing did the worst he
could against him, viz. he bruised his heel, i e. he crushed his Humanity to
death: yet neither so could he conquer him by obtaining the least Sin to be
committed by him. Had he effected this* he had obtained his purpose, and done
his own business, viz. he had de^cated our Salvation, and established his own
Throne for ever: but (blessed be God) the Captain of our Salvation was
Victorious; and by so doing he ^ath canc^lled all the Claim that the D^vil can
p^ssibly make unto us and has utt^rly dissolved and ^isp^^sed all Shadow of
pretense to the Right of Conquest over us; and since he received his Commission
from God, and in all his Temptations and trials he fought his Battles against
the Devil, it is evident that his Right hand and his holy arm h^ve gotten God
the victo^y: and so indisputable is the Right of Conquest* Vid. Grot. de jur.
B^l. and Paris. lib. 3. c. 7.
as that (by the Law of Nations) Conquerours are always and every where Lords
and Sovereigns over them that they have taken in just and lawful Wars: since
therefore in the War between Christ and the Devil (most justly and graciously
designed for our Redemption) our Blessed Savior was the Conqueror, he has
thereby undoubtedly renewed (if not also augmented) Gods Rig^t of Sovereignty
over us; and by so doing has laid (as we shall see in the Sequel) f^esh
Obligations of All^giance and Subjection to Him upon us.

Neither is that all; for by his sufferings he did not only ^e^^ore us into the
freedom of Gods service; 1 Jo^. 4. 10. Romans 3. 25.
but did also propitiate and make him gracious unto us. For God sent his Son to
be the Propitiation for our Sins, or he set him forth to be a Propitiation,
through Faith in his Blood: and so Mat. 26. 28.
the Son Himself tells us, that his Blood was shed for many for the Remission
of Sins. As a farther proof and illustration hereof, it will not be amiss to
observe, That the Law of Moses had this severe Sanction; Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
Book of the Law to do them: the matter of this Curse was a violent Gal. 3. 10.
death without mercy: so that whosoever transgressed Heb. 10. 28.
it, was for that Cause liable to be put to death: this Law then was severely
Penal; and known it is sufficiently that Lawgivers on earth (much more may the
Supreme one in Heaven) admit of a Relaxation of their Laws: and accordingly so
has God done in diverse Cases: as for instance, in case the high Priest, or the
Congregation, or a Ruler of the People sinned through ignorance: although
according to the Rigor and utmost severity of that Law, the Sinn^r ought to be
put to death, yet God accepted of a Sacrifice. Concerning Levit. 4.
which Sacrifice we shall do well to observe three things, viz. First that the
thing Sacrificed (whatsover it was) was substituted in the place of the
offender; and this its Surrogation was usually signified by the imposition of
his hands upon V. 4, 15, 24.
it: and then secondly the Bullock or Kid of the Goats thus substituted in the
stead or room of the offender was killed and offered in Sacrifice Ibid.
unto God: and hereupon thirdly Gods Wrath was appeased; by the Offering or
oblation of this Sacrifice, the Offender obtained pardon for his fault, and his
life was to be spared, for the Priest thereby made an atonement for him
concerning his V. 20, 26, 31, 35.
Sin, and it was forgiven him. The suffering of a viol nt death was remitted,
he was no longer bound over to it, he had no cause to fear it from the hand
either of God or of the Magistrate.

Now know that (the Law having but the Shadow of good things to come) these
things were Types of our state by Nature and deliverance therefrom by our
Blessed Savior: a violent temporal death (the penalty of transgressing the
Ceremonial Law) did Typifie or at least not Inelegantly adumbrate Eternal death
(the Sanction and Curse of the moral Law:) whereunto both by Nature and
Practice we are all obnoxious: but it pleased God to admit a Relaxation even of
this Law, and thereupon to send his Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins. i.
e. to be a Sin-offering, a Propitiatory Sacrifice, or Sacrifice of Atonement
and Exp^ation for them, and this he was in his sufferings, especially his
Bloody Death and Crucifixion; for the three essential parts of such a Sacrifice
but now m^ntioned, were all evidently contained therein; Mat. 20. 28 Luk 22.
19, 20. Romans 5. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 14. H^b 2. 9. 1Pet. 221. ^18.
as first his Surrogation in ^ur stead; this is very plain to be seen in his
Death; for He gave his life a ransom for many: his Body was given and his
Blood was shed for you: Christ dyed for the ungodly, i. e. for all: He did taste
Death for every Man: He suffered for us, i. e. for our Sins, the Just for the
Unjust. From any, much more from all these Texts of Scripture the Surrogation
of Christ in his sufferings is so plain and evident, as that the Socinians
(with all their Criticisms and distinctions.) will never be able wi h any
Probability to gain say it. The like also we may observe concerning the second
thing in a Sin-offering under the Law; namely the Oblation thereof unto God:
this likewise is evident in our Saviors sufferings, for through the Eternal
Spirit he offered Heb. 9. 14.
himself without spot to God; And that this Oblation of himself to God, was not
made (as some would have it) by his entrance into Heaven, but by his sufferings
on the Cross, appears, if not from the Apostles making it the same or almost
all one thing therewith, by calling his offering of Himself in one V. 25, 26.
verse, his suffering in the next: yet, from the Comparison he makes between
the condition of Christ V. 27.
and other Men: it is appointed unto Men once to die, V. 28.
so (says he) Christ was once offered to bear the Sins of many; so that Christ
in dying was offered, and in being offered he dyed, so that (...) are
sanctified thro^gh the Offering of the body of Jesus Christ once Heb 10. 10.
for all; and this offering of his b^dy to God was antecedent to his Glory in
Heaven, for after he had offer^d one Sacrifice for Sin for ever, he sat down on
V. 12.
the right hand of G d: it is not therefore to be doubted, but our Savior upon
the Cross, offered Himself a Sacrifice to satisfy divine Justice, and so to
appease the Wrath of God against us. For lastly his Sufferings had the Effect,
that was natural and necessary to a Sin-offering, namely, the Atonement and
Reconciliation of God to Sinners: for when we were enemies we were Reconciled
unto God Romans 5. 10.
by the death of his Son: and you that were enemies in your mind by wicked
works yet now has he reconciled Col. 1. 21. 22.
in the body of his flesh through death; hereby then methinks it is so plain,
as that nothing can be plainer (unless it be to those that can see knots in a
Bull-rush) than that Reconciliation and Atonement was made to God for us, in
and by the death of his Son. Thus fully do we see, that our Blessed Savior in
his Temptations and Sufferings has redeemed us from the power of Satan and the
Curse of the Law, or the Wrath of God against us.

But these things I confess are not sufficient, for to any one that shall
consider the imbecility of humane Nature, now in its state of Mortality and
imperfection, it must needs methinks be evident, that after this great
Salvation thus far wrought out for us and revealed unto us, we still shall want
Grace and Mercy to help in time of need: Grace to help our Infirmities, and to
enable us acceptably to perform our Duty: And Mercy, to forgive us our Sins,
and to succor us in our Miseries: Both these it is manifest that we want: Know
therefore lastly, that both these Christ is enabled to give unto us by his
Temptations and Sufferings for us; for in H^b. 2. 18.
that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted. But was not he able to succor us before he suffered and was
tempted? Yes doubtless that he was, as he is God over all blessed for ever: but
Infinite Wisdom and Goodness (condescending to our infirmities) were pleased
to constitute another way of showing mercy, and affording Succor to us in
miseries and temptations. When we consider the Infinite distance between God
and us, together with our manifold sins and odious miscarriages against him, we
may well be afraid to approach him, or else void of confidence in our
approaches: To the end therefore that we might have the highest assurance that
may be, both of Grace and Mercy, and of their accommodation to our Nature under
its abasing reflections on it self, it seemed good to Infinite Wisdom so to
order the matter, as that the Divine Grace and Mercy should in some sort be
made Humane: for being conveyed to us through the Heart of our Lord Jesus, the
Mercy of God is so assimilated unto and made the Mercy of a man as that though
we cannot conceive how the Divine Nature is disposed to show Mercy; yet by the
familiar experience of our own hearts toward others, we may conceive how
Christ will be merciful unto us, viz. by way of Pity and Compassion on us:
Afflictions and Temptations we know are often grievous unto us; our Hearts are
troubled, and our Souls are sorrowful and sad under them: Those good men that
know our condition and love our persons, especially if they are merely related
to us, and have Af^^ction suitable to that ^^lation: these men I say d^
sympathi^e with us; in so^e sort they feel what we ^nd^^e, and share with us in
our sufferings. And thus has God provided that our Mediator should; to this
end it beho^ed him in all things to be made like unot his br^thren: by his
Incarnation he was made like unto us in the parts and properties, the faculties
and affections, the imperfections and infirmities of our Nature, Sin only
excepted: The same affection therefore of Pity and Compassion, which in us is
natural, was by him assumed together with the rest our sinless Nature: and
probable it is, that this most sweet and indearing Affection was more tender in
him than it is in us, because it was pure and altogether unmixt with the leaven
of Vice, and so without any allay of Acerbity, Envy or Cruelty whatsoever: and
besides that, this affection he assumed to this very end, that he might be a
merciful Heb. 2. 17.
and faithful High Priest in things pertaining unto God: i. e. that he might
have comp^ssion on us in our Miseries and Temptations, and that out of this
affection of Commiseration he might faithfully and sincerely mind our business
in Heaven, and get it done for us with God Almighty. Now unto this his merciful
and faithful High-Pries^hood he was Consecrated. i. e. set apart or rendered
more apt and fit by his Sufferings and Temptations; and this is his Ability to
succor them that are tempted.

But here the Inquisitive will certainly be ready to ask, not only how the
Sufferings and Temptations of Christ do conduce her^unto, but also how it can
be? For their satisfaction therefore I shall so far enlarge this Digression, as
to return Answer to these two Questions.

Quest.
1 How do the Sufferings and Temptations of Christ conduce to his Ability to
succor them that are tempted?

Ans.
By way of Experiment. Christ in the days of his flesh suffered (as ^ight
easily be demonstrated) all those Evils which are common to all Mankind, and
was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin: Hereby then he did
experimentally find and feel the very self-same kind of Sorrows and troubles,
griefs and pertu^bations, which we endure under our sufferings and temptations.
Now then observe, That not only the Divine, but also the Humane Nature of
Christ in Glory has knowledge of all occurrences that in this life do befall
us: were it not so, it would be impossible that he should be (as the Apo^^le
says he is) touched H^b. 4. 15.
with a feeling of our infirmities: This he affi^ms, not of the Divine Nature,
but of that that was tempted in all ^oints like as we are, i* e. of the humane:
and affirm i^ he does for our encouragement to hold fast our profession; but an
encouragement it cannot be unto us, unless that he knows all our infirmities;
because if otherwise, we not knowing which he knows and which not, should be
utterly discouraged from seeking succor from him in any: The conclusion
therefore must be, That he knows all our infirmities and temptations: and
together with this his knowledge, it is more than probable that he has an act
of Memory whereby he calls to mind how he himself was affect^d under the same
or the like Trials and Temptations here on Earth: for surely it is not to be
doubted, but the memory ^f things done and endured in this World, remain with
him in Glory: for if the immediate seat of Memory be the Soul herself, Vid. Dr.
More Immortality of the Soul, lib. 2. cap. 11. and lib. 3. cap. 11.
and all the representations with their circumstances be reserved in her, not
in the spirits nor in any part of the body, then surely it remains with the
Souls of all men departed either into Hell or Heaven. Son, remember thou in thy
lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; Luke
16. 25.
said Abraham to Dives in Hell. Remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom,
said the good Thief Luke 23. 42.
to Christ on the Cross: So that both in Heaven and in Hell there is a
remembrance of things done in this life. But to come nearer to the case in
hand, namely our Saviors remembrance Heaven of his Temptations and Sufferings
here on Earth; He himself said to St. John, I am he that Revel. ^. ^^.
lives, and was dead. He remembers then that he was dead; and strange it is
that he should remember his Death, and forget the Temptations and Sufferings
that brought him to it! This cannot be: By his remembrance then thereof he is
able, i. e. apt and inclined or affectionately disposed (out of Compassion and
Pity) to succor them that are tempted: for known it is sufficiently, that
there is nothing in the World, that does so much move men to pity and compassion
on others in misery, as their own M^mories that they themselves have suffered
in the same or the like manner: Hand ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco,
Virg. AE ^* neid. lib. 1.
said Dido to Aeneas, I my self being not unacquainted with evil, do now learn
to succor those that are in misery. Thus our Blessed Savior having suffered
in the days of his flesh, and endured Temptations in all points like unto us,
He is able, i. e. his Heart is fitted and disposed out of his own experience,
to pity and succor them that are tempted.

Q. 2.
But how can this be? The Humane Nature of Christ is now advanced unto Glory,
and made perfect in Bliss and H^ppiness: Surely therefore He is not now subject
to Pity or Compassion; for such we know is the nature of that affection, as
that in some sort it makes us share with others in their sufferings, and to
feel what they endure: how then can it remain with Christ in Glory? Can we
throw sorrow into the regions of joy, or grief into the place, yea the very
Fountain of gladness? How can these things be?

Ans.
This difficult Objection the Apostle foresaw, and therefore by way of
pre-occupation or prevention, he said, We have not an High Priest which cannot,
i. e. We have one that can be touched with the feeling of our infirmities. And
forasmuch as he has said it, by what we have already discoursed concerning the
reasonableness of the Christian Faith, it appears that we ought believe it,
although we cannot apprehend the manner of it: yet even here our Reason is not
at a loss; for it tells us that since Christ (even now in his state of
Exal^ation) is our merciful and faithful High Priest; he undoubtedly has such
Affections for us, as are suitable to that Office and Relation to us; and he
being a Man, yea the very same man that he was before his Exaltation, Reason
again tells us that he has all those Affections which are essential to our
Nature: i* e. the very same Affections that he had in the days of his flesh,
only it teaches us to distinguish between the affections and the frailty of
them: which if we do in the case now before us, we shall find it not impossible
to conceive how Compassion remains with him in Glory: for* as to the nature and
essence of it, it is we know little or nothing e^se but a motion of the
appetite* following the apprehension of another evil: as for that grief and
sorrow which in this life do sometimes follow it, it is no way essential to it:
for they who are most generous, and D^s ca^^^s of the Passions.
have the greatest spirits, so that they fear not any evil to themselves, and
hold themselves above the power of fortune, are not exempted from Compassion,
Art. 1^7.
when they s^e the infirmity of other men, and hear their complaints; for it is
a part of Generosity to bear good will to every man: but the sadness of this
Pity is not bitter: And if not bitter, then surely not grievous; and if so,
then grief is not essential to compassion; yea, it seems* so f^r may it be from
being grievous, as that it may be rather joyous; for we take a delight to feel
pass^ons excited in us, and this delight is an intellectual joy, which may
Ide^^.
spring as well from sadness as all the rest of the passions. Art. 147.
Why then should it seem strange to any one that the Heart of Christ in Glory
should be touched with a feeling of our infirmities? It is true indeed, such
frailty of affections as is a distu^bance to the joy of his Soul, or an
impediment to either of the beati^ick qualifications of his body, is not to be
thought to remain with him: yet since our Faith assur^s us that our Blessed
Savior now ^itteth at the right hand of God in that very same Body which was
Crucified at Jerusalem, our Reason tells us, that it has true humane blood
running in its veins and arteries, as formerly it had, and this blood and
spirits by their motion may affect his Heart with Pity and Compassion on us,
and that without any the least diminution of his joy and glory, or Impair to
his Body, by weakening themselves: for his body being now a Spiritual body, it
lives not in Glory as formerly it did and ours do here on earth, viz. by Meat
and Drink produced out of corruptible elements, but by the immediate
^us^entation of the Spirit; so that the support of his life and joy being
altered, the same Affection of Pity and Compassion may be in him still* which
was in him heretofore, yet without causing the least degree of grief in his
Soul, or of obstruction to the vital motion of the Heart in his Body, as it
formerly did in him, and still does in us here on Earth. We may conceive that
thus it may be, and forasmuch as it is plainly revealed, that notwithstanding
his Exaltation above us* he does still sympathize with us, it is at least
probable that thus it is: but whether it be or no, is not material: our
Curiosity should give way to our Faith, and let it so triumph over all its
objections, as that since it is revealed, we should firmly believe that in that
Christ has suffered being tempted, he is able, i. e. out of Pity and
Compassion disposed, or of his own Will inclined to succor them that are
tempted, i. e. to afford them Grace and Mercy to help in time of need: hereby
then it appears, that he is able to save to the uttermost them that come to God
by him: had he only conqu^red the Devil* and made atonement to God for us, and
so left us to work out our Salvation with only our own strength, we should
certainly have relapsed into the state of Nature after the Fall: but since he
has not only conquered the Devil, and made atonement to God, but also ever
lives to make Interc^ssion for us, to afford Succor and assistance to us, it
is evident that he has most completely Redeemed us* Nothing now is wanting to
our Deliverance and Salvation, but our own acceptance of what He has done for
us, and submission to the directions, which He by his Commands is Pleased to
give us.

And hereunto we are undoubtedly obliged by what He has done for us: for an
Obligation (according to the definition that Civilians give of it) is little or
nothing else but a Bond of the Law whereby one is bound to pay what he owes.
Which definition, if it be not restrained to the Laws of Men, but extended to
the Laws of God and Nature, may be commodious enough for the Explication of
those things which appertain to the Internal Court of Conscience, as well as of
those that belong to the Courts of Church or State: and forasmuch as all
Obligation (as appears by the very definition of it) takes its Original from
some Law, and there is a twofold Law, the one Divine and Natural, the other
Civil and Humane, there must also be a twofold Obligation; the one Natural,
which by force of the Law of Nature, i. e. of Gods Law, obliges in the Court
of Conscience: the other Civil, which by force of Men's Laws bind Externally in
Ecclesiastical Courts or Courts of Civil Jurisdiction. At present I have
nothing to Vid. Sanders. de ^ur. Oblig. Prae. Pri. ^. 11.
do with the latter, but only with the former, viz. the Obligation that arises
on Men from the Laws of God or of Nature: and this again seems to be twofold,
the one we may call an Obligation of Authority, the other of Goodness: the
First arises from the Sovereignty or Dominion of God, the Second from his
Beneficence or Goodness. They both make it our duty to keep his Commandments;
the one because of his most Just Authority and Dominion over us, the other
because of his great Goodness, Bounty and Beneficence toward us* Now both
these Obligations are laid upon us by the Redemption which our Blessed Lord
Jesus has wrought out for us: for Christ (as we have seen) Redeemed us by
force, He conquered the Devil, cancelled his claim to us, and has so far taken
us out of his hand into his own Custody, as that he cannot approach to hurt us,
but by his Permission; so that we may be saved (if we will) in despite of the
Devil and all his works; it is not in his power to hinder it: he cannot take us
out of Christ's hand, but by our own voluntary revolts and backslidings to him:
the Captain of our Salvation h^th rescued us out of the power of Satan, and if
we do not run away from him by Infidelity or Disobedience, he will keep us
through Faith unto Salvation; and the Devil and the World, yea, a whole World
of Devils shall not be able to help it. Taken therefore it is certain we are,
and kept also by the force of Arms, or in War, from the Devil: and since (as we
have already observed out of Grotius) all that are so taken by the Laws of
Nations are Servants to them that so took them, it follows that we are so to
Him. By his Redempti^n therefore he has acquired a right of Dominion over us,
and therefore his Commands lay an Obligation upon us.

Neither is that all, but besides this Obligation of Dominion, there is an
other that arises from the Goodness and B^neficence of Redemption. Such is our
Nature, as that by Reason of a benefit received, there arises upon the
R^ceiver an Obligation ad (...), i. e. to make returns of the like or greater
kindness to the Giver; and this is so fixed and natural unto Man, as that, as
by Nature we are in some sort driven to defend our selves against the injuries
of force and violence, so also are we compelled by Nature to requite one
Kindness with another, or (in case of Inability) to reckon our selves so deeply
Obliged to the Giver as to be willing to serve him according to what we are
able; or at least to acknowledge the benefit received; this our own Nature will
force us to do, if not openly, yet behind the Curtains of our own Conscience,
which will chide us for doing no more, or being no more regardful and
Obs^quious to them that have been so good to us: this is so commonly known and
believ^d among us, as that it is almost a Proverb one good turn d^s^rves
another: therefore also the Poet says, Martial.
Quisquis magna dedit, voluit sibi magnar^mitti.
Not that the liberal Man's Design in giving is to get as much or more again
than he gives* but since Nature prompts us to make Returns of Gifts, he that
will give great things, by consequence Wills that great things may be returned
to him again* this then it seems our Nature has made to be the Law of
Gratitude; In so much that those who walked not by it the Athenians and
Macedonians made a Law against, whereby it was provided, that they might be
dealt with as Theives, or other grievous Malefactors; the Persians also did the
same, and though it may be all Nations were not so serve, yet all have looked
upon them as transgressors of the Law of Nature, unworthy of any help or
assistance from Man, incapable of being called worse than they are, viz.
Ungrateful: him therefore on whom a bene^it is freely conferred, Vid. Alex. ab
Alex. Genesis Dier. lib. 5. ^a. 1.
the Law of Nature does bind and oblige to make Returns, either in the like or
some other kind, according to what he is able. Hence then it follows, that if
we have any advantage (as undoubtedly we have much every way) by the Redemption
of Christ, then are we thereby obliged to keep h^s ^ommandments, because it is
impossible for us otherwise ^o make any credible Re^urns of Gratitude; for
words we know without Works, when and where Works are required and may be
(especially when with advantage) performed, are but blasts of a putrefied
breath, that stinks of flattery and smells rank (in distinguishing Nostrils,) of
Affront and Mockery; unless therefore we will mock our Savior instead of
thanking him for our Redemption, we must do what He requires us. And no Man can
think our Obedience too great a Return for it, if he does but consider the
benefits which we receive by it, the ease and satisfaction which our Souls may
find in it, and the encouragement we have from it.

1. The benefits which we receive thereby, and here ask not what they are, but
rather what are they not: for (besides our Sins) there is nothing which we
either are, have or hope for, but is given us on the account of his Redemption:
we our selves were dead in Law without it, our possessions forfeited, and our
Hopes not only dashed, but turning into Despair, or a certain fearful looking
for Heb. 10. 27.
Judgment and fiery Indignation to d^vour us: but blessed be God, who by
sending his Son to be the Heb. 2. 17.
Propitiation for our Sins, made him in all things like unto his ^r^thr^n, that
he might be a Merciful and fait^ful High Priest, to make Reconciliation for the
Sins of the people, not only bythe Sacrifice of atonement which he suffered
here on Earth, but also by his Intercession for us in Heaven; so that the
people (notwithstanding their Sins) do now find God Propitious and Gracious
unto them; as it is evident that we do, not only by the free Proffer of
acceptance in case of Repentance, but also by the Series of Providence, which
either Crown^th our years with Goodness, and its paths drop Fatness, or else it
clothes us with Sables, makes us go mourning some part of our days; one way it
leads us, and the other it drives us to Repentance, and Repentance we know is
(...) a secure care of our selves, or a care of our selves Jo^. Clim. Scal.
parad. Grad. 5.
to be secure: and this was at all times very reasonable, but never so much as
since Christ was made Redemption unto us: for there are now no Cherubims or
Flaming Sword to keep the way to the Tree of Life against us, but God being
Reconciled unto us, by the Atonement which Christ has made for us, there is
none of his Attributes but now speak kindly to us and invite us to take of its
Fruits and eat them. We have therefore now no Just cause from God either of
Despair or of servile Fear: neither the pr^parations that he has made for the
Punishment of the Impenitent in the other World, nor the afflictions that his
Providence brings on us in this, do give us any cause to think (as the
Superstitious seem to do, viz.) that there is some sour despite or envy
lodged in his Nature, or little but Evil in his purpose toward us. For if when
we were enemies, we were reconciled Romans 5. 10*
unto God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be
saved by his life. For he ever Heb. 7. 25.
lives not only to make Intercession for us, but also Act. 5. 31.
to be a Prince and a Savior for to give Repentance to Israel and forgiveness
of Sins: so that That Grace which he requires of us, and those Benefits which
by his Atonement he has purchased for us, he is exalted to give unto us:
evident therefore it is, that now we have such sufficient ground of cheerful
dependence on God, and of such ingenuous affiance in him, as that there is much
Reason for us out of a Principle, not of Fear and dismal dread of his
Greatness, but of Love and Thanksgiving, Joy and Gratitude for his Goodness, to
serve him all our days.

2. Whereunto also we are yet farther obliged, by the Satisfaction which our
Redemption by Christ affords us. Such is the Nature of our Souls, as that the
difference of Man from other living Creatures, may as well, perhaps better be
expressed in his definition by the word Religious, than Rational: the Reason
is, because other Creatures seem in some measure to partake of Reason, but not
at all of Religion. That there are some Footsteps of Reason, some strictures
and emissions of Ratiocination in the Actions of some Brutes, is too Vulgarly
known and too commonly granted to be doubted: it seems then that not Reason in
general, but as it does dispose us to Actions of an higher Nature than those of
Brutes, especially those of Religion, is the form of our humane Nature. This is
it that does constitute us Men and most of all distinguish us from other
Animals. And well may the honor of this distinction be cast upon Religion
rather than Reason, not only because it sets us farther off from Brutes than
that does without it, but also because it is as inseparable from our Nature as
that is: for no Creature that knows it self to be so, can be reasonable
without owning it self obliged to love, reverence and worship its Creator:
Hence I suppose it is, that the Principles and Foundations of Religion, viz.
the Being of a Deity and of a future state or judgment, are so firmly laid in
all mankind (and in no Creature below it) as that the utmost endeavors that
can be used, are insufficient wholly to race them out, or utterly to suppress
their Energy. Whence else is it, that sometimes when there is no apparent
danger, professed Atheists are subject to fears as well as other Men? or whence
else is it that it is almost as easy to find a Nation without Souls, as without
all Religion? these things would be unaccountable, if Religion were not
Essential to our Nature, as well as Reason. If then so it be, manifest it is
that a Religion we must have; for we cannot be happy because our Souls will not
be satisfied without it: and forasmuch as we aim at some good (as our End) in
all our Actions, and those of Religion are conversant (not about the little low
things of the World, but) about God himself and the things that are his, it is
also manifest, that we can therein regularly aim at nothing less than some Good
or Perfection which this World cannot afford, and God only can give: and what
can this be but the supreme Bliss and Happiness whereof our Nature is capable?
This then is it which we except to obtain by Religion: and difficult it is for
the mind of Man to pitch upon a Religion which his own Reason will think in all
points sufficient for this End, for this it cannot judge any Religion to be,
unless it shows us a likely way to Happiness, and removes the Impediments or
obstructions that therein are unto it.

The way that to our Reason seems likely to lead us to Happiness must of
necessity lie through Holiness: the Reason is, because perfect Righteousness and
Integrity in all our Actions, was the way that was made and ordained in our
Creation; and our Souls retain so much of their Primitive constitution, as that
(though by our fall we are so bruised and maimed as that we cannot walk in it,
yet) our Reason cannot fully assent to any way that leads not to it, there is a
kind of Reluctance in Reason against it: our own Natural Conscience cannot be
fully persuaded that Happiness can be attained without Holiness: it is true
indeed, Men that live in Notorious Wickedness, by the wind of Phanaticism may
be blown up into an Opinion of their own Saintship, and confidence of their
Salvation; but if the power of imagination did not suppress their Reason and
put it to silence, their own Conscience would soon tell them, that they cannot
advance toward Heaven by their verbal Religion, while they go toward Hell by
Wickedness of living: the way therefore that seems likely unto Reason to carry
us unto Happiness, must guide us unto and keep us in the paths of Holiness: yet
withal, if it deals impartially it will tell us that we cannot therein so walk
as by walking to attain to that end of our journey, because (as we are thereby
convinced) we shall stumble into Sin, and by so doing shall fall short of
Eternal Glory: for Eternal life (as we have already said,) is so far from being
a Reward that in Justice is due to our works, as that we cannot Reasonably
expect, that God (on whose very Being as well as Honor, we have made most
odious attempts by our Sins,) should ever be pleased (without Atonement and
Satisfaction) either to give, or again to profer it unto us. And indeed, should
our own self-love flatter us into a firm persuasion, that God is willing we
should be saved; yet if there be no way made for our Salvation, but what was at
first ordained in our Creation, our Reason would teach us, that we should be
never the nigher; for our Souls being fettered to That that is fading, and
inslaved to diverse Lusts, cannot possibly enable us therein to walk to Eternal
Happiness, but of necessity we should relapse into our former state of Nature
since the Fall of our first Parents. By this discourse then it appears, that
That Religion which we rationally make choice of to bring us to the supreme End
of our Being and Actions, viz. Eternal Life and Glory, must of necessity do
these three things for us, viz. First it must show us a sufficient Atonement or
Satisfaction made for our sins past, present, and to come. Secondly, it must
lead us unto Virtue and all Holiness of living. Thirdly, it must dispose us so
to follow it, as that with God we may find acceptance.

Where then shall we find a Religion that upon a just and impartial examination
may in reason be judged sufficient for these things? Shall we seek it among the
Gentiles? Alas their Wisdom is but foolishness, their knowledge of God but
Ignorance, their way of worship and exercise of Religion, Profaneness; their
virtue, unholiness, and their strength Weakness in respect of that that is
requisite for us: And as for the atonements and Satisfactions they make to God
for their offenses, who so weak sighted as not to see the shortness and vanity
of their Sacrifices and Lustrations? they exceed not the power of corrupted and
enfeebled Nature, which by these means strives to cast off the burdens of
guilt, that it groans under: They are therefore at best but implorations of
Mercy, and so no Satisfactions to injured Justice: in them therefore men can
reasonably put no confidence. Much more unlikely is it, that our anxious Souls
should find rest among the Turks, for their Alcoran (which with profound
rev^rence they receive as the Rule of their Faith, Hope and Practice) is indeed
and in truth but a Rhapsodie of nonsense and gibbrish, filth and wickedness,
much more apt (though blended with some sense and wholesome instruction) to
retain men in, than to help them out of their Spiritual wants and N^cessities.
And truly if we go to the Jews themselves, we shall find, that though their Law
by Gods appointment had a shadow of good things to come, and their Prophets
spoke by inspiration of them, yet the shadow was so dark, and the Prophets
prenotions of them so obscure* as that men had need to be very sharp sighted,
and to lay their eyes very close to see through them.

But in the Redemption we have by Christ, we may behold with open face as in a
glass, all those things which we expect our Religion should do for us* For
therein we find an Atonement infinitely sufficient to expiate the offenses of
the most guilty, and to satisfy the doubts of the most scrupulous, to silence
all the clamours of an accusing Conscience, and to answer all the objections of
a misgiving Understanding, if the Sinner be but truly penitent. For though the
Humane Nature of Christ was the sole Subject of his Sufferings, yet the Manhood
being taken into God, it was the Divine Phi^. 2. 8.
Person* that humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of
the Cross; insomuch that A^^. ^0. 2^.
the Church of God is said to have been purchased by his Blood. What then can
there be so Precious as the Blood which Christ shed to redeem us? What Sins can
there be so great and crying as to call so loud for Vengeance, as that does for
Mercy upon penitent Offenders? If then we are weary and heavy laden with the
burden of our Sins, here we may find Rest, and here we may repose our Souls
with such confidence as the severest Reason cannot shake, and will not gainsay:
And if so, then undoubtedly the Sufferings of our Savior do satisfy our
Reason in the first thing it expects to find in our Religion, viz. a sufficient
Atonement made for our Sins.

The like Satisfaction they give it in the second, viz. That it should show us
a likely way to Heaven; 1 P^t. 2. 21.
and so they do, because Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye
should follow his steps: And the Example that he has left us, our own Reason
can not choose but approve of; for it is such an unblemisht Pattern of Purity,
as cannot be paralleled in all the World: He did no sin, neither was V. 22.
guilt found in his mouth. So magnanimously holy was he, as that
notwithstanding the Injustice and Severity of his Sufferings, he would do no
sin, nor so much as speak a guileful word: This is an Example that farther
exceeds all others in Purity, than the Sun does the Moon in Brightness: And an
Example he has left us, not only of the most immacula^e Purity, but also of
the most elevated Virtue: and this (as St. Bernard observes) we have in the
work the manner and the final cause of his Passion. Ser. t^rti^^ de Pass. Dom.
For in the work there is Patience, in the manner Humility, in the cause
Charity commended unto us. And indeed his Patience in the one was so
insuperable, his Humility in the other so admirable, and his Charity in the
third so inestimable, as that they pass our expressions, and are fir for no
less than Exstasies of apprehension: And such is the nature of those Virtues,
as that if we rightly follow him in these steps of his Example, we shall
undoubtedly pursue the highest degree that can be of Virtue and Holiness: for
if Patience has her perfect work, it Jam. 1. 4.
will make us perfect and entire, wanting nothing. If we be humble and lowly in
heart, we are qualified 1 P^t. 5. 5.
for the Grace of God, for He gives grace to the humble: and if we follow
after Charity, we shall Romans 13. 10.
not only tread in the steps of his Example, but also walk in the way of his
Commandments, for Love is the fulfilling of the Law, and the end of the
Commandment 1 Timothy 1. 5.
is Charity. Herein then ought we so to follow the Example of our Blessed
Savior, as that we may come to a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ. And although now in this our state of Imperfection,
we cannot tread exactly in the steps of his Example, yet may we therein walk
uprightly: And this is all that the Grace of God in the Gospel of his Son, has
made necessary, as a means of our Happiness: for though perfect Conformity
thereunto be our duty, yet (God be thanked) Sincerity of endeavor after it
only, is an indispensable condition of our Salvation: so that the Holiness of
Christ's Example is adapted both to our Reason and to our Ability. What he has
done being our duty, how plainly does it lead us unto Holiness? But, but what
we can do, being a condition of our Salvation, how graciously does it stoop to
our infirmities? How satisfactory therefore is the Religion which we may read
in the red Letters of our Savior's Blood and Passion? with what delight and
complacency may our Reason receive it, and our rational faculties contemplate
and think on it?

Especially considering that the Religion therein recommended unto us, does not
only lead us unto holiness, but also (more than any other whatever) it does
dispose us to follow it; because it is taught us by an Example: for, Examples
we know (especially of those whose actions may be thought to warrant ours) have
the force of Natural Agents, as well as Moral. Commands do oblige, and Promises
do persuade us to obedience; but Examples do (in some sort) constrain and drive
us to an Imitation: The reason I suppose is, because Example makes its way to
the Affections, not only by the Understanding, but also by Imagination: Such is
the force of prevalent Affection, as that out of the abundance of the Heart the
Eye looks, the Foot walks, and indeed the whole Man moves as well as the
Mouth speaks: And observable it is, that there is a kind of plastic power in
Imagination, whereby it shapes and forms a man as much as may be* into a
conformity likeness or resemblance of the image of persons or things therein
lodged by a strong impression, and this is apt much more vigorously to incite
the Affections, than bare Precepts can do to a prosecution. If then we did set
the Lord always before us, and meditate so frequently as we ought on our
Savior in his Sufferings, how conformable should we be to his death? how
crucified to the World, and mortified to the ^lesh? how patient in adversity,
and humble in prosperity? how resolute not to be overcome of evil, but to
overcome evil with good? In short, how servent in Charity, and consequently
advanced should we be in all Virtue, if we did rightly understand and duly
consider the Temptations and Sufferings of our Bl^ssed ^^od Jesus: for they not
only have the efficacy of a most powerful Example, but also 3. They give us
the gr^atest encouragement and assistance that can be to follow it: For (as we
have already seen) Christ suffered and was tempted, that he might be able to
succor them that are tempted. This is one gr^a^ advantage which we Christians
have above the holy Patriarchs and Pr^phets of Old: they indeed did believe in
the M^ssias that was to come, and they did h^pe to be saved by his future
Merits: but they then had not an high Priest in Heaven that could be touched
with a ^eeling of their infirmities; but (blessed be God) We have* and what a
migh^y encouragement is this unto us, to take his Yoke upon us and to learn of
him, i. e. advisedly and constantly to frame our selves to keep his
Commandments and follow his Example? With what vigorous r^solutions may it
inspirit us? With what magnaninmity and fortitude *notwithstanding all
oppositions) may it animate and embolden us to wressle* not with ^l^sh and
blood only, but with Principaliti^s and Powers, with the Rulers of the darkness
of this World* and spiritual wi^kedness in high pla^^s? Since the Captain of
our Salvation all alone, and that when he was at the lowest, both in single
Duels, and when their f^rces were united against him, has foiled and beaten
both his and our enemies, and is now made perfect in glory and power over them;
whom shall we fear, of whom n^ed we be afraid in the way of our duty? When we
consider that He who upholdeth all things by the Word of his Power, by which
also they are made to bow unto and ob y him, does himself sympathize with us in
all our pr^ssures and troubles, afflictions and temptations, to the end that he
might be able, i. e. affectionately disposed to succor and therein to help us:
how exceedingly (almost infinitely) does it pr^ponderate and outweigh all the
discouragements, that we can possibly find or fancy, either from the
imbecility of humane Nature, or the power of Temptation, or whatever other
topics there are, from whence men think to draw excuses for their
disobedience? how do they all vanish and evaporate into Air before this one
consideration, viz. That He who now governs the World, and shall h^reafter
judge it, is touched with a feeling of our infirmities, and is able to succor
them that are tempted? What encouragement can we desire, or indeed can he give
us greater than this, to continue his faithful Souldi^rs and S^rvants unto our
Life's end?

Let us then hear the conclusion of the whole matter, which is this; That
seeing our Bl^ssed Lord Jesus in Redeeming us, has so e^fectually rescued us
out of the hand of the Devil, and s^ brought us into the Liberty of Gods
Service, as that the Prince of the power of the Air, who rules in the Children
of disobedience, cannot now approach to hurt us without his permission, and our
own unworthy defection from him; He has thereby obtained such an indisputable
Right of Dominion over us, as that his Commands do most evidently lay the
obligation of most just Authority upon us. And forasmuch as Christ in the days
of his flesh made such an All-sufficient Atonement to his Father, and now lives
to make such Intercession for us, as have and do procure to us, the most
inestimable Benefits and Favors, that in this life can be conferred on us, the
most ample, and the highest satisfaction that our Reason can expect to find in
our Religion, together with the greatest Encouragement, that our Souls can have
to obey it, we must of necessity (by the rules of Gratitude, i. e. by the Laws
of our own Nature) be most highly obliged so to do. For, that a man which
receives Benefit from another of mere Grace, endeavor that he which gives
it, have no reasonable cause to repent him of his good will, the Leviathan it
self grants to be a P. 1. cap. 15.
Law of Nature. Although this be true, yet is it but an ill-favored definition
of Gratitude, for it deforms the face of that fair Virtue, as if it looked
directly only on it self, and asquint upon its Benefactour, and had no design,
but only to avoid an impend^nt evil, viz. his repentance of his good will: but
there is more in it than so, for it belongs to the nature of it, for a benefit
received from any one, presently in heart and good Will largely to requite the
Vid. Aquin. 22. ^. Q. 106. Sharrock de Officiis secundum Natureae jus. cap. 5.
Donor: and afterward seasonably to do it in word and deed according to the
affection of the Giver, and the ability of the Receiver: And to this we are
obliged by the very Law of our Nature; and consequently this we are bound to do
unto God for the Benefits of our Redemption by our Blessed Lord Jesus. But
alas, they are so free and transcendently great, as that they infinitely exceed
all requital, and justify astonishment at the goodness of the Donor. What then
shall we render unto the Lord for them? it is evident we cannot be sufficiently
thankful: yet the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name, and that of our
lives in keeping his Command^^nts, it is manifest we may render unto him. Could
we do more, more we should be obliged to do; the very Law of our own Nature
would tell us, that both the greatness of the Benefits and the affection of the
Giver would deserve it at our hands. How just therefore and reasonable is it
for us to do what we can? i. e. out of a Principle of Love and Gratitude, and
not of fear only, to keep his Commandments, and (what ever it costs us) to wal^
in the same to our Lives end.

Which God of his Mercy grant all men Grace to do, through the same Jesus
Christ our Lord, To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be Glory and
Honor, Power and Dominion, Praise and Thanksgiving World without End.

Amen.
FINIS.
Books Printed for William Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple-Barre, 1679.
1. THE Complete Vineyard or a most excellent way for the planting of Vines in
England, and to make Win^ of their Grapes according to the French and German
way, by W. Hughes, price 2 s.

2. A Description of Candia with an Account of the Siege and Surrender of it
into the hands of the Turks, octa. price 1 s.

3. The Deaf and Dumb man's Discourse, being a discourse of such as are born
Deaf and Dumb, showing how they may express the sentiments of their minds,
together with an account of the Rationality of Beasts, Particularly of the
Reason of the Elephant, price 1 s.

4. An Answer to Mr. Fergusons doctrine about Christ's Justification and
Sanctification, together with an account of the extent of Christ's Death, by J.
Knowles. octa. pr. 1 s. 6 d.

5. Sir Henry Blunt's Voyage in the Levant, in Twelves, price 1 s.

6. The Complete Measurer, or a new and exact way of Mensuration, by Tho.
Hammond, octavo, price 1 s.

7. Mr. Hobbes's Rosetum Geometricum, five propositiones aliquot frustra
antehac tentatae, cum censura brevi Doctrinae Wallisianae Authore. T. Hobbes.
Quarto.

8. The Carpenters Rule made easy, or, The Art of Measuring of Superficies and
Solids etc. 3 d. Edition. To which is added Gaugeing, by J. Darling.

9. The Flower-Garden enlarged, Showing how to order and increase all manner of
Flowers, whether by Layers, Slips, Off sets, Cuttings, S^eds, etc. Also how to
draw a Horizontal Dial in a Garden. With a Treatise of all Roots, Plants,
Trees, Shrubs, Fruits, Herbs, in the Kings Plantations. Twelves.

10. The Elegant Poems of Dr. Richard Corbet, Dean of Christ-Church in Oxford,
after, Bishop of Norwich. Twelves.

11. Brownlows Reports Complete in two Parts. Quarto.

12. The Court of Curiosity, wherein by the Lot the most intricate Questions
are resolved, and Nocturnal Dreams and Visions explained, according to the
Doctrine of the Ancients, to which is added a discourse of Physiognomy, and
Character of Countries. Written in French, and now translated into Engli^h, by
J. G. Gent. of the Inner Temple, London, the Second Edition. Twelves.

13. Lux Mathematica excussa Collisionibus. J^. Wallisii and Tho. Hobbes,
multis and sulgentissimis aucta radiis, Authore R. R. Quarto.

14. Principia and Problema^a aliquot Geometrica ante desperata nunc breviter
explicata and demonstrata Autho. T. Hobbes.

15. The American Physician, treating of all the Roots, Herbs, etc. in America,
by W. H^ghes.

16. The Great Law of Nature about Self-preservation, vindicated against the
abuses in Mr. Hobbes's Leviathan. Twelves.

17. Calliop^s Cabinet opened, wherein all Gentlemen may be informed how to
order themselves, for Feasts, Funerals, and all Heroic meetings: to know all
degrees of Honor, and how all degrees are to take place* with a Dictionary for
Herald-Terms. Twelves.

18. A Discourse of the Dukedom of Modena, the Native Country of her Royal
^ighness the Duchess of York. Quarto, 6 d.

19. Brevis Demonstra^io, Proving the Truth and Excellency of the Christian
Religion by Reason; Recommended to all rational men by several eminent Divines
in London. Twelves.

20. The Apophthegms or Witty Sentences of Sir Francis Bacon. Price bound 6 d.

21. The Primitive Institution, or a seasonable discourse of Catechizing;
wherein is showed the Antiquity, Benefits, and Necessity thereof, together with
its suitablenss to heal the present distempers of the Church, by L. Addison. D.
D.

22. The present State of the Jews, wherein is contained an exact Account of
all their present Customs, Secular and Religious: To which is annexed a
Discourse of the Mis^a, Talm^d, and Gemara, by L. Addison. D. D.

23. Homers Works Translated out of Greek into English, by Tho. Hobbes of
Mal^sbury.

24. The Golden Rule of Arithmetic, made more easy than is commonly found in
our Books of Arithmetic, by C. H. Octavo.

25. A Supplement or 3 d. Volumn to Mr. Hobbes's Works, in Qua.

26. The Grounds of Sovereignty and Greatness, in Quarto.

27. a^^ra Regis, Or, The present State of ^ondon, containing the Antiquity,
Frame, Walls, River, Bridge, Gates, Tower, Cathedral, Officers, Courts,
Customs, Franchises, etc. of that City. Octavo, price 1 s.

28. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of a sober Religious man found drowned in
a Pit; since revised and enlarged by the Author.

29. A Visitation Sermon preached at Chichester, by W Howell. Qua.

30. The School of Righteousness: A Sermon preached before the King, by His
Grace the present Archbishop of Canterbury. Quarto, price 6 d.

31. The Circumcision of the Great Turk's Son, and the Ceremony of the Marriage
of his Daughter, sent over by the English Ambassador's Secretary.

32. Scarron's Comical Romance, or, A ^ace^ious History of a Company of
Stage Players; interwoven with diverse choice Novells, rare Adventures, and
amorous Intrigues: Written in French by the Famous and Witty Monsieur Scarron,
now done into Engli^h by J. B. Gent. Fol.

33. A Letter about Liberty and Necessity: Written by Thomas Hobbes of
Mal^sbury, to the Duke of Newcastle, with Observations on it by the Bishop of
Ely. 1678.

34. A Modest plea for the Clergy of the Church of England; Wherein is
considered the Original, Antiquity, Necessity, together with the occasion they
are so slighted and contemned, Octa. 1678.

35. A Treatise of Wool and Cattle, showing how far they raise or abate the
value of Lands in England. Quarto.

36. An excellent Rationable Discourse of the Lawfulness to take Use for money,
by the Learned Knight, Sir Robert Filmer, and published with a Preface to it,
by Sir Roger Twisden. 1678.

37. The Wonders of the Peak in Darby-shire, called the Devi^s-Arse of Peak, in
Latin and English. Octavo, 1678.

38. The Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Philosophy, Moral and Natural:
Treating of the Egyptians, Arabians, Grecians, Romans, English, Germans,
French, Spanish, Italian, etc. Philosophers, and their Philosophy, with the use
to be made of it. 1678.

39. Decameron Physiologicum, or, ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy, by Tho.
Hobbes of Malmsbury. To which is added the proportion of Straight Line, to half
the Arc of a Quadrant by the same Author. 1678.

40. Melpomene, or the Muses Delight, being new Poems and Songs, Written by the
great Wits of our present Age. 1678.

41. Clelia, an Excellent new Romance, in 5 Parts, in Fol.

Plays Printed for W. Crook.
1. White Devil, or, Vittoria Coromb^na. 2. The old Troop, or, Monsieur Raggou.
3. Catalines Conspiracy, by ^. Johnson. 4. Amorous Gallant, or, Love in
Fashion. 5. Mock Duellist, or, The French Vallett. 6. Wrangling Lovers, or, The
Invisible Mistress. 7. Tom Essence, or, The modish Wife. 8. French Conjurer.
1678. 9. Wits led by the Nose, or, The Poets Revenge. 1678. 10. Rival King,
or, The Loves of Oroondates. 1678. 11. Constant Nymph, or, Rambling Shepherd.
1678. 12. Counterfeit Bridegroom, or, Defeated Widow. 1678. 13. Tunbridge
Wells, or, A days Courtship. 1678. 14. The Man of New Market. 1678.
Books Printed for W. Crook, this Year 1679.
1. The Confinement, A Poem, with Annotations upon it. Octavo, price 1 s. 2.
Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae, Author. Francis^. Clark, Edit. Secunda.
Twelves, price bound 1 s. 3. Justifying of Faith, or the Faith by which the
Just do live. To which is added a Discourse of the Excellency of the
Common Prayer Book. Octavo, price bound 1 s. 4. The first State of Mahumadisme,
or an Account of the Author and Doctrines of that Imposture. Octavo, price
bound 2 ^.
FINIS.

