A Practical DISCOURSE OF Silence and Submission: SHOWING, That Good MEN SHOULD
Possess their Souls in PATIENCE UNDER THE Severest Providence, And
particularly In the Loss of Dear Relations. Preached at St. Thomas's Hospital,
Southwark.

By WILLIAM HVGHES, Hospitaler there.

Shall we receive Good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil?

Job 2.20. Pessimi est Debitoris Creditore faceri convitium.

Sen. de Cons. ad Mart. c. 10. LONDON: Printed by W. Only, for I. Salusbury,
at the Rising-Sun in Cornhil. 1694.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir Robert Clayton, Knight. Alderman of the City of
London, AND President of St. Thomas's Hospital, in Southwark.
To the Worshipful, James Reading, Esquire Treasurer of the said Hospital. AND To
the rest of the Right Worshipful, Worshipful, and Worthy Governors of the same.
Right Worshipful, etc.
THE Divine Preacher tells us; It Is better to go the House of Mourning, than to
the House of Feasting. And there is indeed great reason for his saying so. It Is
something, that this latter place commonly leaves Men Vainer, than it finds
them. But it is a weighty one that he is express in: the former; That, is, the
end of all Men, and the living will lay it to heart. It shows; What all must
come to: therefore, the need of being prepared accordingly. Now, that my Lot is
fallen in a great Family of greater Sorrows, although it be your greatest Care to
turn those into the Speediest Joys; is no Absurdity to affirm. I Am sure,
besides the sad Calamities of our Domestics, the Experience of my small
Apartment has for these two Years past, by frequent and grievous Sickness, and
by Death lately, met with loud Knels of Heaviness. Nor may we doubt, but that
many of your selves, some time or other, have heard such doleful Lessons. Nay,
who can tell, how soon those, yet exempted, may taste of the same Bitter Cup;
and perhaps drink deeper of it? So that a Discourse, adapted to such
Circumstances, cannot be unseasonable. Especially, if it respect Preventing,
Supporting, Delivering thence, and making wise Improvement thereof. All which
Advantages these Papers aim at: and, it is hoped, do not utterly miss their
Mark.

Unto your Worships, the Essay, such as it is, is most humbly dedicated: as to
It Is Author's Patrons; and most worthy of more Honor than is within his reach
to pay you. To forbear (tho not forget) your kind Respect unto Himself: nor to
insist upon the most Signal, but Secret, Charities of several of you, unto many
hundred Pounds, (which, tho you would not have your left hand know what your
right hand did, could not be quite concealed; indeed, such Rare Examples ought
not): Your Joint Compassion, and Tender Care of the Many Poor in this Great
Hospital, proclaim your Merit, hardly Imitable; I Am sure, truly Admirable! For,
besides your Constant Provision of the Best Food, and Physic, and Surgery,
that you can get; with very meet, both Firing, Lodging, and Attendance, you are
now New-building of their House; and at the vast Expense of many Thousand
Pounds. Whereby, at once you prevent their being Buried Alive in the Ruins of
an Old-decayed-Place; and likewise provide for, Better-Preserving Life, and
Sooner-Restoring Health, unto them, by a far more Airy, Sweet, and Pleasant
Dwelling, than before they had: or ever could have hoped for, But from Your
Selves. That the God of Mercy, who first inclined you, may preserve and prosper
you, to the finishing of this Earthly Tabernacle for his Poor; and, in due
season, Reward you with an Habitation not made with hands, Eternal in the
Heavens, is the Prayer of,

Right Worshipful, etc. Your very Hamble Servant, W. Hughes, Hospitaler.

To my Beloved Friends, THE Officers and Patients, OF St. Thomas's Hospital, in
Southwark.
Beloved Friends,
THE Calamities of this House in general, and the particular Distresses of most
of us, call aloud upon us, to seek a Refuge from the Storm; at least, to get
some Shelter, till it be over. My hopes are, that these Sermons will somewhat
Contribute to those Ends; if due Regard be had unto them. And though mine own
Afflictions were their Midwife; yet, being thus brought forth, they may be
Useful unto Others also. I should be very glad to do you Good from the Press;
notwithstanding so many of you slight my Service from the Pew, and Pulpit. For
to my Grief I speak it, it is very doubtful, whether a fifth Part of you (that
can) be constant at the Chapel. 'Twas altogether otherwise in the former Years
of my Ministry here. And I am sure, my Pains are nothing abated: but my
Judgment somewhat improved since. But then indeed we had the Happiness of a
Steward, who made Conscience of the Duty of his Place; and did not only duly
come himself, but brought Others with him; and punished those who, causelessly,
absented. And I am fully of Opinion, that True Religion was as thriving then
among as, as ever is has been since. Do not our Public Orders tell all
Officers here (as well as Patients;) that, without reasonable Excuse, they mst
be constant at the Public Worship? And does not every Officer Enter on his
Place upon those Terms? Can it be Conscience then; to take the Wages, and not
do the Work? Will not That say; let alone the Salary, or buckle to the Service?
How many, notwithstanding, are never present? So vain a Coyness with some, and
vile Profaneness with others, has of late times prevailed among us! Were there
just Quarrel at the Public Prayers; (as I know no Person with us, that has
any; or justly can have;) must Sermons suffer for that, however? Has Any a
Grudge against the Minister? Surely a Wise Man will not sullenly leave his
Food, because the Cook has angered him? But if the Bread of Life be given you
here; and you refuse it: is not the Giver, more contemned, than he that brings
it? Beware of their most heavy Guilt; whose Souls (they said) loathed that
light Bread. For that was spoken against God, as well as Moses, Number. 21.5. Tho,
you are told expressly; to Despise, or not to Hear (which are both One) a
Gospel-Minister, is serving both the Son and Father too, at the self-same rate,
Luke 10.16. If a very few can plead, Their Relations elsewhere, in their own
Defense. Why? Without meddling with the Merits of the Cause; (and beside what
was said about twenty lines before) Is not the Plea as good; to justify an
hungry Man's Refusal of wholesome Food at his loving Neighbor's; because,
forsooth it was not set upon his own Table, where he did use to Eat? Let us be
faithful to our Souls. Is not the want of Spiritual Appetite, our great
Distemper? Did we hunger, thirst, and long for God: would we be so Coy, as to
meet him only where we please; and when ourselves think sitting? Surely we
would be glad at any place, and as often as we could, to enjoy his blessed
Company in his holy Ordinances. We should flock as Doves to our Windows: and
the Feet of them that bring glad Tidings, whoever they were, would be beautiful
in our Eyes. Were we so sensibly affected, as we should be, with our weak
Faith, chill Love, faint Hope, earthly Mind, and strong Corruptions; the
Opportunities for quickening Graces, and killing Lusts now neglected, if not
despised, would be more welcome to us; and be with greater Diligence improved
by us. But if a Form of Godliness without the Power be all we mind (so, it is
with thousands:) as that will easily serve with Men, though not with God; so it is
no marvel, that our sorry Humors, and not serious Conscience, steer our Course
for us. Well: Manna lies abundantly about our Tents at present: but it may so
happen (I Am sure our Sins deserve it) that such Scraps as these, now reckoned
only worthy to be thrown under Table, may e're long be accounted Dainties.
Black Clouds are over us: Distresses near us: Grim Death, most certainly is not
far from us. O that we may be Wise, and husband so that little inch of Time yet
left, in true Christian Praying, Hearing, Reading, Meditation, and holy
Walking, that we may be prepared for a Blessed Eternity: This is the hearty
Desire of,

Your Souls Faithful, and Truth-telling Friend, W. H.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. l. 9. for 3dly, r. 2dly, p. 10. l. 29. after thought, a Period. p. 15.
l. 23. r. Impatience. p. 18. l. 10. r. afflicted for affected. p. 20. l. 23.
after them, Coma. p. 33. l. 5. r. Blood. p. 39. l. 19. after it, r. self. p.
41. l. 5. after Bar, r. thereto.

A Practical Discourse ON The Severest Providence, etc.
PSALM XXXIX. ix. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou, Lord did
it.


MAn is born unto trouble, (says holy Job) as the sparks fly upwards; which
constantly is the nature of them. And to the certain truth of that Assertion,
Towas, Cities, and Courts; in Pagan, Tunkish, and Christian Countries, do ever
and anon bear ample Testimony. For there is neither Quality, Age, nor Sex of
Mortals can plead a Privilege, to be exempted thence. But, of all other Men,
the truly Pions have the most cause to expect their share therein; and least
reason, truly, to complain thereof. That blessed Book, whereto they are not
strangers, as others are, informs them; that it is their Lot, to have their
Evil things here, and their Good hereafter. But, the mean while, it is far from
justifing their raising Mole-hills into Mountains; and making of their Troubles
a great deal worser than indeed they are. Nay, it condemns, justly, and
severely, Laying the Products of their own Follies to the Fault of God; as if
he dealt not fairly by them, when, in truth, it is they fall soul upon
themselves; both in the bringing, and the bearing all they suffer.

Now, having often seen this guilt too much abroad; and being myself more than
once, (so it has seemed meet to the Righteous Providence) in danger of
plunging into the same Gulf; I held it necessary for the Common Interest of
Christianity, as well as my own, to make Enquiry after, and to sind out the
means, whereby good People may recover from, and not relapse into, a case so
dangerous. My thoughts then, being once upon Enquiry, soon lighted on this
welcome Text. And truly, it is an excellent Remedy! which also I nothing doubt,
will prove successful where it is duly used. The Use whereof, I think, should be
according to the Method my following Discourse prescribes.

Context.] The Psalm does plainly manifest, that its Author, David, was
laboring under a very sore Distress. Vid. Chrysostom. Calv. P^^c. M^nis, etc.
Whether it arose from bodily Sickness, as some have thought, or the Rebellion
of his Darling, Absalon, as others are of Opinion, or from any other Cause, (as
many might be gues'd at) since none's expres'd; to make strict Search about it,
would savor more of fruitless Curiosity, than of useful Industry; and in the
Issue, leave us at Uncertainty too. This he, that runs through the whole,
may quickly read, as written there, in Capital Letters, That there was such a
Storm (from whencesoever it rose) that had like to have shipwrack'd all. It
seems, as if the Rigging were torn in pieces, the Hull shrewdly shattered, and
the Freight likewise in manifest jeopardy to perish in the Deep. The Afflicted,
in Spirit, Soul, and Body, to all appearance, received no little Damage by the
same. For Proof whereof, 'twere very easy to offer several Instances from the
Psalm, would it not be too tedious particularly to insist upon them.

However, something must appear in viewing of the Parts thereof: which are
these two in general:

1. The Psalmist's Procedure with himself, under his great Affliction; and that
in the two first Verses; resumed also in my Text.

2. The Effects of that Procedure with himself upon him, in the following
Verses, even to the end.

1. As to the former: The course he takes (as you may read) is, to seal his
Lips, and silence his Heart too. That not a Word might slip from thence to show
one discontented Thought toward God there. Thus he stops his Mouth, and stills
his Mind at once; that no Complaint, or any Murmr might be with him against
the Divine Providence, for the severer Methods used toward him. But yet (Good
Man) herein it happened unto him, as it sometimes may to the best Archer in the
World; who to prevent his Arrow's falling short, levels so high, that he
over-shoots his Mark. For the Holy Psalmist also (though to his Grief) does
over-do his Work for a little while. He held his peace from good: but thence
his sorrow was stirred, Verse 2. latter end. But the sault is soon amended, by
the new Aim he takes. As will be seen by,

3. The Fruit of his thus dealing with himself: which, truly, was not to be
repented of. And 'twas two fold:

1. Internal. All Complaints, and Repinings too, against God's Justice being
stifled, his Meditations are set warm at work upon his Mercy: Those raise his
passionate Desires after him, and they force their passage through his Lips
unto him. His heart was hot, the fire burnt; and then his Tongue stood still no
longer. Verse 3. Then spoke I with my tongue, says he. Thus comes the other
Effect.

2. External. viz. Hearty Prayer unto the just and gracious God, made up of
three particlar Petitions first; and then a general one, as the Conclusion.

1. He begs particularly: 1. For an affecting Sense of his Frailty and Vanity:
Make me to know mine end, etc. Verse 4. And pleads humbly for Success herein,
to Ver. 8.2. Then for pardon of his sin, Ver. 8. Deliver me from all my
transgressions, etc. Using my Text for furtherance of his Suit. And lastly, He
prays Deliverance from his Afflictions also: Remove thy stroke, etc. Ver. 10,
11. urging for pity; both the Load that lay upon him, and his, and all others,
Inability to stand up under Divine Displeasure.

2. He concludes with a general Supplication, for a gracious Answer to his
former Petitions: and for prevailing, represents his sad Condition as a most
suitable Object of Divine Compassion, Ver. 12, 13.

But I must return to the second particular Petition; whereto I did observe, my
Text was added as an Enforcement of it.

David, Ver. 8. begging pardon for his Sins, which were the cause of all his
Troubles; and which, particularly, made wicked Men to open their mouths against
him; begging pardon, as I was saying, in these words, Deliver me from all my
transgressions, and make me not the reproach of the foolish; now, that this
humble Suit might speed the better, readily yields, and plainly enough makes
this Confession: That notwithstanding their Reproaches, as well as all his
other Troubles, were most unjust from Men; yet they came not without the
justest reason from the Lord upon him. And therefore he had not one Word to
speak, nor Thought to think, against the same: I was dumb, (says he) I opened
not my mouth, etc.

Thus stands the Text in relation to the Context: But if we consider it in its
self, then it gives us,

1. A sresh Account of David's Carriage under his great Distresses.

2. The important Reason why he did so.

1. The former here: I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, where the latter Phrase
ascends higher than that before it. Both importing plainly; that as he did
not speak at all, so he never so much as offered it neither. Yea, and the
Hebrew Verb, in the latter Clause, being of the Future Tense does intimate,
that he would not ever make any such attempt in time to come. And this
demonstrates the absolute silence and perfect satisfaction his Soul was brought
unto under that heavy Providence, whatever it was, that lay upon him. For as
when the Waves don't swell the Winds are still; so when the Mouth makes no
complaint, the Heart does use to be at rest. And it is our Savior's saying, Out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Matthew. 12.34.

2. The latter part is there: Because thou, Lord, did it. As who should say,
Whatever influence second Causes may have had immediately upon my present
Troubles, and whatever Imputation I may justly lay on Persons, or on Things,
for what I suffer, I must not here abide, but pass on further, through them and
beyond them, to the first Cause of all: Thou, Lord, did it. This was like
holy Job; who, for all the mischief Satan, the Chaldeans and Sabeans wickedly
did him, looks higher to the righteous Hand of God, and humbly bows before him,
saying, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away; and blessed be the Name of
the Lord, Job 1.21. We see Good Men are utterly unlike the sottish Cur, which
snarleth at the Stone that hits him, until he dangers breaking of his Teeth in
gnawing it, without regard unto the Hand that threw it. The Ungodly commonly
are thus guilty; and are reproved justly by the Prophet for it, Lord, when thy
hand is lifted up, they will not see, Isai. 26.11. But the Pious practice
otherwise, as we find; and thence find also cause to stoop to God, and possess
their Souls in patience under all their Sufferings. And that there is
sufficient reason so to do, we shall see anon; when, besides all other
Arguments, it will appear particularly, what a prevailing influence the latter
part of my Text has on the former.

In order whereunto, since there is just presumption, that this great Example
is obliging to all other Persons in like Circumstances, let this Proposition
seriously be considered by us, viz.

Propos.] A Godly Person is to be still and silent, and by no means impatient
under the heaviest Hand of God upon him.

Now this Proposition being plain, and very intelligible in all the Terms
thereof, we have only need of, 1. A further Confirmation of it. 2. A fair
Solution of some Objections. 3. and lastly, Some Guidance for the better
Application of the whole unto our selves for good. Whereof in order. And,

1st, 1. Proof, by Examples and Arguments.
To make full Proof, I shall produce two kinds of Evidences, viz. Plain
Examples, and Powerfal Arguments, and with a good stock of both from the Holy
Scriptures. I begin with Plain Examples.

I. Examples.] They shall be Seven or Eight, and every one well deserving
special Observation.

I will take them in that order the Scriptures set them: And so begin with,

1. Moses. That the most wise and gracious Providence saw meet to exercise this
most eminent Saint with various Trials, and some that had much sharpness in
them, the Book of God bears ample testimony: nor is it silent about that even
and quiet Temper wherein his Soul was preserved under them. The danger of his
Life from the hands of Pharaoh, at his first appearance, in one of his
Brethrens cause, against an Egyptian, made him to fly the Country for his
fafety. But he Heb. 11.27
endured it, says the Text, and left no Murmuring nor Complaints behind him;
no, nor carried he any with him, that we can sind, Exodus 2.15. His Brethren
likewise often dealt so unkindly by him, and their Insolences toward him (not
withstanding his most constant and tender concernment for them) were so
insufferable, that the righteous God does espouse the quarrel, and is provoked
to destroy them, root and branch, for the same. Yea, and he promised Moses to
make of him a Nation mightier and greater than they were, if he would consent
thereto. But he, good Man, Exodus 32.10, 11.
bears all with patience from Them, Number. 11.17, 19.
and is most instant with God for saving of them; Deuteronomy. 9.18, etc.
and so requites them good for evil. Why, though Numb. 26.59.
Aaron and Miriam, that came out of the same Womb with him, affronted and
reviled him, (unjustly we are sure, because God was offended with them highly
for the same) yet he takes it quietly; and begs, and procures God's pardon to
them for it, Numb. 12.9, 13. Nay, when the Wise of his Bosom taunts him to his
face, and at the same time the Face of God was frowning on him also, yet is he
the same Man still, Exodus 4.24, 25.

Should not we think, that these were none of them slight Afflictions, though
some more sharp than others? Would they not easily warp us to impatience under
them? But as it is written, That he was the meekest man upon the face of the
earth, Numb. 12.3; doubtless 'twas meant, that he was not only so toward Men,
but toward God also.

However, you shall yet hear greater things than these.

2. Aaron, It Is true, he had great Frailties in him, and like Afflictions on
him; but still he has this excellent Character given him, The saint of the
Lord, Psalm. 106.16. Now this Saint has a bloody Breach made by an angry God
upon his Family, and not for any personal Crime of his neither; nay, the Method
was not usual, but extraordinary, and full of terror: His Sons make a daring,
but it proved a dear, Adventure. They offered strange fire before the Lord; and
a more strange fire from the Lord falls down upon them, and devoured them,
Levit. 10.1, 2, 3. Fire, in it self, is a very furious and frightful Element;
but this, being not the fire that burned in the bush, and burnt it not, Exodus
3.2, 3. nor that which carried up Elijah into Heaven; so far from hurting him,
as making of him happy, and putting him out of the reach of Hurt for ever: No,
but a fire from the Lord, says the Text; who is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29:
especially to bold Offenders; that are as dried Stubble before him. This offers
one terrible Circumstance to our thoughts, Moreover, this Fire falls down, not
upon the good Man, Aaron's, House, or Goods, or Cattle; any of which might have
had dread enough therein: but on his Children, on his Sons, his Sons that were
God's Ministers; nor upon one alone, but two at once: not in the Fields, or in
a private House, where possibly it might have been concealed, at least but
little notice taken of it: but in the Tabernacle; and at God's Public Worship;
and in their Ministration there; and before the face of all the Congregation.
Here is an heap of Circumstances, not one of which but carries horror and
astonishment with it: but all, together, are utterly confounding. Well, but
hereupon how does the good, but sad Father, behave himself? What? Does he fret,
and fume, and vex his Soul to death again? No, no. Does he rage, and rave, and
fly in the face of God upon it? 'Twas further from him. Jehoram's great, but
wicked Messenger, in a time of Distress, would say, This evil is of the Lord;
why should we wait for the Lord any longer? 2 Kings 6.33. He bids adieu to God;
and let him find some other Attendants, if he please. Job's naughty Wife would
have prompted him to relieve himself, by cursing God, and dying together with
his sons, Job 2.9. But this pious Person was of another spirit: sor says the
Text, Aaron held his peace. His silent Soul sealed up his lips; and the
submission of his heart kept his mouth close shut. He knew who did it: and to
undo God's Work, so much as by a word or thought; no Creature ought to make one
attempt. The least dislike abetted, bids all (in Humane reach) unto it: No,
when God has done, he will not begin, but end together with him, and be most
humbly (...) to him, He held his peace. A (...), and well worth the writing
after.

3. (...) next, and against this good old Man (though under much Infirmity) the
Almighty dips his Pen in Gaul and Vinegar. 1 Samuel 3.11 etc.
And truly they are sharp and bitter things that are written in the sacred Book
against him, and his Family with him. It Is not the pruning Branches, or lopping
off some greater Boughs; but it is the digging up by the very Roots, that is
insisted on. And for his full assurance, he must be certified once and again
thereof. Chap. 2, and 3.
First by a nameless Prophet, and then by his Darling-pupil, Samuel. The former
tells him from the mouth of God, that, The days come that I will cut off thine
arm, and the arm of thy father's house; and there shall not be an old man in
thine house for ever, Chap. 2.31, 32. with much more terrible Tidings besides
this. And the latter, That God would perform against Eli all things which he
had spoken concerning his house; and that he would judge it for ever, Chap.
3.13, etc. with other Threats like those. Well now: how does this aged Father
entertain the doleful News? Does he dispatch the Messenger that brought such
unwelcome Tidings? Or so much as wish unto him Micaiah's Doom from wicked Ahab,
To be clapped in goal, and be fed with bread and water of affliction? Does he
curse his harder Fates, whereby he was chained unto such unavoidable Misery;
and like the Desperate Qui, manu sanguine suo repleta, and in ae^a (...),
dixit; Vicisti Galilaee. Theed. Hist. 4.25.
Julian, go off the Earth with bidding a Defiance to the God of Heaven? As much
unlike those Tempers, as Heaven is unto Hell. It Is taken by him without the
least Complaint; and without so much as any Token of Regret. If you feel his
Pulse, there is nothing of a Feavour on him. The very Attendants of Impatience
are driven into Exile by him. Hear his own words, It is the Lord; let him do
what seems him good, Verse 18. As who should say, All are his own, and he
may, therewithal, and ought to do what is best pleasing to himself. Who are we,
entire Dependants on him, to call him to account about his matters? God past a
Sentence that seemed hard indeed; but this good Man approves it. Here was
Contentment unto admiration.

Perhaps you will say, But Judgment was not executed yet, only threatened. Right,
else 'twould have been too late to have enquired how he took the Tidings, when
he was not? But the double Assurance, that a Besom of Destruction was ready to
sweep him, and by no means to be prevented by him, was enough (to speak as Men)
to strike a terror of Distraction on him. But yet when others (who are mere
Mortals) might have proved like a tempestuous Sea, we find with him the
profoundest Calm. Oh! what a Pattern for our Imitation?

4. David is Fourth: And how does he acquit himself, when the provoked Majesty
of Heaven strikes even to death that Child he so much labored to preserve in
life? While it was yet alive (says he) I fasted and wept: for I said, Who can
tell whether God will be gracious to me, that the child may live? But now he is
dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I shall go to him,
but he shall not return to me, 2 Samuel 12.22, 23. If you reflect upon the
beginning of this Chapter, and bring down your eyes unto these Verses read, you
will find this Judgment on his Child was but on link of that long Chain
prepared for him by the Prophet Nathan, from the mouth of God: and when a
single link of any Chain is touching of us, it shows the rest are drawing
after, and that the whole will quickly reach us. Besides, this Punishment also
had those Sins that were the Parents of it, engraven in such Capital Letters
upon its Forehead, that though the Prophet brought him a Pardon sealed for his
own Life, the way of bringing him foul Transgressions into fresh remembrance,
could not but create as fresh, both blushings, startlings, and convulsions in
his Conscience for such great Miscarriages. Moreover, the Child we speak of,
was very dear unto him; witness his deep Humiliation on behalf thereof in
Fasting, Prayer, and lying on the Earth all night, Verse 16, 17. in spite of
the Importunity of his Counselors unto the contrary; if possible to have
gotten a Reprieve, at least, from Heaven for it. And lastly, his Servants were
afraid to impart the Tidings of the Child's Death to him, for fear he should
have done himself a Mischief upon hearing of it: As the Hebrew Phrase imports
(...)
; and both the Procul dubio malum sibi inferet.
Syriack and the Ne malum sibi inferat.
Arabic Version read.

Now all these Considerations put together make it fully manifest; that this
Stroke of Providence must needs fall very heavy; and certainly was enough to
shake him sorely; if not link him utterly to the Ground.

Yet mark his Stilness under so great a Storm. Whilst the Child was living, he
did his utmost to preserve the Life thereof. But when 'twas Dead, What had he
else to do; but at the least to acquiesce in what the Lord had done? And note,
what weighty Arguments he stops the mouth of all Impatients by. And they are
three,

1. 'Twere most Unreasonable to Afflict my self (says he) for this Affliction
any longer. Wherefore should I fast: i. now when the Child is Dead? Produce
just Cause, or any color of Reason for that: if any of you are capable so to
do. Reason is so far from Patronizing such a Practice, that it quite abandons
it; as carrying,

2. Perfect Vanity, and impertinent Folly in the face thereof. Can I bring him
back again? i. to life. Kings can do much, indeed. And good Kings, in all
reason, should be able to do more than other. (Now in this number David was.)
But this is above all Mortal Art and Power. The King of Kings alone is
sufficient for such Work.

3. To conclude: I have other business, and of far greater conscquence upon my
hands, faith it is great Man. Instead of foolish and fruitless afflicting of my
thoughts in the bringing of him back; it is my grand concernment to bethink me
of, and prepare myself for, Cur immoderate ferat ab isse, quem mox subsequeris?
Tert. de Patient. c. 9.
going unto him. Whose turn is next; God only, and no Mortal, knows. But this
I know, that I must go to him; how soon I known not; He cannot return to me.
Here lies the Art of putting such an Affair into its right Method. And proves
the best Improvement of what we may account the worst of Providence. So shall
the loss of some dear Friend tend to the saving of a dearer self, our precious
Soul.

This is the Example of that Person, who was A Man after God's own heart; and
who elsewhere too, and in a worser Case, was yet content, That God should do
unto him, as seemed good in his eyes, 2 Samuel 15.26.

And are not these such Steps as are most worthy to be trod in by us?

5. Job. Next let us look on Job: On him this glorious Character is bestowed,
even by God himself, as to a very NONESUCH, viz. A perfect, and an upright
man; that feared God, and eschewed evil, Chap. 1.8. Nay, his Judge, and the
Judge of all the World, declares him innocent, as to a Guilt deserving such a
Punishment as was falling on him. And, for full proof thereof, makes him a full
Amends, and ample Reparation for all him Losses, afterward. Chap. 42.10, etc.
But that, as yet, could not come under the Sufferer's Cognizance. Well: this so
excellent a Person's Calamities assault him like the Billows of the Sea; where
furious Tempests force them foreward, one upon another's back, till all before
them is overwelmed by them. First, the bad News of the Sabeans seizing on his
Oxen and his Asses, and slaying of his Servants that attended them. Then, how
the Lightning had consumed his Sheep and Shepherds all together. Next, that the
Chaldeans fell upon his Camels, and destroyed their Keepers too. And last of
all, (with scarcely a time to breathe between them, as we say,) the frightful
Death of his Dearest Children, Chap. 1.14, 15, no fewer then seven Sons, and
three Daughters, by the sudden fall of an House upon them, is brought unto his
Ears. Now, when so sad a Story, with all the frightful Circumstances of it,
shall be considered seriously by us, shall not we be apt to start these
question: What flesh could bear it: what heart of steel but must sink under it?
Well, grant the Case be insupportable unto mere Humanity: yet, Nothing is too
hard for God. Genesis 18.14. For though the flesh and the heart does fail, where He
is the strength of the heart, Ps. 73.26. there is full support notwithstanding.
His grace s sufficient, 2 Cor. 12.9, and can give Conquest, and make
Triumphant, when the other is utterly overcome and routed. See here a Proof!
Job is affected greatly, and his Soul, affected deeply. God's hand is very
heavy upon him. But it is far from driving him into Rebellion. The most humble
Submission is practiced by him: He worshipped, and said, Naked came I out of my
mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither. The Lord gave; and the Lord
has taken away: and blessed be the name of the Lord, Job 2.21. Where we see
plainly; 1. He disclaims is own right to any Mercies. 2. Proclaims God's sole
Interest in them also. 3. Thanks him heartily for his Rod, as well as for his
Staff. And what lively Arguments are these of a Mind acquiescing fully in God's
good Pleasure; although its one great Pain? Thus 'twas with this good Man: Nay,
when the Hurricane, that before had overturned his Estate, destroyed his
Servants, and all his Children, reaches at last his Person with a tremendous
Judgment; both an unusual, and universal kind of shameful, loathsome, and
painful leprosy, Job 2.7. having great advantage, to his other Afflictions,
for forcing him unto Impatience, and Desperation; and when She that lay in his
Bosom (and whose Duty 'twas to have administered Help and Comfort to him, in his
Distress,) instead of cooling, labors to inflame the Fever of his Soul, and
puts him upon Raving like a Bedlam, or a Devil rather, Verse 9. How does he
play the Man (shall I say) yea, with a Virtue more than manly, act the Saim;
and instead of being overcome, comes off with Victory? Thus, he both, justly
rebukes his Wise, and vindicates God: Thou speak as one of the foolish women
speaks. What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not
receive evil, Verse 10. Q. D. Must we be cocker'd so, as to have all Days, and
no Nights? the Sun shine constantly, but not a Shower, or a Cloud? The Summer
to last all the Year, and Winter never take its turn? most foolish, fond, and
proud Presumption! That Man's Humor should be still complied with, and the
Supreme Providence by no means cross it! Oh! the vile Absurdity, the profane
Impudence of the Clay, to prescribe unto the Potter! Who does not know (when he
remembers, that he is a Creature) and will not acknowledge, (if he be a
Christian) that we are not to be Carvers for ourselves, but thankfully should
accept the Portion given us? And, in a Journey to the heavenly Kingdom, we
should be well content, that foul Ways, sometimes, as well as fair, should fall
unto our share. It Is brutish, of the worser kind, to stand gently at the Crib.
but fling and throw at the Yoke. Shall God only stroke, and never strike us?
Good Job, you hear, does equally acquiesce in Good and Evil, from the hand of
God. An Heavenly Temper, this! And it would be our Honor, as it is our Duty, to
be like him, and make it ours; especially, since we live in Gospel-days, from
whence he was as so great a distance.

6. Hezekiah.] But we will proceed to the pious Prince Hezekiah, him we shall
find to be very much of this Celestial Grain likewise, according to that
proportion his Afflictions held with those fore-spoken of. It Is true, he was a
great deal short of most of them in the point of suffering, but little
inferior unto any in that of Submission. The Almighty sends him word, and by a
faithful Messenger, his Prophet Esaiah, That the days should come, that all in
his house, and what his fathers had laid up in store, should be carried to
Babylon, and nothing left. Moreover, that the fruit of his loins, his sons,
should be made captives there, and the vilest of them Eunuchs, Chap. 39.6, 7,
8. Now with this Plundering of his Treasure, and Enslaving of his Issue, we
must necessarily admit, that a world of other Mischiefs would be in company,
because a vast, and foreign, and a barbarous Army was to do the Execution. And
it is well known, that spoiling the Fruits, burning the Houses, deflouring the
Virgins, and murdering the Subjects, with other horrid Villainies, are the
Effects of War, and the Delights of bloody Enemies. Now it is plain, that this
Divine Threat was pregnant with a numerous train of frightful Evils; although any
single one of them might have made work enough for the best of Men to have
grappled with. How then does Hezekiah acquit himself upon the Tidings? Does he
exclaim of God, and cry out of his unequal Dealing with him? Bad Men will do so
upon far less, and truly none, occasion; and put the Almighty (in his own
Vindication) to make the Blow recoil upon themselves: Are not my ways equal?
Are not your ways unequal: Ezekiel. 18.25, 29. But here was not one word, no, not
a thought, to cast an ill Reflection upon God: You shall hear him avow the
contrary; and instead of an Accusation of him for the Message, give a singular
Approbation to it, Good (says he to the Messenger, not bad,) is the word of
the Lord, which thou have spoken, Ezekiel. 39.8. notwithstanding all the Terror
contained in it. A graceless Wretch will be apt to eavil thus: If this be good,
then what is bad? But a godly Soul concludes justly, that nothing but good can
possibly come from Goodness itself. And such is God, being good to all: but
unto them that love him, making all to work for good. Thus was this good King
affected; and we should Copy his Example out unto ourselves.

7. Our Blessed SAVIOVR.] But what shall we say to our Blessed Lord? He comes
next to be considered, according to that Order we have pursued hitherto, and at
the first proposed. If the Members have done excellently, the Head will
certainly surpass them all! He taught, and lived this heavenly Lesson of
Silence and Submission unto GOD, in his whole course on Earth. It were beside
my Purpose, to insist Distresses, To possess our souls in patience, Luke 21.19.
And for his Practice, there is no occasion to be large on that, neither: it is
so well known to every Person that is but ordinarily versed in the Holy Gospel.
His Sufferings, out of all doubt, considered with all the Circumstances
appertaining thereunto, are not to be paralelled by any Instance that the Earth
could ever afford. When we remember how great and good he was; what measure,
though, was meeted out unto him, and with what Contentment all that was bad, and
the very worst, was put up by him; it must amaze us! He was the GOD, that made,
preserved, and rules the World; and will most certainly be its Judge at last.
He took our Nature, and came among us; not to condemn us, or accuse us, or to
do any hurt at all unto us; but the greatest good, (though we deserved worst
Usage at his hands,) viz. to be the Author of eternal Salvation to us. Yet was
he undervalu'd, reviled, and abused, at as bad a rate as it was possible for
the spite of Earth and Hell to do it: He is seized on as a Malefactor, when
most innocent, and the greatest Benefactor the World ever had; imprisoned, spit
on, buffetted, scourged, and crucified, as one of the worst and vilest of
Offenders. But with what a calm and quiet Spirit does he take it all? The
Prophet Esaias foretold his meek and patient Temper long before his Incarnation,
saying, He was oppressed, and afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: He is
brought as a lamb to the slaughter; and as a sheep before his shearer is dumb,
so he opened not his mouth, Es. 53.7. We all know the quietness of those
harmless, and most useful Creatures, under the Butcher's hand and knife. Alas!
with how much ease could the Lord Jesus have frowned his Enemies Bodies to the
Grave, and their Souls to Hell: or Both at once unto the place of everlasting
Torments? And it had been surely done; but that his Lamb-like Soul abhorred,
Vile Mortals sweet revenge. He also knew it was his Father's Will, that the
Just should suffer for the Unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18; and from them too: and unto him
he thus submits himself: Not my Will, but thine be done, Luke 22.42. He will
not choose for himself: but takes with great content, what God is pleased to
carve unto him. Nay, when his servant Peter would by a valiant and a righteous
Force have rescued him; he bids him hold his hand; and for this reason; It was
his Father's pleasure, that he should thus suffer, and he ought not hinder his
most ready compliance with it: The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I
not drink it? John 18.11. Thus has our Savior walked before us, breaking the
Ice, and paving the Way unto us; that we, with less regret, and greater ease
might go after him. This is St. Peter's observation: Christ suffered for us,
leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps. Who, when he was
reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, threatened not: but committed
himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2.21, 23. And if we abide in
Christ; in this his Patience, as well as other Virtues, we ought to walk, as he
walked, 1 John 2.6.

8. Paul. To conclude Examples: The Holy Apostle Paul was an ingenious Scholar,
and very apt Disciple to his most excellent Master and Instructor, the ever
Blessed Jesus. Pray mark how he had conn'd his Lesson, and gotten it persectly
by heart too, by his own profesion: I have It Is a work of Learning, and
Exercise, and Care. S. Chrysostom. in loc.
learned (says he) in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be contented, Phil.
4.11. In Health, and Plenty; in Peace and Liberty, this is no difficult Lesson,
all Men know. But in the case of Sickness, Poverty; loss of Friends, Estate, of
Liberty; or in the danger of Life: how many then will quickly cry out, This is
an hard saying: who can bear it? I answer them: Such a one as Paul can do it.
And further; he that has been taught of God, and has learned the truth, as it
is in Jesus: even He can do it also. If all the World should frown upon them;
if Midnight-Darkness hide all Comforts from them; if neither Sun, nor Moon, nor
Stars appear unto them; yet these People are able to retire within themselves;
or rather, run into the Name of the Lord; and All is well. For the Name of the
Lord is a strong Tower; the righteous runs into it, and is safe; says
Solomon, Prove. 18.10. This also made the holy Apostle say; He could do all
things, through Christ that strengthened him, Phil. 4.13. And the Context
shows, that this Doing Chiefly respects Suffering. Wherein Christ's
Presence with the Soul converts Complaints into Thanksgivings, and Repinings to
Rejoycings. The Church of old makes a clear Proof of this: Although the Fig Tree
shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vine; the labor of the Olive
shall fail, and the Field shall yield no meat; the Flock shall be cut off from
the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in the Stall: Yet I will Rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation, Habak. 13, 18. And how are
Murmuring, and Impatience sent into Exile then; never to take harbor in such
Breasts, as these? Well, now we know, how quiet, and at what hearts ease, the
holy Apostle was in in the worst condition. He was content! And what are Any,
or the very Best of us, that in our Sufferings we should not bring our Minds to
that Sedateness, wherein his was, who was so much Above us? The plain reason
is: Because, in Grace, we are so much Beneath him.

Recapitulation.] Now, looking back upon this Cloud of Witnesses, we must
acknowledge; that they all conspire to ring it loudy in our ears: Let Patience
have its perfect Work within you, whatever Distresses lie upon you. If we are
Real Christians, to be Meek with Moses; to hold our Peace with Aaron; leave God
to himself with Eli; possess our thoughts with our own approaching End, as
David did; to bless God's Name for our Adversity, as well for Prosperity, after
Job's example; approve his Methods, although severe, in a compliance with
Hezekiah; submit our Wills entirely unto his; as was our Savior's holy
Practice: and lastly, to learn with the great Apostle of the Gentiles; in all
estates to be contented. If God see meet to take away Estate, to be content; if
Name, content; if Health, content; if Liberty, Friends, or Children, nay,
Father, Husband, or Wife, dear to us as our selves; yea, or life it self; to be
Contented still. Whatever Distress the gracious Providence shall bring us to,
it is our Duty, after the Examples of all these Famous Worthies (Christ Jesus
Soldiers) and the Captain of their and our Salvation himself; to learn the
Doctrine of my Text: To be dumb, and open not our mouth; and that, because God
does it.

And so much of the Examples.

II. Arguments.] Now for Powerful Arguments, which will evince the necessary
Obligations that Pious People do lie under, to bear Afflictions without
Impatience, and a Quiet Mind. There are but five I shall make use of: but that
which brings up the Rear, if I may not say, 'twill prove a Mother of Nations;
at least, 'twill show, it has a Teeming Womb, and bring us forth a double
Number to the whole Tale mentioned.

They are these in brief: 1. Hereby they are conformed to the Best of Saints,
and in their Best Condition, on the Earth. 2. The first and second Birth do
Both dispose to Troubles. 3. Impatience is so far from helping then, that it
does more hurt. 4. There is Undoubted Good unto the Godly at the Bottom of all
they suffer. And 5ly; It Is the Lord that sends their Distresses to them.

Arg. 1. Good Christians should bear with Patience their Distresses; because
They but conform them to the best of Saints, and in their Best Condition upon
Earth. Then why such sore Complaints among them? Had there been formerly no
famous Instances given to this Purpose; who, that has only tasted Holy
Scriptures can be ignorant; that In origin statim mundi Abel a fratre
occiditur, Jacob fugatur, Joseph venundatur, and David Saul persequitur, etc.
S. Cypr. de Exhort. Mort. cap. 11.
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, had Generally this Measure meted out unto
them; nay, pressed down, shaken together, and running over; especially to the
Last; and I may say, the Best of them, our Lord's most dear Disciples? It Is
certain that St. Paul says; not barely, that They were appointed to
asslictions, 1 Thessalonians. 3.3; but that he thought, God had set Them forth as Men
appointed to death it self: for they were made, in their Sufferings, a
Spectacle to the World (the upper and the lower) of Angels, and Men too, 1 Cor.
4.9. And should it now be accounted a grievous matter for the Successors to be
like their Predecessors? What? Are we better than they? Alas! How much beneath
them? Whose Modesty will not prompt him freely to confess himself far shorter
of them in real worth, than he is in time behind them? And, pray now; do we not
all desire to be Partakers with them, in point of Prosit; and shall we grudge
our share of Pains? Would we arrive at the blessed Harbor where they are
driving an heavenly Trade; and yet refuse to cross the swelling Waves after
them? Is it fit and equal, that we should settle in their Canaan, without the
Troubles and the Dangers of that Wilderness, which they have passed, and is the
strait way to it? If we have hopes to be such as They in Heaven, it must not be
grudged, if we be like them on the Earth. How proper is it, that a Similitude
should be betwixt the Eellow-members? And how much more, with the Head it self?
Is it not written, Heb. 2.10. That the Captain of our salvation was made
perfect through sufferings? He put not on his Crown, but going from the Cross:
nor sat he on the Throne, before he had hung upon the Tree. And shall it be
thought intolerable, or any thing hard; to follow such a Leader? And unto such
a Journey's End?

But, as I said before, Saints suffering State was best unto them: even so it
is. The Riddle was of old; that the Eater affords meat, and the strong
sweetness. Judge. 14.14. And truly, good Men's sorrows on Earth bring solace
down from Heaven unto them. When the Knife was putting to Isaac's Throat by the
sad Father; an Angel comes and puts a Ram into his room, unto his greater joy,
Genesis 22.14. As a father pittieth his children; so the Lord does them that fear
him. For he knows our frame; he remembers that we are but dust. Parents are
wont to be most tender to their weak, and sickly Ones: others can make a better
shift. And shall not he that puts these Bowels into them toward theirs, have
them much more within himself to His? What though a Mother Should forget her
sucking babe; Esa. 49.15. (and such, a Worse-thing-than-a-Brute, is found
sometimes in Humane shape) God will not, cannot do so. We read, that suffering
Saints are said to Glory in tribulations. And Glorying is no sign of Grieving
and Repining. How should impatient Lamentations be able then to keep their
Ground; When light afflictions, and for a moment, work a far more exceeding and
external weight of glory?

This is the 1st Argument. And the 2d will prove like unto it.

Arg. 2. Distresses should not raise great Storms, and Tempests in the pious
Soul; because our First, and second Birth do, both, dispose us to them. As we
are Men, and Christians, they are the Lot appointed for us. And ought we not;
and therefore, to be quiet under them? How great's the Folly; to be so
disturbed, at what is not to be avoided? Man, now, is born to trouble, as the
sparks fly upward; as we heard, at first, was spoken by Holy Job. And all Men
know; neither Art, nor Force can make the Flames descend; but they are always
mounting upward. That is the Nature of them. Wherefore to be Impatient under
Trouble is to be quarreling with the Almighty Majesty, by whom a Humane Body
and a Rational Soul is bestowed on us. And so there is Ingratitude, and
Rebellion linked together. Thus to requite him, that brought them out of
nothing by mere Bounty; and by the same, has made them capable of enjoying all
things, and the best of all; His blessed self for ever: if they will be ruled
by him.

And for the second Birth: it commonly has the throws, and pangs of a
traveling Woman: and, often, worser far. General Experience makes a proof of
this. However, in growing up unto Maturity there is no escaping of Adversity:
Through much tribulation (says St. Paul) we must enter the kingdom of God. We
must: it is necessarily, and unavoidably so. Heaven is on high: and it is hard
to climb an Hill; a steep, and long one, especially. The Lungs will labor;
Feet will faulter; and Bones will ache, in doing it. Were there no Difficulty in
our way to Glory, and we met no Troubles in our Travel thither, we might indeed
be called, and accounted Christians: but how we should be really so; I mean,
Legitimate Children unto God, is hard to manifest, and may very well be
doubted, from the holy Apostle's words, who says; Heb. 12.5, 6, 7, etc. My
son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves he chastneth; and scourges every son
whom he receives: If ye endure chastening, God deals with you as with sons;
for what son is he whom his father chastneth not? But if ye are without
chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are you bastards, and not sons.
Let now a distressed Christian seriously ponder this; and let him not stagger
through Unbelief; and it is not possible for Discontent to keep its post any
longer in his Heart. Let him be strong in Faith, and this will turn his Crosses
into Crowns; and make what is bitter to the outward, relish sweetly to the
inward Man. Now if ever, the Apostle's words will be certainly verified with
the upright, though afflicted, Person: We faint not, but though our outward man
should perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. Earth's
Darlings, and who have their portion only in this life, cannot avoid a world of
Miseries: and shall Heaven's Offspring be disordered at abiding what both
Grace and Nature has prepared for them? Especially, since Truth it self has
plainly told them, That their Affliction is but a certain Token of God's
Affection.

Now, surely; there is no reason for Repining, but occasion rather of Rejoicing.

Arg. 3. Impatience is so far from doing service to us in our Sufferings, that
it makes our Case a great deal worser than it was before; and brings many,
and very evil Inconveniences with it. Imagine, that under a sore Distress we
should make hoarse our throat with cries, Impatientes non efficient ut a malis
eruantur; sed ut mala gravior a patiantur. S. Aug. de Patient. cap. 2.
and drown our bed with tears, and crack our brain with cares, and break our
heart with sighs and groans: what would the Upshot be of all this pitiful
Passion? Would such a Course, so void of Reason and Religion, prove an
effectual Relief unto us? Would the loss of Livelihood be hereby repaired? A
bodily Sickness be recovered? The Life of a deceased Friend again restored? Or
any Calamity, whatever, be removed; or so much as eased? Alas! poor silly
Creatures as we are! what do we else by such a Procedure, but plainly imitate
the folly of the Fly, when it is entangled in the Spider's Web: She makes a
Noise, and is greatly Fluttering; and hampers herself thereby the faster in
that Net; and becomes a sooner Prey to him that spread it. Methinks we are
resembled fitly by the corded Beast whose head the Axe, and heart the Butcher's
Knife has struck; which, the more it struggles, silly Wretch, the faster
lets out its lood, and life therewith together. Such is the natural Issue of
Men's Impatience: They look for peace, and there is no good; for a time of
healing, and behold trouble. The Benefit, which they promise, proves a Damage
to them. Undoubtedly, a manifold Mischief flows from hence, How can the Offices
of Love and Service be discharged, as they ought to be, unto Relations, by a
Mind disordered, and unhinged by this Distemper? Expect, as soon, a Man that
has a Palsy, or is Bedrid, should fetch you Food, or make your Fire. Beside,
it so affects the Body, that sometimes Death itself is quickly called unto it:
always the Seeds thereof, in lingering Sicknesses, are deeply rooted in it. And
how untuned the Soul must necessarily be, and barred its acting with spiritual
life, and vigor, is very easily understood: The griefs, and cares, and fears
are apt to usher in Despair; but certainly drive out Faith, and Hope, and Love.
To conclude, he that is thus captivated, cannot be capable to pay due Homage to
his God. How should he, as becomes him, fear his Threats, obey his Precepts,
trust in his Promises, and rejoice before him with Thanksgiving? I will say but
this: Impatience, and Murmuring under the Hand of God is a great Affront unto
his blessed Majesty; and cannot be well taken by him. Nay, he has often set
the Marks of his Displeasure on it. I will pass by that which Exodus 16, 7, 8,
etc. Numb. 14.27, etc.
Moses once and again has recorded thereof: remembering you only of the
Apostle's Caution to the Corinthians, Neither murmur ye, as some of them also
murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer, 1 Cor. 10.10. We may conclude of
this (wherewith I close the Argument): If we belong to God, and are
dissatisfied at his Dealings with us, we lay a kind of force upon him: Either
to keep us longer in his Furnace, or to remove us thence with our Dross upon
us. And surely the Choice is not the best, on either side. Wherefore we must
rebuke Impatience: and the rather, for that --

Arg. 4. There is undoubted Good at the bottom of all Afflictions to the truly
Godly. Then, what pretense for Coffeehouse under them? Had they their rise
from an Heart replete with Vengeance, Rage, and Fury toward us; and were they
the Blows of a bloody Enemy, that aimed at nothing less than our utter ruin;
our Case were then so sad, that 'twould be hard to find out Comfort for us; and
seem unequal, to condemn a turbulent Carriage in Distresses. But, blessed be
GOD, things go at quite another rate: The Cloud that is Darkness unto Egypt, is
Light to Israel, Exodus 14.20. The Devil and his Angels, who may be Executioners
to the righteous and good Providence in our Sufferings, are none otherwise than
most malignantly disaffected to God's People. Yet, how bloodily soever they are
bent; and whatsoever Mischief they are permitted to effect: that which happens,
is not what their Malice does design, but what God's Mercy does direct. The Axe
never heweth; but when, and as, the Carpenter strikes therewith. And the
sharpest Sword will fetch no Blood, but from the Hand that wields, and smites
with it. But Men, and evil Spirits too, are Tools, which God, (as far as it is
pleasing to him) makes use of: And he lays them by again, as he thinks good;
and then they must be quiet in spite of all their Cruelty. The Condition of
holy Chap. 1, and 2. Ps. 17.13, 14. Es. 10.5, 6, 7, 15.
Job does make this evident. And both the Psalmist, and the Prophet Esaias,
plainly declare as much. So that who, or whatever brings a Calamity to us; we
must conclude, it is sent of God for good. And, if we wisely attend our Duty,
'twill be with us, as with He in his Excile living in greater state than his
own Country could afford; said to his Servants, Sirs, We had been Undone, if we
had not been Undone. Plut. Them.
Themistocles, Better in our trouble, than without it. This is not
peradventure, presently, perceived by us, in every Trial. Nor do the Sick, or
Wounded, at the first or second, or (may be) many applications of the most
proper and sovereign Medecines to them, forthwith receive a Cure, or find Ease
thereon. However, it is better with them; because they are in the ready way
thereto. And is it not egregious Folly to exclaim against, or have hard
thoughts of, either Doctor or Surgeon, for a griping Belly, or a smarting Leg,
when it is to save the Life, and to recover Health? Should Sufferers be so far
from benefit in their Troubles, that they do not yet so much as understand the
meaning of them: why, they should know that the Golden Oar is covered with
coarser Earth; and it will ask both pains and patience to dig deep enough to
reach it. And our blessed Savior's words to his Servant Peter, are very
applicable here: What I do, thou know not yet; but shall know hereafter,
Joh. 13.7. Wait then with quietness; and thou will sooner find the Treasure.
But if thou quarrel with thy Medicines, and storm at him that does apply them,
it must be longer, if ever, thou get a Cure; when a submissive Spirit will soon
be healed. God must be met, in his own way. As he 1 Kings 19.11.
comes not in a great strong Wind; nor in the frightful Earthquake; nor in the
furious Fire: but in the still small Voice: we must attend him also with a
still and quiet Spirit. Turbulent Passions in the Soul, are like loud Noises,
and deafning Clamours at the Ears. These mar the Hearing, and so the
Understanding. Hence it is, that in such a Lurry we cannot hear the Rod, and who
has appointed it, Mic. 6.9; so as to understand, and receive, the good God
means us by it. Yet good is surely meant thereby. What prudent Father ever did
correct his Child, but for his benefit? And how should Infinite Wisdom, with
equal Love, have any other Aim? Afflictions are God's File, to rub off the rust
of Sin that it may not rot our Souls. His Fan, to scatter far away the Dust and
Chaff, which are apt to bury our Grain in Uselesness. Yea, and his Furnace too,
where the Dross and Tin is severed, that the Metal may be pure and bright. Are
not all these for greatest good? But the Apostle is express, in saying, That
though some men correct for pleasure; God chastens us for our profit, Heb. 12.10.
And the Psalmist had the proof upon himself, for he professes, Psalm. 119.71.
'Twas good for him that he was afflicted. For he was gone astray before that
met him, and brought him back to God. And how far he might have wandered, to
the utter losing of his Way; had not his wild Carreer been stopped by the Rod of
God, who can tell? Certain it is, that long Prosperity is a Bait to all Impiety;
and no Affliction oft-times proves the very worst Affliction: Yea, and Impunity
the greatest Punishment. Therefore God threatened, in his high Displeasure,
Hosea 4.14. Esaias 1.5. Hosea 4.17.
Not to punish the daughters, nor the wives in Israel for their whoredoms; to
strike Judah no more: and let Ephraim alone in his idolatry. When Providence
smiting of a Pious Man with Lameness only, preventing his running away from
God: or with Bodily Sickness, it is for preserving his Soul in, or recovering it
to, Health. Such Men's Losses of Temporal Riches, are for securing Eternal to
them: and Death's removal of their Earthly Friends, is for renewing, and faster
settling their Friendship with the Heavenly Majesty. Nay, and their own
approaching End serves for preparing them unto an Endless Bliss.

And where is the Cause now of Complaining? How great's the reason, rather, of
Rejoicing: at least, of Silence, and Submission? Especially, when the 5th and
last Argument shall be considered.

Arg. 5. Thou, Lord, did it. And this is what the Royal Psalmist urges in my
Text. Which only (tho our Proverb aptly says, Store's no Sore) in mine
opinion, might be sufficient to give repose and quiet to a sincere Christian in
his greatest troubles; suppose it be considered in its just extent. Should I
pronounce it like the Tower of David, builded for an Armory, wherein there hung
a thousand Bucklers, all Shields of mighty Men; it were not spoken much amiss.
I Am sure it is no Hyperbole, instead of calling it a single Argument, to say an
Heap of those are lodged therein. For with a little Patience you shall see it
bringing forth at least One Decade of them. Only it is requisite, that we should
retrieve our former thoughts upon the words, and with this short Improvement.
Thou, Lord, did it; seems to make the holy Prophet after this manner to
address himself to God: O Lord, I stilled my Soul, and stopped my Mouth under my
doleful Case; because no Luck, or Chance without me, none Evil Accident on me,
none Inadvertency or Presumption in me; no Lusts of Men, or Rage of Devils
against me, was the Prime Cause of my Calamity. Whatsoever Mischief mine
Enemies, or my sinful Self, might be instrumental in unto me; 'twas only as thy
Justice, and thy Goodness gave Commission, or Permission thereunto. Whence,
mine Impatience were nothing else but Quarelling at thy Providence. Therefore
was I silent, both as to Words and Thoughts too: Because Thou, Lord, did it.

1. Now the Firstborn of this Argument shows it thus: Thou, Lord, did it:
Thou, whose we are, All, and Every of us: the very Work of thine own Hands. We
are the Clay, and thou our Potter, Esaias 64.8. And who can justly take offense
at thee, Ye are not your own, 1 Cor. 6.19. We are the Lords, Romans 14.8.
for doing as thou please with thine own? Mat. 20.15. If the Potter make one
Vessel of siner Earth than he does another: and appoints this for the common
service of the Kitchen, when that is to be set up in the Closet; where is the
reason to complain? Nay, if one, or more, or many of them be broken into
Potsherds by him; is he not without control; for that? Although Himself be not;
yet They are his own, But we are much more God's: to be dealt with by him, as
it seems good unto him. So, if the Husbandman will put one Parcel of his
Sheep into rich Pastures, when the rest can hardly live upon the barren Common:
and fatten some of his working Cattle with Food and Rest, for Weeks and Months
together; whilst constant Labor and coarser Provender make others leaner than
a Rake (as we say): who shall call him to account for this? Are they not his
own? But we have no such property in what is called Ours: as the Almighty has
in us. In truth, we are but Stewards: He Absolute Lord. We are, All; the
Highest in the World, responsible unto God: but God to None. Then at what rate
soever it pleases him to deal with us; tho he afflict us sorely in our Person,
Relations, or Estate; our Duty is to say, We must be dumb, because thou, Lord,
did it.

2. Thou, Lord, did it. Who can do whatsoever thou will do; and none can
hinder thee. Thy whole pleasure shall be effected in Heaven, Genesis 18.14. Is any
thing too hard for God?
and Earth, the Seas, and all deep places; nor is there any thing too hard for
thee, Psalm. 135.6. And, Lord, if thou sendest one Affliction on me; it might
have been an hundred. Have thou withdrawn one choicest Mercy; why is there any
left? Say, that the comfort of our Life were gone: why has not our Life it
self taken wing, and flown away together with it? Should we say, Nay; would
that have prevented it? Or was there Power enough, or Craft at least, with us,
to have put a Bar to? Who is so great a Fool, as to entertain such Thoughts?
Let God once speak the word; it is instantly done, Ezekiel. 12.25. If he command
Estate, or Health, or Liberty, or Friends away; if he require our Soul: can we
compel, persuade, or entreat the longer stay of any of them? Admit it then,
that it may go hard with us in some respects: why is it better; wherefore not
bad, or at the very worst, in all? He that has only given a gentle lash upon
our Hand, could have cut off our Head; or stabbed us at the Heart; if that had
been his mind. How easy were it for Almighty Power so to do? And is not God
thus furnished? Wherefore, well might the holy Psalmist say in his distress,
and the very best of us say after him upon the like occasion; I was dumb, I
opened not my mouth; because thou, Lord, did it.

3. Thou, Lord, did it. Thou have seen it meet to take (suppose) One Mercy
from us: but yet have left us Many: Nay, have bestowed Hundreds, Thousands on
us! For thy compassions never fail; but are new every morning, Lam. 3.23. And
thou do Encompass them, that truly trust in thee, with mercy, Psalm. 32.10.
When we, with grief remember, what a Blessing we have lost; shall we forget the
while those many others which we still enjoy? What Favors, much above all
reckoning, do thou, O Lord, afford, for Soul and Body too? Unto our selves
and Friends likewise? If we be real Christians, we then must be Disciples to
the Psalmist; and say our Lesson that he teaches; How precious are thy
thoughts unto me, O God? How great is the sum of them? If I should count them,
they are more in number than the sand, Psalm. 139.17, 18. That only one, which
is worth ten thousand others; the Gift of thy blessed Son, to die for our
offenses, rise for our justification, and at thy right hand to live, for making
intercession for us; that we may have Pardon, Pity; Support and Comfort under
all our Pressures; What an Invaluable Mercy is it! We have God's sure Promise,
That he will never leave, nor forsake his People, Heb. 13.5. till he has
brought them through the Wilderness of this World in safety to the heavenly
Canaan. God gave his Son unto this very purpose. And as Joshua, who was the
Type of Jesus, led the Carnal Israel into the Promised Land Below; so Jesus, by
him typified, will certainly conduct the Spiritual Israel into that Above. Oh,
Ravishing Blessing! And the very Quintessence of all Blessings! Able to make a
Pious Soul Rejoice in spite of Sorrow; and to triumph in its Tribulations. To
be sure; it will, and must have influence on him in his Sufferings, to say with
David; Lord, I am dumb: because thou did it.

4. Thou, Lord, did it. Who, notwithstanding, have made it better with us;
much better, than with many others, much our betters. Imagine some of us have
lost a fair Estate: there are those good People who, with their Estate, have
lost their Health too. Say, thou art sick: why such a Friend, or Neighbor, or
Acquaintance at the least, is sick and lame withal: and some (poor Souls) with
Poverty into the bargain. Admit, that thou have parted with One dear Relation:
Many are they, that have lost Many such; and some All. If Death has snatched
away one Child from thee: there are those that have none left them now, tho
time was, they had many. Has the Just Providence removed an Affectionate
Mother from thee? There are not a few whom it has bereaved of such a Father.
And several that it has made Orphans; destitute both of Father, and of Mother
too. If a Good Man's Help-meet be gone: there are Pious Women that have had
their Head taken from them. Whoever thou art that truly fear God, and art
too much complaining of thy Infelicity, be but persuaded to leave off poring
only on thy self, and look abroad a little; and thou shall find, Thou have the
light side of the Cloud, when many others must be contented with the dark.
Remember that most excellent Person, who stands upon Scripture-Record with
this most sad Complaint of his to God, Lover, and friend have thou put far from
me, and mine acquaintance into darkness, -- Similes aliorum respice Casus,
Mitius ista feres. Ovid. Met 15.8.
Psalm. 88.18: and surely then upon the whole, thou must acknowledge, that thou
ought to say; I will say nothing: because thou, Lord, did it.

5. Thou, Lord, did it. Thou, who art abundantly able to supply my greatest
Wants; support me under my heaviest Loads; repair me for my greatest Losses. Is
any thing too hard for God, with whom all things are possible, Genesis 18.14.
Matthew. 19.26. I grant; were any one's Necessities unrelievable; his Burdens
insupportable; or his Damages irrepairable; the Case of such a Person were very
lamentable! But good and wise Christians do All know better things. And to the
Upright Man; that God, who is his Constant Hope, both Can, and Will, most
certaily prove his Effectual Help. Is it not promised; My God shall supply all
your Need according to his Riches? Phil. 4.19. And we are assured of his
Sufficiency in the last words, as of his Good Will in those foregoing. And how
punctually was it made good to holy Job after all his long and dismal
Sufferings: when his latter end was better than his beginning? Job 42.12. All
was made good in kind to him, that had before been taken from him. And the
Lord's Hand is not shortened now, nor his Heart hardened, neither: but, if that
be best, he can, and will do so again, to suffering Saints of the present Age
also. Had Job's Condition never to have been matched in future Times, wherefore
should the holy Apostle James, Jam. 5.11. direct our eyes point blank on this
Example for our encouragement in Afflictions? But so, you know, he does.
However, God will never fail to make up every Loss unto his faithful Servants,
Psalm 73.26. Lamen. 3.24. 2 Cor. 12.9.
in value, where it is not sit it should be done in kind. Himself, if all be
gone besides, will be, and is his People's Portion. And is not this enough, and
infinitely the better Share! Who that is afflicted but must say: I am dumb;
because thou, Lord, did it?

6. Thou, Lord, did it. Thou took'st away my dearest Relations (whether
Husband, Wife, Father, Mother, Child, or Friend) whom (blessed be thy Name)
thou tookest into Covenant with thyself before. (And for this once, I will be
limited thus.) I am bereaved, Lord; and it is thy righteous doing too. But oh!
what better provision have thou made for him, or them, than I could ever
possibly do, had they staid with me? Mine is the loss, it is true; but theirs
the infinite gain! For, what is Earth to Heaven! What is a Husband, Wife; a
Father, Mother; a Child, or Friend, to God? Cum chariquos diligimus de seculo
exeunt, gandendum
Now we are sure, that those, who live a while to Him below, shall live with
Him above for potius quam dolendwn. S. Cyprian. de Mort. ever. And are we so
much Afflicted for parting with them? Where is the love then, that we think we
bear them? Are not ourselves the proper Object of it; and its utmost Term? No
doubt it is Nicknam'd-kindness, that would have them leave the Church
Triumphant for the Militant. What? would you have them pay back their Wages;
come down, and do their Work once over more? Now they have won the Field, and
are dividing the Spoil, to have them run the hazard of another Battle, is
certainly very far from real Friendship: is great Unkindness. It cannot be Love;
to desire Men gotten safe into their Port, and with so rich a Cargo, should be
thrust out afresh into a Sea, most dangerous, and tempestuous. Is this our
Kindness to our Friends? In short, for them to be with us again, were to
exchange their ravishing, unspeakable, and eternal Joys and Bliss, for Cares,
and Fears, and Pains, and Sorrows, and Sins, once more. These now the Almighty
Mercy has freed them from for ever: Those it has sixed them in eternally.
Can find in thy heart to grudge that admirable Kindness God has showed them?
Must thou not readily speak it: I am dumb; because thou, Lord, did it?

7. Thou, etc. Thou, at whose hands we have deserved abundantly worse, than
ever yet we have received. Well may we say with the holy Prophet, how bad
soever it fares with us: He has not dealt with us after our sins; nor
rewarded us according to our iniquities. Psalm. 103.10. Nay, the good Man Ezra's
acknowledgment would be ours also: Our God has punished us less than our
iniquities deserve. Chap. 9.13. He that complains for wanting of the staff of
Bread, may give God thanks that the Bread of Life is not taken from him: for
long ago, and too too often he made a forfeiture of his Right unto that
greatest Mercy. He that bemoans his Lameness, Pains and bodily Sickness, is
Debtor to mere Grace, that he is not under the tormenting Terrors of Soul, and
the Rack of a wounded Spirit: his Sins having amply merited that, and a great
while since. He that lamenteth a dear Friend's being gone to Heaven, and
leaving him behind on Earth; most justly may admire the Divine Goodness that
his own Transgressions had not a great while since tumbled his own Body into
the Grave, and his Soul to Hell. It is a stinging Question, and smartly rebukes
the querulous Christian, which is put by the Prophet Jeremiah; he asks,
Wherefore does a living man complain? A man for the punishment of his sins?
Lam. 3.39. We are the Fools, that make the Rod, for our own back; and may well
enough be said to lay it on too: for we procure the doing of it. But why do we
complain; and yet the Grave has not swallowed us up? Whilst there is life (we
say) there is hope. And so there is: Hope of a Peace with God; hope of
Judgment's being removed; hope of a latter End proving better than the
Beginning. Why then does a living man complain? But for a Saint, that is yet
alive, and shall live with God for ever; Content must conquer his Complaint,
and Triumph over it. Thanks be to God, that pays us not in our own Coin. We rob
him often of that Faith, and Hope, and Love; that Praise, Obedience, and
Submission, due to him upon infinite Obligations. And shall we murmur, when he
takes but a little from us; and nothing but his own; and lent us merely; and
only till he calls for it again; as all our Comforts are? Surely, for very
shame, in every trouble that happens to us, we humbly should confess to God,
that as our Duty is, We will be dumb; because thou, Lord, did it.

8. Thou, etc. Thou, that meanest us no hurt at all in any, thy severest
Providence toward us. This Lesson may seem hard, it is true. But if we can
believe (as our Savior said) all thimgs then are possible, Mark 9.23. And this
is very far from being improbable. The Ulcer is not lanced; no, nor the Limb
cut off; with a design to destroy the Patient: but to save his Life. When holy
David had been sorely tossed by a violent Tempest in his Thoughts, about the
Prosperity of the Wicked, and Adversity of the Righteous, he happily weathers
the Point at last; and as a Man o'er-joy'd thereat, he cannot forbear a kind of
Triumph (though abruptly) for the great conclusion he had gained: Truly God is
good to Israel: even to such as are of a clean heart, Psalm. 73.1. Though he
distress them: it is not to destroy them. The Surgeon, and the Soldier, both
take Blood away: but He, means not to hurt, but heal; This, for no good, but
killing, where he smites. When the Almighty's Anger lays home upon the wicked
and impenitent; it is to make riddance of them; and by a first, to plunge them
into the second Death. But Death it self, the worst of Evils, has lost its
sting, and does no hurt to the truly Godly seized by it. Then lesser Evils are
less likely to be for mischief. But I shall come to certainty (although but
breefly, since something near this purpose has before been spoken:) St. Paul
declares it on his knowledge, That all things work together for good to them
that love God, Romans 8.28. And Afflictions must be in the Number of ALL THINGS.
INdeed they chiefly are respected by the Apostle there. And then it cannot be
too bold a Speech to say; The Sender of them means no hurt to the Pious
Bearer of them. He is not therefore to forget his Lesson; but keep it still in
Mind, and readily speak it with his Mouth: I am dumb: because, Thou Lord, did
it.

9. Thou, etc. Even Thou, who always usest to deal out Sufferings to thy
Servants, in their due, Weight and Measure. For as thy Bowels do restran thee
from administering the bitter Potion, when no bad Disease is either to be
removed, or prevented: So when these Cases happen, and Necessity urges the
giving of it; the Dose shall certainly bear exact proportion to the dear
Patient's strength and case. That former; thine Apostle Peter does assure us
of, saying; Now for a season (if need be; and not otherwise) ye are in
heaviness, 1 Pet. 1.7. Blessed be thy Name, Thou do not as some ill
Physicians do: viz. make Experiments, and try Practices on them. No; no: Thou
do not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men, Lament. 3.33. Much
less the Children of God; thine own Regenerate Offspring. Then for the latter;
thy Servant Paul does make us confident; that thy Wise Compassion in thine
Administrations does distinguish betwixt the Fathers, Young Men, and Little
Children in thy Famil^. For he tells us; That thou art faithful, and will not
suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, 1 Cor. 27.8. Here is no
prescribing an Equal Quantity (hand over head) to young and old, to weak and
strong; as the Blind Quacks are wont to do. Esaias gave this Evidence long before
the Apostles time; when he acknowledges unto God touching the troubles of his
People; That in measure, when in shoots forth he would debate with it, Esaias
27.8. (whether, and how far agreeable to their state and strength) and, if the
case required, bate some drams, or scruples, or grains at least: for says he,
Thou stayest thy rough wind in the day of thine east wind. Whence it is clear;
either their Burden shall be Lighter, or their Backs made Stronger. And then
it is no complaining Case, and commands repose and quiet to their Minds: they
must be dumb: because thou, Lord, have done it.

10, and lastly; Thou, Lord, did it. Thou, O most Compassionate and Gracious
Lord; who shortly, very shortly, Dabit Deus his quoque finem. Virg.
wilt put a Final End, an Everlasting Period, to all Distresses of thy Faithful
Servants. It is but yet a little While; a few Moments longer, and then Adieu,
and Farewell for ever; All Cares, and Fears; All Griefs, and Sorrows; All Losses
and Disappointments whatsoever. Yea, and Be Gone Eternally, That Troubler of
God's Israel; That Achan in the Camp; That Jonah in the Ship; Indwelling Sin;
whose teeming Womb has brought forth all our Miseries, and will be ever
breeding more: be gone for ever! And welcome, Then, All Joy and Gladness,
Exalting and Triumphing in an Holy State of Bliss and Glory, Unspeakable,
Inconceivable, and Eternal! You have need of Patience, says the Apostle, Heb.
10.36. And for your help thereto; remember, It Is but a little while, and he
that will come, shall come, and will not tarry, Verse 37. What is an harder
Service, or Apprentiship, to him that has but a Month, or Week, or Day for the
Expiration of his Term? Who makes a Pother of a frosty Morning's pinching of
him; when the Spring's upon us, and Summer at its heels? A Good Man's darkest
Night is just at breaking up; not only into a Dawning Light; but a Glorious
Sunshine, and a Perpetual Noon. And then all frightful Storms are hushed by a
delightful Calm; and heartbreaking Sorrows turned out by ravishing Solace.
Who, pray, would grudge a little pains and trouble, to put off, and exchange,
his Mourning Weeds for Wedding Robes? And think it much to sweat (perhaps) in
laying by an heavy Cross, for taking up an heavenly Crown? This is the true
Christian's Business in all the Troubles wherewith he now is exercised. Let him
hold out, and labor, but a Moment longer, 2 Cor. 4.17; and all his present
Misery shall end in Endless Happiness; when the Prosperous Sinner's Sweets
shall be swallowed up in Gall and Wormwood; and that for ever. This is the
Lord's doing: and should be marvelous in our eyes. This steels the Heart of a
suffering Saint. This blunts the Arrows; and flats the Bullets that light upon
him; and makes him stand impenetrable. This makes him dumb, and open not his
mouth in his distresses; save only, with profound submission and humility, to
give God this reason of his silence: Because thou, Lord, did it.

Thou, 1. Whose we are; 2. Who can do what thou please; 3. Who have left us
Many, though taken One Mercy from us; 4. Who yet make it better with us than
with many our Betters; 5. Who art able to relieve still, as bad as it is; 6. Who
providest better for our dear Friend that is gone, than, if he had staid with
us, we could; 7. Who justly might have done much worser by us; 8. Who
meanest no hurt in what thou have done; 9. Who dealest in weight and measure
with thy People in their Sufferings, always; 10. Who very shortly wilt put an
Everlasting Period to all their Evils.

And now, I think, my Word's made good: and you have found an Heap of Arguments
in the Psalmist's One. Nor is there wanting any of the Number promised. Nay,
they perform effectually (in mine opinion) what was undertaken for them.
However, in this I may be bold, yet with sufficient modesty; that from hence,
and elsewhere, you have heard abundant Reason, For a Godly Person to be still
and silent, and by no means impatient under God's heaviest Hand upon him. Which
was the First Task incumbent on me.

II. Solution of Objections.] The next Service I am to be engaged in, is to
give Solution unto some Objections, which may have taken hold on Honest Minds
against this Doctrine. For the past Endeavors justly may encourage us to
conclude, that they have gotten down the Flames; and afford us hopes of
thinking, that the Fire is out: yet, commonly, distressed Souls are filled with
troublesome Smoke; and have those Embers in them still, that possibly may break
out afresh. And truly Great Afflictions are much like Great Fires; whereof when
Industry well applied has checked the the Futy, yet still there will be
Smothering some days after, that must not be neglected, but taken meet care of.
Which makes me willing (what in my power lies) to extinguish every Spark; that
the Pious Sufferer may have satisfaction unto all his Doubts and Fears; and not
without especial and particular Thoughts, About his loss of Dear Relations;
which usually (above all others) lies most heavy on, and sticks most close
unto, us. But let us now attend them.

Obj. 1. Some, upon hearing of the Premises, (it may be) will be ready to say:
What? shall we then be stupid, and sensl^ss of our Misery? Must the Affections
be eradicated; as the Stoics taught? May we not deeply mourn under our
dreadful Evils?

Ans. I answer to this quarrelsom Cavil: for that is its Name: the past
Discourse never casts its Eye that way at all. But Passion, when it masters
Reason, hurrieth Men from one Extreme unto another, and will not suffer the
Golden Mean to have their company. The Holy Scriptures gives us many Instances
of the most Eminent Saints that have been much affected upon their Losses, in
point of Health, and Friends, and specially of the Word of God and the Churches
Peace. It Is true, the Lamentations of Jeremiah (to look no further) will show
us, they have had some concernment (tho of a lower size) about Estate too. But
touching Sickness; David and H^zekiah, two Pious Princes, Psalm. 33.5, 6, 7.
Esaias 38.3.
have much complained. As for a Friend's decease, David and all the People wept
at Abner's grave. 2 Samuel 3.
A Brother was bewailed by Mary and Martha. John 11. Genesis 50.
So their Father by Jacob's Son: as he had mourned before for his Son Joseph.
Genesis 37.
The like was done, and with tears also, by the Father of the Faithful for his
Wife Sarah. Genesis 23.
But why should I stay on those that were Mere Men, tho truly Pious? the
God-Man, Christ Jesus, Wept for dead Lazarus, John 11.35. So that it is neither
sinful, nor feminine frailty, to grieve with Fears on just occasion. And the
subversion of the Temple and the Synagogue, wherein the Means of Grace, the
Word and Ordinances were solemnly administered, is grievously lamented by the
Church of old in the Psalm. 74.7, 8.
Book of Psalms. So that it is not Mourning simply, is condemned; but the
Manner, Measure, or Duration thereof, that makes it faulty.

1. Manner.] Touching the first; When the the Heart does swell, the Spirit
murmur, and the Thoughts repine in an Affliction: it is then bad indeed! As if
the Judge of all the Earth would not do right! As if his Ways were not equal!
As if Iniquity could be found with him! Heinous and dreadful Guilt! Such
Mourning, with Briny Tears, and a Broken Heart, is to be Mourned over again.

2. Measure.] As to the second: Excess of Grief impairs both Body and Soul too;
and puts the whole Man out of frame, to that degree; that he becomes unfit for
Duty toward God and Man. And indeed it seems; not only a violating of the
sixth Commandment; Thou shall not kill.
but near a renouncing Christianity, and turning Pagan. Which makes the Apostle
bid Christians, Not to sorrow as those that have no hope: meaning Heathens, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.

3. Duration.] Then for the third and last: There is, indeed, a Time to mourn,
says the Divine Preacher, Eccles. 3.4. And it is but a Time: it must determine;
and not be for ever. To set the Bounds thereof, precisely, may perhaps be hard.
But note; Genesis 27.41. and 50.4, 10. Deuteronomy. 34.8. Esaias 60.20.
The Sacred Writ does call them Days of Mourning; and not Years, nor Months;
no, not Weeks. Which manifests, that we ought to keep within a great deal
narrower compass, than many practice. I know, Antiq. Jud. lib. 4. cap. 8.
Josephus tells us; That Thirty Days was its stated time, among the People of
God of old. And we are more certain; that Moses was mourned for just so long by
the the Jews: as both himself, and they, Deuteronomy. 34.8. Numb. 20.29.
had done before for Aaron. Of this we may conclude; when once our mourning
hinders cheerful attendance upon God, and due respect to Men; Its time is then
expired; and it must determine.

Obj. 2. Alas! in my Condition, may others say, Having lost so dear a Friend,
my Care, and Pains, and Prayers; my Hopes, and Expectations too, are all made
frustrate. What should I do, but as once Jacob said, Go down into the grave
mourning? Gen 37.

Ans. I answer, in the Apostle's words upon another occasion, I show thee a
more excellent way. Rebuke thy Soul, as holy Asaph did his own; and good Jacob
should have also done; and all pious Persons ought to do, when they are tempted
to think God has no kindness for them, because severer Providence rest upon
them: This is mine infirmity, Psalm. 77.10. It Is, in good truth, an Infirmity;
and no little and inconsiderable Frailty, neither. It borders, at the least,
upon all those faulty circumstances of that Mourning just now spoken of: it
cannot plead not guilty, to the Charge of Murmuring at God's good Pleasure; and
that too much, and too long also. For, is it fitting that God's Will be done,
or yours? If yours; why are you Creatures, depending upon him entirely, and to
be disposed of by him wholly? Nay, why do ye play the Hypocrites, and mock him
daily to his face; by saying, Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven? Do
not the holy Angels, and Spirits of just Men made perfect both readily do, and
readily acquiesce in, what He will have done? What if they be not obnoxious to
your present Evils; are not ye in the assared expectation of partaking of their
good e're long?

Besides, you are under a great Mistake. Your Care, and Pains and Prayers are
not Frustrate: However your Hopes and Expectations be reckned off Because God's
Ends are answered; and they should be yours. Bend but your Will; to his: and
they are fulfilled As for thy Prayers, how can they be Frustrate; either to the
Deceased, or unto thyself Surviving? If all things work together for good to
them that love God: this providence also must do so; Suppose thee such. And
then (to pass by lesser matters) Thy Friend is not (properly) Gone away; only,
Gone before a little. Nor are Requests denied, because not answered as we
expected. God has a better way to grant them in, when he does not give them to
us our way. Our dearest Lord was heard in that he feared: although he dyed the
Death, against which he so earnestly prayed, Heb. 5.7.

Obj. 3. There are those also with whom this Language is to be found. I have
lost at once my dearest Friend, a comfortable Estate; nay, my Subsistence and
Support. How should I bound my Lamentation?

Ans. Being taking for a Person fearing God, thou deservest the Reproof that
was given St. Peter by our Savior: O thou of little faith; wherefore do thou
fear? Does man live by bread alone, and not by every word, that goes out of
the mouth of God? Matt. 4.4. whose is the world, and the fullness thereof? who
feeds the fowls, and clothes the lillies? And art thou less to God, than they?
But there is worse than this at bottom of this Complaint. The guile and fraud
herein is plain to Man, much more to God. It is not the Friend, but what was
His (it seems) thou do Bewail the loss of. But to spare thee there. Who is it
bids us, Take no thought for our life; no nor for our body? Matthew. 6.25. Let
not Anxiety seize us either for food, or raiment? For if our Souls be now (as
they should be) in Heaven; our Bodies will make good shift enough on Earth;
never fear it. Our Gracious Lord, who cannot deceive us, bids us; Seek God's
kingdom, and his righteousness above all things else; and he has passed his
Word, and is both able and willing to make it good; that all things necessary
shall be added to us, Verse 33. thrown in, as Thread and Paper at the Grocers,
without distracting Cares about them. Nature is contented with a little. And
Satisfaction, Peace and Quiet with our Portion is never attained by an Addition
to, but a Substraction from, our fond Desires. I need not send these People to
that Cloud of Witnesses recorded in the Book of God, who in their greatest
wants could cast their care on Him, and found supply enough in him. That
blessed Name (whereby we all are called) although he made the World and had it
wholly at his Command, and Beck, was notwithstanding pleased well enough, when
he had not where to lay his head, Mat. 8.20. But the Morals of a very Heathen
will cry shame on such a Christian. Thence you shall often hear much to the
purpose; Dici potest de Divitijs, quod in Medicum gloriosum dictumest; tuum
remedium morbum gravorem facit. Plut. de Cupid. divit. Is maxim divitije
affluit, qui minime indiget. Sen. de Pauper. Non in Paupertate vitium, sed in
Paupere, etc. Id. de Remed. fort.
of contemning Wealth, and being content with a mean Estate. What danger's
there; and what safety here: and therefore how far from being repined at are
lower Circumstances in the World? The Divine Oracle assures us; That Godliness
with Contentment is great gain. And if we be Godly, whatever Portion God shall
allot unto us; that will certainly serve; and ought to please; us. And so this
Storm is calmed.

Obj. 4. The Comfort of my Life is gone; say others, What Counsel, Support,
Refreshment, and Encouragement, was I wont to have from the true Sympathy of
ANOTHER SELF? But all is vanished, and gone for ever. And who can bear it?

Ans. And is it no Comfort, that thou sometimes had such a Comfort; and did
so long enjoy it? Methinks, thy cheerful Thanks for that, should somewhat
check thy doleful Moanes for this. But to deal more plainly: Is It so indeed? No
marvel, if a Jealous God would not endure a Rival with him. His Kindness, he is
liberal of, unto his People: but his glory, he will not give unto any other, Esa.
42.8. We often lose our Mercies, because we dote so much on them, as to have
God too little in our Thoughts by reason of them. And should he like that? when
Reason and Religion tell us; the Creator should have the Throne within our
Hearts: the Footstool serves the Creature well enough. Nay, this is real
kindness to us: that God diverts the muddy Streams, to make us run to the
Crystal Spring. When the loving Master will not give the Trencherscraps unto
his honest Servant; but the while allows him a well-stor'd Larder: has he any
cause to take that ill? Or if an affectionate Husband likes not to have his
Pocket picked; whilst he gives his Wife the Keys to take out Gold and Silver at
her own discretion: has she cause to make Complaint for this? No doubt, but
every good Man will say to God with David: All my springs are in thee, Ps.
87.7. And with the Apostle to our Savior: Whither shall we go? Thou have the
words of eternal life, John 6.68. Now such a Providence calls aloud upon him,
to hasten to his Fountain, and his Storehouse. Indeed, suppose a Saint in this
distress had not a God to go to; or were he barred access unto his Presence;
when his desired Comfort were gone for ever: there might, I grant, be a little
pardon for his Impatience. But (blessed be the Lord) His Eyes are ever looking
after him; His Ears stand always open to him; His Hands are stretched out
continually for him; and His Heart never without yearnings toward him: and
surely, this is ample Compensation for, and abundant Consolation in, the worst
Affliction; if People will duly apply their Souls to God. It Is that He aims at;
and urges us unto. Call upon me in the time of trouble; I will deliver thee,
and thou shall glorise me. Psalm. 50.15. Psalm. 55.22. Phil. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.7.
Cast your burden on the Lord, and he shall sustain thee. Be careful for
nothing. But cast all your care on God. What loss cannot he make up in Specie,
Puta Deum dicere, quid habetis quod de me queri possitis? Sen de Pro vid. c. 6.
if he please? And if he does not give the Idem; the Tantundem is as good. To
be sure, tho Elkanah asked his Wife only; was not he better than Ten Sons? God,
who is his Peoples Portion in all Distresses, is better than Ten thousand
Worlds.

Obj. 5. But, 'twas my woeful Folly; or else mine Evils had not come upon me.
That Loss, This Sickness, The Other bad Accident, had never happened to me, if
becoming Frudence had been my Conduct. Such Means would have prevented all my
Misery. Now: Woe is me, for my hard Hap!

Ans. Remember first: That Hap was certainly God's Hand. For Fortune, Luck, and
Chance, -- Sed te nos facimus, Fortuna Deam, Coeloque locamus. Juv. Sat. 10.
are mere Heathen Deities: although the Wiser there did laugh thereat. The
Almighty, Wise, and Righteous Providence governs even our Inadvertencies, and
Mistakes; and directs them to the issue they arrive at. Nay, all Events
whatever, are so much influenced Thence, as to be Effected, or thereby
Permitted. Genesis 45.8. Acts 4.28.
Such hand it had about the selling Joseph into Egypt; and the villainous Murder
of the blessed Jesus: that neither That nor This were brought to pass without
it. Yet wicked Men, and Devils, are the sole Efficients of all Moral Evil. Sin
is hateful unto God; Psalm. 45.7. Psalm. 5.5. Hab. 1.13.
and Sinners too, who persist therein; and they shall be punished to a sad
Eternity for the same. So, tho it be highest Blasphemy once to conceit it, that
God is the Author of Iniquity; yet He undoubtedly sets Bounds thereto, as to
the Raging Sea; and says, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further: and here
shall thy Proud Waves be staid. Wherefore, notwithstanding, All our Culpable
Errors are to be truly, and fadly, repented of; with Supplication for God's
Pardon: yet we may not overlook his Hand in ordering of them to their Issue.
Under which, being humbled duly, we may expect seasonably to be lifted up, 1
Pet. 5.6.

But most especially; let us never forget the Lesson that our blessed Savior
taught his most dear Disciples: That not one of the poor, Matthew. 10.29.
little, and (...). Magna hic emphasis Diminutivi. Bez.
despicable Sparrows fell to the ground without our Father: his License, Order,
or Appointment, that is: Fear ye not therefore; ye are of more value than many
Sparrows, Verse. 31. is our dear Lord's Inference thence. And so we may
conclude; That the most unhappy Accidents, in Estate, Health, Relations, or any
other way; are of God's wise and good sufferance, or sending, to us. Then, as
for the Lives of the Saints of God: if their Hairs be all numbered, v. 30. and
their Death be precious in his sight, Ps. 116.15; as both are certain; with
what exactness will he keep the reckning of their Abode on Earth? Surely, no
single Day, nor Hour, nor Minute, shall carelessly, or casually, be cast away.
Yea, doubtless; not only our times are in God's hand, Psalm. 31.15; but our days
are determined, and the number of our months are with the Lord: our bounds are
appointed, which we cannot pass, Job 14.5. And then we need not fear, but that
we shall reach up thereto: whatever may be thought unto the contrary. Indeed,
the Will of Purpose in the Lord is unknown to us, until the Event declares it.
And it is our Duty, only to attend his Will of Precept. We must use lawful Means
which he approves: yet be content, that the Almighty's pleasure be effected by
them.

And as for Means suggested to be omitted; Either it was really so; or not. If
not: how childish is it, to complain for nothing? If so: 'twas either through
thy fault, or not. If this; Not through thy fault: (And how unlikely is it,
that the fear of God, and love of one so dear, would suffer Means to be omitted
wilfully?) Suppose it thine Unhappiness; it is not thy Sin; and should not be
thy Torment. Therefore such Fears and Jealousies, which often overcome
afflicted Spirits, must be withstood, and banished.

Obj. 6. Some yet may say: But I am ignorant of God's meaning toward me, in
his heavy Dispensation. And what to do, but Mourn, I know not.

Ans. Admit, thou art to seek therein: will it make thy self yet more incapable
to find it out? This is the readiest way of all thereto: Excessive Grief both
blinds and deafs the Soul at once. And what is to be seen, in
Midnight-darkness: or heard, at the Cataracts of Nilus; or by the beating of a
Drum? Thou raisest Clouds, and make Clamours within thy Bosom, that put thee
to confusion and astonishment. Be therefore Master of thy self in patience, and
thou make it possible to enquire to purpose. Whilst Job was in this Hurry,
he says indeed to God: Show me, wherefore thou contendest with me, Job 10.2,
etc. But this came from such discontent, that it returned without its Errand.
Tho afterward, when he came fully to himself, and deals in a quiet, humble,
and submissive way with God; abhorring himself for his past frowardness and
impatience; Job 42.6, etc. per tot.
and repenting in dust and ashes; he quickly meets with blessed success, unto
abundant satisfaction: as may be read in the Chapter quoted in the Margin.

Observe beside; it is no easy matter, ordinarily; and doubtless, oftentimes,
impossible, to assign the special Message of such, or such a severer Providence
toward those that truly sear the Lord. It Is true, it sometimes happens, that
the Judgments carry such visible Tokens of the Sins that sent them, written as
it were in Capital Letters on them; that it becomes no difficulty to understand
the special Errand that they bring. You saw it the Case of Holy David, Example
4. Supra.
spoken of before. But commonly, and for the most part, as I said, it is
otherwise. And the Pious, in affliction; if they find not full satisfaction, in
our Savior's words to Peter, spoken of before; What I do, thou know not
now; but shall know afterward: yet I am very confident, that under the
smartest, darkest, and most uncouth Providence; let them nut loath themselves
in their own sight for all their offenses; be numbled under the mighty Hand of
God; run to the Fountain opened for Sin and for Uncleanness; die more unto the
World, and lay up their Treasure, and Heart too, more in Heaven; have none but
God Above; and God above all Below; unto them: Let them make this their
Business under their saddest Sufferings, and persevere thereat: And most
undoubtedly, as God obtains his End, they shall not miss his Mind. Thus all
Afflictions shall serve his greater Glory; and surely issue in their greatest
Good.

And then; I conclude with confidence; This will not only still a distressed
Saint; but turn his weeping into laughter, and put off his Sackeloth for more
beautiful Garments; and exchange his Lamentations into Songs of Praises unto
the God of his Salvation; who commands light to shine forth out of darkness,
and will bring Good from Evil, to them are good and upright in heart before him.

3. The last Thing undertaken was; Some Guidance for the better Application of
the whole unto our selves for good. And this I shall dispatch in these two or
three following Inferences:

Infer. 1. Since it is so, That, etc. Then certainly, pious People must not
expect all Halcyon Days on Earth; nor flatter themsleves with hopes of a Summer
that shall last their life, without any storm or cloud attending it: but they
must reckon on it, and be content, to take their share of trouble that happens
to them. How otherwise, could it be a Duty on them; To be quiet in Distresses,
if none should ever reach them? Assure your selves; that tho Best Christians be
not in all respects True Lazarus's: yet must they, with Him, expect to have
their Evil things here: and happy are they, that they shall be sure of their
Good hereafter. A Traveller in a strange Country, far distant from his Native
Soil: A Mariner sailing a long and dangerous Voyage on the Ocean: and
especially, a Soldier, that has a Crafty, Cruel, and Powerful Enemy to contest
withal, must not befool himself with hopes of Ease, and Rest, and Quiet, and
his Heart's desire, without all thoughts of trouble ever coming near him. This
were so silly a Self-Flattery; as must at last make Men to rue it sadly with
too late Repentance. Are we not going out of Egypt, and through the Wilderness,
toward the Heavenly Canaan? Is not this World, wherein we all are lanched,
more like the Earth surrounding Main, than the Three Leagues Red Sea which
Israel passed through? And are not the Devil, World, and Flesh, All mortal Foes
unto us, and of too much strength to do us mischief? Can we be free from
trouble then? Nor is this any just discouragement unto serious Piety; as he
well knows that has not lost already the things before discoursed on at large.
It only serves to make us stand unto our Arms, that we be not surprised; and
whets our Courage, the better to engage the Difficulties that we meet with. Our
blessed Savior never meant to drive Men from him; when he tells them plainly,
That they should count their Cost; resolving to bear their Cross, and follow
him; as they would be his Disciples, Luke 14.27, 28, etc. The Gospel gives most
full Assurance; and experienced Christians know right well; that true RELIGION
weighs down to the ground whatever Inconveniences lie in the Scale against it.
Nor is there any Comparison to be made, betwixt the sufferings of this present
time, in an holy course; and the glory that shall succeed hereafter, Romans 8.18.
The Proportion is much nearer betwixt losing a Brass Counter, for gaining of
Ten hundred thousand Guinea's. And what a Bargain worth the having is That? But
still; a Christian's Life is a Continual Warfare. Suppose there be a present
Truce: who knows but that a few hours hence it may be broken? And if we are
surprised then at unawares; of how great damage may it prove unto us: if not
irreparable? Look therefore for Afflictions, if thou be truly Godly; not with a
frightful, but a fixed Mind. Look for them so; and whenever they come, they
will not then look ghastly on thee.

Infer. 2. Since, etc. Then the worst of Sufferings that can befall God's
Servants are not so terrible as the World does commonly reckon; and perhaps,
the Sufferers themselves, may take them for. This follows plainly: because,
that Wise and Gracious God, who looks for nothing from his People, but what is
most just and equal, does yet expect, that they should be sedate and quiet
under all Distresses. Wherefore they cannot, duly, be accounted as amazing
Prodigies, and monstrous Portents. Indeed there is no Affliction but is
grievous in its own nature. And many go a great deal nearer to the quick, than
others do. Yet still; the very worst upon a pious Person has not Plague-Tokens
with it: is not Incurably Mortal. He that has swallowed up Death in Victory,
Esaias 25.8. gives us encouragement to say of the very worse of their Diseases;
This Sickness is not unto Death, John 11. I mean not, Tantu^ interest non
qualia, sed qualis, quisque patiatur. S. Aug. de Civit. D. 1.8.
as to Temporal: but it is not, to Eternal Death. For the plain truth is: for
such, to die on Earth, is nothing else, but to live in Heaven for ever. Then no
Distress, whatever it is, can be truly deadly to him that lives in Christ. No:
as the Hand that gives the stroke, is ever set on work, and guided too, by
Infinited Love and Wisdom: so likewise, there is the Good Samaritan always
standing by, and ready to apply the Balm of Gilead with tender Pity, and sure
Success. I know, that a wicked and malignant World, inspired from Hell, and
thrust on by the Devil thereof, will make what havoc they are able on God's
People; and then erect their Trophies, and Triumph upon the Spoils that by
themselves are made. Yea, tho their own Life does vouch themselves sworn
Vassals unto Satan; yet under such Calamities, they will pronounce the
Righteous but Mere Pretenders unto God. And this, they count, is perfect proof
thereof: in that they think, they have them at their own Mercy; whose Mercies,
we are sure, are very Cruelty. The Man after God's heart could fare no better
at their hands. His Enemies, that lay in wait for his Soul, took counsel
together, and spoke thus against him: God has forsaken him: for there is none
to deliver him, Psalm. 71.10, 11. But their Measures failed them there: as they
will do elsewhere, upon like occasion. The last Verse faith, They are
confounded; they are brought to shame, that seek my hurt. The Wicked, are God's
Staff indeed: yea, and they are his Rod. And how frequent (if not constant) is
it; for the merciful Providence to break that Staff, and burn that Rod,
wherewith his Children had been smitten? Sure I am; that the Proud and Powerful
King of Assyria (although he feared no such matter) was forced to feel it, Esaias
10. And neither Turk, nor French, nor Pope, can hope for better; when the
Season is. Faith then should banish Fear; and suffer Terror to take no hold
upon us. Improve That; and 'twill be able to scorn the sury of the Oppressor,
Esaias 51.12, 13; tho Earth and Hell, together, abet him. Nay, and All other
Evils, that may happen, then, cannot be dismal to us. If neither Life nor
Death; not Angels, Principalities, nor Powers; neither present things, nor
future, nor height, nor depth, nor any Creature, can separate the truly Pious
from the love of God in Christ, Romans 8.38, 39. What should be greatly
Terrible and Affrighting to them? I may therefore well conclude with the
Apostle Peter's Charge; That none of us think it strange, concerning the
severest Providence; suppose it should be a fiery Trial; as if some strange
thing happened to us, 1 Pet. 4.12. For a Christian's Sufferings, whatever they
are, cannot seem Uncouth and Horrid Matters; if our past Discourse be well
considered by us.

Infer. 3. Since, etc. Then in the last place: it ought to be the care and
labor of us All, in all our sad'st Conditions, to acquit our selves, not only
as God;s Creatures, but as good Christians also: i. to be still and quiet under
the severest Providence of God. Being the Work of his Hands; All that we have
and are is his own, and due to him; both when, and how, he will please to call
for it. But, being the Price of his Blood too: his Right is double; and there
can be no dispute; but that we are, and ought to be most absolutely, and most
righteously, at his Disposal. But I shall not stay on Arguments to persuade
hereto; being fully of opinion, that those on whom the former Discourses will
not have sufficient Influence to convince them of their Duty in the point;
neither would they believe themselves obliged, should a Messenger from the Dead
come, and acquaint them with it.

All I shall therefore further meddle with at present will be, to do what
service I am capable of, in giving the best Directions, that I can, for our
more ready Obedience unto God in this important Business; Of being still and
silent under the greatest troubles that befall us. There are but three or four
(though many more are ready) that I shall insist upon: and they are these,

Direct. 1. Make sure, thy Soul be furnished with effectual, and saving Grace:
that thou be not barely an Appendant unto Jesus Christ, but implanted into him;
and have devoted thy self entirely to him. Then, being found a Christian in
Sincerity: either there is little danger of thy being plunged into that Gulf;
or great presumption of speedy getting out again. But otherwise, there are no
hopes of special Help from Heaven. I grant, indeed, if any People have attained
to Stoical Apathy, or are the Masters of the ancient Roman Gallantry (as it is
called); they then may seem to out-brave the worst of Evils on them, with a
quiet and Christian Resolution. But, alas! it is nothing so, at all. The
Principle, whereby the former is acted, puts of true Man; and what moves the
latter is an utter stranger to the true God. And neither of them deserve the
Name of true constant Fortitude; but indeed of a foolhardy desperate
Stupidity. The Christian Valor neither rashly courts a Misery, nor declines it
basely: but being come, as it feels the smart, so it knows who sent it: and
that much worse was well deserved; but yet, this coming on a gracious Errand,
it bears up under it, with out Repining at it; and waits quietly a seasonable
Deliverance from it, and great Advantage by it. But now, this Herb grows not in
the Common-fields of Christianity. It Is not the Highway, Matthew. 13. Luke 8.
nor the Thorny, nor the Stony Ground will bring it kindly forth. No: it must
be a good and honest Heart, made so by special Grace, where it arriveth to
persection. If thou have now a bare Name to live when thou art dead; and take
up with a form of Godliness, but without the power thereof; there are no hopes,
thou should have help, and be kept steady when violent Winds and Waves
assault thee. But if Religion be thy Business; the biass of thy Heart be
Heavenward; and Jesus Christ be the Loadstone that thy Soul stands to, and
only sixeth at; why then, as thou art Upright with thy God, thou also art
become even God's Delight, Prove. 11.20. Now unto the Upright there arises
light in darkness;, Ps. 112.4. The reason is, Light is sown (by the sure
Husbandman) for him; and gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm 97.11. And
what God sows, must sure grow up, and soon be ripe too. Wherefore we are called
on, to look upon it, as that which never fails to our Observation: Mark the
perfect Man, and behold the Upright: for the end (however his beginning, or
middle time shall prove) of that Man shall be peace, Psalm. 37.37. And all know,
it is the End crowns all. O that we, every one, would rouse up our Souls from a
lukewarm Temper; and by no means settle under the leaves of a bare Profession,
without the power of a living Principle of Holiness in our Hearts, always
making Heavenward whence it came. This would so six us on the Rock, that though
the Tempests shake, they should never overturn, us. We are certainly else upon
a sandy bottom; and that has no security. How can we stand in an evil Day, of
Life, or Death, or Judgment; except we are thus provided? Think sadly of the
woeful Disappointment to the foolish Virgins; that had their lamps indeed, but
had no oil; and were shut out, when they thought sure of entering in, Mat 25.10.
And that thou may fare better, trust not in outward Form; but get the Truth,
and Life of Grace, which God alone approves: and thou art safe.

Direct. 2. Be not indulgent to thy flesh, let not thine earthly Tabernacle be
too much cocker'd, and fondled by thee. It Is not intended here to prohibit Men
from running out into excess of Riot, and following of the dissolute Courses of
the Debauchees of the Evil Age we live in. No: those Spots are not the Spots of
the Children of God; to whom I now am speaking. They are the manifest
Brand-mark set upon the Herd belonging to the Bottomless Pit. Who think it
strange, and speak evil of the others; because they will not be as vile that
way as themselves are, 1 Pet. 4.4. But what I plainly mean is; that Christians,
who will bear Distresses to the best advantage, should not allow themselves
unto the utmost Bounds of Christian-liberty, in things that are so far from
being simply evil, that they are indifferent; yea, good and necessary in the
due use thereof. Such are both Rest and Labor, Meats and Drinks, Habits and
lawful Recreations; with other things like these. He that treads upon the very
Line of some large Circle, may soon step over. It Is very dangerous to run upon
the Edge of the Bank, least ye fall into the Brook. All that is lawful, is not
expedient, 1 Cor. 6.12. the Apostle teaches. Moderate Sleep and Exercise
refresh Nature, and preserve Health: but excess, in that brings fuel to
Corruption; and in this consumes the Spirit. The sober use of wholesome and meet
Food and Liquors is necessary to our subsisting: but Intemperance, in
Delicacies and Varieties specially, brings Sickness and Death. So Clothing
hides our Nakedness, and defends from the God: but Garrish and Antic
Fashions are a Vanity full of Michief to ourselves and others. Nay, Recreation,
that should be only used to sit for Business; how often being excessive does it
untune for that, and rob us too of our choicest Jewel, Precious Time? And yet
amongst good People, some may be found (I wish the Number were much smaller)
that are so coy and delicate; that nothing but the best, and most of every
thing will content them. Nay, and it is so; that the Sun must not shine, nor the
Wind blow, nor the Rain drop on some of Them! These are the ways so to
Emasculate poor Peoples Souls, that the lightest load is able to sink them to
the ground. And how should great Distresses then be born; and stood up under,
with such an even and fixed Resolution as they ought? The holy Apostle does
indeed allow a little Wine for the stomack's sake, and for those infirmities of
that good Man, whose drink was nothing else but Water, 1 Timothy 5.23. But
otherwise the self-same Person he calls upon, to endure hardness, and as a good
soldier, 2 Timothy 2.3. Are we not all Christ's Soldiers: and if we will be good
Soldiers; must we not follow, and be like unto our Leader? O how unlikre him,
do we acquit our selves; who court this World, which he so scorned and trampled
on; and pamper the Body, which he made drudge of to the Soul, and in God's
service! Is It probable, at this rate, when Poverty, Sickness, Persecution, or
Death assault, (and how near any of them may be to us, who can tell?) we should
be dumb and open not our mouth, submitting quietly to his Father's Hand, as he
did constantly? At least, let us labor to tread in his Apostle's steps; keep
under our body, (as it were by Club-law) and bring it into subjection, 1 Cor.
9.27: that the vain Fancies, and sond Appetites there may be restrained and
curbed; and our Souls may fasten and abide on what will fully satisfy them,
and never can be rifled from them.

Direct. 3. Lay not thy treasure up, on earth; but in the heavens, Matthew. 6.19.
Excellent Counsel of our blessed Lord! For where the Treasure is, there will
the Heart (i. the Man himself) be also. And if a Man has once his Heart: viz.
his Love, Delight, Desire, and Hopes, as high as Heaven, with God and Jesus
Christ above; he cannot be so concerned with any Disaster here below, as to be
disordered greatly by the same. As he that looks down from some high Steeple,
sees every thing beneath him but as a small and little matter: so Earthly Good
and Bad must necessarily seem to one, whose Conversation is in Heaven. It Is
certain, that there are those Mountains in the World, whose tops will be
serene, and clear, and calm; when Thunder, Storms, and Lightning, threaten to
mix Heaven and Earth together at the lower parts thereof. Could we take off our
Affection from things Below, to set, and always keep them upon what is Above:
how should we live as in a constant Sunshine? Nihil erus sentit in nervo, cum
animus in caelo est Tert. ad Mart. cap. 2.
When Pestilence, Famine, Sword, should range the Earth; when Poverty,
Sickness, Death, should knock at our own Doors; how little would the
Disturbance be unto us? Poor Archimedes was so intent upon his Mathematical
Studies, that he knew not when his City was stormed, and taken. And, verily, as
Christian, that gets his Heart full bent toward Heaven will find the
distracting Hurries of the Earth slip over him with but little observation by
him. The holy Apostle Paul was certified by the Holy Ghost, in every City he
passed through, that bonds and afflictions waited for him at Jerusakm, and yet
he faith, none of those things so much as moved him, Acts 20.24. The Joy in
finishing his Course, and the Reward after it, made even his life it self, tho
likely to be lost, but a little matter with him. We are very sure, that Moses
refused being a King's Grandson, and chose rather an afflicted state with the
People of God, than sinful Pleasures in a Prince's Court: valuing the Reproach
for Christ as a Better Estate than the Exchequer of Egypt, Heb 11.24, 25, 26.
But what was that which betrayed so wise and good a Man into such a Paradox, in
the World's Opinion? Why, let them think so still: but his Judgment was truly
Orthodox, notwithstanding. For he had respect unto the recompense of reward,
Verse 26, fin. And sure, to be Heir apparent unto the Crown of Egypt, deserves
not to be compared with an undoubted Title to God's Kingdom. And the Delights
in Heaven are so surpassing, that all Earthly Joys are not insipid only, but
nauseous, fulsome; Carrion and Poison, to them. Which having his Heart affected
with, by a Believing Prospect thereof; what was it to him, to throw off the
Courtier, and take up the Clown? Nay, worse? To skulk and hide a while for
scaping of those Bloodhounds that were hunting after him? And, at the last, to
flee his Country, and abide those many dangers and distresses that attend a
Banished Outlaw? Seculi hujus quem non decipit prosperit as non frangit
adversit as. S. Aug. de verb. Dom. Sermon. 42.
All that the Earth could do against him, you see, how little 'twas unto him;
because his Treasure was in Heaven: he had respect to the recompense of reward.
Were Christians heartily making after him; although they should not fully
overtake him; how light and easy would their many great and heavy Burdens lie
upon them? To conclude; The Author and Finisher of our Faith, for the Joy
above, that was set before him, endured the pain, and despised the shame of the
Bloody Cross, whereon he suffered, Heb. 12.2. And would the Christian duly look
to Christ, he surely, would be like him, much more than he is.

Direct. 4. Lastly: Let Sin be more uneasy, and be sure thy Sufferings then
will be easier far. Were thou worse able to endure Corruptions, thou would
be better to abide Afflictions. When once Iniquity is our greatest Burden; all
others will be little felt. The very reason why Distresses sometimes triumph
is, because we have not made a Conquest over our Transgressions. They are these
that bring Tribulations to us: and make them sit more heavy on us, when they
are come. Guilt is a most heavy Load to an Awarkened Mind; although Another's
Eye should not be able to espy so much as a light Feather on its back. But the
weight must needs be much increased, when Actual Punishment cleaves unto
Guilt. Whether the good Woman of Zarephath's words, spoken to the Prophet; (
Art thou come to call may Sins to remembrance; and to slay my Son? 1 King.
17.18.) do not imply; that a fresh cognizance took by Conscience of her
faultiness toward God, had imbittered the Affliction to her; tho it seem
probable; I will not determine. But it is very plain; that This added Chains
(as I may call them) to the Confinement of Joseph's Brethren: For their open
Confession is: We are verily guilty concerning our Brother; in that we saw the
anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear. THEREFORE IS
THIS DISTRESS COME UPON US, Genesis 42.21. Whence it must follow: would we be more
Innocent, we should be less Unhappy: most certainly; our Misery would pinch and
gall us less. What made our blessed Lord so Easy, Patient, and Submissive, in
those worst of Evils upon him? Verily; because He had the best of Souls within
Him. No Sin had ever thouched it: and how should Sorrow fetch Blood from it? O,
let us grow in Grace; and then our bitter Cup shall have no Dregs to touch our
Lips. Those are reserved for the Graceless Ones; to wring them, out, and drink
them up, Ps. 75.8. But thriving Christians, though they must have Burdens, shall
not sink under them. Such wait upon the Lord to purpose: and so renew their
strength. They are enabled to walk without fainting; and run and not be weary,
Isa. 40.31. Wherefore abound ye in the work of God, and your labor will not be
in vain, 1 Cor. 15.58. Not only, by a more diligent Attendance on all
Ordinances; but especially, about increasing Faith, inslaming Love, confirming
Hope, perfecting Patience, and setting, and keeping the whole Heart on Heaven.
This would advance the Spirit to its due Sovereignty; and reduce the Flesh to
just Subjection. And what can bring Disorders then? This will draw back Sin's
Fuel; and then its Fire goes out, of itself. But the neglect hereof, is
throwing off our Armor, instead of girding it close about us: and then we are
easily Shot, ands fall.

Mere Nature, with all the strength that Reason brings it, proves a weak
Creature; at the last however. But Grace, and when like David waxing stronger
and stronger, overcomes all Difficulties in the way to Glory. And though a
Pharaoh be behind, a Sea before, and a Wilderness on both sides; it will bear
up the Soul until it see the Salvation of its God.

The Sum of all my Advice is this: 1. Make sure of Saving Grace, and being
Right at Heart: 2. Be not indulgent to the Flesh, nor fond upon thy Earthly
Tabernacle: 3. Lay not thy Treasure up on Earth, but in the Heavens, and let
thy Heart be with it there: 4. Lastly; Let Sin be more Uneasy to thee, and thy
Sufferings will be easier far. Grow but in Grace, and thou shall Out-grow all
Grief that can possibly seize thee here. For Then, thou will be the fullest
Echo to the Psalmist: I was dumb; I opened not my mouth: because, etc.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by J. Salusbury, at the Rising-Sun over against the
Royal Exchange in Coruhill.
THE Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption, by the Lord Jesus Christ, by William Bates, D. D.

The Changeableness of this World, with reflect to Nations, Families, and
particular Persons; with a Practieal Application there^f, to the various
Conditions of this Mortal Life, by Timothy Rogers, M. A.

A Mirror for Athiests, being some Passages of the Life and Death of the Right
Honorable John Earl of Rochester; written by his own Direction on his
Deathbed, by Gilbert Burnet Lord Ep. of Sarum.

An end of Doctrinal Controversies, which have lately troubled the Churches, by
Richard Baxter.

The Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits; fully evinced by unquestionable
Histories of Apparitions and Witchcrafts; Voices proving the Immortality of
Souls, by Richard Baxter.

The Protestant Religion truly Stated and Justified: by the late reverend Mr.
Richard Baxter, prepared for the Press; sometime before his Death. Whereunto is
added, some account of the learned Author, by Mr. Daniel Willams and Mr.
Matthew Sylvester.

The Christian's Coverse with God: or, the Insufficiency of Haman-friendship,
and the Improvements of Solitude in Converse with God; with some of the
Author's breathings after him, by Richard Baxter. Recemmended to the Readers
serious Thoughts, when at the House of Mourning and in Retirement, by Mr.
Matthew Sylvester.

The Mourners Memorial, in two Sermons, on the Death of the truly Pious Mrs.
Susannah Soame, with some account of her Life and Death, by Timothy Wright and
Robert Fleming.


