HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms

An Humble ADDRESS To the Right Honorable LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in
PARLIAMENT, In vindication of KINGLY POWER AND GOVERNMENT Against the Damnable
Positions of Jesuits and Phanatiques, desiring they would be pleased to call in
the King without dishonorable conditions according to his Just Right.

Written by the Author of a Letter to a Member.

Romans Chap. 13. ver. 1. (...).

Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no Power but of
God, etc.

LONDON, Printed by Peter Lillicrap, for Henry Marsh, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane. 1660.

An Humble ADDRESS To the Right honorable LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in
PARLIAMENT, In vindication of Kingly Power and Government against the damnable
Positions of Jesuits and Phanatiques, desiring they would be pleased to call
in the King without dishonorable conditions according to his just rights.
NOthing in this world can present this sad nation with so pleasant a sight as
your Honorable Session in Parliament, which gives a rapture of joy to all
Loyal and Religious hearts, transporting them with the high contemplation of
the inexhaustible Treasure of Divine mercy, that God out of the wise conduct of
his ever to be admired providence (after our great and various Tragic scenes
of Governors and Governments acted by the politic Jesuits, the great
State-mongers, in their secret influence on the Counsels of this nation) should
dispose your much prayed for Convention, the delight of our hearts, and desire
of our souls, as the only expedient left us under God to reedifie the ruined
Church, and to repair the sad breaches of the decayed State.

You are the expected Center, in which the several lines of different interests
meet, that after their diverse unhappy motions in you (their proper place) they
may receive rest and perfection; you are that benign Constellation in the
sphere of Government, by whose propicious influence, all things in our lower
orb receive the more refined production of their better being, in the
conception, birth and maturity of our blessed restoration.

Me thinks these many years in the sad winter of our afflicted Clymate, all
things seem to have been void of fire and spirit, but your pre ence like a warm
spring reviveth our withered expectations, and inliveneth our dull bodies with
a new soul, full of like opperations; and after the long Lent of our most low
condition, we are blessed with an Easter of your meeting, which after the death
of our hopes, gives a resurrection of our happiness; which offers us an
argument for ever to magnify Gods unspeakable goodness, and an opportunity to
congratulate the prosperous estate of the Kingdom in you, our most faithful
Trustees, and to speak our thanks, that you are pleased to take upon you the
trouble to redress our intolerable grievances, and to redeem the distressed
Nation, long groaning under many heavy pressures from high slavery and eminent
ruin.

The best way to prevent it is to find out the first original, on which as a
prime cause the great complication of our miseries depends, and truly without
any curious disquisition you may perceive it to flow from disobedience to that
Authoty, which God has set over us, and the grand Error in principles has
proved so fruitful, that it has had many branches springing out of it
according to the Philosophers received maxim in his Physics, (...), one
Capital Error begets a thousand.

It is that unhappy dispute (which the two Houses had with the King, first
embroiled the Nation in a Civil war, and then involved it in a Labrinth of
miseries! when blood is once drawn, it is very dissicult to stench the flux of
it; the surviving always being acted with a bitter animosity to revenge the
quarrel of their murdered friends, each party being ambitious to gain the glory
of a conquest and soverainty over others, are so much biassed with their own
interest of an earthly enjoyment of themselves, as they aim to be Masters of
other men's estates and fortunes, which gives a high disturbance to the
conquered party, who will be always unwilling to sit down with loss of liberty
and livelihood.

Pray be pleased to use the utmost of your industry in your prudent Counsels,
to make such a provision for the future to take away all occasions, and lay
aside such disputes, which will inevitably produce a new War, which to hinder,
nothing is so rational, as to fix the Government of the Kingdom upon the
ancient basis, which is the means to satisfy all honest interests, and as for
the other it is as fond as disingenious to gratify them, they being so
inconsiderable cannot pretend to merit any bodies esteem.

I know it is your Christian intention, and the peoples great advantage to make
a firm and lasting peace, which will be crowned with so good a product, as the
Kingdoms flourishing estate, and the con^ec^ation of your blessed memories to
posterity. Nothing can be more honorable to the Nation, and suitable to the
genius of the people, then the ancient established Government, which speaks
great Attributes of glory and wisdom to our forefathers, who have founded such
an admirable fabric of Polity among us, that after ages have rendered
themselves no less miserable, then contemptible in the alteration of it.

The late unfortunate revolutions will easily convince the refractory opposers,
that Monarchy is the best model of all Polities whatsoever, holding a
correspondence in some manner with Gods Government, all inferior Creatures (as
his subjects) by a natural impress serving each other in an admirable order,
Naturals serving the Plants, and Plants the Animals, and Animals the Rationals,
and at last Heaven and Earth and all the several orders of Entities out of a
principle of Nature, reason or religion, pay a tribute of obedience and
devotion to God their supreme omnipotent Monarch.

This Loyalty of the Creature is presidentary to men endued with a more sublime
principle of Reason, and united in a common society, are obliged to be
subservient to each other in their superior or inferior degrees of
subjection, or command, to promote the common welfare, and most
conscientiously to perform all service and duty to the King by his lawful
inheritance, and Gods divine institution, their supreme governor.

And as more naturals that Elements ought of a universal dictate move upwards
and downwards, contrary to their particular inclinations, in silling up a
vacuum, to serve the common good of the universe, and to keep inviolable the
law of the Creator, I wish none placed in a sphere above them, being courted by
their example, would be so far elevated above their private concerns, and
endeavor (though contrary to their self advantages) by all means possible to
advance the public good in their regular subordination to the King, the
supreme Governor of the Nation, And therefore I desire you would nighly
di^countenance that base Jesuiticall principle (a fundamental Error in
Politics, the sowers of all Rebellion and Annarchy) that Kings and all in
Authority have their power from the People, which is as truly false in it self
as fatal to this Nation.

For though the People do nominate Kings etc. in elective kingdoms, or consent
to them in Hereditary (as ours is, and the Crown ought to be transmitted to our
most gracious Sovereign from a long series of his numerous and royal
progenitors) yet their nomination, or consent is either by way of fo^m or
order, to declare an approvement of, or submission to the King as the supreme
Power of the kingdom: which is derived by divine institution from God himself
(the sole most obsolute eternal Monarch and fountain of all lawful Power) it
being no more in the People to give Power to Kings, then in their own Power to
give themselves being.

All Power being Authoritative originally or radically in God, as the first
founder, in the King Representative and per modum subjecti, as a subject
capable of the just managery of it: and in the People materially, and per modum
patientis, in the nomination of the Person (not the constitution of Power) in
their choice in Elective kingdoms, and by their consent do not give a Power, be
an attribute of obedience in their due subscription to it in hereditary.

We have Gods (...) for it per me Regis regnant, by me Kings reign. By me
Constitutive and efficienter, per modum Authoris, as the supreme Agent, and
Kings do reign Ministerialiter per modum Dei locum tenentium, as Gods
Vicegerents, their Power being a Ray of Divinity, by whose benign influence,
mankind (the flower of the universe, watered in showers of graces from above,
and streams of Justice below) receives its bud and perfection under his
propitious conduct in a happy planting and orderly maturing all things in this
inferior world.

And therefore Kings and all in Authority are not of the Peoples but of Gods
christionizing, and that after his own Name, I said ye are Gods: whereupon for
his sake, and by virtue of his Commission (as his Deputies) the People are
liable to pay a just tribute of obedience to them.

But suppose that Kings and those who are in Authority shall (as the Phanaticks
of this age object) neglect the great end of Government, and improve all
opportunities and advantages of their Power and Grandeur unto their own
personal and family interest, especially when they shall wilfully and against
universal reason and the apparent danger of the common safety, then say they,
they determine their Authority, and having in such cases quitted their care and
respects to the Peoples protection, they likewise quite the People from their
Allegiance and obedience.

To this damnable and Jesuitical Position, I thus reply. It is rare to find
Kings (they and their People being Correlatives) to have so much cruelty for
themselves, as in bauishing the universal Dictates of Reason, in the common
ruin of their kingdoms, theirs and the Peoples being one joint interest, and
their greatest concern (next the glory of God) is a mutual opposition of
enemies, and a joint concurrence in vigorous endeavors for the support and
promotion of each others happiness.

But grant that Kings should so far degenerate as to cancel all obligations to
God and nature, in order to Liberty and Propriety of their People; it is no
more then is clearly described in the sacred Oracles, where Samuel stateth the
absolute Prerogative of a King, 1 Samuel Chap. 8. ver. 2. to the 17. And he said,
this shall be the manner of the King that shall reign over you, he will take
your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his Chariots.

And let them take their much admired Calvin's authentic Paraphrase on the text
(out of his care done to truth rather then Kings) in the latter end of the 26
Paragraph, De publica Administratione: Ac si dixisset Samuel, eo se proripiet
licentiae Regum libido, quam cohibere vestrum non erit, quibus hoc restabit
unum, jussa excipere, ac dicto audientes esse. To such a height of Tyranny
shall the will of Kings break forth, which to restrain is not your duty, in you
this only remains, to hearken to his words, and obey his commands, with
which you are in humble submission to comply, and not in a rebellious
resistance to dispute.

And to that effect is that most signal place of Scripture, Jer. chap. 27. ver.
6. and 8. And now have I given all those lands into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar
the King of Babylon my servant, etc.

Who this Nebuchadnezzar was is sufficiently known, who had conquered Jerusalem
the holy City, and had by his absolute power invaded other Territories, yet God
styleth him Nebnchadnezzar my servant (though a great Tyrant and Usurper) by
virtue of his unquestionable Commission, which none but God himself could take
from him. And once more be pleased to take Calvin's Comment upon the recited
Text; Videmus quanta obedientia Dominus tetrum illum ferocemque Tyrannum coli
voluerit, non alia ratione nisi quia Regnum obtinebat; You see (says he) with
what obedience the Lord would have that cruel Tyrant observed, upon no other
account, but as he was by himself invested with the Royal Throne. And Calvin
further urges in the same Paragraph, Eodem decreto constitui etiam nequissimos
Reges quo Regum authoritas statuitur; nunquam in animum nobis seditiosae illae
cogitationes venient, tractandum esse pro meritis Regem; nec aequum esse ut
subditos ei non praestemus, qui vicissim Regem nobis se non praestat; By the
same Commission are wicked Kings constituted, by which the Authority of Kings
in general is enacted; and we must never entertain within our minds such
Rebellious thoughts, how that the King is to be treated according to his
demerits, neither is it fit we should with draw our obedience as subjects,
though he does not express his gracious clemency and Moderation as a King.

Therefore these Phanatick objections of this latter age since 1642 are very
unjustifiable, that service and obedience is to be wholly devoted only to the
just commands of superiors; this is that disloyal principle which has
introduced so much Barbarism and confusion among us, which has an ill aspect
upon our Oeconomicks as well as Politics, and has gained an opinion with
wives, children and servants, that no service is to be given by the one to
their Masters, nor duty by the other to their Parents, nor obedience by the
third to their Husbands, if Masters, Parents, or Husbands do (as they conceive)
impose their severe commands upon them, and if they act any thing contrary to
their fancy, they deem they may justly infringe all obligations whatsoever due
by Religion, Law and the right of Nature to their several Relations.

But suppose that Kings and all in Authority shall neglect the great ends of
Government, and improve all opportunities and advantages to their own personal
interest, to the apparent danger of of common safety (say the Phanaticks) they
determine their authority, and having quitted their care of the Peoples
protection they quit the People from their Allegiance and Obedience.

To this I answer, That Kings though most absolute Tyrants cannot be justly
deposed by the People; I confess the end of all Government is the common good
in a due administration of Justice, to the promotion of which all their royal
endeavors, as so many lines ought to concenter themselves (as in a point) in
the public safety of their subjects.

And although Kings do not perform their duty, in governing according to Law,
yet their Authority does not determine, it being supreme is liable to give an
account only to God, who only determines both the Power and Person.

And although the people do by Election or Consent confer a trust on Kings and
Governors, which is absolute, no Governor being so weak as to take it on the
condition of his good behavior, and durante Populi beneplacito, the will of
the people being as mutable as fond, and having not always Reason for its
Conduct, and solid principles for its Basis, under pretense of ill managery,
will speak a determination to the lawful power of a supreme Governor, and the
best modelled Government of a Nation.

It is very reasonable to grant that the people do give a very high trust to
Kings and those in Authority, which is sealed to them by Gods power, Be subject
to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, from whom Kings receive the
Patent of their Authority, which no body under any gloss how fair soever can
cancel, he being in no capacity to forfeit that power to man, which he has
immediately derived from God alone, I mean the sword of Justice; it being not
in the power of the people originally to kill one another without a Magistrate,
they being endued with an equality in nature, and cannot exercise this
sovereignty over each other. And if the King could forfeit his trust by not
discharging it according to the intention of the Donors, and the Laws to which
he has obliged himself, that the people cannot resume that trust, when it has
received the approbation and confirmation of Gods power, which the people
cannot assume to themselves, without the most impious arrogating one of the
supreme Attributes of God to themselves.

But then it will be replied that the people are in a sad condition, having no
sense against the arbitrary power of Kings: to which I briefly answer, they
have for their refuge Tears and Prayers, the Arms of the Church in their
greatest straits and perplexities, and God, in whose hands the hearts of Kings
are to turn them as he pleases according to his holy wisdom; and for my part,
I shall ever deem it better to live under the Tyranny of Kings then under the
Anarchy of the people.

I desire you would be pleased to make a deep inspection into those two
erroneous principles so much cried up by the Phanaticks, that salus populi est
suprema lex, and Rex est singulis major, and universis minor; which they
conceive are most absolute rules to walk by, and a firm basis to secure their
cursed actions from the titles of rebellion, perjury, sacrilege, murder,
oppression, etc. To the first, that the safety of the people is the supreme
law, I thus answer; the safety of the people in strict speech is not a law, but
an end of it, the law being made for the just conservation of the peoples
safety; but grant it in common language to be a law, and then sure none is so
void of sense and reason, if an end may be called a law, but to give to the
ultimate end the attribute of supremacy, and then Gloria Deiest suprema lex,
and indeed his word is a law, and it is his glory to maintain it. Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; and God so far condescendeth as
to give a reason of it, for the Powers that are are ordained of God.

Now the debate will be, who is supreme, the King or the people; I confess the
people de facto have of late made themselves so, but I hope they have not the
boldness de jure to think so, the Legislative power being ultimately in the
King, by whose Royal consent the results of the two Houses (who are called and
dissolved by his power) receive the signature of Laws; the house of Commons
being Commissioned by him ad inquireddum, and the house of Lords ad
consulendum, and in him their legal head is the supreme power ad determinandum
de ordine negotiis regni, it is his right with the advice of Parliaments his
great Council to determine what is the safety, peace and the just Rights of the
nation, and not in the people, who are not a head of law, but the body of the
kingdom to be governed by it.

And if the People should deem in their private sense (which cannot be so
discerning and impartial as the public judgment of those that are placed on
the hill of government, who see much more then they that kneel in the valley of
subjection) that the known fundamental Laws instituted by them (who are Gods
Ministers) are diametrically opposite to the just interest of a nation, yet if
they cannot (it being repugnant to their conscience to give an active
observance to those laws made, as they apprehend, against the safety of the
people) yet they are obliged to give a passive obedience to the Governors
(who as they are ordained, if good, are to give him only an account of their
actions) in an humble submission to whatsoever punishments shall be imposed by
them.

And here the people are readily to write after our blessed Saviors excellent
copy, who submitted to an unjust power in the loss of his life, contrary to all
law, rather then dispute his own ordinance; and so it is better for them in
Christian patience to die Martyrs, then by an illegal resistance to be rebels.

To that their maxim (being a main foundation upon which the Phanaticks have
at first built, and still endeavor to support that most unhandsome
superstructure of Rebellion, Sacrilege, Perjury, and in a word, their
violation of all humane and divine Laws) that Rex est singulis major, and
universis minor, the King is greater then any single person, and lesser then
the community of the people; to which I reply, that the body of the people
cannot pretend to be superior or rival with him, except his two Houses of
Parliament, who have no being, unless they receive birth by his summons,
consulere de arduis negotiis regni, and so they may be justly styled his
Counselors to advise, and not his superiors to command.

The Legislative power (which to vindicate he is armed with the Militia of the
Nation) being principally seated in him, that those wholesome laws which derive
their rough draught, and first delineation of parts from the two Houses, and
afterward their life and maturity from the signature of his Excellent Majesty's
Royal consent.

Again, the King may challenge a preeminence over the whole body of the people,
in respect of his right of dominion over them, upon which account he is endued
with the more peculiar image of God, which as a King is imprinted in him, and
therein does represent the person of God in his sovereignty, which the whole
community of the people cannot pretend to, in relation they are subjects, and
that notion speaks an inferiority.

And though subordinate Magistrates in a sort represent Gods Person, yet it is
not directly, they immediately representing the Kings, as he does Gods; so that
the best of the people (who are Magistrates) or the Kings Vicegerents, as he
only is Gods, who is the sum of all power, and the King is his Ray, and all
inferior Magistrates are but shadows of that ray of Divinity.

The Phanatiques insisting on the pretended principles of public safety, peace
and liberty, have practiced licentiousness, war and ruin to the kingdom, and
therefore they most confidently assert, that all Laws, Statutes, Ordinances,
Covenants, Engagements, Promises, Protestations, all acknowledgements, Vows,
and Covenants, and all manner of obligations and expressions hereof are only
binding unto the public safety, and not at all (as they will have it) to the
persons of the Governors, but with reference thereto.

Pray be pleased strictly to perpend these damnable Positions, anciently
contrived by the Romanists and lately distilled into the factious spirits of
this nation, to teach us first to destroy our lawful Governors by the
plausible pretenses of new-modelled principles of Common Reason, justice and
equity, have almost nulled all Religion and Government, according to the
ancient fundamental common and Civil laws, at last to make us a rasa tabula, if
not somewhat worse, that we might be forced to deem it more rational to have
their Religion, (a bad one) rather then none at all imprinted in us.

This plot is much more subtle then that of Gunpowder Treason, when the old
Jesuits, or the new Quakers, by the underhand insinuations of Religion, peace
and liberty have put the Phanatiques on the most horrid contrivances
immaginable, and by a blasphemous impulse of spirit, did advise them to
justify many extraordinary strange and very illegal actions, as taking up
arms, raising and forming Armies against the King, fighting against his person,
imprisoning, impeaching, arraigning, trying and executing him, cutting off his
head, banishing his children, abolishing Bishops, Deans and Chapters, took away
Kingly Government and the House of Lords, brok the Crowns, sold the Jewels,
Plate, Goods, Houses and Lands belonging to the Kings of this Nation, erected
extraordinary Courts of justice, and therein impeached, arraigned, and
condemned his Majesty's most loyal subjects, Persons eminent for moral honesty
and great piety, as so many notorious enemies to the public Peace of the
kingdom, when the laws in being and the ordinary Courts of justice could not
reach them: these were unknown strange practices in this nation, and not at all
justifiable by any known Laws and Statutes.

And now I have been bold to present you with a view of the gross crimes of the
late times, most humbly desiring the honorable Houses to concur with the
King in the constitution of such wholesome Laws (as a sanctuary) to defend the
nation from the like horrid perpetrations for the future, and to give an
impression and terror to others, not to dare to commit the like violations,
upon the incuring of penalties proportioned to their demerits:

Now I offer to your most serious consideration, in your most retired thoughts,
how God out of a continued series of justice has pleased in these various
scenes of his Providence to give to diverse actors in those late fatal tragedies
a true sight of their great Errors, in a grievous sense of their high
sufferings. First, a faction of the Hou^e in the beginning of their Session
connived at tumultuary commotions, assaulting the late Kings most sacred
Person, in disfavour of that noble Hero the Earl of Strafford, as a means,
where they could not conquer by strength of argument, to out-talk with clamor
of the multitude, pretending to satisfy their just importunities (which indeed
were arrogant mutinies) concluded to judge him (whose powerful wisdom would
have bounded their insolence) by a new coined word and law of accumulative
treason; when it had served their turn, they condemned the law with the person,
and truly more guilty then him, lest it should rise up in judgment against
them to make them exemplary for their injustice.

Not long after these new Justiciaries were secluded the House by the minor
part of it, by power of the Army, to make them sensible how by a force of the
tumults they first sentenced Strafford, and afterward by listed tumults they
themselves were ejected by their fellow members, who not long after having
pulled down the House of Lords, murdered the Lords Anointed, and banished his
royal relations, and ruined his loyal subjects, were twice ejected by Cromwell
and the Army, to give them a reflection of their wicked actions, and speak a
check to their farther disloyalty, oppression and ambition.

And now at last the late Juncto (whose being and base contrivances had been
entombed in their own empty sculls, had they not been hatched by the warmth of
a military power) have well requited the army their former civilities in
cashiering them their commands, and paid them their long score of Arrears with
a short empty vote of indemnity, which I hope will make them sensible of their
gross misdemeanors, in the just turn of their miseries.

And here I cannot but eternally give my thanks to that great God, who after so
many strange alterations of Governors and governments, will make you
instrumental in your sage counsels, to make a perfect settlement in our
distracted State and distressed Church.

And this puts me in mind of paying of my most humble gratitude to that most
excellent Genesis Monk, who out of a great principle of honor, has preserved the
ancient and famous City, (the Metropolis of the kingdom) from being made the
prey of some Boutefeus of the late Juncto, who intended (as I am informed) had
not they been prevented by the infinitte mercy and power of God, after they had
pulld down the Gates, rased the Walls, and imprisoned the most considerable
persons for Religion and loyalty in the Common Council, whom they would at last
have executed at their own doors, and then burnt the Charter of the City, and
disarmed and plundered the most conscientious Citizens, if they would not
prostitute the honor of their souls in a base compliance with them in the
acknowledgement of the late barbarous Juncto to be the supreme Authority of the
Nation.

My most humble desires unto your Excellency are, that as you have been already
pleased in a handsome act of clemency to open the doors to the secluded
members, you will add a further obligation of your justice in protecting the
two honorable Houses of Parliament from the further violence of the
Phanatiques, who by open force have dissolved many Parliaments, contrary to the
known Laws; in which they have rendered the Nation sinful to God, shameful to
themselves, and a scorn to the world.

Into your hands it is put by divine providence to stop the rage and ambition
of the Anapaptists, highly acted with pernicious principles of the Jesuits, who
at this time design in the dissolution of this Parliament a total subversion of
the true Reformed Religion, and our ancient and well-established civil
government, and cunningly to introduce, under the notion of new lights, the old
darkness of Roman Error and superstition, and under fair pretenses of liberty
and common safety in a Free State, to ruin and enslave us to the power of
foreign Princes.

The only way to render your selves high in the esteem of the world, is to
make your selves a full Parliament, consisting of the three estates of the
kingdom; an excellent frame and composition of the three governments, so
rightly balanced according to the Ancient institution of it in a well-tempered
Monarchy in the King, Aristocracie in the Lords, and Democracie in the Commons;
each particular interest complying so handsomely in a fair correspondence with
each other, the inferior still subscribing to the superior in a regular
subordination without animosity or dispute.

So that this admirable constitution may be justly styled Monarchy without
Tyranny, Aristocracie without ambition, and Democracie without Anarchy; every
man a freeholder concurring by his representatives to redress his grievances,
and to constitute the Laws of the nation, to which he is in all justice obliged
in a due observance most readily to subscribe, when by his power in the advice
of his delegates they are enacted.

And to that end in completing the Parliament (he being head of it) you will
give a great honor to your selves, happiness to the nation, and glory to God,
in being instrumental under him to bring in the King, a most glorious person,
of Majestic aspect, beautified with rare proportions of body, polished in an
excellent deportment, all subservient to the more noble operations of his soul,
communicating the choice notions of it in an elegant purity of speech, his
significant expressions in great variety of languages, being so many different
emblemes, that plainly interpret, and clearly comment upon the inward
characters of his acute fancy, and profounder judgment.

And his heroic habits of personal valor, justice, prudence, magnanimity,
clemency, meekness, humility, temperance, faithfulness, constancy in his
Religion, and above all his most eminent charity in forgiving his enemies,
speak him most illustrious, and highly accomplished in moral, intellectual, and
Theological virtues; so that if he had no title to the Crown by right of
inheritance (in its descent to him through so many Royal ancestors) yet his
incomperable merits would justly challenge your election of him to be your King.

But if these ingenuous principles will not obliege you to your duty, pray be
pleased to consult the great national advantages. Our high born King, being
allied to most if not to all the Princes of Europe, his Royal interest will
make our peace with them, and give the banquerupt kingdom such a repute with
foreign Princes and Nations, that it will highly advance our decayed trade in
transporting our various manufactures, the great employment and support of the
meaner sort of the kingdom.

You cannot give your selves a greater boon, nor the kingdom a grerter
satisfaction, then to call in the King without signing such conditions, which
in effect will make him a Duke of Venice, it is not consistent with the duty of
Subjects to impose such restrictions on their Sovereign, which shall render
null in him, the sacred function of supreme Magistracy, which is not of humane
institution, and therefore it cannot be resumed with the hands of the people,
without giving an affront to God himself the true doner of it, and let those
look for the full viols of Gods wrath to be powered out upon them, in being
given into the hands of a military power, for the administration of justice, as
a due punishment for taking away the Militia from the true owner, as of late we
have been two sensible of, in imposing such articles in treating with the late
most pious King, to which in honor and conscience he could not consent.

I hope God will vouchsafe you more gracious tempers, then to dispute the Kings
most indubitate right, and Regal dignities, with which his Royal Ancestors
have been formerly possessed: do not study to gratify the pusillanimous fear
of those, who think they have so highly disoblieged him in their unparalleled
actions, that they have no security for their persons and fortunes, except he
be rendered incapable of deserving them, in the loss of his power, this is to
punish him because they have offended, and to keep him from doing civil justice
to the nation, to protect their injustice from a due censure in the old current
of the Law.

Do not blast your own reputation, and those great hopes the kingdom conceives
of you, in not giving the King his ancient Rights, the Parliament its due
privileges, do not abridge the power of the Militia, and deem you do him
right, in giving him an empty title, without power to vindicate it, which is no
more, then to let him wear a fair scabbard, and take away his sword.

His late gracious Father chose rather to quit his life, then that just power
of the sword, in which by divire Right, and his own inheritance he was estated:
now is the time to make satisfaction to his glorious son (as his immediate
heir) for those matchless violations which have been offered to his Fathers
sacred person; do not think to expiate the guilt of former times, (which long
has laid heavy on the nation) in engaging in the same errors, with which they
were justly branded.

The Militia is that, which speaks him the chief Magistrate, which protecteth
his sacred person, and his subordinate magistrates in the exercise of justice,
and in pressing of the severe execution of those penal laws upon malefactors,
to the due loss of their lives, liberties, and fortunes, to which (though never
so just) they would not out of a partial love to themselves submit, unless
compelled by a stronger coercive power.

It is but a vain speculation to style him supreme, and at the same time invest
the people with the power of the sword, who may (when they please) dispute his
commands (though never so lawful) if they hold not a compliance with their
desires, having a design to abrogate or lessen the just rights of the Crown,
which though never so much according to the law of God and man, yet they may
easily pretend as heretofore has been done in the late Juncto) that they are
tyrannical, and inconsistent with the liberty of the freeborn people of
England, in that they give a check to those incendiaries, who under the fair
glosses of common safety, and liberty, have sacrificed the King, and people,
and all sacred, moral, and national laws and liberties to their own base
tyranny and avarice.

Though for the present, for the breaches of privileges of Parliament, and the
unlawful resistance of Kingly power we have been lately whipped by the divine
hand (inflicting great sufferings on us as a due punishment for our greater
sins) into a thought of restoring the supreme Magistrate, to whom (as Gods
Vicegerent) we truly intend to pay a just duty of Allegiance.

Yet succeeding ages being not sensible of our smarts and ills, may be so
dandled with the same vain fantasies, the people (being naturally adorers of
power and licentiousness) should, being led by their forefathers example (whom
they may count honorable to imitate) when before prepossessed with their own
ambitious desires, may by our fault fall into our errors and miseries, if the
King being disarmed in the loss of his Militia, shall not be able to defend
himself and his loyal subjects, against the insolence of his rebellious
oppressors.

Be not pleased to entertain your selves with the least suspicion, that the
King will not weild the sword of justice (in the most prudent and pious
Managery of his government over us) with the greatest moderation and integrity
imaginable: be pleased seriously to consider in his low ebb of condition,
being exposed to the charity of foreigners, how obnoxious he was rendered to a
sea of temptations, when he was highly imbarqued among them, courting him with
a powerful assistance in order to the restoration of his Royal dignities, if
he would innovate his Religion, choosing rather to dure the worst of fortune
then by a foreign invasion to gain a Crown in the forfeiture of his honor,
conscience and religion.

What can be more pleasing to God, and advantageous to the nation, then
honorably to possess the King with his own, without ugly obligations, which
will reasonably induce him (he being so much a friend to himself, to improve
his utmost endeavors to free himself from those bonds, which shall be unjustly
imposed upon him, and this will create such a perpetual jealousy between him
and his people, that it must necessarily speak them both mutually unhappy.

But the great Remora and obstruction of the Kings Royal and free inauguration
in order to civils, is the opposition of those, who have possessed themselves
of the Crown, Bishops, Dean and Chapter Lands and Revenues, in answer to which
the King out of his gracious condescension to a firm peace, will vouchsafe not
to be his own carver, wholly refering himself to the Honorable Houses, who
will assuredly treat them with all the justice and equity imaginable.

And for his own part, let them read for their ample satisfaction his late
Declaration, wherein he promises they shall have his lands and the Churches
till they are reimbursed of the money, principal and interest, which they have
paid for them, and they are bound in conscience to restore them to the true
owners, the Church and Crown.

In order to Ecclesiastics, the only way to make up the sad breaches of the
Church in point of doctrine and discipline, is to restore the ancient and
Reverend Fathers of it, instituted by the holy Apostles (as conservatours of
it) against heresy and schism; and our gracious Sovereign when he shall be
entrusted with the government, out of his Princely care and Royal inclinations
will preserve the unity of of the Church, that nothing shall be imposed on
truly conscientious persons contrary to their different judgments, professing
the same fundamentals of Orthodox Christian Religion, and differing only in
circumstancials, conditionally they deport themselves with humility not
intrenching on the public in giving a disturbance to the unity of the Church
and peace of the nation.

Nothing can give me a greater truth and admiration, then by sad experience to
see England, most eminent heretofore for Religion and Loyalty, should in this
present age so far degenerate from the principles of our Church, and the
ancient honor of the nation, who have had so high a duty for their native
Prince that they had rather quit their lives, then their sense of Allegiance.

Wherefore my most humble request to the two honorable Houses our faithful
Trustees is, that they would be pleased to repair the honor of the nation (so
lost abroad that no traveller dares own himself an English man, being in
danger of being sacrificed, except he recant the public errors of the nation)
in the most honorable reception of the King, most Illustrious in virtue and
Religion, According to his just Rights by law, and vindicate the ancient
privileges of Parliament, and the due liberty and propriety of the subject,
which will speak glory to God, and honor to your selves and the Nation.

FINIS.

