An Humble Offer at the Decision of the QUESTION, How the Vacant Throne shall
be supplied without Wrong to any Pretender?
THE Assurance of some worthy Members of the Convention, is such, That they
speak even more than enough upon most Subjects; while a distrust of their own
Abilities withholds others from speaking their own Sense, and the Sense of
those who sent them. And It being now, if ever, a time to speak, and to speak
out, so, as all Europe may hear: For the Service of God, and the Satisfaction
of those whom they represent, and of their own Consciences, those that cannot
Speak, must Write.

Three sorts of Persons are supposed to be in the House: Some, who are at
bottom for a Commonwealth, which however flourishing and happy abroad, cannot
be so in England; We are not ready for it, we are not Publick-spirited enough;
witness the Election for Members of Parliament, where the Electors are too much
swayed by Drink. Besides, how can we, without manifest Injustice, alter a
Monarchy to a Democracy? And indeed, it is a Jest to tell the People they are
Free: For in a Commonwealth they have many Masters, whereas in a Monarchy they
have but one. Secondly, Others in the House are thought secretly to desire to
bring back the Self-Deposed King, the Mischiefs of which need not, I conceive,
be Inculcated to this House. Thirdly, Others out of a true and honest design to
redress Grievances, may (it is feared) by much differing in Opinions, and
Spinning out of Time, leave the greatest Grievance of all (want of Settlement)
unredress'd. These Three together make a great Party in the House, but adding
those to them who although they think that King James the Second has most
certainly forfeited his Right to the Crown, yet it is not really in the
disposal of the People, but the Power ought to be Deposited in the Hands of a
Regent, or the next Heir.

These I observe, added to the other, make up the Major part of the House, and
therefore it is justly feared that the Debates will hardly be ended in one
Afternoon.

But now, if a Way could be found, to Do the Work without Altering the
Succession, or Doing Wrong to any, sure it were Advisable.

Th^^ the most Noble Prince of Orange is the fittest Person to fill the Vacant
Throne, all the Unbyast part of the World must yield. A Prince of so great
Valor, so great Experience, and so great Moderation: A Prince so long versed
in the highest Affairs of State, and Conduct of Armies and Fleets^ A
Good-natured Daughter may possibly come to be Reconciled to a Dissembling
Father; but an Experienced Prince, who sucked in his Aversion to Popery with
his Nurses Milk, and has always been as averse, as he has been ungrateful, to
the Papists, is liable to no such Objection: So that in point of Prudence, to
have the Prince seated single in the Vacant Throne, and so prevent all Disputes
that may a rise, is undoubtedly most desirable. But

Some say, This will be a Wrong to the Princess of Denmark, (not to speak of
Her Royal Highness the Princess of Orange, who will be Queen in Right of Her
Husband:) To Answer which might be instanced the English Proverb, That Change
is no Robbery. Here a Prince of about Forty Years Old, is substituted before
Her Royal Highness, in stead of an Immortal Prince of Wales, and as many Dukes
as her most Fruitful Majesty, the Popish Queen, may bring forth.

Therefore none can doubt the Reasonableness, as well as Expediency of placing
our Illustrious Prince upon the Throne, but the fear of Injustice may be a
Stumbling Block, and really a just Cause of Offense to many. To obviate which,

I desire it may be well weighed and considered, That by all Law, which is the
Wisdom of a Nation collected, as I may say, the Extract, the Essence of our
Wisdom, No Man can Claim by the Will of Another, so long as the Testator lives:
Likewise Non est Hares Viventis; There is not, there cannot be a Wrong to the
Successor, so long as the Popish King survives; Therefore as it is most
Reasonable, and most Expedient, so it is no way dissonant to the Highest
Justice in this Grand Conjuncture, to place the Noble Prince of Orange upon the
Throne. Therefore

Without longer Dispute, though I desire no Precipitation in so weighty an
Affair, but humbly conceive that one Day may end all our Debates upon account
of past Grievances, which will all probably be remedied by the happy change of
temper in our Governors, That a Vote may be passed, to which the Lords
Concurrence may be desired, That in respect the Throne is Vacant, and the
Necessity of the Three Nations require it to be filled, (and not kept in
Suspension as our Bishoprics have been,) That His Royal Highness may be
forthwith Proclaimed and Crowned, or Crowned and Proclaimed our King, at least
so long as King James the Second lives; which may be done without Wrong to any
Pretender. But

That it may not give Suspicion of Indecency to the Prince Himself, if His
Survivorship should reduce him from King of Three Kingdoms, only to be Prince
of Orange again. I humbly move, That the Two Princesses may be humbly desired
to Resign their Right to the Kingdom of France, and that War be prosecuted
until our Noble Prince William Henry, with the Sweetness of His Temper, and
Irresistibleness of His Sword, shall be placed upon that Throne, and then Great
Britain having so Benign a Neighbor, may venture the Scepter to be Swayed by
Female H^nds.


