AN ANSWER TO SOME Queries proposed by W. C. OR, A REFUTATION of Helmont's
Pernicious Error (that every Man is often Born, and has Twelve Ages of Trial
allowed him in the World by GOD) warmly Contended for In, and About, LAMBOURN
in Wiltshire.

In a LETTER to a FRIEND.

They shall proceed no farther, for their Folly shall be made known unto all
Men.

2 Timothy 3. 9. OXFORD, Printed by Leon. Lichfield, for John Buckeridge
Bookseller in Marlebrough, 1694.

SIR,
WHY these Papers, which before attended you in Manuscript, now come to your
hands in a more public way, is chiefly due to the threatenings of our
Inquirer's Friends, who upon hearing them Read, declared, That they would see
that they should be Printed: This it seems they thought an Advantage, and you
see I am so fair an Adversary as to give it them.

You will readily observe that not only the Style, but the whole Contexture is
negligent: and I freely own that I have endeavored to be Fine in neither; For
no body that knows the Persons I write For, or those I write Against, or the
Trifling Opinion I am to refute, can believe there is need of any accuracy on
this Occasion. My chief care has been that I might be understood by those few
plain Readers this Paper is designed for, and therefore I have not run into
Physics or Metaphysics, so often as my Subject would carry me thither; and
when the stream of Reasoning has sometimes brought me amongst these Sciences,
my stay there has been as short as I could make it, and I have at such times
endeavored to express Philosophical matters in terms Unphilosophical, and by
which I made, or endeavored to make the Poor to know, etc?

for with what measure you mete, it shall then be meted to you again. This is
the natural and obvious Signification of these Words, and what is agreeable to
the Sense of all Christian Expositors. None, besides these Helmontians, did
ever think of a Revolution, upon Reading them: Thus far, however we both agree
in the meaning of this Passage, as to believe, That hereby Christ does threaten
to punish Offenders in a way suitable to their Crimes; and besides, that this
Punishment is sometimes inflicted in this Life. But here is the Point at which
we part; he concludes, That if God should fail to punish an Offender, before he
comes to his Grave, he must be born into the World again, to suffer in like
manner as he has offended; whereas I conclude, concerning such a one that so
dies unpunished, that his Doom is deferred till the great Day of our Accounts,
in order to which he shall rise again, and then shall God reward every Mat 16.
2^
man according to his works. (...) 8, 1. 4 Job. (...)
This Life is no time of Recompense, but in that day ye shall see, without the
Expedient of so many Revolutions, all the Dispensations of God cleared; for
then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked, betwixt
him that serves God, and him that serves him not, Mal. 3. 18.

But I shall not be thought fully to have satisfied this Query, till I have
distinguished between the same general Analogical measure, according to which
God will mete to every man in that day, and between a measure the same in kind,
which our Inquirer imagines God does mete to every man in this World. The
Impossibility of which I will show by and by, in its proper Place.

How shall we understand that Saying of John, Rev. 13. 10. He that kills with
the Sword, shall be killed with the Sword: He that (...) Inquirer thinks, That
these Two passages of St. Paul, speaking of the Jews, That, a remnant shall be
saved, and all Israel shall be saved, are inconsistent, unless they be
explained by his enlightening Doctrine of Revolutions; whereas I think, there
needs only a Capacity to distinguish, between the first Tender of the Gospel to
the Jews, which was made in the time of our Savior, which they generally
refused; and the last, which shall be hereafter, upon the Completion of the
Gentiles, which they shall as unanimously embrace. Let me advise such as need
any farther Enlargement on this Distinction, to take notice, That in the
Chapters from whence these Passages are taken, the Apostle does with some
length speak, concerning the calling of the Gentiles to the Christian Faith, by
God's acceptance of whom they were to become his Children, according to
Promise; whereas his own People, which were always favored by him, and might
for their Number (so greatly were they Blessed!) be compared unto the sand of the
Sea; were so hardened, that but few of them would receive the the Gospel, when
'twas first tendered unto them by our Savior, and therefore but a Remnant of
them could be saved at that time: But I, says St. Paul, would not have you
ignorant of this Mystery, or Secret (least you should be puffed up with Spiritual
Pride) that there shall come a Generation of the Jews in Aftertimes, that
shall be as Unanimous as you, in embracing the Gospel of Christ, though for the
present till the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, God gives them up to an
hardened Heart.

What may be the meaning of those Words of Christ in Mat. 23. 35. That upon you
may come all the righteous Blood shed upon the Earth, from the blood of
righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias Son of Barachias, whom ye slew
between the Temple and the Altar? Does it not plainly appear, that they were
the very Men that did kill Zacharias? Or else what Justice were there in God to
punish them for that which their Fathers had acted Forty Generations, or near
Four Thousand Years before? Since God no where threatens to Visit the Sins of
the Fathers beyond the Third and Fourth Generation, under the Law?

greater mark of Distinction between Persons, then their not living in the same
Age, which it is plain these Men did not, for ver. 30. they say, If we had been
in the days of our Fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the
blood of the Prophets: So that the same Men could not be the Children and
Fathers too, as our Inquirer imagines; they could not be the same Persons,
because they never lived together in the same Age.

I cannot but farther observe, That though the Murder of Abel be as remarkable,
and bears an equal weight in the Verse with that of Zacharias, our Inquirer
does not Argue from that, as he does from the other; because he could not but
see that this Instance of Abel would ruin his Proof of a Revolution for Two
Reasons. 1. Because the vast Multitude of the Jews, upon whom the Blood of Abel
(as well as Zacharias, and others) was charged, could not live in Abel's time,
when all Mankind made up but Four Persons. 2. Because his Master, Van Helmont,
allots to every Man only See a Letter concerning the Rev^lution of Humane Souls
p. 10.
1000 Years in the World, to undergo his 12 Revolutions in; whereas this
Punishment, threatened the Jews, befell them 4000 Years after Abel's Murder.
What a stand then are we at! By the Helmontian Doctrine, unless the Murderer of
Abel be Born again, to have the same Measure meted to him, the Justice and
Truth of God cannot be salv'd; and yet you see it is beyond the Power of this
Expedient called a Revolution, to bring him down low enough to suffer with the
Jews for it: So that hereby instead of defending the Dispensations of
Providence, which they pretend to aim at, they expose it, by making it liable
to all those Absurdities and Contradictions this Doctrine does run them into.

What may be the meaning of the Prophet Ezekiel 16. 55. When thy Sister Sodom
and her Daughters shall return to their former estate, and Samaria and her
Daughters shall return to their former estate, then thou and thy Daughters
shall return to your former estate (that is Jerusalem and her Daughters.)
Seeing it plainly appears that they were Dead and gone, how is this possible to
come to pass that they should return to their former Estate without being born
a new into this World?

Sodom and Samaria were (...) ^^tage he will bring to his Cause; for who can
read such Expressions, Generation goes and Generation comes, Age goes and
Age comes, Year goes and Year comes, and thereby apprehend that the very
same Generation, Age or Year goes and comes? If Solomon had meant any such
Sense, as there would have been a necessity of his expressing himself in a
different form of Speech from what he has done, so who can doubt but that he
was able enough to do it?

What may be the meaning of these words in 1. Peter, Chap. 3. ver. 18, 19, 20.
For Christ also has once suffered for Sin, the Just for the Unjust, that he
might bring us to God, being put to Death in the Flesh, but quickened by the
Spirit, by which also he went and Preached to the Spirits in Prison [in Greek
to the same Spirits] which were sometimes disobedient, when once the
long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the Ark was a
preparing, wherein few, that is, Eight Souls were saved by Water? Were not
these the same Souls that were living in Bodies of Flesh again at the time of
Christ and his Apostles on Earth, that so they might have his Death and
Resurrection preached to them? Else what benefit could these men have had of
the Death of Christ, had they not lived and had the Grace and Favor of our
Lord Jesus Christ tenderd to them, according to what is written, he tasted
Death for every Man?

Inquirer's Argument is this, That the Disobedient Persons in the times of Noah
must afterward be born again, or else Christ could not by his Spirit Preach to
them, as he is here affirmed to do. But I see no necessity at all of forcing
such a Conclusion from these words: a Signification may be allowed them, that
is more natural, which is, that Christ by his Spirit in Noah, who was styled a
^ Pet. 2, 5
Preacher of Righteousness, did once Preach to that Generation of Rebellious
Sinners, who lived before the Flood, whose Spirits at the time the Apostle
speaks of them were in Prison (i. e.) in Hell, for their former Disobedience.

The Inquirer's Interpretation will not stand for these Reasons. 1. Because he
takes the Prison here mentioned for Humane Bodies, which though it be agreeable
to the Platonic Philosophy to call the Body the Prison of the Soul, and to say
that it is thrust into (...) ^ther it can find any Countenance from Reason.

OUR Inquirer discovers to us his Notion of this Revolution from some Instances
which he lays down of a rich Man that bears himself to the Poor in an
Unmerciful way: He informs us that if this Text of Scripture be true [The same
measure etc.] that then it is necessary that this rich Man should be born again
and become Poor and know hunger and want as he made the poor man to know; that
he which kills with the Sword shall be killed with the Sword, etc. But though
in these and the like Cases punishments in the same kind will hold, yet we
shall find upon a little Consideration, that it must fail in a Thousand
instances; for Pray, how is it possible for Nero who destroyed the Christians
by more than a Hundred kind of Deaths, to suffer Death in so many kinds
himself, though we should with Helmont grant him Twelve Revolutions? These
Revolutioners say that the design of their Hypothesis is to clear the Justice
of God in such matters: Let us suppose this bloody Tyrant to have taken away
the life of Ten Thousand Men only, it cannot consist with God's Justice to let
either of these Murders to go unpunished; and if Nero should live Twelve
times, and be killed as often, the measure would be abundantly too short: the
Blood of 9988 would still remain calling for Vengeance; and if we should allow
Nero as many Births and violent Deaths, 'twould (not only contradict the
Helmontian Doctrine, but) lay a necessity on God to prolong the World 200000
years (allowing but 20 years to a Revolution) before Nero can have all these
measures of Murder meted to him that he has meted to others; but I Will change
the Instance: What is to be done to a Man that makes himself Drunk, or Murders
himself? must he not be born again, and exercise the same upon himself again?
If a Man commits a Rape, he must according to this Doctrine be born a Woman,
and suffer the like. Did Wat Tiler and Jack Straw raise Rebellion against their
Prince? Woe be to 'em! for they must be born again, and be Princes, to have
Rebellion committed against them. He that abuses a Beast by Sodomy, must be
born a Beast, or else he cannot have the same kind of measure meted to him.

II. God would be the Author of Sin. Whatsoever God has ordered to come to
pass (...) must make a large Breach in this Helmontian Hypothesis.

VI. If Men that live now have lived diverse lives before, Either they do
remember what was done in their former lives or they do not. If they do not
remember, to what purpose is it for Men to be born again to suffer for Faults
which they cannot recollect, or have the least knowledge that ever they were
guilty of them? and how can they be hereby made sorry and Repent for their
Offenses, seeing upon the strictest Search they can make, they cannot tell
when, against whom, in what, nor how they have Offended: and how shall they or
others take warning by these Punishments, since they can never guess for what
it is they are punished: God forbid that we should think that the great Judge
of Heaven and Earth should ever establish such a senseless manner of Inflicting
punishments. If they do remember, how useful may such Men be to the World, in
supplying the Defects, and desiding the Differences amongst Historians
reporting the Facts of dark and Fabulous Ages? And that we may know whether the
Enquirer be able in this kind to become a Benefactor to the Public, let him
show the length of his memory, in the more easy task of recounting in what
Countries he receivd his various Births; who were the Princes or Governors
there, what Profession or Trade he might be of in each life, and whether many
or one Religion served his turn, how many Wives and Children he has had in all
times of his Revolutions, and in what Registers I may find their names. But if
to excuse himself from this trouble it be said that our Inquirer has not yet
undergone his Second Revolution, then indeed he will not be brought into either
part of this Dilemma as it now stands; but if this present Life will become
future, then I shall bring him within the compass of it, and that too with
great advantage to himself, if this be his Opinion and he in earnest with it;
for I do hereby make him this Offer, that on condition that he will now deliver
me 100l I will give him the best security he can desire, to pay 2000l, when he
comes a second time into the World; and by the leave of the Government I must
be allowed to say that this is an Encouragement, beyond the Lottery-Act, (which
provides only for the present Life) for by this means an old Helmontian that
has done with the Enjoyments (...) ^^tion etc. cannot, in any tolerable Sense
be true, if this Opinion be.

III. This interferes with the Doctrine of the Resurrection, for (allowing this
Opinion) what St. Paul delivers of it, would not hold so much as generally
true, He that Romans 8. 11.
raised up Christ from the Dead, shall quicken your mortal Bodies. Now all
Bodies are Mortal, and therefore All are to rise, for as in Adam all die, even
so in Christ shall all be 1 Cor. 15. 5. 22.
made alive. But if these Pretenders to Inspiration should not think St. Paul's
Authority Great enough, take that of our Savior himself in Joh. 5. 28, 29. The
hour is coming in the which all that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice,
they that have done good unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done
evil unto the Resurrection of Damnation: So that All must Rise, and All come to
Judgment. Wherefore Van Helmont, seeing that He could not drive his Revolution
this way, unless he would fall on these and many other passages of Scripture of
the like Importance, takes the other end of the Staff, and affirms, that the
same Soul is joined to the same Body again, and being so united, do make up the
same Person that lived before. If you would know the manner of this Union, read
his 123 and 124 Queries, where you are informed, That the Soul in each
Revolution, See a Letter concerning etc. p. 25.
when it receives the first beginning of the Body in the Womb, does by a
Magnetic Virtue, attract to it self the Particles of its former Body, as the
Lodestone does the Particles of Iron-dust, so that there is a Revolution of
the same Bodies as well as of the same Souls. Now if the Inquirer will follow
his Master in accounting thus learnedly for our beginning in the World, he will
upon a little better Consideration find, that it must force him, if not to do
greater Violence to Scripture, yet certainly to offend more against Reason and
Philosophy, than if he had taken the former way, and held that the Soul is
united to a new Body. For first, (to consider the manner of this reunion) it is
impossible for what is immaterial, as the Soul is, to attract in a way Real and
Natural, as it is here affirmed to do; for whatsoever does so attract does do it
by sending out of Particles or Qualities, which nothing but what is Corporeal
or a Body can do, because no Beings besides Corporeal ones, do harbor such
Qualities or Particles in them, and whatsoever is Corporeal does consist of
divisible parts, and what (...)

V. But if I should be so kind to these Helmontians, as to grant that this is a
proper Generation; let us then sit still, and consider what will follow from
it. They tell us that this same Person that is now born did live perhaps before
in the World diverse times: at this rate 'twill fall out that a man may beget
his own Grandfather and Grandmother, which is one of the most ridiculous
Paradoxes in the World. Let me explain my self in the instance of Adam and Eve;
They after their first Death could be born of none but their Grandchildren,
and if they were born of them, 'twill unavoidably follow, that these
Grandchildren begot the very same Persons that begot their Father and Mother:
And if Adam had died young, and had, according to Helmont's Hypothesis come to
his Second Revolution within a little more then 27 Years, he must have been
Born of his own Children, and so Cain or Seth, whom he begat, must have done as
much for his Father in begetting him again. Hence too must follow, that, our
First Parents were the mediate causes of themselves, that they were Born and
Created too, that they were Polluted with original Sin, and yet lived in a
state of Innocence. That Adam was in Paradise, was Tempted, did Fall, that he
Knew Eve his Wife, and yet he knew her not, but was born long after all these
things were done. If Riddle and Banter can recommend any Doctrine to the World,
I know none that deserves better Esteem than this.

VI. This will bring Confusion and Obscurity upon the Geneology of Adam, and
the imputation of Ignorance or Falsehood on St. Jude; for he reckons Enoch the
Seventh from Adam; which it is impossible he should be, if Adam made his first
Revolution in due time, and if Seth too received his next Birth in his own
Line, there can be but 5 Persons from Adam to Enoch, though Moses also reckons
up 7 in the Fifth Chap. of Genesis And if Adam and Seth were born again, and under
new Names reckoned amongst the 7, are not these inspired Men more likely to
know it then the Inquirer or his Master? And if they knew it, can we believe
them such Sophisters as to reckon up 7 Persons for 5, to amuse us with new
Names instead of new Men? Would it not have well become the Ingenuity of such
pious Men, by some information, to prevent that Error and Confusion, such a
strange way of Numera (...)

8* But to cut my Work shorter, instead of amassing more Arguments of this
kind, I will make use of one sensible Demonstration, which I will desire leave
here to lay down out of its proper place. But that the force of it may be
better understood, 'twill First be necessary for me to give you an account of
as much of the Hypothesis of Van Helmont, as will be needful for my purpose;
and this I will do out of a Book, sent me by the Inquirer, called, A Letter
concerning the Revolution of Humane Souls. In that we are told, page 10, 11,
12. That every Man lives a 1000 years on the Earth, in which time he undergoes
12 Revolutions in the same Body: In all which time the Soul is absent from the
Body 333 Years; and if these 12 times of Absence are computed one with another,
the distance between every parting and meeting again of the Soul and Body, will
be 27 Years, 10 Months and 2 Days. Now I will show the Impossibility of the
Reunion of these parts, in the time that this Philosopher has assigned for it;
and the Reason I do it by is obvious. viz. The testimony of our Senses, That
the Bodies of departed Souls are not reassumed by them in a much longer space.
It Is so intolerably ignorant to think that our Bodies do, within the compass of
28 years, corrupt small enough to be drawn into the Womb at every new imaginary
Birth, that the Plea of Dotage, which commonly attends old Age, will not be
sufficient to excuse it. For whose Faculties can be so much impaired as not to
know, That ordinarily in dry Graves the Bones will appear entire, and in some
Vaults the Flesh will not be all consumed in that time. Many Persons now
living, who saw Bishop Braybrook's Body taken up out of a Vault in St. Paul's
Church, about 20 Years since, (in which he was laid about 200 Years before) can
testify, That there remained not only a firm Connection between the Bones, but
that also the outward Skin that covered them, and some Entrails within, though
dried like Parchment, were not consumed. The Romanists do show abundance of
Bones, as Relics, which though most of them did never belong to those ancient
Persons they are ascribed to; yet they have, amongst them, Loads of such as are
about 1000 Years Old. These are not, can not be attracted into the Womb, and
yet the Men, in whose Contexture they once were, cannot make their Revolutions
without them; unless the Helmontians believe that a Man may be made up like a
Collar of Brawn, all Flesh and no Bone. But if you desire Instances that are
more General, I would carry your Thoughts as far as Egypt, Judea, and indeed to
all the East, where anciently that curious way of Embalming dead Bodies
prevailed, or to old Rome and many other Nations, who burnt their dead Bodies,
and by an Artful way they had, separated the Ashes of the Body from that of the
Fuel, and then put them into Pots. Now were I an Helmontian, there is nothing I
should hate more than these ways of preserving Bodies; for they are so ordered,
that the Magnetism of the Soul has afterward no power to draw them toward a
Revolution: I will send these curious Inquirers no farther than the University
of Oxford, where they may see Instances of both these Sorts of preserving:
There is a Body Embalmed, of which there are undeniable Tokens, that it must be
2000 Years old, and their Urns are but little under that Age: but it is not to
be doubted but if the Vessels which contain this Humane Dust could last so
long, but that they would remain till the last Trump shall call them to
Reunion. Well then, if the Souls to which these Bodies did belong, have not
fetched them away in all this time, there is then no Ground for this
Unphilosophical Position: That the Soul, after a few Years spent in a state of
Separation from the Body, should join with its old Companion again.

Lastly, This Doctrine, if believed, would lead Men into Security: For if they
cannot recollect, that they ever had any Life besides the Present, they must
conclude that they have XI more behind, and on that Account would defer the
trouble of living well till their Last Revolutions. That Men, if they had lived
at all before, would remember it, I prove 1. From (...), etc. Iamb. cap. 14.
Pythagoras, who positively affirms it. Now his Testimony in this Case ought to
be deciding, because He first taught this Doctrine to all the Eastern Nations,
and therefore must better understand his own Opinion than his late Disciples
the Helmontians. 2. Because the Body decayed by Age would be repaired at every
new Birth, and therefore the Soul would exercise memory, and all its other
Functions, in it better than before. 3. The Rich Man in the Gospel (Luke 16.
25, 27.) is represented as remembering his Family. 4. Unless we retain in
another Life a memory of this; we cannot give an Account of it in the day of
Judgment, as we must do. (Romans 14. 14.) 5. The Worm that never dies, (Mar. 9.
44.) is an evil Conscience, reflecting in the next World upon Sins committed in
this; But if I should not insist on this, but yield that Men cannot remember,
this Consequence against Religion will still follow: For since they declare
that every one must have XII Revolutions, granting that a Man cannot come to
know whether he be at the First or Last of them, yet he is sure, that it is XI
to one but that he shall have another Revolution, which is odds enough on the
Sinners side. And if Men are apt now to delay their Repentance, whilst they are
under the Persuasion that this Life is the only time of Trial; how wicked will
they be, when they come to believe, (as so great a probability must make them
do,) that they shall live again, at least one Age more, on the Earth.

The Inquirer concludes thus,

Now if any Man will put Pen to Paper to deny the Return of Souls, I would put
my Hand to Paper to prove that That Man does deny there is any God but what he
has fondly conceived. But if Men will only exclaim against, and call it
Damnable Doctrine (as I hear some do) I would thereupon ask this Question,
Whether it be not a Duty incumbent on Teachers to refute this Damnable Doctrine
(if they are able) that Men might not run into it? But seeing many Books
containing this Doctrine, have been Printed in diverse Languages and diverse
Countries, and no Man, that we can hear of, has hitherto written against it,
therefore I think it altogether impossible for them to confute it. If any One
will undertake to Answer these Questions (I mean any Teacher of one of the
diverse Congregations) and send his Answer to me, it shall be kindly received. I
have offered my Queries to some of the Clergy of the Church of England, and I
could not find that they were willing to meddle in the Matter. I have also sent
them to the Learned amongst the Presbytereans; but if I receive no Answer from
them, nor any other of the diverse Congregations, to whom they are proposed, I
shall conclude that they are altogether unable to Answer what I have Written.

W. C.

Here he forgets what Modesty becomes One who pretends to be seeking about
after the Truth, and insults upon all that differ in Opinion from him. He
swaggers, like Goliath, before he enters the List, and Challenges out the Army
of separate Teachers; but in a manner that bespeaks him a foul Adversary: for
if they will not Answer him, he concludes it is because that they are Ignorant
and Unable; but if they will Answer him, then he will charge them with Atheism.
I know there are some amongst the Persons he provokes, that are Men of good
Learning, and who could, had they not despised This Cause and the Defenders of
it, easily have corrected the Opinion the Inquirer and his Master have of
themselves, and let them understand what little Creatures they really are.
Toleration has lately brought forth Three unshapely Sons at a Birth, the
New-Jerusalem-Man, the Barker and Revolutioner; But of the Three, the last is
the weakest Brother, as having only instead of Reason, a hard Forehead where
with to defend himself.

That I may not be too tedious, I Will put a stop here, and conclude my self, SIR,

Your Most Affectionate Friend and Servant, J. H.



