THE HUMBLE ADDRESS OF THE Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the City
of LONDON; on Tuesday last, being the 9th. of this instant August: To the
COUNCIL of STATE.

TOGETHER WITH The Lord WHITLOCK's SPEECH In Answer thereunto.

Wherein is discovered the state of the Affairs in Cheshire, Lancashire,
Yorkshire, Kent, Sussex and Surrey; And several other parts of the Nation.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid over against the Anchor Inn in Little Britain,
1659.

ON Tuesday last, about Five of the Clock in the afternoon, came the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Counsel of the City of London, by Order of
Parliament to attend the Council of State, and entering in at the back door of
the Council Chamber, they (after the Council came, in) seated themselves, the
Lord Majors Chair being placed opposite to the Chair which was appointed for
the Lord Whitlock, the Common Counsel men having seated themselves (according
to their places) behind the said Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, the Lord Whitlock,
made a Speech to them as follows?

The Lord Mayor neither at his Entrance or Return said any thing; only
expressed his Thankfulness by the bowing of his Body.

The Speech of the Lord Whitlock, made in the Council Chamber at Whitehall; in
the presence of the Council of State, and the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council of the City of London; upon Tuesday the 9th of August 1659.
MY Lord, and you his Brethren, and the rest of the Common Council of the City
of London; it has pleased the Parliament to Order this meeting by you, to give
you notice of the Proceedings now on foot in this Nation: And whereas in your
Petition, and Declaration to the Parliament; you have set forth your Affections
to them, and your Willingness to join with them in the Affairs of the Nation:
And you were pleased to put them in mind of several Particulars, worthy of
their Consideration; in which, and in many others, the Parliament have made a
good progress, though they found a great alteration in the state of Affairs,
since the time they were, (as you mention in your Petition;) and the truth is,
with Violence Interrupted; for when they met again, they found a great
alteration, by a vast expense of treasure, a great decay, and loss of Trade,
and Wars begun with Foreign Nations, and chiefly to support the interest of a
single Person: Yet however the Parliament were willing to look forward for the
carrying on of Affairs in these Nations, and put all in Oblivion that was past
in the late several changes of Government, and now desired to settle a
Commonwealth, and thereupon past an Act of Indemnity; but they were informed
at their first meeting and coming together, of a design of Charles Stuart, and
his Agents, to destroy this Nation of their Freedom, and settlement of this
Commonwealth; this was carried on during the last Convention, and was managed
by some Members of that Convention, which has appeared Acters in it* Therefore
it has taken a great part of their time to discover their wicked practices: At
that time there was Massey and diverse others, as parties employed to carry on
that Design; and here in London, they had their Councels, and secret meetings
to carry on that business, In it was also Mr. John Mordant, who made a narrow
escape for his Life, at his Trial before the High Court of Justice, yet is fallen
again into this Design, that is so labored, and endeavored to be carried on;
for it appears manifest, that Mr. Mordant is gone over as their Agent here, to
Charles Stuart; and has received direction, and was supplied with moneys, for
the carrying on of this desperate business now on foot in England: There are
many others, as Mr. Newport, lately taken prisoner in Shrewsbery there was also
Letters intercepted, directed to the Lady Howard, and another to the Lord
Herbert, and diverse others, amongst which, were some from Charles Stuart, as
has appeared by the Examination and Confession of several persons now taken
prisoners: so that this Design is evidently made forth, that they endeavor to
set up Charles Stuart, to reign in Tyranny amongst us, and to destroy this
State and Commonwealth; for there has been several Meetings and Randezvouz
appointed by them in several places of this Nation; but by the care and
diligence of the Parliament, and Council of State, with the help of their
forces at home and abroad, meeting with them in diverse places, they have
disappointed them, and taken diverse prisoners, being frustrated in these parts,
there has another party appeared in a Body in an open Hostile manner in
Cheshire, Lancashire, and those parts, (as I presume you have all heard,) there
are with them, (and joined in this Design,) diverse eminent Commanders and
Officers, as Randal Egerton, and Robert Werden, and others that were in the
late Kings Army, and with them there has joined Sir George Booth, and Sir
Thomas Middleton, and are all in actual Arms, having taken Chester, and Carrick
Castle, and have proclaimed Charles Stuart to be King in Warrington, and those
parts; and what their Design is, is evident by their actions; this is their
business and their Design, to ruin and imbroil this Commonwealth in blood; but
the Parliament having pleased by their Authority, and their Council, have taken
care, that a considerable Force has been sent forth under the conduct of the
Lord Lambert, and they are far on their march to those parts to suppress those
Rebels, yet those in Cheshire have been working to see what may be done in
procuring Assistance in this City of London for their help in carrying on this
desperate Design; it appears fully by many examinations taken by the Council,
and as it appears by some taken by your Lordship, and some of you worthy
Gentlemen; so that you see their Design is to make a disturbance in this famous
City, that your Houses and your Goods may be brought into the hands of the
Spoilers; There Design was to have fired the City in ^ivers parts of it, and to
plunder the City, and to bring an utter Destruction upon this famous City;
which I doubt not, but the Lord will preserve, and have a care of: And
therefore we hope that you will all have a great care in this business, and be
very careful to join with those that have the (...) of the Affairs of this
N^tion, in the preservation of this Commonwealth. It is the duty of all well
^ffected and faithful Citizens of this ^ommon-wealth; therefore it must be your
endeavors herein, that so you may be Examples to others. The Parliament
therefore finding this City thus deeply concerned in the Affairs of this
Commonwealth, have thought good, things might be im^^^ed to you the Lord
Mayor, and Aldermen, and the rest, the Common Council of your City, by reason
there are such desigens among you, that it is plain and evident, by some
parties engaged among you in this Design; therefore it is your duty, and we
doubt not of your care, but that you will join in this business, though there
are diverse of your Apprentis^s gone forth to assist those persons, that intend
ruin upon this City. Gentlemen, you that are Commissioners of the Militia of
this City, you have taken a great deal for care for the forming of a Militia
for your own preservation, you have raised some Horse and some Foot; The
Parliament hope you will go on, for your own sakes, for your own protection, as
well as the Public. It is the duty of the Parliament to take care of all their
Forces, in a special and peculiar manner, for the preservation of this City,
and of your Safeties, and of the safety of your Wives and Children, And
therefore they thought good to let you know the state of things and designs
abroad; They have testified their intention of advancing of the Trade of this
Nation, and their putting an end to all their Troubles; It is their Duty, It is
their Trust, but you cannot but be sensible of their Interruption. Gentlemen,
we are all envolved in one and the same cause, it is a Righteous cause, a Just
cause, it is a settlement of peace, a settling of you and your posterity, that
you may not be under the Yoke of Tyrany, and made Vassal^, but that you may be
a free people, and your Freedom advanced, your Peace preserved, and your
Rights and Liberties continued; so that if we be united together in the cause
it self, we shall not need to fear the Enemy it self, but hope, that that God
that has appeared hitherto, will still appear for us, in a cause so just, and
which we ought to maintain: And therefore Gentlemen, being the minor of the
Parliament, they have been pleased to pass a Proclamation, which I shall read
to you.

WHereas the old and Implacable Enemy having for some time before the restoring
of this Parliament, formed a Design for the bringing in of Charles Stewart, to
the Destruction of all the faithful and constant Asserrors of the Parliaments
most Just and Righteous cause, and had brought it to such ripeness, that (by
the Confession of diverse Engaged) the day was prefixed, the first of this
instant August for their Rising in Arms; but through the good Providence of the
Lord, were so timely discovered, that their Design was in a great measure
disappointed. Nevertheless it has pleased the only wise God, to suffer the
said Design so far to break forth, that Randolph Egerton a Major General, and
Robert Werden a Colonel, with diverse others, Officers and Commanders in the War
under the late King, together with Sir Tho. Middleton, Sir George Booth, and
other Apostates, in prosecution of the same Design, have proclaimed Charles
Stewart to be King, Levied Actual War, and possessed themselves of Chester.

The Parliament does therefore Declare and Proclaim the said Randolph Egerton,
Robert Werden, Sir George Booth, Sir Thomas Middleton, and their Adherents in
this War, to be Rebels and Traitors.

And because it is not probable that the said persons should, upon what
specions pretenses soever, undertake so wicked a Design without expecting
Assistance from others, The Parliament, to the end that no more of the people
of this Commonwealth be seduced into any Compliance with them, do also
Declare, That whosoever shall from henceforth any ways Assist, Abet or Conceal
the carrying on of their said Design, be Deemed and adjudged Rebels and
Traitors, and shall be proceeded against accordingly.

This Proclamation the Parliament having past, thought it seasonable to
communicate to you: Thus briefly you have heard the particulars of their
present Affairs; The Parliament desires yout Care, and expects your utmost
Assistance, and best Affections for the carrying on of this work* being a
Righteous and Good cause, and to do what lies in you; That your peace and
comfort may be brought home to you, and you shall find them and their best
Assistance to go along with you, in the carrying on of this work, advancing the
Trade of your flourishing City, and preserving your just Rights, Liberties,
Laws and Privileges.

The End.

