The Humble Petition and Address OF THE Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR,
ALDERMEN and COMMONS of the City of London, in Common Counsel Assembled.
To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
WE, Your Majesty's most Loyal and Obedient Subjects, considering; That it has
pleased Almighty God by a wonderful Providence to bring to light the Devilish
Attempts and Plots of our Adversaries, the Papists, against Your Majesty's
Sacred Person, Your Government, the True Protestant Religion, the Lives,
Liberties, and Properties of Your Protestant Subjects; And, That by the Letters
and Papers of the Conspirators themselves it does appear, that one of the most
effectual Means they proposed to accomplish their Designs, was by the procuring
the frequent Adjourning, Proroguing, or Dissolving of Your Parliaments; Were
surprised with Astonishment at the untimely Dissolution of Your late
Parliaments, before Your Majesty and They could fully pursue the Discovery and
Suppression of the said Designs and Conspiracies, or provide Remedies necessary
for the Preservation of Your Sacred Person and Government, and the Protestant
Religion at Home and Abroad. But we stand more amazed at the Unpresidented
Boldness of some Private Persons, who (by Printed Papers, and otherwise) take
upon them to Arraign and Condemn the Proceedings of Your Two last Parliaments,
which (as Your Petitioners humbly conceive) plainly tends to bring that part of
the Constitution into Contempt, and in the Consequence of it to Dissolve the
Ancient Government and its Fundamentals, the Preservation whereof is absolutely
necessary for Your Majesty's Honor, Power and Greatness. But We relying upon
Your most Gracious Disposition, to receive the Dutiful Addresses of Your Loyal
People, think Our selves obliged, by our Allegiance, to represent to Your
Majesty, That by these Means, contrary to your Royal Intention, Occasion is
taken by the Conspirators, and their Accomplices, to hasten and accomplish that
Ruin of Your Majesty, Your Kingdoms, and the whole Protestant Interest, which
has been so long Projected and Prosecuted by the Councels of Rome and its
Adherents.

In the pursuit of which They are chiefly animated by the continuing Hopes of a
Popish Successor, and sharpened by the Justice done upon the late Viscount
Stafford, and other Conspirators. And the continued and great Confidence of the
Party, is daily visible in the open Numerous resorts of Papists about Your
Royal Palace and this City.

Also we should be deficient in Our Duty, should we not Represent to Your
Majesty the Necessity of maintaining Your Dominion and Sovereignty of the Seas,
and the full Exercising Your Royal Naval Power; the want whereof has been the
Occasion, that not only very many of Your Subjects Ships, and great Estates
therein, have been taken, but also Multitudes of Your good Subjects and Able
Seamen, have of late been carried into and held in Miserable Slavery by the
Algerines; which will in time (if not redressed) not only be an Encouragement
to Others to commit further Outrages and Depredations upon Your Subjects and
their Ships, but will also inevitably be the Occasion of the decay of Trade,
and of Impairing the Strength so Necessary for the Defense of your Kingdoms.

And as our Duty, from the Apprehensions we have of the Imminent Dangers that
Your Majesty's Royal Person and Government, our Religion, and all that is near
and dear unto Us lies Exposed to, obliges us humbly to offer the same to Your
Princely Consideration; so we do with all Fidelity and Humility assure Your
Majesty, That we are very far from being moved by any Commonwealth Principles,
in Opposition to the English Monarchy, which we esteem the best of Governments;
or by any Ambitious or Factious Designs; nor are we further concerned for our
selves therein, than is natural for Men under Common Danger to look out for
Common Safety.

And seeing our Danger is so Apparent and Visible, we do in all Humility apply
our selves to your Sacred Majesty, beseeching Your Majesty to have regard to
the Valuable, Industrious, and great Part of Your People, by whom Your
Government, Your Revenue, and Your Kingdom is supported, and assure Your
Majesty we will Expose our Selves, our Lives and Fortunes, and all things dear
to Us, for the Preservation of Your Majesty's Royal Person, Your Government and
the Protestant Religion.

And inasmuch as the same can be no way effectually secured but by the joint
Endeavors of Your Majesty and Your Great Council the Parliament, Your
Petitioners confidently hoping that no Misinformations or Aspersions created or
raised by ill Men, for the Accomplishment of their wicked Designs, can have any
such Impression on Your Royal Mind as to lessen Your due Esteem of Your great
Council the Parliament, Do most humbly pray, That Your Majesty will cause a
Parliament to Assemble and Sit, till they have so far proceeded, that due
Provision may be made, and full Security had and obtained, for Your Majesty's
Royal Person and Your People in all the said Matters.

And Your Petitioners (as in Duty bound) shall ever Pray, etc.
Ward Mayor. Commune Concilium tent' in Camera Guildhall Civitatis London Die
Veneris xiiio Die Maij. 1681. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi Angl' etc.
Tricesimo tertio.
IT is Ordered by this Court, That the Petition and Address, now read and
agreed upon, to be presented to his Majesty; shall after the same accordingly
presented, be Printed by the City Printer in one Sheet of Paper; As the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor shall direct and appoint.

Wagstaffe.

Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, 1681.


