An Humble APOLOGY FOR Non-Conformists: WITH Modest and Serious REFLECTIONS ON
THE FRIENDLY DEBATE, And the CONTINUATION Thereof.

By a Lover of Truth and Peace.

1 Cor. 4.13. Being defamed, we entreat. 2 Cor. 6.8. As Deceivers, and yet
true. Printed in the Year 1669.

To the Readers.
THe Author of the Friendly Debate having smitten us on the face, both on the
right cheek and on the left; lest our deep silence be brought in evidence to
proclaim our guiltiness, and so having lost our Livings, we should lose our
good Names also, which ought to be dearer to us than our very Lives, It may
seem high time to Apologize for our selves, and to make it appear to the World,
that we are not so black and ugly as we are painted, nor so bad as we are
represented. Our Apology shall be that of the blessed Apostle St. Paul, a
little altered, (against whom also they brought many and grievous Accusations,
which they were not able to prove) They have not found us in the Temples (or
Churches) disputing with any man: neither raising up the people, neither in the
Synagogues, (or places of Convention for Religious Exercises) or in the City;
neither can they prove the things whereof they accuse us. But this many of us
confess, That After the way that they call Schism and Phanaticism, so worship
me the God of our Fathers; believing all things that are written in the Old and
New Testament, and in the Articles of Religion of the Church of England, so far
as concerns the Doctrine of Faith and Sacraments. And are still ready to
subscribe to all that the Learned and Famous Mr. Chillingworth says was meant
by Subscription; namely, That we are persuaded that the constant Doctrine of
the Church of England is so pure and Orthodox, that whosoever believes it, and
lives according to it, shall be saved; and that there is no Error in it, which
may necessitate any man to disturb the peace, or renounce the communion of it.
Now this being our Judgment, I humbly conceive we are acquitted from Schism in
the Opinion of Mr. Chillingworth, and ought to be so in the Judgment of that
learned and judicious Bishop Saunderson, who (as I have been credibly informed)
being asked what he thought of the Subscription before mentioned, said, (after
he had read it and considered it) I never subscribed in any other sense my
self. And that this Subscription might suffice in Equity and Conscience (if the
Supreme Authority should think fit) my Lord Chancellor Bacon has declared in
his Considerations about Ecclesiastical Affairs, tendered unto King James: His
words are these, -- For Subscription, it seems to be in the nature of a
Confession, and therefore more proper to bind in the Unity of Faith; and to be
urged rather for Articles of Doctrine, than for Rites and Ceremonies, and
points of outward Government: for howsoever politic Considerations and Reasons
of State, may require Uniformity, yet Christian and Divine Grounds look chiefly
upon Unity. It is the Duty of all Christians to be zealous, and to contend
earnestly for the Unity of Faith, and to labor with all their might with
themselves and one another, for unity of affections: Luther's Motto becomes
every good Christian, In quo aliquid Christi video illum diligo. That the most
considerable Nonconformists are Sons of Peace, and not Sons of the Coal, may
hence be argued, That those who were Joynt-Commissioners for the Reformation of
the Liturgy, became humble and earnest Petitioners to their
Fellow-Commissioners the Bishops, and others their Assistants, for peace. That
we are not generally such Boutefeu's and Incendiaries as we are charged to be,
may in part appear in this, That we published no Answer for so long a time to
two such angry and provoking Pieces as these: And that little which is here
done by way of Reflection, is with so great moderation: Doubtless if we had
been utterly unable to have answered the Reason or Logic of these two Books,
we could not have easily failed of abundantly requiting the Author of them with
Stories and Recriminations.

Were all the Irregularities and Impieties of Men of our own Coat, though
Canonical, reckoned up, and should we give our selves leave to look back thirty
or forty years for matter of Accusation, (as the Author of the Friendly Debate
sometimes does) we might fill whole. Volumes with Errata's, and might occasion
the common Enemy of out Religion, to triumph over, and the common People to
trample upon the English Ministry. Had the Author we deal withal, had like
Charity with Constantine the Great, or with King Charles the First, of blessed
memory; he would rather have buried in silence the faults of the Ministry, than
to have exposed them, whether real or imaginary, to the Eye of the World, to be
beheld through a Multiplying and a Magnifying-glass, as he does. Yea, had he
not come short of Mr. White, the Centurist, in his Charity, he might have
learnt of him not to have published a Second Part to blaze abroad the faults of
his Brethren; there being now no War to inflame him, no Adversary by any Reply
to provoke him: The Non-conformists now outed, being down on the ground, down
in the mire, (and yet perhaps neither so dirty, or so much sullyed, as were
some formerly Sequestered, there being neither Scandal, nor Insufficiency, so
much as charged upon one of a thousand, as any Reason or Cause of their
Ejectment.) Had be used the like Candor toward the Non-conformists that Dr.
Moulin does toward the Romanists; and which I believe he expects from us
toward his own Party; he would never have charged the faults and errors of a
part upon the whole, of a few upon all, a very few excepted; and so doing, he
might have spared wholly his Continuation, and have much abridged his first
Dialogue. He needed not to have made so many blazes as he does, by so often
firing men of straw of his own making; nor so great a noise in the world, by
discharging so many great Guns, against Castles in the Air of his own building.

But since he advances Reason so much in word, upon all occasion, we may
wonder he has made no more real use of it in his Discourse. For say we might
(and think we can justify it) that his Words are more than his Matter, his
Rhetoric far beyond his Logic; and therefore we choose rather that he should
smite us with his Fist, than with the Palms of his Hands; I mean with his
Logic, rather than with his Rhetoric. What Reason or Logic is in such a
Discourse as this? Mr. T. W. and Mr. W. B. have Printed such and such things,
therefore all, or almost all the Non-conformists are so and so; or Preach and
Print thus and thus; or else Mr. Jews Hughes, Mr. Viccars, the two Mr.
Bridges, say or write thus; Ergo, this is the Way, the Spirit, and the Language
of the whole Party. Or one or two in a Kingdom, or in the three Kingdoms, and
that too, when the Kingdoms were all in a flame with the Civil War, were hot
and fiery, etc. Ergo (now notwithstanding that there has been nine years peace,
an Act of Indemnity and Oblivion passed, the generality of men formerly
divided, quiet and quietly disposed, uniting, cementing and soddering together,
cooperating For the peace, settlement, and welfare of the whole (a few
Clergymen excepted) all that were sometimes of the one Side or Party, must be
looked upon as Hotspurs, Incendiaries, very dangerous Persons, Enemies to
Authority still, etc. must have the skins of wild Beasts put upon them, and a
hideous noise and outcry made after them, on purpose to stir up the People to
hunt them down, or worry them; or else to move and provoke Authority to make
and spread Nets and Toils to take them: Would it not have been more rational
and Christian, more Logical and Theological, for the Author to have argued
thus; Mr. Baxter, Mr. Allen, Dr. Tuckney, Dr. Conant, and many others now
living, though Non-conformists, are good men, good Christians, good Subjects,
good Preachers, good Writers; therefore we must not judge all our Brethren
Inconformists, for the failings or miscarriages of a few? Or might not the
Author of the Debate, if he had pleased; have argued much better and stronger,
thus; Mr. Dod, Mr. Ball, Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Rathband, Mr. Geree, and many
others of the old Non-conformists, were meek and moderate, serious and sober,
zealous against Separation; therefore it has not been the way and Spirit of
Non-conformists to be turbulent, movers of Sedition in the State, or makers of
Rent and Schisms in the Church? Or thus: Mr. Love and Mr. Gibbons laid down
their Lives for their Loyalty, and Mr. Cawton was indicted of High Treason for
praying for his Majesty that now is: The London and Country Ministers declared
zealously against all proceedings against the Crown and Life of King Charles
the First, of Blessed Memory: Mr. Vines, Dr. Spurstow, Mr. Young, lost their
Masterships at Cambridge, and others their places elsewhere, for refusing the
Engagement. The Cheshire and Lancashire Ministers published a Book in Print
against the Engagement, sided with Sir George Booth in his Undertaking for his
Majesty. The Presbyterians generally throughout the Kingdom were cordial and
zealous for his Majesty's Just and Royal Title: Therefore they are good men,
and good Subjects to his Majesty. Or if you will, thus: The Presbyterians and
other Nonconformists have really lost their Livings, pretending to keep their
Consciences, have been and still are generally either actively or passively
obedient to the Laws; pray for, and seek the peace and happiness of the King
and his Kingdoms; have in patience possessed their Souls above seven years
together, and all this while have forborne, even in their private Meetings, all
exasperating and provoking Language, or publicly in print, scurrilous
Pamphlets or Libels against the Government. And have not (as the Author of the
Debate has) endeavored to prejudice a great part of his Majesty's Subjects,
by many Reproaches and Terms of distinction, contrary to his Majesty's Royal
Declaration, ordaining, That all Notes of Discord, Separation, and difference
of Parties, be utterly abolished among his Subjects: Therefore Presbyterians
and other Nonconformists, are men of Peace, Religion and Loyalty.

Forasmuch then as the Author of the Debate has endeavored with his Sparks of
Wit and Fire, to inflame lightheaded and hotheaded Persons, (if it be
possible) to make a combustion, contrary to the Law of the Land, the Peace of
our Sovereign Lord the King, and the great Law of Love and Peace, the Act of
Oblivion; I would advise him to do Justice upon himself, in executing his own
Books in the Flames, for being Incendiaries. The worst I wish him is his
Reformation; that for the time to come, he may be more charitable and
good-natured; or more Sanguine than now he is, and less Sanguinary than these
his Books speak him to be.

Next to our desires to cure our Adversary, I hope we may have leave to go
about to heal our selves; and this I shall endeavor to do, by pulling out the
Weapons that have made the wound, and by imitating the practice of the
Sympathetical Doctors, namely, by applying some Sovereign Balsam, or
Healing-Plaisters, to his two Weapons, his Sword and Dagger, or his Sword and
Rapier, (call his two Books which you please) if by any means I may heal the
wounds Which they have made.

And though perhaps some others would never have scrupled to have answered
these Pieces, Railery with Railery, or even Railing with Railing, and to have
thrown that Dirt in his Face which he put into our hands; and to have labored
to quench his Wildfire, though with dirty and stinking Billings-gate
Kennel-Water: Yet this has not been my design, but rather the contrary, to
overcome him with good usage and good words; and because I cannot give him as
good Language as he brings, therefore to study to give him better; however
nothing so bad; to use hard Reasons, and soft Words; and herein to follow the
Reverend and Judicious Hooker, rather than Martin Mar-Prelate.

As for the way and method I take in assaulting his two strong Holds or Forts,
(which some think impregnable) namely, why I do not charge in a right Line, and
rush directly upon the Pikes, the Noli me Tangere's of the Books; my answer is
that of the Duke of Parma, upon occasion, I know very well what is fit for me
to do, for the attaining my Ends, and am not come so far, to take counsel of my
Enemy. Or as another Prince said, I will not take a burning Coal out of the
fire with my bare Fingers, when I can do it better with a pair of Tongs. I add
further, It does not necessarily argue the want of a good Cause, or a good
Courage, to come on the Flank or Rear of an Enemy as well as on the Front; or
to seem sometimes to give Ground and Wheel-about, with a design to charge with
the more advantage.

I shall not detain you much longer, Good Reader, in the Porch, being sensible
of being so long already: May I crave your leave to make a brief Declaration, a
short Petition, and to enter a reasonable Protestation.

I Declare, I do hold the Elders that Preach Well, or Rule well, or Live well,
by what names or titles soever dignified or distinguished, whether they be
Archbishops, Bishops, Pastors or Curates; whether they be Conformists or
Nonconformists, to be worthy of double honor. And that I had much rather we
could meet each other halfway, to reconcile our Differences, and to give each
other the right hand of Fellowship, than to try it out for Victory by these Pen
and Paper Combats any longer; lest Atheism and Popery be advantaged by our
dissentions, and enter in at our breaches. I would not have Ministes of either
persuasion, be like the silly Coneys that continually fight and tear one
another, without ever joining to make resistance against the Polcat. I declare
also, I do not, in, or by this Treatise, condemn Conformists, or commend
Non-conformists as such; yet I cannot but own my utter dislike of the
Principles and Practices of some high Conformists or Hectors for Conformity;
namely, such as prefer the Romish Church, before the Reformed Transmarine
Churches; Arminius before St. Austine; who judge Aerius a greater Heretic than
Arrius; who have more charity for those that deny the Deity of our Savior,
than for those that scruple the strict jus divinum of Episcopacy; and who can
with more Patience hear a Dispute against the very Being of a Deity, than about
the taking away of a Ceremony; that profess themselves the chiefest Sons of the
Church of England, and yet dissent from her Doctrine contained in the Articles,
Homilies, and Liturgy; and transgress the Laws of the Church about Rites and
Ceremonies, by going too far on the right hand, or running too far before them,
and become Non-conformists themselves, and breakers of the Act of Uniformity,
even by their extreme Conformity. These, these are the Hectors, I mean, who
when they have persuaded a man to strain hard to go a mile with them in
Conformity, will compel him to go twain; that are implacable Enemies to
Non-conformists, though peaceable and Pious; and are no good Friends to
Conformists, except under the same degree of Longitude and Latitude with
themselves: Yea, I may say, that notwithstanding their pretended zeal ard
devotion to the Hierarchy, look on former Archbishops, such as Grindal,
Whitgift, Abbot, as Puritans, and would (if they could) Unbishop some of the
present Bishops for Presbyterians.

As tor the Author of the Friendly Debate, I hope better things of him; and
though he be a Champion for the Conformists cause, and I differ from him in
many things; yet I must confess I do not look on him as one of the Hectors
before described; but I say of him rather, Talis quun sit utinam noster esset;
For I am confident, that one of his parts, learning and style, could easily
make a Dialogue, wherein the high Conformists should appear as simple and
ridiculous as he has made the Non-conformists.

My Petition, my humble and hearty Petition is to the Fathers of the Church,
the most Reverend the Archbishops, and the Right reverend the Bishops, and to
the Sons of the Church, our Conforming Brethren, That they would manifest their
love to Peace, by their condescentions and desires of Union, with their
dissenting Brethren; and that there might be, by the means of the Governors of
our Church, their Mediation with His Majesty and the Parliament, some such Laws
made, as might for ever take away the differences 'twixt them and those that
are for Moderation, that still hold themselves Members of the Church of
England, though not admitted to be Teachers in it: And* Oh! that it were in
their hearts, as many of them as hold Communion with the Reformed Churches
beyond Seas, to offer such Bill or Bills to King and Parliament, as might
enable the Bishops to receive all again into the Bosom of the Church, and to
the Exercise of their Ministry, who besides taking the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy to his Majesty, can conform to what is necessary in other Reformed
Churches.

And my earnest desire to all Nonconformists is, That they love and follow the
Truth and Peace; that they endeavor after Union and Coalition; however that
they avoid Schism and Separation, truly so called: And especially that they
keep far from that dividing Principle, To imagine a thing of it self
indifferent, to be therefore unlawful, because commanded by a lawful Authority;
and also from that grand Crime of the Donatists, that unchurched all besides
themselves.

My Protestation is this, That whereas the Author of the Debate has offered us
Nonconformists many and great Affronts, has made so many hard and desperate
Thrusts or Passes at us, and hard thereby forced us at last to Draw in our own
Defense; That if he shall presently cause our Persons or Weapons to be arrested
or seized therefore, He may never more be proclaimed for a Courageous Champion,
nor the Nonconformists posted for base Cowards.

If the High Sons of the Church have the Liberty and Privilege to throw Ink in
out Faces; the Sons of Adam, the Sons of Peace, and his Majesty's good
Subjects, may have we hope a Toleration or Connivence to wipe it off.

These things premised; Since the Author of the Debate has so vehemently
charged us, and put in a First and a Second Indictment against us, for
Irreligion, Disloyalty, Schism, Sacrilege, etc. We plead, NOT GUILTY; And put
our selves upon the Trial of our Country, which be You.

The Contents.
Page. EVery transgression of humane Law, not deadly, p. 3, 4. Nonconformists
better treated in former times, p. 7, 8. Nonconformists not Schismatics or
Sectaries, p. 10, 11, 12. Ordinations by Presbyters, formerly counted valid by
(...), p. 12, 13, 14. The Assem^^y men cleared from countenancing Sacrilege, p.
15, 16. Non-conformists offer to clear themselves by Oath from Peevishness and
Obstinacy. p. 17. Nonconformists not like Pharisees, p. 17. How Conformists and
Nonconformists may be Reconciled, p. 18, 19. What Reformation was desired
formerly by the House of Commons, in the 30th Year of Queen Eliz. p. 21, 22.
Nonconformists not so rigid toward Dissenters as is pretended, p. 22, 23.
Nonconformists Obedient to His Majesty. Declared against the late horrid Murder
of His late Majesty, p. 26, 27. Nonconformists do not deprive his Majesty
Ecclesiastical Causes, p. 32; 117, 11 Of Conformists and Non-conformists
Charit^^ p. 34, 35 Presbyterians no Changelings, p. 37 Nonconformists use the
Lords Prayer, p. 39 Why some scruple some old Words, as Altar, Priest etc. p.
41, 42 Of keeping Holy Days, p. 43, 44 Of the Surplice, p. 46, 47, 48
Conformists differ amongst themselves in many things, p. 49, 50 Of praying that
we may Preach in the evidence an^ demonstration of the Spirit, p. 53, 54 Of
Praying by the Spirit, p. 55, 66. Of conceived Prayer, and Prayer ^^^^ok, p.
59. Of Afternoon-Sermons, p. 62. Of Catechizing, p. 64. Of diverse modes of
Preaching, p. 60, 69. Of Conventicles, p. 61. Of Experimental Preaching, p. 70,
71. Nonconformists Preach Obedience to Magistrates, p. 72, 73. And to the Moral
Law, p. 75, 77, 78. Some Conformists Dissent from the Doctrine of the Church of
England, p. 80, 81. Of Absolute Promises, p. 83. Of Good Works in the matter of
Justification, p. 85. Of the difference 'twixt the Old and New Covenant, p. 86.
Non-conformists not Time servers, p. 89. Of Holy Conference, p. 96. Of
Stage Plays, p. 97. Of Mr. T. W. p. 99, 10. Of Mr. W. B. p. 100. A Declaration
against Vennor and his Confederates, by the Congregational Ministers, p. 101.
Non-conformists more tolerable than Papists and Quakers, p. 102, 103. The old
Puritans peaceable, p. 106. Modern Non-conformists compared with those in Queen
Eliz. her days, p. 111. Unity may be where there is not Uniformity, p. 126.
Presbyterians no Separatists, p. 128. Presbyterians rather to be satisfied than
Papists, p. 131, 132. The Divinity of Non-conformists not a Phrase-Divinity, p.
138. Of Ruling Elders, p. 141. Of the Use of Reason in Theology, p. 143.
Whether Arminians or Calvinists come nearest to the Doctrine of the Church of
England, p. 144. Non-conformists not like the Donatists, p. 145.
ERRATA.
Page 6. line 10. for gage read gauge. p. 35. l. 18. f. Antiparistasis r.
Antiperistasis. p. 36. l. 13. f. humors r. honors. p. 37. l. 17. f. Btailas
r. Brayles. p. 42. l. 12. f. Christmss r. Christmas. p. 43. l. 14. f. leave r.
leave. p. 50. l. 3. f. Rigidissimos r. Rigidissimo's. l. 12. r. if more, etc.
p. 79. l. 24. f. mediatore r. mediatorem. p. 80. l. 29. f. (...) r. (...). p.
93. l. 23. f. aequilibro r. aeliquibrio. p. 117. l. 7. f. disquet r. disquiet.
p. 119. l. 14. f. Academae r. Academiae. l. 19. f. ni sialiter, r. nisi aliter.

An humble Apology for Nonconformists, with modest and serious Reflections on
the Friendly Debate, and Continuation thereof, etc.
Question.

WHat Reason can be given, if there be no guilt in the Nonconformists, that no
Answer was given to the Friendly Debate, for so long a time?

Answ. Bishop Bramhal, that learned Prelate, may be their Advocate in this
Case; (I hope the Sons of the Church will not disdain to hearken to a Father of
the Church) Those who have composed minds, free from distracting cares, and
Means to maintain them, and Friends to assist them, and their Books and Notes
about them; do little imagine with what difficulty poor Exiles struggle, whose
minds are more intent on what they should eat to morrow, than what they should
write. Bishop Bramhal of Schism, page 275. Besides, if an Answer had stolen
forth without License, would it not have been arrested for a seeming breach of
a late Act about Printing; and the Author of it, according to the Divinity and
Logic of the Friendly Debate, page 3. concluded to be neither a good Subject,
nor a good Christian? ( vide Deb. page 2. Edit. 4.)

Quest. Whit Answer then can be made for printing this present Answer and
Apology?

Answ. The Intent and Design of Laws, is the Conservation of the Public Peace.
The Law is Just, Uniform, and no Respecter of Persons, whether Conformists, or
Non-Conformists, but binds all to the Peace and Good Behavior alike, does not
hold one Man's Hands, whilst Another cuts his Throat, or stabs him under the
fifth Rib. If a Man be once and again violently assaulted, he may lawfully
defend himself. The Author of the Debate has smitten us on the one Cheek, and
on the other also; has reviled us, and with his Pen persecuted us, and said
all manner of evil against us falsely. In this case, a dead and stupid silence,
might argue we were verily guilty concerning the Crimes laid against us. If a
man that is Charged, Indicted, and Arraigned, refuses to plead, the Law
adjudgeth him to be pressed to death. Our blessed Savior himself Apologized
for himself and his Disciples. So did Justin Martyr and Tertullian, for the
Primitive Christians. The great and soul Blots which have been cast upon our
Names by that Author, would not soon out, if no means or endeavors should be
used to wipe them off.

Quest. But is every Transgression of a Humane Law, though but penal, so
culpable of criminous as is pretended?

Answ. I humbly conceive not. And there are thousands of good Subjects, and
good Christians (many of them good Sons and Daughters of the Church of England)
who did eat Flesh last Lent, or last Friday, asking no Question for
Conscience Sake, in reference to any penal Law or Statute in that Case; and who
have not scrupled to bury their Dead in Linen, though contrary to a late Act of
Parliament. And if you lay so great a Burden upon every breach of a penal
Statute, how shall the Carrier long keep his Cart on Wheels, or the Citizen
long stand on his Legs for want of Trading, by reason of an Act of Parliament
requiring the Tire of the Wheels to be four Inches wide, under the penalty of
forty Shillings for each offense?

Quest. Is it not therefore enough to satisfy the Law to pay the Mulct or
Penalty required in such Cases? ( Vide Contin. page 22.)

Answ. Mr. Perkins, famous both at Home and Abroad, for his great Piety and
Learning, has amongst his Cases of Conscience, this Case: Whether Students in
Colleges, and Members of Corporations, are tied to observance of their Local
Statutes, under pain of Perjury? In resolving whereof, he has something
useful, and pertinent to our purpose: He says, That Statutes are of two sorts,
Principal and Fundamental, or less principal; the first sort, belonging to the
Being of the Society, are necessary to be kept under pain of Perjury: As to the
lest principal, namely, Statutes that are for Order and Decency, the Founder er
Lawmakers exacts not Obedience simply, but either Obedience or the Penalty;
because the Penalty is as much beneficial to the state of the Body, as the
other, that is, as actual Obedience: And in this Case, he does not charge the
Breach of any Local Statute with the crime of Perjury. And Bishop Tailor, in
his Rule of holy Living, Chap. 3. page 183. says thus: As long as the Law is
obligatory, so long our Obedience is due; and he that begins a contrary Custom
without reason, sins: But he that breaks the Law when the Custom is entered
and fixed, is excused; because it is supposed the Legislative Power consents,
when by not punishing, it suffers Disobedience to grow up to a Custom. And I
have formerly learnt it for good Divinity, That every mere or bare Omission to
do a thing required by Law, is not a sin, (extra casum scandali and contemptus)
provided it be not done scandalously and contemptuously, or with offense to our
weak Brother, and in contempt of the Magistrate.

Quest. What Is all this to the Case of the present Nonconformists? Do not they
scandalously and contemptuously break the Laws, in dwelling in and neat London,
and holding Religious Meetings, commonly called Conventicles? ( Vide Debate,
page 2.)

Answ. Many of them have taken the Oxford Oath, and are legally qualified to
live in Corporations. Others cannot possibly live in the Countries, for want of
a Livelihood. I have heard of a Reverend Minister, that going abroad to seek
maintenance from well-disposed Christians, being benighted, lost his Way and
his Life both, being through cold starved to death. Others perhaps will plead
they cannot live peaceably in the Country: I heard one, and a principal one,
say, He never looked toward the City, nor ever should, if he had not been
driven out of the Country. The Law of Nature teaches the Heart, the Hare, and
all Creatures that are pursued, to fly to the nearest and thickest Covert, or
hiding place. I have heard Huntsmen talk of giving the Hare Law; I do not well
understand Forest Law: but I believe this is not meant by it, That she shall
have no mercy if she seeks to hide or to save her self by flight from those
that pursue her. There are also some amongst the Nonconformists, that think
themselves bound to preach the Gospel; and though they will not intrude into
Churches, which are at the Magistrates disposal, yet they look upon it as their
Duty to preach in private Houses: And for that in London and other Cities, the
multitude of those that desire to hear, are greater than in other places, and
their Meetings here may be least taken notice of, therefore probably they repair
to these places of concourse. And what Fowler had not rather shoot at a Flock,
than at two or three single Birds? And what Fisherman would not choose father to
cast his Net into the main Sea, than into a small Brook? The Quarrel of Fimbria
against Scevola, was, That he would not receive the Weapon of Death far enough
into his Body; and the same is the Quarrel that some of our Brethren have
against us, That there being such sharp Laws made against us, we are not
willing to present our naked Breasts to the point of them, and let our Brethren
gage us with their Weapons, but choose rather to fly from Country to City, and
from City to City, to hide our selves. Some there are, who can say they hold no
Meetings contrary to Law. There are that hold some private Meetings, but first
they and their Auditors go to Church, and hear Common Prayer and Sermon there.
Most of those that do otherwise may be supposed to be in and about London,
where, by reason of the burning of above fourscore Parish Churches, the
Churches that remain may not be capacious enough to receive or hold all the
Inhabitants, and besides may possibly be at inconvenient distances from their
present Habitations. If you say, That the Old Nonconformists, when they were
silenced by the Bishops, forbore to preach, and justified their silence against
the Brownists who accused them for it. To this may be replied, That the number
of Ejected Ministers formerly, were not comparable to what i^ is now; usually
not one to one hundred, to wha^ it is in our days. Besides, the People that are
dissatisfied with the Liturgy or Ceremonies now, are ten, if not a hundred to
one, to what they were formerly. What shall Ministers do in this Case? Our
Savior when he saw the multitudes, had compassion on them, because they were
as Sheep Without a Shepherd. Had you rather that Quakers and Romish Seducers
should gather up Multitudes; and that Taverns, Alehouses, and worse places,
should on the Lords day be filled with the number of those that absent
themselves from the public Assemblies, rather than that they should be
tolerated to hear a Sermon of Faith and Repentance, and other Duties toward
God, and of Loyalty to the King, of Love and Charity one toward another, in a
private house? For my own part, I confess in this Case, I would much rather go
learn what that means, The Harvest truly is great, and the Laborers are few:
pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth Laborers
into his Harvest. Again, it is to be considered, that Mr. Dod, Mr. Hildersham,
and others, were silenced formerly but in some Diocesses, and for some time;
afterward they got diverse times liberty to preach. Mr. Cotton had a License
to preach, under the Broad Seal of England, procured by Bishop Williams, then
Lord Keeper, notwithstanding his inconformity. Mr. Cartwright notwithstanding
he had writ so much, and so sharply against Conformity, was suffered to preach,
and enjoyed a place of Master of an Hospital at Warwick to his dying day. Yea,
Mr. Brown, the Father of the Brownists, if we believe the Historian, was
suffered to keep a Living, and that no mean one, ( Achurch in Northamptonshire)
to his Death. The Bishops in those days, if they turned Men out of their
Pulpits, let them have a Livelihood; either some way from their Livings, or
else permitted them, or connived at least, at their teaching of School. My
Schoolmaster at a Grammar School, was one that had left a Living, rather man he
would Conform. And it is storied of old Mr. John Fox, by Doctor Heplin, that
though he refused to subscribe to any thing but the Greek Testament, yet he
enjoyed his Prebends place in Salisbury till his dying day.

It Is worthy our notice, that these men's Yoke was more easy than ours: And
that notwithstanding they are thought to be of different Principles from the
present Nonconformists, yet certain it is, that they held it lawful to preach
and pray, and keep days of Humiliation in private Houses. And I was told by one
Mr. W. That he never had any other Ordination but Prayers and Imposition of
hand^ by old Mr. Dod, and some other Ministers his Friends, in a private House.

Upon the consideration of the Premises, my hearts desire is, That the present
Age may labor to imitate and surpass the Age past; the Right Reverend the
Bishops, their Predecessors, in their Forbearance and Moderation; and the
Nonconformists theirs, in their Meekness and Peaceableness: That the Bishops
would endeavor to be Reconcilers, and Repairers of out Breaches, and Restorers
of our Pulpits to preach in; and that the Nonconformists would desire nothing
but what may become Sons of Peace, and such as earnestly long after Unity, and
had much rather, as becomes Laborers, be admitted to work in the Vineyard,
than to stand any longer idle in the Marketplace: Or, as becomes Fishers of
Men, to be casting their Nets on the right side of the Ship, than to sit any
longer mending their Nets on the Shore. That so the Ages to come, when they
shall read the History of this Generation, when we all ( Conformists and
Nonconformists) are laid down to rest quietly together in our Graves, may have
no occasion to rise up and say, That whereas the late War had made its
thousands of Separatists, Rigid Conformity had made its ten thousands; And all
this too, during the peaceable Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign, (a Son of
Peace) CHARLES the Clement; as he has manifested himself, by his Royal Letters
and Declaration from Breda, his Royal Declarations since, and his present
Princely Clemency: And this too, notwithstanding great Animosities,
Exasperations, and Irritations of some, on the one hand, out of an inordinate
Zeal; and many Weaknesses, Follies, and Provocations of some on the other, for
lack of Knowledge.

Quest. Are not the Non-conforming-Ministers, who hold Private Meetings,
Schismatics, and Sectaries, and Breakers of the Peace and Unity of the Church?
Vide Deb. p. 211.

Answ. It Is a sign of exasperation (says my Lord Bacon, upon the like
difference) to condemn the contrary part as a Sect; yea, and some indiscreet
persons have been bold in open preaching, to use dishonorable and derogative
speech and censure of the Churches abroad; and that so far, at that some of our
Men (as I have heard) ordained in foreign Parts, have been pronounced to be no
lawful Ministers So he. And further, Let Us remember (says the same judicious
Author) that the ancient and true Bonds of Unity, are, One Faith, one Baptism;
and not, One Ceremony, one Policy: And endeavor to comprehend that saying,
Differentia Rituum commendat unitatem Doctrinae; Christ's Coat was indeed
without Seam, yet the Churches Garment was of diverse Colors. The Presbyterian
and Congregational Nonconformists do profess to agree in the main Doctrine with
the Church of England, contained in her Articles of Religion, so as fully to
embrace, and constantly to adhere unto what is purely Doctrinal in them.
Besides, the Presbyterians do not separate from the Church, so as to set up
Church against Church, Altar against Altar; but being thrust out of the Church
themselves, and the number of men and women dissatisfied about either some
passages or Ceremonies in the Lyturgy, so that they dare not receive the
Sacrament in the way required in the public Assemblies, being very great; they
take occasion to meet for Religious Exercises in private, for a time only,
till a door be opened for them in the Church, by the removal of some supsosed
or real Corruptions in the public Worship. And the reason why some (whilst
they continue in the City) do not frequent the Public Assemblies, may be this;
Because they are here by connivance only, and dare not be seen openly to
outface a Law: But when they are in the Country, they join with the
Congregation where they reside protempore, to show their Union with the Church,
and Conformity to the Laws. Nor are they therefore to be judged Schismatics,
because they still hold internal Communion with all Christians, and so with the
Church of England, with whom in some things they conceive they cannot
communicate externally. And there is not (says a Learned Bishop) so great
Conformity to be expected in Ceremonies, as in the Essentials of Sacraments.
The Separation of the N.C. from the Chapter of Engl. is not total, nor perpetual;
and a man may remove from his Fathers House, it being infected, with a purpose
to come thither when all is clear and well again. And their desire and prayer
is still, That they that went forth of their Churches weeping (yet bearing good
Seed, viz. the Doctrine of Faith, Repentance, and Obedience to God, and his
Vicegerent) may come again rejoicing, bringing their Sheaves (that is, their
Congregations) with them.

Quest. But is not this partial and occasiona^ withdrawing of some
Nonconforming Ministers and people, from the public Legal Assemblies, justly
charged with Schism?

Answ. Hear what a Romish Doctor says, which is cited by Bishop Bramhal, in
his Treatise of Schism, page 7, 8. When there is a mutual division of two parts
or Members of the Mystical Body of the Church, one from the other, yet both
retaining Communion with the Universal Church, (which for the most part springs
from some doubtful Opinion, or less necessary part of Divine Worship) quam
cunque partem amplexus fueris Schismaticus non audies, quippe quod Universa
Ecclesia neutiam damnarit; what side soever you take, you are not a
Schismatic, etc.

Quest. Since that diverse of the Nonconforming Ministers had no Ordination but
by their Brethren the Presbyters, Can they be esteemed lawful Ministers? Is
such Ordination valid, without Reordination by the Bishops?

Answ. Ordination by Presbyters without Bishops, was adjudged valid by our
former Bishops; witness the Case of three Scottish Bishops, consecrated in
England in King James his days: Take the History of it from Archbishop
Spots^ood, who relates the matter and manner of it ^hus: A Question, says he,
was moved by Doctor Andrews, Bishop of Ely, touching the Consecration ^f the
Scottish Bishops, who as he said, must first be ^rdained Presbyters, at having
received no Ordina^ion by a Bishop; the Archbishop of Canterbury, Doctor
Bancroft, who was by, said, That thereof ^here was no necessity; seeing where
Bishops could not ^e had, the Ordination of or by Presbyters, must be esteemed
lawful: This applauded to by the other Bishops, Ely acquiesc'd; and at the day
and place appointed, the three Bishops were consecrated. A. Spots. Hist. Book
7. p. 514. Dr. Field in his Book of the Church, holds the Ministers lawful
Ministers in the Transmarine Churches, though ordained without Bishops; and Dr.
Thorndike, in his Treatise relating to the Primitive Government of Churches,
has so much charity as not to unchurch the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas,
who have no Bishops, page 202. The pious, learned, and famous Mr. Gataker,
never had any Episcopal Ordination, but was ordained by Dr. Stern, Suffragan of
Colchester. The Religious and Renowned Archbishop Usher, in his Reduction set
forth by Dean Barnard, was of the Judgment, that the Chor-Episcopi, or Rural
Deans, might lawfully Ordain: And this his Judgment was attested by Doctor
Holsworth, yea and very probably too, by Bishop Brownrig, and others of the
Sub-Committee for Ecclesiastical Affairs, in the beginning of the Long
Parliament. The Attestation is as follows: We are of the Judgment that the
form of Government here proposed, is not in any point repugnant to the
Scripture, and that the Suffragans mentioned in the second Proposition, may
lawfully use both the power of Jurisdiction and Ordination, according to the
Word of God, and the Practice of the Ancient Church.

Quest. But what great matter is it what the Modern Bishops or Doctors do or
say in this Affair? Is it not sufficiently known that Aerius is reputed an
Heretic for this Tenet, viz. For denying a superiority of Bishops above
Presbyters? And was not Ordination by Presbyters condemned by a Council of the
Ancient Church?

Answ. Aerius is counted an Heretic for other Opinions also, by Epiphanius,
for which our Brethren that Conform will acquit him of Heresy. And the
Reverend, Learned, and Laborious Dr. Stillingfleet has given several Reasons
why those Ordinations might be lawfully made void by the Council, in case they
had been performed by a Bishop; as because in another Bishops Diocese, because
sine Titulo, etc.

Quest. If the Presbyterians can be freed from Schism, yet what can be said to
clear them from the sin of Sacrilege, either as Principals or Accessories? Did
not the Assembly put out Annotations on the Bible in those times, and for fear
of displeasing their Masters, never meddle with condemning of Sacrilege?

Answ. I answer: The Notes commonly called the Assemblies Notes, came out
before the Assembly was convened, and was none of their Act: And this is taken
notice of, by some very considerable Persons in their Preface to the Reader
before the Morning-Exercises, printed 1659. ^n these words: We have (not
without some regret) ^bserved that the Large English Annotations, in which but
some few only of the late Assembly, together with some others, had an hand,
are generally scribed unto the whole Assembly, and usually carry ^^e Name of
the Assemblies Annotations, as if done ^y the joint Advice of that Grave and
Learned Con^ention. Yet further, as to the places mention^d in the Debate, they
were commented upon by ^e persons here mentioned: That of Romans 2.22. ^y Dr.
Featly, an Episcopal Doctor, and a Reve^^nd man, a great Sufferer for his
Majesty in the ^te times: That of Ezekiel. by Dr. Richardson, Bi^hop of Ardagh in
Ireland, a person of great Lear^ing and worth; and that in Genesis by Mr.
Leigh, ^ho was Sub-Dean of Chester. As for the As^embly, when they sat and
acted as an Assembly, ^^en in those days, they did dare to condemn ^^mony and
Sacrilege both, as Sins against the se^ond Commandment; as you may read in the
^^rger Catechism; and they cite those two Scriptures for the proof thereof,
Romans 2.22. Malachy 3.8.

And as these were their Principles against the Alienation of Church-Means, so
they made it their business to preserve the Lands and Revenues of the Church
from Spoil and Rapine The Bishops Temporalties were engaged for great Sums of
Money before ever the Assembly met, and I never heard that the Parliament
advised with the Assembly about the sale of them. Yet this is certain, that the
Tithes belonging to the Bishops were kept unsold, and reserved for the Churches
use; and all the Dean and Chapters Lands left untouched, even by that
Parliament, which (if over any) Was the Presbyterian Parliament, until their
Members were seized on, secluded, imprisoned, and driven away b^ the Army. They
were not Friends to the Hierarchy, if we believe Dr. Heylin in his Cyp. Ang^
who designed the buying in of all Impropriations; and if we credit Dr. Fuller,
in fifty year they would have bought them all in. And in after times, when
great Attempts were made t^ sell the Tithes and Glebe Lands, it was withstood
zealously and effectually, for it was prevented, under God, chiefly by the
means of the Presbyterians, and their Friends in the City and Country. To
conclude, will you have Mr. Kno^ the Foreman of the Presbyterians, his
Judgment about Sacrilege: For John Knox, (as sait^ Archbishop Spotswood) it is
clear by his Sermons and Writings still extant, that he held it a point of high
Sacrilege to rob and spoil the Church of Tithes.

Quest. Is it not very pride, self-conceitedness, humor, peevishness, yea, and
very obstinacy, that occasions their Nonconformity?

Answ. Some of the Nonconformists of old, and of late, have offered to purge
themselves by Oath from so great Crimes in the Case. And others have in the
Pulpit in their Farewell Sermons protested the contrary, and that it was meet
Conscience of Duty, and fear of Sin, which caused their Inconformity.

Quest. Are the Nonconformists justly compared to the Pharisees? ( See Cont. p.
138.)

Answ. No: The Pharisees in our Saviors time were great Zealots and Sticklers
for the Ceremonies of the Jewish Religion, and particularly for men's Traditions
and Humane Inventions; were high Conformists themselves, men in Power and Place
in the Church, and great Haters and Persecutors of the Nonconformists of their
times.

Quest. Can any man that is not either very simple, or very scrupulous,
question any thing in the public Worship, in the Liturgy, or Ceremonies? Is
not the Liturgy so perfect, that nothing can be added to it, or taken from it?

Answ. It was not always so. Time was, and that but in the year 1644. when
learned Mr. Chillingworth preaching before King Charles the First at Reading,
used these words: At what time, soever a Sinner does repent him of his Sins
from the bottom of his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my
remembrance, says the Lord: says thus: The plain truth (if you will hear it)
is, The Lord has not said so; these are not the very words of God, but the
paraphrase of men; and (by reason of the mistake to which it is subject) I fear
very often a pernicious paraphrase. The Right Reverend the Bishops have done
very well to remove this stumbling block at the beginning of the Liturgy; O
that they would go on to remove out of the way every thing that offends! That
the Lessons out of the Apocrypha-Books might be either exchanged altogether for
the Canonical Scripture, or at least reduced to that small number that was
appointed in the late Scottish Liturgy, where were appointed only two Chapters
out of the Apocrypha, one out of Ecclesiasticus, the other out of the Book of
Wisdom. That the new Translation of the Psalms might be read, as well as of the
Epistles and Gospels: That the three Ceremonies, the Cross in Baptism, the
Surplice, and Kneeling at the Sacrament, whether nocent or innocent, night be
removed out of this, as out of diverse other Reformed Churches, by means of the
Bishops Mediation with his Majesty and the Parliament, on that behalf, as was
thought advisable by the Sub-Committee for Religion, whereof the Bishop of
Lincoln had the Chair, and Bishop Brownrig, Dr. Holsworth, Bishop Hacket, etc.
were Members: Or at least, that the use of them might be free, according to his
Majesty's gracious Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs. I wish that of my
Lord Verulam might be always sounding in the Ears of the Fathers, and the Sons
and Daughters of the Church, till they give ear to it, That a contenti^us
retaining of Custom, is a turbulent thing, as ^ell as Innovation. Methinks it is
as possible for Nonconformists and Conformists to be reconciled, ^s for the
Church of England to be reconciled with Rome; and yet that great learned Bishop
Bramhal thought that not altogether impossible: ^upposing (says he) that
something from whence. Offenses either given or taken, which (whether right
(...) wrong) do not weigh half so much as the Unity of Christians, were put out
of Divine Offices, which ^ould not be refused, if animosities were taken away.
Bramh. of Sch. p. 280. To this, let me add that Golden Saying of Mr. Hales, in
his little piece ^f Schism: Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving, Reading of
Scripture, Administration of Sacraments (...) the plainest and simplest manner,
were matter ^ough to furnish out a Liturgy; though nothing either of private
Opinion, or of Church Pomp, of ^arments, or prescribed Gestures, of Imagery, or
Music, of matter concerning the Dead, of many superfluities which creep into
the Church under the name of Order and Decency, did interpose it self.

Quest. Is there any thing that can reasonably or modestly be desired to be
amended or bettered in the managery of the Ecclesiastical Government or
Discipline?

Answ. The Rubric before the Commination in the Liturgy, supposes it
desirable, that the Primitive Discipline used in the beginning of Lent, might
be restored; when notorious Sinners were put to open penance. Is nothing amiss?
(says my Lord Bacon) Can any man defend the use of Excommunication as a bare
process to lacquey up and down for Duties and for Fees; it being the greatest
Judgment next unto the General at the la^^ day? Lord Bacon his Discourse about
Church Affairs, p. 32. And might we not say, That it seems liable to exception,
that Chancellors, and Commissaries, and Officials, persons not in holy Orders,
should have power of Excommunication? I have read indeed that the French King
has the power of Excommunication; but it may be considered that a Christian
King is mixt^^ Persona, and custos utriusque Tabulae, and is o^ Right, supreme
Governor over all persons, a^ well Ecclesiastical as Civil. Besides, it were
(...) be wished in reason by the Bishops themselves, that the Bishops might not
be controlled by their Chancellors, and their Sentence and Order, o^ Judgment
one day in Court, be reversed or made insignificant by a contrary Order or
Judgment of the Chancellor, the next.

Quest. But what is the reason that now adays their is such Alteration and
Innovation in Worship and Discipline desired and labored for?

Answ. Diverse things have along time, even all along more or less, been
complained of, as grievous; and the Removal of them have been requested from
our Kings and Parliaments almost ever since the Reformation. Some of the
Bishops, and other men in great place, have felt the burden of some things
required of them; Bishop Hooper would willingly have been dispensed withal, as
to some of the Episcopal Habits. Dr. Sampson, Dean of Christ-Church in Oxford,
was turned out of his place for Inconformity. Peter Martyr professor, and a
Canon of Christ-Church, could yet never be persuaded to put on a Surplice all
the time be was in Oxford. The Commons in Parliament, in the thirtieth year of
Queen Elizabeth, presented a Petition to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, for
the Redress of sixteen Grievances: The six first, says the Historrian, were
against insufficient Ministers: The seventh, That no Oath or Subscription might
be tendered to any at the entrance into Ministry, but such as is expressly
prescribed by the Statutes of this Realm, except the Oath against corrupt
Entering. The eighth, That they may not be troubled for the omission of some
Rites or Portions prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer. The ninth, That they
may not be called and urged to answer before the Officials and Commissaries,
but before the Bishops themselves. The tenth, That such as had been suspended
or deprived for no other offense, but only for not
subscribnig, might be restored; and that the Bishops would forbear their
Excommunication ex Officio mero, of Godly and Learned Preachers, not detected
for open offense of Life, or apparent Error in Doctrine. The thirteenth, That
the high Censure of Excommunication may not be denounced or executed for small
matters, nor by Chancellours, Commissaries, or Officials, but by the Bishops
themselves, with the assistance of some grave Persons. Di. Full. Chapter Hist.

Quest. How can the Nonconformists reasonably expect any alterations and
condescentions now for their sakes? Did not they deny a toleration to the
Episcopal Clergy but lately? And did not the Elder Brother, Presbytery, deny to
bear with the Younger, Independency? And were they not very severe and strict
in punishing all Dissenters from their way? See Cont. p. 124, 125.

Answ. The Nonconformists of the Congregational way were then, and still are
for Liberty of Conscience; and the Presbyterians humbly move for the like
Favor and Liberty which others had in those days, different as to Government
from them in the like Circumstances. They forbore the imposing of unnecessary
things, or such things as were doubtful, in and about the service of God, as
terms and conditions of Communion with them. Besides, they suffered many of the
Episcopal persuasion without ever taking the Covenant to enjoy places in
Churches, Colleges, and Schools. And it is notoriously known, That Dr. Wild,
afterward Bishop Wild, Dr. Gunning, and others, had numerous Meetings for
Common Prayer and Preaching, at London; and Dr. Hyde, Dr. Fell, and others, at
Oxford, in those days. As to the five poor men (as the Author calls the
Apologists) they had liberty to preach, and enjoyed the fattest and richest
public Lectures in London. Give me leave to add too, that the Parliament by
their Ordinance allowed the Bishops 200 l. per annum for their Lives; and I
find in the Life of Bishop Morton, that he had an Order to have 1000 l. out of
the Treasury at Goldsmiths-Hall, with which he paid his Debts, and purchased to
himself an Annuity of 200 l. per annum during his Life. And a fifth part of
Livings, where the Minister was ejected, for maintenance of Wife and Children:
And scarce any man in those days, that was able, sober, and peaceable, but
might, if he had pleased, have Employment and a Livelihood. The Parliament made
no Act for Banishment of them from Corporations, forbad them not to teach
Schools, or entertain Boarders in their Houses, imposed no Oath on Women that
taught School, to capacitate them for that Calling, or else left them lialbe to
punishment for so doing. And although they made two Ordinances against the use
of the Common Prayer, I never knew one that suffered the penalty of them.

Quest. Were there no Ceremonies imposed by the Presbyterians in any part of
the Worship of God? Did they not require men to be bareheaded at the reading of
the Covenant, and that they should all take it lifting up their right hand to
heaven? Are not these Ceremonies? And is not an Oath a special part of Divine
Worship? ( See Debate, p. 166. Ed. 4.)

Answ. An Oath being an immediate and solemn Appeal to God, and having
something of Invocation, of the Divine Majesty in it, does therefore require
some Gesture or Postute, that is naturally expressive of Reverence, at the
taking of it. Besides, the lifting up the right hand to Heaven, Rev. 10.5, 6.
was that, which the Angel did, when he sware-Bring as good reason, and as good
a president fox all the Ceremonies imposed in the Liturgy, and they will be
more easily conformed unto.

Quest. Are not the Nonconformists disobedient to Governors, no Friends to
Caesar, Unpeaceable, Refractory? Has not this been their practice always, and
do pot they teach men so?

Answ. His most Excellent Majesty had knowledge of diverse of that way, who were
commissioned by him for the Review and Alteration of the Liturgy; and his
Majesty is pleased to give them a better Character in his Gracious Declaration
about Ecclesiastical Affairs. His Royal Expressions are these: We must for the
honor of all those of either Persuasion, with whom We have conferred. Declare,
That their Professions and Desires of true Piety and Godliness, are the same;
their professions of Zeal for the Peace of the Church, the same; of Affection
and Duty to Us, the same: They all approve Episcopacy, they all approve a set
Form of Liturgy, and they disprove and dislike the Sin of Sacrilege and
Alienation of the Revenues of the Church. And now his Majesty has so far
testified for them their, good Behavior; Hear them speak for themselves, and
that when they were in Council too. "It Is the Duty of People to pray for
Magistrates, to honor their Persons, to pay them Tribute and other Dues, to
obey their lawful Commands, to be subject to their Authority for
Conscience Sake. This they teach as Doctors in Synod in their Confession of
Faith, and this they would have other Teachers teach all others in their Larger
Catechize, and in part by their own example, in the Directory for public
Worship. And as for their practice, I say, greater Loyalty than this has no
man, than that a man lay down his life for his Sovereign; and yet such were
some of them; (as Mr. Love and Mr. Gibbons.) Some of them also had trial of
cruel Mocking for their Loyalty; some of them of Bonds and Imprisonments, of
Sequestration and Banishments. There are to be found among the present
Nonconformists, who solicited Heaven and Earth with their Prayers and Tears,
for the saving of the Life of his late Majesty of Blessed Memory. And whereas
there were threescore and three unjust Judges that condemned his Majesty, there
were just as many Minister, all except two, accounted Presbyterians, who
appeared with the hazard of their Livings and Liberties, (if no also of their
Lives) with Scripture-Reasons, and most earnest Entreaties, to dissuade men
from and to declare against, so horrid a wickedness Which very thing was the
occasion that afterward some of them were driven from their Houses others
imprisoned, sequestered, an^ threatened to be hanged. Mr. H. Dr. W. Mr. A.
That these persons were real, cordial, and conscientious too, (and that of the
Oaths they had taken to his Majesty) you may in charity judge, if you take a
taste of one of those Papers to the General, and the General Council of War,
Presented and Printed during his Majesty's Trial. In it they declare against
all Proceedings against his Majesty's Crown and Life upon grounds of Conscience
and Prudence: Which when they had laid down, etc. they conclude saying, It was
the Conscience of the many Oaths (...) God its which you, we, and the
generality of the Kingdom indispensibly stand bound before God, Angels, and
Men; which made them thus to declare themselves. That we desire to wash our
hands, as from the Blood of all men, so especially of our Dread Sovereign; and
to approve our selves innocent of all that blood and misery, the Deposing and
taking away his Majesty's Life, will in our apprehension involve us, our
Posterity, and all men professing Godliness in the three Kingdoms. We do
therefere from our Soul beseech and importune you and every one of you, as Men,
Gentlemen, and Christian Soldiers, by all that can be dear to good men, as you
desire to render a good account of your actions at the great day, to the
righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, That you will forbear doing ought in the
Premises, which may wound the Conscience, or pierce the Hearts of any of Gods
People, (who are all alike with you, or any of you, precious to him as the
Apple of his Eye) which may rend and tear the Bowels of this your and our
native Countries; and occasion the common Enemy to blaspheme the Majesty,
Truth, and Cause of our God: And further to contribute the utmost skill, study,
and endeavors of you, and every of you in your proper places (and the great
Counselor and mighty GOD direct you all) to remove ours and the Kingdoms
fears, to remedy the present abounding Distempers, and present and universal
Destruction: That we and the Generations to come, may rise up and call you
Blessed; and so eminent a preservation of the Kingdom in such an extremity, may
be had in everlasting Remembrance.

And as for their Loyalty to our most Gracious Sovereign that now is, (and
long, and long may God continue Him, and bless Him with all the Blessings of
Heaven and Earth, both in his Person and Government!) the Presbyterians have
given good Proof thereof: Mr. Cawten prayed for his Majesty, with his Royal
Titles, in public; and for his so doing, was accused and arraigned of
High Treason. Others of them in private Houses prayed for him, would not own
the Government that then usurped over us, nor keep their Days of Thanksgiving
for the Victory at Dunbar or Worcester, nor publish their Declarations against
his Majesty or Sir George Booth, and those that endeavored his Restoration;
yea, there are to be found amongst the present Nonconforming-Ministers, who had
like to have been hanged for engaging with Sir George Booth, and hardly escaped
with their Lives then, who have since lost their Livings: Yea, so zealous were
the Presbyterian Ministers for his Majesty's Restoration, that the chief
Quarrel in reason of the high Hierarchists against them, should have been no
other than that of the men of Israel against the men of Judah, Because they
were the first in bringing the King back.

Quest. Can any man believe that the High Conformists were not the great Doers
and Sufferers both, for his Majesty, and that merely out of Principles of
Conscience?

Answ. I acknowledge there were diverse amongst the Bishops and the
Conforming-Clergy, that did both do and suffer really out of principles of
Conscience; yet that their own Interest had some considerable influence into
the Loyalty of many of them, may be suspected; for that they seem to express
more and greater Zeal against the Presbyterians, who yet endeavored to save
the King's Life, than against the Regicides themselves that put him to death;
and more frequently and more fiercely every where charge, arraign, and condemn
the Covenant, than the Engagement; as if they judged it was a more unpardonable
crime to endeavor to extirpate Prelacy, than actually to take away King and
House of Lords, more heinous to divest a Prelate of his Pontificalibus, than to
cut off the Head of the Lords Anointed. This may possibly occasion many sober
persons to query, If the Tables had been turned, and that his Majesty bad been
for the extirpation of Prelacy, and the removal of Liturgy and Ceremonies, and
the Parliament for the continuance and upholding of them, whether many that
were very hot, would not have been lukewarm, if not key-cold in his Majesty's
cause? I conclude the Answer to this Question, when I have laid down this great
Truth; That the Mitre is more beholden to the Crown, than the Crown to the
Miter; and that it wit his Majesty that restored the Bishops, and not the
Bishops which restored his Majesty.

Quest. Is not this then a true Maxim in Policy, That Monarchy is greatly
supported by Prelacy; and that the greatest Hectors for Uniformity serve his
Majesty's Interest and Government most and best?

Ans. The Lord Falkland (either then or a while after Secretary of State) said
in Parliament of some stirring and leading Prelates before the War, as
follows; A little search will find them to have been the destruction of Unity
under pretense of Uniformity: to have brought in Superstition and Scandal,
under titles of Reverence and Decency, etc: In which they have abused his
Majesty as well as his People. Heyl Cyp. Ang. p. 408.

Quest. But if it be granted that the Presbyterians have any Loyalty to his
Majesty, have they also any love to the peace of the Church, and to Dissenters
from their Government? Do they not implacably hate the Episcopal Clergy, and
stand irreconciliable to all Uniformity and Liturgy?

Answ. In the Presbyterians Address to his Majesty they assert the lawfulness
of Episcopacy, and of a Liturgy. The mention of the names of many Bishops both
in the beginning of Reformation, and of later times, are precious to them, like
an Ointment poured forth; the memory of them is and shall be in Benedictione:
And there have been never any so bad since, as to make so^er persons to condemn
all. There are still of the Hierarchy men of that piety, learning, temperance,
meekness and moderation, that we despair not (if some Boutefeau's and
Incendiaries would cease blowing the coals) might be the happy Instruments to
quench the Fire, and be like the good Shepherds, who bring home their Sheep
when gone astray, in their very bosoms, and with their Benedictions. There are
also amongst Dissenters many sons of peace, who love not to fish in troubled
waters, or to blow the coals; great friends to Unity, Peace and Order, and no
enemies to Bishops; who either keep no Private-Meetings, or therein dissuade
not the people from frequenting the Publick-Assemblies, or hearing their
Ministers or Liturgy.

Quest. Have not they that took the Covenant ^bjured all Episcopacy?

Answ. It was declared in the Assembly before the Covenant was taken, that the
Covenant did not bind against a Primitive-Episcopacy; and at the time of taking
the Covenant) this was frequently declared in private conference, and some did
it from the Press and Pulpit. However, the Covenant obliges men, to act only in
their places and callings and so far as lawfully they may; it does not (...)
men to be seditious in the State, or schismatical in the Church, t^ bring about
any alteration or reformation of Government: We are far from thinking (say the
Presbyterians in their Paper of Proposals to his Majesty, speaking of the
Covenant) that it obliges us to any evil, or to go beyond, our places and
callings to do good, much less to resist Authority, t^ which it does oblige us,
(p. 13.) We ought not to use violent, tumultuous, seditious, or any unlawful
mean to bring about a Reformation. Notwithstanding the Covenant, we acknowledge
it belongs to his Majesty with the advice of the Parliament, to settle and
regulate the Church. Government. And it may be remembered, that Presbyterian
Parliament voted his Majesty's Concessions a ground of Peace, although he never
consented to the extirpation o^ Episcopal-Government.

Quest. Were the Presbyterians bound by the Covenant to divest his Majesty of
his supremac^ in Ecclesiastical Affairs? See Debate, page 168 4. Ed.

Answ. An Oath for confirmation ought to be an end of all strife. They have
since generally taken the Oaths of Supremacy and Alleagiance not above six
(that I hear of) refused it in all Scotland. And on the other side, it is not
unknown to some, that a very learned and great Clerk, a Dignitary of this
Church, of no small note, was hardly persuaded to take down this bitter Pill
(according to his gust) though it was double gilt with a Prebend of 200 l. per
annum. His Majesty's Commissioner presides to the General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland. They willingly and heartily give unto the Kings Majesty the
chief Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical
or Civil. The Covenant binding men to reform according to the Word of God,
could not reasonably or charitably be construed to take away that Prerogative
which we see to have been given always to godly Princes in holy Scriptures, by
God himself: i. e: That they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to
their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain
with the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil Doers. Yea, they are so far from
wasting or clipping this his Majesty's Royal Prerogative that they would not be
offended; if the Statute of King Edward the Sixth, was again revived, whereby
all Citations in the Courts Spiritual, should issue out in the Kings Name, and
be sealed with his Seal. And if it should once please his Majesty, it would not
displease them (no, though they themselves were admitted into the Church) to
have a Vicar General in Spiritualibus.

Quest. Are the high Sons of the Church advanced so many degrees as is
pretended above the poor Nonconformists in their Charity? See Debate, p. 20.
Ed. 1.

Answ. There is just cause to fear that amongst them, some there are, who have
a greater Charity for the Church of Rome, than for the Presbyterians; that is,
for them that differ from the Church of England in Substantials, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government; that for them who differ from them only
or chiefly in Circumstantials, in lesser and lighter matters, not of the
Foundation of Religion, but belonging only to the Superstructure; or if you
please, at best to the adorning of it. For my own part (and for all the
Nonconforming-Ministers) I may say, for ought I know, That we would sooner give
the Right Hand of Fellowship to the highest and most rigid Father or Son of the
Church of England, than join hands with Rome. That some of our Brethren of the
other side have not a heart so enlarged with Charity to all men, and
particularly to Dissenters, as is pretended and boasted, may be evinced by the
Treatise under consideration; which may seem to be designed to render their
Brethren, and Ministers of the Gospel too, ridiculous, if not odious. I heard
no mean man say, That the design was, To put the Beasts Skin upon us, and then
to cry, Ha-loo! Ha-loo! I must needs confess, it appears to me at least very
uncivil, if not uncharitable also, to go about to pluck off the Healing and
Sovereign Plaster, which his Majesty's Royal Hands, with the Advice of his
Parliament (a whole College of Physicians) in the Act of Indemnity had laid
on the bleeding Wounds which the late War had made amongst us. I might add
also, that there are some passages so full of Lightness and Drollery, that they
might better become some Ecclesiastical Hudibras; or a Ben-Johnson, a Doctor of
the Stage, than a Rabbi, or a grave Doctor of the Church.

Quest. Are men of the high Prelacy, or high and rigid Sons of the Church, men
of the highest form in Religion, and of a more perfect, serious and solid
Godliness, than the poor silly scrupulous Nonconforming-Turn-ours? ( See
Debate, p. 155.)

Answ. It Is very strange if Preferment, if great places of Power and Profit
should indeed make men more truly and seriously godly, and particularly should
by an Antiparistasis produce the great work of Self-denial, Mortification, etc.
We will not at present compare Godliness; but this I think, That it is no
demonstration of a higher degree of Godliness to jeer at Godliness, though in a
Dissenter, and accompanied with some Weaknesses and imperfections, to make the
door to the Theater and Stage so wide, and to the Church and Pulpit so strait
and narrow: Cer^^inly the true right perfect godly man, is neither your
Nonconformist godly man, nor Conformist as described in the Debate; but made up
of both put together: whose Character we have in a great measure in the 165th
page of the Treatise, in my opinion the best page in the Book: Where the Power
of Godliness is set forth after this manner:

A truly godly man, (who has not only a name to live, etc is dead; who is a
Jew not only outwardly in the flesh, but inwardly in the Spirit; who has not
only the Form, but the Power of Godliness in him) is such a one as denies
himself for God and his neighbor; that sets not his heart upon getting Riches,
and is humble and modest; that reverencet^ his Governors, and studies in word
and deed to preserve their Authority; that humors his Parent though not of
their Opinion, or perhaps ungodly that is sensible of Benefits, and grateful to
Bent factors; that studies Purity and Chastity; that (...) kind and tenderly
affected to his Relations; the keeps his Faith, and performs his Promises,
thoug^ to his own damage; that is easily reconciled, if (...) have been grossly
injured; that speaks well (if he can) of his Neighbor, and is not ready to
believe ever Story of them; that endeavors to preserve an ev^^ temper; that
commands his Passions; that is stea^ and uniform in his Actions; that is meek,
and su^^ missive, peaceable and humble; that loves Vert^ whore-ever he sees it,
and does not despise or reproad it under the name of mere Morality; that is
faithful to his trust, sober, advised, and considerate in his undertakings;
that has no opinion of himself, at loves God above all things; that chus^th
rather^ keep at home, and mind his own Concernments, than to be prying into the
secrets of his Neighbors house; that has no other design upon any, either man
or waman, than to make them good, and further their increase in true Wisdom.

Quest. Are not the Presbyterians, Changelings, men of very limber Consciences,
who instead of being called Turn-outs, may better be called Turn-coats? See
Cont. p. 29.

Answ. One would think in reason, that those that are charged to be so rigid,
scrupulous, super^titious, tenacious of their own Opinions, obsti^ate in their
own way, should not easily turn with every wind. Amongst the Ministers, it is
true, there have been Willows, as well as Oaks; amongst our Parsons, we have
had some Vicars of Brailas, who have turned in their Pulpits as well as the
Weathercock on their Steeples. Some Ministers indeed would not turn, and for
that treason are turned out. Confident I am, that the greatest number of them
that were Sufferers for refusing the Engagement, and non-comply^^nce in the
late times, were of those that, are or have been Sufferers since for
Nonconformity.

Quest. Are not the Nonconformists men of narrow Souls, and of a narrow
Charity, confined to a Party, within a few private Walls or Conventicles;
whereas the high Sons of the Church their Charity is as large as their
Churches, even as their CATHEDRALS

Answ. Sure I am their Charity is not so large as St. Paul's, Romans 14. There
was before the Wars a Lady (as I have heard from Persons (...) Quality) not
very many years since, wrote t^ the Bishop of Lincoln, on the behalf of a
Nonconformist that was in trouble for some small Omission or Inconformity: To
whom the Bishop replied, If the Person your Ladyship wrote for, had been a
Drunkard or a Whoremonger, I could have showed him favor; but in this case,
no^ at all. It is mavelous to think, but so it is, that Church-Charity should
not be so large as Civil. The Members of the Long Parliament, who too^ the
Covenant, and imposed it upon others, sit quietly in This, without having that
imposed on them, the refusal whereof, might occasion their Ejectment out of the
House. The Nobles and others about the Court, that were divided in the the late
Wars, are sodered again, love one another, and (which is a good and pleasant
thing) dw^l together in Unity. The Lawyers in the Inns (...) Court, unite,
cement, and plead together; do not, for the old Quarrel, turn one another over
the Bar, or out of Doors. The Knights and Gentlemen in the Country, that
fought on seyerul sides, are reconciled, and act together as one man for the
good of his Majesty and his Kingdom, notwithstanding what passed in the late
differences. Only the Ministers and Ambassadors of the Gospel of Peace, who
say and do not, will as yet have no peace, clapping their Wings to stir and
beat up their Metal, and crowing to sound an Alarm to a Paper Combat. This is
a Lamentation, and ought to be for a Lamentation. Pudet hoc opprobria nobis,
etc.

Quest. It the Nonconformists are so charitable, so willing to forgive what is
past, and to receive Dissenters into their own Bosoms, or to come themselves
into the Bosom of their Mother again, (though she may possibly be charged to
have thrust them out of doors, because they have narrow Throats, and could not
swallow a Pompion instead of a Mastick Pill, or a Hedghog in stead of an
Oyster) what is the Reason then that of old in their public Churches, and
nowadays in their private Conventicles, they use not the Lords Prayer? Was it
not because of that Petition, Forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that
trespass against us? Debate, p. 95. 1 Ed.

Answ. There were those who are now Nonconformists, that in former times used
it constantly; and some who wrote Apologies for it: And diverse Ministers
nowadays who do keep private Meetings, do still use the Lords Prayer in their
private Congregations.

Quest. Can they be thought charitable, especially to Dissenters, that cry out
of the Pope as Antichrist, and the Popish Religion as Antichristian?

Answ. King James called the Pope Antichrist in his Writings. The Homilies call
him so. Hom. Tom. 1. p. 17. Edit.. and again p. 38. and p. 70. Yea, the public
Prayers for the 5th of November. before Archbishop Laud's time, said of the
Ramanists, that their Faith was Faction, and their Religion Rebellion.

Quest. Have the Nonconformists nothing momentous against the Common Prayer and
Ceremonies, but only to cry out, that it was taken o^^ of the Mass Book, and
that they are Relics of Rome, and Popish Superstitions? Deb. p. 97. ed. 1.

Answ. I do know scarce one intelligent Nonconformist who refuses to use the
Liturgy, upon this account, only, or chiefly, because taken out of the
Mass Book. My Gold is not therefore straight become dross, because stolen out
of my Chest, and found in the house of a Thief; when it is legally restored to
me again, what is it the worse? The Common Prayer is older than the Mass, as we
usually take the word Mass now adays: but the Mass, by the corruption of the
Times, getting by degrees insensibly, by little and little, into the Liturgy,
the Reformers finding things so, owned and adhered to the Liturgy as good Gold,
but rejected the Mass as very Dross and Tin. Yet forasmuch as we cannot win the
Papists to join with us in our Liturgy, as they did the first ten or eleven
years of Q, Elizabeth; and that some of our own Church are ready to run away
and separate from us, pretending we comply too much with Rome, in some of our
Forms or Ceremonies: If if should please his most excellent Majesty and the
Parliament, to cause the Liturgy to be revised, and some greater Alterations to
be made for the better, than was of late; it should not offend, but rather much
rejoice the Presbyterians. I have read that the Archbishop of Armagh declared
his Judgment, when time was, against the introducing of the English Ceremonies
into the Church of Ireland. And I have been told that the Right Reverend the
Bishop of Hereford that now is, upon another occasion, expressed his Opinion to
be, That the further of we keep from the Church of Rome, the better. I might
add this also (which I had from a credible person presently after it was
spoken) That the late Archbishop of Canterbury was very willing to have had,
though a Liturgy, yet one that might not be so much displeasing, or
dissatisfactory, as this was to many. I confess there are some well-meaning
people who forbear to use the names of Altar, Priest Christmas, etc. or to
call Festival days (wherein the Church of England commemorates the Saints, and
blesses God for their example) by the names of those Saints days; yet they
are not altogether without all excuse in this their Scrupulosity, if we
consider what a bad use they of the Church of Rome make of out keeping and
continuing old words; Let us keep our forefathers words (say the Annotations on
the Rhe^ist Testament, on 1 Timothy chap. 6.) -- and w^ shall easily keep our old
and true Faith we had of the first Christians; Let them say Amendment.
Abstinence, the Lords Supper, the Communion. Table, Elders, Ministers,
Superintendents, Congregation, so be it. -- Let tee keep the old terms,
Penance, Fasting, Priest, Charity, Bishop, Mass, Mattins, Even song, the
blessed Sacrament, Altar, Oblation, Holt, Sacrifice, Alleluja, Amen, Lent,
Palmsunday, Christmss, etc. and the very words will bring us to the faith of
our first Apostles, and condemn these new Apostates, their new faith and
phrases. If we consider further what is reported of Bishop Bonner, namely, that
when he saw the Reformation, and how many of their Ceremonies were retained,
being asked what he thought of it? If they like (said he) to taste of our Broth
so well, they will eat of our Beef shortly. I dare say the Church since the
Reformation never intended any adoration of the Bread by our kneeling in the
act of receiving, and yet Bishop Hall says thus; I had a dangerous conflict
with a Sorbonist, who took occasion by our kneeling at the receipt of the
Eucharist, to persuade all the company of our acknowledgment of a
transubstantiation. It must be confessed further, that, amongst well-meaning
people, some there are (though scarce any among the Ministry) who scruple the
naming the Apostles and other Saints, whether real or imaginary, by the name of
Saints; and their plea may be, they cannot see any sufficient reason (setting
aside the Authority of our Governors and the Custom of the Times and Places we
live in) why we should say St. Matthew and St. Andrew, Debate, page 64, 65.
rather than St. Moses and St. Aaron; and why they should call David a Bishop
in Wales, St. David, rather than K. David King in Jerusalem, the one being
truly a Saint and the Lords Anointed, and the other canonized by the Pope. Yet
doubtless there are none so scrupulous amongst us but had as leave say St.
Michael as St. George. As for the Nonconformists-Ministers, it was the practice
of Dr. Thomas Goodwin (as I am informed) and was all along the late time^ to
say such a Chapter, or such a Verse of St. Matthew, St. Mark, St. Paul. etc.
That it is not always necessary to mention the Apostles with the title of Saint,
for fear of sin in the Judgment of our Church, may hence be concluded, that in
all the Collects for the days set apart to commemorate the Holy Apostles in,
there ate but two wherein they ate styled Saints.

Quest. Do the Nonconformists hold it utterly unlawful to keep days in
remembrance of what the holy Apostles, Deb. p. 73. 1. Ed.
and other Saints have done or suffered? and had they much rather keep a day of
Thanksgiving for O. C. his defeating his Majesty at Worcester, than for Michael
the Archangel his victory over the Devil and his Angels?

Answ. Some think it impossible for a man, without special warrant from God, to
sanctify so that the service performed unto God upon that day should be more
acceptable than on any other. Some think the abuses of those Festival days are
so great, common and customary, that if his Majesty and the Parliament saw
good, it would be better and more easy, to abolish the Observation of them,
than to take away the Abuses, which they think cleaves to them like the
Leprosy in the wall of the house. That these Feasts were of Apostolical
institution, or observed by the Apostles, any except Easter, is not so much as
pretended unto that I read of; Hospinian has told us the Original of them, to
be of a much later date: And as for the observation of Easter it self, Mr.
Hales is of opinion that it was an Error to hold it necessary to observe such a
Feast; and the Controversy about the Time (which set all the World in a
Combustion; and were it not that both sides pretended Conscience in the case,
Hales of Schism, p. 5.
he thinks them all guilty of Schism) he says was a matter most unnecessary
and vain, The old Nonconforming Ministers did use to take the opportunity of
those days to preach in to the people. Some Reformed Churches have no Saints
days, but only keep some few days Holy in remembrance of our Savior, or
relating to the blessed Trinity: So as I take it, does the Church of Scotland
even at this day. For my own part I think the Church of England is well
justified by Mr. Perkins from Superstition in her observance of the Festival
days she observes. I can assure you there are that can observe a day to give
thanks for the victory of Michael over the Devil, which neither did, nor could,
nor would keep a day to give thanks for the victory of O. C. over the King at
Worcester, or of Lambert over Sir George Booth in Cheshire. As for occasional
days of Fasting and Humiliation, they have not been so much scrupled in the
World by sober men, nor may be so liable to exception or abuse, as the stated
Fasts and Feasts may; and I think usually they are mote strictly observed. As
for the Nonconformists private days, which the Author of the Debate speaks of,
if they keep them no better (those that do keep them) than many, if not most
do, the ordinary stated Fasts and Feasts, I think they may do every whit as
well to lay them aside.

Quest. Next to Holy Days, what do the Nonconforming-Ministers think of the
Surplice, and the rest, commonly called Holy Garments; Is it not a
superstitious and a very superfluous zeal which boyls over so against these
things?

Answ. Some I confess are offended the Surplice because abused in the time, of
Popery to superstition; and conceive possibly, that because Queen Elizabeth's
In junctions or Articles say, that the gray Amice shall not be used, because it
has been so abused to Superstition; that there is the like equity for the
disuse of the Surplice. There was a Learned, and Pious Person, once said, He
had often worn the Surplice, but he thought he should rather be hanged than
wear it again. For my own part, I should be loath to be a Martyr for or against
the Surplice; being commanded to be used by the Church, not as having any
holiness in it, but only as a decent Garment: Yea, I should be loath to be kept
out of the Church or Pulpit by Suilling. The truth is, the Surplice is little
beholding to those Doctors, that are the Champions for its use, when they tell
us that it may teach us purity and holiness, wherewith we are to be clothed:
And may it not as well mind us of the leprosy of sin wherewith we come into
the World Lepers as white as Snow? Or when they tell us that the Saints that
follow the Lamb in the Revelations, were all clothed with long White Robes;
for by this reason all the People, men and women, as well as the Minister,
should wear Surplices; and this too would make more for Uniformity.

Whereas it is said, That there it at much to be said for a Ministers wearing a
Surplice, at for his wearing a white Cap; and that there is no more reason for
any to be offended to see a Minister wear a black Hood, or a Surplice, than to
see him wear a white Cap under a black.

It may be answered, That the Surplice is a Garment commanded to be worn by the
Minister in Chapel or Church, and for the time of his Administration only: The
Cap is ad libitum, at his choice, and worn at all times, and places, and
employments alike; and not appropriated to holy persons or holy services; and
what more reason why any man should be offended to see a white Cap under a
black, than to see a little black Jack tipp'd with Silver? As for the Bishops
Lawn Sleeves, (whatever the Judge said) I hope they shall not choke me. The
Cassock was a Garment for a Soldier, and may well enough become those of the
Spiritual Militia. The Cirsingle, as it is called, is not for us Nonconformists,
being turned out to Grass: Yet I would much rather choose to have it about my
Middle, than my Neck; and to wear a Girdle, than to want a Blessing.

But now seriously to address my self to the Author of the Friendly Debate: I
think an indifferent temper about indifferent things, is the best; my Religion
stands not in crying them up or down; I cannot be very zealous for or against
them: Yet methinks it does not argue much skill or cunning in a Chapman that
has Wares to sell, to tell his Customers, when they enquire and would be
satisfied about the goodness of them, They are indifferent, they are
indifferent. These things of themselves, and in themselves considered, with
other humane Ceremonies, are but lawful, or indifferent, not necessary, in the
Judgment of the Fathers and Sons of the Church. They are held, the Surplice and
other Ceremonies, utterly unlawful in the Judgments and Consciences of many on
whom they are imposed. Now grant it be their weakness so strongly and zealously
to oppose these things; yet I most humbly beseech the Most Reverend and Right
Reverend Fathers of the Church, seriously to weigh and consider what that Great
Apostle St. Paul, the Great Doctor of the Gentiles, would have done in that
case.

Quest. Do those do well that reproach, revile, or slight Ministers, for their
Cassocks, or Girdles? etc.

Answ. They do not do well; no more do they that reproach and revile Ministers
for not wearing of them. There has been too much of this both on the
Conformists and Nonconformists side; but it is to the commendation of neither.
If we would forbear clashing one against another, live as Friends, as Brethren,
and up to our profession, we should be men set by, and Reverenced by the
People. What a shame is it that there should be so many several Religious
Orders in the Romish Church, who have their several Habits, ceremonious
Observations, and yet honor one another, and are all honored by the People.

Quest. Yet if the Nonconformist would come into the Church, and nor stand out
as they do, out of Order and Rank, would not the Church be terrible like an
Army with Banners?

Answ. The Way to have all conform, I humbly conceive, is for the Bishops to
follow the example of the Great Council Jerusalem, to lay upon the Necks of
their Disciples, whether Pastors or People, no other Burden but necessiry
things, Acts 15. Add to this, At this day there is no perfect Uniformity
amongst our Brethren that Conform: For some read all the Prayers, some not;
some pray before Sermon, some only bid Prayer; some pray after Sermon, some
not; some read Prayers on the holy days, some not; some read Prayers on
Wednesdays and Frydays, some not; some preach twice a day, some but once; some
Catechize in the afternoon, some not; some preach upon the 30th of January and
the 29th of May, some, yea the most, not; some bow toward the Communion Table,
most not; some call it an Altar, most the Communion Table; some bow at the name
of Jesus, some not; some are for their Doctrine Calvinists, some Arminians;
some are Latitudinarians, some Altitudinarians; some moderate Conformists for
Canonical Conformity; some High Conformist^ and for Praeter-canonical
Conformity; some are Rigidissimos, that have short, narrow, little soul^ and of
the childrens threes; others have large true Christian breasts, of a capacious
and of a comprehensive Charity: some are for Union Coalition, and
Accommodation, though with some Condescension or yielding on their part, (if
his Majesty and Parliament think fit) other think Moderation marts all: Some
account the Calvinian-Conformists, Puritan-Conformists, and could be pleased
more of them were cast out o^ the Church; others think the
Nonconforming-Puritans (such is their Life and Doctrine) may (permissu
Superiorum) well be received again into the bosom of the Church.

Quest. If the Nonconforming-Ministers forbear to come into the Church and
conform ou^ of Conscience, and not out of Policy, what reason can be given why
diverse of them when they were offered preferments in the Church at hi^
Majesty's first coming into the Land, stood blowing upon them so long, before
they would either take or leave them? D. p. 111.

Answ. In the Judgment of Charity we may judge the true reason was, they
expected then some Alteration and Reformation both in Worship and Government;
and they waited to set whether there would be such a Reformation as their
Consciences could rest satisfied withal: if so, they resolved to accept those
Dignities; but when they perceived things were to be settled in statu quo, in
the condition they are now, they waved those places and preferments. Might but
Bishop Ushers Reduction have been admitted in the Government, and the
Ceremonies removed; or but his Majesty's Declaration about Ecclesiastical
Affairs been made a Law, they would have thankfully embraced the offers that
were then made them.

Quest. What needs the removal of the Ceremonies be so much as desired of our
Governors? Are they not like those of a Master of a Family to his Children and
Servants to come into the Parlour or Hall at such an hour to Prayer in the
Family, and to kneel there, and he uncovered during Family-Prayers? D. p. 106,
107.

Answ. The Nonconforming-Ministers are very willing to come to the Church at
the hours appointed by Law, and there to stand or kneel, and be bare or
uncovered at the time of Prayers, if such conformity may serve the turn: But
diverse look upon the Ceremonies enjoined in the Liturgy as of another nature
than those abovementioned (relating to Peace, Order and Decency only) namely,
as Rites of a Mystical or Sacramental signification, and therefore have been
rejected together with Popery at first by many of the Reformed Churches beyond
the Seas, who yet we doubt not worship God decently and orderly, and in the
beauty of Holiness.

Quest. Are the Nonconformists such a cross-grained Generation, that it is the
only way to bring them to Conformity, for the Magistrate to forbid the use of
the Ceremonies? D.

Answ. I wish (if his Majesty pleased) trial might be made in forbidding the
Cross and Surplice, the reading the Lessons out of the Apocrypha, and the Old
Translation of the Psalms o^ David?

Quest. Do not the Nonconformists hold that nothing may be done in the Worship
of God but what is in joined by him in his Word? Deb. p. 101. edit. 1.

Answ. They generally hold that nothing must be done as a part of Gods Worship,
nor as properly a medium cultus; but they hold that the determination of meet
circumstances necessary in genere, is not necessary to be set down in the Word.
Vid. Mr. Baxt. his disputat. about Chapter Governm. and the Proposals of the
Presbyterians to his Majesty.

Quest. Do the Nonconformists Ministers hold the Church of England no true
Church, and the Ministers of it, if Conformists, no true Ministers? and do they
dislwade people from frequenting the Churches, and hearing their Ministers
settled in them?

Answ. The Presbyterians have justified the calling of Ministers in the Church
of England, in their Jus Divinum Ministerii Anglicani; they ^efuse not to
communicate with the Public Assemblies; diverse that sometimes keep private
Meetings for Religious Exercises, they and their Auditors go to Church also,
and join therein in praing and hearing, and receiving the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper.

Quest. Do the Nonconformists-Ministers hold all superiority of one Presbyter
above another, Antichristian?

Answ. As to the Bishops of the Church of England, invested with all that Power
which they have, and usually exercise in the Church of England, without the
joynt-advice and consent of the Presbytery, we look upon them not as Jure
Divino strictly, but as his Majesty's Deputies and Commissioners in
Ecclesiastical Affairs; and, since his Majesty is pleased to make them Lords,
can give them their Title, and serve God and the Church under them.

Quest. Is the Assembly in their Directory for Worship so much out in advising
and directing Ministers to preach in the evidence and demonstration of the
Spirit and of Power? and are those Ministers guilty of error and presumption
now-a-dayes who make this a petition in Prayer before their Sermons, that they
may be enabled so to preach? See Deb. p. 5. edit. 1.

Answ. The sense of the Author of the Debate and diverse other Interpreter? and
the sense in which the Assembly and many other pious and learned Preachers use
this Scripture, 1 Cor 2.4 need not necessarily to exclude one the other. Take
Bishop Hall's Paraphrase upon the place My speech both in my private
Exhortation, and i^ my publicly Preachings, was not curiously plausible as if I
would win with words of humane Eloquent and Wit; but in plain and powerful
expressions (...) God's Spirit speaking in me, and working in you (...) me. And
the pious, prudent, and learned Bishop of Chester, in his Ecclesiastes,
directing what kind of phrase a Minister must use in his preaching, says, it
must be affectionate and cordial, (...) proceeding from the heart, and an
experimental atquaintance with those Truths which we deliver -- adds, this it
to speak in the demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. Besides, the learned
D^ Hammond tells us in his Comment on the New Testament, that diverse places in
the Old Testament are said to be fulfilled in the New b^ way of Accommodation.
And why may not this Scripture be used by Ministers by way of Accommodation
also? Do not the Sons of the Church pray for the Clergy of England, as for
God's own Tribe, the Tribe of Levi? Besides, if you seriously consider the
Context, you may see cause not wholly to reject the other interpretation namely
that of Mr. Dixon in loc. Demonstrativ^ nibus Scriptura and solida Veritatis
quibus Spirit^ potenter se exerebat and operabatur in vestris animis

Quest. Do the Nonconforming-Ministers preend now to pray by the Spirit, as if
the Holy Ghost should immediately infuse method, matter and words whilst they
pray?

Answ. Mr. Hollingworth, sometime a prime Presbyterian in Lancashire, shall
answer for them. They do not hold that they ought not to take bought
beforehand what they should pray, expecting that the Holy Ghost should
immediately inspire them with method, matter and words of Prayer; who ever
said, it was not they that prayed, but the Holy Ghost praying in them. And yet
in this duty as well as in others, the Sons of God are led by the Spirit of
God, which is a Spirit of Grace and Supplication: and because we know not what
to ask, he helps our infirmities; and we may be said to pray in the Spirit,
not only because the holy Spirit does stir up, warm and enlarge our affections
in prayer, but be brings often times to our remembrance the savory and suit able
phrases and passages of holy Writ, especially the promises which are most
pertinent to our purpose. Why should any imagine that the evil spirit can have
power to suggest evil thoughts or imaginations into us, to distract and hinder
us when we are praying, and not the good and holy Spirit should suggest good
thoughts and desires, and that too in his own language, I mean in
Scripture Phrase and expressions, bringing them at such a time to our
remembrance; Yea, the Holy Ghost (says that pious person) restrains the
petulancy and extravagancy of wit, great swelling words of vanity, vain
bablings, idle repetitions, etc. and he teaches us to pray in the words of
truth and soberness. We acknowledge a distinction betwixt the Gift of Prayer,
and the Spirit of Prayer; The one is a common gift of the Spirit, the other is
a special gift or grace of the Spirit, that consists in apt expressions,
outward enlargements; this in deep impressions on the heart, devout affections,
which are too big for expressions; these are the sighs and groans which cannot
be uttered. A Reverend and worthy Prelate of the Church of England, treating of
the gift of Prayer, says thus, P. 12.
-- If it be a fault not to strive and labor after this gift, much more is it
to jeer and despise it by the name of Extempore Prayer, and, praying by the
Spirit; which Expressions, as they are frequently used by some men by way of
reproach, are for the most part the sign of a profane heart, and such as are
altogether strangers from the power and comfort of this duty.

Quest. In case this expression may be tolerated and admit of any favorable
construction, Do not they oftentimes use many light and indecent and sometimes
very clownish expressions in their Prayer, to gratify the rudeness of their
Auditors? Deb. p. 62. edit. 4.

Answ. As for many of them they are not rash to utter any thing before the Lord
they are very serious and sober in their expressions, affectionat and zealons
in their utterance. There is a little Book of the Prayers of many of the chief
of them; taken, I suppose, in Shorthand, without their knowledge, and
published (for ought I know) without their consent; yet I conceive with some
grains of allowance for common and pardonable errors, might pass with an
Imprimatur. And if there be some who have used unbecoming expressions; Are
there not to be found also among the Conformists guilty of the like
Indecencies? Not to mention the Pr. of D. I. M. at Oxford, nor the Pr. of D. R.
at Windsor; I hope it may be pardonable to cite that of the D. which was
printed with his own knowledge; Let the Gold of our Nobility excel in Grace as
they do in Honor; purify the Silver of our Gentry from the dross of Vice;
engrave upon the Brass of the Communalty the fear of thy holy Name. As for
their affectionate way of utterance, I suppose it may be a means to move
themselves and others to suitable affections to the duty they ate about. Vocal
Prayer, where it can conveniently be used, is by some preferred before mental,
because it is a means to excite affections, and prevent distraction. One end of
Prayer, as a very learned Author tells us, is not to move or affect God, but
our selves, that we may be fit to receive the good things that we beg of him;
and then those words and phrases, and that way of utterance or speaking which
is most affectionate and least affected, which is best adapted to the matter of
the prayer, and productive also of good effects in our selves and others, ought
to be esteemed least liable to blame or exception. Is it not the part of an
Orator to change his voice and gesture, according to the variety of the
subject or matter he is speaking of? do not men begin an Oration with a low
voice or tone ordinarily, and so rise higher as they go further, and ordinarily
are most intense and earnest toward the Conclusion? We are directed in the
Common Prayer Book to repeat the Confession of Sins after the Minister with a
meek, heart and humble voice: And I have heard of one, that, for his voice and
confidence, was charged that he confessed his sins as if he was proud of them?

Quest. Do not some Nonconformists complain that they cannot be so affected in
the hearing of Common Prayer, as at other Prayers? Deb. p. 89. edit. 4.

Answ. I have heard it bitterly complained of, that the Common Prayers which
are good in themselves, should be abased by mean, pitiful, scandalous
Readers, and be read in so slight and dull a manner. The Liturgy is not
ordinarily, as to its effects on the generality of the Auditors, the same, when
read by a worthy person, and in a grave and decent manner, as otherwise: yet I
confess some reason why many men are not so much affected with the
Common Prayer is with the Minister's own Prayer, may be the frequent repetition
of the same prayers. I suppose where a man strictly tieth himself to a Form of
Prayer (though of his own composing) constantly before or after Sermon, it is
not ordinarily so affecting or quickening to himself or others, as when he does
otherwise. I think Prayer by forms, and conceived prayers, both lawful, and
both of them have their excellencies in some respects. That by a Form, excells
in some respects Conceived Prayer; in others, as I heard the Pious, Reverend
and Learned Dr. Holdsworth when he was Vice Chancellor (at the Commencement) at
Cambridge determine the matter, though he concluded for the lawfulness and
expediency of a Liturgy for Public Worship; Such it the nature of man that he
is ordinarily most excited in his affections, and his attention soonest engaged
and raised by Novelty or variety. And hear what a Reverend Person, no enemy to
Episcopacy and Liturgy, says of Prayer by Book; There is not that life and
vigor in it to engage the affections, as when it proceeds immediately from the
soul it self, and is the natural expression of those particulars whereof we are
most sensible. B. Chapter G. P. p. 12. Now one Reason being given in the Preface to
the Liturgy, why some Ceremonies are retained, being this, because they are apt
to affect the dull mind of man, etc. why may not a Minister so order his
Prayers before and after Sermon, etc. as to voice and phrase, as may most
probably affect himself and them that join in prayer with him? I do by no means
approve of Romantic or Courtly expressions on the one hand in Prayer, nor Rude
and Rustic expressions on the other. I think Scripture Phrase is best,
fittest, and of choice, therefore to be made use of. And to this (I think) I
may safely say the generality of the Non-conformists do conform as much as the
Conformists themselves.

Quest. How can a man join in a Prayer in which he is not before acquainted?

Answ. As a man may in his judgment assent unto any Divine Truth delivered in a
Sermon, which he never heard before; so may he join in his affections unto any
holy desire in a Prayer which he never heard before. B. C.
If he who is mouth of the rest, shall through impudence deliver that which he
cannot approve, God does not look upon it as our Prayer, if our Desires do not
say Amen to it.

Quest. Do the high Prelatists allow of Ministers to pray any Prayer besides
the Common Prayer?

Answ. Dr. Heylyn condemns the custom of praying before and after Sermon. We
are told that this does frustrate the end and design of the Liturgy, and that
it is needless, etc. And that although many Orthodox men, not intending evil
thereby, have in latter times taken up this fashion, yet they are generally to
be blamed, and have much to answer for their Nonconformity herein, if we
believe the Author of a late Pamphlet, called the Converted Presbyterian.

Quest. What is to be thought of Afternoon-Sermons, is not that a thing wholly
superfluous, and would it not be better if as the Citizens and others have
reduced their Families to one Meal a day; so the Ministers would their
Congregations to one Sermon a day, and so have nothing besides Common Prayer
and Catechism in the evening? Deb. p. 89. edit. 4.

Answ. The Lord Falkland, in his Speech in Parliament, complained of some
leading Bishops before the Wars, that they cried up Catechizing, to decry
Preaching. Catechizing indeed is talked of much, but by many it is to be feared,
it is to justle out the Afternoon-Sermon out of doors: for we find in many
Churches there is neither Preaching nor Catechizing in the Afternoon. Of old,
preaching was accounted praecipuum munus Episcopi, the Bishops chief Work or
Office. Bishop Latimer was very smart against Unpreaching Prelates in his time;
but of later times the Lord Falkland in his speech in Parliament charged some
of that Order that they discouraged and discountenanced Preaching; that they
preached not themselves, and discountenanced them that would. And not long
before the Wars, I heard a Friend, a Minister (that had been with his Diocesan)
who said, That upon his quoting of Bishop Davenant to the Bishop, in
justification of something he said; the Bishop replied, WHAT DO YOU TALK OF
HIM, A PREACHING-COXCOMB! Bishop Latimer, Ridley, Jewel, etc. were great
Patrons of Preaching, and themselves practiced it Archbishop Grindal went so
far as to countenance the Meetings called Prophecyings; and Bishop Hall of late
thought they might be profitable. Former Histories did nor tell stories of any
Bishop of the Reformed Religion, that gave God thanks that he had not left one
Lecture, or one afternoon-Sermon in all his Diocese. There was a Gentlewoman of
good Quality, cited a Kingly Preacher, viz. Solomon in his Ecclesiastes, for
preaching in the Evening as well as Morning, Eccles. 11.6. In the morning sow
thy Seed, and in the Evening withhold not thy hand. In the Country they account
those Shepherds most careful of their flocks, and to have usually the best
Sheep, who fothet twice a day. The Apostle Paul exhorts to be instant in season
and out of season: a Sermon in the afternoon can be but out of season. It Is
observed that the Sermons at Court before Queen Elizabeth were constantly in
the afternoon. And I knew a Parish in the Country, where it was desired by the
good women, That in case their Minister would preach but once a day, it might
be in the afternoon; because, they said, it might be a meant to keep their
Husbands out of the Alehouse. The Morning Service according to the Common
Prayer Book being so long, they thought a Sermon might be better spared in the
morning than in the afternoon.

Quest. Although preaching in the beginning of the planting the Christian
Religion might be necessary, yet is it so in these days?

Answ. Preaching serves not only to inform the Understanding, but to excite
and awaken the Affections, and to bring to remembrance what we have been taught
before. Paul planted, and Apollos watered even there where the Apostle Paul had
first planted. A good Stomach can digest two Meals a day, and why may not a
Soul of a healthful constitution have two Meals a Week. I believe the
Christians in Russia have never the fatter Souls for going in lean Pastures,
for two Meals, I mean two Sermons a year.

Quest. Would it not be good Policy not to suffer any to preach, but only to
read Common Prayer and the Homilies? Would not this be an effectual way and
means to prevent Errors and Heresies, Rents and Divisions amongst us? Does not
this preaching sow many Tares in the Field of the Church?

Answ. I have heard of some Preachers indeed who preach down preaching, but I
take them to be never a whit the better Preachers, nor the better Christians
for that; I acknowledge the Homilies to contain wholesome and very profitable
Doctrine, and think I should spend my time better to heat one of them read,
than to hear some Preachers nowadays. But if ability to read the Book of
Common Prayer and the Book of Homilies, be all the Book-Learning necessary for
a Minister, it is to be feared that some Princes or Parliaments may come, before
many Ages pass who may be so thrifty as to be willing to save the needless
expense of a million or two millions a year in Church-Maintenance; and think 20
l. per annum enough for men of such Parts, Education, and Learning.

Quest. Is not Catechizing the younger people in the afternoon, a very
profitable and a laudable practice?

Answ. This I can say, I used It for many years together, besides preaching
usually twice a day. It Is observed that the Protestants in the beginning of the
Reformation, got advantage over the Papists, by their diligence in Catechizing;
and that since the Papists by their diligence the same way, have got ground of
us. I am not against the use of the Church-Catechism for Children; and do
really think the Right Reverend Bishop Nicholson has deserved well for bis
Exposition of it. But I confess I cannot approve of the Vicar that in his
Catechizing, going about to justify that Question, What it thy Name? brought
that Scripture for it, where it is recorded of our blessed Savior, that he said
to the man possessed of the Devil, What is thy Name? and he answered, My Name
is Legion.

But as for the knowledge, of the Catechism (if it may lawfully be done) I
could be glad none might be married before they give an account of it.

Quest. Since preaching is so necessary, what way of preaching is best? The
Jingling way, or the Rational Philosophical way, or the Rational Scripture way,
with Reasons out of Scripture, and Testimonies from Scripture?

Answ. I dare not commend the first way, which yet I suppose was more practiced
in former times than of late: Such as that was of Dr. Pl. on that place of the
Canticles, My Bed is green; Typical, My; Topical, Bed; Tropical, green:
Typical, Topical, Tropical; My Bed is green. Such as was that of the Doctor and
Dignitary at Oxford about the lost Groat; such as was the mode of the Wits
about thirty years ago; and such as was well expressed and exposed since by a
Citizen or Countryman, who being asked how he liked the Sermon, and how the
Minister preached? Answered, He could not say much of it, but it ran or sounded
thus, as if he had said, A Pudding, a Pie;
A Pudding-Pie:
A Pudding for thee,
A Pie, for me;
A Pudding-Pie
For me and thee.
Nor do I look on him is one of the finest Preachers, that lately exhorted his
Hearers to put on the Satin of Sincerity, the Purple of Purity, and the Silk
of Simplicity.

As for the Rational way, the mode of some great Doctors of these days, if they
would intermix more of Scripture-Reason, or Scripture-Testimonies, it might be
very profitable for learned Auditories.

As for the way by Doctrine, Reason, and Use, by Testimonies out of the holy
Scriptures, more than Citations out of the Ancient Fathers, or by Reasons
deduced from Philosophy, (such as I apprehend was the preaching of Mr. Perkins,
Mr. Hildersham, old Mr. Dod, Archbishop Usher, Bishop Sanderson, Bishop
Reynolds, and many others in our days) I think it most edifying to ordinary
Auditors: And this I conceive to be that which the Assembly mean in their
Directory for preaching, and others in their Prayers before Sermon, by
preaching in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. Bishop
Hall in his Paraphrase, and the Bishop of Chester in his Ecclesi^stes, as I
conceive, are both of this Judgment. Scripture-Reasons, and Scripture-words and
phrases, do best of all become a Minister of the Word. Doctrina Evangelii cum
sit Divina ac tota spiritualis Divinis etiam verbis explicanda, and Divinis
rationibus confirmanda est, ut proportio servetur inter res and verba itemque
argumenta qua^^ non temere in rebus Theologicis usurpandae sunt ^^manae
phrases, nec rations Philosophicae nisi pror^^ evidentes sint facile
adhibendae. Vorstius on the second Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians.

Quest. Are not all private Meetings for exercise of Religion, illegal and
schismatical, though not in opposition unto the Public Assemblies?

Answ. Till of late, a Conventicle, I have heard, was a Meeting under pretense
of Religi^^, where people met to pray and preach against the Government of the
Church and State. The Bishop, by the Canons, has power to give leave for the
keeping of a private Fast: And I know a Bishop that did so, before the Act
against Conventicles was made.

Quest. Is it impossible that they should be either good Christians or good
Subjects, who keep and frequent private Meetings, commonly called Conventicles?

Answ. There are amongst the Papists (whom may suppose the Author of the Debate
thinks good Christians and good Subjects) who assemble themselves for Religious
Exercises. And there were a Congregation of Protestants in the Reign of Queen
Marry, which yet were good Christians and good Subjects; and which I would not
brand with the name of a Conventicle, no more than the Author of the Debate
would the Meetings of Dr. Gunning, Dr. Hyde, and other, for the Common Prayer
in the late time; although if Conventicles be against the Common Law, that was
the same then and now. Judicious Mr. Hales in his Tract of Schism, has more
Charity for Dissenten: P. 2.
When either false and uncertain Conclusions are obtruded for Truth, and Acts
either unlawful, or ministering just scruple, are required of us to be
performed; in these Cases, (says he) Consent were Conspiracy; and of open
Contestation is (...) Faction or Schism, but due Christian Animosity.

Quest Whether do the Nonconformist-Mitisters look after Visions and
Revelations?

Answ. It Is that which the Papists and Semi^ P^pists, the Quakers, pretend
unto; but these I conceive may rather be ranked amongst the Conformists, than
the Nonconformists, by the like reason that Seekers and Anabaptists are number
a nongst Nonconformists. And here let me inser^ a short story:

In the late times, One (now a great Son of the Church) traveling with two
(now Nonconforming) Ministers; he being the Senior Man and Minister was desired
to pray with them and for them, before they went to Bed: this he did; and in
his Prayed, That God would send them Godly Dreams that night. On occasion
whereof, one of the Ministers said to the other, He did not like this
over-Godliness; he that would over-godly it, would undergodly it.

If any Nonconforming-Ministers have been superstitiously observers of Dreams,
it may be queried whether the late Little Great Archbishop of Canterbury was
not guilty of the same fault also.

Quest. Do the Nonconformists persuade or assure themselves of Gods favor
only or chiefly from a voice within them, which they say is the holy Spirit,
telling them that they are Jedidiah's, beloved of God? And do they not look
upon what Graces the holy Spirit has wrought in them, as evidences of his Love?

Answ. We affirm that the Works or fruits of the Holy Ghost in us, which upon
search we find in our own Souls, are our Evidences of Gods love to us. If we
once find in our selves those gracious Qualifications to which the Promises of
Pardon, Peace, and Comfort are made in the holy Scripture; this is every whit
as sure as if an Angel from Heaven should tell us with an audible Voice, Be of
good cheer, your sins are forgiven you; Peace be to you, you are the Favorites
of Heaven. The Spirit of God is first a sanctifying, and then a sealing Spirit;
first he converts us, and then he comforts us.

Quest. Do not Nonconfomists vaunt too much of their Assurances, Comforts,
Experiences? And may not these prove strange fancies in conclusion?

Answ. The holy Prophet David, and the blessed Apostle Paul, both cite their
own Experiences, and draw comfor from them. He delivered me from the mouth of
the Lion, 1 Samuel 17.37.
and from the paw of the Bear, and he will deliver me from this uncircumcised
Philistine: So the ore. And he has delivered, he does deliver; in whom I trust
also that he will yet deliver. So the other.

Quest. Do these Nonconforming-Ministers cheat the People, by making them
believe that they preach experimentally what they have heard and seen, and
experimented themselves. Deb^^ p. 35, 37. Edit. 4.

Answ. I have heard that it was the Saying of a Learned Man, no Nonconformist,
That the way to be a good Preacher, was to get a good Heart. Doubtless that
which comes from the Heart, is most likely to go to the Heart. He that has
tasted the sweetness of Honey and Sugar, can better speak of it, knows better
by his experience the sweetness of Honey and Sugar, than he that has only
heard and read of it in a Book. Holy David, a King and a Prophet, called to
others to hearken, and he would tell them what God had do^^ for his Soul. He
that has been persuaded and converted himself, is likeliest to persuade and
convert others.

It Is storied of Junius, That before his Conversion, meeting once with a
Countryman as he was in a Journey, and falling into discourse with him about
diverse points of Religion, he observed the plain fellow to talk so
experimentally, with so much heartiness and affection, as made him first begin
to think sure there was something more in those Truths, than his notional
humane Learning had yet discovered; which occasioned his more serious enquiry
into them, and afterward his Conversion.

Quest. Is it proper to allege the conversion of Souls from the Error of their
Ways, as a Seal to our Ministry?

Answ. The Apostle St. Paul, when his Ministry was questioned and disgraced,
appealed unto this, 2 Cor. 3.2. Ye are our Epistle, ( viz. of commendation to
or from the Church of Corinth) written in our hearts, known and read of all
men. This Epistle was the Apostles Evidence and Seal that he was a true
Minister of the Lord Jesus.

But this I must have leave to say, that it is no evidence of a real conversion;
to rail at Bishops, or the Common Prayer; nor on the other side, at
Nonconformists, as Schismatics, Sectaries, Rogues, etc. I know that Religion
is another thing, and teaches other things, better things than these. And I
believe there are serious, sober, solid, godly persons, excellent Christians,
placable, Sons of Peace, of both Persuasions; that pray to God, and would be
ready to join in Petition to Authority, for some expedient for a
Reconciliation: And such a spirit as this, I look on as a Gospel Spirit, and
well-becoming Preachers and Professors of the Gospel of Reconciliation: and if
there be any of either side, that have not attained to this or the like spirit,
I look on them as of a lower form of Godliness; and on endeavors and actings
contrary to this way of Peace, to be no part of their Godliness, or any
evidence of their Conversion; though I will not say, they are therefore ungodly
or unconverted.

Quest. Why do not Nonconformists preach up Peace and Unity, and Obedience to
Superiors?

Answ. You tell us that the Nonconformists hold it their duty to declare the
whole Counsel of God; and they tell us that it is their duty to pray for
Magistrates, and to obey their lawful Commands for Conscience Sake; and
therefore it is but Charity to judge they will not be wanting in what they are
convinced of, is their Duty.

If there be any that sow the Seeds or Tares of Division and Disobedience,
whether in private Meetings, or public Congregations; I say concerning them, O
my Soul, come not thou into their secrets, unto their Assemblies be not thou
united: yet there are, I fear, who cry peace, peace, when there is no peace,
but war in their hearts; all the Peace and Unity they intend and endeavor
after, is but to bow all to their own Bent, Ways, Opinions, and Sentiments; and
to break all those whom they cannot bend. Some there are, who with much
pretended Zeal, cry, and that aloud, for obedience to Magistrates and Laws, and
act more out of policy and self-interests, than Conscience; making these but as
stalking-horses, the better to come near, and to shoot at their own Game; thus
taking vengeance on their own supposed Enemies, whilst they seem to do God and
his Vicegerent service: Hereby breaking the whole Law of God, pretending the
observation of the fifth Commandment; and that fundamental Law of our Peace and
happiness, the Act of Indemnity, whilst they pretend Zeal to the Act of
Uniformity: Else what is the reason that they seldom or never preach but upon
that subject, when as it suffices by the Canons to treat of it four times a
year. For my own part, I acknowledge and profess it is a duty to preach
obedience to God and his Vicegerent, both to be obedient our selve, and to
teach others also this duty by Precept and Example: Yet I must confess, I do
not think they do all things decently and in order, who always preach up the
Duty of the people at Court, not they that preach the duty of Rulers in the
Country.

Quest. But are there not Nonconforming-Ministers, who were formerly great
Friends to the Army, and Countenancers and Encouragers of them in their
illegal, unjust, and horrid Proceedings against King and Parliament?

Answ. I know none of the whole Tribe of the Presbyterians that are so. I have
heard of one Mr. Martin lately imprisoned for a Conventicle at Warwick, that
lost his Arm in his Majesty's service; and I have heard of one that marched
before the Soldiers, when they went to fight against his Majesty at Worcester,
that has been a zealous Conformist since: Not do I know that he and many
others ever saw day, till the Royal Sun arose in our Horizon, to scatter the
Clouds that hung over their eyes. The horrid murder of his late Majesty, as it
was abhorred and declared against by the Presbyterian Ministers, and others, in
City and Country, from Pulpit and Press; so it was (that I know of) never
undertaken to be justified by any Minister in print, but by J. G. that great
Goliath and Champion of the Arminians. And the Presbyterians, yea, those who
were Commissioners for the View of the Liturgy, Declare in one of the Papers to
his Majesty, That till the Covenant was decried as an Almanac out of date, and
its Obligation taken to be null, that odious Fact could never have been
perpetrated against your Royal Father, nor your Majesty so long expulsed from
your Dominions.

Quest. Do the Nonconforming-Ministers call those Moral Preachers who preach
obedience to the Moral Law, and the necessity of good Works?

Answ. He that rightly divides the Word of Truth, must preach Law and Gospel
both; Moral as well as Evangelical Duties; yet it is best to preach the Law as
it was first delivered in the hands of a Mediator. Blame them not if they
preach frequently the Gospel, and the great love of Christ to sensible Sinners,
because the love of Christ constrains us to love him again; it is the Loadstone
of Love: Nothing, they say, is more easy, than to love him that loves us; and
the Apostle John tells us, That we love God, because he first loved us. But
it is not very long since Puritan Preachers, as they were nicknamed, were
charged to preach nothing but Hell and Damnation.

Quest. Do Nonconforming-Ministers use to preach Comfort to ungodly Sinners,
resolving still to live ungodly?

Answ. No, by no means: The Presbyterians and others used to declare against
Antinomianism, and to preach Repentance toward God, as well as Faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ; to him that was sensible of sin, and weary of it, and that
mourned for it, they were willing to preach glad Tidings of Remission, and
Reconciliation: They were and are Enemies both to presumption and desperation,
and seek to save Souls from perishing either way: They are ordinarily first
Beanerges's then Barnabas's; and seek first and most to wash the inside of the
Platter, than the outside; first they aim to cleanse the Heart, then the Hands:
They press men first to seek God in prayer with their whole heart for pardon
and grace, and then direct them how to pray (whether with or without a Book in
private) as shall be most expedient for them; they deny (those that I converse
withal) that they dissivade any from the use of the Liturgy or Common Prayer.
This indeed is a Maxim with them in Religion, Quod cor non facit non fit; and
that the devotion of the Soul, is the soul of Devotion.

Quest. In case a person be truly troubled in Conscience for his sin, to which
is he to be sent for Comfort? To the Law, or to the Gospel; to his own
Obedience or Good Works, or to the Obedience of Christ?

Answ. The ordinary method of Cure, is first to search the Wound to the bottom,
and then to apply healing Remedies; first to pour in Wine, and then Oil. Our
Physicians use first to purge or vomit their Patients, and then to give
Cordials: So spiritual Physicians, till the Patient be truly and rightly
sensible of his sins, they send him to the Law, for by the Law comes the
knowledge of sin, the horrid nature and demerit of it; but then for Comfort,
they send him to the Gospel, to this sovereign Balsom; yea, they pour on them
the Oil of Gladness, upon whom they perceive has been the Spirit of Heaviness:
They say not, Physician heal thy self; but rather send them to the Great
Physician, by whose stripes we and they are healed: We dare not trust in our
own Righteousness, but in the Lord our Righteousness.

Quest. Do not Nonconformists, as they desire liberty from the Impositions of
Men in the Worship of God, so preach up liberty from the Commandments of God in
the Course of their Lives? Or at least do they not lift up their Voice like a
Trumpet, when they publish the Gospel; but only speak in a small and still
Voice, when they treat of Obedience to the moral Law?

Answ. It Is an unjust Calumny cast on the Protestants by the Papists, That they
are Solifidians, and against good Works: And it is an uncharitable censure of
the Nonconformists by the Author of the Debate, that they do not preach
obedience to the Moral Law, as well as Faith in Christ; and the Duties of the
second Table of the Law, as well as of the first. Whoever reads the Assemblies
Confession of Faith, their Larger and Shorter Catechism, M. Dod on the
Commandments, Mr. Anth^^ Burgess his Vindiciae Legis, and may see cl^^^ that
the Nonconformists are not Lib^^^^es, ^^^^gh they desire some Liberty) and that
thou (...) pray to be delivered and freed from humane ceremonial Laws, (as God
has freed them from the Ceremonial Law of his own making) yet they are not
Antinomians; they commend, and in Gods name require, Obedience, as well as
Faith; Doing, as well as Believing; they commend Moral Honesty, but prefer
Piety: We deny him to be a truly godly man, that is not a good honest man; we
deny him to be righteous before God, that endeavors not to approve himself
righteous, in his dealings with men. We would not by any means break the two
Tables, by dashing them one against the other; and yet we prefer the Gospel
before the Law, Christ to Moses, the second Covenant to the first, that of
Grace to that of Works.

Quest. Is not Obedience then to the Moral Law, the Condition of our
Justification? See Debate, p. 13.

Answ. No: It Is not the Condition and Qualification of the Covenant, so
properly, D. M.
as it is of those Persons that enter into the Covenant. Faith justifies the
Person before God, and Obedience justifies the Faith before men. Obedience
(says a Reverend Author) must be in the same Subject with Faith, but it has
not a Voice in the same Court. We do not cry down man's Obedience, when we cry
up the Obedience of Christ, as the matter of our Justification, and the
Imputation of it, as the form of our Justification: We dare not appear before
God in our own filthy Garments and menstruous Clothes: We expect a Blessing
from our Heavenly Father, when we are arrayed with the Robes of our Elder
Brother Jesus Christ his Righteousness, which sends up a sweet smell in Gods
Nostrils.

Quest. Is Faith, or believing in Christ, a coming to Christ, or a relying on
Christ for the pardon of our sin? See Debate, p. 43.

Answ. Yes: John 7.37, 38. there coming to Christ, and believing, are all one:
And to what end Sinners are called to come to Christ, we my learn from our
blessed Savior, Mat. 11.28. namely, That they may find rest. I believe in God,
(says Bishop Nicholson in his excellent Exposition of the Church-Catechism) as
if I said, I put my whole trust, hope, and confidence in him, I ^ely upon him:
And so may Faith in Christ, I ^hink be very well described, to be a relying on
Christ for the pardon of our sins, and all good things. If my memory fail not,
I have often ^eard that Renowned Professor, Dr. Samuel Ward, deliver it for
good Doctrine in the Chair, That Faith was Recumbentia in Christum Media^re,
etc. a Recumbency on Christ for the pardon of ^ins.. One Mr. Down, that wrote
too against Separation, defines Faith to be a rest of the Will upon Christ and
his merits, for Justification, and consequently Salvation. And the same Author
ob^erves that the Hebrew words (...) and (...) all words equipollent in the old
Testament; and what is meant by them in the Old Testament, is expressed in the
New by Believing: To instance in one, Trust in the Lord with thy whole heart,
says the Old Testament, Prove. 3.5. If thou believe with thy whole heart, or
with all thy heart, says the New, Act. 8.37. We may define Faith thus: It it a
gracious habit infused into the Heart by the Spirit of God, whereby the Soul
rests or rolls it self upon Christ for all things appertaining to Life and
Godliness, for Gods Glory and its own Salvation.

Quest. Who are the greatest Enemies to the Church of England, and to Religion
it self, those who bring in new and strange Doctrines, or those that dissent
only from her as to the Ceremonies?

Answ. Those that differ in Substantials (...) Religion, are to be thought more
to differ, th^^ those that differ only in Circumstantials; and those ought to
be reputed the greatest Nonconformists, who do not conform to the Doctrine^ the
Church of England, set forth in her Articles Homilies and Liturgy.

Quest. Who are they?

Answ. Even many that have been conformable enough as to Ceremonies; their
Names an^ Tenets you may find in a Book entitled Laude^sium (...), and in
another called La^densium (...): Who they were the maintained these Doctrines,
and their Doctrin^^ in some measure also, you may find in Mr. Rushworth's
Collections, and others, who have written the History of the Times immediately
preceding the late Wars. I shall refer you to one, and that is Dr. Fuller in
his Church History, who relates, that it was complained of to the
Sub-committees for Religion in Parliament, (of which Sub-committee the Bishop
of Lincoln, the Bishop of Armagh, the Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of Exeter,
Dr. Sam. Ward, Dr. Hacket, Dr. Holdsworth, and others, were Members) that all
the Tenets of the Council of Trent ( abating only such points of State Policy
against the King's Supremacy, as were made Treason by the Statute) Good works
Co-causes with Faith in Justification, private Coufession by particular
ennumeration of sins, needful necessitate medii to Salvation; that the Oblation
(or, as others, the Consumption of the Elements in the Lords Supper) holds
the nature of a true Sacrifice, Prayers for the Dead; lawfulness of Monastical
Vows, the gross substance of Arminianism, and some dangerous points of
Socinianism had been preached or printed by some amongst us.

Quest. If it should be proved true, that the high Conformists should warp
somewhat from the Doctrine of the Church of England; yet have they not all, and
always been constant and firm to the Government to King and Parliament, and
great admirers of what their Superiors do and say?

Answ. Dr. Heylyn tells us that he cannot reckon the death of King Edward the
sixth, for an infelicity of the Church of England, for being (as he says) ill
principled in himself, and easily inclined to embrace such counsels as were
offered to him, it is not to be thought but that the rest of the Bishoprics,
before sufficiently impoverished must have followed Durham; and the poor Church
left as destitute of Lands and Ornaments at when she came into the world in her
natural nakedness. The abovenamed Dr. Heylyn, in his History of the
Reformation, charge the Grandees at Court and in the Parliament of those
times, with such vices and crimes, as our Adversaries may make use of to
blemish our Reformation. All which, with some other considerations, may give
occasion to some to think, that what the Devil said falsely and maliciously
against Job, may, a little altered, be too truly, and without breach of
charity, said of some high blades; Do they fear and honor the King and
Parliament for naught? Have they not made a hedge about them, and about their
house, and about all that they have on every side, and their Substance is
increased in the Laud? But let but King and Parliament put forth their hand
now, and touch all they have, and they would (if not for fear of punishment)
curse them to their face.

Quest. Is there any other absolute promise besides that of sending Christ into
the World?

Answ. Yes, many; As that Genesis 9.9. not to drown the World any more. That of
calling of the Gentiles, Genesis 49.10. The promise of the Conversion of the Jews,
as is generally thought, Romans 11. The promise of giving Christ the Heathen for
his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, Psalm.
2. And that Isa. 53. He shall see his Seed, he shall prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands: That Christ shall have a Seed
to serve him; that Christ shall certainly and infallibly save some; and the
Lord knows who are his: That he has not shed his Blood in vain, like water
spilt on the ground; that this glorious Head of the Church, shall certainly
have a Body in some measure answerable and suitable to the Head, etc. The
promise of First Grace is thought to be absolute, I will take away your heart
of Stone, and give you a heart of Flesh. It Is confessed, we are bid to convert
and turn, and to come to Christ, and to make our selves new hearts; and yet
it is as true, that we cannot do any of these things of our selves, without
Divine Assistance, and special Grace: But this for out Comfort, That which is
the matter of Duty in one place of Scripture, is the matter of a Promise in
another: And again, That Gospel-Commands are not only significations of out
Duty, but Conveyances of strength to do our Duty.

Quest. Is not Mr. W. B. absurd in comparing Gods people to Plate?

Answ. I answer, There is Scripture-ground enough to justify the calling of
Gods people his Plate: for in Scripture they are called Gods Jewels, or his
peculiar Treasure, Psalm. 3.17. And obdurate wicked men are compared to
Reprobate Silver, Jer. 6.30.

Quest. May we not say, That we come to the Promises by Christ?

Answ. In him are all the Promises Yea, and in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. As a
woman has a right to her Jointure, by first taking the man to her wedded
Husband; so Christians have a right to the Promises, and all good things, by
taking Christ first for their Lord and Husband.

Quest. Is fear the chief and principal motive of a Christian to Duty and
Obedience, I mean the fear of punishment?

Answ. No: The chief and best Principle is Love; I look on them as of a lower
form in Religion, who only serve God for fear of Hell: Although this fear is
useful, yet it is not the principal motive to obidience in Gods Children. And
this was the Divinity of former time. I do not hold it unlawful to serve God
for fear of punishment, nor hopes of Reward; yet this I say, That fear alone
speaks a man a Servant, and love speaks a min a Son: And those are the best
Servants to Virtue, who serve virtutis amore, for the love of Virtue. A man may
hate the good he does, and love the evil which he does not do. If then a man do
that which is commanded merely or chiefly for fear of Hell, is be necessarily
one of Gods best Servants? I think not; because he may at the same time hate
the good he does, and love the evil he abstains from. As for working with an
eye to the Reward intuitu mercedis, it is justifiable and commendable; it is that
which Moses did, Heb. 11.26 and which our blessed Savior did; and it suffices
the Servant to be as his Master; Christians to be Followers and Imitators of
Christ their Lord and Master.

Quest. Are good Works necessary to our Justification? Debate, p. 13.

Answ. The Church of England in her 11th Article, teaches her Children thus: We
are righteous before God, only for the merit of the Lord our Savior Jesus
Christ by Faith, and not for our own Works or Deservings: Wherefore that we are
justified by Faith only, is most wholesome Doctrine, and very full of Comfort,
etc. And in her Book of Homilies, Tom. 1. page 17. Edit. 1623. thus:
Justification is not the Office of man, but God: or man cannot make himself
righteous by his own Works, neither in part nor in whole; for that were the
greatest arrogance and presumption of Man, that Antichrist could set up against
God.

Quest. Has the Doctrine of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness for our
Justification, been the Doctrine of our Church, and the prime Doctors of it?

Answ. The Papists indeed call it with a jeer, Putative Righteousness. And it is
storied of a Popish Bishop, lighting accidentally on that place, Romans 4.6. Even
as David also describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
Righteousness without Works, etc. threw away the Book in great displeasure, and
said, O Paul! an tu quoque Lutheranus factus es? O Paul art thou also become a
Lutheran? It Is observed by (...) Conforming Minister, that the Apostle Paul
mentions this grace of Imputed Righteousness ten times in the 4th chapter to
the Romans; and Bishop Andrews in his most excellent Sermon on that Scripture,
Jehova Justitia nostra, His na^^ shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness;
and B^ Downham, in his Treatise of Justification, strongly asserts it: And the
Doctors of the Chair for (...) long time, have taught the same Doctrine. So
that now I should think that Doctor, though in the Chair, to be besides the
Cushion, that teaches otherwise.

Quest. Is the difference betwixt the Old and New Covenant this, that the Old
Covenant made with the Jews propounds temporal rewards, and the Gospel
propounds eternal? and has this been the Doctrine of the Church of England,
and of the prime Doctors since the Reformation? Deb. p. 26.

Answ. The 7th Article of the Church of England says thus; The Old Testament
is not contrary to the New. Both in the Old and New Testament everlasting life
is offered to mankind by Christ; who is the only Mediator between God and man;
wherefore they are not to be heard which say, that the old Fathers did look
only for transitory promises:

Quest. Do not Nonconformists abuse the people in their preaching, by preaching
in the Apostolical language, That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto
you?

Answ. I think the Prophet David does not abuse himself and others, when he
says, O taste and see that the Lord is gracious; Nor the Apostle Paul the
Ephesians, when he tells them that Jesus Christ came and preached peace to them
that were near, and to them that were afar off; Nor the Galatians, when he
says, Jesus Christ was evidently set forth, crucified amongst them: Neither
does Job juggle, or cast a mist before his own and others eyes, when he says,
with these eyes he shall see his Redeemer; although we take the interpretation
of Mercer on the place, of his Recovery here. What though the Apostles saw our
Savior in the flesh, heard his Sermons, and conversed daily with him; may not
Christians now-a-dayes see him with an eye of Faith in his Word and Sacrament?
and hear him when he speaks to us in the Writings of the Apostles, as it were
from Heaven, and by the mouths of his Ministers upon Earth? Must no passage or
phrase of Scripture be used but in its first signification? sure we are that
many places of the Old Testament are used in the New, chiefly or only by way of
accommodation.

Quest. Do the Nonconforming-Ministers amuse and abuse the people when they
speak of Spiritual desertions?

Answ. Who so please to read Mr. Perkins his Cases of Conscience, Mr. Capel on
Temptations; and Dr. Sibbs his Souls Conflict; although they never saw Dr.
Goodwyn, may see a Child of Light walking in Darkness; And in such a case I
would not send for, as Saul did, one to play upon at Instrument; Nor, with a
Conformist Minister, that I knew, when his Daughter was in trouble of mind for
her sins, counsel her to play at Cards; Or with another, how learned soever
they be, send them to a Theater; but either to some able Minister, or to Prayer
and the Promises, advising them to put them in suit in the Court of Heaven; for
it is God only that kills and makes alive, he wounds and he heals: In his
presence is life; and his withdrawing or deserting of the soul, though for a
time only, is as the shadow of death. If our blessed Lord on the Cross cried
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? what so great wonder, if a
Christian under the Cross, oft-times complains, Why hidest thou thy face, and I
am troubled? Is the Servant above the Master? If these things be done in the
green tree, what shad be done in the dry?

Quest. Are the Nonconformists Time-servers? Deb. p. 65.

Answ. If so, why do they not serve the Times now, and themselves of the Times?
Certain it is there are some now Nonconformists, whose consciences would not
permit them to serve the Times in Bradshaw's or O. Cromwell's days; diverse who
were turned out for not taking the Engagement, have since been outed for
Nonconformity: They could not serve the Times then, and the Times will not
serve them now. Can ye think we are such Bedlams as to choose sorrow and
suffering, Bonds and Imprisonments, when we might so easily escape all
sufferings, and have all, honorable employment in the Ministry, and some of us
(perhaps) preferment and advancement like our Brethren that conform.

Quest. Do not the Nonconformists call the Liturgy, Broth?

Answ. I never did so, and I approve not any that do; yet possibly the
expression might first be occasioned from that saying of Bishop Bonners,
formerly mentioned upon our retaining some part of their Service Book and
Ceremonies, If they taste of our Broth, they may one day come to eat of our
Beef. And here let me tell a story: I have heard that a conformable Minister
invited a Friend, or Friends, to his House, to eat a piece of Collect-Beef; so
he called Beef roasted on the Lord's Day, and kept usually cold in the house
all the week; with allusion, it is to be supposed, to the Rubric, which
ordinarily enjoyn^ the Collect for the Lords day, to be read all the week
after. I think this Conformists Beef, alike unsavory expression with the
Nonconformists Broth.

Quest. Do not Nonoonformists generally reproach and revile the Conformable
Ministers for their reading the Common Prayer, and for their Grave and Decent
Habits which they wear; and do not Nonconforming-Ministers teach them so to do?

Answ. If any there be who scorn or mock at grave, godly, sober persons, for
their reading the Liturgy, or for their Cassocks, Girdles, and the like, Take
them Donatus for me. Suppose some few rude persons should slight a Minister for
his Cassock, are there not others that mock and jeer at those that want the
Canonical Habits? How many are there that preach not, except they have a fling
at Nonconformists? Are not Nonconformists scorned and scoffed at on the Stage,
from the Press and from the Pulpit? How are they jeered at, and made a
May Game, by this in name Friendly (but really Unfriendly) Debate. It Is to be
thought the Author of it did never seriously consider that saying, Non est
major confusio quam serii and joci; and that other of my Lord Bacon, That it is
an inlet to Atheism to bring the exercise of Religion into contempt, in the
persons of sundry Preachers. Fol my part, I esteem it a point of serious and
solid Godliness, to love, honor, reverence Piety, Gravity, Learning, and true
Worth, whether in Conformists or Nonconformists: I look upon it as no good
evidence that a man is of the higher form in Religion, to magnify and multiply
the weaknesses or miscarriages of a few Dissenters, to the vilifying and
reproach of all or the generality of them. As it is an argument of an unjust
Steward, instead of an hundred to write fourscore or fifty, so is it of a false
and bad Accomptant, instead of twenty to set down fifty, fourscore, or an
hundred. It Is the method and way of God, whom we ought to imitate, to overlook
the failings of them that are sincere, to observe and note the little good he
sees in his servants, and to pass by or overlook the evil: So the holy
Scripture teaches us in the case and catriage of Sarah to her Husband; of
Rahab concerning the Spies; and of the Egyptian Midwives, Exodus 1. It Is not the
part of a Be, but of a Fly (we know) and that not of the best sort, to pass
over a goodly Garden of sweet Flowers, and at last to light on a galled Back,
or a heap of Dung. And it is but a dirty business to rake the Kennels, and throw
dirt in the face of Passengers.

Quest. Has not the Author of the Debate done worthily, like a vigilant
Watchman, foreseeing Danger to King and Kingdom, to alarm both? See Debate, p.
188, 189.

Answ. Far be it from me to call the Author of the Debate, Doeg, Ishmael, or
Haman; yet this I may say, (without hazard of Truth or Modesty) That there it
false accusation, mocking and scoffing in the Treatise; and there may be
something of Haman, or ambition, suspected to be in him, who would insinuate to
his Majesty, that it is not for his safety, nor for the peace of his Kingdoms,
to suffer these Jews, etc. When the bottom of all the uproar may be this, There
is perhaps some Mordecai in the Gate or in the Parish, that will not bow down
to him. And yet I dare boldly say this, That the Enemy could not countervail
the Kings damage, if all the Nonconformists were destroyed, or banished out of
the Land.

What a fondness, folly, madness is it to imagine, that men that pretend
Godliness, practice sobriety, and who are themselves, and who have their
Chests, their All, in the same Ship with his Majesty and the State, should go
about to blow it up, or bore holes in it, to sink the Vessel, themselves and
all together?

It was the saying of Mr. Calamy (that discreet, honest, pious Mr. Calamy)
before be died, That he had rather suffer under a lawful Sovereign, than be
preferred under an Usurper. The Loyalty of the Nonconformists has been
experimented now above seven years together, who notwithstanding they have
suffered the loss of their Places, Callings, Livelihoods, yet in patience
possess their Souls, and pray for his Majesty and the Government with all their
hearts and souls. As for the high Conformists, I may say to them, when they
boast of their Loyalty, (considering the great Honors, Profits, Preferments
they enjoy under his Majesty and the Church Government) If you do good to them
which do good to you, what than have ye? What do ye more than others? Sinners
also do the same.

Quest. Do not the Nonconformists do what they do, only to act a part, or make
a show? If it be possible, to drain the Peoples Purses, pretending Conscience,
but being really moved by carnal Reasons to their present Opinions,
Professions, and Practices?

Answ. Some have better (if any have carnal) reasons for their Nonconformity: A
hundred, two, or three hundred pound per annum, may likely weigh something with
some Conformists too, and might at least help to turn the Scales, when the
Judgment was in aequilibro: And if there be not some weight in this with some,
what is the reason that Ministers generally are more conformable than their
Parishioners, who ^ave no such weight or bias upon them? As for their Gains by
their Nonconformity, I may say ^hey have not the fifth part of what they had
formerly; no, not the Tithe of what the Conformists have: Some of them are
forced to work with their hands, to turn to secular employment. Others, who
cannot Work nor beg, if others did not work or beg for them, were in danger to
starve.

Quest. How could that man pretend Conscience for his Nonconformity, that
condemned the Common Prayer, and confessed he had never read it over in all his
Life?

Answ. Perhaps though he had not read it all over, he might have read some of
it, and liked not the taste of it. But I put him, (if such a one there was)
with those hundreds that subscribed and gave their Assent and Consent to it,
and to all and every thing contained therein, before ever they had seen the
Book Authorized by Parliament; it being at that time, if printed, yet not sent
down into the several Diocesses where they were to testify their approbation
of it.

Quest. Are not Nonconformists a sour and sad sort of Christians, a Generation
not at all Sanguine, of Melancholy Tempers, morose, and but bad Companions?

Answ. They are not all so, nor always so, and some of them not at all so: and
as good Friends and Companions as the World has any. The Fogs and Damps are in
the lower part of the Air and Earth, and the Clouds are in the middle Region;
all is pure and serene, and always so, in the upper Region. Christians of the
lower Form, Conformists or Nonconformists, are liable oft-times to be under
Darkness, and under the power of Melancholy for a time: Yet as they advance
higher, the Weather is clearer with them; and ordinarily the more perfect
Christian, the more ^^ful Christian. Yet this may be said for weeping
Christians, they may have Joy in their Hearts, when there are Tears in their
Eyes; is the Sun sometimes shines whilst it rains. David, one of the greatest
Mourners in Israel, witness his watering his Couch with his Tears, etc. was yet
the sweet Singer of Israel. Heaviness endures for a Night, and Joy comes in the
Morning. And though Christians sometimes deny themselves, yet God does never
deny them any lawful Delight; not did God ever make Godly Sorrow to destroy
men's Bodies (though to help toward the Salvation of their Souls) I have heard
that Old Mr. Dod observed, That if Godly Sorrow should have killed any man, it
might have most probably been Adam, (the first and none of the least Sinners)
because of his Apostasy from God, and Fall from Happiness, he and his
Posterity; yet he lived 930 years.

Quest. Do Nonconformists teach, That Christians must be ever speaking of God
in conference with men, or with God in Prayer and Meditation? Must they have
nothing else in their mouths in all Places, Times, and Companies?

Answ. Mr. Shepherd of New England advises not to entertain good thoughts, if
they prove a hindrance to a Christian in his particular calling. And Mr.
Carter, coming upon one of his neighbors, that was a Tanner, suddenly, and
finding him taughing of a Hide; and the man excusing himself for being found
so: the Minister answered, I desire Jesus Christ may find me so, when he calls
for me, or when he comes, that is, busied about the works of my calling. I
grant it is very commendable for persons who have ability and have time and
leisure from business, and are in suitable company, to be often spenking one to
another of Christ and of Heaven, and to stir up one another to Faith, Love, and
Good-works; God's People did thus in the Prophet Malachy's days, ( Mal. 3.)
and they that did so, are esteemed God's Jewels; but with us, at least by many
amongst us, such kind of persons are as vile (though not so common) as the
stones in the street. In other Religions they account of men the more and the
better, the more religious they seem to be, and the more precise, strict and
punctual they are in the observation of the Rules of their Religion: So the
Papists, so the Turks. The Turks account all Fools to be Saints: and many
amongst us account all Saints to be Fools, and the greater Saints the greater
Fools.

Quest. Are not Nonconformists more precise than wise, in not allowing
themselves and others the delights of Plays and other divertisments?

Answ. Dr. Heylin in his Geography observes that the Protestant Ministers in
France are so strait-laced as not to allow of mixed dancing. The Nonconformists
here are not all of this Judgment; they did not, do not use to enquire before
persons approach unto the Lord's Table, whether or no, where, when, or how
often they have danced? whether they go to see Comaedies, etc. I my self have
been asked whether Dancing was lawful? I answered, Dancing was lawful; but
whether mixed dancing was, they could tell better than I: If it was to them a
motive or incitement to evil, to them it was unlawful, else I dare not condemn
it as sinful; I will not make more sins than the holy Scripture, and the Light
of Nature has discovered to be so.

As for Stage Plays, if they were reformd and regulated, so as to have no
cursing or swearing, nothing of lasciviousness and wantonness, nothing of
impiety or profaneness, no putting on of Apparel not belonging to be sex by the
Actors, I should look on them as one of the best Recreations; only I would not
have seeing of Plays be made a man's work or business, and that which should be
but a divertisment be a man's whole employment: But as they are frequently made
and acted (if we may believe reports) the must have stronger Champions than I
to throw down the Gantlet, or take it up in their defense. It Is well known the
Ancient Fathers of the Church, and some reverend and learned men, Sons of the
Church of England, have condemned them. Dr. Reynolds, Doctor of the Chair at
Oxford, (and we are told a Conformist too) wrote against them; Dr. Andrew Rivet
(Professor of Divinity, and Tutor to the Prince of Orange, and one that
remembered the condition of our Sovereign, when in Exile, in his last hours and
Prayers) is no friend to them; And Dr. Fern, afterward Bishop of Chester,
offered to join with some Presbyterian Ministers, in declaring for the
sanctification of the Lord's day, and against Stage Plays in the late times.
Yet as for those that go to see them, I do not, I dare nor therefore judge them
no Christians, or no good Christians, because sometimes they are seen in the
Theater, though oftener in the Church: I must confess that that inference [I
may see a Picture, therefore a Play] is but weak and dark, and but the shadow
of an Argument: For those who condemn such Representations on the Stage, do the
like in a Picture; that is, they damn lascivious and wanton Pictures, Books,
and Songs as well as Plays. Again, the seeing of a Picture good or bad, has
not (I conceive) such a powerful influence on us, as the acting or personating
on the Stage has; We are not usually so affected by reading of a Book as by
heating a Speech; the voice and action speak louder, and are oftener heard, than
a dumb shadow or a silent picture. However, to conclude this matter, I think
the Author of the Friendly Debate had much better have spent his time in
hearing or seeing of Plays, than in writing of that Treatise; yea that he might
as well, and to as good purpose have gone about to find out the wandering Jew
(he speaks of) as to find Evidence to prove the generality of
Nonconformist-Ministers neither good Subjects, nor good Christians.

Quest. What then, do you think that the Author of the F. Debate was not well
employed in writing these Books, and in discovering the vanity and childishness
of Mr. T. W's Writings, or the falseness and dangerousness of Mr. W. B. his
Books to the World?

Answ. As for Mr. T. W. I have heard that he has written diverse useful Books;
and I suppose in that Book or Books criticized upon, might have been found
matter as well as phrases, and some great as well as little things: and if a
man had a mind to carp and cavil at other men's works, as the Author of the
Debate does, he might pull some of the Fathers by the Beards, and tell them
also they have written very childishly. All men write not in the same (We and
phrase, or in the like method; as all Cooks dress not the same joint of meat
with the same sauce, and garnish not the dish in the same manner when they send
it up. And some Readers and Auditors like one way of writing or speaking; some
another; (else what need such variety of Gifts?) but all tend to the
Edification of the Church. The Scholar is taken with one way of preaching or
writing, the Citizen with another, the Countryman with another. Mr. Calvin, Mr.
Farrel, Mr. Viret, all three, had their Excellencies, one in this way and
manner, and another in that: If the Doctrine which is preached or printed, be
sound and wholesome, what though the style and phrase be not complete and
polite? If thy meat be good and savory, what though not served up in a Lordly
Dish? I had rather have wholesome Food in an Earthen Platter, than Poison in a
Golden Charger. I suppose all Conformists have not the same low opinion of Mr.
T. W. if it be true which I heard, that one of them preached one of his Printed
Sermons, and that a Citizen his Auditor, after Sermon went to him with a Thank
you Mr. Watson for your pains.

Quest. Does not Mr. W. preach and print dangerous and poisonous Doctrines,
such as tend toward Commotion, and disturbance of the public Peace?

Answ. If he do, I leave him to apologize for himself, I will be no Advocate in
such matters; And if he does, he is condemned by those of his own way, I mean
our Brethren of the Congregational Church; Twenty nine Ministers of that
Judgment, as to Church-Goverment, being in and about the City, published a
Renunciation and Declaration against the horrid Insurrection and Rebellion
acted by Venner and his Confederates, to which they subscribed their Names: In
conclusion of which, they declare as follows, We cease not to pour out our
hearty prayers for all sorts of Blessings, spiritual and temporal, upon the
Person and Government of his Majesty, both in our Congregations, Families, and
Retirements; and through Gods grace, according to our Duties, shall continue so
to do our selves, and to persuade others thereunto; and to live quietly and
peaceably, in all Godliness and honesty. And as to the Actings and Resolutions
of Venner and his party, they say, The Instruments of Cruelty are in their
Habitations. Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce; and their Wrath, for it
wat cruel. And we each one say, O my Soul, come not thou into their Secrets;
unto their Assemblies, mine Honor, be not thou united: But let God divide them
in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. Mr. Bridge was not in Town then, which
may be supposed the Reason we find not his Name amongst the Subscribers.

As for W. B. whether his Writings be so faulty as they are charged to be in
the Debates, I cannot tell, having not read them; but a Conformable Doctor told
me, that he had searched them, and that the Author of the Debate had dealt
disingeniously in his quotations of him, etc.

Quest. May not every whit as much be said for the Papists, why they should be
tolerated, as to the public exercise of their Religion, as for Nonconformists?
Do not they profess all Loyalty to his Majesty, and declare against all
Rebellion?

Answ. The Papists depend upon a foreign Power in Ecclesiastical Affairs,
superior (as they think) to his Majesty. And it was subscribed by twelve
Bishops in Ireland, as follows: Their Religion is superstitious and idolatrous,
their Faith and Doctrine erroneous and heretical, their Church in respect of
both, Apostatical. Whereas the Nonconformists, whether Presbyters or
Congregationists, agree with the Church of England in the Doctrine of Faith and
Sacraments, differ not in any substantial part of Religion from her. What the
Papists practice has been, how dangerous to the Civil Peace, the History of
England in Q. Elizabeth's days, can tell us. That it is impossible for any
Nation to be free from Troubles or Treason, so long as they suffer Jesuits
amongst them, says Watson in his Quodlibets. And that he and his Order were
not so good and loyal as they pretended, may be guessed from hence, that he
himself was afrerwards executed for Treason.

Moreover Papists cannot, when they have power, long live without persecuting
Protestants, says a Reverend Doctor: Hence may appear that we see K. H. III.
of France, stabbed and lamn'd, because he would not persecute them enough. So
the Answer to the Papists Apology, p. 21.

As for Quakers, they may seem to be the very Spawn of the Romish Emissaries,
proselyted by them, but made more dangerous to Magistrates, and all Civil
Society, by this one Principle that they hold, viz. That they ought to be
guided and to act, not by the Scripture, nor according to the command of the
Civil Magistrate, or Spiritual Guides and Pastors; but by and sudden Flash or
Light within them. I am not satisfied to have a hand in the Execution of the
Sanguinary Laws against Papists, yet should be loath to try how Sanguine or good
natured they would be, if they had power in their hands to execute the Writ De
Haeretico comburendo. If we may say of them, (as they use to say of Fire and
Water) They are good Servants; I am sure it is as true, That they are but bad
Masters.

Quest. How can we agree to live quietly with these Nonconformists? Are they
not so much divided from us in their Judgment, that they divide from us in
their Language also; and in fine would bring all things into a Babel of
Confusion? Cont. p. 1.

Answ. The greater number of them, I presume, speak as others do; and conform
to that ordinary phrase, Well, I thank God. If any when enquired of about their
Health, say, I am well, through Mercy; they do but as the French Protestants
do; they are surely few in comparison that say so commonly; and I do not
remember one Minister that uses to say so; they that do, possibly have
recovered from some sickness, or escaped some danger, which occasions them to
use this expression: But if you will be critical, some think it a sign of a
greater humility to say, I am well through mercy, than the other, I am well I
thank God; However it is not so liable to exception as to say, I am well y'
faith, as I have heard that some Conformists do, although Bishop Saunderson
does not approve of that language in common discourse. We do not hold it
unlawful to use the name of God in our Salutations as Boaz did; and can say and
pray, God save the King as heartily as your selves. I know ^o
Nonconforming-Ministers that hold it unlawful to teach Children their Catechism
and Prayers lest they should take God's Name in vain. And yet I must have leave
to say, that a reverend Bishop does reckon that we sin against the third
Commandment, by an irreverend and customary mention of God's great and glorious
Name upon trivial occasions; and a learned Doctor in his Exposition of the
third Commandment, makes it a duty not to use the Name of God but with great
reverence. See Dr. Pat. Catech.

Quest. Are Nonconformists most guilty of breaking the third Commandment in the
main sense? See Cont: p. 4.

Answ. Mr. Case, Mr. Edwards, and the London Ministers (cited by the Author of
the Debate in his Continuation) all prove they were very tender of the breach
of an Oath, desirous to keep far from it themselves; and to save others, with
fear plucking them out of the fire; and the present ejected and dejected estate
of the Nonconformists may testify, that they are such as fear an Oath. The
Presbyterians are bold to say in one of their Papers to his Majesty, That the
Obligation of the Covenant upon the Consciences of the Nation, was not the
weakest Instrument of his Return. As to your citations out of Mr. John Goodwyn
and Mr. John Lilborne, I say there lies an Exception against the Witnesses in
the Case; as I suppose you might say, if their Testimonies were produced
against the Hierarchy, Liturgy, and Ceremonies.

Quest. What may be the cause the Author of the Debate is so fierce against the
Protestation taken by the Parliament before the War, and which his late Majesty
excepted not against when taken, although he was then at Whitehall?

Answ. The true Reason may be this; because the House of Commons put out an
Interpretation, that by the Doctrine of the Church of England, which they
promised to maintain, they meant only the Doctrine in opposition to Popery and
Popish Innovations, and did not thereby oblige themselves or others to the
maintenance of the Discipline and Government. If that had been in, it is to be
thought it would have gone down as easily with men of his way, as the
Et-caetera Oath did, concerning which the Historian gives us this account; That
some Bishops pressed it on Ministers before the day required to take it by the
Canon, and enjoined them to take it kneeling; a Ceremony not exacted or
observed in taking the Oath of Alleagiance and Supremacy Full. Hist. 6.11. p.
17.

Quest. What is to be thought of the Continuation of the Friendly Debate?

Answ. It seems to be an unfriendly Continuation of Debate and Strife, contrary
to the Act of Indemnity, and to be a continued breach of that Law in the very
design of it; Else, why, contrary to the Act of Oblivion, does he rake up the
memory of what was written and preached before and in the Wars, and that
sometimes by persons very little considerable for their parts, learning, or
place amongst their own party? and why does he charge those things upon the
Nonconformists of this Generation?

Quest. Were not Nonconformists even from the beginning of Nonconformity
generally very peevish, impudent, censorious, and disobedient to Authority?

Answ. The Old Puritans (if we believe the Historian, and he was a Conformist
and a Dignitary) were humble, meek, patient, hospitable, charitable, as in his
Censures of, so in his Alms to, others. Dr. Full. H. 6.11.220. And if we
be^ieve the Author of the Debate, the Ancient Nonconformists were (many of
them) men of ^ober and peaceful principles, and did submit to Authority, and
were enemies to Separation; such were Mr. Ball, Mr. Geere, and all those who
were the Authors of that grave and modest Confutation of the Error and Sect of
the Brownists, or Separatists, published by Mr. Rathband.

Quest. Have not some of the High Sons of the Church changed their Principles
in relation to King and Parliament?

Answ. Time was when they pleaded strongly, Where the Word of a King is there
is power: But lately when his Majesty published a Declaration about
Ecclesiastical Affairs, etc. then their note was changed; That was no Law (they
said) and the King could not do it without the Parliament. And yet then the
House of Commons gave his Majesty thanks for doing it. Time was when a Long
Parliament was accounted by them a grievous Disease, and now it is the great
Remedy. Time was when they cried down all Parliaments; now they cry up this.
Whence comes this change? I answer, The case is altered, quoth Ployden.

Quest. Is this good Logic, or solid reasoning; Mr. Jews Hughes, Mr. Vicars,
Mr. Bridges did write thus and thus in the War-time; Ergo, or therefore the
Nonconformists at present are all thus and thus?

Answ. I deny the Consequence, as the Author of the Debate would, and well
might. If a man should argue thus: Mr. White set out a Book of a hundred
(which he called) Scandalous Ministers that were ejected by the Parliament: If
we grant some of those hundred were scandalous, therefore all that were ejected
in those days, were scandalous. Or thus: They say one Wallis of Gloucester
published a Book of scandalous words and deeds of perhaps twenty or thirty now
Conformable-Ministers; therefore if some of them were guilty, all that conform
are faulty in like manner.

Quest. Is it an argument or evidence of eminent Godliness, and of
extraordinary Charity, to charge thousands with Errors or miscarriages of half
a dozen or half a score?

Answ. No. God, who is Love it self, would have spared Sodom for the sake of
ten righteous persons. And surely our enemies when they are serious and sober,
and their passions not predominant, both of old and of late, might find (if
they would look about) more than ten righteous persons, godly, meek, modest,
charitable and peaceable among the Nonconformists. In the beginning of the
Reformation, there were a sort of Anabaptists rose up in Germany, and did
horrid things at Munster and elsewhere; was the fault therefore in the
Reformation? Although the Papists use to charge it upon the Protestant
Religion, that it is the Spring and Fountain of Sedition and Rebellion where it
is received; Yet both We, and our Brethren Conformists, are able to wipe off
that foul aspersion; and so are the Nonconformists of these days, the dirt
that is thrown in their faces by the aforesaid Author. If any have called
Conformists Egyptians, Babylonians, Canaanites, Antichristians, or the like,
let it not be charged on those that disapprove and condemn their sayings. If
any speak in the Clouds, and you fancy they challenge to themselves a power by
Prayer to rain down Blood upon us, let it not be charged upon them that live
quietly and peaceably in the Land, and teach men so to do by their life and
doctrine, if they preach at all, If there be any man that designs by preaching
or otherwise, to throw the Nation into War and Blood again, I wish he may
prophecy in Sackcloth; And when he pretends to pour out Vials of Wrath, his
threatenings may be like water spilt upon the ground.

Quest. Do Nonconformists look shortly to shut Heaven, and turn Waters into
Blood? C.

Answ. Mr. Parker of New England printed a Book on Daniel's Visions and
Prophesies, Anno 1646. and according to him there will be no shutting of
Heaven, no turning of Waters into Blood, at least no putting off of the
VVitnesses Sackcloth (which says our Author ( Contin. of Fr. Deb. p. 142.) Mr.
W. B. now expects) till the year 1856. when we shall be all, Conformists and
Nonconformists, at peace in our Graves. If Mr. W. B. discourse of such
Prophecies in his Sermons, I assure you he and one more are all that I can hear
of, that meddle to preach on such subjects. I am told, Those that preach in
private, preach Faith and Repentance, and meddle not with matters relating to
the Government either of Church or State. And I was lately asking a prime
Nonconformist, and an able Preacher, what he said to that Objection in the
Debate, that the Nonconformists did not preach up Obedience to Magistrates? He
very zealously and confidently replied, They did it, and that more than the
Conformists themselves.

Quest. Do not the Conformists, some of them medule sometimes with the
interpreting and applying phrases and notions they meet with in the Revelations?

Answ. Bishop Williams, Bishop of Ossory, wrote a Book to prove the Long
Parliament Antichrist; and he or another made Oliver Cromwell Antichrist; and
Dr. Fuller in his Church History, writes of one that observed that the Covenant
had in it the Number of the Beast, One hundred sixty six; consisting, as he
said, of just so many words.

Quest. Were not the old Nonconformist^ much better then those in our days? C.

Answ. Their Nonconformity did not cos^ them so much as it does us; and in the
times they lived, they were likely accused as we are now: When we are as they
now, really (as well as Legally) dead, it may be we may have a good word also.

In Queen Elizabeth's days the Nonconformists were not more pliant or
complying, than they are now. There were not the Tithe of the Ministers then
ejected, to what since. There were more bitter Books put out then against the
Hierarchy, than are now. If I mis-remember not, the Nonconformists gave the
first Charge then, but nowadays we are alarmed and assaulted once and again,
and no man appeared publicly to defend our Principles or Practices. We are
loaded with Reproaches, and many grievous and heavy things laid to our charge,
and no man for a long time in our name in print so much as pleaded Not Guilty,
and offered to Traverse the Indictment, or put himself upon the Trial of his
Country. Say not therefore that the Nonconformists of former times were better,
more peaceable, more modest then these.

If any man, though in the heat of his passion, and in the heat of the War,
have called the Conformists Gentiles, Uncircumcised, Philistines, Egyptians,
Babylonians, the Brood of the Serpent, and have denied pardon of sin and Heaven
to them because of their Conformity, I think he ought to repent of such hard
sayings, and uncharitable Censures of his Brethren and Fellow Servants, and to
bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance for the time to come, viz. To lay a Law
of Love and Kindness upon his Tongue and Pen, as long as he lives. It Is to be
hoped the number of those that had such unbridled Tongues and Pens, was very
small; the instances you bring of such intemperate heats, and irregular zeal,
are taken out of the Furnace of the late War; and that too, after the fire had
been raked up in Ashes by many years peace, and fully quenched by the Act of
Oblivion and Indemnity. If we had a mind to recriminate and retaliate, we
could repeat much foul Language, and bitter reviling speeches, by some of your
way against us also. But these are not the methods of Peace. I desire therefore
that all such matters may be forgiven and forgotten on both sides, and
remembered only or chiefly by the Anthors and Abettors of them, that they may,
if they have not already, repent of them more than in Dust and Ashes.

Quest. Did not the Scots in Ireland write to their Brethren in Scotland to
send over Ministers to them, in such language, as if they thought there had
been but little of Religion amongst them in that Country, during the Reign of
the Bishops? C.

Answ. There might be many dark Corners in Ireland for want of Oil to maintain
Lamps, preaching Ministers I mean, such as should be like John Baptist, burning
and shining Lights amongst them. The Scottish Presbyterians, if they be like
their Brethren in England, had a Reverend esteem of Archbishop Usher, and the
Bishops of Ireland, for the Irish Articles of Religion, and their zeal against
the toleration of Popery there. Who or what was the cause of the scarcity of
able Ministers, except want of Maintenance, and fear of the Irish Papists, I
know not; but confident I am, the Bishops of Armagh and Ardagh were not, if any
other Bishops.

Quest. Have not the Nonconformists a high conceit of themselves, and those of
their own way, and a low esteem of all others for Religion and Godliness? Does
not Mr. Baynes say, There is more of God and his Religion in some one
Congregation of a silenced Minister, than in all the Bishops Families in
England? And does not Dr. Ames approve that of Mr. Baynes?

Answ. I have heard that Dr. Ames had so much charity for Corvinus, that he
said, He did not doubt but to meet him in Heaven: Why then Mr. Baynes passes,
and Dr. Ames approves such a smart Censure on the Bishops Families, I cannot
tell. Yet it is not to be imagined that Mr. P. Baynes meant that the Bishops had
no Religion in their Families; If so, I cannot commend his Charity. I think
this is a sure and clear truth, That neither Bishops not silenced Ministers can
be said to have all Religion or no Religion amongst them and their Followers. I
hold a Monopoly in Religion as unlawful, as some have thought those in the
State illegal. Never the-less it must be confessed, That the Articles of
Visitation, or the Injunctions of the Great Apostle St. Paul, are Canonical: A
Bishop must rule his own House well; for if a man know not how to rule his own
House, how shall he take care of the Church of God? 1 Timothy 3.4, 5. He that
writes the Life of Archbishop Usher, tells us, That he had four times a day
Prayer in his House; that there was an hour spent in Catechizing once a Week,
viz. every Friday; that he had on the Lords day in the Evening the Sermon which
he preached in the Morning, repeated in his Chapel by one of his Chaplains.
This was the way to have a Church in his House. All Bishops do not write after
this Canon, nor this Copy. I know a Minister, a learned, sober, and zealous
Conformist, that after he had been with his Diocesan, at his House or Palace,
to subscribe; came home with a sad heart, and professed it was not for any
thing he had done, but for the profaneness and disorder he observed in the
Bishops Family amongst his Servants. It Is to the great commendation of the
present Archbishop of Canterbury, that which is reported of him, That he keeps
a good House; that is, in Bishop Goodman's Dialect, he spends Church-Means in a
Churchly manner: And that he keeps a well-governed House, allows not
Debauchery; if a Servant be drunk once, there is no place for a second Error. If
so, it must be acknowledged that there is Discipline in that School, where
nothing saves but a primum tempus.

Quest. Does his Majesty's Coronation Oath to protect the Bishops and their
Privileges to his power, (as every good King in his Kingdoms in right ought to
protect and defend the Bishops and Churches under their Government) hinder his
Majesty, that he may not regulate the Jurisdiction of Bishops, or remove the
controverted Ceremonies out of the Church?

Answ. Hear Mr. Geree, one whom the Author of the Friendly Debate calls a
discreet Presbyterian: The King, says he, is sworn to maintain the Laws of the
Land in force at his Coronation; and yet it is not unlawful after to abrogate
any, upon the motion, or with the consent of his Parliament. The King is bound
to maintain the Rights of the Clergy, whilst they continue such; but if any if
their Rights be abrogated by just Power, he stands no longer engaged in that
particular. If any Privileges of the Clergy, prove prejudicial or contrariant
to the Laws and Liberties and Privileges of the People, which the King is
bound to maintain, the King may lawfully relieve his other Subjects, by passing
such Bills as may take away such Privileges. His Majesty's Oath first made to
his Subjects in general, being lawful, cannot be voided or superseded by his
after-Oath to the Clergy. And as for the Laws about Ceremonies, they are not
like those of the Medes and Persians, unchangable; but may be changed, and the
Rites and Ceremonies now in use, may be abolished by the same power by which
they were here established.

Quest. Did the Nonconformists generally make Addresses formerly to Oliver
Cromwell and Richard Cromwell?

Answ. For my own part, I never made any Address to O. C. or R. C. And the
only Address that the Presbyterian-Ministers of the City of London, made to O.
C. was for the saving the Life of Dr. Hewit. As for Addresses to R. C. diverse
Now-Conformists at well as Nonconformists, did join in them, as they did also
generally to General Monk. for a Free Parliament in Order to his Majesty's
Restoration.

Quest. Are not all Laws once made, rigorously to be put in execution
necessarily, and especially Laws concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs?

Answ. Laws that are lawful and necessary to the Esse or Being of the Church or
State, are doubtless to be put in execution; not so those always, that tend to
Order and Decency. Supreme Governors may, upon just occasion, forbear
inflicting the Penalties upon Offenders against penal Statutes. Yea
Excommunication, that Great Church-Censure, may be suspended, when the major
part of a Church are infected with some Error, or are guilty of some
scandalous offense, the end of Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, being the peace
of Church and State; where the execution of Laws may occasion more harm than
good, more disquet than peace, there the supreme Power may for a time wave the
exact and rigorous execution of them. His Majesty in his Declaration to all his
loving Subjects, December. 26.1662. published by the Advice of his Privy Council,
conceives the power of dispensing with the Penalty (upon those who living
peaceably do not Conform) to be inherent in him. Some Laws are made in
terrorem, like Rods in a School. It Is not intended that every Offender and
every Offense should be presently punished, according to the utmost severity of
them. The Common Law in some Cases seems to need a Chancery, to moderate the
rigor of it, lest that summum jus, prove summa injuria. He who will not allow
his Majesty to save some by his Prerogative, who are cast by the Law, robs him
of a principal Flower of his Crown, his very Crown and Glory, and that is, His
CLEMENCY.

Quest. Were not the Old Puritans, as they used to call the Nonconformists,
Enemies to the Kings Supremacy?

Answ. In a Treatise of Learned Mr. Bradshaw, who wrote of Justification, there
is a Protestation by them made of the Kings Supremacy, in these words: We hold
and maintain the same Authority and Supremacy in all Causes, and over all
Persons, Civil and Ecclesiastical, granted to Queen Elizabeth, to be due in
full and ample manner, (without any limitation or qualification) to the King,
and his Heirs and Successors for ever. Neither is there, to our knowledge, any
one of us but has been most willing to subscribe and swear unto the same,
according to form of Statute. And we desire that those that shall refuse the
same, may bear their own Iniquity.

Quest. Were not the Nonconformists in former times disobedient to the Laws?
And did they not refuse to conform out of humor and stubbornness, and not our
of Conscience?

Answ. The same Mr. Bradshaw in the same Treatise, protests in their Name, as
follows: We never refused Obedience to any haves or Commandments of the King
or State whatsoever, but only to such as we have proved, or are ready to
prove, if we might be heard, to be contrary to the Word of God. And we are
ready to take our solemn Oaths before the Throne of Justice, That the only
Cause of our refusal of Obedience to those Canons of the Prelates, for which
roe are at present so extremely afflicted, is mere Conscience, and a fear to
sin against God. And if by due form of Reasoning, we may be convinced in our
Consciences of the cannery, we are as willing at any Subjects in the Realm to
obey and conform.

Quest. But is it at all material what the Nonconformists swear? are not our
present Nonconformists guilty of taking God's Name into their mouths backward
and forward, and never blush? Vide Contin. p. 18.

Answ. It was the conscience of an Oath, and a care to prevent the great guilt
of Perjury, that made Dr. Hill, one of the late Assembly, when Vice-Chancelor
of Cambridge, and the University in those days, to insert those explanatory
clauses in the Oaths of those who took degrees,

Viz. Jurabis te haec omnia and reliqua Academae Statuta (quatenus ipsa ad te
spectant) vel fideliter observasse and observaturum, vel monitiones,
correctiones and paenas dictorum Statutorum transgressoribus incumbentes, sine
contradictione quacunque, humiliter subiisse aut subiturum, ni sialiter per
gratiam per Acaedemiam concessam dispensatum tecum fuerit, sicut Te Deus
adjuvet, etc. and again, Senatus Cantabrigiensis decrevit and declaravit eos
omnes qui monitionibus, correctionibus and paenus Statutorum, Legum Decretorum,
Ordinationum, Injunctionum and Laudabilium Consuetudinum hujus Academiae
trangressoribus, quovis modo Incumbentibus humiliter se submiserint, nec esse,
nec habendos esse perjurii reos. By which clauses it is manifest, that either
active or passive obedience to the Statutes, Orders and Customs of the
Universities did save from the guilt of Perjury. And confident I am that it is
the fear of an Oath that is the chief cause why many suffer the loss of their
Livings at this day.

Quest. Is there not a good riddance of so many Mr. Scruples out of the Church?
And is there any want of able Preachers up and down in the Country now they are
ejected?

Answ. My Lord Bacon in his days, thought there was a scarcity of able
Preachers, and yet there were not the tithe perhaps of Ministers silenced then,
to what are now. And be thought then that the silencing of the Ministers for
their Nonconformity was a punishment of the People rather than of the Minister.
He conceived then also that such Subscriptions might have been forborne as
occasioned the silencing of diverse of those Ministers. Cons. ab Eccl. Aff.

Quest. What if there were many places made void by the ejectment of
Nonconformists, may not those places be well filled by Conforming-Pluralists?

Answ. My Lord Bacon says, In case the number of able Ministers were
sufficient, and the value of the Benefices were sufficient, then Pluralities
were in no sort tolerable. And as for Nonresidents, except it be just of
necessary absence, he says, it seems to be an abuse drawn out of
covetousness and sloth; for that men should live of the Flock they do not feed,
or at the Altar whereat they do not serve, is a thing that can hardly receive
just defense. And to exercise the Office of a Pastor in matter of Word and
Doctrine by deputation is a thing not warranted. So he in his Treatise
dedicated to King James about Ecclesiast. Affairs. For my own part, I think the
Poligamy of the Fathers or the Patriarchs of old, as excusable as the Spiritual
Polygamy of many of the Sons of our Church. And to serve Cures of Souls merely
by Proxies and Deputies (besides that it may seem to strengthen the Pope's plea
for Universal Pastors) whilst so many stand idle in the Marketplace, able and
willing to take care of those Souls, is a thing I shall not take upon me to
justify.

Let me add this also, that it is one Objection which has been formerly made
against the Liturgy, That it occasions an ignorant, dumb, and a lazy Ministry,
but were it not for Pluralities and Non-residency and insufficient Livings,
there might be no place for such objection.

The Author of the Debate tells us in his Continuation, p. 383. that at first
the chief promoters of stinted Liturgies were renowned for their constant and
unwearied preaching every day in the week, and someeimes twice; and as probably
this was one thing that advanced the credit and esteem of Liturgies in former
times: As I am persuaded one great cause why many do not esteem of the Liturgy
so much now, is, that so many great Conformists and sticklers for it are
Pluralists and Nonresidents; and diverse of them either preach not at all, or
very seldom; and then too, some of them preach against Preaching, and saw down
the branch of that Tree upon which they stand so high above their Brethren. And
on the other side, those who scruple some things in the Liturgy and Ceremonies,
are such constant and zealous Preachers, and that when Bonds and Imprisonments
abide them for their so doing.

Quest. But is it not indeed the Bond of the Covenant, the Scottish Covenant,
wherewith our English Presbyterians have bound their Souls, the great or only
Cause that makes so many Nonconformists?

Answ. The Covenant mentioned was not the cause of the War; the Battle at
Edgehill was fought before the Covenant came into England. And whereas the
Covenant was entered into in Forty Two, and Forty Three, there have been
Nonconformists ever since Bishop Hooper, and the Reformation in King Edward the
Sixth's days. There are some amongst the Covenanters that can conform to the
Liturgy, and submit to Episcopal Government. And the greater part of
Nonconformists Preachers at this day, never took the Covenant.

Quest. What is the reason that diverse Nonconformists read Logic in private
Houses? Is not this contrary to their Oath takes in the University? Cont. p.
10. edit. 4.

Answ. I have consulted as able as any in the Universities (and by their
Offices as likely to know as any) about the matter, and am told, That the Oath
there prohibits the setting up of another University in Opposition to the
Universities, and Reading in order to the taking Degrees elsewhere. The words
are at Oxford, They shall not solennes Lectiones resumere; which does not make
Dr. Busby perjured for initiating his Scholars some time in Logic before they
go to the University. Nor the several Professors at Gresham-Colledge, who read
as solemn Lectures surely, as a Nonconformist does in a private house. Besides,
I hear but of one Nonconformist that at present does teach Youth in that manner
privately.

Quest. What security can his Majesty and the Parliament have, that
Nonconformists will not (under pretense of Conscience or Covenant) seditiously
endeavor an Alteration of Church Government; but that they will live quietly
and peaceably in their places.

Answ. They are ready to give the ancient Legal-Security, the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy; and that is more than the Papists will do, and as
much as is required of the generality of the rest of the Nation,
notwithstanding their having taken the Engagement in the late times, which yet
many Presbyterians, now Nonconformists and Ejected Ministers, would never do,
though some of them lost their Places for their refusal. Moreover many of them
since have taken an Oath not to endeavor any Alteration of Government in
Church and State, and yet are not trusted to preach publicly, much less to
enjoy any Ecclesiastical Benefice. And the rest that scruple some words or
phrases in that Oath, are yet ready, besides the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, to swear that they will live quietly and peaceably in their places,
and not under color or pretense of the Covenant, or any pretense whatever,
endeavor by force, or sediciously and tumultuously, any Alteration of
Government in Church and State.

Quest. Is the Act of Uniformity, and the Oxford Act, to be strictly and
rigorously pressed upon, and executed on all transgressors?

Answ. If it be, then what will become of many Conformists who use other Rites
and Ceremonies than what are by Law required? and of them who use other Forms
of Prayer then are there prescribed; and of all those Ministers that do not
read the Common Prayer either publicly or privately, morning and evening; and
so those Lecturers who do not monthly read their Assent and Consent? etc. And
as for the Oxford Act and Oath, I have heard from a very learned person, a
Conformist, that the Bishops themselves come within the compass of it, as many
as have not assented and consented, etc. as often as they came within five miles
of their Sees, or any there Corporation. This I say, not to bring the Bishops
within, but to bring others out of the reach of that Act; or rather to incline,
if it nay be, our Fathers and Brethren to use their interest with his Majesty
and Parliament to remove those Laws which are a Partition Wall betwixt the
Conformist and Nonconformist.

Quest. But are not the Nonconformists sinners and transgressors of the Divine
Law, as often as they withdraw from actual communion with the Church of England,
being (as many of them confess) a true Church?

Ans. Many of our learned Doctors hold Rome to be a true Church; as a Woman is
a true Woman, though an Harlot; and a Man a true Man, though overspread with
Leprosy. And yet being we cannot actually hold external communion with them,
without either subscribing to many false Tenets, or joining in a corrupt and
Idolatrous Service, we withdraw from them without sin. Our withdrawing is not
to be charged with sin or schism, although too we were the minor part who
withdrew, and against the determination of a pretended General Council. And I
believe it would be a hard matter to prove that many of those Meetings, which
are now commonly called Conventicles, want any of the essential requisites to a
true Church, and yet do not think themselves Schismatics for not holding
actual communion with them, because not countenanced by the Law. And if a Legal
Establishment be absolutely necessary to the being of a true Christian Church,
then there was no true Church at Rome till Constantine's days; which I suppose
you will judge very unreasonable to assert.

Quest. Is it possible there should be Unity without Uniformity in Rites and
Ceremonies, etc.

Answ. Yes. There is Unity amongst the Protestant Reformed Churches beyond the
Seas, that follow Calvin, and yet diverse forms of Prayer, and diverse Rites. The
Author of the Debate will not take it well, if a man should not say, there is
Unity at home amongst Conformists, and yet the Cathedrals and
Country-Parish-Churches differ in some Rites, and in their mode of Worship; and
in the Parish-Churches there are diversity of Ceremonies and Usages in the
Worship of God. In some Churches they stand up at the Hymns, in others not; In
some they read the Hymns and Psalms Minister and People antiphonatim, in
others not: In some, in most, they read the Prayer for Christ's Catholic
Church, if at all, before Sermon, but I know where it is constantly read after.
And it is well known that none boast more of Unity than the Romanists, and yet
in several Countries they have several Rites, Customs, and Privileges: and in
England before the happy Reformation, the Service was ad modum Sarum, and ad
modum Bangor, different in diverse Churches.

Quest. Is it not necessary to appoint the same Vestures and Gestures for the
Worship of God, to avoid difference and confusion?

Answ. There is no Gesture or Ceremony prescribed in the singing of Psalms, and
yet People generally are bare and reverend in that exercise.

The late Canons in 1640. leave Bowing toward the East of Altar indifferent;
and would not have those that do it, to judge those that do it not; nor those
that do it not, to judge those that do it. Now what greater inconvenience would
follow, if the same moderation and liberty to practice differently, were used
as to the Cross, Surplice, and Kneeling at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

If there must be absolute and universal Uniformity in the Worship of God
amonst the Worshippers, then all must alike have their Faces one way, must wear
all Garments of the same fashion and color. In the late Times, when the
Liturgy and Ceremonies were disused, there were not a quarter of those private
Meetings that have been since. The number of them that separated from the
Public Worship, were very small in comparison; I suppose not ten to an
hundred. The Author of the Debate, I guess, and hundreds, if not thousands, of
Conformists, did not hold themselves bound, notwithstanding the Laws for
Liturgy and Ceremonies, to absent themselves from the then Public Worship, and
assemble privately, that they might uphold Uniformity in Forms of Prayer, Rites
and Ceremonies: Whence we may reasonably conclude, That they thought Gods
Public Worship might be carried on without Uniformity in these things: And
again, That the omission of things required by Law, is not judged so great a
sin as is by them pretended.

Quest Did not Presbyterians decry all Separaration, and refuse to tolerate
Independents? See Cont. p. 224.

Answ. The Presbyterians both old and modern, are against Separation: They deny
that they separate from you; for upon occasion they join with you in
Ordinances, and if you remove some things wherewith your Worship is clogged,
they would joyfully communicate constantly with you. The present partial and
temporary withdrawing, as to some Acts of Worship, is not to be charged with
Schism. If you hold forth communion with your Church as in the Apostles days,
with a Liturgy sufficiently corrected without Symbolical Ceremonies, without
such Oaths, Declarations and Subscriptions, they will come into your Bosom,
though you not only cast them out of your Lap, but thrust them out of your
House, and shut the Doors upon them. As we justify the Church of England from
Schism, notwithstanding our Separation from Rome; so the Nonconformists will
endeavor to justify their withdrawings in some Acts, and for a time only; by
reason of the terms of Communion imposed on them. That they are for
Reformation, not Separation, may be hence concluded, That in a late project for
Peace and Agreement, this was one Proposition given in by the Presbyterians
themselves, That whosoever should be capable of any Employment, should profess
to hold Communion with the Church of England, and to the uttermost of his power
to promote the Peace and Happiness thereof. And when there was a difference
betwixt Presbyterians and their Brethren, commonly called Independents,
formerly, there was a Conference before a Committee of Parliament betwixt them,
in which the Presbyterians (as I am credibly informed) offered either to give
or take: that is to say, They would take the Establishment, and allow their
Brethren of the Congregational-way a well-regulated Toleration; or let their
Brethren take the Establishment, and allow the Presbyterians such a Toleration.
And one of the chief of them, when the London-Ministers waited on his Majesty
at the Hague, when discourse was about Ecclesiastical Affairs, earnestly moved
his Majesty, that he would please to think of a way to indulge them a Liberty,
though they should not be comprehended in the Public Establishment, as it was
then hoped the Presbyterian would have been.

In brief, the Presbyterians disclaim Separation; they are willing to have
Union and Communion with the Church of England, upon Christian and friendly
Terms: And they desire the like Liberty and Toleration from the Bishops, that
they were willing and ready to have showed to their Brethren of the
Congregational Way: Yea, they would bless God and our Governors, if they might
have the like Favors and Liberties that Dr. Gunning, Dr. Wild, Dr. Hide, and
others the Now-Conformists had in former times.

Quest. If the Presbyterians are willing to conform to a Liturgy, and to this
Liturgy when sufficiently corrected; yet what hopes is there that ever there
should be any Alteration or Reformation of it, which will satisfy or please
them, so as to use it?

Answ. Yes, there is such a draught already made, to the great content of the
chief of the Presbyterians; and this done by three Reverend persons, all
Conformists: And which I hope may be produced, when ever Authority shall please
to command it.

Quest. Would it not be accounted a weak thing to yield or condescend, though
never so little, if this might be a means to cement and soder us together again.

Answ. It was the prudence of the ancient Church to satisfy the Joannites, who
had kept Conventicles apart from the Church for thirty years, being disgusted
at the dishonor done to John Chrysostom their Bishop or Pastor; and this the
Church did, by restoring his honor after he was dead. Socrat. Eccles. Hist.

Quest. Why should the Church of England remove the Ceremonies which she has
retained since the Reformation? May she not thereby disgust and offend the
Romanists, to please the Nonconformists, which they call Puritans rather than
Protestants?

Answ. These Ceremonies were at first retained and continued when others were
cast out of the Church in hopes to bring the Papists to a compliance with our
Church: But Archbishop Usher, as he that writes his Life informs us, upon
occasion declared his Judgment concerning them, That experience of many years
has showed that this condescension has rather hardened them in their Error,
than brought them to a liking of our Religion; this being their usual saying,
If our Flesh be not good, why do you drink of our Broth? If the Church stick
close to the Ceremonies, she is not like to gain our Adversaries the Romanists
to our Communion; if she lay aside the Ceremonies, she may gain thousands and
ten thousands of our Brethren to our Church again. That they may do thus, God
grant that the same mind might be in all our Bishops, that was in Christ Jesus,
the chief Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls; that they may love and feed their
Sheep, and be ready to lay down their lives for their Sheep; and then their
Yoke will be easy, and their Burden light. Or that was in the blessed Apostle
Paul, on whom was the Care of all the Churches; who professes of himself, I
became all things to all men, that by any means I might win some. Or else that
was in this Godly Archbishop Usher, of whom it is recorded in his Life, That
though he conformed himself, yet he desired that his Majesty would not impose
the English Ceremonies on the Irish Church; saying, If I had all men's
Consciences in my keeping, I could in these disputable Cases give Laws unto
them as well as my self: But it is one thing what I can do, and another thing
what other men must do. Since the Ceremonies be things (says our Church) in
their own nature indifferent, and yet by some held superstitious and unlawful,
it seems to fall within the Apostles Rule, which is, That the strong do
descend and yield to the weaker; if we will hearken to the Counsel of the Lord
Chancellor Bacon, in his Considerations touching the Church of England.

Quest. Does the holy Scripture caution us against grieving our Brethren, as
well as against offending of them, so as to occasion them to stumble and fall
into sin?

Answ. It Is our duty not only to prevent out Brothers fall, but his fears; and
to keep his heart from sinking, as well as his feet from falling. To the weak
became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men,
that I might by all means save some, 1 Cor. 9.22. It Is the part of a good
Shepherd to carry the Lambs in his Arms, and gently to lead the Ewes that are
great with young; and of Nursing Fathers and Mothers, to be tenderhearted and
tender-handed toward Babes, toward weak and young Children. If it be said, We
must not grieve or vex the Magistrate: I answer, It Is true, we must not; but if
the Magistrate please to remove the Law; where there is no Law, there is no
Disobedience; and then the Offense cease: And where there is no Offense
committed by the Inferior, there should be no Offense taken by the Superior;
or when there is none given, there should be none taken. The things are
alterable in themselves. The Magistrate is a Minister of God for good; and if
he shall please to remove every stumbling-stone and grieving-thorn out of the
way to the Church, and out of the way of Obedience, How shall God and his
people bless him? All the power that the Church has, it is to edification, and
not to destruction; and there is a far greater necessity of Unity, than of
Uniformity: It Is a great deal better not to make Canons, than to make such as
we foresee will be broken by thousands, and that under a pretense of
Conscience, and who are serious, sober, civil people in their Lives and
Conversations.

Quest. What may be thought the readiest way to make the Bishops work easy,
and his person to be beloved?

Answ. It Is I think to use Moderation, to rule with Love, and not with Rigor;
and that notwithstanding some young Counselors, some Hotspurs, may advise
them, as of old the young men did Rehoboam; when their Brethren come to them,
and say, Your Forefathers (or your Predecessors diverse of them) made our Yoke
grievous: Now therefore make ye, we pray you, the grievous Service of your
Forefathers, and their heavy Yoke which they put upon us, lighter, and we will
serve you: To say to them, Our little Finger shall be heavier than our
Forefathers Loins; and now whereas they did lade you with a heavy Yoke, we
will add to your Yoke: Our Forefathers chastised you with Whips, but we will
chastise you with Scorpions. The deeper you lay the Foundation in Humility, and
the broader in Charity, the higher you may probably build your House, and it
may likewise stand the longer. A well-grounded Jus Humanum, may stand longer
than a high-built pretended Jus Divinum. And Reason shows, says one, that
Episcopacy will stand more firm in conjunction with Presbytery, than by it self
alone. There be two circumstances; says my Lord Chancellor Bacon, wherein I
could never be satisfied; the one, the sole exercise of their Authority; the
other, the deputation of their Authority. For the first, he says, surely I do
suppose (and I think upon good ground) that ab initio non fuit ita. And that
the Deans and Chapters were Counsels about the Seas and Chairs of Bishops at
the first, and were unto them a Presbytery or Consistory. And again, we see
that the Bishop of Rome (Fas est and ab host doceri, and no question in that
Church the first Institutions were excellent) performs all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, in Consistory, with advice, that is, of the Cardinals or
Parish Priests of Rome. And hereof again (says he) we see diverse shadows yet
remaining: as that the Dean and Chapter proforma chooses the Bishop, which is
the highest point of Jurisdiction.

Again, The same Author tells us, that the Bishop is a Judge, and of a high
nature; Whence comes it that he should depute, considering that all trust and
confidence is personal and inherent, and cannot or ought not to be transposed?
surely in this again ab initio non fuitita: But it is probable that Bishops
when they gave themselves too much to the glory of the World, and became
Grandees in Kingdoms, and great Counselors to Princes, then did they leave
their proper Jurisdiction, as things of too inferior a nature for their
greatness; And then after the similitude and immitation of Kings and
Counts-Palatine, they would have their Chancellors and Judges.

Quest. Is the Author of the Fr. Debate so extraordinary zealous, as he
pretends, for the honor of our Governors and Government in the State?

Answ. See page 50, 51. of the Continuation, where he does insinuate, or more
plainly inform the Nation, that not only Nonconformists keep Conventicles, but
that Mass is said, and that the Papists take the same liberty in the exercise
of their Religion as the Nonconformists do in theirs. And that little or no
notice is taken of any Drunkards, Sweaters, or Blasphemers. If he had pleased,
it is to be thought he might have found great sins amongst the Clergy, little
taken notice of, and not much punished in Ecclesiastical Courts. If he had done
like Shem and Japhet, to have rather endeavored to cover his nakedness, he
might have been blessed by them; or else, if he will needs have his jerks at
Nonconformists, though it light partly on his and our Superiors in the State,
to have gone on, and have whipped the Buyers and Sellers in, out of the Temple
also.

Quest. Do the Nonconformists teach the people railing language, particularly
to call all they like not, Antichristian and Babylonish? Vid. Contin, p. 155,
and 266, etc.

Answ. Time was when Reverend and Renowned Mr. Vines (that lost the Mastership
of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge, because he would not subscribe the Engagement;
as did also Dr. Spurstow the Master of Katherine-Hall, and Mr. Young of
Jesus-Colledge for the same cause preaching before the Parliament, said,
Henceforward he should take Antichrist for a better man than ever he thought
him to be, there were so many good things charged upon him. And another
Presbyterian, now a Nonconformist, preaching to the same Auditors, preached
that Antichristian and Babylonian, were terms sooner imputed or charged, than
proved.

But if the Nonconforming-Ministers or People were yet ignorant, and to seek
for scoffing and reviling language, they might have a Dictionary of such hard
words out of the Friendly Debate. If there be in Private-meetings that use
railing and reviling speeches (as too many too often have is public
Congregations) I would rather advise people to sit quietly at home, if they
will not go to Church, than to go or step out of doors to learn their language.
I do not love a biting tongue; and I take a black mouth to be as venomous in a
man, as it is accounted wholesome in a dog. And if there be any printed Book wi^h
such railing speeches or phrases in them, (I will promise you) it shall never
have my Imprimatur, without an Index expurgatorius in the next Edition.

Quest. Is the Divinity of the Nonconformists a Phrase-Divinity? and in case
their Books and Sermons are not filled with foul language, is there any thing
besides fine words, and new phrases in them?

Answ. There was something besides words in the Old Nonconformists, witness the
writings of Mr. Dod, Mr. Ball, Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Bradshaw, etc. And doubtless
there is matter, and that good matter and sound speech, that need not to be
ashamed, in the Writings of Nonconformists of this Generation, witness the
Books written by Mr. Baxter, Dr. Manton, Mr. Caryll, Mr. Allen, Dr. Owen, Mr.
Pool, etc. they hold to Scripture-expressions, and to the terms of sound words,
which they have received from the most serious solid pious Bishops and Doctors
of the Chair, Professors at home and abroad in former times; yea, the
Nonconforming-Presbyterians and Congregational Ministers profess to agree with
our Articles of Religion of the Church of England, in all things concerning the
Doctrine of Faith and Ceremonies: And is all this but Phrase-Divinity!

The Author of the Debate, and diverse other of the present Conformists may as
justly be charged for new Divinity, new minted words in Divinity, new phrases
and modes of expressing themselves in Sermons and Writings, and these too less
conform to the language of the holy Scripture, our own Articles and Homilies,
the Harmony of Confessions of the Reformed Churches, and our ancient Bishops
and Doctors. The Author of the Debate, though he seems to be the Bishops
Advocate, yet his Writings show him more an Episcopian than an Episcopalian;
and it is easy to see from what forge they have their new Divinity and new
Theological Dictionary.

Quest. Were not the Nonconformists the cause of the strange and new Doctrines
and Opinions, and of fantastical words and phrases in preaching and writing?

Ans. I grant the taking down the old Mound or Hedge, and not setting a new one
in the room, was an occasion that many erroneous persons, like wild beasts, did
get into the Vineyard, and that some strange Doctrines, Phancies, Phrases and
Whimses were vented in the Times of War and late Confusions; but I say, that
these things are not to be charged upon the Presbyterians: for if they had had
power to their principles and purposes, they would doubtless have raised up a
Mound or Fence against such Errors, Fancies and Follies, as strong as that the
Parliament removed. I have heard it observed, that of all Churches, no Church
has had fewer Heresies and Heterodoxies spring up, or at least prosper in it,
than the Church of Scotland, and that this was acknowledged by King James.

Quest. Were all that took the Covenant bound thereby to endeavor to introduce
the Government of the Church of Scotland into England, because they obliged
themselves to maintain and defend Religion in the Church of Scotland, and to
reform Religion in the Church of England! Vid. Contin. p. 168.

Answ. No. They engaged only in their places and callings, and so far as
lawfully they might to preserve Religion in the Church of Scotland against the
Common Enemy, notwithstanding which the Scots might reform ought that was amiss
or defective, with his Majesty's leave and consent, in a legal manner. And the
English Covenanters were not bound to model the Church Government in England
according to the pattern of the Kirk of Scotland, but according to the Word of
God and the best Reformed Churches. Whether Scotland, or Holland, or Geneva,
etc. was the best Reformed Church, was not determined. And the English were not
engaged in their places and callings, and so far as lawfully they might, by the
Covenant, to follow the Model of any one of these, or all the Reformed
Churches, in any thing disagreeing from the Word of God; and in case a
primitive Episcopacy (that is, Church Government by a Bishop, with a Presbytery
as his Counselors and Assistants) prove most agreeable to the Word of God,
they were bound to set up, (only in their places and callings, and so far as
lawfully they might) that Government in the Church of England: Notwithstanding
what the Earl of Bristol, when Lord Digby, has written in his Letters to Sir
Kenelm Digby, viz. He that would reduce the Church now, to the Form of
Government in the most primitive times, should not take, in my Opinion, the
best nor the wisest course, I am sure not the safest; for he would be found
pecking toward the Presbytery of Scotland, which for my part I believe, in
point of Government, has a greater resemblance than yours or ours, to the
first Age of Christ's Church. But whatever was the meaning of the Imposers or
Takers of the Covenant in those days, I have heard an eminent Person, a Doctor
that had taken it, though a Nonconformist, declare, That he was not bound by it
to endeavor any other Reformation than what he had been obliged unto, if he
never had taken the Covenant; that he is not bound to use any unlawful or
seditious means, or endeavors, to bring about a Reformation. That the Law of
the Land is the Rule to judge by, what means or endeavors are unlawful and
seditious.

Quest. Do not the Presbyterians play fast and loose, and turn with the wind?
Was not the time once when they held Ruling Elders to be Jure Divino, but now
they hold no such matter?

Answ. I believe the Scottish Presbyterians were and still are of that
Judgment, that Ruling Elders are Jure Divino; but I knew few English, if any,
that held that Office so, save only in a large sense; as many Episcopalians
now hold Bishops to be Jure Divino, that is, a lawful Government, not repugnant
to the Word of God. However, it is said, and that by no mean Scholar, That
Geneva did not first institute those Officers, but only restored them. And I
have read that it was acknowledged by a great Prelate, That the Church had in
every Church certain Seniors, to whom the Government of the Church was
committed. Surely they are as tolerable in a Church, where the Supreme Power
thinks good to establish that Order, as are Chancellors, Commissaries, etc. But
in case that some Presbyterians of old, held them of use in the Apostles days,
this alone (without an Institution and an Injunction to perpetuate them) does
not make them, or any other Ecclesiastical Officers, unalterable; for we see
that the Office of Widows is laid aside in the Church, notwithstanding.

Quest. Did not the Presbyterians wholly lay aside the use of the Lords Supper?
And was it not for want of Ruling Elders?

Answ. They celebrated the Lords Supper in London, and that too in some
Churches, once a Month; and frequently at Oxford; and I suppose in many other
places: Possibly the expectation of a settlement might hinder the
Administration of that Ordinance for a time in many places. Bur I knew a Parish
where it was a long time disused, though desired, because the Parishoners did
not provide (though often urged unto it by the Minister) decent and necessary
Utensils for the Celebration of it.

Quest. Do the Nonconformists decry all use of Reason in Theology?

Answ. They use frequently Reasons in their Sermons. Indeed they allow Reason
but the second place in Divinity; to Revelation they give the first. Reason and
Philosophy they make to be the Handmaids, but Divinity they honor as their
Sovereign Lady and Queen. Reason is the Counselor, but Revelation is the
Lawgiver. We say the Light of Reason is as the Light of a Glowworm, or of a
Candle, or (if you will needs have it) as the Light of the Moon; but the Light
of Divine Revelation, is as the Light of the Sun, when it shines in its full
strength. Dr. T.
And with a reverend and learned Doctor, we allow the use of a Candle, although
we would have it snuffed; and when it is set up in the house, we would not have
the Window shut, either to keep our, or at least to darken the Light of the
Sun. We prefer feeding on Manna, before feeding on Acorns and Husks; the
Commands of St. Paul, before the Precepts of Plato; the Mass of Gold in the
Mine, before a few pieces of Silver scattered here and there in the Studies of
Philosophers.

Quest. Do the Congregations of those that dissent from the established
Worship, consist mostly of Army Saints?

Answ. I have heard one that has reason to know upon many Accounts better than
the Author of the Debate, say, That there is scarce a fifth person of those
that meet privately that was engaged in the late Differences. And that the
greatest part of the late Army are at this day Members of Parochial Churches,
is an even Wager.

Quest. Do the Arminians or Calvinists come nearest to the Doctrine of the
Church of England?

Answ. The profound pious and learned Doctor Samuel Ward, that was the La.
Margaret's Professor of Divinity in Cambridge, (whose Determinations are set
out by the great pains and care of the Right Reverend Seth Lord Bishop of
Sarisbury) in a Sermon of his Ad Clerum, and dedicated by himself to the
University of Cambridge, testifies, That as the whole Church of God ever since
St. Austine, so in particular the National Church of England, and the
University of Cambridge from the Reformation, and all the Professors, except
only one Baro, were against Arminius his Tenets. And this Baro within two
years was forced to leave the Chair, by the Power and Authority of Archbishop
Whitgift.

Illud etiam vere adjicere possum plus uni Augustino jam veterano and in ista
causa versatissimo tribuendum esse quam centum Corvinis, Grotiis, Vorstiis,
Bertiis, Tilenis and id genus, recentioribus Dogmatistis. Accedat and illud
coronidis loco, Augustino semper ad baesisse, hac ex-parte, Ecclesiam
Universalem ab ejus temporibus Ecclesiam item Anglicanam, ab initio
Reformationis, etc.

Quest. Is the case of the Donatists and the case of the Non-conformists alike?

Answ. The Donatists, as they had no cause in regard of the Faith (by reason of
any dangerous Doctrines or Practices imposed on them) to cease from
communicating with any part of the Catholic Church; so they divided from the
whole Church, with the breach of Charity, condemning it for no Church, and
drawing the Communion wholly to themselves. The Nonconformists do not condemn
the Church of England as no Church; they do not confine the Communion to
themselves; they humbly pray a Reformation of some things which they conceive
amiss, and are willing to have Communion with them as Parts of the Catholic
Church (saving the Practices wherein they differ) they leave them to their
Liberty, and desire a Liberty for themselves to serve God according to their
Consciences. The Presbyterians showed their Charity in their earnest endeavors
to save the life of Dr. Hewit an Episcopal Dr; for which purpose, they joined
in an Address to O. C. the only Address they ever made unto him; Neither
Presbyterians, nor Congregationists, charge the Episcopalians for being
Schismatics, because they do not communicate with their Congregations, and yet
they look upon themselves as true Churches of Christ, and both for Doctrine and
Discipline, to come as near the Scripture-Patern as themselves. They offered to
Unite and Reconcile with the Episcopal-Clergy upon Christian terms, before His
Majesty's Return, and since. As for out Brethren of New England, they are of
Age, let them answer for themselves. As for our Congreational Brethren at home,
I lately heard that Dr. Goodwin should profess to hold Communion even with the
Lutheran Churches. And Dr. Owen professes against all Impositions; and that
it is his Judgment, That the Episcopals and Presbyterians be left to worship God
as they judge in their Consciences best; That for his part, he judges no man
for his Conformity, provided he be not a Persecuter of those that cannot.

Finally, The Presbyterians for themselves desire much rather a Reformation, or
well stated Comprehension, than a Toleration; and are against Schism and
Separation, truly so called, as much as any; which they have sufficiently
evidenced by their constantly declared Opinions and Practice: They would be
glad to see the day, when being eased of burdensome Impositions, they might
have opportunity to manifest this their sincere desire of Union and Coalition
with the Church of England.

A Postscript to the Author of the Friendly Debate.
SIR,
YOu have dealt with us, as the Jews did with our Blessed Savior; blindfolded
us, and smitten us, and in effect bid us Prophecy who it is that smote us.
Some ghesses have been who you are by the roughness of your hand, and the
smartness of the blow; I have not taken upon me thus to shoot in the dark, and
yet pretend to hit the Mark. Nor will I go about to pull off the Vizor you put
upon your own face, but to wipe off the dirt which you have cast on ours. To
this purpose I pray you, after these premised Reflections by me on some
Passages in your Friendly Debate, etc. you would be pleased to reflect upon
your self, and to ask your self these few Questions.

Quest. 1. Whether or no you might not with as much reason, and more charity,
have produced Testimonies out of the Large Annotations, Printed in the year
1651. to clear Nonconformists from temporizing, and conniving at Sacrilege, as
you have done the Omissions you charge them withal in the Edition of 1646, to
prove them guilty. And sure I am, if you had pleased to search, you might have
found in the Last Edition, their dislike of Sacrilege in their Notes on Prove.
20.25. It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy. That is, say
the Annotations, to apply it, or take it to his own use, which was appointed to
Gods: yea, to go about to do it by inquiring how the Vow might be made void. As
also on Acts 5.1. in the case of Ananias and Sapphira, they declare plainly and
fully against Sacrilege as follows. The scope of this History is to show how
odious to God that perfidiousness is, which counterfeiting Sanctity, would
impose upon God, as if He saw not what men do; for otherwise ( Ananias giving a
part, had been commendable) so great a mischief is Hypocrisy, so dangerous the
perversion of an Holy purpose, and the withdrawing of things Consecrated to
the Churches use (though by himself who gave) that the Sacriligious perished by
detaining a part of that whole which he would seem to give. -- If he that
takes from the Church but a little of that which was his own, be Sacriligious
and struck dead for the same, what punishment will the same Divine Justice lay
on him, who by fraud or violence takes away the Possessions wherewith other
men endowed the Church?

And upon Romans 2.22. to that Question which some make, why the Apostle does
vary the crime, saying, Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege,
and not rather do thou commit Idolatry? They give this Answer for one, That
the Apostle uses an aggravation, as if he should say, Thou that abhorrest
Idols, do thou commit a worse sin, to wit, Sacrilege?

Quest. 2. Whether Dr. Sherlock in his Visitation Sermon ( page 7, 8, 9.)
Preached at Warrington May 11.) and Printed at London with an Imprimatur, June
9. 1669. charging all Conformists, who pray before and after Sermon, any
Prayers besides those of the Public Liturgy, as guilty of sacrilegiously
breaking their Vows and Promises, may not as justly be urged against
Conformists, as Mr. Case his Complaint against Covenant Breaking, be urged
against Nonconformists, to prove them transgressors of the 3d Commandment, in
the main sense and meaning of it.

Q. 3. Whether it may not as reasonably be desired, that the Conformists should
be agreed about the Rule and Standard of Conformity, before others be pressed
to come up to it; as to require that the Nonconformists should be all agreed
what will satisfy them before any condescentions may be desired for, or
granted to them. Are the Old Canons Law, or are they not? Are the Canons made
in the Synod 1640, Law or not? Must we read Second Service at the Communion
Table, or must we not? Must we pray before Sermon, or must we only bid or
exhort the People to Pray?

Q. 4. Whether they are not to be reputed Nonconformists, who go beyond the
law, and do more then is required? who use other Rites and Ceremonies, then the
Act of Uniformity injoyns, as well as those that fall short of doing some
things by law required?

Q. 5. Whether it may not well become our Spiritual Fathers and Brethren of the
Church, to yield a little in things indifferent to the weakness of those
(suppose they be in an error) who really scruple the lawfulness of them, and
who are ready to take a solemn Oath that they would Conform, if they could but
be once convinced, that by their Obedience to man's Ordinances, they should not
disobey the Laws of God.

Q. 6. Whether what was said, done, or Printed in times of War, ought to be
remembered and produced in Evidence in times of Peace, after a most solemn Act
of Oblivion and Indemnity?

Q. 7. Whether it was seasonable, when His most Excellent Majesty, and the
Parliament, at the last Session, had under Consideration some Expedient for
Union and Reconciliation, for a Minister of the Gospel of Peace and of a
professed large Charity to Print and publish such Books as might rationally be
thought might prove to be Obstructions in the way of Accommodation?

Q. 8. Whether there be not as much evidence of Charity, Modesty, Meekness and
Moderation in Mr. Corbet his Two Pieces, as in the Three Parts of the Friendly
Debate?

Q. 9. Why you are pleased to charge the Nonconformists with so much rigor and
severity against Dissenters formerly, without remembering that the Archbishop of
Armagh, and Bishop Brownrig were Public Preachers in the Inns of Court in
those times; or that the present Bishop of Worcester, then Bishop of Oxford,
enjoyed a good Parsonage; and that the greatest part of the now Conformists in
England, had public Employment in those times?

Q. 10. Whether you think that the late Assembly of Divines at Westminster,
whereof Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Twisse, Mr. Gattaker, Dr. Tuckney, Dr. Arrowsmith,
Mr. Herle, Mr. Vines, Mr. Anthony Burgess and others were members, consisted of
Persons of so inconsiderable and contemptible Parts, Piety or Learning, as is
represented now a-dayes? And, whether the present Nonconformists, such as Dr.
Owen, Mr. Baxter, Dr. Manton, Dr. Conant, Dr. Bates, Dr. Goodwin, Dr.
Dillingham, etc. are really such Ignoramusses as some of your Zelots would have
the world imagine them to be?

Q. 11. Whether Dr. Heylins History of Presbytery does not wound the
Reformation through the sides of the Presbyterians?

Q. 12. Whether if the Nonconformists Confessions in their Prayers, may be
produced in Evidence against them, How the Sons and Daughters of the Church
will appear Innocent, who are taught after every Commandment read by the
Mister, to say and pray, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to
keep this Law?

Q. 13. Whether if His Majesty and the Parliament, would be graciously pleased
to leave the use of the Three Ceremonies of our Church as indifferent, as the
Canons in 1640 do the Ceremony of Bowing toward the East, or Altar; That Rule
of Charity might not be still observed, namely, That those which use these
Ceremonies should not despise them that use them not; and that those who use
them not, condemn not those that use them?

Q. 14. Who has thriven most and prospered best, the Spaniard with his
Inquisition, or the Hollander with his Toleration?

And now having desired you to ask your self these Questions, Give me leave to
reflect upon my self too, and to consider what I have done. I say not, What I
have written, I have written; but rather, if I have written any thing which
shall he truly interpreted Seditious or Schismatical, or which is justly
offensive to any of my Superiors, Inferiors, or Equals in Church or State, I
humbly beg Pardon, and Conclude; desiring you and all my Brethren, Conformists
and Non-conformists, to join in that good Prayer, Give Peace in our time, O
Lord.

FINIS.

