AN HUMBLE ADDRESS From the PEOPLE of ENGLAND To their Representatives in
PARLIAMENT, For an Act against Buying and Selling of Offices.
Gentlemen,
THE great Trust and Confidence which we have Reposed in you, will sufficiently
convince all the World, that we do not presume to make this Address upon the
least distrust of your Prudence and Care over us; which on the contrary, we are
so sensible of, that we desire to make all due Acknowledgment for the same, and
in a more particular manner, for the Establishment of the Government under our
most Auspicious and Gracious Sovereigns King William and Queen Mary, whose long
and prosperous Reign over us is that great Blessing we daily Pray for, as the
only means next under the Divine Providence, that can make us the most Happy
and Flourishing People in the World.

But considering the multitude and almost infinite Variety of Affairs both
Foreign and Domestic that lie before you, it is a wonder that you should think
of so many things as you do; and therefore, least one amongst so many should
happen to escape your present Thoughts, which we conceive to be of more than
ordinary Concern to us, We Humbly take the Freedom at this time (which we hope
is Seasonable) only to Recall it to your Memory, and (that is) The Buying and
Selling of Offices.

We do not take upon us to say there has been any such thing, but Humbly
Submit to your determination of that Point, as the Grand Inquisitors and
Representatives of the Nation; and shall only observe the Rational Consequences
thereof, and that in case any such thing has been practiced in former times,
That we may very probably date all our Miseries from the Commencement thereof:
For suppose it were possible in former Ages, that a Judges Place could not be
obtained without a Generous Acknowledgment of so Great a Favor, What can be
expected from such a Person, who has perhaps a numerous Family, no Estate in
the Country, and is forced to borrow a great Sum at Interest to lay down upon
such an Occasion? Will not such a Man in all humane probability rather comply
with the Times, than see his Family utterly Ruined by loosing his Place and
Money too? And then as to the Cases of Meum and Tuum, Will not he that thinks it
Lawful to Give for a judicial Place, think it also Lawful to take when he is in
it? And does not our Lives and Fortunes, our All, depend upon their Integrity
and Ability? Who would wonder at the Case of the Shipmony, the Dispencing
Power, Excessive Bail, Unlawful Fines, Unusual Punishments, Prosecution of the
Bishops, or the like, in such a Case? Either the Judges Acted according to
their Judgment in these Cases, or they did not; if they did, we have nothing to
say to them, but hope our Courts of Justice, both in England and Wales, will
now be filled with more Able Men. If any of them did not Act according to their
Judgments, then we submit to your Opinions, Whether this might not be the
Secret and Original cause of their Compliance? And if in this Case, Why not in
the other proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Court against that Reverend and
Learned Prelate, the Bishop of London? The President and Fellows of Magdalen
College, etc. Since no Man can easily believe that a certain Bishop beyond Sea
(whose Life and Conversation was so publicly known to the World) was merely
preferred for his Piety and Devotion.

And might not the Oppressions of the Poor by the Officers of the Chimny money,
Excise, etc. and all other Abuses and Extortions from the Common people, be
publicly attributed to the same Cause? In the Case of the late Army, if any
Officer purchased a Commission, What could be expected but that he should make
his Soldiers contribute to it? And will not his Soldiers have it out in their
Quarters? Nay, Might nor this First introduce Billiting the same Soldiers upon
several Houses at one time, and taking Money from every House, to the great
Oppression of the Subjects? And must not the Nation always suffer by these
ways? For a Soldier of Fortune, a Man of Honor and Experience, depends upon his
known Courage and Merits, and either has no Money to give, or else scorns to
Submit to such Mercinary Terms; and when Merit gives place to Money, the Nation
must be lost to any Enemy that will Invade us.

Thus at length when the grievous Oppressions of the Officers become
intolerable, and the People have no relief in the ordinary course of Justice
(for when the Inferior Officers can Accuse their Superiors, they need not fear
any Accusation themselves) then are they forced in all Humble manner to
Petition for a Parliament, And what is the consequence of this? But Abhorences
against Petitioning, Advice for Quo Worrantoes, Surrenders of Charters, and
Regulations of Corporations, the freedom of Elections of Members to serve in
Parliament are Violated; the Members must be Closetted, and all Men displaced
and ruined that refuse to comply with their Terms; the Judges have Instructions
in their Charges, to Preach up for Law the Kings Dispencing Power, and the
Country Gentlemen invited by his Neighbors, and proud of his new Authority
amongst them, securely relies upon so great an Authority; and so by a Chain of
necessary consequences, it seems to us, that all our Miseries may be derived
from this Secret and Invisible Grievance of Buying and Selling of Offices.

Wherefore for avoiding the Effusion of Christian Blood, the Ruin and
Destruction of Families, which must follow; First by the wicked Practices above
mentioned (for Men will be Men to the end of the World) and afterward in the
Capital and other Punishment of the Authors of them.

Since our Religion teaches us Humility and Mercy, and not severe Persecutions
of one another; Since the Fundamental and Original Cause of all our late
Grievances may so much be attributed (as you see) to the want of such a Law by
our former Representatives; and we that have the advantage of their Actions and
Laws, must be the (...)ather persuaded to bear with the conseqences of their
Omissions.

Therefore it is that we have thought fit with all due Reverence to acquaint
yon, That in regard we owe this happy Deliverence to the Providence of Almighty
God, who forgiveth us many Sins, and delights not in the Destruction of an
Offender, but rather in his Repentance; and in regard our Most Gracious
Sovereign King William, the Glorious Instrument thereof, has with so much Zeal
and Compassion recommended to you a most general Act of Oblivion.

We shall like good Christians and good Subjects rather choose your Mercy than
your Severity; rather choose an Act of Prevention for the future, than an Act of
Attainder for what is past; and that you may see we do so in earnest, we Humbly
Present you with an Act for that purpose; The Substance and Form whereof is
with all imaginable Duty and Defense submitted to your great Judgment and
Discretion.

A Draught of an Act against the Buying and Selling of Offices.
Forasmuch as it has been found by Experience in all Ages, that no Government
ever prospered where all Offices are Bought and Sold, but on the contrary,
where Persons have been Prefered for their Merit and Ability, to Serve their
King and Country, the Nation has always been happy within it self, and
successful against its Enemies.

Wherefore for the Encouragement of Industry and Virtue, and the Rooting out of
Idleness and Corruption, for the Honor of God, the Advancement of Justice, the
Security of the Lives, Riligion, and Property of the Subjects, and for the more
effectual Support and Defense of this Kindom in these times of War, by able and
prudent Officers both at Sea and Land.

Be it Enacted by our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen, by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons in
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same; That all, and every
Person or Porsons, who since the 13th. day of Febr. last past, have been, or
hereafter shall be admitted into any Office or Employment, Civil or Military,
Judicial or Ministerial, within this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, (except such Offices as are herein after excepted)
shall take this Oath following, in such Manner, at such Times, before such
Persons, and in such Courts and Places as is appointed for the taking of the
New Oaths, by one Act lately made for the Abrogating of the former Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and appointing other Oaths, Viz.

I ( A.B.) do Swear, and solemnly Promise in the presence of Almighty God, that
I have not given or promised to give any Money, Fee, Reward, or other Profit,
Directly or Indirectly, to any Person or Persons whatsoever, for the Office (or
Employment) of (...) or for the Deputation of the Office (or Employment) of
(...) nor for the Interest or Recommendation of any Person or Persons
whatsoever, in obtaining thereof: And that I do not know, or have in the least
consented that any Friend, Relation, or other Person whatsoever, has, should
or shall hereafter, give or promise any such Reward, Directly or Indirectly to
any Person or Persons whatsoever for the same. And further, I do Swear that I
have not Received, nor Consented, nor willingly Permitted any other Person to
Receive, nor will hereafter Receive, nor Consent or willingly Permit any other
Person or Persons whatsoever to Receive, any Money, Fee, Reward, or other
Profit, Directly or Indirectly, for any Office or Employment within my Disposal
or Gift nor for my Interest or Recommendation to obtain any Place or Employment
whatsoever, (except such Offices and Employments as are excepted in one Act
Entitled, An Act against Buying and Selling of Offices, made in the First Year
of the Reign of King William and Queen Mary) all which I Solemnly Promise and
Swear according to the plain and common Sense and Understanding of the same
words, without any Equivocation, Mental Evasion, or Secret Reservation
whatsoever, So help me God; and by the Contents of this Book. A Clause that all
Bargains and Assurances be void. A Clause of Penalties and Disabilities in case
of Neglect or Refusal, as in the case of the other Oaths. Another more severe
Clause of Penalties and Disabilities against all those that shall be Convicted
of a Breach of the said Oath. A Proviso to except all such Offices and Persons
as are excepted in a Statute made the 5th. and 6th. of Ed. VI. Ca. 16. A
Proviso, that this Act shall not extend to the accustomed Fees for Warrants,
Patents or Commissions, etc.


Thus we have Humbly laid before you a hasty and short Scheme of our present
Thoughts of this Matter for the public good, which we Humbly Submit to your
Correction and Improvement. And since there are but two ways left us for our
Security, in this juncture of Affairs, viz. The Destruction of all Offenders,
or else a Generous Pardon; for the Middle way of setting a Mark or Fine upon
them, neither gains Friends nor prevents Enemies; we conceive the latter most
consistent with the Protestant Religion, and being seconded by such a Law as is
above set forth, may more effectually Establish our present happiness, and
prevent the like Evils for the future, than any examples of Severity, or other
proceedings whatsoever.

Sublate fundamento corruit opus
Es cossante causa cessat effectus.
Licensed May 27. 1689.

LONDON Printed by George Croom at the Blew Hall in Thames Street near
Baynards-Castle.


