An Humble ADDRESS TO ALL The Truly Loyal COMMONS OF ENGLAND, By a true Lover
of his King and Country.
GENTELMEN,
I am not ignorant that whatever comes forth in Print, although it assert
Allegiance to the King, and Obedience to Magistrates, yet now a days it is
Alamode to Libel it: as I fancy not the sheltring my self under any man's Wings
in a matter of this nature, because it signifies in my apprehension a distrust
of what is written; which were I Guilty of, I would not come in public View.
So also I decline to Court the Readers with a flattering Epistle for their
approbation, it being irrational, yea rediculous, to think that judicious men
will be wrought upon by any thing but what convinces their Judgments and
Reasons, and not according to men's Fancies and Affections, and he that judges
otherwise, is not a competent Judge, neither shall I vallue what such men say.
Gentelmen, if you seriously consider what amazing Cirtumstances have of late
attended the managemet of State Affairs in this our Hemisphear; it must needs
be matter of wonder and astonishment; and I will appeal to all sober persons
who are not biased by Interest, or swayed by Passion, whether they believe any
History can parallel the impudent Libels and saucy Pamphlets that have lately
been exposed to public View, Tempora mutantur a principio non fuit ita, the
excellent saying of the reno wired Lord Chief Justice North, is truly
verified, That his Majesty is merciful even to a Miracle, and notwithstanding
all the violent Commotions in State Affairs, how great has been the Prudence
of our Royal Sovereign, who in Concurrence with his honorable Privy Council in
the great interval of the Parliament has continued us in Peace. How great have
been the Clamors of Popery and Arbitrary Government; yet whose Rights and
Privileges have been in the least measure invaded. Gentlemen, I earnestly
implore of you, that you will let Reason have its Domination and Rule in you,
and suffer not your selves to be misled, nor insinuated by men who pretend
Loyalty to the King, and prosperity to the Government, when in reality,
Ambition is their only Aim; for no man who is Compomentis can believe that
those men who in their Caballs strive to carry on private Designs contrary to
the known will of their Sovereign, can wish real happiness to his person or
good to his Government, but only to become popular. Therefore I do positively
aver it is the undoubted Right of our Sovereign to admit whom he pleases to be
of his Privy Council and at his pleasure, for Reasons best known to himself,
to send them a Quietus est, and by this he fully understands their Tempers and
Inclinations, and in whose Judgments he may faithfully rely; and it is a Duty
incumbent upon all, from the highest to the lowest, still to return their
Fidelity and Allegiance to the King, and not to murmur nor slighly to insinuate
into the people, a misconstruction of their Princes Actions and a mislike of
his Government; it was a true saying by a Peer who received eminent and signal
Favors from his Prince, that they that, fall under the displeasure of their
Prince fall gentely; God grant it may work a through Reformation. It is common
among all men to cry long live the King, let not their Actions give their
Tongues the Lie. Let them speedily put in practice those things that tend to
administer peace to their Sovereigns Mind and tranquillity to his Life; and now
Gentelmen and fellow-Citizens, I will address my self more particularly unto
you: I very well know you are not ignorant of an Address lately presented to my
Lord Mayor, wherein the Commons are earnest with my Lord to represent them
Loyal to the King, and that they are ready to join in the defense of his Royal
person and the Protestant Religion against all Attempts and Plots. There are
many hundreds of the Commons likewise, who were not present at the delivery of
that Address, who desire that those Gentelmen that were, will be pleased in a
second Address to my Lord Mayor, desire him to acquaint his Majesty of their
readiness to join with those Gentlemen that were not there, in the defense of
his Majesty's Royal person, and the Protestant Religion established by Law,
without any Alteration either in Church or State; and that the Parliament may
Convene when his Majesty shall judge it most convenient for his own benefit and
the Nations welfare; and that then all Animosities and Distinction of Parties
by Names may be obliterated, and that we may all strive to exceed each other in
our fearing God and honoring the King; then may we expect Peace and plenty to
cohabit amongst us, which that it may faxit v^ni. I shall take the freedom to
reassume the Address, it were well if those worthy Citizens who delivered the
Address, would acquaint their fellow Citizens particularly with the Names of
the persons who misrepresented us to the King, that innocent persons might not
be in the Catalogue of indiscreet informers: I could heartily wish (my dear
fellow-Citizens) that those persons whose inclinations have in them a
propensity to Passion and Ambition would permit of Reason to bear sway; and
that they would seriously consider of the speech lately spoken by our present
Loyal Lord Mayor; who therein declares, that he calls God to witness he never
did misrepresent the Citizens to his Majesty, nor he does not easily believe
any would. Were there but a candid Construction put on men's Actions, and that
men could not credit every idle and impertinent Story, there would then be no
room left for Jealousies and Animosities amongst us. O I do positively aver,
never any Magistrate served his Majesty more faithfully, nor the City more
honesty than our present Magistrate considering the present circumstances that
we lie under, and it is very plain he is not easily insinuated and wheedled by
the little Artifices of hot headed and turbulent men. It is well known he has a
plentiful Estate, and therefore he does not covet Ambition, but makes it his
greatest Care to serve his King and Country, and that which many men strive to
attain, per fui and nefas, he is invested with power in himself, to wit, to be
a Member of Parliament. It is to be hoped that our noble Senators at their
Convention, being very sensible of the Designs and Caballs of Men of Republican
Spirits in this long Enterval, will frustrate them, and will by a unanimous
concurrence amongst themselves follow the Examples of their Ancestors, and
supply his Majesty frankly; and by this means they will endear his Majesty to
his Subjects, and his Subjects to him: whoever they are that are of contrary
Opinion, their descent is not from the Result of a deliberated Judgment, or a
well regulated Reason, but upon the score of self-Interest; or else they are
such who through inadvertencie or secular advantage, have been formerly
concerned in Lands belonging either to Church or State; and it is evident what
the Designs of such Men are, and what they aim at: witness some Wills which
have been lately made, wherein after they had bequeathed great part of their
Estates, they are pleased to insert in order to the Lands formerly in their
possession. If Providence shall order a return they bequeath it for such and
such Uses. It is very obvious to considering men, they have a mind to be
fishing with the old Ba^t; but from Men of such Principles, Libra nos Domine,
and I think his very perspicnous to all sober good men, that some Citizens
amongst us, who were very Zealous for the Convention of the Parliament, their
Zeal was not out of public good either to the King or people; but for
advantage to themselves; and to be accounted great in the esteem of the Vulgar;
and yet these are the Men who are very fierce against worshipping of Jeroboams
Calves, either at Dan or Bethel, yet account it nor Icolatry to be Idolized
themselves. For had they not been half witted, they must needs have remembered
what his Majesty had formerly declared, that it was his Resolution to continue
the Parliament by short Prorogations, not resolving their Sitting til November,
unless Affairs from abroad occasioned him to appoint their sooner Convention. I
do believe there is no rational Man but is of Opinion it is the Subjects Right
to Petition their Prince, but to Petition for that which his Majesty had
resolved should be, looks as if they doubted of his Majesty's performance; and
none but men of shallow principles would entertain such Notions. It is very
well known there are some persons amongst us of Antimonarchial Principles, who
are for model^zing of Government according to several Chimeras in their Brains,
and they are waspish and angry because they are not admitted to understand the
Arcana Imperii, but if they please to go to Jerico till their Beards are grown,
or they grown wiser, it is very probable if his Majesty has occasion to use
them, he will give them timely notice; or they should do well to converse with
their Grammar again, and put in practice that excellent Rule, Sort tua
contentus abi, it is very likely, that Midsummer-Moon being past they may be
reduced again to their right temperament of mind: There is one thing worthy of
the inspection into by our Senato^s, which is the Licentiousness of the Press,
which has greatly occasioned our Domestic jars: I could heartily wish, that
many of those Gentlemen who descent from the Church of England, not in
Fundamentals but in Circumstantials, would not allow nor manifest their
approbation to many of those pernicious and lying Pamphlets which reflect on
his Majesty and his Government, would they but openly in Print declare their
dislike and detestation of them, it would greatly demonstrate ^o the King of
their true Loyalty to his Person, and submissiveness to his Government: It is
our Coffe Houses those Posts of the Nation, that occasion much Contention
amongst us, there Lies are minted, and boldly asserted by many impudent
beggarly Coxcombs, and many grave Fops give as much Credit to them as they do
to their Creed: would men mind their Shops and frequent these Houses less,
there would be more Love and less Contention amongst us. Hither it is in
Parliament time that the Petty-fogging Solicitors, and the Excrementious
Giste^pipes, with many other Impudent Fellows resort to hear what News, and to
Censure the Actions of our Grave Senators, and Cavil at whatsoever pleases not
their Humors. It is to be hoped our Senators will take Cognizance of many
things worthy of their speedy and serious Consideration in this long Interval,
and will be happy Instruments of settling this our distracted Nation, in Peace
and quietness, what an happy Sight will it be to see the King and his People
Accord, a threefold Cord is not easily broken. I hope God will still preserve
his Anointed, our gracious King, this present Parliament, and all his Loyal
Subjects, from all dangers whatsoever, for Si Deus nob scum quis contra nos.

London, Printed by D Mallet, 1680.


