THE HUMBLE DESIRES AND PROPOSALS Of the private AGITATORS of Colonel Hewsons
Regiment to the general Agitators of the Army, to be presented to his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and communicated to both Houses of Parliament.

Wherein is contained these particulars, viz.

1. Their desires concerning the Army 2. Concerning Prisoners being brought to
trial, 3. Concerning justice to be forthwith executed. 4. Concerning diverse
corrupt Members in both Houses of Parliament. 5. Concerning the Soldiers of
this Kingdom, and their resisting of a foreign Power.
London Printed by I. G. 1647.

THE HUMBLE DESIRES AND PROPOSALLS Of the private AGITATORS of Colonel Hewsons
Regiment, to the General Agitators of the Army.
Gentlemen,
WE cannot but review those divine manifestations to us, in a first and second
model of this Army. Its not altogether unlike the building of the Temple, the
stones were ready hewed, and fitted for their several stations, so that there
was neither Axe, nor Hammer heard in the Temple; even so has God erected and
compacted us together in our various conditions to be a mean for the end, to
administer and establish Truth, Peace, and Righteousness, in this our
Tabernacle. We have not much heard the hammerings and noise of flesh in our
Councels, and resolutions, as to boast in the Arm of flesh; but in a still
sure confidence in God, and from the manifest presence of God, have we obtained
in all our adventures. The sweet union we had with God does indeare us together
in love, from the power of love. There was such a reprocall contract, that
there did not so much of man appear, as to make distinctions of names or
parties, though differing in Judgment; God having seemingly accomplished the
ends of our desires in conquerring the Kingdoms and our visible enemies, we
were taken up to contemplate in the hopes of enjoying the fruits of our labors
in a happy Peace: Then unexpectedly there appeared a Ghostlike enemy of the
same spirit as the former, only in another vizage, then God awaked us dead and
dry bones, and gendred us together, and gave in life, light, and strength, to
act without any known forms or Custom, but in unknown and untroden paths,
save this maxim, viz. salus populi suprema lex. But above all this satisfied,
viz the invitation of God in us to this work. Then were we acted out to elect
adjutations, in which we have seen God clothed in your flesh, and prefigured
in love, union, holiness, me^k^es, and self annihilation the more you enjoy
God, the more you thus live, and act like him; but on the contrary, if carnal
self interest shall puff you up, and cause you to act beyond your spheire, and
hereby beget divisions, then know that God is risen out of you, and will carry
on the w^rk in some other dispensation: besides then you have forfeited the
trust reposed, for the end of our electing of you was to unite scement, and
contract us together, and for an orderly presentment of our grievances to the
General, that confusion may be avoided, we speak not this from any fear or
doubt you, but by motive in order to a reflection within you that ye may see
God all in all, and the creature nothinged. We profess we rejoice and
congratulate with you for that sweet frame of spirit in love union and pulique
intrest that is amongst you, and do in the name of the Souldi^ry of the
R^g^ment give you many thanks for your faithful services and unwearied pains
for the good of us, and the Kingdom, and as we have always hitherto been
satisfied with (and rested in your just proceeds: so we shall not degress, but
shall remain in our formal way of presenting our agrievances to you: and
shall rest in your known fidellity for the representing of them to the
General, and as all we have had large testimony of the uprightnes, and
faithfulness of our ever honored General and his Council, so we humbly desire
you to preserve in your duty as aforesaid, and there to acquiess. As also to
resolve by the assistance of God to stand firm to your first principles, and
submitting to and defending of the legal Au^hosity of Parliament, giving due
obedience to the derivative power in the General, under whom we have had the
presence of divine protection. We do as Adjutators for the several and
respective Companies in Col. Hewsons Regiment subscribe our selves.

Yours and the Kingdoms faithful Servants.

The humble Desires and Proposalls of the Agitators of Colonel Hewsons
Regiment, to be presented to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.
1. THat the Parliament would speedily take care for pay for his Army.

2. That those Prisoners who have been committed, may be brought to a speedy
and just Trial, and being found to be unjustly imprisonned, maybe released and
receive ample reparations.

3. That justice may be forthwith executed upon all sorts and degrees of men,
who were in the bloody design to engage this Kingdom in a new War.

4. That all visible corrupt Members of both Houses in Parliament, may be
forthwith expunged, without which we cannot have any happy assurance of safety.

5. That no persons may have places of trust in the Kingdom, but those of
known fidelity that hereby we may be ready to resist any foreign attempts.

And it is further humbly desired, (by the aforesaid Agitators) that these
Proposalls may be forthwith presented to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax;
and to be communicated to both Houses of Parliament; that so, both his
Excellency and the Parliament, may forthwith proceed to a full period and
result of the foregoing particulars, that Justice may the better be executed,
upon all sorts and degrees of men, who were active in the late bloody design
to engage this Kingdom in a desperate and new Watre, and that the Kingdom may,
be also put into such a posture, and under faithful Commanders, both of
integrity and trust, that so they may be ready to assist and oppose any
foreign power, upon any attempt whatsoever.

FINIS.

