AN HUMBLE ADDRESS Offered to the CONSIDERATION OF THE Lords and Commons
Touching a Law concerning Perjury.
WHEN contagious Diseases reign, its natural for Men to have recourse to, and
make their Application to Physicians, for their Direction and Help, as Persons,
who by their Profession, are presumed to be the most knowing in such an Affair,
and in the compass of whose Art it may probably lie to prescribe Remedies, that
may quell and totally subdue their power, at least so control it, that they may
not licentiously domineer and rage, to the utter depopulating of their
Dwelling-places.

And thus when some heinous Immorality predominates in a Nation above any
other, and good Men are under just apprehension and fears least the Distemper
grow Epidemical, it is reasonable for them to resort to the Civil Governments,
and request of them the making of some Antidote, the framing of some wholesome
Law against it, which may either kill it outright, entirely suppress, or
correct its Poison so, that it may not diffuse it self over the several parts
of the Body Politic, to the Destruction of the whole.

Such an Immorality is Perjury, especially when it is solemn, and committed
before a Judicatory; the prodigious increase whereof in this Kingdom these late
Years, more particularly from 1678, until this present time, easily observable
by the most unthinking and incurious, and yet never enough to be deplored, by
any who believe the Existence of a Deity, that a Veneration is due to his great
Name, or have a sense, that the Honor of his Majesty is deeply wounded by this
Sin, is the sole occasion of this Address to you, my Lords and Gentlemen, as
those in whose power it lies, by the making provision of some severer Remedy,
than is yet to be found extant among our Laws, for the giving a check to its
daily growth, obstructing its farther Progress, and wider spreading it self
among us, to be serviceable to God's Honor, and beneficial to your Country; it
being Penned to implore your immediate Assistance in preparing such a Bill as
your Wisdom shall think most expedient to this end, and to use your utmost
endeavor afterward, that it may have the force of a Law.

And while I offer such an humble Address to you, for the begging your aid, and
that you would be pleased to set your hands to this excellent Work with all the
speed you can, I have judged with my self it may not be useless to premise
something by way of Advance concerning the horrid Guilt of customary Swearing,
to make this of solemn Forswearing to have, as indeed it has, a far more
horrid Aspect, and so by this means, excite in you the greater Detestation of
that Wickedness for its hideous Monstrousness, and a sprightlier Zeal to curb
it.

For though I am sufficiently persuaded there are very many Knowing Persons in
your Illustrious Assembly, whose Abilities can more exactly represent to
themselves this Villainy in all its Blackness and Deformity than my Weakness
can, yet, I presume, I may without justly and deservedly incurring the
Imputation of doing an unnecessary and superfluous work, be allowed in
imitation of St. Peter's Example, writing to those who were before sufficiently
informed in the Christian Doctrine, to put you all Pet. 2. c. 1. ver. 12.
in remembrance of what you know already.

But besides, being only your Monitor and not your Instructor in this Point, I
consider, that having your Thoughts employed by multiplicity of Business, and
Public Affairs lying before you, you want that leisure to make those
Reflections on the Flagitiousness of this Crime, which your Minds not otherwise
occupied could themselves Suggest, and yet withal as busied as you are, you may
find a Vacancy to peruse such, which are made fit for your hands by another.

And where for want of leisure to recollect what you know on this Subject, you
may not form so full an Idea of its Ugliness, nor consequently entertain such a
perfect Abhorrence of it, as may stir up and quicken you to set about framing
such a Bill, as is convenient for the fore mentioned purpose, and expediting it
with all the speed possible; yet what is more negligently and loosly said or
thought on such a matter by another, than would have been by your selves, could
you spare time to take a view of it in your own Minds may in some measure serve
to supply this, and warm you with such a degree of hatred against it, as may
engage you to set about drawing such a Bill, and dispatching it in some
reasonable and convenient time.

Reas. 1. If then Laws should be enacted against Common Swearing, or those
already past for corroborating the Divine Prohibition of this Sin, with civil
Sanctions and temporal Penalties, be put in full Execution, or you supplicated
to see this done, because it is a disrespectful using the Name of God, and so a
slight put upon him, whose Majesty signified by it, is in all Relations to be
infinitely revered by us, i. e. as far as we are able, commensurably to it
self, and the being over familiar with his Name in our Mouths without
considering the Reasons, the occasions we have to use it, the end for which,
and the manner how, is an act of the highest Malapertness and Sawciness, and
withal, this should be done out of a just Caution least a customary using the
Name of the most High lightly, and without any regard at all, in matters, which
are as they assever, bring Men on a sudden to apply that dreadful Name to
things that are utterly false; an abstinence from swearing at all being the
surest mound and fence against Cic pr^, Roscie.
Perjury: (For if the Observation of one of the greatest and wisest Persons,
who ere wore the Roman Gown) hold good, as no doubt it does, that an habitual
Liar is very apt to be perjured, it is most certain that a frequent Swearer is
in nearer danger of forswearing himself than such a one; Attention to what he
deposes being only able to preserve such a one from committing Perjury, which
he wants who Swears rashly and precipitately, and by an inveterate Custom of
Swearing, is very often insensible whether he Swears or not.

If for these Reasons, I say, common Swearing ought to be restrained by your
devising of new Laws, or by your issuing out your Orders for the Execution of
the good ones we already have; and these are Motives cogent enough to Petition
you, that you would see this effectually done, the Reasons are more urgent and
pressing, and the Motives more violent, why you should be applied unto, for the
framing some sharp Act to prevent Perjury, in Courts of Justice more eminently,
or to correct it, since that the Nation is already furnished with, is in the
nature of its Constitution too feeble to effect it, the Punishment to be
inflicted on an Offender of this kind, being only the forfeiture of 20 l. and
six Months Imprisonment, if he has a Purse to pay, and standing only in the
Pillory with his Ears nailed to it if he be insolvent; and that of the Suborner
to this Wickedness being only a Fine of 40 l. and 6 Months Imprisonment, and
standing 5 Eliz. 9.
an Hour on the Pillory, and a disabling both to give Evidence for the future,
till the Judgment be reversed by Attaint, or otherwise.

And yet the Crime of Perjury is of that outrageous Nature, that it is an
affronting God in the highest degree, and most provoking manner that Men are
capable of doing it, it is a Corrupting and Suborning as much as in them lies,
or thinking they may be able to do so, Him who is Eternal Truth, Truth it self,
to be a witness to a Lie; it is a derision of his Omniscience, a scorning his
Justice, and bidding defiance to his Almighty Power, while they call him in to
be a Witness to what they say, and a judge of their Falsehood, if guilty of any,
imprecating him in this case to avenge it, with pouring out his Judgments upon
their heads, which they would not be so presumptuous and daring to do, if they
did believe any thing of his taking notice of this, of his Inclinations and
Will, or his being in a Condition to punish their Perfidiousness.

Reas. 2. And as the Crime is of a more enormous bulk, and more affrightful
Complexion than any other, except it be a flat and obstinate denial of his
Existence, or transferring that Honor and Worship, which is his peculiar
prerogative to his Workmanship, or rather the immediate Workmanship of Men's
hands, yea in some sort equals their Magnitude, and is of the same dark hue
with them if it does not exceed them, forasmuch as it is a mocking him, which
our Estimation places in the foremost rank of Injuries, that can be done us;
so in Proportion it draws a Judgment upon the Person greater than others; God
having positively declared that he will not hold a Criminal of this kind
Guiltless, i. e. that he will not pardon Exodus 20.
him, threatened that he himself will be a swift Witness against such a one,
pursue him to Condemnation, and pronounced farther, Mal. 3.5.
that the flying Roll or Sith in the Translation of the 70, Zech. 53.
20 Cubits long, and 10 broad, shall enter into his House, and consume the
Stones with the Timber thereof, i. e. lay his Family and Estate wast, and the
Heathen Oracle mentioned by Herodotus (...).
threatened as much.

And its no wonder so dreadful a Punishment from God pursues it, since it is a
Complication of other Sins, not merely a contumely against him, but a wrong to
our Neighbor, generally fails not to be joined with Theft and Murder, taking
away the Lives, and sweeping away the Estates of the Innocent, and so is not
barely an omission of that common duty of Justice we owe us (which certainly is
to have our Lives and Estates and Reputations defended and secured,) but a
direct Commission against the Rule of it, in doing that to others, which we
would not have done to our selves, despoiling them of their good Name, Honors,
Possessions, and their very being, to make it a complete and consummate Villainy.

It not only changes the course of Justice, which should be equally
administered to all, every man that is born into the World, having a natural
claim to have right done him, but perverts it; not only damns up those streams,
which should so flow, as every one should be refreshed by them, but turns them
into a clean contrary channel, where with their Rapidness they carry away and
overwhelm those, whose merits required a far different fate, instead of
sharpning and turning the edge of the Sword or Axe against Delinquents and
Malefactors, for whom the Law appointed them, it makes these applied to the
cutting off the most virtuous and honest in a Public Society, as it did most
eminently at Athens while the 30 tyrannized there, or at Rome under the
alternatively prevailing Factions of Marius and Sylla, all whose stubborn and
incorruptible Integrity will not suffer them to bow down to Usurpation, or
applaud and congratulate Violences.

3. Reas. But Vengeance does not only pursue, and at last overtake, and
severely scurge perjured Persons themselves and their Posterity, whom it often
roots out from the face of the Earth; but likewise this crime, if suffered to
escape scot free by Civil Judicatories, which should punish it, does many times
over and above drawd own from Heaven heavy and sore Judgments upon a whole
Nation, where it is thus suffered to go off with Impunity, or march off in
triumph over defeated Justice.

This Sin is usually specified by the Prophets, Jeremiah especially, Jer. 4. 2.
Hos. 4. 1^.
as one of those many crying ones, which instigated God to threaten the Jews
with Extirpation out of their own, and Deportation into a foreign Land, and
incensed him afterward to put that Sentence in Execution, because, though they
swore as the Lord lives, yet they swore falsely.

4. Reas. Howbeit should no Calamity overtake a Nation, where this Sin is rife,
and no Judicial Cognizance taken of it, or dismissed in Courts with a shrug or
grimace only, yet it is a foul disgrace to that People, where it is frequently
practiced and rarely discountenanced; Sin, It was the wise Man's Observation
long ago, is a reproach to any People of what kind soever it be, Prove. 14.
as Drunkenness, Gluttony, Wantonness, Inconstancy wherewith some Nations are
taxed as their Epidemical Diseases by others, which are sound and free from
them. But none casts a blacker and yet juster Aspersion upon a People than
Perfidiousness.

The use of an Oath is a tacit Reproach thrown upon Mankind by themselves, for
their baseness; for it implies they cannot believe one the other upon their
bare words and asseverations but that must be interposed to gain credit to
these, like as the use of Paper or Parchment, Wax; Seals, Subsignations in
Contracts and Obligations is a kind of exhibiting a Charge, and giving in
Evidence against their own Honesty, which they mutually mistrust, unless
guarded with these Formalities. But when once words backed with Oaths, Oaths
first brought into use to put doubtful Truth out of question, are not of
sufficient validity to confirm it, nor power enough to gain credit, its the
outmost Ignominy and Scandal of a Nation.

What a tainted Reputation have the Cretians in Story, when Poets, whose
business is Fiction, nay one of their own, who Epimenides and Caltimachus.
may be thought would have concealed his Country's Shame had it not been too
notorious, shall charge them with being perpetual Liars, and to play the
Cretian shall pass into a byword, importing as much as to deceive?

What a discredit is it to the Greeks for daring to lard their Historical
Ju^^nal.
Relations with Fables? But what a fowler blot is it for for them, the
Ligurians and Carthaginians to be noted for not observing their Faith, and to
be transmitted to all after Ages with such a Character from the Roman Writers,
that their faith and downright Perfidiousness, how widely different soever
these two words are in their original Signification, pass among them, as pieces
of the same weight and value?

And albeit some one Man of Honor and Principles may make an Exception to a
general Character, and by his stiffness and constancy to his Word and Oath may
serve to redeem his Country from such an Imputation, yet he will hardly have
the confidence to own his descent thence without a blush, when it is thus
stigmatized.

Reas. 5. But however the worth and honesty of such a one may help to rescue
his Country's Fame, as the Justice of Aristides may give Athens a Credit,
whereby she may rival the Glory of Rome for her Cato Censorius, or his great
Grandchild of Utica; yet the Religion such a Country professes can never
escape the having dirt thrown upon it by Men of a different Persuasion, if it
lets Perjuries, which are as much contrary to the dictates of Natural Religion,
as they are against the express Prohibitions of Revealed and Christian one, go
away unpunished, or what is tantamoun, but lightly. It subjects it to extreme
doubts whether the Religion of such a Denomination, or such a Sect of it be
Orthodox or no; however it puts it out of all manner of question that such
Professors or Disciples who are guilty of this outrageous Crime, or wink hard
at it, while committed by others, do not believe a single Syllable of its
Doctrine to be true, how grave and demure a Countenance soever they set upon
the matter.

It was easy for Amurath the II. to imagine Christian Religion gave Countenance
to Perjury, when he fully understood that Uladislaus K. of Hungary had broken
the Truce of 10 Years concluded between them, and confirmed by an Oath, upon
the Solicitation of one of its Purple Fathers, Cardinal Julian sent from its
great Patriarch in the West, Eugene the IV. to represent the Advantages he had
to do it, while that Sultan's Arms were employed in Asia; and he would have
thought he had had an infallible ground to conclude it false, had not his
Appeal to the God of the Christians, with his hands lifted up to Him in a
Bonsin. Dec. 3. Lib. 6. Annal. Turcici ad An. 1443
Supplication, (and some say with the Schedule containing the Articles of Truce
held up in them) at the Battle of Varna, that he would revenge the
Perfidiousness of his followers, been answered with a Victory immediately on
his side, which before inclined to the Christians, Uladislaus the Breaker of it
being slain in the Field, and the Cardinal, who instigated him to it, in the
Persnit. And so it was for Abimelech the Saracen to think the same, had not his
appeal against the Perjury of Justinian. Rhinotmetus fastening the Articles of
the broken Peace to a Spear, received the Cedren.
like determination by the discomfiture of that Emperors Army.

Reas. 6. But, abstracting from the Religion of an Oath, and the Punishment it
draws down from God on particular Persons, or a whole Nation guilty of it, and
the Scandal it reflects upon a People, or the Religion professed by them, the
inflicting a light Punishment on the Perjured, such as makes him no way
concerned with the fear of undergoing it, creates an opinion in the generality
of Mankind, who take their measure in judging of the quality of Offenses from
the penalties allotted to them by the Law, that the Crime is trivial. And such
a conceit once imbibed by Subjects is apt to shake the Crowns on the Heads of
Princes, and tends to render all Government precarious and tottering, because
it is an Invitation to them to break all their Oaths of Obedience to them, the
Esteem of whose Religion and Sacredness, is a stronger security to them than
Guards and Armies.

Nor can it be reasonably expected, that they, who have learned not to value
their Faith staked down at the Bar in an Assertory Oath, should regard the
keeping of it pledged to them in a Promissory one, though sitting on their
Thrones, or in the Besides, as all Government is or should be built upon the
basis of Justice; so this Virtue must be the Pillars and Buttresses to support
it: And if at any times it happens, as too often it does, that that Civil Fabric
should be erected upon other Foundations than those of Justice, yet upheld it
must be by doing it. And because it is rarely seen that they, who get the Power
of Government Deuteronomy. v. 16.
into their hands by Fraud and Wrong, are careful of doing right, we may thence
prognosticate, instructed by the Examples of past Ages, that they will soon
sink themselves and Estate into irrevocable Ruin.

But all administration of Justice must of necessity be stopped, if Perjury be in
the way; And in this corrupt and degenerate Estate of Mankind, numbers upon the
hopes and prospect of an encouraging Reward, if offered, and there no fears of
a slight Punishment, should it be their misfortune to be discovered, will
without any difficulty of persuasion, be induced and stand ready prepared to
commit it.

Thus in brief I have laid before you, My Lords and Gentlemen, the heinousness
of Perjury in its own Nature, and the terribleness of it in its Consequents, to
spare your pains and time employed now upon many important Affairs lying before
you; some portion of which the reducing these to your Memories, and considering
them in your Thoughts would divert; And that taking my rise thence, I might be
the more likely to succeed in my design of moving you to prepare some Bill for
the speedy suppressing or curbing at least this growing Crime, by providing
some penalty against it, which by its sharpness may be more effectual to the
obtaining this end, than that already ordained by our Laws.

Now with all due Submission to your great Prudence and Experience, My Lords
and Gentlemen, it is probable that after research and examination, no expedient
will be found so adequate and apposite to this purpose, no remedy so proper for
the cure of this Distemper as the making this Crime Capital in the Offenders;
and fortifying your Bill which shall interdict it with the Sanction of Death:
For the sharpness of the Law in punishing a Crime, disciplines Men into Virtue
and good Life. Sert. Caecilius Ap Agellium Noct. At. l. 20. c. 1. Paulus lib.
5. Sentent. ad Leg. Cornel. Testamentar. Hi qui cb falsum Testimonium
perhibendum acceperit, dederint, Judicem ut Sententiam ferat, vel non ferat
corruperint, corrumpendumve curaverint, humiliores capite puniantur,
honestiores publicatis bonis cum ipso Judice in insulam deportentur.
By the Roman Constitution, Those, who suborned or corrupted any to depose
falsely against another, if their quality was ignoble, were punished with Death:
If their Condition was Honorable with Confiscation of Goods and Transportation,
which though a Penalty on this side of Death, yet it was in the Eye of their
Law a Capital one.

Among the Lycians a false Evidence had his Goods and Estate Heraclid. Ponticus
de Lyciis. (...). Jure Roman. vocatur Diminutio Capitis, v. Zouch. Elem. Jur.
P. 4. 9.
seized on, and was himself sold for a Slave; and the loss of Liberty among one
of the wisest Nations and best able to judge of it, was ranked with Capital
Penalties, etc. at least, I think, the Punishment with which this Bill should
be strengthened ought to bear a just proportion and equality with the mischief
intended by the Perjured Person against the Innocent; so that whatsoever
Punishment the Law has denounced against an Offense, and the Person convicted
of it by legal honest Witnesses, was to undergo, the same, if he proved his
Innocence, should the false Deponents suffer, forasmuch as their false Oaths
were directed and levelled to do that same mischief to him.

For that would be but Retaliation, than which no part or act Mat. 7. v. 2.
Rabbini in Gomara, Tit. Sanhedr.
of Justice can be more equal, it being meeting back to Men the same measure
they first meeted out.

And nothing appears more reasonable, than that the Contriver of a villainous
Accusation, should receive for a Reward of his Merits the Punishment due to the
Villainy; the forgers of a Plot should enjoy as the Fruits of their Labor, what
the Plotters ought.

The Tyrant to whom the Brazen Bull was presented, thought Ovid. Trist 5 Eleg.
it highly equitable as well as the Poet, that the famous Inventer of this
Engine for tormenting of others, should first handsel his Work, and try the
Experiment, how well it bellowed.

Yea, God has allowed this procedure, and not only so, but Exodus 21. 24, 25.
Deuteronomy. 19. v. 18.
established it for a standard of Justice, Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, etc.
and particularly in the present Case, if he shall testify falsely against his
Brother, then shall ye do unto him, as he thought to do unto his Brother, and
by this they proceeded in Simembrum ruperit, Talio esto L. 12. Tab. Covarruvias
cap. Peccati, Part. 2. Lessius de Ju. and Just. lib. 2. cap. 33. dub. 8. Grot.
de B. and P. l. 2. c. 16. 2 Kings 9. 36.
putting the two Elders to death, who had impeached Susanna of Adultery. And
according to this Principle it is the common determination of Casuists, that a
corrupt Judge, a false Accuser, or Evidence should make Satisfaction to the
Praty grieved, proportionable to the damage he sustained by the Sentence,
Impeachment, or Testimony.

And it is correspondent to his own method of Providence, when he takes the
Cause into his own hand, by the Justice of which it so happens, that the Foot
of the Wicked is caught and entangled in the same Snare, that he laid and
privily hid for others, falls into the same Pit he dug. This very Conduct God
observed in the Sin of Ahab and Jezebel, the Dogs licked the Blood of the last
in that very spot of Ground, which she by the procuring or suborning of false
Witnesses robbed Naboth of, together with his Life; and the slain Carcass of
Ahab, who coveted an evil Covetousness against his Vineyard, and by it
occasioned the Perjury and Murder by which this was gained, was thrown at
Jehu's command into that very portion, who remarqued the Truth of God in the
completion of his Prediction, as well as his Justice in Ib. v. 25. compare 1
Kings 21. v. 23. and 2 Kings 9. v. 36.
the affair. So he did in punishing Rudolph of Swaben, the Pseudo-Emperor, set
up by Pope Hildebrand against his lawful Sovereign Henry the IV. (which is not
only taken notice of by Historians, but related by them as his own Sense) whose
Conscience being wounded with a Reflection on his guilt, as well as his body
was at the Battle of Elastra or Elister, having first lost his Right Hand,
before Godfrey of Bulloin struck him through the Breast with the Abbas
Vspergens. Sigebert. Gemblac. ad Ann. 1080.
Staff of the Standard he carried in that Action, extorted this Consession from
him, That he justly suffered in that Hand, which he laid upon the Gospel when
he swore that Fealty to Henry the IV. which he had perfidiously broke.

In short, our Wise Neighbor-Nation of Scotland, tho I know not whether she
exercises this Retaliation against false Witnesses (which yet I believe she
does, having great respect, in the framing of her Laws, or the practice of them
to the Imperial) does it however against the Judge; so that if at any time,
upon the scanning over again the Judicial Proceedings, it shall appear, the
Judge, transported by Hatred, Envy, or any such vile Passion, or swayed by
Bribes or Interest, directed the Jury to bring in a Verdict, which took away
wrongfully the impleaded Person's Life, he shall, if alive at the
Re-examination of the affair, satisfy for it with his own, or if not, his
Estate shall make Satisfaction proportionate to the Damages the Heirs of the
Executed Person sustained by his Death.

But forasmuch as neither making the false Deponent suffer the Punishment
enacted against the Crime, whatsoever that be, which he injuriously objects to
the innocent, may be sufficient to restrain the Sin of Perjury; nor yet may the
infliction of Death, nor the Confiscation of Estate and Goods, together with
the perpetual loss of Liberty in every such Case, carry terror enough in them
to affright Men, who are audaciously wicked from adventuring on it, to execute
the Conspiracy they have entered into against the Lives, Fortunes, and good
Names of others; because they may hope to cloth themselves and machinations
with so much night, to walk in such deep silence and thick darkness, as not to
be descried by the most diligent and piercing Eye, nor the quickest Ear, and
then if the divelish Engine be so secretly placed, and the Mine dug so deep
that they cannot be discovered before hand, the one may be played and the other
sprung with dismal and fatal Success against the best Men and worthiest
Patriots; it will become the Sageness of your Illustrious Assembly, My Lords
and Gentlemen, to consider of means, even to obviate, if possible, the
mischievous designs of such, who have a mind to Perjure themselves to compass
the ruin of others, upon Confidence they can order matters with so much
cunning, and carry them so closely, as they shall not be detected.

In my Opinion, which I deliver with all deference to your Judgments, it would
mightily conduce to this end, if in the same Bill you should prescribe Rules,
whereby Courts of Justice, should regulate themselves in admitting Persons to
give Testimony. For all without distinction are not fit to give Testimony in
many Facts, or to be believed; and such who are infamous for Lewdness in all
the Scenes and Stages of their Life, I take to be very incompetent Witnesses,
and that their Testimony, for want of Credibility, ought to be rejected.

It seem to me that there is greater Reason why the Law should be careful in
requiring Qualifications in those, whom Articuli sup Chartam 28 Edv. 1. c. 3.
34 Edv. 3. c. 10. 1 Rich. 3. 4. c.
she allows to be Witnesses, as in general that they be Men of unblemisht fame
for their probity, than she is in directing what Choice the Sheriff should make
of Jurors, who according to her Ordination is to impanel no suspicious one; but
they are to be all of good Fame and Name; seeing it is the Depositions of those
which wholly influence these in their Verdict. Wise Nations have constituted
these and these Qualifications for Witnesses, and that those who did not appear
so conditioned, Nam in Testimoniis Fides, mores, Gravitas examinantur L. in
Test. ff de Testibus. In Testibus and vitae qualitas spectari debet and
dignitas. L. 3.. lege ff de Testibus. Grot. de B. and P. lib. 1. c. 2. 10.
Annot. 11. Idem in 17
should not be heard at the Bar.

According to the Roman Law, the Honesty, the Manners, the Gravity of the
Witnesses were inquired into.

And the Judges had Consideration of, and to the Manner and Reputation, and
Honor of the Witnesses lives as the true and solid Grounds of Credibility.

And Servants therefore for the Ignobleness of their Condition, and as
believing they might for that Reason be easier corrupted, were debarred from
giving Testimony, unless wrackt to speak the Truth.

In the Jewish Constitution, neither Thieves after they had made Restitution,
nor common Gamesters were looked upon as any more competent Witnesses, than
Persons berest of their Reason. The first, I suppose, they apprehended might be
induced again to do injustice when it served their Interest, and that the
Second, who for lucre were apt to forswear themselves at a Gaming-Table, might
have the same prevailing motive to do it at a Bar, might make no more bones of
Cozening by a false Oath, than by false Play, as he in Plutarch averred, Men
Plut. Apotheg. (...), etc.
were to be cheated by Oaths, as Boys by false Dice, or that the former was
Men's, the other Childrens play.

In Scotland I am informed the Person Arrain'd for Treason, has the liberty to
Cite by a Subpoena, [or as they speak, allows Letters of Exculpation] not only
Witnesses of his own Peaceable and Honest Conversation, but to confront those,
who are Evidence Mackenz. L. of Scot. B. 4. T. 4.
for the Crown, and if they can prove them to be Persons of a very ill Fame,
their Testimony shall not be accepted against the Prisoner.

And as some ought to be excluded from the Privilege of bearing a Testimony in
any case, especially Capital ones, for their infamous manner of Living; so
should Courts be instructed or authorized to reject others likewise, of whose
Condition of Living, either by Reason of their Obscurity, or their shooting up
like Mushrooms, all on a sudden, no knowledge can be gained. For when this
cannot be discovered, the Prosecuted are deprived of their main guard and
principal defense against false Depositions. Upon this reason the Roman Law
wisely prohibited L. 3. ff ad Leg. Cornel. de Falsari is. Cicero.
under severe Penalties, the Witnesses changing their Names, because by this
means they would so hide themselves as no Inquisition into or Examination of
their Lives can possibly be made; as the Cuttle fish by the effusion of a Juice
like Ink, so blackens the Water that she secures her self from being caught by
all the Art of the Fisherman, and this shifting of their Names could not be
expounded to be done to any other end, than that they might have the better
opportunity to circumvent and oppress those they accused.

Had the Law heretofore made these the Requisites of a Witness before his
Testimony could be accepted; a Fuller could not have had the impudence or the
folly to pretend to be an Evidence in a Plot, in which he would have involved
some Members of the House of Commons; nor Young and Blackhed to appear in an
Accusation of Treason against the Archbishop of Cant. the Bp. of Roch. and
other Temporal Lords; Nor L --,K --,W --,the Presumption to imagine they should
be credited against the L -- shire and C -- shire Gentlemen, by a Jury of the
like quality (no more than any consiering Person could have been inclined to
think, that Capt. Wit -- 's discovery, that Dr. Tho -- d and Mr. Pi --, had
been employed by the Lords Worcester -- Ayl -- and Lich -- to transact with him, that
he assisted with a gang of his Fellow-Robbers would kill his Majesty, as he was
Hunting in Epping or Windsor Forest, had any weight of Credibility in it,
though he had made it in Confession, or as he was turning off at the Gallows)
they being all conscious to themselves of the Profligateness of their Lives, of
having prostituted their Reputation, and some of them, that they had oftener
changed their Names, than the dread of Catchpoles had made them change their
lurking holes, or their wretched Poverty would permit them to change Shirts.

And as the Testimony of all sorts of Men without Discrimination, or any
previous inquiry into their Lives upon the mere calling for them by the King's
Council should not be admitted; for this is precipitating a Man's Condemnation;
so neither should the Judges or Gentlemen of the Jury be too easy in giving a
credulous Ear, or yielding up their Faith, though the Crimes, with which the
Prisoner is charged, are attested by Persons, who were not of a lost Fame, if
they are of that nature, as would affect their Life, Estate, Honor, upon
Conviction, unless there were concurrent Circumstances, which rendered their
Deposition probable. The more enormous the Crime objected against the Prisoner,
or the more heinous the Punishment of it is, the more difficult the Judges and
Jurors should be to credit its Commission by a Man of fair and clear Reputation
for Honesty and Integrity.

Quintillian, whose Art made him capable of in instructing Quintilian l. 4. c.
3. Difficillima enim est gravissimi cujusque sceler is fides.
both Bench and Bar, has mentioned this.

Besides, My Lords and Gentlemen, it will deserve your Care, because it may
concern your Safety, to get it enacted, that the proof should be such, as
should touch not only the Species of the Crime, but reach also to the
individuality of the Fact, and that likewise there should be concurrent
Testimonies as to the Identcal manner of perpetrating it; two at least, as God
ordained Deuteronomy. 17.6.
there should be two or three in order to convict any of Rebellion against
himself, viz. Idolatry; and as it is practiced at this day in Scotland. For
though two should swear home against a Person as to a particular Treason,
namely, a design to Murder a Prince, or stir up Insurrections against him, yet
a discrepancy in their Evidence, as to the intended manner and method of
compassing his design, would afford good ground to suspect the Truth of it.

He, in whom the Spirit of Wisdom of the most High God was found, proceeded
upon this ground, to clear the Innocence of Susanna, after she had been cast by
the point blank and jointly agreeing Oaths of two Elders, as to the Commission
of the Adultery they accused her of, and to disprove their Testimony,
convicting them of forging a lying Accusation against her, by their differing
among themselves, as to the Place where these pretended Eyewitnesses saw the
foulness acted, the one, when Susan. v. 25 and v. 58.
he interrogated them apart, affirming it done under a Mastick, the other under
a Holm-Tree.

^^d the Law thus antecedently directed, it had been impossible that C. Sidney
should have been condemned in West. Hall, when there was but one single
Witness, who was positive to the Conspiracy he was accused of, supported by
another, that he surpised a Treasonable Pamphlet in his Closet, which had no
other proof that it was his own Writing, than one fetched from a similitude of
Hands. Or that Mr. Ash -- should have been Sentenced at the Sessions House, for
having Papers seized upon him (which the Court declared to contain Treasonable
Matter) while the Proof, though full and pregnant to that point of Seizing, was
maim and defective in the making out, even so much as by a conformity and
comparison of Hands that he wrote any of them, or by collateral Circumstances
that he knew what they comprehended. The L. Marl -- could never have been
committed for Treason upon a single Information, when it could not be
reasonably thought, that he should be either so mutable as to engage in a
design to pluck down that Government, to the raising of which he had so
powerfully contributed, or it so ungrateful as to do it against that which had
caressed him with bestowing Honors upon him, or so imprudent as to seek to
better his Condition by an alteration of it. Nor could the E. of Hunt -- and
other Persons of Quality have been denied the benefit of the Habeas Corpus
Bill, when there was but one Witness upon Oath against them: Though S. A. had
the boldness to call a single Testimony, the having Evidence against each
Prisoner, and the art of Equivocating so dexterously, as to make Journal of the
Lords House, Nov. 11. 14, 15. 1692.
Witnesses against the Prisoners in his Affidavit, pass upon the Ct. for a
Plurality against every single one, and get them thereby remanded to the Tower.

Besides the forementioned Reasons to bring in such a Bill, you may be
encouraged to do it, from the just ground you have to hope that it cannot want
the Royal Fiat, Roy le veult, to create it an Act as soon as tendered to his
Majesty; He being a Prince of too great Wisdom, not to understand his Interest
in it, and how beneficial it will be to the Crown; of too great Generosity to
refuse the People so public a good as this will be to them, and of too grateful
a Memory, not to oblige you in passing it, if you insist upon it, from whose
Donation, not 6 Years since, he received the Imperial Crown of this Realm with
thanks; of too much Constancy to depart from Resolutions once well taken up by
him; and since therefore in his Declaration emitted by him when Prince of
Orange, one of the Reasons assigned for his coming over was to obtain a
Reformation of Abuses committed in the Trial of Capital Causes, and there can
be none more foul than Perjury, by which in one breath, the Lives, Estates,
Honors, of the most Noble may be taken away, and they will be always in this
Danger from Wicked Men, while the Motives to induce them to forswear themselves
continue more prevalent, than their Fears to suffer the slight Punishment (as
it is now) of their Perjury, if that be detected; you cannot apprehend, without
an injustice, at the same time you do so, to these his Heroic Qualities, that
the King of England will not redress what the Prince of Orange complained of.

I say, you cannot harbor such a Jealousy without detracting from those his
Royal Virtues, and supposing, He would fly to such little Subterfuges as
Captain Bessus did for an Excuse why he did not fight with those who challenged
him, that Bessus the Valiant was not bound to answer for what Bessus the Coward
said or did; or without thinking him (what is not meet) wretchedly careless how
He transmitteh his Great Name to Posterity, which, in case he did not after the
gaining of the Diadem, perform what he promised before he wore it, might grow
into a Byword, as a famous Lawyers did for varying his Judgment with his Place
and Station: The Case is altered now, quoth Ployden.

If then, My Lords and Gentlemen, you have any Zeal for God's Honor, as you
showed a great deal in providing against the Profanation of his Holy Day,
which yet was but guarding the border and fringe of Religion, for the observing
of a Day is no more of the Essence of honoring him, than Time is of any Civil
Action, and if I remember right, against the profaning of his Great Name, by
customary Swearing, you ought to show it more, in being sollicitous, that it be
not treated with insolent Scorn, as it is by Forswearers.

If you have any regard to the Safety or very Being of your Country, and would
divert God's Judgments, which though delayed for a Season, will at length
over-take and punish a Nation, where Perjury is suffered to thrive to the last
degree, to an utter Excision of them.

If you would not have your Country left Desolate by Multitudes of its
Inhabitants transporting their Persons and Effects into Foreign Parts, where
their Lives and Estates, which here lie exposed to the Mercy of Perjurious
Villains, who have no more regret than Conscience for the destroying both, may
be in some reasonable Security.

If you have any Veneration for its Honor, or would not have it branded abroad
with the infamous reproach of being Perfidious, or redeem us from the Scandal
of that Imputation, which is cast upon us, of being a People, who have no Sense
of an Oath.

If you have any compassionate Care for the Lives of your fellow Subjects,
which lie continually exposed to every profligate Rascal, who has the
Audaciousness to run the risque of peeping through an Inch-board, or having his
Ears nailed to it, or at the utmost can stand the battery of Rotten-Eggs, in
case he should be deprehended to have sworn falsely against them.

If you would not have the Land defiled with Innocent Blood, would not have it
found in your Skirts, nor Blood touch Blood, nor Robbery committed with Color
of Justice, which Crimes drew forth at first God's complaint against Judah and
Jerusalem, and afterward his soarest Judgments upon them.

Or if you have any Tenderness for your own dear Lives, or value your own
Estates and Honors, so that you would not by any Circumvention or Supplantation
from false, mercinary, prostitute Tongues be deprived of them, to which Danger
you lie extremely subject, while they are only guarded by so slender a Penalty,
at that of the present Law, against Lying and Perjurious Lips.

If you would transmit these as safe to your Posterities as you received them
from your Ancesters.

If you would not have your Noble or Generous Blood stained, your ample or fair
Patrimonies annihilated by the Forgery of Crimes against you, which confirmed
with false Oaths will produce this Calamity.

If you would have the Crown sit fast on the Heads of those Princes on which
you have placed it, if you would have them fixed in those Thrones where you have
seated them; since by a false Accusation maintained by superadded Perjury,
which, as the Law now stands, is little less than indemnified, their ablest
Ministers may be ravished from them, and be thereby deprived of the Aid and
Support of their faithful Counsels. Since the Thrones of Kings are Established
Proverb. 12.
by Righteousness, and Crowned Heads subsist by the Reputation of Justice, as
well as ordinary Traders, and this Reputation must mightily be impaired, if
under their Reigns, the Innocent shall want the necessary defense of some
severe Law against the Assaults of Perjury.

If you have any regard to the united Wishes and Desires of the best and
soberest part of the Nation, who considering the late Danger, which through the
Perjury of Miscreants lost to all Virtue and good Name, had encompassed some
Gentlemen of the first Note in their several Countries, and had like to have
swallowed them up, and might probably have sucked in many others, had not their
wicked Artifices been discovered by a timely Providence, are bent upon
requesting and obtaining such a Security from you; I say, if any Consideration
be had of these, you then have, My Lords and Gentlemen, all the Encouragement
to prepare such a Bill, as will procure this Security, which a well built Hope,
that it will pass into a Law, can give you (for you cannot fear that it will
miscarry for want of his Majesty's Signing it, without suspecting him to be
less gracious than he has Promised or has Reason to be to a People devoted
with such Affection to his Service) And all the Reasons and Motives, which the
Honor of God, the Reputation of your Native beloved Country; its Safety
together with that of his Majesty, which is deservedly precious in your Eyes,
the private good of each honest Man singly, and the Public Good of all
conjoyntly can suggest, to incite you to use all the Application you possibly
can, for the dispacthing of so necessary and useful a Bill, which will make the
Nation happy, as far as the covering Innocence, from a Destruction at any time
designed against it can, and your selves in particular for ever memorable, by
procuring so great a Good to it.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
WHile these Sheets were a Working off, a great Peer I am told, brought into
the House of Lords a Bill, worthy of himself, his high Station, to the same end
that this was intended to promote, which I cannot take notice of, without
making all the wishes for its Success, which the Justice and Honor of it
deserves.


