AN Humble Proposal, WHEREBY HIS MAJESTY May Raise and Extend HIS CREDIT To the
Annual Value of HIS REVENUE, Without Interest or Damage TO THE KINGDOM.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Thomas Newcomb, 1675/4

An humble Proposal, whereby His Majesty may raise and extend His Credit to the
Annual value of His Revenue, without Interest or Damage to the Kingdom.
THat all Money may be indifferently respected as a Metal, and as a Coin. As a
Metal it is serviceable to many other good purposes, and being rated
accordingly, it would not rise in price much above other Metalls. As a Coin,
it is no more then a Counter. Yet, as the matter now goes, that is it which now
raises it in value infinitely above all other Metalls in the world; and we
Annually part with great quantities of our best Staple Commodities, to the
value of many hundred thousand pounds worth, to purchase so much of the
aforesaid Metalls, as would supply our want of Money; which, as was said, are
nothing else but certain Authorized Coins or Medals, that like Tokens of
Account are sure upon every Commutation of Commodities to yield their Impressed
value, serving only to supply the interval of time between the selling of one
Commodity, and the buying of another: Which Credit, grounded on good Security,
can as well perform, by transferring the same from one to another, as the
Ownership of Money in Foreign Banks, for that is by many accepted, and often
preferred before Money, is that only, not use, that will both attract and
command it to any place or person whatsoever. Nor is Money so to be thought the
life of Trade, as though it could not subsist without it, seeing it is well
known there has been very great Trading by way of Commutation, or Barter, when
there was but little Money stirring in the world. The Dutch, Italians, etc.
have such remedies against this want, that it can neither decay nor hinder
their Trade; because they commonly transport Bills of Debt, and have both
Public and Private Banks, wherein they assign their respective Credits daily,
for very great Sums, and that with great ease and satisfaction, by Writings
only; whilst in the interim, that mass of Treasure, giving foundation to the
aforesaid Credit, is employed in Foreign Trade and Merchandise, etc. And by
those means they have little other use of Money, more then for their ordinary
Expenses.

The benefit or grand effect of the aforesaid Banks, whether Public or
Private, are sufficiently known, though not so well understood at first; and
were introduced into the Low Countries by a Public Edict or Placaet of the
State, requiring all Payments, exceeding such a Sum, to be made at one place;
which being fairly Registered, and put to each man's Account, the Bank, in nature
of a Record, becomes of course a Witness to all Receipts and Payments made
there: Avoiding thereby many litigious Disputes in Law, which usually happen in
other Countries, to the great obstruction of Commerce.

And although every man might indifferently carry off his Money in Specie to
his own house, or have it placed on his account; yet forasmuch as by Law, all
were obliged to pay it there, whenever they had occasion to issue it out
again, they chose rather to pass over their respective Credits by way of
Assignation, which came in a continual suit to a hundred; by means whereof, an
hundred pound was sufficient to answer the Credit of an hundred times as much
in Bank.

That this Bank Credit was as well current with the State, as with and amongst
the Merchants, otherwise it would have happened to them, as with private
Cashiers in this City, where the sleighting their Bills of Credit, have ever
proved fatal to them.

And therefore if ever His Majesty designs any thing of this nature, He must be
sure, that the same Credit he would have currently received by others
throughout His own Dominions, be made so in all public Receipts and Paiments,
which alone would make it current to all; else it is not to be expected His
Majesty's Credit should pass, or be ever accepted by any man.

That all those places where Banks are erected, and Bills of Debt transported
in Trade, Money is allowed to be brought in, and carried out at pleasure,
without any loss or prejudice to Trade: And in truth, it is reckoned in those
places no more then a Commodity, rising and falling in value, as the same
increases or diminishes in quantity, as all other Commodities do.

And whereas it may be thought, the Kingdom, both in respect of the Government,
and some other accidents frequently objected, is under those Circumstances, as
may render it wholly incompatible with any thing of this nature, then which,
nothing could be offered more to the disgrace of Monarchy, so much admited and
celebrated by the greatest part of mankind, as the best of Governments. It
remains to propose how, notwithstanding, to reduce it to practice in this, as
well as in other Countries.

1. That certain public places, called Banks, or Grand Cash, assignable by His
Majesty, in the most convenient parts of the Kingdom, be erected, where all
Receipts and Payments to and from the Crown, especially exceeding such a sum,
may be respectively made.

2. That all persons receiving Money in Bank, or other aforesaid Grand Cash,
have liberty indifferently to assign over his or their Credits, where the same
shall be placed, to each man's Account, by way of Debt and Credit, according to
what is received and paid, or carry the same away in Specie, provided Security
be first given, to make his or their respective Paiments there, for the value
received, when ever they have occasion to deliver it out again.

3. That the aforesaid Credit being made Current in all public Receipts and
Paiments of the Crown, His Majesty shall never be without the Annual Value of
His Revenue in Cash, without taking up the same (as heretofore) on Interest,
but to employ and improve to the best advantage of the Crown and Kingdom. Or
thus.

4. That in all cases of necessity, and in defect of money, Tallies be struck
in the Exchequer, not exceeding the Annual value of His Majesty's Revenue.

5. That there be a certain public place, where all persons receiving the said
Tallies, may reposit the same under the custody and care of some general
Cashier or Banker, appointed by Authority, who shall upon receipt thereof,
under the Seal of His Majesty's Exchequer, or some other peculiar Stamp, like
those in the Power Impressed on Money, cause the same, at the Election of the
Proprietors, to be Coined into small Bills of Credit, as low as 5 l. or under,
and delivered out accordingly on demand.

6. That to the end the same may become Current throughout the whole Kingdom in
Trade, it is humbly proposed, that it may be ordained by His Majesty's
Prerogative Royal, or in Parliament. That the said Bills of Credit, thus
grounded and supported as aforesaid, shall be allowed and accepted in all
public Receipts and Paiments made to the King, who by those great Sums of
Money, giving foundation to the aforesaid Credit, (being all that while in the
Subjects hands) may be employed in Trade and Merchandise, to the incredible
increase thereof, and further advance of His Majesty's Revenue.

7. And that I may not be thought to be mistaken in the notion of a Tally, I
conceive all Tallies are delivered out of the Exchequer, upon Receipts of Money
paid in, and is in nature of an Acquittance or Discharge for the same, in order
to their Quietus. But in this place, nothing more is meant, then some public
Significavit from the Crown, that may be reckoned both an Evidence and Security
in Law, that shall accordingly be Current in all public Receipts and Paiments
as aforesaid.

8. But forasmuch as some part of the said Public Receipts is made to His
Majesty but for term of life, and so may be reckoned a Contingency; to the end
the aforesaid Credit may meet with no rub in the course of Trade, to the
obstructing His Majesty's more weighty concerns, it is humbly conceived
necessary, that the said Contingency be provided against by His Majesty in
Parliament, or in such other way as to His Majesty's great Wisdom shall seem
best.

9. Thus the said Authorized Bills of Credit shall be reckoned a new Specie of
Money, which His Majesty creates and superads to the general Stock of the
Kingdom, to the great benefit of Trade, which by this means is considerably
advanced and augmented, producing the like effects in the Revenue of the Crown.
And it may be distinguished from the general Coin of the Kingdom, and pass
under the name of Check or Bankmoney. Hereby His Majesty's Security and Pay,
without altering any settled course of His Exchequer, or incumbring it, may be
made as Current and Satisfying as any man's, if not superior to that of any
Prince or State whatsoever, and thereby become. Current in Trade and Commerce,
equal to any Coin, the counterfeiting thereof being made in like manner Capital.

10. That though the said Bills of Credit may be made so, as the Bank cannot be
deceived, there may be yet some difficulty in reference to the Subject, who may
not possibly be able to distinguish the true and legitimate Bills from the
counterfeit: The best way for cure in this case is this, after the example of
the Venetians, especially to write of their respective Credits at the Bank.
This practice duly observed, will be of singular use and advantage to the
Crown, and for ought we know, may be equal in value to His Majesty's Customs.

As for example, Suppose His Majesty should lend 100 l. or 1000 l. upon
Security Real or Personal; the said person by the aforesaid Rules being
obliged, when ever they have occasion to deliver out this money in payment to
others, to bring it to the Bank, they will choose rather to leave it there,
where it lies under that Security; so transferring it to a Third; he, for the
like reason, to a Fourth, and so to a hundred; whereby the King shall receive
the Benefit and Interest of a hundred times that Sum per Annum: mean while the
Credit, grounded on the Security only, is really found, which it ought not to
exceed at any time; and though profitable to His Majesty, as aforesaid, can be
no damage to any man; for if the Security which any man would accept for the
money could be made Current, it is as good as the money it self.

This done, it cannot be doubted, but this new Specie of money will pass from
the King, where he is immediate Debtor, from them again to theirs; and so with
all persons concerned in public Paiments, as Merchants, Brewers, and the like,
with their dependents, which will go a great way in Trade, and in effect
concludes all. By means whereof, His Majesty's Land and Naval Forces are
accommodated. Nor, by the way, will it be difficult for Seamen, or other
Soldiers, to convert the same into money, when transmitted to them under these
circumstances; for being discharged the Public, they put themselves into the
service of private Merchants, who at that time Freighting Ships to Sea, have
always considerable Paiments to make to the King; seeing it may as well be done
in one Specie as in another, and being desired it may at any time be turned
into money by Bankers and others, with but small allowance of common Interest,
forasmuch as they can immediately pass the same to the Merchants, and in making
public Paiments, as aforesaid, with like allowance of Interest from them,
receiving in effect double Interest.

Thus the like may be delivered out upon the Security of His Majesty's
Fee-farms, valued at so many years purchase as they are really worth, or would
yield to be sold, to be allowed and accepted in all public Paiments to the
King, as aforesaid: mean while, bringing in their Annual Rents into the
Exchequer, or Chamber of London, to be always answerable for the credit grafted
thereon.

The consequent Benefits hence arising.
His Majesty's Debts may be hereby immediately extinguished, the Expenses of
the Crown, Naval and Domestic, lessened, every man put in a capacity of
satisfying himself from the King at any time, the Revenue of the Kingdom
meliorated and advanced, equal to the credit hereby raised and extended,
producing a proportionable augmentation in the Revenue of the Crown, and is
equivalent to the like value of money, added to the general Stock of the
Kingdom, or lent for the improvement of Trade.

It will reduce Interest, improve Rents, disperse the money now in Banks,
facilitate the borrowing of money, make all Impositions more easily collected,
secure the Farmer against bad Debts, and the King against all pretense of
defalkation, make Commodities Money, and yet leave the same Arbitrary as
before; whereby, in effect, His Majesty's whole Revenue is paid in Commodity,
to the great ease and profit of the Subject; it prevents many Lawsuits, and
the sail of Sea-mens Tickets for half money, by causing an overbalance in
Trade, contributes to the importation of Bullion, to the further increase of
our Stock, and enriching the Kingdom. Hereby may be undertaken the remitting
and exchange of money from all parts, and by the direction and care of His
Majesty, return the same in Specie, to the draining of other Countries, and
enriching our own. Whereby the Merchants will be necessitated to carry out more
of our own growth and Manufactures, to raise and create a new Fond and Credit
abroad. It is introductive to public Banks, but free from the objected dangers
and inconveniences of Banks here, nor subject to the like accidents with those
abroad; whereby the Prince and the Subject are equally secure.

In short, His Majesty's Revenue is hereby Coined into money, and is equivalent
to the like value of money given him to the end of the world, without Interest.
Hereby all that Interest money which His Majesty now pays, will be Annually
saved, so that hereafter His Majesty will not need those usual supplies of City
Bankers or Farmers, as heretofore, to His exceeding great detriment. And from
the whole, His Majesty's Revenue will be so exceedingly increased, that it may
modestly be computed worth three or four hundred thousand pound per Annum, more
then at present.

FINIS.

