THE Grounds and Reasons OF MONARCHY Considered. IN A Review of the SCOTCH
Story, gathered out of their best Authors and Records. By J. H.

Corrected and Reprinted According to the Edinburgh Copy. Anno MDCL.

THE PREFACE.
THere is nothing has more confounded knowledge among men, then the
reciprocal violences of the understanding and the will; or, to speak plainly,
the passion of the one and blindness of the other: Since some by chance or
interest take up Principles whith they force the Understanding by strained
Arguments to maintain: Others by the Custom of some opinion so bewitch the
will into confedracy, that they can never quit it after confutation; to remedy
this, since I had purposed with my self to say somewhat to this point (which
though it be but a small wire, yet the great weight of civil felicity lies
upon it) I knew no better method then to take the scales off the eyes of the
Understanding, and show the Will how better to bring about her great design of
good: And in the prosecution of this, I would not skirmish with every Argument
which had been a thing of immense slavery and not for every eye; but I choosed
rather to strike at the foundations, that the understanding might loose his
passion, and more freely consider upon what Quicksands they lay; and in this I
needed not to be positive, because I take a task which most men-are rather
happy in, that is, to supplant Error rather then to assert Truth: Hence I
consider King-ship simply, not troubling my self to maintain any other form, or
consider Oaths, Ends, changes of Government, or particular necessity or
Reasons of safety: they being distinct Considerations and tasks by themselves.
Now if this negative way satisfy not, I see no such great cause to be
discouraged, for (I confess) I do not perceive it so easy a thing to find an
error, and I had rather tell a man he was out of the way, then in endeavoring
to lead him to the end of his journey, lead him further about: and it is my
opinion, that as Sceptiscime is not only useless, but dangerous; if in
setting our thoughts in a posture of defense, it makes us absolutely wavering
and incredulous: so had I rather be Scepticall in my opinion, then maintain it
upon Grounds taken up and not demonstrated.

The second Part is merely an instance as to the Arguments of the First,
wherein I would not be understood to be a writer of an Epitome; (I have other
employments for my Time and Thoughts; and nobler too) but to set down a true
Series by way of Example, and therefore I was only to note Accesses and
Recesses to Governments, and the effects proceeding from the persons of
Governors, and here as I needed not much trouble the Chronology: So lest it
might be a bare Sceleton, I sprinkled some observations, that came to hand, and
seem to afford either pleasure or use. Thus much left I might be misunderstood,
I thought necessary to premise.

THE GROUNDS OF MONARCHY.
The first Part.
I Have often thought it strange that among all the Governments, either past or
being, the Monarchical should so far in extent and number exceed the Popular,
as that they could never yet come into comparison. I could never be persuaded,
but it was more happy for a people to be disposed of by a number of persons
jointly interested and concerned with them, then to be numbered as the herd and
Inheritance of One to whose lust and madness they were absolutely subject; and
that any man of the weakest reason and generosity would not rather choose for
his habitation that piece of earth, whereon there were access to honor by
virtue and no worth could be excluded; rather then that where all advancement
should proceed from the will of one scarcely hearing and seeing with his own
Organs, and gained for the most part by means lewd and indirect, and that in
the end to amount to nothing else but a more splendid and dangerous slavery. To
satisfy this, I considered how inscrutably Providence carries on the turns and
stops of all Governments, so that most people rather found them then made them;
the constitutions of men, some not fit to be masters of their Liberty, some not
capable, some not willing: the Ambition of settled Tyrants, who breaking their
own bounds have brought in violent alterations, and lastly, civil discord,
which have either corrupted or altered better settlements.

But these are observations, rather then Arguments, and relate to fact, rather
then reason. That which astonished me most was to see this Heroic learned Age,
not only not rising to thoughts of Liberty, but in stead thereof foolishly
turning their wits and swords against themselves in the maintenance of Them,
whose slaves they are, and indeed they can be no weak causes that produce so
long and settled a distemper though some of them I supposed, if not most of
them, are these.

He knows nothing that knows not how superstitiously the generality of
mankind is given to hold up traditions, and how pertinatious it is in the
maintenance of its first prejudices, insomuch that a discovery or more refind
reason is as insupportable to them, as the Sun is to an eye newly brought cut
of darkness; hence opiniatritrie (which is commonly proportioned to their
ignorance) and a generous obstinacy sometimes to death and ruin: So that it is
no marvel if we see many Gentlemen whose education enabled them only to use
their senses and first thoughts, so dazzled with the splendour of a Court,
prepossessed with the affection of a Prince, or bewitched with some subdolous
favor, That he chooses rather any hazard then enchantment should be broke up.
Others perhaps a degree above these, yet in respect of some Title stuck upon
the Family (which has been as fortunate a mystery of Kingship as any other)
or in rereverence to some glorious former achievements (minding not that in
all these cases the people are the only effective means, and the King only
imaginary) they think they should degenerate from bravery in bringing on a
change. Others are withheld by sloth and timerousnesse, either not daring or
unwilling to be happy; some looking no further then their private welfare,
indifferent for the multiplication of public evils. Others (and these the
worst of all) out of pravity of nature sacrificing to their ambition and
avarice, and in order to that, following any power concurring with any
Machinations, and upholding their Authors: whilst Princes themselves, (trained
up in these Arts, or receiving them in Tradition) know how to wind all their
humors to their own advantage, now foisting in the Divinity of their Titles
into Pulpits, now amuzing the People with magnificencies and inter-ludes, now
diverting their hot Spirits to some unprofitable foreign War (making way to
their accursed ends of revenge or glory, with the effusion of that blood which
should be as dear to them as their own:) Now stroaking the People with some
feeble but enforced Law (for which notwithstanding they will be paid;) and it is
observed, the most notorious Tyrants have taken this course; Now giving up the
eminentest of their Ministers (which they part with as indifferently as their
Robes) unto the rage and fury of the People, so that they are commanded and
condemned by the same mouth, and the credulous and ignorant believing their
King set over them, sit still, and by degrees grow into quiet and admiration,
especially if lulled a sleep with-some small continuance of peace (be it never
so unjust, unsound, or dangerous) as if the body politic could not languish of
an internal disease, whilst its complexion is fresh and cheerful.

Those are the Reasons, which (if I conceive aright) have stupefied the less
knowing part of mankind, Now how the more searching part has so odly
miscarried, will fall under consideration.

First, then, we need not take the pains to demonstrate how easy a thing it is
for men of acuteness, not conversant in Civil things not only to miscarry in
the apprehension, but even in the judgment of them; for they instead of
bringing the series and reason of affairs into rule and method, use
contrariwise to measure them by their own presupposed speculation; and by that
means become incapable of weighing rightly the various incidences and
circumstances of businesses: For it is to be observed, that the Theorems of no
Art or Profession are more easily found, or of difficulter practice, then those
of Policy; so that it is no wonder if men merely contemplative, fail so often in
the very laying of grounds, as we shall anon instance: now how fruitful
dainties are Error and Absurdity, we all know. But more especially the
contentions of contemplative men are most numerous, various and endless; for
wrangling is with them an Art, and they are endued with that ungenerous shame
never to acknowledge: Besides their principles are most times ill rivetted, and
it is to be feared, that in their superstructions, they as often call in their
imaginations, as their judgment to frame arguments. Besides, these men
fighting only with Pen, Ink, and Paper, seldom arrive at a means to decide
the Quarrel, by which he that gains the last word is supposed Conqueror. Or
the other leaves almost as inglorious a conquest to the Victor as if he had
been overthrown

That which I would say from all this, is, that the generality of speculative
men, for the most part guiding their understandings by those notions which they
find in Books: fall not seldom by this means into considerable Errors: For
all Books, those I mean that are humane, and fall directly under consideration,
either lay down Practical things, and observations of King-ship, or some
general and universal Notions, or else controversially Assert Monarchy
against some opposers. Now in the two latter there are generally found two
grand and insupportable fallacies, the first whereof is, that they fraudulently
converse in generals, and (to borrow the School-term) speak of that in the
Abstract, which they should do in the Concret: As for example, where they
should assert the particular right of this or that Prince, they cunningly or
ignorantly lay out most of their discourse in general about Monarchy, and not
seldom weary and amaze the dispute, before they come to the true Ground and
stating of the Quarrel, whereby the Readers diverted by such prepossession, and
entangled by general Notions of Authority, Power and Government, seldom
descend into the consideration of particulars; where the great scruple and
difficulty for the most part lies. So that any King (be his access to the
Government never so fraudulent and unjustifiable) becomes to be looked on as
sacred Authoritative, and by degrees begins to blush at the Attributes of
Sacred Majesty, Grace, and Highness; or any other Terms that the servile
flattery and witty Barbarity of Courtiers can give unto them; nay some even of
the wicked Roman Emperors, could be content to be saluted with Perennities and
Divinities, whereas if men would call their reasons into Council, they might
find that these blazing Stars were opake Bodies, and shone only by reflection:
These men having no more then either the Cabal of their own state and distance.
or the wretched Imposition upon the People cast on them; For would men divest
the Authority from the Person, and then commonly find it inconsiderable, if not
positively evil. And again, consider Authority in it self as a thing fixed,
veritable, immutable, and (when justly administered) sacred, they might find,
that granting a Prince to be the most Regular Just person in all the World, yet
many men as good, joined with him, and entrusted, and concurring to the same
end, might do much more good; and that to deny this, were to be as irrational,
as to deny that one Person could do no good at all. But however, this I take to
be certain and demonstrable out of their own Principles, that Kings being only
to be considered in respect of the trust and power that lies on them, a number
of men by as just means (to say not better) invested with the same trust and
power, are every jot as sacred, and of as much divine right as any Monarch is
(the power being essentially the same united or divided, as if a Commission be
to one or three) it will then result, that republics may be as Just and
Authoritative, as King-ships, and then their radical Argument of the Jure
Divino of King-ship is wholly enfeebled, and the other rendered equally as
Sovereign. And I am to note (but this is but transiently) the poorness, or to
say better, the Blasphemy of that Argument, that flourishes out Kings as the
Eclypes of Divinity, and vainly lavishes some Metaphysics, to prove that all
things have a natural Tendencie to an Oneness; nay, the itch of some merry
wits, have carried them to run over most of the Attribuies (as some English
Lawyers have talked of the Legal, I must say fantastical ubiquity and
omniscience of our Kings, though we see the contrary, and some Civilians about
the Emperor, have gone before them) whereas they should consider, that the
immense simplicity of God flows out in its several workings, with ineffable
variety, God being everywhere and the same, or as the Platonists say, a Center
in every part of his Circle, a Spirit without Quantity, Distance and
Comprehension; whereas man is a determinate narrow thing, who doing one thing,
cease to do another; and thinking of one thing, is forced to quit his former
thought. Now how fit he is to be a shade of this Archytipe, let any judge,
unless he could be refined from his corporeity, and enlarged into a
proportionable immensity. Besides, I know not whether it be safe to think or
no, That as God, who for the most part, suits men with gifts suitable to the
places to which he calls them, would in some measure pour out his Spirit
proportionate to these men, whereas as most commonly we find them,
notwithstanding their extraordinary Advantages, of society, education and
Business, as weak men as any other, and good Princes being swayed by the advice
of men, good and wise, and the bad seduced by men of their own inclinations;
what else are all Monarchies, but in reallity Optimaces for a few only
essentially govern, under the name of one who is utterly as unable as the
meanest of those over whom he claims superiority.

The second Fallacy or paralogism is this, That men, while they Labor thus to
support Monarchy tell us not what kind of Monarchy it is, and consequently gain
nothing, although we should grant, them the former proposition to be true; For
what does it avail to acertain me of the Title of such a Prince, if I know not
by what Title he holds, grant it were visible to me that such a man was marked
out by providence to be my Governor, yet if I cannot tell what kind of one,
whether absolute, mixed, limited, merely Law-Executive, or first in order, how
shall I know to direct my Obedience? if he be absolute, my very natural
liberty is taken away from me, nor do I know any power can make any man such;
The Scripture holding out just Limitations and restrictions to all Governors.
If mixed and limited, I must know the due temperature and bounds, or else he may
usurp or be mistaken, and I oppressed or injured. If Law-Executive, the power
fundamentally resides not in him, but in the great Counsel, or them entrusted
by the people, then I adore only a shadow: Now if any Prince of Europe can
really clear up these mistes, and show the lines of his Government drawn
fairly, and his Charter whole and Authentic, like that of Venice and the first
Rome: For my part, I Will be the first man shall swear him Allegiance, and the
last that will preserve him. But you will find that they will tell you in
general about their office, and in particular of their claims of Succession,
Inheritance and Ancestors, when look but three or four stories back, and you
will meet either some savage unnatural Intrusion (disguised under some forced
Title or inexistent Cognation) or else some violent alteration, or possibly
some slender Oath or Articles hardly extorted and imperrfectly kept. Now if any
man thawill but run over these rules, and apply them to any History whatever
(as we shall exemplify in that which for the present we have pitched upon) and
not find most Titles Ambiguous, the effects of former Monarchies (for where,
in a Catalogue of forty Kings, can you almost show me three good ones, but
things merely struggling to maintain their Titles and domestic Interest)
ruinous to the people (who, for the most part, considering them no otherwise
then as to be Rescued from violent Confusion, not as they conduce to the
positive happiness of a civil life) my small conversation in Books is
extremely false: And truly I conceive it may be the rationallest course to set
any judgment aright, because it instructs by experience and effects, and
grounds the judgment upon material observation, and not blindly gropes after
notions and causes, which to him are Tantum non inscrutable, But of that anon:
A main mistake under this Topic, has been an erroneous Comparison and
application of matters Civil and Military; for men observing that mixed Councels
about Generals, Plurality, equality of Commands, often and sudden Military
alterations, have brought on no small distempers and dangers to several
Governments and attempts; Therefore they presently collect, that in Civils also
it is the safest to continue a Command in one-hand for the preventing of the
like disturbances: But here they are deceived, Civil matters consist in long
debate, great consideration, patient expectation and wary foresight, which is
better to be found in a number of choice experienced heads, then in one single
one, whose youth and vigor of Spirit innables him rather to Action, and fills
him with that noble Temerity, which is commonly so happy in Martial things,
which must be guided always to prevent occasions (which are seldom to be found
again, and which, mistaken, are to scarcely amended) Besides the ferocity of
daring spirits, can hardly be bounded while they stand level, so that it is no
wonder if they extinguish all emulations, by putting the power into the hands
of one, whereas in the City, it is quite otherwise; and Factions (unless they
be Cruelly exorbitant) do but poyse and balance one another, and many times
like the discord of humors upon the natural Body, produce real good to the
Politics. That slender conception, that nature seems to dress out a
principality in most of her works, as among Birds, Bees, etc. is so slender (in
regard they are no more chiefs then what they fancy them, but all their
prepotency is merely predatory or oppressive, and even Lions, Elephants,
Crocodiles and Eagles, have small inconsiderabe enemies, of which they stand in
fear, and by which they are often ruined) that the Recital confutes it; and if
it were so, yet unless they could prove their One man to be as much more
excellent as those are, and that solely, I see not what it would advantage
them, since to comply with the design of Nature in one, they would contrary it
in others, where she were equally concerned. But these Phylologicall and
Rhetorical Arguments, have not a little hindered the severer disquisition of
reason and proposessed the more easy minds with notions so much harder to be
laid aside, as they are more erroneous and pleasing.

These are the fundamental errors that have misled the judgment; now those
which have misguided the conscience, have principally proceeded from the
mis-interpretation of Scripture, and therefore seeming Sacred, have been less
examined and doubted, as carrying the most authority. Thus in the old
Testament, there being such frequent mention of Kings, which notwithstanding,
were Given in wrath, they superstitiously hold forth, not only the necessity,
but the impunity of Kings, whereas we know not their powers and limitations,
and it is in consequentiall to argue, That because Judea was so governed, we
should follow the pattern, when we find neither precept consequence, nor
necessity convincing. And it is mad to think that while the Spirit of God so
freely and vehemently exclaimes against the iniquiries of men, that God would
authorize it so far as to leave it in them unpunishable. As for the antiquity
from Adam it is true, before his fall his dominion was large and wide, but it
was over the Beasts (that after his fall learned to rebel against him) and
aconomically not despotically over his wife and children, But what is this to
Civil Government? In the new Testament (for I the brieflyer pass over this
head, in regard it has been so copiously treated upon by those under whose
profession it falls, and that it does not immediately conduce to my design)
the principal has been the meekness of Christ and his compliance with Civil
powers, which certainly if he had been disposed to have resisted, he could as
easily have overthrown, as with a few cords whip the buyers and sellers out of
the Temple. But he that was the wisdom of his Father, rather thought fit to
build up his Kingdom, which is never earthly, nor known of men of earth, in
meeknes and obedience to civil powers, which are perpetually changed and
hurried at the will of the first mover, otherwise he would never have concerned
himself so much in giving dues to Caesar, and to God, what is Gods; intimating
the distinct obediences owing by all men, as Christians, and Citizens, when
granting Monarchy, the most and the only Lawful Government, yet every one
knows, that knows any thing of the Roman story, that Augustus had no more
Title to that Government, then any of those over whom he usurped, and that his
access to Covernment was as fraudulent and violent as could be. Another is the
mistaking of the Powers (...), when its clear, the Scripture speaks of it in
a latitude, as extending it to all established Governments. Now men have falsely
assumed that those powers were only meant of Kings; and what by an indiscreet
collation of the places of the old, and violent restings of others of the new,
they perfected the other grand mistake, which since it has been already
cleared up (and as we said is but collateral with us for the present) we shall
no further mention.

As for the alleged examples and and speeches of primitive times, I see not
much in them considerable, for through insurrections against Princes cannot be
produced, or rather much is said against them; we are to consider, that the
Gospel of Christ (which was at that time not much defiled by the world) ingages
not to any Domination, but wholly taken up with its own ecstasies, spiritual
delights and expectations, neglects all other affairs as strange and dangerous.
And more over (though I know what has been said to the contrary) I cannot
find (after consideration of those Ages) any probable ground how, if they
would have risen, they could have Bodied. They were indeed numerous, but then
they had Legionaries among them, and who knows not what an ineffectual thing a
People is (be it never so desirous) when overawed by the Soldatesque: And they
were a People (as greatness to God and man is different) not for their wordly
power (for how few considerable Commanders were Converted in the first Ages?)
but out of his own choice, so that it was not strange, if they could not do
much. For God as he chose the weakest means in the planting of the Gospel,
Fishermen; So, in the Primitive propagation he called the weaker men, though
Christianity afterward grew ample and August, and Kings were proud to give
their names unto it.

As for the Fathers (granting them f^ee of their many Bastardizations,
interpolations, and all those Errors and uncertainties which the process of
time and fraud of men has foysted into them) they are to be accepted as
Witnesses, not as Judges, that is to say, they may prove matter of Fact, but
none of their words matter of Right, especially if we consider their writings
either Homilies, Commentaries, or controversies, which are ever directed to
another end then this is, and they themselves (men secluded from Business) are
so much more unable to judge and resolve Civil controversies (as this is) in
regard the unhappiness of the latter Times has produced many controversies:
not know or thought of in their days, which falling directly under their
profession, cannot receive any light or Authority from them.

Having considered Kingship, how well it has appeared through the false lights
of understanding, we shall now consider, whether (taking it by it self) its
foundations be laid upon a Cylender or upon a Cube, and this me thinks we are
the likeliest to do, if we consider them in their rights and uses, or to speak
plainer; in their Legality and policy, so that if we find that none of the
ways of the retaining of their Crowns can be Authentical save one, and that
one make against them, we shall find we have no such just causes of blind
adoration or implicit enforcement to truckle under any of their Commands. And
if again we discover that the Government it self is not so profitable as to the
end of Civil happiness, but rather Diametrically opposite to it, we may suppose
that men are either strangely obstinate, or else they might eradicate an error,
which not only offers so many prejudices to their understanding, but has such
an evil influence upon their outward well being.

We have then to consider, that for One man to rule over Many, there must
necessarily be some right, though it be but colorable; for either he must be
chosen by the people as their Arbitrator and Supreme Judge, or else he must by
force of Arms invade them, and bring them to obedience, which he by force
preserving for his Sons of Successors, makes way for a third claim, which is
Inheritance. A fourth, some have invented, though were it real, it is but a
difference of the last, and I therefore shall mention it under that head. But
to the Consideration.

First therefore Election, supposing the people either finding themselves
unable to weyld their own happiness, or for preventing of disorder, make choice
of one to be set over them, it here instantly follows, that Authority is in
the people, and flowing from them; for choice argues a power, and being chosen
elected a subordination to it, in the end, I mean, though not in every Act: Now
there is none chosen but for some, end, or for some intentions reciprocal
betwixt both parties, for otherwise such a choice were but dotage, and
consequently invalid: Now thus it will follow that those who pretend to King it
upon this Topic, must either show a formal Election, which I think many Kings
are not able to do, or if he can show one, the Conditions and ends for which he
was chosen. Now all parts being either implicit or explained, let him produce
the Covenant, that it may be known whether he govern according to it or not,
for if he transgresses, he forfeits, and the other are disobliged. If the
agreement be unwritten or intentional, either party is relatively tied, and
then if he do any thing against the welfare of the people (that Soveraing Law
and end of all Governments:) The people may not only justly suppose the form
capitulation broken, but even endeavor, by what possible means they can, to
restore themselves to their former rights: for why should the making of a
Compact prejudice any when it is once broken; And here comes in another
fallacy, which the Assertors of Royalty have so flourished with, That an
agreement between a people and one man, should inure, as the English Lawyers
term it, to his Descendants, when as it is to be considered, that the people
choosing of one man, is commonly in consideration of his person and personal
merit, which not being the same in his Son (as commonly Families in the Horizon
are in the Meridian, the Founders being braver then any that follow after them)
that very intent is frustrated and cease, and the People providing for the
happiness of a few years, which are determinable with uncertainty of the latter
part of the life of one man, run themselves and their posterity into an eternal
inconvenience (for any thing they know) of bad Governors; neither if the
people would never so formally agree with him that in regard of his merits or
felicity of actions, his Son should be received in that place, yet would they
not do it, that very pact expiring with the life of either: For my Father may
leave me notionally a slave in a Tenure (a thing frequently with our Ancestors)
or as Civilians term it, it a Feodary, which I a^ content with, in respect of
the advantage it brings me, or because my own estate is to little to be
independent, and therefore I think it good prudence to be sheltered under the
protection of the greater, but my natural Liberty, that is to say, to make my
life as justly happy and advantageous to me as I can, he can no more give away
from me then my understanding or eyesight, for these are privileges whih God
and Nature has endued me with, and these I cannot be denied, but by him that
will deny me a being. But to go on, Suppose a second Generation should accept
the Son, and a third a Grandfire, yet this confirms not a fourth, and they very
impolitickly strengthen, and confirm the power by continuance, and in a manner
with their own hands lay the Foundation of absoluteness; their Governors
themselves growing in Interests, increasing in Aliances and gleaning Forces, so
it is very improbable but within a little they grow to big and formidable, and
leave nothing of the Liberty save the name and (if they be less cunning) not
that. A pertinent example of this, it is so near us, that I cannot pass it, we
see in young Orange and the Low Countries at this day, who continuing his
Progenitors for their signal services, and him for theirs, are now punished
for their generous and indiscreet rewarding of virtue, that their Liberty was
lately blown up before they well perceived it to be undermined, and they are at
charge to maintain their own oppression. As for that formal election and
stipulation, who sees not what a vain and ridiculous cheat it is, they coming
with swords in their hands to demand the Scepter of a weak and stupid multitude
that appears only to gaze upon the Ceremonies, and whose refusal were
ineffectual; but it is a gracious piece of the Caball of Tyranny to deceive
the People with Shadows, Fantasmes, and names of Liberty.

As for those that intrude in by force, they cannot certainly have a Forehead
to infer a right, they being but as the Pyrat said to Alexander, public and
more magnificent Robbers: certainly these are the Nimrods, the great Hunters,
Gods scourges, and the burdens of the Earth; and whether they be Founders of
Empires, or great Captains (as Boccalini distinguishes them) ought rather to
be remembered with horror and detestation, then that undue reverence which they
commonly meet with.

But these are they that lay the the foundations of Succession, and from these
do the Successors claim, and enjoy with the less reluctance, Because the
Regret of the violences and hate of the first, daily wears out; whether it be
by the continuance of Peace, that charms men into a love of ease, or that the
continuance of slavery enfeebles their minds, that they rather chose to look
at their present enjoyment, then real happiness, so that it is not strange if
the Person of their oppressor become in time adorable, and he himself think
that confirmed and justified to him in the process of time, which in the
beginning he had no right to. But if he will consider the business a little
higher, we might find that since neither the People (as we have proved before)
have power to make themselves Vassals, nor the Intruders themselves cannot
pretend any just title; their Domination is merely illegal, and apt to be
shaked off with the first conveniencie, it being every whit as equitable, that
these men should be judged Enemies of mankind, and condemned to die the death
of Parricides for usurping a power, as Nero for mis-using it. But I would fain
ask the Regions Defenders, by what Law they can maintain Governments, to be
inherent in one, and to be transmitted to his Off spring? If they say by the
Law of God I would again demand how they can make this Law appear to me? If
they say that the Scripture holds forth the right and sacreity of Kings, I ask
them again, How they know that God extends that Privilege and authority to
this King; if they say, that he is involved in the general right, they do but
run into the Circle; unless they can show me, that all his approches to
Government were regular, and such as God was pleased with, or else God had by
some sign and wonder declared his approbation of him; for without these two,
they must make God an Author of evil, which is impious, and pretend Commission
for an unlawful Act; and by the same right, any other may to an action never
so unjust, it being no unusual thing to borrow the face of Divinity, even upon
some foul impostures, (as to forbear further instances) Numa his conference
with Aegeria, Scipio's retirement into the Capitol, and Sertorius his white
Heart.

Now, if they pretend the Law of Nature, they must demonstrate unto us, both
that she endowed men with unequal freedom, and that she shaped out such a man
to rule, whereas it appears on the contrary, that all men naturally are equal:
for though Nature with a Noble variety has made different the Features and
Lineaments of men, yet as to freedom, till it be lost by some external means,
she has made every one alike, and given them the same desires. But suppose she
had intended such a Family for Government, and had given them some illustrious
marks, as we read of some had (whether by the imagination of their mothers, or
by deceit yet then would Nature fall into a double irregularity; first in
deserting her method in making all free; and secondly in making her general
work merely subservient, and secondary to her particular, which how contrary it
is to that beautiful harmony of hers, I need not much insist. Now if they say,
they are Fathers of the People; as for that which they call themselves the
Heads, inferring the People no more then a trunk, it is only Metaphorical, and
proves nothing: for they must remember, that since Father has a Correllative
upon which it depends, and upon whose removal it vanishes, they themselves
cannot bring any such; for by Physical procreation they will not offer it. And
for Metaphorical dependence it will come to nothing, we seeing People languish
when their Princes are fullest, and like Leeches, rather willing to burst then
to fall off. And on the contrary the People upon the removal of a Prince,
cheerful and relieved. Now if there were such a strict union between these
two, such a contrariety and antipathy could never appear: for certainly when
any two persons endeavor to gain one upon another, there is an enmity what
ever is pretended; besides, if these men would be Fathers, it were then their
duty to do like Fathers, which is, to provide for, defend and cherish, whereas
on the contrary, it is themselves that eat the bread out of the mouths of their
Children, and through the groans of the poor. And whereas flattery has said,
that what they draw up in vapors they send down in showers, yet are we sure,
such are for the most part unfruitful, if not ominous and infectious: If they
pretend the Law of Nations, it were well, they would declare unto us at first
what this Law is, and whether generally agreed on or no by Nations: if they
say, yes, they must resolve whether explicitly or implicitly; if they say the
former, let them produce them; if the latter, they must demonstrate, that all
Nations are agreed in such and such Notions; now if all men of these Nations
since every one must be of equal capacity; when on the contrary, though the
understandings of most men whom we know or have conversed with, seem to flee to
some general Maxims (yet unpolished, unnumbered, and unmethodixed) yet we see
many Nations differing from us in many things, which we think clearly,
fundamentally and naturally true, neither do climate and education only so
diversity the minds of men, but even their understandings, and the different
ways of thinking so distinguish them, though of one Country, that though we
may please our selves in thinking that all men's thoughts follow the
Fantastical method of ours, yet we might find, if we were perfectly conversant
with all men of the world, and well read in their wits (as we are not with half
of them, no, nor any one man with the twentieth part) that there are scarce
four or five axioms would be universally received. Now (for I have been the
longer in this, by reason that this imaginary Law has been so held up by the
Civilians, and made the subterfuge of so many considerable disputes) if it be
so weak as that we can scarce tell whether it be or no, for even that which we
account the most sacred piece of it, the violation of public Messengers, the
Taertar and Muscovite, unless withheld by fear, break it every day) What are
the Arguments deducted from it? or if there were such a Law, what would it
avail such a particular man, for why should other Nations impose a Governor
were they are not concerned; and if they pretend this Law, as to the
preservations and impunity of their persons, the same Answer will serve again,
with this addition, That they make an offender incapable of punishment, it is
but to give them a Commission to offend: Now if they run upon that distinction
of Suspending only, and not punishing (as if forsooth this kind of people must
be preserved, though by the ruin of mankind, to immediate vengeance) Now, I
say, That Suspension is really a punishment, and if his demerits can deserve
that, I see not but that upon a proportionable increase, they may deserve
Dethronization or Death, as clearly as two and two make four, and four make
eight. If they allege Positive or municipall Laws, and number Homages, they
are not much the nearer, since that all such Laws are but Rivulets and Branches
of those we before examined; and since we found that those speak so little in
their favor, that which these do, cannot signify much, especially since
Princes, who are ever watchful to prevail themselves of all occasions of this
nature, can either by terror or artifice draw assemblies or the major part, to
their own Lure; nay, even the worst of them have not forgot to be solicitous in
this case: but it must be set down, That whatsoever positive Laws are repugnant
to those general, they are injurious, and ought to be repealed: And truly it
is a sad observation, that as Monarchs grow, either out of the weakness of
Government, and (as I may say) pupillage, as Romulus and Theseus did at Rome
and Athens, or else out of the disease or depravation of them, as Caesar again
invaded Rome, so have the people been never more enamoured of them, then when
manners were at the highest corruption, which ever gave access of strength to
them; nor have they more distasted them, then when their Spirits and Discipline
were the most brave and healthful; so fatally disagreeing are true Liberty,
which is the very source of Virtue and Generosity, and the impotent Domination
of a Single Tyrant, who commonly Reign by no other means, then the discords of
braver Citizens, who can neither endure Equality or Superiority among
themselves, and rather admit a general Vassalage, then just equality, or the
vices of the baser, which reconcile them and concern them in a bad example. But
suppose Succession a thing sacred and inviolable, yet once break and interrupt
it, it is little worth, either the Usurper being to be acknowledged regular, or
the whole Series dashed out of order: Nay, we see Aspirers themselves, either
so blinded with their pretenses, or with animosity, so crying their own up,
that it is almost impossible for any private judgment to do right in this
case, themselves thwarting one another, and it not being in the power of nature
that both should be right: But who can instance one Monarch, whose Crown is
come to him by untainted Succession? and what History will not confirm the
Example, I shall anon bring: Certainly though Succession were a thing that had
not so little reason or being, yet I see not why men should with such a strange
pertinacy defend it: Matters of Government ought to be governed by prudence,
but this is to put them into the hands of Fortune, when a Child incapable or
infirm, under the Regiment of a Nurse, must (possibly) be Supreme Governor,
and those whom either their Abilities or virtues fit for it, Subordinate or
laid aside: But what if the person whom Necessity has set at the Stern, be
incapable, Lunatic, Weak or Vicious, is not this a good way to prevent
Controversies? with all this enervates all good Council, when a King should
have need of Tutours, and that a mass of people should be commanded by one who
commands not himself, and when we scarce obey even excellent Princes, to adore
shadows and weak ones.

As for Boxhornius distinction of successive, wherein the next Heir must
necessarily succeed out of the Original right of the former, I would ask him,
whether the Predecessor were a Possessour or usufructuary; if the former, all
our former Arguments fall on him; if the latter, it makes not for his
Successor, the people being owners; and besides, the distinction is one of his
own Coining, never pretended before, upon the first controversy it is invalid,
although the first founder had a right, as we have proved the contrary.

Having with what brevity I could, brought to an end my first intention. I
shall now fall upon the second, which is the intrinsical value and expediency
of this Government, and some little comparison with others; but herein we shall
be short, and only so far as concerns this: And indeed it is a business so
ticklish, that even Mr. Hobs in his de Cive, though he assured himself that the
rest of his Book (which is principally erected to the assertion of Monarchy) is
demonstrated, yet he doubts whether the Arguments which he brings to this
business be so firm or no; And Malvezzi contrarily remonstrates (in his
discourses upon Tacitus) that Optimacies are clearly better then Monarchies, as
to all advantages. And indeed if we look on their Arguments, they are either
Flourishes, or merely Conceptions, such are the reference and perfection of an
Unity, which must needs work better and more naturally, as one simple cause
(besides that it stills and restrains all other claims) then many coordinate,
whereas they never consider that though among many joint Causes, there may be
some jarring, yet like cross wheels in an Engine, they tend to the regulation
of the whole; What violent mischiefs are brought in by the contentions of
Pretenders, Ambiguities of Titles, and lawless ambition of Aspirers, whereas
in a settled Republic all this is clear; and in case any particular man aspire,
they know whom to join against and punish as a Common Enemy. As for that which
alleges the advantage of secrecy in business, it carries not much with it,
in regard that under that even most pernicious designs may be carried on; and
for wholesome counsels (Bating some more nice Transactions) it matters not how
much they be tossed, among those who are so much entrusted and concerned in them,
all cross Designs being never in probability so feeble and ineffectuall, as
when there are many eyes to over look them, and voices to decry them. As for
that expedition in which they say Monarchs are so happy, it may as well further
a bad intention, as give effect to a just Council, it depending on the
judgment of a single man, to whose will and ends all must refer; whereas a
select number of Entrusted persons may hasten every opportunity with a just
slownesse as well as they, though indeed (unless it be in some Military
Critical minutes) I see not such an excellency in the swiftness of heady
dispatch, precipitation in Councels being so dangerous and Ominous. As for what
concerns private Suitors, they may as (if not more) speedily and effectually be
answered in staid Re-publicks, as in the Court of a King, where Bribery and
unworthy Favorites do not what is just, but what is desired.

With these and many others as considerable, which partly willingly, and partly
in this penury of Books, forgettingly I pass, do they intend to strengthen
this fantastical and airie building; but as sly Controverters, many times
leave out the principal Text or Argument, because should it be produced it
could not be so easily answered; so these men tell us all the advantages of
Monarchy, supposing them still well settled, and under men virtuous, but you
shall never hear them talk of it, in Statu corrupto, under lewd Kings and
unsettled Laws; they never let fall a word of the dangers of Inter-reigns, the
minorities and vices of Princes, Misgovernments, evil Councels, Ambitions,
Ambiguities of Titles, and the Animosities and Calamities that follow them, the
necessary Injustices and Oppressions by which Monarchs (using the peoples
wealth and blood against them) hold them fast in their seats, and by some
suspension of Divine Justice die not violently.

Whereas, other Governments established against all these evils, being ever of
vigor and just age settled in their own right, freed from pretenses, served by
experienced and engaged Councels, and (as nothing under the Moon is perfect)
sometimes gaining and advantaged in their Controversies, which have not seldom
(as we may see in old Rome) brought forth good Laws and Augmentations of
Freedom, whereas once declining from their purity and vigor; and (which is
the effect of that) ravished by an Invader, they languish in a brutish servitude
(Monarchy being truly a disease of Government) and like Slaves, stupid with
harshnesse and continuance of Slavery, wax old under it, till they either
arrive at that period which God prescribes to all people and Governments, or
else better Stars and Nephews awaken them out of that Lethargy, and restore
them to their Pristine Liberty, and its Daughter happiness.

But this is but to converse in Notions, wandering, and ill abstract from
things, let us now descend into practical observation and clearly manifest out
of the whole Series of Time and Actions, what circumstances and events have
either ushered or dogged one race of Kings, That if there were all the justice
in the world, that the Government of a Nation should be entailed upon one
Family, yet certainly we could not grant it to such an one, whose Criminal
lives and formidable deaths, have been evidences of Gods wrath upon it for so
many Generations.

And since no Country that I know, yields such an illustrious example of this
as Scotland does, and it may be a charity to bring into the way such as are
misled, I have pitched upon the Scottish History, wherein as I have only
consulted their own Authors, as my fittest witnesses in this case; So have I
(not as a just History, but as far as concerns this purpose) faithfully and as
far as the thing would permit, without glosses represented it, so that any calm
understanding may deduce, that the vengeance which at the present is levelled
against the Nation, is but an attendant of this new introduced Person, and that
he himself, though for the present he seems a Clog among his Frogs, and suffer
them to play about him, yet God will suffer him (if the English Army prevent
not) to turn Stork and devour them, while their cries shall not be heard, as
those that (in dispight of the warning of Providence, and light of their own
reasons, for their own corrupt Interest and greedy Ambition) brought these
miseries upon themselves.

THE INSTANCE Out of the Scottish History, Which is the Second Part.
ANd now we come to our main business, which is the review of Story, wherein
we may find such a direct and uninterrupted Series, such mutual Endearments
between Prince and People, and so many of them crowned with happy Reigns and
quiet Deaths (two together scarce dying naturally) that we may conclude, that
they have not only the most reason, but a great deal of excellent Interest,
who Espouse the Person and Quarrel of the hopeful descendant of such a
Family; nor shall we be so injurious to the glory of a Nation, proud with a
Catalogue of Names and Kings, as to expunge a great part of their number;
though some who have done it affirm, There can be no probability that they had
any other being then what Hector Boys, and the black Book of Pasley (out of
which Buchanan had most of his materials) bestow on them, there being no
mention of the name of Scot in any Authentic Writer, till Four hundred years
after Christ: No, we shall no more envy these old Heroes unto them, then their
placing the red Lion in the Dexter point of their Eschutcheon: But though we
might in justice reject them as Fabulous and Monkish, yet since themselves
acknowledge them, and they equally make against them, we shall run them over
like veritable History: The first of this blessed race was Fergus, first
General, and afterward got himself made King, but no sooner cast away on the
coast of Ireland but a contention arises about the validity of their Oath to
him, and Uncles are appointed to succeed, which argues it Elective; so
Feritharis Brother to Fergus is King, but his Nephew enters a Conspiracy
against him, forces him to resign and fly to the Isles, where he died.
Foritharis dying soon after, was suspected to be poisoned: after him comes in
Main ( Fergus second son) who with his son Dornadilla reigned quietly fifty
seven years. But Reuther his son, not being of age, the people make his Uncle
Nothat take the Government, but he misruling, Reuther, by the help of one
Doualus, raised a party against him and beheads him; makes himself King with
the indignation of the People that he was not elected, so that by the kindred
of Nothat he is fought with, taken and displaced, but afterward makes a party
and regains: His son Thereus was too young, so that his Brother Rhoutha
succeeded, but after seventeen years was glad to resign. Well, Thereus reigns,
but after six years declines to such lewdness that they force him to fly, and
govern by a Prorex after his death; Josina his Brother, and his Son Finan are
Kings, and quietly die so.

But then comes Durst, one who slaies all the Nobility at a Banquet, and is by
the People slain; after his death the validity of the Oath to Fergus is called
in question, and the elective power vindicated; but at length Even his brother
is admitted, who though he ruled valiantly and well, yet he had Gillus a
bastard Son, Vaser and Regni Cupidus: The next of the line are two Twins Docham
and Dorgall (sons of Durst) they while they disputed of priority of age, are by
the artifice of Gillus slain in a tumult; who makes a strong party, and seizing
of a Hold, says he was made Supervisor by his Father, and so becomes King,
cuts off all the race of Durst, but is after forced out of the Kingdom, and
taken by Even the second his Successor (who was chosen by the People) and by
him put to death in Ireland: after Even comes Eder: after Eder, his son Even
the third, who for making a Law, that the Nobility should have the enjoyment of
all new married women before they were touched by their husbands, was doomed to
prison during his life and there strangled; his Successor was his Kinsman
Metellan; after whom was elected Caratac, whom his brother Corbret succeeded;
but then came Dardan (whom the Lords made take on him the Government, by reason
of the nonage of Corbrets son) who for his lewdness was taken by the People and
beheaded.

After him Corbret the second, whose Son Luctac for his lewdness was by the
People put to death; then was elected Mogald, who following his vicious
Predecessors steps, found his death like theirs, violent.

His Son Conar one of the Conspirators against him succeeded, but
mis-governing, was clapped in Prison and there dyed.

Ethodius his Sisters son succeeded, who was slain in the night in his Chamber
by his Piper.

His Son being a Minor, Satrael his brother was accepted who seeking to place
the succession in his own line, grew so hateful to the People, that not daring
to come abroad, he was strangled in the night by his own servants, which made
way for the youngest Brother

Donald, who out-did the others vices by contrary virtues; and had a happy
reign of one and twenty years.

Ethodiis the second, Son of the first of that name was next, a dull un-active
Prince, Familiarum tumultu occisus.

His Son Athirco promised fair, but deceived their expectations with most
horrid lewdness, and at length vitiated the daughters of Nathaloc a Nobleman,
and caused them to be whipped before his eyes, but seeing himself surrounded by
Conspirators, eluded their fury with his own sword; his Brother and Children
being forced to fly to the Picts. Nathaloc turning his injury into ambition
made himself King, and governed answerably, for he made most of the Nobility to
be strangled, under the pretense of calling them to Council, and was after
slain by his own servants.

After his death, Athirco's children were called back, and Findor his son,
being of excellent hopes, accepted; who made good what his youth promised; he
beat in sundry Battles Donald the Islander, who seeing he could not prevail by
force, sent two, as Renegadoes, to the King, who (being not accepted) conspire
with his Brother, by whose means one of them slew him with a hunting spear when
he was a hunting.

His brother Donald succeeds (the youngest of the three) who about to revenge
his Brothers death hears the Islander is entered Murray: whom he encountering
with unequal forces, is taken prisoner with thirty of the Nobility, and whether
of grief, or his wounds, dies in Prison.

The Islander, that had before assumed the name, now assumed the power (the
Nobles, by reason of their kindred prisoners, being overawed) this man wanting
nothing of an exquisite Tyrant, was, after twelve years Butcheries, slain by
Cratherinth son of Findor, who under a disguise found address and opportunity.
The brave Tyrannicide was universally accepted, and gave no cause of
repentance, his Reign is famous, for a War begun between the Scots and Picts
about a Dog (as that between the Trojans and Italians for a white Heart) and the
defect on of Carausius from Dioclesian which happened in his time.

His Kinsman Fyncormach succeeded, worthy of memory for little but the piety of
the Culdys (an order of Religious men of that time overborn by others
succeeding) he being dead, three sons of his three brothers contended;
Romach as the eldest strengthened by his alliance with the Picts, with their
assistance seized on it, forcing others to fly, but proving cruel, the
Nobility conspired and slew him.

Angusian, another pretender, succeeds who being assailed by Nectam King of the
Picts, who came to revenge Romach, routed his Army in a pitched battle, but
Nectham coming again he was routed and both he and Nectham slain.

Tethelmac, the third pretender came next, who beating the Picts, and wasting
their fields; Hergust when he saw there could be no advantage by the sword,
suborned two Picts to murder him, who drawing to conspiracy, the Piper that
lay in his Chamber (as the manner was then) he at the appointed time admitted
them, and there slew him.

The next was Even son of Fincormac, who was slain in a Battle with the Picts,
to the almost extirpation and banishment of the Scots; but at the last the
Picts taking distaste at the Romans entered into a secret League with the Scots,
and agreed that Fergus, (whose, Uncle the last King was) being then in
banishment, and of a Militari breeding and inclination should be chosen King:
with him the Danes maintained a long War with the Romans, and pulled down the
Picts wall, at last he and the King of Picts were in one day slain in a battle
against them; This man's access to Government was strange, ignotus Rex ab ignoto
populo accersitus, and may be thought temerarious; he having no Land for his
People, and the Roman Name inimicall, yet founded he a Monarchy, there having
been Kings ever since; and we are to note, this is the first man that the
sounder writers will allow to be real and not fabulous. Him succeeded his son
Engenius (whose Grandfather Grahame had all the power) a Warlike Prince whom
some say slain, some dead of a disease. After him his Brother Dongard, who
after the spending of five superstitious years, left the Crown (as they call
it) to his youngest Brother Constantine; who from a good private man turned a
lew Prince, and was slain by a Nobleman, whose daughter he had ravished; he was
succeeded by Congall Constantines son, who came a tolerable good Prince to a
loose people, and having spent some two and twenty years in slight excursions
against the Saxons, left the rule to his Brother Goran, who notwithstanding he
made a good League against the Britains, which much conduced to his and the
Peoples settlement, yet they in requital, after thirty four years, made away
with him; which brought in Eugenius the third of that name, the son of Congall,
who was strongly suspected to have a hand in his death, insomuch that Gorans
widow was forced to fly into Ireland with her children: This man in thirty
three years time did nothing but Reign, and make short incursions upon the
Borders; he left the rule to his Brother Congall, a Monastical, Superstitious
and unactive Prince, who Reigned ten years. Kynnatell his Brother was designed
for Successor, but Aydan the son of Goran laid his claim, but was content to
suspend in respect of the age and diseases of Kynnatell, which after fourteen
months took him out of the world and cleared the Controversy, and Aydan by
the consent of Columba (a Priest that Governed all in those days) came to be
King; a man that after thirty four years turbulently spent, being beaten by the
Saxons and struck with the death of Columba dyed of grief.

After him was chosen Kenneth, who has left nothing behind him but his name.
Then came Eugenius the fourth, son of Aydan (so irregular is the Scots
succession that we see it inverted by usurpation or cross elections in every
two or three Generations) this man left an ambiguous fame, for Hector, says he
was peaceable, the Manuscript implacably severe, he Reigned sixteen years, and
left his son Ferchard Successor, who endeavoring to heighten the
Prerogative by the dissentions of the Nobility, was on the contrary impeached
by them, and called to an account, which he denying was clapped in Prison, where
he himself saved the Executioner a labor: So that his Brother Donald
succeeded, who being taken up with the Piety of those days, left nothing
memorable, save that he in Person interpreted Scots Sermons unto the Saxons: He
was followed by his Nephew Ferchard, son of the first of that name, a thing
like a King in nothing but his exorbitancies, who in hunting was wounded by a
Wolf, which cast him into a Fever, wherein he not observing the imposed
Temperance, brought upon himself the lousy disease, upon which discomforted,
he was by the persuasion of Colman (a Religious man) brought out in his bed
covered with Hair-cloth, where he made a public acknowledgement to the People,
and soon after died. Maldwin, Donalds son followed, who after a twenty years
ignoble Reign was strangled by his Wife. Eugenius the Fifth succeed, son (they
say) of King Dongard, though the Chronology seem to refute it: This man spent
five years in slight incursions, and was succeeded by Eugenius the Sixth, son of
Ferchard: This man is famous for a little learning, as the times went; and the
prodigy of raining of blood seven days, all Lacticinia turning into blood.
Amberkelleth nephew to Eugenius the Fifth, succeeded this rude Prince, while he
was discharging the burden of Nature, was slain by an arrow from an unknown
hand. Eugenius the Seventh followed, who being attempted by Conspiratours, had
his new-married Wife slain in bed beside him; for which he being accused
produced the murderers before his trial, and was acquitted, and so ended the
rest of his 17. years in peace, recommending unto the People Mordack, son of
Amberkelleth, who continuing a blank reign, or it may be a happy one, in
regard it was peaceable, left it to Etfyn, son of Eugenius the seventh; the
first part of his reign was peaceable; but Age obliging him to put the
Government into the hands of four of his servants, it happened to him, as it does
to other Princes, whose fortunes decay commonly with their strength, that it
was very unhappy and turbulent: Which miseries, Eugenius the Eighth, son of
Mordack restrained; but he it seems, having a nature fitter to appease tumults,
then to enjoy rest, at the first enjoyment of peace, broke into such lewdness,
that the Nobility at a meeting stabbed him, and made way for Fergus the son
of Etfyn, one like his Predecessor in manner, death, and continuance of
reign, which was three years; the only dissimilitude was, that the latter's
Wife brought his death; for which, others being impeached, she stepped in and
confessed it, and to elude punishment, punished her self with a knife. Soluath,
son of Eugenius the Eighth, followed him, who though his gout made him of less
Action, yet it made his prudence more visible, and himself not illaudable, his
death brought in Achaius the son of Etfyn, whose reign was innobled with an
Irish War, and many learned men, besides the assistance, lent Hungus to fight
against the Northumbrians, whom he beat in famous battle, which (if I may
mention the matter) was presignified to Hungus in a dream; Saint Andrew
appearing to him, and assuring him of it, and in the time of the battle, a
white Cross, (that which the Heralds call a Saltier, and we see commonly in
the Scots Banners) appeared in the Sky; and this I think to have been the
occasion of that bearing, and an order of Knights of Saint Andrew, sometimes in
reputation in Scotland, but extinguished for ought I can perceive, before the
time of James the Sixth, though the Collar and Pendent of it are at this day
worn about the Scots Arms. To this man Congal his Cousin succeeded, who left
nothing behind him but five years to stretch out the account of time. Dongal
the son of Soluath came next, who being of a nature fierce and insupportable,
there was an endeavor to set up Alpine son of Achaius, which design by Alpine
himself was frustrated, which made the King willinger to assist Alpine in his
pretension to the Kingdom of Picts, in the which attempt he was drowned, and
left unto Alpine that which he before had so nobly refused, who making use of
the former raised an Army, beat the Picts in many signal Victories; but at
last was slain by them, leaving his name to the place of his death, and the
Kingdom to his son Kenneth. This man seeing the People broken with the late
War, and unwilling to fight, drew on by this subtilty, invites the Nobility to
dinner, and after plying them with drink till midnight, leaves them sleeping on
the floor (as the manner was) and then hanging Fish-skins about the walls of the
Chamber, and making one speak through a trunk, and call them to War: they
waking, and half asleep, supposed something of Divinity to be in it, and the
next morning not only consented to War, but (so strange is deluded
imagination,) with unspeakable courage fell upon the Enemy, and put them to the
rout: which being confirmed by other great Victories, utterly ruined the
Pictish Name. This man may be added to the two Ferguses, and truly may be said
to be the Founder of the Scots Empire, not only in making that the middle of
his Dominion, which was once the bounds: But in confirming his acquests with
good Laws, having opportunity of a long peace which was Sixteen years, his
whole time of Government being Twenty. This was he that placed that Stone,
famous for that illusory Prophecy, Ni fallat fatum etc. (which first was
brought our of Spain and Ireland, and from thence to Argyle) at Scown; where he
put it in a Chair, in which all his Successors (till Edward the First brought
it away) were crowned, and since that, all the Kings of England, till the
happiness of our Commonwealth made it useless. His Brother Donald was his
Successor, a man made up of extreamities of virtues and vices, no man had more
bravery in the field, nor more vice at home, which increasing with his years,
the Nobility put him in prison, where either for fear or scorn, he put an end
to his days, leaving behind him his brother Constantine, a man wanting nothing
of him but his vices, who struggling with a potent Enemy, (for the Picts had
called in the Danes) and driving them much into despair (a bravery that has
not seldom ruined many excellent Captains) was taken by them, put into a
little Cave, and there slain. He was succeeded by Ethus his brother, who had
all his eldest brothers vices, and none of his seconds virtues; Nature it
seems, making two extremes, and a middle in the three Brethren: This man
voluptuous and cowardly, was forced to resign; or, as others say, died of
wounds received in a Duel from his Successor, who was Gregory son of Dongal,
who was not only an excellent man, but an excellent Prince, that both
recovered what the others had lost, and victoriously traversed the Nothern
Counties of England, and a great part of Ireland, whose King a Minor, and in
his power, he generously made no advantage of, but settled his Country, and
provided faithful and able Guardians for him. These things justly yield him
the name of Great: Donald son of Constantine the second by his recommendation,
succeeded in his power and virtues, notwithstanding some say he was removed by
poison: Next was Constantine the third, son of Ethus, an unstable person, who
assisted the Danes, which none of his Predecessors would do, and after they
had deserted him basely, yet yielded them succors, consisting of the chief of
the Scots Nobility, which with the whole Danish Army were routed by the Saxons;
this struck him so, that he retired amongst the Culdys (which were as the Greek
Caloyers, or Romish Monks at this day) and there buried himself alive: After
him was Milcom, son of Donald the third, who though a good Prince, and well
skilled in the arts of peace, was slain by a Conspiracy of those to whom his
virtue was burdensome: His Successor was Judulf (by what title I find not)
who fighting with the Danes, that with a Navy unexpectedly came into the Frith,
was slain: Duffe his son succeeds, famous for an accident, which if it be true,
seems nearly distant from a fable; He was suddenly afflicted by a sweating
disease, by which he painfully languish'd, yet no body could find the cause,
till at last a Girl, that had scattered some words after torments, confessed
that her mother and some other women, had made an Image of wax, whirh, as it
wasted, the King should waste, by sweating much; the place being diligently
searched, it was found accordingly; so the Image being broke, he instantly
recovered: That which disturbed his five years Reign, was the turbulency of the
Northern people, whom, when he had reduced and taken, with intent to make
exemplary punishment, Donald the Commander of the Castle of Forresse, where he
then lay, interceded for some of them, but being repulst, and exasperated by
his wife, after he had made all his servants drunken, flew him in his bed, and
buried him under a little bridge, (lest the cutting of turfs might bewray a
grave) near Kilross Abbey; though others say, he turned aside a River, and
after he had buried him, suffered it to take its former Channel: Culen the son
of Induffe, by the Election of Parliament, or Convention of People succeeded,
good only in this one Action of inquiring and punishing his Predecessors
death, but after, by the neglect of Discipline, and the exquisitnesse of his
vices, became a monster, and so continued three years, till being weakened and
exhausted in his body, and vexed with perpetual diseases he was summoned by the
Parliament, and in the way, was slain by a Thane (so they then called
Lieutenants of Counties) whose daughter he had ravished.

Then came Kenneth, brother to Duff (though the forepart of his Keign was
totally unlike his) who being invaded by the Danes, beat them in that famous
battle, which was won by three Hays, husbandmen (from whom all the Hays now
give three shields gules) who with their Sythes reinforced the lost battle, but
in his latter time he lost this reputation, by poisoning Milcolm son of Duff,
to preserve the Crown for a son of his name, though of less merit (for says
Bucanan, They use to choose the fittest, not the nearest) which being done, he
got ordained in a Parliament, that the Succession should be lineall, the Son
should inherit, and be called Prince of Scots; and if he were a minor, be
governed by some wise man (here comes the pretense of Succession, whereas
before it was clearly Elective) and at fifteen, he should choose his Guardian
himself; But the Divine vengeance, which seldom, even in this life, passes by
murder, overtook him; for he was ensnared by a Lady, whose son he had caused
to be executed, and slain by an arrow out of an ambush she had laid.
Constantine the son of Culen, notwithstanding all the artifice of Kenneth, by
his reasoning against the Act, persuaded most of the Nobility to make him King,
to that Milcolm the son of Kenneth and he made up two factions, which tore the
Kingdom, till at length Milcoms Bastard Brother (himself being in Englaend
assisting the Danes) fought him routed his Army, and with the loss of his own
life, took away his, they dying of mutual wounds. Grime, of whose birth they
do not certainly agree, was chosen by the Constantinians, who made a good
party, but at intercession of Forard (an accounted Rabbi of the times) they at
last agreed, Grime being to enjoy the Kingdom for his life, after which
Milcolumb should succeed, his fathers Law standing in force; but he after
declining into lewdness, cruelty and spoil (as Princes drunk with greatness
and prosperity use to do) the people called back Milcolumb, who rather
receiving battle then giving it (for it was upon Ascension day, his principal
Holyday) routed his Forces, wounded himself, took him, pulled out his eyes,
which altogether made an end of his life, all factions and humors being
reconciled.

Milcolumb, who with various Fortune fought many signal Battles with the
Danes, who under their King Sueno had invaded in his latter end he grew to such
Covetousness and Oppression, that all Authors agree he was murdered, though
they disagree of the manner; some say, by Confederacy with his servants; some,
by his Kinsmen and Competitours; some, by the friends of a maid, whom he had
ravished. Donald his Grandchild succeeded, a good natured and unactive Prince,
who with a stratagem of sleepy drink, destroyed a Danish Army that had invaded
and distressed him, but at last being ensnared by his Kinsman Mackbeth (who was
pricked forward by Ambition, and a former vision of three women of a
Sour-humane shape, whereof one saluted him, Thane of Angus, another of Murray
the third King) he was beheaded.

The severity and cruelty of Mackbeth was so known, that both the sons of the
murdered King were forced to retire, and yield to the times, whilst he
courted the Nobility with largesses: The first ten years he spent virtuously,
but the remainder was so savage and Tyrannical, that Macduff The One of Fife
fled into England to Milcolm, son of Donald, who by his persuasions, and the
assistance of the King of England, enterd Scotland, where he found such great
accessions to his party, that Mackbeth was forced to fly, his death is hid in a
such a mist of Fables, that it is not certainly known.

Milcolumb, the third of that name, now being quietly seated, was the first
that brought in those gay inventions and distinctions of Honors, Dukes,
Marquesses (that now are become so ayery, that some carry them from places, to
which they have as little relation as any, as Island in America, and other from
Cottages and Dovecoats) his first trouble was Forfar Mackbeths son, who claimed
the Crown, but was soon after cut off: some war he had with that William, whom
we call falsely the Conqueror, some with his own People, which, by the
Intercession of the Bishops, were taken up: At length, quarrelling with our
William the second, he laid Siege to Alnwick Castle, which being forced to
extremity, a Knight came out with the Keys on a Spear, as to present them to
him, and yield the Castle, but he not with due heed receving them, was run
through the eye and slain; some from hence derive the name of Piercy (how truly
I know not) his son and Successor Edward following his revenge too hotly,
received some wounds, of which, within a few days, he died.

Donald Bane (that is white) who had fled into the Isles for fear of Mackbeth,
promised them to the Kings of Norway, if he would procure him to be King, which
was done with ease, as the times then stood, but this Usurper being hated by
the People, who generally loved the memory of Milcomb, they set Duncan Milcombs
Bastard against him, who forced him to retire to his Isles; Duncan a Military
man, showed himself unfit for Government, so, Donald waiting all advantages,
caused him to be beheaded, and restored himself; but his Reign was so
turbulent, the Islanders and English invading on both sides, that they called
in Edgar son of Milcolmb, then in England, who, with small assistances,
possessed himself, all men deserting Donald, who being taken and brought to the
King died in Prison. Edgar secure by his virtues, and strengthened by the
English alliance, spent nine years virtuously and peaceably, and gave the
People leave to breathe and rest after so much trouble and bloodshed. His
Brother Alexander, surnamed Acer, or the fierce, succeeded, the beginning of
whose Reign, being disturbed by a Rebellion, he speedily met them at the Spay,
which being a swift River, and the Enemy on the other side, he offered himself
to foard on horseback but Alexander Car taking the employment from him,
foarded the River with such courage, that the Enemy fled, and were quiet. The
rest of his Reign some say he had the name of Acer, for that some Conspiratours
being by the fraud of Chamberlain, admitted into his Chamber, he casually
waking first, slew the Chamberlain, and after six of the Conspiratours, not
ceasing to pursue the rest, till he had slain most of them with his own hands,
this with the building of some Abbeys, and seventeen years Reign, is all we
know of him.

His Brother David succeeded, one whose profuse prodigality upon the Abbeys
brought the revenew of the Crown (so prevalent was the superstition of those
days) almost to nothing, he had many battles with our Stephen about the title
of Maud the Empress, and having lost his excellent wife and hopeful Son in
the flower of their days, he left the Kingdom to his Grandchildren, the
eldest whereof was David a simple King, baffled, and led up and down into
France by our Henry the second, which brought them to such contempt, that he
was vexed by frequent Insurrections, especially them of Murray, whom he almost
extirpated; the latter part of his Reign was spent in building of Monasteries,
he himself tied by a Vow of Chastity, would never marry, but left his Successor
his brother William, who expostulating for the Earldom of Northumberland gave
occasion for a War, in which he was surprised and taken, but afterward releast
upon his doing Homage for the Kingdom of Scotland to King Henry, of whom he
acknowledged to hold it, and putting in Caution the Castles of Roxborough (once
strong, now nothing but ruins) Barwick, Edinburgh, Sterling, all which
notwithstanding was after released by Richard Ceur de Lion, who was then upon
an expedition to the Holy War, from whence returning, both he, and David Earl
of Huntington, brother to the King of Scots were taken Prisoners: the rest of
his Reign (saving the rebuilding of Saint Johnstone, which had been destroyed
by the waters, whereby he lost his eldest Son;) and some Treaties with our King
John was little worth the memory; only you will wonder that a Scottish King
could Reign forty nine years and dye in peace.

Alexander his son succeeded, famous for little, save some Expeditions
against our King John, some Insurrections, and a Reign two years longer then
his Fathers. His son was the third of that name, a boy of eight years old,
whose Minority was infested with the turbulent Cumins, who at riper age, being
called to account, not only refused, but surprised him at Sterling, governing
him at their pleasure; but soon after he was awaked by a furious Invasion of
Acho King of Norway (under the pretense of some Islands given him by Mackbeth)
whom he forced to accept a Peace and spent the latter part amidst the
turbulencies of the Priests (drunk at that time with their wealth and ease) and
at last having seen the continued funerals of his Sons, David, Alexander, his
wife, and his daughter, he himself with a fall from his horse broke his neck,
leaving of all his race, only a Grandchild by his daughter, which dyed soon
after.

This man's family being extinguished, they were forced to run to to another
Line, which that we may see how happy, expedient, immediate Succession is for
the Peace of the Kingdom, and what miseries it prevents; I shall as briefly and
as pertinently as I can, set down.

David, brother to King William, had three daughters. Margaret married to
Allan, Lord of Galloway, Isabell married to Robert Bruce, Lord of Annadale and
Cleveland; Ada married to Henry Hastings, Earl of Huntington now Allan begot on
his wife Dornadilla married to John Baliall after King of Scotland, and other
two daughters, Bruce on his wife Robert Bruce, Earl of Carick, (having married
the heretrix thereof,) as for Huntington he desisted his claim; The question
is, whether Balial in right of the eldest daughter, or Bruce being come of the
second (but a man) should have the Crown, he being in the same degree, and of
the more worthy sex; the Controversy being tossed up and down, at last was
referred to Edward the first of that name of England he thinking to fish in
these troubled waters, stirs up eight other Competitors, the more to entangle
the business, and with twenty four Counselors, half English, half Scots, and
abundance of Lawyers, fit enough to perplex the matter, so handled the
business, after cunning delays, that at length he secretly tampers with Bruce
(who was then conceived to have the better right of the business) that if he
would acknowledge the Crown of him, he would adjudge it for him, but he
generously answering that he valued a Crown at a less rate, then for it to put
his Country under a Foreign yoke; he made the same motion to Baliall, who
accepted it; and so we have a King again, by what right we all see, but it is
good reason to think that Kings, come they by their power never so unjustly,
may justly keep it.

Baliall having thus got a Crown as unhappily kept it, for no sooner was he
Crowned, and had done honage to Edward, but the Abernethys having slain
Macduffe Earl of Fife, he not only pardoned them, but gave them a piece of
land in controversy, whereupon Macduffs brother complainis against him to
Edward, who makes him rise from his seat at Parliament and go to the bar, he
hereupon enraged, denies Edward assistance against the French, and renounses
his homage, Edward hereupon comes to Berwick takes and kills seven thosand,
most of the Nobility of Fife and Lowthian, and after gave them a great defeat
at Dunbar, whose Castle instantly surrendered: After this, he marched to
Montrosse, where Baliall resined himself and Crown, all the Nobility giving
Homage to Edward, Baliall is sent prisoner to London, and from thence after a
years detention into France. Whilst Edward was possessed of all Scotland, one
William Wallace arose, who being a private man, bestirred himself in the
Calamity of his Country, and gave the English several notable foyles. Edward
coming again with an Army, beat him (that was overcome with envy and emulation
as well as power, upon which he laid by his Command, and never acted after, but
slight Incursions) but the English being beaten at Roslin, Edward comes in
again, takes Sterling, and makes them all render homage; but at length Bruce,
seeing all his promises nothing but smoke, enters into League with Cumen to get
the Kingdom; but being betrayed by him to Edward, he stabbed Cumen at
Drumfreis, and made himself King. This man though he came with disadvantage,
yet wanted neither patience, courage, nor conduct; so that after he had
miserably lurked in the mountains, he came down, and gathering together some
force, gave our Edward the second such a defeat near Sterling, as Scotland
never gave the like to our Nation, and continued war with various fortune with
the Third, till at last, age and Leprosy brought him to his grave. His son
David a Boy of eight years, inherited that which he with so much danger
obtained, and wisdom kept; In his minority he was governed by Thomas Randolf
Earl of Murray, whose severity in punishing was no less dreaded then His valor
had been honored, but he soon after dying of poison, and Edward Balial, son of
John, coming with a Fleet, and strengthend with the assistance of the English,
and some Robbers, the Governor the Earl of Mar was put to the rout, so that
Balial makes himself King, and David was glad to retire into France; Amidst
these parties ( Edward the third backing Balial) was Scotland pitifully torn,
and the Bruces in a manner extinguished, till Robert (after King) with them of
Argyle and his own Family and Friends, begin to renew the Claim, and bring it
into a War again, which was carried on by Andrew Murray the Governor, and
after by himself; that David after nine years banishment durst return, where
making often Incursions, he at length in the fourth year of his return, marched
into England, and in the Bishopric of Durham was routed, fled to an obscure
Bridge, showed to this day by the Inhabitants, where he was by John Copland
taken prisoner, where he continued nine years, and in the thirty ninth year of
his Reign died.

Robert his sisters son, whom he had intended to put by, succeeds, and first
brought the Stewarts (which at this day are a plague to the Nation) into play:
This man after he was King, whether it were age or sloth, did little; but his
Lieutenants and the English were perpetually in Action; he left his Kingdom to
John his Bastard Son by the Lady More his Concubine, whom he married, either to
Legittimate the three Children (as the manner was then) he had by her, or else
for old acquaintance (his Wife and her Husband dying much about a time) this
John would be Crowned by the name of Robert (his own they say, being unhappie
for Kings) a wretched unactive Prince, lame, and only governed by his brother
Walter, who having David the Prince, upon the complaint of some exorbitancies,
delivered to him to take care of, made him to be starved; upon which the King
intending to send his Son James into France, the Boy was taken at Flamburgh,
and kept by our Henry the Fourth; upon the hearing of which, his Father
swounded, and soon after died: His reign was memorable for nothing, but his
breaking with George Earl of March, to whose daughter, upon the payment of a
great part of her portion (which he never would repay) he had promised his Son
David for an husband: to take the Daughter of Douglas who had a greater, which
occasioned the Earl of March to make many in-rodes with our Henry Hot-spur; and
a famous Duel of three hundred men a piece, whereof of the one side ten
remained, and of the other one, which was the only way to appease the deadly
Feuds of two Families: The Inter-reign was governed by Robert, who enjoying the
power, he had too much coveted, little minded the liberty of his Nephew, only
he sent some Auxiliaries into France, who, they say, behaved themselves
worthily; and his slothful Son Mordac, who making his Sons so bold with
indulgence, that one of them killed a Faulcon on his fist, which he denied to
give him; he in revenge procured the Parliament to ransom the King, who had
been eighteen years prisoner. This James was the first of that Name, and though
he was an excellent Prince, yet had a troublesome Reign; first in regard of a
great Pension raised for his Ransom, next for Domestic Commotions, and lastly
for raising of money, which though the Revenue was exhausted, was called
Covetousness, which having offended Robert Graham, he conspired with the Earl
of Athol, slew him in his Chamber, his Wife receiving two wounds, endeavoring
to defend him.

This James left the second, a boy of six years, whose infancy by the
mis-guidance of the Governor, made a miserable People, and betrayed the Earl
Douglas to death, and almost all that great Family to ruin; but being
supplanted by another Earl Douglas, the King in his just age suffered minority
under him, who upon displeasure rebelled, and was killed by the Kings own hand;
afterward having his middle years perpetually molested with Civil broils, yet
going to assist the Duke of York against Henry the Sixth, he was diverted by an
English Gentleman, that counterfeited himself a Nuncio (which I mention out of
a Manuscript, because I do not remember it in our Stories) and broke up his
Army: soon after besieging Roxburgh, he was slain by the bursting of a Cannon
in the twenty ninth year of his Age.

James the Third left a Boy of seven years, governed by his Mothe, afterward
the Boyds through the persuasions of Astrologers and Witches to whom he was
strongly addicted, he declined to Cruelty, which so enraged the Nobility, that
headed by his son, they conspired against him, routing his Forces near
Sterling, wherein he flying to a Mill, and asking for a Confessor, a Priest
came, who told him, that though he was no good Priest, yet he was a good Leech,
and with that stabbed him to the heart: A Parliament approved his death, and
ordered Indemnities to all that had sought against him.

James the Fourth, a Boy of fifteen years, is made King, Governed by the
murderers of his Father, a prodigal vainglorious Prince slain at Floddon
Field or as some suppose at Kelsey, by the Humes, which (as the Manuscript
alleges) seems more probability, in regard that the Iron Belt (a Ring to which
he added every year) which he wore in repentance for the death of his Father,
was never found, and there were many the day of the Battle habited like him.
His Successor was his son, James the Fifth of that Name, a Boy of not above two
years of age; under whose minority, what by the Mis-government of Tutors, what
by the factions of the Nobility, Scotland was wasted almost into famine and
solitude, yet in his just age, he proved an industrious Prince, but could not
so satisfy the Nobility but he and they continued in a mutual hate, till that
barbarous execution of young Hamilton, so filled him with remorse, (he
dream-that Hamilton came and cut off his Arms, and threatened after to cut off
his Head) and displeased the people. that he could not make his Army fight with
the English then in Scotland, whereupon he dyed of grief, having heard the
death of his two sons, who dyed at the instant of his Dream, and leaving a
Daughter of five days old, whom he never saw.

This was that Mary, under whose minority (by the weakness of the Governor,
and ambition of the Cardinal) the Kingdom felt all those woes that are
threatened to them whose King is a Child. Till at length the prevalency of the
English Arms (awakes for her Cause) brought the great design of sending her
into France to perfection, so at five years old she was t^ansported, and at
fifteen married to the Daulphin Francis, after King, (whilst her mother,
daughter of the Guise, in her Regency, exercised all Rage against the
Professors of the pure Religion then in the dawn) who after two years, left
her a childlesse Widow, so that at eighteen she returned into Scotland to
succeed her Mother (then newly dead) in her exorbitoncies.

This young Couple in the transport of their Nuptial solemnities, took the
Arms and Title of England; which indiscreet Ambition we may suppose first
quickened the jealousy of Elizabeth against her, which after kindled so great a
flame.

In Scotland she showed what a strange influence loose education has upon
youth, and that weaker Sex, all the French effeminacies came over with her, the
Court lost that little severity which was left. David Rize was the only
Favorite, and it too much feared, had those enjoyments which no woman can
give, but she that gives away her honor and chastity.

But a little after, Henry Lord Darnly, coming with Matthew Earl of Lenox his
father into Scotland, she cast an eye upon him, and married him. Whether it
were to strengthen her pretension to England, he being come of Henry the
Sevenths Daughter, as we shall tell anon, or for to color her Adulteries, and
hide the shame of an impregnation, (though some have whispered, that she never
conceived, and that the son was supposititious) or some Phrenzy of affection
drew her that way; certain it is she soon declined her affection to her
husband, and increased it to David (he being her perpetual Companion at Board,
and managing all Affairs, whilst the King with a contemptible train was sent
away) insomuch that some of the Nobility that could not digest this, entered a
Conspiracy, which the king headed, and slew him in her Chamber.

This turned all the neglect of her Husband into rage, so that her chiefest
business was to appease her Favorites Ghost with the slaughter of her Husband;
poison was first attempted, but it being (it seems) too weak, or his youth
overcoming it, that expectation failed. But the Devil and Bothwel furnished her
with another that succeeded, she intices him being so sick, that they were
forced to bring him in an horselitter to Edinburgh, where she cherisht him
extreemly, till the credulous young man began to lay aside suspicion, and hope
better; so she puts him in a ruinous House near the Palace, from whence no news
can be had, brings in her own bed, and lies in the House with him; and at
length when the Design was ripe, causes him one Sunday night, with his
servant, to be strangled, thrown out of the window, and the House blown up with
Gunpowder, her own rich bed having been before secretly conveyed away. This
and other performances made her favor upon Bothwel so hot, that she must marry
him, the only obstacle was, he had a Wife already; but she was compelled to
sue for a Divorce, which (so great Persons being concerned) it was a wonder,
was in granting so long as ten days. Well, she marries but the more honest
nobility amazed at those exorbitances, gather together, and with arms in hands
begin to expostulate: The new-married people are forced to make back
Southwards, where finding but slender assistances, and the Queen foolishly
coming from Dunbar to Leith, was glad at last to delay a parley till her Dear
was escaped and then (clad in an old tottered coat) to yield her self a
prisoner.

Being brought to Edinburgh, and used rather with hate of her former
enormities, then pity of her fortune, she received a message, that she must
either resign the Crown to her son James (that was born in the time of her
marriage with Darnby) or else they would proceed to another Election, and was
forced to obey: So the Child then in his Cradle was acknowledged James the
Sixth, better known afterward by the Title of Great Britain.

The wretched mother flying after into England, was entertained (though with a
Guard) by Queen Elizabeth, but after that being suborned by the Papists, and
exasperated by the Guizes, she entered into plots and machinations, so
inconsistent with the safety of England, that by an Act of Parliament she was
condemned to death, which she after received by an hatchet at Fothering-gay
Castle.

The infancy of her son was attended with those Domestic evils that accompany
minority of Kings: In his youth he took to wife the Daughter of Denmark (a
woman I hear little of, saving that Character Salust gives Sempronia, she could
saltare elegantius quam necesse est probae) with whom he supposing the Earl
Gowry too much in League, caused him and his brother to be slain at their own
House whither he was invited, he giving out, that they had an intent to murder
him, and that by miracle, and the assistance of some men (whom he had
instructed for that purpose, and taught their tale) he escaped. For this
Deliverance (or to say better assasination) he Blasphemed God with a solemn
Thanksgiving once a year all the remainder of his life.

Happy had it been for us, if our fore fathers had laid hold of that happy
opportunity of Elizabeth's death (in which the Teuthors took a period) to have
performed that which (perchance in due punishment) has cost us so much blood
and sweat, and not have bowed under the sway of a Stranger, (disdained by the
most generous and wise at that time, and only supported by the Faction of some
and sloth of others) who brought but a slender title, and (however the
assentation of the times cried him up a Solomo) weak commendations for such an
advancement.

The Former stood thus, Margaret, eldest daughter to Henry the Seventh, was
married to James the Fourth, whole Son, James the Fifth, had Mary the Mother of
James the Sixth. Margaret after her first Husbands death, martyrs Archibald
Douglas, Earl of Angus, who upon her begot Margaret, wife of Matthew Earl of
Lenox, and Mother of that Henry Darnly, whose Tragical end we just now
mentioned. Now upon this slender Title, and our internal dissentions (for the
Cecilians and Essezians, for several ends, made perpetual applications) got
Jammy from a Revenew of 30000. li. to one of almost two Millions, though there
were others that had as fair pretenses (what else can any of them make) the
Statute of 25. Ed. 3 expressly excluding Foreigners from the Crown? and so the
Children of Charles Brandon by Mary the Second Daughter, Dowager of France,
being next to come in. And the Lady Arbella, being sprung from a third Husband,
(the Lord Stewart) of the said Margaret, and by a Male Line, carried surely a
formidable pretention (it should seem) that even that iniquity which was
personally inherent to her, made her days very unhappy and most part captive,
and her death ('it is thought) somewhat too early, so cruel are the Persecutions
of cowardly minds, even against the weakest and most unprotected innocence.

And indeed his right to the Crown was so satisfactorie even to the most
judicious of those days; that Tobie Matthew having a suit about some
privileges which he claimed to his Bishopric (which was then Durham) wherein
the King opposed him; having one day stated the Case before some of his
friends, and they seeming to approve of it; yes, says he, I could wish he had
but half so good a Title to the Crown; and it is known that some speeches of Sir
Walter Rawley, too generous and English for the times, was that which brought
him to Trial and Condemnation for a feigned crime, and afterward so
facilitated that barbarous design of Gundamar, to cut of his head for a crime,
for which he was condemned fourteen years before, and which by the Commissions
he after received (according to the opinion of the then Lord Chancellor, and
the greatest Lawyars) was in Law pardoned.

This may besides our purpose, but we could not sever this Consideration,
unless we would draw him with an half face, and leave as much in umbrage as we
expressed. That which most solemnized his Person, was, first the consideration
of his adhering to the Protestant Religion, whereas we are to consider that
those slieght velitations he had with Bellarmine and the Romanists, tended
rather to make his own Authority more intrinsecally intense, and venerable,
then to confute any thing they said, for he had before shakt them off, as to
Foreign Jurisdiction, and for matter of Popery, it appeared in his latter
time that he was no such enemy to it, both by his own Compliances with the
Spanish Ambassadors, the design of the Spanish Match (in which his Son was
personally imbarkt) and the slow assistances sent to his Daughter, in whose
safety and protectiod Protestantism was at that time so much concerned.

For his knowledge, he had some glancings and niblings, which the severitie of
the excellent Buchanan, fore'd into him in his younger time, and after
conversatian somewhat polisht, but though I bear not so great a contempt to his
other works, as Ben. Johnson did to his Poetry, yet if they among many others
were a going to the fire, they would not be one of the first I should rescue,
as possibly expecting more severe and refined judgment in many other. And
knowing that he that had so many able Wits at command, might easily give their
their Oracles through his mouth: but suppose the things generous and fit to
live (as I am not yet convinced) yet what commendations is this to a King (who
should have other ausinesse then spinning and weaving fine Theories, and
engaging in School Ciquaneries) which was well understood by Henry the fourth,
who hearing some men celebrate him with these Attributes; yea (answers he very
tartly) He is a fine King, and writes little Books.

It Is true, he was a good droll, and possibly after Greek Wine somewhat
factious. But for substantial and Heroic Wisdom, I have not heard any great
instances; he himself used to brag of his kingcraft, which was not to felicifie
his People, and prosecute the ends of a good King; but to scrue up the
Prerogative, divert Parliaments from the due disquisition and prosecution of
their freedoms, and to break them up at pleasure, and indeed his rendition of
the Cautionary Towns of the Low Countries, and that for so small a sum, showed
him a person not so quick-sighted, and unfit to be overreach'd.

For his peaceable Reign, Honorable and just Quarrels he wanted not, but
sloth and cowardice withheld him, and indeed the ease and luxury of those
times, fomented and nourished those lurking and pestilent humors, which
afterward so dangerously broke out in his Sons Reign.

We shall not trouble his ashes with the mention of his Personal faults,
only, if we may compare Gods Judgments with apparent sins; we may find the
latter end of his life, neither fortunate nor comfortable unto him, His wife
distasted by him, and some say, languishing of a foul disease; his eldest son
dying, Nimis apertis indiciis, of Poison, and that as is feared by a hand too
much allied: His second (with whom he ever had a secret Antipathy) scarce
returned from a mad and dangerous voyage; His daughter (all that was left of
that sex) banished, with her numerous issue, out of her husbands Dominion, and
living in miserable exile; and lastly, himself dying of a violent death (by
poison) in which his Son was more then suspected to have an hand, as may be
inferred by Buckinghams Plea, that he did it by the Command of the then Prince;
his own dissolution of the Parliament that took in hand to examine it; and
lastly, his indifferency at Buckinghams death (though he pretended all love to
him alive) as glad to be rid of so dangerous and so considerable a Partner of
his guilt; yet the Mitred Parasites of those times, could say, one went to
Heaven in Noah's Ark, the other in Elisha's chariot, he dying of a pretended
Fever, she (as they said) of a dropsy.

Charles having now obtained his Brothers inheritance, carried himself in
managing of it, like one that gained it as he did. The first of his Acts, was
that glorious attempt upon the Isle of Rhee. The next that Noble and
Christianly betraying of Rochell, and consequently in a manner the whole
Protestant interest in France. The middle of his Reign was heightening of
Prerogative and Prelacy, and conforming our Churches to the pattern of Rome;
till at last just indignation brought in his Subjects of Scotland into England,
and so forced him to call a Parliament; which though he shamelesly say in the
first line of the Book (called his) was out of his own inclination to
Parliaments, yet how well he liked them may appear by his first tampering with
his own Army in the North, to surprise and dissolve them, then the Scots (who
at that time were Court-proof) then raising up the Irish Rebellion, which has
wasted Millions of lives; and lastly, open secession from Westminster, and
hostility against the two Houses, which maintained a first and second sharp
War, which had almost ruined the Nation, had not Providence in a manner
immediately interposed and rescued us to liberty, and made us such signal
Instruments of his vengeance, that all wicked Kings may tremble at the example.

In a word never was man so resolute and obstinate in a Tyranny, never people
more strangely besotted with it, to paint the Image of David with his face, and
Blasphemously parallel him with Christ, would make one at first thought think
him a Saint: But to compare his Protestations and actions; his actions of the
day, his actions of the night, his Protestant Religion, and his Courting of
Pope, and obedience to his wife, we may justly say, he was one of the most
consummate in the Arts of Tyranny that ever was. And it could be no other then
Gods hand that arrested him in the height of his Designs and greatness, and
cut off him and his Family, making good his own Imprecations upon his own head.

Our Scene is again in Scotland, who has accepted his Son, whom for
distinction sake, we will be content to call Charles the Second. Certainly these
People were strangely blind as to Gods judgment perpetually poured out upon a
Family, or else to their own interest, to admit the spray of such a stock; one
that has so little to commend him, and so great improbabilitie for their
designs and happiness, a Popish (or very near it) education, if not Religion
too (however for the present he may seem to dissemble it, France, the Jesuits
and his Mother good means of such improvement) the dangerous Maxims of his
Father, (besides the revenge he ows his death, of which he will never totally
acquit the Scots) his hate to the whole Nation, his sense of Montrosse his
death; his backwardness to come to them till all other means failed (both his
Foreign begged Assistances, his Propositions to the Pope, and Commissions to
Montrosse) and lastly, his late running away to his old friends in the North;
so that any man may see this his Compliance to be but Histrionical and forced,
and that as soon as he has led them into the snare, and got power into his own
hands, so as he may appear in his own visage; he will be a scourge upon them
for their gross hypocrisy, and leave them a sad instance to all Nations, how
dangerous it is to espouse such an interest, which God with so visible and
severe a hand fights against, carried on by, and for the support of a
Tyrannizing Nobility and Clergy, and wherein the poor People are blindly led
on by those affrighting (but false and ungrounded) pretensions of perfidy and
perjury, and made isntrumental with their own estates and blood, for the
enslaving and ruining themselves.

FINIS.

