The Humble PETITION of the Widows and Fatherless Children in the West of
England, Presented to this present Convention.
WE, to the Number of a Thousand and more, Widows and Fatherless Children, of
the Counties of Dorset, Somerset, and Devon, our dear Husbands and tender
Fathers having been so Tyrannously Butchered, and some Transported, our Estates
sold from us, and our Inheritance cut off by the severe and harsh Sentence of
George Lord Jefferies, now we understand in the Tower of London a Prisoner, who
has lately, we hear, endeavored to excuse himself from those Tyrannical and
Illegal Sentences, by laying it on Information by some Gentlemen, who are
known to us to be good Christians, true Protestants and Englishmen. We your
poor Petititioners, many hundreds of us, on our knees have begged Mercy for our
dear Husbands and tender Parents, from his Cruel Hands, but his thirst for
Blood was so great, and his Barbarism so Cruel, that instead of granting Mercy
for some, which were made appear to be Innocent, and Petitioned for by the
flower of the Gentry of the said Counties, he immediately Executed; and so
barbarously, that a very good Gentlevvoman at Dorchester, begging on her Knees
the Life of one Mr. Bescombe, to Marry him, and make him her Husband, this vile
Wretch not having common Civility with him, and laying aside that Honor and
Respect due to a Person of her worth, told her, Come, I know your meaning, some
part of your Petition I will grant, which shall be that after he is Hanged and
Quartered, you shall have that Member you best like when living, and so I will
give Orders to the Sheriff: These, with many hundred more Tyrannical Acts are
ready to be made appear in the said Counties, by honest and credible Persons,
and therefore your Petitioners desire, that the said George Jefferies, late
Lord Chancellor, the Vilest of Men, may be brought down to the Counties
aforesaid, where we the good Women in the West shall be glad to see him; and
give him another manner of Welcome than he had there three Years since.

And your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere will be Published in a few Days a Treatise Entitled, The Bloody Assizes:
or, Hell in Little, being a complete History of the Life of GEORGE Lord
JEFFERIES, from his Birth to this present time, etc. Wherein (amongst other
things) is given a true Account of his unheard of Cruelties and barbarous
Proceedings in his whole Western Circuit; the manner of his coming to
Dorchester, his Tyrannical Behavior there, his Affronts to the Sheriffs and
chief Gentlemen of Devon-shire, Dorset-shire, Somersetshire, etc. His
barbarous Practices at Exeter, Taunton, and the City of Wells; the Trials and
Condemnation of 947 Persons, with their undaunted Courage at the Bar, and
remarkable Circumstances that attended their Executions: Faithfully Collected
by several West Country Gentlemen, now in London, who were both Eye and
Ear-witnesses. Which will be Sold by John Dunton at the Black Raven in the
Poultrey, over against the Compter.

A Second Collection of the Dying Speeches, Letters, Prayers, etc. of those who
suffered in the West will speedily be Published, the first Collection having
met with a Candid Reception.


