17 Martii, 1646.

The Humble PETITION OF The Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons of the City of
London in Common Counsel assembled, this day delivered TO The Honorable, The
Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT. WITH The ANSWER of the Honorable House of
Commons thereunto.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Petition, with the
Answer, be forthwith printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
MARCH 18. 1646.

Die Mercurii, 17 Martii, 1646.
THe House being informed, That diverse of the Aldermen and Common Counsel were
at the Door, desiring to prefer a Petition to this House, they were called in,
and Sheriff Edmonds did acquaint the House, That they were appointed by the
Lord Major, Aldermen and Common Counsel of the City of London, to prefer this
their Petition to this House; The Petition was styled, The humble Petition of
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London in Common Counsel
assembled: The Petitioners being withdrawn, The Petition was read, and likewise
the Copy of a Petition annexed, which is the same with that printed Copy which
was informed against, and brought in to this House on Monday last.

To the Honorable, The House of Commons assembled in the High Court of
Parliament; The humble Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the
City of London in Common Council assembled:
HUmbly acknowledging the hopeful progress which this Honorable House has made
upon some particulars of the former Addresses of the Petitioners, wherein as
they are confident you will still go forward, so they humbly crave pardon if
they continue their importunity for such an effectual and speedy resolution
upon the whole, as may, with Gods blessing, at length setle the Affairs of this
long distracted Kingdom.

And now that His Majesty is come nearer in Person to His Parliament of
England, the Petitioners would gladly entertain some hope, and cannot but
earnestly desire, That God would also bring His Royal heart and will nearer to
this His chief and greatest Council: And that His Majesty will now be persuaded
to join with His Parliament and all His People in the National and Solemn
League and Covenant, and give satisfaction in the matter of Propositions which
the Parliaments of both Nations shall make unto Him, for the full assurance of
His People in the future, and the firm establishment of the Peace and Union of
this Kingdom in Church and Commonwealth; without both which the Petitioners
cannot expect any firm or real Peace in this Kingdom.

And that His Majesty may be the better disposed to this Conjunction, and the
Parliament and this City in the interim secured, the Petitioners humbly offer
it unto the wisdom of this Honorable House to take course, That such as have
been in opposition to the Parliament may be removed out of this City, and be
kept at a distance from His Majesty's Royal Presence.

These Are the Hopes and Prayers of the Retitioners, which they humbly pray may
be as favorably accepted and interpreted, as they proceed from a sincere heart;
That which the Petitioners intend hereby, is, still more and more to manifest
their Integrity to the Parliament, to stop the malicious Tongues of Sectaries
on the one party, who have from the Petitioners late humble Addresses,
suggested some defection in the City; and to cut off the vain hopes of
Malignants, and such as have been in opposition to the Parliament, on the other
party; That they can expect no compliance from the Petitioners. For the
Petitioners do for themselves, and the whole City whom they represent, Declare
unto the whole World, That they still are, and with Gods blessing are resolved
so to remain, in their Zeal as fervent, and in their Respects as humble and
real to the Parliament as ever. And according to their Covenant, do next under
God wholly rely upon the Wisdom and Justice of the Parliament for the
settlement of their Peace and Prosperity.

And the Petitioners humbly pray, That this Honorable House will give no credit
to any Representation of the mind and sense of the City, contrary unto this
their solemn Profession, although even some of those who serve for the City, or
are free thereof, or any others, should make any other Representation of the
same.

Here the Petitioners should willingly have concluded, but that the Army (which
they hoped should ere this have been disbanded) is now drawn so suddenly, and
quartered so near the Parliament and this City: Besides that in the same
juncture of time, a most dangerous and seditious Petition (as they humbly
conceive) is set on foot, to be presented to this Honorable House; the Copy
whereof, as it was delivered to them, is annexed: which does exact this
addition from the Petitioners; That this Honorable House would consider, what
effect the unexpected approach of such an Army, and the concurrence of such a
Petition may work in the People; How long time all manner of Provisions have
been dear and searce in this City; How much the same must needs be increased,
when such an Army must be fed, before they can expect to be served thence, and
what murmr the same may raise amongst so great a multitude of Poor, as are
already, and do daily increase in this City.

And then that this Honorable House would be pleased to give Command that the
Army may be forthwith removed, and after with all convenient speed Disbanded;
That the Petition annexed may be out of hand suppressed, and the Contrivers and
Promoters thereof enquired after; And, that the Parliament and this City may in
the mean time be preserved in safety: That this Honorable House would please to
give this Court authority, to make Annual Election of the Members of the
Militia of this City, according to their late Petition.

And the Petitioners shall daily pray, etc. MICHEL.

THe Petitioners were again called in, and Mr. Speaker acquainted them, That
the House had considered of the particulars in the Petition; and that the House
had already most of the particulars under consideration, and have appointed a
time to take the rest into consideration, and do resolve to proceed in such
manner with them, as may be most for the ease, safety and satisfaction of the
City and the whole Kingdom; That a copy of the Petition annexed was lately
brought to this House, and that they had put it into a way of consideration: He
further acquainted the Petitioners, That he was commanded to tell them, That
the House take very special notice of the declaration and expressions of the
Petitioners, and by them of the whole Cities constant, fervent, real and
sincere affections to the service of the Parliament: The seasonableness of
these expressions adds some weight unto them, it being at such a conjuncture
of time, when the enemies both to the Parliament and City, did raise to
themselves vain and groundless hopes of some misunderstanding between this
House and the City, The contrary whereof this will sufficiently manifest; For
which he is commanded to give them the hearty thanks of this House.

H: Esynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

