THE Humble Petition OF MANY INHABITANTS In and about the City of LONDON.

Presented to the Parliament by Mr. SAM. MOYER and others, May 12. 1659.

Together with the Answer of the Parliament thereunto.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Brewster and Livewell Chapman, 1659.

TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND.
The humble Petition of many Inhabitants in and about the City of London.
Humbly shows,
THat whereas it has pleased the most wise Orderer and Disposer of all things,
to put you once more into the exercise of that Supreme Trust, wherein the King
of Nations some years since suffered you to be interrupted, as a righteous
check and chastisement to you and us, for our unthankfulness, for the Great
Salvations wrought for us, and unfaithfulness in a vigorous improvement of the
opportunities thereby given, to bring to maturity and perfection the sure
foundation of a Commonweal in matters religious and civil, then happily laid
and declared for, and signally owned by the Lord of Hosts in the days of
Appeals in the high places of the Field; which stroke from the Lord, with its
sad consequences and effects, we desire may be never forgotten by you or us. We
judge it our duty, as to admire the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of God therein,
and heartily bless his Name for hearing, and in his own time miraculously
answering our sighs, tears and prayers: So also to present unto you our cordial
owning and rejoicing in this special Providence toward you and us, wherein you
are recalled by God, and the Friends of this Commonwealth, and capacitated to
re-assert the main Substance of the Good Old Cause, and effectually to
Superstruct thereupon, till the Top-stone of Universal Liberty, Freedom, Common
Justice and Righteousness be visibly laid, to the Glory of God, the
Satisfaction of your Friends, and the Conviction of all Enemies and Gainsayers.

We presume your hearts and doors will be always open, to the sober addresses
of your Friends, as opportunity shall be offered, and therefore shall not in
this juncture of time perplex your weighty affairs with multiplicity of
particulars.

Wherefore at present we only pray; 1. That the Militia of the several Cities
and Counties within this Commonwealth may be speedily settled in the hands of
such who have in this time of trial approved themselves faithful to the
Interest thereof. 2. That such faithful persons, who have been ejected out of
places of Trust, Military or Civil, or have for Conscience sake been
necessitated to quit their employments, may be speedily invited and restored to
their former capacities; and that none for the future may be employed in any
place, from the highest to the lowest, but such who have (without declension)
manifested their good affection to the Commonwealth. 3. That care may be taken
that the persons entrusted with the Legislative power, may not be perpetuated,
but that all persons within this Commonwealth may taste of subjection, as well
as rule, and in order thereunto, that in convenient time provision may be made
for an equal distribution of Elections in the Representatives of this
Commonwealth, with such due qualifications of the Electors and Elected, as may
consist with the Interest thereof. 4. That the Liberty of all persons within
this Commonwealth may be so tendered, that neither their persons may be
imprisoned, nor their goods touched, without the breach of some known Law, and
due prosecution accordingly, and that such Ministers of Justice, Jaylors and
others may be proceeded against and removed, who have acted contrary hereunto.
5. That what Moneys are, or shall be levied upon the people for the service of
the Commonwealth, may not be diverted to any other purpose whatsoever; that
the great sums of Money, proportions of Lands, and places of Advantages that
have been granted to, or conferred upon any by the Broad Seal, or otherwise,
since the 20th. of April 1653. may be taken into Consideration, and that the
chargeable Office and Officers of the Exchequer, (as to receipts and payments)
may be reduced and regulated, as being calculated more for the Meridian of the
Court, then fitted for the service of the Commonwealth. 6. That provision may
be made, that such who live peaceably in Godliness and Honesty (though of
different persuasions in matters of Faith and Worship) may be equally protected
and encouraged. 7. That a Committee may be appointed to receive Propositions
from any such person or persons as may be able to give light and direction in
such things, as may conduce unto the frame or constitution of a good and equal
Commonwealth, or Free Estate. 8. That all such sums of Money, that since the
20th. of April 1653. have been received, or borrowed out of the Exchequer by
Privy Counselors or others, be repayed into the Treasury of this Commonwealth.


Thursday May 12. 1659.
THe House being informed that several Gentlemen were attending with a Petition
at the door, they were called in, and Mr. Samuel Moyer Esquire in behalf of them
all presented a Petition, which when the Petitioners were withdrawn, was read,
being entitled, The humble Petition of many Inhabitants in and about the City
of London.

Ordered that the Petitioners be called in, and that Mr. Speaker acquaint them,
That the House will take the matter of the Petition into consideration in due
time, and that he give them thanks in the name of the Parliament, for their
good and constant affections.

And the Petitioners being again called in, Mr. Speaker returned them this
answer.

Gentlemen,
The Parliament have read your Petition, and every part of it, and do intend in
due time to take the things therein mentioned into consideration; In the mean
time they have commanded me to tell you, that they do accept of your Petition,
and give you thanks for your care in it, and for your good affection.

Jo. Phelpes, Clerk of the Parliament pro tempore.


