An Humble PETITION Of the University and City of Oxford; lately presented to
His Majesty, for a speedy accommodation of Peace, between Himself and His
High Court of Parliament.

Together with His Majesty's gracious Answer to the said Petition.

printer's device: English royal blazon, surmounted by a crown and flanked by
the English lion and the Scottish unicorn C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Printed at Oxford by Leonard Lichfield, and now reprinted at London for Thomas
Vincent.

DOCTRINA PARIT VIRTVTEM a device consisting of an open book with a sword,
scepter, and surrounding motto
THE Humble Petition of the University and City of Oxford, to His Majesty, for
a speedy accommodation of Peace, with His High Court of Parliament.
MAy it please your most sacred Majesty, we your humble Petitioners, in all
duty show, that seeing the whole kingdom so many years under the reigns of
your Royal predecessors, blessed with a constant and continual peace, is now
overwhelmed in a most lamentable civil War, which always is destruc^^ve to
that Kingdom where it rages, the honor of God being thereby declined, the
study of good literature, for so many ages famously extant in this ancient
University, neglected, the safety of your Majesty's person diverse times
hazarded, the Commonwealth lamentably impoveris^ed by the cessation o^ Trade
within our own Kingdom, and commerce with foreign Nations. Finally, by that
want, the noble Cities of this Land, as London it self, and this our City of
Oxford, reduced to great distresses, and near approaching with the rest of the
Kingdom to inevitable ruin, unless some speedy redress be put in practice;
which we your humble Petitioners (...) from the care (...) of your sacred
Majestic whom we in all ^umility best ^e fi^ to take into your Royal and
serious consideration the aforementioned miseries surrounding the Kingdom, to
(...) with a gracious eye upon the grievous distempers, which (like Hydra's
heads, increase even by cutting off) both in the Church and Commonwealth, to
survay the strange and horrid effects produced in civil Wars, where, not
only Christians destroy Christians, and Countrymen their fellow countrymen,
but brothers sight against brothers, and fathers against their dearly beloved
children, the sword running still through the bowels of your Majesty's
Subjects, whom as you are the father of the Country, your Majesty must needs
tender with a paternall love, to behold strictly the increasing famines,
devastations, depopulations, and sicknesses, which as fast as clouds pursue
clouds, trace the steps of an intestine war, making hideous way by their
merciless effects, to the ruin and desolation of Kingdoms. To ponder the
afflictions and miserable estate of many thousand good Protestant subjects in
your Kingdom of Ireland, exposed to all the barbarism and cruely of the
pertinacious, and bloody-minded Irish Rebels who imboldened by the still
emergent distractions here, like uncontrolled torrents, run on without any
considerable resistance there in their audatious and unchristian villames. And
lastly, we in all humility request your sacred Majesty to weigh the long and
much lamented separation betwixt your royal self and your High Court of
Parliament, the supreme Council of this Kingdom, which in all ages has
been the glory and security of your famous and redoubted ancestors: and all
these considerations reduced into one contract, we doubt not but they will be
with the help of the Almighty, most efficacious inducements to invite and
incline your gracious mind to a sudden and so much desired peace and union
betwixt your Majesty and your high Court of Parliament.

For the speedy accomplishing whereof, we most humbly beseech, that without any
more attention to the lewd and unchristian counsels of those ill-affected
Malignants, who for their own seditious and sinister ends, do all that in
them lies to augment and continue the present distempers; or without further
misconceits or jealousies of the integrity and well-meaning of the honorable
your high Court of Parliament, that your sacred Majesty would graciously please
to think on some speedy course for the settling all differences between your
Majesty and your high Court of Parliament, which way in your wisdom shall be
accounted most fit and commodious for the bringing peace once more into our
dwellings; that the increase of honor, wealth, prosperity and plenty may be
redoubled in all your Majesty's dominions; that trade and commerce both at home
amongst our selves, and abroad with our confederate neighbournations, may be
renewed and augmented: that all schism and distraction may be taken away in
the Church and Gods holy worship (as it ought to be) performed: that the
Schools of good learning in this Kingdom, especially this famous University,
may again flourish and bring forth painful Laborers, and pious Instructors
into the Lords Vineyard: that our Brethren in Ireland may be relieved from
their calamities, and that kingdom settled in its pristine obedience to your
Majesty. And finally, that your sacred person being by this peace secured from
the dangers' attendant on war, you may be beloved and feared both at home and
abroad, and outshine the glory of your Imperial Progenitors. And we, as in all
duty bound, shall ever pray for your Majesty's prosperity and eternal felicity.

His MAJESTY'S gracious Answer to the Petition of the University and City of
OXFORD.
I Have received your Petition with much joy and alacrity of mind, to
understand that so signal a City as this is, one of the Eyes of Our Kingdom,
should with so unanimous and general consent, desire the re-establishment of
peace in Our so much distracted and distempered Dominions: For which your
request, We render you Our royal thanks, and do intimate to you, that there
is no earthly blessing We so much covet, as the fruits of peace in Our
Kingdoms, which have groaned so long under the oppressions and alarums of
civil war, for hundreds of years not heard of, until these last of our
reign, in this fertile Kingdom. And to let you have a full sense of Our
intentions concerning the Accommodation of Peace which you so earnestly desire
between Our self and Our Parliament; you shall know, that We esteem nothing
more dear or relative to the royal Prerogative devol'vd upon Us from Our
Ancestors, then the peace and tranquillity of Our subjects; that blessed and
happy peace which is the immediate bounty of the Almighty, the darling and
delight of humanity, which by rendering the subject rich and wealthy, renders
the Sovereign powerful and mighty; that peace which is the nurse of plenty
and mother of prosperity, which is now unfortunately fled from Us, leaving war
upon Our borders; which certainly shall no longer continue there then We can
have means to expel it thence. We have a true and equal feeling of the
sufferings of Our subjects, of the neglect of Gods true worship, the decay of
good literature, the afflictions of Our Kingdom of Ireland, grown almost
desolate by the rapine and tyranny of the bloody minded Rebels: And if you dare
give Us credit, your so humble and loyal Remonstrance of these grievances is
not more prevalent to incite Us to an Accommodation of Peace, and conjunction
with Our high Court of Parliament, then Our own natural inclination to the
good of Our subjects, and real commiseration of their daily afflictions and
grievances.

We are not unacquainted that the power of Our Progenitors has been much
augmented by the diligent care and vigilant assistance of the High Court of
Parliament, and do unfainedly wish that there never had been any difference
betwixt Us and Our present supreme Council of the Kingdom, Our High Court of
Parliament; or at least, that it had not thus long continued, nor grown up to
this fearful height, this fatal and prodigious Civil war: Which certainly, We
have no way neglected with Our utmost endeavors to appease, nor shall
hereafter (though We are not diffident of Our strength) cease to labor as much
as We may with Our Honor and safety, to bring to a sudden period. Commerce and
traffic We well know are the nerves and sinews that knit together the Body
of Commonwealths, especially this of Ours, which has arrived to all it is
wealth and fortune by exporting it is native commodities, and importing
foreign: And how careful We have ever been to preserve it, the Kingdom can
bear Us righteous witness, and how industrious Our studies shall be to settle
and reconfirme it, Our after endeavors shall give an ample testimony for Us.
We bleed in the wounds of Our subjects; we suffer in their losses, and are
afflicted in their sufferings. Not a man thus slain on any side but we esteem
as a son taken from Us. And that which as much as any thing else troubles Our
thoughts, is the apparent detriment to this famous University, in the decrease
of it is Students, out of which has flourished so many eminent Patriots and
learned Champions of Gods Gospel: And to see this City, which has been so
loyal to Us, and so ready to give Us entertainment, should be impoverished by
that decrease; but God will provide better for you hereafter, and surely Our
part shall never be wanting to gratify you with the testimony of Our favor,
for the loyalty and readiness We have found in you to do Us service. And so to
conclude, we hope, none amongst you, nor any of Our good subjects but will
believe that, since these miseries and mischiefs which have overwhelmed Our
Provinces fall equally on Us; (but that the head is fensible of any paint in
the rest of the members) but that We will with Our best abilities labor to
take away the cause off these distractions here* that We may be better enabled
to suppress the lamented and bloody Rebellion in Ireland; and give speedy
relief to our distressed subjects there, who, though further of^ are as near
as the Natives of this Kingdom to Our affections: For malignant Counsels which
may deter or impeach the proceedings of a happy union betwixt Us and Our high
Court of Parliament, We shall neither entertain nor hearken to any such
advises, but seriously and suddenly study out some fitting mean that may
atone these civil differences. What it shall be we are not yet determined of,
a case of so much consequence requiring mature deliberation; but whatsoever the
conditions of the peace be, they shall be no way disadvantagious to the liberty
of the subject or the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. And so requiring
your prayers to Almighty God for the prosperity of Our intentions doubt not but
you shall see a sudden and fair accommodation of Peace between Us and Our High
Court of Parliament.

FINIS.

