AN Humble Proposal TO Cause BANCRUPTS make better and more speedier Payment of
their Debts to their Creditors, Than, By long Experience has been found, the
Statutes against Bancrupts do effect; Or, Than any other Way hitherto Proposed,
has shown.

By a Well-wisher to Trade, and the Public Good.

London, Printed in the Year, 1679.

An Humble PROPOSAL, etc.
THE Benefits proceeding from Trade, are Obvious to all, every one granting, it
advances our Manufactur's, our Growths, and the Land it self in Value: Yet
few, so seriously as they ought, do consider the Coyness of this Worthy Dame,
who Espouseth her self to none, longer than they bid a free Welcome, and kindly
Caress both Her and her Followers; And therefore it is a wonder, we have had so
greatly her Favor, since we treat her Retinue with so much Immanity; For when
any of them chance to be cast behind by Misfortunes, we Seize withal Violence,
and cast them into Prisons, where they lie like the Damned, without a Moments
Reprieve or End of their Torments; pursuing them with all the Rigor that Law
can inflict, how unequal or inhumane soever we esteem the Process, were it
turned on our selves. For what more unnatural Proceedings can there be by any
Law, than is found in the Practice of that against Bancrupts, where when they
have once taken out a Commission against any, by the Authority thereof, they
Convene persons of all Ranks before them where you have poor helpless Women (to
heighten their sorrow) frighted with Commissioners by the menaces of a Prison,
and forced to swear against their Husbands, Children against their Parents,
Parents against their Children, Servants against their Masters, and the
intimatest Friends, one against the other: And in, such cases oft-times it
happens, where neither Imprudence, Neglect, or Vicious Living has caused their
Misery, but has rather come to pass by the malice of some contemporary Rivals
with them in Trade, who have devised variety of ways to despoil them of Credit;
and so destroying the Reputations of such who have great Concerns abroad, do
easily say waste their Estates at home; Or else they may be undone by some Loss
at Sea, or other mere fatal stroke of Misfortune proceeding from Causes unseen,
or Accidents unthought on; which do often befall the Best, the Diligentest, the
Frugalest, and Wariest of Men, if once plunged in Business, and immerged in
Worldly Affairs.

And some such at times it lights on, whose Intentions are far from all Fraud,
and whose Conversation in Trade was ever found upright and honest, as their
Ruin might rather merit compassion, and that Collections by Public Briefs
should be made, (as Authority in other Cases (for he as well deserves pity, who
has his Estate sunk at Sea, as he that has his House burnt at Land) not less
deplorable, does allow) wherewithal to sustain them and their Families; than to
have that little Estate which remains, with all the Cruelty of an unnatural
Law, torn out of their hands, when they had preserved and collected it for no
other end, but equally to share out to their Creditors, on condition of their
own Liberty; A Contract so just, no good Man disallows: freedom of Person from
Confinement being the old English Law, till the desire of Gain prostituted that
Native Right, and introduced these Estate destroying, Spirit-breaking, and
Ingenuity starving Imprisonments, which are so commonly practiced amongst us,
because they are now established by Law, and which by sad experience is found
prejudicial to both Creditor and Debtor, beyond what the Primitive Contrivers
designed, as we may in charity judge: Prisons in reason most proper (if for
any) for the stubborn and wilful, not the weak and unable.

So that if the violentest prosecuting Creditors, or the very Commissioners
themselves, who are Authorized and Accustomed by Law, to ransack and rifle
decayed Men's Estates, were thus melted into the same Mould by Misfortunes, they
would judge it right Reason, there should be an Abrogation of these Statute
Laws against Bankrupts, or at the least, that they would become so favorable
and kind to their Children, their Kindred, and Friends, which might outlive
their good Fortunes, as willingly to move by Petition the Honorable Houses of
Parliament, now sitting, for Redress of Grievances; that this might as a main
one be redressed, either by abolishing these Estate-wasting Statutes of
Bankrupt, wherein none but Commissioners and Assignees are accustomed to make
Profit. Or at least, that they would by Law capacitate the Majority of
Creditors to make Agreement conclusive and binding to the whole, with their
Debtors; especially with such who have lain under the Purgatory of Trial for
some years, not only without the least Benefit, but to the great Loss of their
Creditors; tho their Persons have been confined to severe Imprisonments, and
their Estates subject as it were to the Inquisition, (a Court in other cases at
this time so hated in England) undergoing all the severities that the three
Statute Laws now in force can impose on Men so unfortunate; and wherein each
one, like Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace, have been made hotter by degrees; as if the
Lawmakers of those times had intended to have forced all Men beyond Fate, and
through Fear to have made all honest or fortunate.

And tho some do suppose this Law of the Major part bearing sway, is in Reason
unjust, and in no case ought to the Minor in value be binding, which they argue
from a Principle mainly Fundamental, That every Man always has Right to
dispose of his own, how, and which way he pleases, and that therefore these
Honorable Houses of Parliament cannot take cognizance, by this means to
redress such a Grievance.

To which it is replied, That if Circumstances be so set, as renders private
Property a Public Grievance, in such cases it seems reasonable, that the Public
do exercise their Authority to convert this private Grievance into their
Commonweal. Which Course in making Laws is most frequent and in use. The like
whereof in some kind has lately been practiced by the last Parliament,
disposing the Properties of so many thousands of Persons by that Ten pound Act,
as could not well amount unto less than a Million of Money, whereby was most
mercifully delivered many Hundreds of poor starved Prisoners from Jail, some
whereof brought considerable Estates with them into Prison; so that had there
been this Law of the Majority in force, it would not only have thus prevented
their Ruin, but in all probability, those considerable Sums now lost or spent,
had then been paid to their Creditors.

But to make it appear, that Property in some Cases may amount to a Grievance,
especially in such Nations where Trade is admitted, and where it is most
frequent, as in this of ours. Let us set before us the State of our Navigation,
which is the Strength of our Kingdom, and the Vehicle of Trade; commencing its
Rise and happy Success in this and all Nations, from the Majority ruling the
Minority in value; and which by continued experience is found so wholesome a Law,
as will never perish whiles Trade and Navigation lasts in the World. Now the
usual Method of Merchants is to build Ships in shares, which they commonly
divide into 3/3 4/4 or Quarter parts, if of small value; but Ships of greater
burden they usually branch into more, as 8/8 16/16 or 32/32 parts. Which to
make yet more plain to our purpose, we will suppose the Charge of a Ship to
cost 6400 l. (tho the Cost and Charge of most of our East India Ships set to
Sea, comes to well nigh double the value); now that Owner who has 1/32 part,
costing but 200 l. has as true a propriety as he that has 1/16, or one half
part, amounting to 3200 l. and therefore by this Law of Propriety she can
undertake no design of a Voyage without his concurrence, how profitable soever
it appears to the rest of the Owners; nay, tho their Arguments to him were
cogent enough to persuade, and that their Reasons convince him, there is
nothing but Gain attending the Project; yet being not his Interest to consent,
because his Resolution is fixed on the Ruin of that Owner, who has one half
part of the Vessel, in regard he knows more of his Estate is therein laid out
than he ought to have done on such a Design, and that he has made too bold
with his Credit; and therefore by stopping all Voyage, he constrains him to
sell at great Loss, or else at the price of his small Share, will condemn the
Ship to lie and rot by the Walls. Or it may otherwise happen, Owners design her
a Voyage, to them all in appearance most gainful; but with such Merchandise she
fraights to a Port, as to him would prove more twice the loss of his small part
in the Ship, by bringing down the price of such Goods, as he has engrossed
large store of in the said place; so that for him to consent in the Voyage is
morally impossible, without the force of a Law, since Interest to him (and all
Men) is always Reason in Trade. And therefore for Redress of this Mischief, by
experience the best Course has been found, to form into a Law, that parts
interest shall govern; and parts gives Law to, as does 9 to 7/16, etc. And tho
this Demonstration seems too prolix, for which the Reader's kind pardon is
begged; yet since the whole Argument of the Hinderance and Let of this Law
seems chiefly to hang upon this Pin of Propriety, it is fit to use plainness of
Reason to pull it out, and to show with all clearness, that particular Interest
may be prejudicial to common Concern, and without the Force of Law cannot be
made consistent with the Public Good.

Furthermore, this Instance of Ship and Owners, bears some resemblance with
Creditors and their Debtor, where every Creditor has embarked a share, or is
Owner in this losing Voyage of the Debtor, and wherein are found many various
Interests, cross Intrigues, and humorous wilful Devices to mischief one
another, where every one has not his will, each Man projecting and devising
with himself, which way he shall manage to obtain the most for his share, how
destructive soever it be to the Public Concern. And he who is concerned 100 l.
being rich, and well able to sustain its Loss, hectors and insults with all
violence over another poor Creditor concerned for more then he is able to bear,
and with much vaunting Humor at all Meetings boasts he will have all, or lose
all: which often proves also baneful to the credulous Widow, unversed in
Business, who has placed her All in so unhappy an hand; and no less to be
lamented is the helpless Orphan, who has the whole of his Maintenance left to
sustain him envelop't in the like fatal Misfortune. Both which might better
spare the loss of one Third, or a Half of their Estates, as many times at the
first is offered them, than to be dispoiled of the whole, by these wilful
Humorists, grasping at their all, till all by their delay is spent or lost.
Infinite Examples most deplorable may of this kind be shown, and more will
daily come to pass, except the Wisdom of our Lawmakers, by this only Remedy;
prevent it, Enacting, that in all cases of this kind, the Majority of
Creditors, like that of Ship-Owners, give Rule and Law to the lesser in
Interest concerned.

Wherein it will also be further needful for the Redress of this so grievous a
Grievance, that all Executors, Administrators, Guardians, Trustees, and other
Persons, disabled by means of the present Laws, be enabled by some Clause in a
new Law, to accept of any Offer, and to make any Composition or Agreement, with
the Debtor, for less than the whole Debt, as if it was their own Concern; and
shall by no means be liable to account with their Wards, Cesteque Trusts, or
other Persons whatsoever, for more than what they do in very deed receive on
such accounts; else will the Remora be so little hereby removed, as will leave
all to the old Confusion.

It will no less be necessary, that one thing more on the Debtors behalf be
dommoded, whereby to enable his performance (as the Creditor to comply) with
his Agreement; otherwise not one in ten Persons will be able to make good their
Accords, because of the Reasons which follow.

For no man becomes Insolvent, or Breaks, who has the remaining Estate
reserved in ready Money in his hands; But lies in Debts, Goods, Merchandise, or
some other thing worth Money concealed, so that by receiving which Debts, and
selling those Goods at Market like value, he calculates, will amount to the
offer he made his Creditors, and to which they) have already agreed.

But our present Law being such, as a one can securely pay a known Bancrupt the
Money he owes him, nor buy of him any Goods, without fear of paying twice of
them, Because if the Bancrupt perform not his Composition (by what Accident
soever it happens) the Debtor, as also the Chapman to the Bancrupt, do both of
them repay their Moneys to the Statute on foot, which is the very Cause, why
some men (when Statutes against them are once taken out) fore seeing themselves
split on this Rock, do never make their Creditors any offer of all. And others,
who setting to Sea, with better Fortune as (they thought) gaining the
prosperous Gale of their Creditors universal consent and accord, have scarce
gone a League on their Voyage, before they have sunk on this Sand, as unable to
Comply, because no Debtor would pay, no Chapman would buy, except at price so
low and vile, as would re insure him all prospect of Loss that might in
futurity happen. Whence it comes to pass, to the Creditors great loss and
damage, that the Bancrupt gives one Moiety of his Goods, to have Money for the
other part paid him, which may be said the true Cause, when Statutes are once
taken out, so few Men (of any thing) make offer, and fewer are able to perfect
their Accord: but are hereby plunged into Miseries far greater, and accounted
more Knaves than at first.

For Remedy whereof, it is in like manner needful, when the Debtor has once
accorded with the Majority of his Creditors; that then all Moneys paid, or
Sales of Goods made, should be allowed of as firm and good in Law. Which will
undoubtedly produce less loss to Creditors; by reason the Debtor, being made
thus capable to perform, will always make offer of the remaining Estate in his
hands (it resting in the power of the Majority to reject his Proposal, if they
be not fully persuaded that he does them Right:) for not one Man in many, is so
void of all honesty, or born so much a Knave, but prefers his Liberty, before
his Confinement, it being only the aforesaid Impossibility of his Compliance,
which imposes a necessity upon him, silently to acquiesce; and with the Proverb
to conclude, That since it must be a sorrow, A Fat one is better than a Lean:
And so, I say, without struggling, he calmly surrenders himself, to philosophize
with his Goal, and willingly undergoes the Verdict of his Creditors Jury, to
make Dice of his Bones. Which Course does as often affect the Creditor with
Torment, as it feeds the Debtor with Affliction: Producing no real benefit to
any but Goalers; whom it feasts with all Delicates, and Clothes them in
Gayities, affording the attendance of Coaches and Foot-boys, arrayed in
Liveries more sumptuous, than Keepers of poor Prisoners, unable to pay their
Debts, should require (by their Commitments in Salva Custodia) to keep them.

And all this occurs, through the Inadvertency of Creditors, who daily go on
lineing their Prison Chambers with fresh Debtors, fraught with Your Estates;
which the Jailer extorts with all Cruelty, from your Debtors, with such Tricks
and Devices out of the Verge of all Statutes; nor can any Law be formed to
prevent them, except each Month in the Year, a new one be made: So craftily
does this Goal-abuse, Spawn from the first Grievance, which admits of no Cure,
like the Law we propose, of the Majority in Value, to Govern the rest
concerned. Whereof, we may be confident, a small time of Trial, would most
effectually show it, a true Means to regulate Trade and Traders in this point:
And would no less retrive the Imprudent misfortune of those Creditors, who
constitute Goalers Guardians of their Estates, in their Debtors Hands, which
seldom with better Fortune succeeds, than that of his, who set the Wolf to
guard the Lambs.

FINIS.

