THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor, ALDERMEN, AND
Commons of the City of London, IN Common Council Assembled, ON THE Thirteenth
of January, 1680. To the King's most Excellent Majesty, for the Sitting of this
present Parliament Prorogued to the Twentieth Instant.

TOGETHER With the RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS, and DEBATES of the said COURT.

LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to the Honorable City of London.
1680.

IT is Agreed and Ordered by this Court, That the Petition now Agreed on to be
Presented to His Majesty, and such Orders and Proceedings of this Court had
this Day, as the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor shall think fit, shall after
the said Petition Presented, be printed by such Person as his Lordship shall
Appoint.

Pursuant to which Order, and to prevent false Copies, I do appoint Samuel
Roycroft, Printer to this Honorable City, to print this Petition, with all the
Orders and Debates thereupon; and that no other Person presume to print the
same.

P. Ward Mayor.

Commune Concil' tent' in Camera Guildhall Civitatis London Die Jovis decimo
tertio die Januarij Anno Domini 1680. Annoque Regni Domini nostri Carol'
Secundi nunc Regis Angl' etc. Tricesimo secundo, coram Patient' Ward Mil',
Major' Civitatis London, Thoma Aleyn Mil' and Barr', Johanne Frederick Mil',
Johanne Lawrence Mil', Georgio Waterman Mil', Josepho Sheldon Mil', Jacobo
Edwards Mil', and Roberto Clayton Mil', Aldermannis, Georgio Treby Ar'
Recordatore dicte Civit', Johanne Moore Mil', Willielmo Pritchard Mil', Henrico
Tulse Mil', Jacobo Smith Mil', Roberto Jeffery Mil', Johanne Shorter Mil',
Thoma Gould Mil', Willielmo Rawsterne Mil', Thoma Beckford Mil', Johanne
Chapman Mil', Simone Lewis Mil', Thoma Pilkington Ar' Ald'ris, and Henrico
Cornish Ar' Ald'ro ac unum Vicecom' dicte Civitatis necnon Major' part
Comminarior' dicte Civitatis in Communi Concil' tune and ibidem Assemblat'.
THIS Day the Members that serve for this City in Parliament, having
communicated unto this Court a Vote or Resolution of the Honorable House of
Commons, whereby that House was pleased to give Thanks unto this City for their
manifest Loyalty to the King, their Care, Charge, and Vigilance for the
Preservation of his Majesty's Person, and of the Protestant Religion. This
Court is greatly sensible of the Honor thereby given to this City, And do
declare, That it is the fixed and uniform Resolution of this City to persevere
in what they have done, and to contribute their utmost Assistance for the
Defense of the Protestant Religion, His Majesty's Person, and the Government
Established.

It was now unanimously Agreed and Ordered by this Court, That the Thanks of
this Court be given to the Members that serve for this City in Parliament, for
their good Service done this City, and their Faithfulness in discharging their
Duties in that Honorable and great Assembly.

Upon a Petition now Presented by diverse Citizens and Inhabitants of this City,
representing their Fears from the Designs of the Papists and their Adherents,
and praying this Court to acquaint his Majesty therewith, And to desire, That
the Parliament may sit from the Day to which it stands Prorogued, until they
have sufficiently provided against Popery and Arbitrary Power. This Court,
after some Debate and Consideration had thereupon, did return the Petitioners
Thanks for their Care and good Intention herein; And did thereupon nominate and
appoint Sir John Lawrence, Sir Robert Clayton, Knights and Aldermen, Mr.
Recorder, Sir Thomas Player Knight. Mr. John Du Bois, John Ellis Esquire and Mr.
Michael Godfrey Commoners, to withdraw, and immediately to prepare a Petition
to his Majesty upon the Subject matter of the said Petition; who accordingly
withdrawing, after some time returned again to this Court, and then presented
the Draught of such a Petition to his Majesty. The Tenor whereof follows, Viz.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, etc.
After reading whereof, It is Agreed and Ordered by this Court (Nemine
Contradicente) That the said Petition shall be Presented to his Majesty this
Evening, or as soon as conveniently may be. And the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor is desired to present the same, accompanied with Sir John Lawrence, Sir
Joseph Sheldon, Sir James Edwards, Knights and Aldermen, Mr. Recorder, Deputy
Hawes, Deputy Daniel, John Nichols, John Ellis, Esquires, Mr. Godfrey, and
Capt. Griffith Commoners, who are now nominated and appointed to attend upon
his Lordship at the Presenting thereof.

Ward Mayor.
Commune Concil' tent' 13tio Januarij 1680. Annoque Regis Car. 2di 32do.
IT is Agreed and Ordered by this Court, (Nemine Contradicente) That the Humble
Petition to His Majesty from this Court, now read and agreed upon, shall be
Presented to His Majesty this Evening, or as soon as conveniently may be. And
the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor is desired to Present the same, accompanied
with Sir John Lawrence, Sir Joseph Sheldon, and Sir James Edwards Knights and
Aldermen, Mr. Recorder, Deputy Hawes, Deputy Daniel, John Nicholls, John Ellis,
Esquires, Mr. Godfrey, and Capt. Griffith, Commoners, who are now nominated and
appointed to attend upon his Lordship at the Presenting thereof.

Wagstaffe.

TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent MAJESTY.
The Humble PETITION of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
LONDON, in Common Council Assembled.
Most Humbly shows,
THat Your Majesty's great Council in Parliament, having in their late Session,
in pursuance of Your Majesty's Direction, entered upon a strict and impartial
Inquiry into the horrid and execrable Popish Plot, which has been for several
years last past, and still is, carried on for destruction of Your Majesty's
Sacred Person and Government, and extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and
the utter Ruin of Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects; and having so far
proceeded therein, as justly to attaint upon full Evidence one of the Five
Lords impeached for the same, and were in further Prosecution of the remaining
Four Lords, and other Conspirators therein.

And as well the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as the Commons in Your said
Parliament assembled having Declared, That they are fully satisfied, that there
now is, and for diverse years last past, has been a horrid and Treasonable Plot
and Conspiracy contrived and carried on by those of the Popish Religion in
Ireland, for Massacring the English, and subverting the Protestant Religion,
and the Ancient established Government of that Kingdom.

And Your said Commons having Impeached the Earl of Tyrone, in order to the
bringing him to Justice for the same; And having under Examination other
Conspirators in the said Irish Plot.

And Your said Commons having likewise impeached Sir William Scroggs, Chief
Justice of Your Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, for Treason and other great
Crimes and Misdemeanors in endeavoring to subvert the Laws of this Kingdom by
his Arbitrary and Illegal proceedings; And having voted Impeachments against
several other Judges for the like Misdemeanors.

Your Petitioners considering the continual Hazards to which Your Sacred Life,
and the Protestant Religion, and the Peace of this Kingdom are exposed, while
the Hopes of a Popish Successor, gives Countenance and Encouragement to the
Conspirators in their wicked Designs. And considering also the Disquiet and
Dreadful Apprehensions of Your good Subjects, by reason of the Miseries and
Mischiefs which threaten them on all parts; as well from Foreign Powers, as
from the Conspiracies within Your several Kingdoms, against which no sufficient
Remedy can be provided but by Your Majesty and Your Parliament, Were extremely
surprised at the late Prorogation, whereby the Prosecution of the Public
Justice of the Kingdom, and the making the Provisions necessary for the
Preservation of Your Majesty, and Your Protestant Subjects, has received an
Interruption. And they are the more affected herewith, by reason of the
Experience they have had of the great Progress, which the emboldned
Conspirators have formerly made in their Designs, during the late frequent
Recesses of Parliament; But that which supports them against Despair, is the
Hopes they derive from Your Majesty's Goodness, That Your Intention was, and
does continue by this Prorogation, to make way for Your better Concurrence with
the Counsels of Your Parliament.

And Your Petitioners humbly hope, That Your Majesty will not take Offense,
that Your Subjects are thus Zealous, and even impatient of the least Delay of
the long hoped for Security, whilst they see your precious Life invaded, the
true Religion undermined, their Families and innocent Posterity likely to be
subjected to Blood, Confusion, and Ruin; and all these Dangers increased, by
reason of the late Endeavors of Your Majesty, and Your Parliament, which have
added Provocation to the Conspirators, but have had little or no Effect toward
securing against them: And they trust Your Majesty will graciously accept this
Discovery and Desire of their Loyal Hearts to preserve Your Majesty, and
whatever else is dear to them, and to strengthen Your Majesty against all
Popish and Pernicious Counsels, which any ill-affected Persons may presume to
offer.

They do therefore most humbly Pray, That Your Majesty will be graciously
pleased (as the only means to quiet the Minds, and extinguish the Fears of Your
Protestant People, and prevent the eminent Dangers which threaten Your
Majesty's Kingdoms, and particularly this Your Great City, which has already
so deeply suffered for the same) to permit Your said Parliament to Sit, from
the Day to which they are Prorogued, until by their Counsels and Endeavors
those good Remedies shall be provided, and those just Ends attained, upon which
the Safety of Your Majesty's Person, the Preservation of the Protestant
Religion, the Peace and Settlement of Your Kingdoms, and the Welfare of this
Your Ancient City, do so absolutely depend. For the pursuing and obtaining of
which good Effects, Your Petitioners unanimously do offer their Lives and
Estates.

And shall ever pray, etc.
FINIS.

