The Humble PETITION OF THE Protestants of France TO THE French-KING, To Recall
His Declaration for taking their Children from them at the Age of Seven Years.
SIR,
YOUR Majesty's Protestant Subjects of the Reformed Religion, most humbly
represent to your Majesty, That the registring of your Majesty's Declaration of
the 17th. of June last, plunges them into a Desolation, which scarcely leaves
them the free use of their senses. Yet they presume to address to your Majesty,
persuaded, that being, as they are most Humble and Loyal Subjects, the access
to your Majesty's Justice will not be denied them, and that your Majesty will
not reject their Complaints; therein imitating God, whose Ears are always open
to the Cries of the Distressed.

In this Confidence, (Sir) prostrate at your Majesty's Feet, with all the
humble Reverence they are capable of, they beseech your Majesty to consider,
That this Declaration is directly contrary to the Edict of Nants, under which
they live, and which was given them as a perpetual and irrevokable Law. For,
besides that this Edict of Nants necessarily supposes, that they should enjoy
all the Rights, both Natural and Civil, that are common to all your Majesty's
Subjects; and that, among these Rights, that which makes Parents Masters of the
Education of their Children, till they attain ripeness of age, is one of the
most Sacred and Inviolable, it is, upon the account of these Articles also,
their due and indisputable Right.

The 18th. Article expressly forbids that any of their Children, who are of the
said Religion, should, either by force or persuasion, contrary to the will of
their Parents, be taken away from them, to be Baptized or Confirmed in the
Roman Catholic Church. Without all contradiction, this prohibition extends
beyond seven years of age, since that none are Confirmed till after that age;
and if it be not precisely set down till the age of 14. that is to say, during
all the time that Children are not of years of consent, and have no legal will,
the reason is, because it was presupposed, as a Maxim which was never yet
called into question. It is in the same sense that the 38th. Article is,
concerning the particulars which gives to the Parents, professing the said
Religion, liberty to provide such Tutors for their Children as they think good,
and substitute one or more, either by Wills or Codicels, or other Declarations
past in the presence of Notaries, or written and signed with their own hands.
Your Majesty (Sir) is most humbly prayed to weigh exactly this term of Tutors,
even after the death of their Fathers; for it clearly demonstrates that the
Edict had respect to the Right of Parents over their Children, not only during
their own lives Inviolable, but as a Right extending it self after their Death;
which no zeal of Religion, or other pretense whatsoever, can infringe; and far
from being limited to the age of seven years, it maintains and keeps it self in
force, during the whole course of their Education, which scarcely begins at
that age, and is very much restrained, when it is confined within the term of
14 years, the age of natural ripeness.

Sir, the Edict of Nants was not the first Law in this Case; By the Petition
answered in the year 1571. in the Reign of King Charles IX. a time in which
those of the Protestant Reformed Religion were most afflicted, the Rights of
Parents over their Children were so Inviolable, that it was said in the 24th.
Article, that they should not be molested in the Instruction of their Children
in their own Religion, according to their Consciences; and that after the death
of the Fathers, those Children should be bred up in the same Religion, till
they accomplished 14 years of age, at which time they should be at liberty.

But none of your Majesty's Predecessors have more established the Authority of
this Law, than your Majesty; For, besides several Orders given in your
Majesty's Council of State, in the years 1663. and 1665. which are full and
plain in the Case, the Declaration of 1669. does expressly forbid all sorts of
persons whatsoever, not only to take away by force or stealth any of the
Children of the said Religion, but also to presume to instruct them, or to
persuade them to make any Declaration of the change of their Religion, before
the Males arrive to to the age of 14. and the Females of 12. and in the mean
time, before they accomplish this age, that the Children born of Fathers of the
said Religion, should remain in the hands of their Kindred of the said
Religion, and all those that should detain them, should be constrained to
render them by the usual ways and means of recovery. The same thing was
confirmed by a Determination which the Archbishop of Rhemes caused to be set
forth, in the month of August 1676. by which he judged and and declared, That
no Maid should be received into the House of the Propagation of the Faith at
Sedan, till she had fully accomplished 12 years of age, and that she had
plainly showed a true desire of Conversion; presupposing, that there could not
be an effective Conversion before that age.

If yet (Sir) your Majesty will condescend to hear the most humble
Remonstrances of your Supplicants, let it please your Majesty to permit them to
set before you, that there will be a vast difference found between your
Majesty's own Declaration in 1669. and this. The first left unto Nature its
Privileges, and unto men the liberty of acting according to their Consciences;
No ways thwarted the Principles of Civil and Canon Law, nor hindered Parliaments
from proceeding according their ordinary Rules: This gave to strangers a
pattern worthy of their imitation, and to the Roman Catholic Religion, the
glory of preserving measures of Equity, conformable to the practice of all the
ancient Churches. But, on the other hand, this Law no ways agrees with all
these Noble Characters. Nature will suffer violence, when Children shall be
torn from the Bosoms of those to whom she had at seven years of age more
especially committed them then before, because that at that age they begin to
be capable of Instruction, and their Fathers then actually enter into
possession of their Right to give it them. The Consciences of your Petitioners
will thereby be brought into the most extreme perplexity that can be imagined,
in as much as the right exercise of the paternal authority is one of the
strongest and most indispensible Duties of which man is to render an account to
God, whereby the Father is made responsible before him for all the Actions of
his Children as a Trust reposed in him by Nature as long as they continue under
his Direction. Civil and Ecclesiastical Rites further plead for the
Supplicants; for if Children are capable before their ripe age of choosing a
Religion, which is the most Important Action of the whole life, why are they
not allowed either to make Wills, or to bear any valuable Testimony in the
Courts of Justice, or to make Vows, or to pass any Act of the free consent of
their wills? Sir, your Parliaments, which complying with those Maxims, have
never made Children liable to Capital Punishments, will find themselves obliged
to abolish this Custom and Usage of all Nations and all Ages; for the Children
of 7 years old being rendered capable of changing their Religion, are at the
same time rendered capable of falling into the Crime of those they call
Relapsers, and made liable to the capital Punishments of it, ordained by your
Laws, foreign Nations and even those that are Infidels, will believe themselves
authorized by this example, against those who profess a Religion contrary to
theirs. To conclude, the Roman Catholic Religion will not be honored by it,
when it shall be said, that it is the Issue of Conversions at 7 years old, that
is to say, in an Age wherein Reason has no force, nor Judgment no Rule, and by
consequence the change of Religion cannot proceed from a legitimate choice. It
may be added that this Law breaks off from the practice of the whole Christian
Church, for suppose the Supplicants Heretics, it is a constant Truth, that the
Church never took away Children under Age from those that were regarded as
Infidels, living with them in the same Civil Society.

It was (until now) never known among Christians, and other Nations of the
World, that the paternal power of Parents over their children has been limited
to seven years of Age, principally in the point of their Religion. One of the
greatest Doctors of the Roman Catholic Church decides the Case, that the
Children of the Jews ought not to be baptized against the will of their
Parents, for two Reasons; One, that the practice of the Church never gave any
countenance to it. The other, that natural Righteousness opposes it. In effect,
when some Kings of Spain or Portugal, as Sizibuts, and Emmanuel the second,
have attempted it, the 4th. Council of Tolledo opposed the action of the first,
and all the World condemned the other. And Osorius a Famous Bishop, who relates
the Ordinance of Emmanuel, appointing the Male-children of the Jews to be taken
away under the age of 14. Years, says, that it was an Action that had no
foundation either in Law or Religion, tho it seemed to proceed from a good
Intention, and had an appearance of Piety, because that God requires of men a
voluntary Sacrifice, and will not that Consciences be forced, to which he adds
the horrible circumstances that accompanied this Law, wen those unhappy
Fathers, who feared to have their Children ravished from them, fell into such
excess of Raging grief, that they cast their Children into wells and themselves
with them. The Supplicants fear nothing like that by the Grace of God, and the
Justice of your Majesty. But yet they are persuaded the Declaration cannot be
executed against them, but with most deplorable consequences.

Let it not be said, that it commands not to force the children out of the
bosom of their Parents, but only puts them into a freedom of choosing the
Catholic Religion; for in the first place, the force is not to be considered
as acted upon the Children but on their Fathers, to whom Nature gave them. The
same forecited Doctor makes the same judgment and argument in the Case;
Injustice (says he) would be done to the Jews, if their Children should be
baptized against their consent; for the paternal power which they have over
their children, would be injuriously forced from them. He adds, It is that
which the Church never did, even when it had Catholic Princes, as Constantine
and Theodosius, who had no doubt permitted it, if it had not been a practice
contrary to Right Reason. Also the Edict of Nants in the 18. Article equally
forbids Force and Persuasion, and gives the name of Violence to both. And all
the Ordinances have as severely provided for the the punishment of the Rape of
Persuasion, as that of Force. But in the second place it is an act of Force and
Violence to take children at seven years old out of the hands of their parents,
as well as if they were still hanging on the breast. For if Natural and Civil
Right puts Children under the power of their Fathers till their ripe age, it is
the same thing to take them out of it seven years old, as if they were forced
from them out of the Cradle; for the paternal power is equally violated in both.

If it be said that Children at seven years old are capable of mortal sin, and
that being so, they may make choice of a Religion; besides, that to speak
generally, this Principle is very uncertain, and that it would be a strange
course to judge the Supplicants according to Principles which they acknowledge
not; Who sees not (Sir) that the Consequence is not just, and that there is
great difference between the first Ideas of Good and Ill which children may
have in the Actions of their life, and the Capacity of Judging in matters of
Religion, or rather determining whether they should forget the Faith wherein
they have been educated, to embrace another which is unknown to them, and thus
to make a Choice which is the greatest Effort of the understanding of a Man,
when he wholly applies himself to seek after his Salvation.

Your Petitioners will not here insist on the sad and mischievous Consequences
of the execution of this Law, which appears so terrible to them. The despair
into which Fathers and Mothers will be driven, the unavoidable disagreement
between them and their children, the perverting the Order intended by Nature
for their education who begin by a submission to the will of their Parents, to
be formed into subjection to Magistrates and Princes, and rendered good
Commonwealths-men. The forced flight of many Families out of the Realm, The
Libertinism of Children, who will no more fear Correction, and who will always
have a pretense to withdraw themselves from it, whereby even the Fruitfulness
of Marriages, which is the support of Commonwealths, will come to be
apprehended, and a multitude of Quarrels will every day arise amongst all sorts
of people; Which, together with a thousand other Inconveniences will ensue to
the disturbance of Civil Society.

Your Petitioners are with the rest of the World convinced that Your Majesty
can execute whatsoever you do resolve; but they also know that you are pleased
to temper your Authority and Power with your Bounty and Justice, according to
the example of God himself, who never displays his infinite Power over his
Creatures, but that at the same time he regards them with eyes of Compassion.
Thus (Sir) it is your Justice that the Supplicants in the excess of their
Sorrows, implore; To it they address their Cries and Tears; And, without
Failing in the duty they owe to your Majesty's Orders, it is to it they presume
to say, that they shall chase all manner of Sufferings, and even death it self,
rather than to endure a separation from their Children in so tender an age, and
to be made incapable of rendering that account to God of them, which their
Consciences lays an obligation upon them to enddeavour.

For these Reasons, may it please your Majesty by Revoking the new Declaration
of the 17th. of June last past to Ordain that the Declaration in the Month of
February 1669 may be executed according to its Form and Tenor. And your
Petitioners will continue their Vows and Prayers for your Majesty's Health and
Prosperity, and the Glory of your Reign.

LONDON: Printed by N.T. for Andrew Forrester in King's-street Westminster,
1681.


