The Humble PETITION OF THE Protestants of France Lately presented to His Most
Christian Majesty, By the Marshall Schomberg, and the Marquis of Ruvigny,
A true Copy in French and English.
SIRE,
VOs Sujets de la Religion pretendue Reformee se jettent aux pieds de Vostre M.
avec un profond respect, pour luy representer le grand nombre de maux don't on
les accable coup sur coup, and pour la supplier tres humblement de leur fair
ressentir les effets de sa justice and de sa bonte.

Les Edits des Roys vos predecesseurs, and particulierement ceux de Henry le
Grand, and de Louys le Just, que vostre Majeste a confirmez authentiquement a
son heureux avenement a la Couronne, and depuis encore par diverses
Declarations, ont toujours regard ceux de la ditte Religion, comme faisant une
party considerable des Peuples que Dieu leur av^it soumis: Comme tells ils
estoie^t receus, non seulement aux emplois, aux a^^s and aux mestiers, sans
lesquels des sujets ne peuvent gagner leur vie, mais aux charges and aux
honneurs, qui sont la marque and la recompense du merit and de la virtue: Ils
avoient avec Ja liberte de leur conscience le libre exercice de leur Religion
and de leur Discipline dans tous les lieux designez par les mesmes Edits, outre
les Commissaires qui estoient authoriscz pour empescher les moindres
infractions.

Il y avoit des Chambres Miparties pour fair que dans tous les tems ceux de la
Religion pussent s'asseurer d'une justice impartiale, tant pour leurs
persons, que pour leurs biens. Les Gentilshommes en particulier estoient en
droit and en possession de commettre des Officiers soit de l'une ou de l'autre
Religion dans leurs fiess. Enfin les supplians jouissoient presque en toutes
chooses du meme bonheur, and des memes avantages que les autres sujets de vostre
Majeste.

Il est vray, Sire, que c'estoient des concessions des Roys vos predecesseurs,
and de V. M. meme; mais des Concessions etablies par des dispositions que les
memes Edicts appellent une Loy perpetuelle and irrevocable, pour entretenir les
sujets de l'une and de l'autre Religion dans une parfaite amity. Les supplians
peuvent dire, qu'ils ont toujours vescu sous la Loy de ces Concessions, and
qu'ils n'ont pas eu le malheur de s'en render indignes. Ils ont eu au contraire
cet avantage que V. M. a eu la bonte de fair des Declarations publiques and
solemnelles de l'entiere satisfaction qu'elle avoit du Zele and de la Fidelite
que les supplians ont fait paroistre pour son service, dans les tems memes les
plus difficiles. Cependant, SIRE, sans remonter a ces tems eloignez, combien la
condition present des supplians est elle differente de l'estat ou ils estoient
il n'y a que quelques annees?

Non seulement ils ne sont plus admis aux charges, comme ils l'estoient
auparavant, mais plusieurs ont este depouillez de celles don't ils estoient
revestus, and dans lesquelles ils auroient toujours servi avec honneur.

On leur a oste, contre les propres terms de Edict les Consulats mi-partis and
les charges municipales dans les Villes memes ou les supplians sont en plus
grand nombre, and ou ils ont le plus d'interest en l'administration de la
Police, and dans le maniment des deniers qui s'imposent sur eux.

Ils n'ont plus la meme entree aux moindres fonctions publiques en diverse
lieux, ni aux arts and aux metiers, qui sont les seuls moyens qu'ont des sujets
pour subsister.

Ils peuvent compter jusqu'a trois cent Temples qu'on a fait demolir en moins
de dix ans, quelques-uns meme qui estoient nommez expressement dans l'Edict de
Nantes, ou compris dans la disposition formelle du meme Edict.

Les Commissaires qui sont toujours prets a escouter les pretendues
contraventions qu'on impute aux supplians, refusent de connoitre de celles don't
les supplians se pleignent, ou s'ils en connoissent, ils ne prononcent que pour
fair des partages, souvent meme les Commissaires Catholics rendent des
jugements contre les supplians sans la jonction des Commissaires de leur
Religion.

Ceux qui ne peuvent trouver le repos de leur conscience horse ladite Religion
apres l'avoir quittee, and qui veulent y retourner, sont a present exposez aux
peines les plus rigoureuses sous le titre de Relaps, and les Ministres and
Consistoires a estre supprimez.

Si d'autres veulent passer de la Religion Catholic a ladite Religion
pretendue Reformee, on inquiete ceux de ladite Religion pretendue Reformee a
qui ils s'addressent pour s'eclaircir de leurs doutes, ou pour declarer leur
creance, and l'on pretend que c'est la une subornation.

Les Chambres de l'Edict sont non seulement incorporees aux Parlemens, comme
l'Edict portoit qu'elles pourroient l'estre, mais esteintes and supprimees.

Les enfants des supplians, quoy que nez dans leur Religion, leur sont enlevez,
avaunt qu'ils ayent atteint l'aage port par les Edicts pour declarer dans
quelle Religion ils veulent vivre: Si l'on se retire sur cela verse les
Intendans de V. M. comme chargez de tenir la main a l'execution des Edicts, ou
ils refusent d'en connoistre, ou ils eludent des annees entieres toutes les
plaintes qu'on leur fait, and les juges ordinaires n'y ont pas plus d'egard.

On veut reduire ceux de ladite Religion a n'avoir qu'un seul Maistre d'escole
dans les lieux meme ou l'on voit jusqu'a 2. ou 3. mill petits enfants, comme
si un seul Maistre pouvoit suffire pour un si grand nombre d'escoliers.

On a surpris une Declaration pour fair changer la form de la tenue de leurs
Synodes, en y faisant assister des Commissaires Catholics: Ce qui est
entierement oppose a la disposition des Edicts, and a la Declaration de Louys
XIII. de l'an 1623. and a l'usage toujours observe: and cela meme sous des
pretextes contraires a l'honneur des supplians, and a la fidelite qu'ils ont
toujours eve au service de V. Majeste.

Messieurs les Eveques sous pretexte de leur visit pretendent, par un Arrest
surpris dans vostre Conseil, empescher l'exercice de laditte Religion des
semaines entieres.

Les Ecclesiastiques allant dans les Temples de ceux de ladite Religion pour
ecouter leurs preches, imputent aux Ministres des chooses qu'ils n'ont point
dites, ou prennent aussi des pretextes des terms qu'on ne peut eviter dans les
Controverses, pour leur fair des process criminels devant des Juges animez
contre leur Religion, pendant que les memes Ecclesiastiques ne cessent de se
servir contre les supplians de terms deffendus expressement par les Edits.

Les premiers Juges des lieux a qui il n'avoit jamais appartenu de connoistre
des cas des Edicts, entreprennent, par des procedures tout a fait inouies,
d'interdire les Ministres des Provinces entieres.

Enfin, on vient de publier une Declaration pour empecher que les femmes de
ceux de ladite Religion ne se servent que de Chirurgiens ou de Sages-femmes
Catholics pour accoucher, afin que les enfans puissent estre ondo yez, ce qui
est encore directement oppose a la disposition des Edicts, and aux principes de
la Religion des supplians: Leur conscience ne leur pouvant jamais permettre de
consentir a cet usage, parce que d'un cost ils ne croyent pas que le baptesme
soit necessaire d'une necessite absolve, quand la mort previent les soins de
ceux qui sont obliges de le procurer; and de l'autre ils croyent qu'un si grand
Sacrement ne peut en null cas estre administre par des persons laiques, and
que l'ondoyement ne peut jamais tenir lieu de baptesme.

Tous ces faits, SIRE, and un tres grand nombre d'autres tres considerables,
mais qui dans le detail seroient ici trop-longs and trop ennuyeux pour V.
Majeste, sont d'une connoisiance public, on justifiez par les pieces que les
supplians ont enter les mains, and meme par les Jugements, par les Arrets, and
par les Declarations. Tout le monde qui voit l'abbaissement extreme ou les
supplians sont reduits, commence de les regarder comme s'ils estoient
abandonnez a la haine and a la poursuite de ceux qui veulent leur ruin entiere.

Il ne se peut rien ajouter a la consternation generale ou sont tous ceux de
ladite Religion dans tous les endroits du Royaume: plusieurs sont deja sortis
par crainte ou par necessite, pour chercher leur repos dans les pays
estrangers. Le plus grand nombre ne sont retenus que par l'amour qu'ils ont
pour V. Majeste; quelques-uns peut estre par la difficulte qu'ils ont a quitter
leurs biens and le pays de leur naissance. Tous, SIRE, apres Dieu n'attendent
de seurete ni de repos que de la justice and de la clemence de V. M. Elle a
toujours eu la bonte de leur donner acces a sa person sacree, and de vouloir
ecouter leurs justes plaintes, Elle avoit meme nomme des Commiss. de son Cons.
pour les examiner plus particulierement, and pour en fair le rapport; mais les
grandes Guerres que V. Majeste a eues a soutenir, l'ayant occupee au dehors,
les maux des supplians n'ont fait que se multiplier and s'accroistre.

Maintenant, SIRE, que V. M. jouit avec tant d'eclat des succe glorieux don't
Dieu a favorise ses desseins, and que tous ses peuples s'attendent aussi
d'avoir part aux fruits de ses travaux, les supplians esperent de la justice
and de la bonte de V. M. qu'elle ne voudra pas distinguer en cela les supplians
de ses autres sujets, ni que pendant que les uns seront dans la joye and dans
le repos, les autres pleurent and gemissent.

A ces Causes, SIRE, and que les supplians ont toujours le meme Zele, and la
meme Fidelite pour vostre service, Plaise a Vostre Majeste, avoir la bonte de
fair entendre a Messieurs de son Conseil, aux Presidents, and Procureurs
Generaux de ses Parlemens, a ses Intendants and Commissaires executeurs des
Loix, and a ses autres Magistrates and Officiers, que son intention Royalle est
que les Edicts soyent gardez and executez, ordonner aux Commissaires nommez par
V. M. ou autres qu'il luy plaira nommer, d'examiner les memoires and pieces
justificatives des supplians, and en informer V. Majeste; and en particulier a
Messieurs les Secretaires d'Estat, and de ses commandemens de luy fair
incessamment le rapport de celles qui sont les plus pressantes, and don't les
inconvenients sont plus grands, pour y estre pourvu selon le bon plaisir de V.
M. Et les supplians continueront toujours leurs voeux and leurs prieres pour sa
gloire, and pour la prosperity de sa person sacree and de son regne.

SIR,
WE your Subjects of that Religion (which we call the Reformed) do with most
profound Reverence cast our selves at the feet of your Majesty, that so we may
represent the many aggrievances, which have been heaped upon us, one after
another, and may most humbly beg some effectual resentments of the same, from
your justice and goodness.

The Edicts of the Kings your predecessors, and particularly those of Henry the
Great, and Lewis the Just, which your Majesty most authentically confirmed at
your happy Inauguration, and since by diverse and sundry Declarations have
always had regard to those of the said Religion, which consists of a
considerable part of those people which God has committed to your charge: And
as such, they have not only been permitted to exercise their Employments, and
Arts, and Trades, whereby they gain their Livelihood, but also have been
promoted to Places of Trust and Honor, as effects of their Merit and Virtue:
They have also enjoyed a Liberty of Conscience, by a free exercise of their
Religion and Discipline in all places privileged by the aforesaid Edicts, and
Commissioners also have been appointed to take care, that there should be no
infringments or violations thereof.

There have been also Courts of Justice consisting of men of both Religions,
that at all times the Protestants might be assured of impartial justice both as
to their Persons, and Estates. And the Gentlemen particularly had right, to
place in their Fee-Farms those of one, or the other Religion, without any
difference: In short, your Petitioners enjoyed almost the same freedom and
advantages, as the other Subjects of your Majesty.

It is true, Sir, that these were the Concessions of the Kings your
Predecessors, and of your present Majesty, and have been established with such
circumstances, as the Edicts themselves call a perpetual and an irrevocable
Law, designed purposely to keep your Subjects both of one and the other
Religion in perfect amity. And your Petitioners can confidently averr, that
they have so demeaned themselves under this Law, and Privileges, as never to
have rendered themselves unworthy thereof. But on the contrary have gained this
advantage, that your Majesty has made many solemn and gracious Declarations,
testifying the entire satisfaction your Majesty has conceived of the Zeal and
Loyalty of your Petitioners, in times of most hazard and difficulty. And now,
SIR, we need not search the Histories of many years, to demonstrate the
difference of our present condition, from those times; for it is now but a few
years since your Petitioners have not only been made incapable of being
admitted into public Offices, but discharged of those in which they were
invested, and in which they had always served with honor and fidelity.

For contrary to the true intent and words of this Edict, they have taken from
your Petitioners the privilege of equally entering with others into the
Commission of Consulates, and the Municipal Offices of Towns, even in those
very Corporations, wherein your Petitioners are the greatest number, and have
the greatest interest in the administration of the Civil Government, and
management of that Money which is levied upon them.

They have not now in many places any admittance to the meanest Office in the
Public, nor are they licensed to exercise those Arts and Trades whereby they
gain their sole livelihood and subsistence.

They can reckon up at least 300 Protestant Churches, which in the space of ten
years have been demolished, notwithstanding that some of them have been
expressly named in the Edict of Nantes, and others comprehended within the
limits and sense thereof.

The Commissioners which are always ready to receive Process against your
Petitioners, yet stop their ears to their complaints; and if they do take
notice of them, it is with a corrupt and partial sentence, and oftentimes the
Catholic Commissioners pronounce Judgment against your Petitioners, without
the intervention and assent of those of their Religion.

Those who have changed from the Protestant to the Catholic Religion, not
finding that quietness of conscience which they expected therein, so that they
have returned again to their first persuasion, have been exposed to most
rigorous penances, under the term of Relapse, and the Ministers and
Consistories have been liable to be suppressed.

If any of the Catholic Religion become Protestants, they presently persecute
those to whom they applied themselves for clearing their doubts, or declaring
their belief, pretending that thereby they come within the compass of that
crime, which is called Subornation.

The Chambers of this Edict are not only incorporated with the Parliaments,
against the express sense of the Edict, but are extinguished wholly, and
suppressed.

The Children of your Petitioners, though born in their Religion, are often
taken from them, before they have attained to that age which the Edicts allow
them, before they are obliged to declare the Religion which they resolve to
profess: And if hereupon they address themselves to your Commissioners,
advising them to put in execution the Edict, they either refuse to take
cognizance thereof, or else elude it in that manner, that for several years
together they take not the least notice of their complaints, nor have the
ordinary Judges any regard thereunto.

They will not suffer the Protestants to entertain more then one Schoolmaster
in the Town where they live; and though the Children amount to 2 or 3000 in
number, yet they will not allow more then one Master for them all.

Your Petitioners have been much surprised by a Declaration issued out, for
changing the form and tenure of their Synods, by placing certain Catholic
Commissioners for Assistants therein: which being entirely contrary to the
meaning and substance of those Edicts, and Declaration of Lewis the 13th. set
out in the year 1623. and to the custom always observed, has no other
foundation then those pretenses which reflect on the honor of your
Petitioners, and that fidelity which they have ever professed toward the
service of your Majesty.

The Bishops under color of their Visitations, and by virtue of an Order of
Arrest from your Privy Council, have pretended to suspend the exercise of the
Religion of your Petitioners for several weeks.

The Clergy which have entered the Protestant Churches, to hear the Sermons
which are there preached, do object unto the Ministers matters which they never
uttered, or take advantage of certain terms which cannot be avoided in
Controversy, to form a criminal Process against them before a Judge, who is
pre-possessed with a prejudice against them; and in the mean time the Clergy do
not cease to justify themselves against the Petitioners, by such courses as
are expressly forbidden by the aforesaid Edicts.

The Chief Justices of several places, to whom matters relating to the Edicts
did never appertain, do now undertake by unknown methods of procedure, to
interdict or suspend the Ministers of whole Provinces.

In fine, so far are they proceeded, as to make a Declaration, forbidding
Protestant women to make use of other Chirurgions, or Midwives, then those
which are Catholics, that so their Children may be dipped in water by them in
case of necessity: which as it is directly opposite to the sense of the Edicts,
so it is also to the Principles of that Religion which your Petitioners
profess; for their consciences will never allow them to consent hereunto,
because that as on one side, they cannot believe that Baptism is of an absolute
and indispensable necessity, where death prevents the due care and cautions we
use to obtain it; so on the other side, your Petitioners have that just
reverence to so great a Sacrament, as not to commit the same to the
administration of Lay-persons, nor do they believe that such dipping or
sprinkling with water, can ever supply the place of Baptism.

These proceedings, SIR, and many more of them very considerable, are more
easily mentioned in general, then to be troublesome to your Majesty in a recital
of the particulars, which are either notoriously known to the World, or to be
justified and made good by Attestations which your Petitioners have in their
hands, together with Judgments, Arrests and Declarations. All the World, which
observes the low condition unto which your Petitioners are reduced, begin to
consider them, as persons exposed to the malice and persecution of those who
desire their total destruction.

Nothing more can be added to the general consternation of those, who profess
the Protestant Religion in all parts of your Kingdom; so that many for fear, or
for necessity, have been forced to abandon their dwellings, and seek their
repose in the Dominions of Strangers: such as remain here, are detained by the
love they bear to their Native Country, or by some difficulty they find in the
disposal of their Estates; though the greatest number are obliged with an
affection to your Majesty and your Government. In all these aggrievances, SIR,
your Petitioners have no other defense and protection, under God, then the
justice and clemency of your Majesty, by which they have formerly had access to
your Sacred person, which has ever lent a gentle ear to the just complaints of
your Petitioners, having nominated Commissioners of your Council particularly
to examine their Cause, and make report thereof to your Majesty: but the great
Wars which your Majesty has lately maintained, have diverted this care to
greater thoughts, whereby the evils and oppressions of your Petitioners have
been multiplied and increased.

And now, SIR, since your Majesty enjoys the triumph of those glorious
successes with which God has favored your designs, and that your People
expect likewise to share some part of the fruit of their labors: your
Petitioners hope, through the justice and gracious goodness of your Majesty,
that no distinction shall be made between your Petitioners and your other
Subjects, lest whilst some are in joy, and at rest, the others should mourn,
and groan under oppressions.

For which Reasons, SIR, and because your Petitioners have ever entertained the
same Zeal and Fidelity to your Service; may it please your Majesty to make
known unto the Lords of your Council, Presidents, and Attorney-Generals of
Parliaments, to Super-intendents, and Commissioners executing the Law, that
your Royal Will and Pleasure is, that the Edicts be observed and executed; and
particularly to encharge such Commissioners as are already named by your
Majesty, or shall be hereafter named, that they examine the Memorials, and
Papers of Justification, which your Petitioners shall produce, and to inform
your Majesty thereof; and especially to the Secretaries of State, that a due
report may be made thereof, and of those aggrievances and burdens which are
most oppressing, that so your Majesty being truly made sensible thereof, may
act therein according to your gracious pleasure. And your Petitioners shall
continue their vows, and prayers for the glory of your Majesty, and for the
prosperity of your Sacred person, and Kingdom.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for L. Curtis.


