To His Highness OLIVER, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging.
May it please Your Highness,
THat I should commend a Cavalier to You, may, at this time, seem an
incongruous address, considering how much You have suffered from some of that
party: But then, if those I present be none of that some, but such as are
neither guilty of Schism nor Sedition, nor (being true to their principles) can
be so; it will then, I hope, not be taken as presumption, so much as duty, to
commend such Servants to the protection of so good a Master. So that now, Sir,
having drawn You into a c^ncern in that Party, I shall be a little more free on
their behalf.

Sir, It is to all the world apparent, that there is no Party that by their
Principles stand more inclined and affected to the present Government, that is,
to Monarchy, then they: For they fought for their then Monarch, even for
Monarchy sake; not for him as he was Charles Stuart, but as that their S^veraign
Lord the King, which by the grace of God had the present dominion over them.
Nay, Sir, in that, we did not only show good affection to this present
Government, but to You our present Governor; yes, and fought for You too, and
that when You fought against Your self. For, Sir, it cannot be denied, but that
as You are more eminently Your self now then before, as being by the grace of
God advanced to that power You had not then; so also, in fighting for him, who
was by relation our then present Protector, we did fight for You your self, our
present Protector now.

But it may be objected, that there are some that have conceived personal
prejudice against You. It is too plain there are so; but these are not the men
I plead for, nor are they such as (by the most considerable men amongst us) are
owned as true Royalists or Cavaliers No, Sir, they are by them looked upon as
their greatest enemies, even because, by t^eir undu^iful and disloyal attempts,
they have given You occasion to suspect the whole party. Sir, our Principle is
to respect him that is our Higher Power as in conscience sake to the ordinance
of God, and not out of any fancy sake to his person alone, as the ordinance of
man. And yet, Sir, in respect of your personal worth too, and of that affection
and esteem the most of us have of you, I will speak it knowingly, that were it
in our own choice, we should rather have you then any other in the three
Nations to be our Sovereign. And as for any hardship under which we do for the
present lie, and whe^ein violation may seem to be offered to the Act of
Oblivion, we do (as I said) impute the occasion to those that have wrongfully
assumed the name of the Royal party. It is not (I assure You) taken as
proceeding from Your self, who are looked upon as the chief Author of that Act,
as David was of that Covenant made with Abner, for reducing all Israel (such as
had formerly taken part with the house of Saul) under one obedience But as all
the people and all Israel understood then that it was not of the King, so are
they persuaded of You now. We consider, that as David had such as Shimei and
Sheba, that out of personal relation to others did disturb him, so also had he
sons of Zerviah, such as were too hard for him, although in the Throne: He had
such as Joab, who out of emulation to be outscript in service or fidelity, or
out of secret grudg or anger at the loss of a Brother, or the like, received in
the time of war, would persuade that Abner, and such as he, came but to deceive
him, and to be as Spies to him in the behalf of some other In which their
dealing toward such as were their brethren and of the same Nation and Religion
with themselves, they showed not so much conscience and good nature, as is
recorded 2. Chron 28. 9, and c. to have been used toward those that had been
overcome by war then.

But, Sir, we look upon You as as our Joint-Protector now; and our prayer shall
be to Him that has the hearts of Princes in His hand, and can turn them which
way soever He pleases, That no Council may prevail with You, but what may be
for the Glory of GOD, and the general Peace and good of these Nations. In which
Your royal resolution, I hope You shall never fail of the ready assistance of
those that are of the Royal party; nor, I am sure, of the prayers and
endeavors of

Your HIGHNESS most humble and loyal Subject, JOHN HALL

PREFACE.
IT was to me an unhappy diversion, when the Civil distractions of my Country
about matter of Government and Obedience, had berest me of that Employment
wherein before my livelihood did consist, and only furnished me with a
melancholy leisure to reflect upon the true grounds and justice of quarrels of
like nature. Which being at first done for my own satisfaction only, during the
time of that contention, came afterward to such bulk, as that by the advice of
some that were well-willers to Peace, I was persuaded to send it abroad into
the World for the satisfaction of others, in way of prevention of what might
happen in like case for the future.

But then again, proposing to my self to become as effectual herein as I could,
and considering how prone such as had been of the contrary party and opposite
to Monarchy, might be to object partiality to me in reference to that relation
I bore to the late King and the Court, I was the more wary not to let any thing
slip that might seem to have personal respect: But as I had from Scripture and
Reason found Monarchy to be the best and only right form of Government, so to
let them see that it was not for any one Monarchs sake I did it; but out of a
desire to maintain perpetual peace and unity amongst us, I asserted this
obedience to be continually due to that Person which God in his providence
should set over us. And truly I have looked upon submission and conformity to
the present Power, not only as necessary in respect of duty and care of public
peace and benefit, but for advance of private wishes too, be they on which side
they will: Not only fittest to be given to him that by Divine appointment is to
be settled in this power, but also to be given in case he should be removed; for
that the sooner that work is done, and he brought to that height which God has
decreed, the sooner shall he be taken away, and some other put in his place.

That which I then did to avoid imputation of partiality, has been by some on
the other side conceived as an Apostacy from the true Principles of the
Royalist, and as savouring both of ingratitude to the last, and of flattery to
him that is now in power. Upon which account they have also condemned
whatsoever is by me done in conformity to any present Establishment in the
outward profession of Religion; as not deeming what was before settled in that
kind by the former Higher Power, can be legally abrogated by this. In answer to
all which I shall desire it may be considered, that I undertake not to write as
a Servant, but as a Subject, and of the duty of subjection and obedience as
indefinitely put, and abstracted from all personal regard. It was not the scope
of my intention to compare person with person, or to show which of them I was
most obliged unto, or would for my own part have chosen either for my Prince or
Master; but to set forth that duty which became me and all men else, as
considered in the common relation of Subjects: which being impartially done, I
doubt not but it will to others, as it has done to my self, appear, that (in
order to the manifestation of Gods glory) all the means for man's preservation
ought to be endeavored; that man's preservation, peace and charity having a
necessary dependence on submission to the authority of some one, that shall be
in all causes and over all persons as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, next under
Christ supreme Head and Governor* it could not but follow, that he only was to
be obeyed in things of this nature. And that the means to Peace, Unity and
Charity may at no time be wanting, I have determined obedience to be given to
him that shall be from time to time possessed of this high place of Supremacy
and power. And these things I have made the Arguments of the three Chapters of
this Treatise. The first to show the true rise and scope of Religion; the next
to show what the n^tion of Church does import, and of the power of him that
shall be Head thereof; and lastly* to show that no imputation of defect of
Title can take off our duty of subjection. All which being cleared, I presume
that those censures which passed on me and others for hearing or receiving
where Common-Pr^yer or other Ceremonies were not used, or for hearing of such
as (I might suspect at least) were not ordained as heretofore, and the like,
would be found to be grounded more on prejudice then reason.

In the first larger Book of Government and Obedience, having (as I said) an
especial aim to the satisfaction of such as were neither convinced in the right
of Kingly government, nor of that fullness of power that belonged thereunto; I
made use of no authority in proof of what I said, save that of Scripture and
Reason; both because these were not only the best and true authorities, as also
for that (generally) with them all humane authority was not regarded But now
being put to question what are the true Principles of the Cavalier or Royalist,
to the end it may be known whether I, in my conformity, or others, in their
recusancie, have best followed them; it must be expected I should quote some of
the most Reverenced and Orthodox Authorities in our Church that have treated of
things of this nature. And if in any thing in this Treatise I shall be
conceived short of the proof intended, recourse may be had to the former
Volume, where most of the same questions are more largely handled; unto which
this was intended as a supplement in some part only.

And for fear any should mistake or conclude me disrespectful to the
Service Book or former Ceremonies, because I am now persuading to conformity in
alteration; I shall in this case also desire them to consider, that I am not
now taking upon me the part of a Judge or Lawmakers, and comparing those Forms
and Rights with any other of like kind, so as to estimate which were best and
most convenient to be received as to separate worth in themselves; but writing
now as a Son or Member of a Church* in things determined by her authority
already, the case will be found much different.

As I am not so partial to my self, as not to conceive my own insufficiency
may be a cause why in many particulars my Proofs and Reasons are no more
satisfactory and convincing: So, on the other side again, being to write in
defense of Authority, and to persuade to Obedience, I must expect that both my
self and work shall be vulgarly entertained with a Censure suitable to what Mr*
Hook armed himself against, when he wrote against the Nonconformists of his
time, viz. He that goes about to persuade a multitude, that they are not so
well governed as they ought to be, shall never want attentive and favorable
hearers, because they know the manifold defects whereunto every kind of
Regiment is subject; but the secret lets and difficulties, which in publ^que
proceedings are innumerable and inevitable, they have not ordinarily the
judgment to consider. And because such as openly reprove supposed disorders of
State, are taken for principal friends to the common benefit of all, and for
men that carry singular freedom of mind; under this fair and plausible color,
whatsoever they utter passes for good and current: That which wants in the
weight of their speech, is supplied by the aptness of men's minds to accept and
believe it. Whereas on the other side, if we maintain things that are
established, we have not only to strive with a number of heavy prejudices
deeply rooted in the hearts of men, who think that herein we serve the time,
and speak in favor of the present State, because thereby we either hold or seek
preferment; but also to bear with such except^ons as minds so averted
beforehand usually take against that which they are loath should be poured into
them.

The grounds of prejudice and aversion, are (I must confess) naturally strong
and pressing, especially when they come to that height (as mine did) to be
thereby deprived of all. But when we shall have laid that passion aside which
might arise from the thoughts of our former condition, and consulted with
Reason, of what in conscience and prudence is fittest to be resolved on in the
condition we now stand, I doubt not but those Motives that have prevailed with
me, will prevail with others also, that the remainder of our life may be led
with more comfort. Upon which hope I have thus exposed my self to public view;
as mindful of that admonition of our Savior to S. Peter; And thou being
converted, strengthen thy brethren. Which God Almighty grant.

CHAP. I. Of Religion in its true ground and foundation.
THings that have life, are essentially distinguished from those that want, by
particular sensation of their own perfections and enjoyments. And as they are
again specifically distinguished and differenced from one another by degree of
perfection and beatitude, so also by degree of vigor and relish in fruition.
For as it is an abatement to happiness to have sense of loss or pain
intermixed; so is it also an increase thereunto, to be perceptible thereof in
the highest degree of satisfaction and assurance. In which regard, since
evidence of compleatness and fruition must be increased through increase of
extention and emanation issuing from it self, and that again increased through
increase of those objects whereon it works (whereby as the Print from the
Seal, the party possessed may find it self in degree more fully and powerfully
therewith endued:) It must therefore come to pass, that as it is most natural
in God to be in the highest measure perfect and happy, so also to be
communicative or good, and in goodness again to be enlarged and apparent. For
to be blessed or happy, as to self-respect alone, argues not so plainly an
immensity in any thing as to be extensive herein to others, without other
confinement save that of its own good pleasure. That incomprehensible degree of
wisdom and power which in the beginning of time did manifest it self in the
whole Creation, took effect from that innate propension to beneficence, which
before all time was in the Creator himself: Omnipotency serving as the means
to accomplish that which Goodness had first designed as its end.

1. Consequent to the work of Creation is that of Providence: For as it was a
work proper to the prime Goodness to make things perfect and happy, so likewise
to preserve them so* In which respect (again) it must farther fall out, that as
evidence of possession and perfection was increased from the signature thereof
upon other things, even so also, for farther manifestation of the worth and
force of the energie and impression (as to goodness and bounty) it was onwards
necessary, that according to those degrees of blessings and benefits received,
there should be in the Receiver a higher measure of resentment implanted, the
which we usually comprehend under the name of Pleasure. For, these things which
of mere grace and mercy do from divine bounty fall on any Sensitive, when they
come to be received by that Sensitive as beneficial and good, cannot naturally
be otherwise attested then by and under that conception; Pleasure it self being
no otherwise evil or for bidden, then as depriving us of some more large and
lasting delight.

2. Which pleasure again, as it is by each sensitive pursued as its end, by the
wise dispensation of the Creator it is so ordered, that it should be not only
in the highest degree communicated to things which are of greatest perfection,
but also to such actions of their most eminently annexed, as do withal tend to
the preservation and benefit of their own particulars, or that of their race
and species. And therefore since some things stood more participant and
sensible of the beatitude, perfection, and image of their Maker (by means of
life, understanding, and will;) it will farther follow, that in reference to
the more full expression of his own glory and goodness, a more exact and
greater measure of providence and express rules should be set down and added
for their preservation, then of things of inferior regard. That Law of Nature,
and those instincts and properties wherewith Inanimates or other sensitives do
stand guided, seemed not sufficient for the conduct of man; who being in a
higher degree participant and sensible of divine resemblance and goodness,
stood not only in himself, like them, positively expressing Gods bounty in his
own receipts, but, beyond them, by means of his reason and intellect, able to
acknowledge even those benefits which himself or others had received, and so
become a more express witness of his Makers favor and glory.

3. From hence it comes to pass that men, like other sensitives, are not only
naturally led by sense of pleasure to the prosecution of those things that tend
to specifical or particular perservation, (in order to the accomplishment of
his will, that ordains his bounty to be extended as well to the individuals
that for the present are, as to the successive generations of them to be by
this means brought forth and made participants thereof) but also by another Law
proper to themselves, even the Law of Reason, can apprehend and acquire that
which is in a fuller degree fit for themselves also to execute, either for
their own avail, or that of others. And therefore when again we find, that
there is in all things naturally implanted a certain degree of love and delight
unto those things unto which they are most usually associated and conversant;
even so we find Mankind not only, like them, won to love and liking of one
another by means of society, but by discourse and reason, being in degree made
sensible of the benefit and pleasure which other things receive by means of the
expression of this his love toward them, and also of his duty in doing, he is
by sense of honor as well naturally and politically enforced, as by
encouragement from above strengthened and directed in this resolution.

4. The passed discourse being summed up, and examined toward the discovery of
man's duty, will easily discover that juncture and coincidence that is between
the Precepts of the First and Second Table. We may find why God that cannot, as
in any proper regard, be any ways steaded or served by us, does yet reckon of
our services to one another as a service to himself; according to that saying
of David, My goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the
earth, and to the excellent, Ps. 16. 2* 3. Or that of Job, Can a man be
profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself? Job 22.
2. And again, If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? chapter 35* 6. Or if
thou be righteous, what give thou him? Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou
art, and thy righteousness may profit the son of man.

All which would be well considered of by such as, in a mistaken or misgrounded
zeal to Gods honor, Gods service, Gods glory, Gods worship (as they use to
phrase it, and to be performed in such a measure and manner as they are
persuaded is best and truest) are ready to make him apparently to act against
himself, and will themselves be his Agents even to kill men under color of
doing him good service. These men are to consider, that if Gods honor or glory
had, under the Gospel, been tied to any such precise outward form of Worship,
it had been easy with him at first, and easy every day it still is, to make
such exact declaration of his will therein, that none can make doubt or scruple
thereof; as amongst the Jews he did. But he now requiring chiefly the devotion
of our hearts, and leaving all things disputable, in the measure and manner of
any outward Form, to those that have the rule over us, we do then dis*serve
him, when we break Charity and Order, and make a Schism in our service to him.

And since God does not only take care for man's Being, (which is politically
included under the notion of Peace) but of his Well-being also (which we may
comprise under the term of Plenty) to the end that through the sense and
pleasure of his enjoyments he may be stirred up to praise and acknowledge him;
it is therefore farther to be considered, that even in those duties that are
apparently to be performed toward God, as being expressly commanded for
perpetuity in Scripture, as duties of the first Table, there be not yet so
violent a pressure made, or yoke laid on the back of flesh and blood, as to
defeat the end of the second Table, Man's good, and make his service seem
altogether a burden. And therefore they that are so ready to fancy to
themselves an eminent proficience in piety, out of the more strict observation
of some one or two Precepts, as the Pharisees of old were wont to do in the
strict observation of the Sabbath, even to the neglect of the rest, are to
remember our Saviors answer to the same Pharisees, That the Sabbath was made
for man, not man for it. For as the sense of pleasure and enjoyment was
implanted as well to witness Gods bounty, as to provoke us to gratitude;
therefore unnecessarily to abate man's pleasure, is to abate Gods glory: Which
should have been considered of them that, for fear of breaking the Sabbath Day,
would now turn it into a day of fasting and mourning. They are to remember how
that Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 1. is declaiming against those things
that were done in more direct service to God, as Sacrifice, Prayers, and the
like, and directs them to the observance of those things that tended to
Charity, as a more ready way to serve and please him; To abstain from blood, to
seek judgment, to relieve the oppressed, the fatherless, the widow, and the
like. They are to consider, that although God does set down his own service
first, and strictly call for our faith and fear toward him, (as well knowing
that according to our fear and confidence in him, our observance of his laws
will follow) yet does he always aim at our good, to be gained or strengthened
by any religious observance. In which regard we may well know how to interpret
that speech of S. Paul, He that provideth not for his family has denied the
faith, and is worse then an Infidel. Where in an Oec^^^^ical instance he
speaks of that force which Christian Religion, upon its true ground and
intent, should have in the promoting of all moral virtues besides: Insomuch as
not to do the one, is to deny the other, and to become worse then he that has
no faith in Christ at all, because he wanted that divine direction and
ecouragement thereunto.

And lastly, for want of due consideration of these things, and how Charity is
the end of the Law, it is, that men are generally so superstitious, and so
disconsolate and unsatisfied in their religious performances; even so as to
become Quakers, Seekers, and what not? For while they guide themselves in their
actions, without due sense or regard how these things are both of them by Rules
of Religion made mutually serviceable to the same end, they do lose their
Religion by this irregular and partial seeking of it in one sort only; even by
dissolving and disjoining those things which God has thereby joined together.
For as all Virtue and Morality (in regard of our inability to be so fully
complete as the first strict Rule of Providence requires) is no better then
Heathenish Philosophy, when done without faith in Christ, or sense of duty
toward God; so also all acts of devotion proceeding from any uncharitable
heart, or not having charitable intention, but done only out of fear or care to
please or serve God thereby, as in things by him aimed at for himself, are at
best but superstition. And therefore when our Savior makes up our Religion by
joining these fundamental precepts, Thou shall l^ve the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy self: And when again it is said, Follow
peace with all, men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord: It
is not for us to think of disjoining that religious tie of the Word, and to
believe that by any extraordinary way of serving God whom we see not, or of
following of some holy duties, we can find acceptance, if we have not (the
while) a due regard to the love of our Brother whom we do see, and to follow
Peace also. But since Righteousness and Peace have thus kissed each other, Men
should therefore in their religious deportments seek to preserve the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of Peace, and even study to be quiet, by making
conscience of avoidance of such things whereby scandal may be given or taken,
to the disturbance of their joint Communion in the same Profession. Let men be
to their utmost wary in communicating in acts of known sin, because nothing of
that kind but tends to the dishonor of God, and the general harm of men: But
let them withal take heed that private prejudice, interest or passion makes
them not forsake their society as they are men, much less in what they do as
Christians; for that were more directly both to dishonor God as Creator and
Redeemer, and to prejudice man himself: For although we may and must hate and
abandon vice and sin, yet we may not the vicious and sinner farther then they
are so; but so far as i^ possible, and as much as in us lies, to have peace
with all men.

7. If we look to Mankind in their first way of Religion, and to that condition
and ability they then stood in, for maintenance of their duty both toward God
and their neighbor; we shall find that in all these deviations or defects
wherein, through private appetite and abundance of enjoyment, they might be led
both to forget the Author of their benefits, and to neglect the good and
preservation of other things, their fellow creatures, that God almighty did
accept of them and what they did, while they should forbear to eat of that
forbidden Tree of the Knowledge of good and evil; Sacramentally put to repute
them as innocent in all such actions, as in a strict sense they might be found
to deviate from the fulfilling of the whole Law or Rule of Providence, since
they implicitly obeyed him that was the Author thereof, and took not upon them
to be guided by their own knowledge of that good and evil whereto they might
morally tend.

8. In the second estate, and under the Law, we may apprehend God conditioning
with the posterity of him that had been most righteous in the keeping of the
first Natural Law, for the observation of a certain number of Precepts; upon
the performance whereof there was a promise of Justification, as if they had
performed the whole Moral Law, or Law of Providence.

9. But this being yet found too difficult, God almighty, in the third way of
dispensation of his will, to wit, in the Evangelical Covenant, conditions with
Mankind for Belief; not accepting us for any acts of our own, as our own, but
as done and accepted in the name and by the merit of another; whom, by faith,
we are now to apprehend and rely upon, as having in himself fulfilled all we
stood outwardly bound unto, as well in reference to the first large Law of
Providence, as to the Jewish abridgment thereof.

10. In the first Covenant it was, Forbear this and live; in the second, the
Condition was, Do this and live; in the third, Believe this and live.

11. If we shall compare these Covenants one to another, we shall find the
greatest similitude and agreement between the first and the last; between our
state and condition under the first, and under the second Adam. For as under
the first, we had but one Precept to observe as immediately divine, so under
the second also. Then, whereas we stood innocent in our deportments while
guided inwardly by the propensions of uncorrupted Nature; and in what we might
thwart one another, stood obedient to our natural fathers: So here, are we
innocent too, while inwardly guided by Nature rectified by Grace, being all
^aught of God to love one another: And for our outward deportments, both in
Godliness and honesty, submitting to such as have a spiritual fatherhood and
rule over us, whose faith we are to follow, considering the end of their
conversation, Heb 13. 7. even the maintenance of peace and order: And do all
things without murmuring and disputing, that we may be blameless and harmless,
the sons of God, in the midst of a froward and perverse generation, wherein we
shine as lights in the world, Phil. 2: 14* To which end we may observe our
Savior, the second Adam, describing the innocence of the Evangelical estate
to consist also in the abnegation of our prying humors, when he answers the
Pharisees that would be so much guided by pride and partiality in their
interpretations of the written Law, without regard to the main drift of the
Law: If ye were blind, you should have no sin; but now ye say we see, therefore
your sin remains.

12. But now, under the Law, all these Preceps being so immediately and
strictly given and enjoined by God himself to be for perpetuity, literally
observed by all of that Nation and Covenant, no one person could plead
exemption from that sentence, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things written in the Law to do them, farther then he could be to himself
conscious, that according to his best enquiry he had exactly fulfilled them.
Whereas under the Gospel or New Covenant, we shall find the case clean
otherwise; and not as it was formerly made with our fathers, when God took them
(as it were) by the hand, to guide them in their actions by Rules delivered by
himself, Heb. 8. 9. But now does it by an inward Law written in our hearts. And
therefore S. Paul putting the difference between them, brings in the
Righteousness which is by the Law speaking in this wise, The man that does
these things shall live by them; when that righteousness which is of faith,
enquireth neither for new literal precepts to be received from Christ now in
heaven, or for literal observance of the old Law, the which he fulfilled in his
death: But what says it? The word is nigh us, and every day preached; if thou
shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart
that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. And then for our
conformable outward obedience to Christ as King, as well as confession he is
our Lord, we have his own direction to hear such as he shall from time to time
delegate, when he says, He that hears you hears me, and the like.

13. If we search after the quality of these which were from time to time to be
in this sort heard* and that according to those several states and conditions
which man then stood in, in respect of those different Covenants and
Dispensations he was under; it is to be considered, that as the will and
affections of Mankind stood at first more simple and incorrupt, and their
inward plantation of love more natural and entire, so had they again more
immediate directions from God himself to guide them in such things as they
might occasionally err in. The innocence of that first estate causing him
more familiarly to converse with the Patriar^hs at first; as by those familiar
speeches used to Adam and others, and their ready answer (not betokening
strangeness) may easily be presumed.

14. But after the Flood, and toward the promulgation of the Law, whenas
Mankind grew worse and worse, he then by degrees withdrew such manifestations
only appearing by Angels, or the like; and resolved that his Spirit should not
(so immediately) strive with man in that kind; but to constitute others, who as
his Vicegerents should be obeyed in his stead. He would not take to himself
such personal Judgment in the acts of violence, as in the case of Abel, but
remit the sentencing of it here to be done in an appointed way, by man himself;
Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. In which recess
of his we must next suppose, that all things tending to the ends before
rehearsed, that is, to the honor and worship of God, or preservation and good
of men, are now to be directed and guided by others; excepting only such things
as by express Law from himself are to be obeyed and acknowledged as unalterable
by any other.

15. If we look unto the way and kind how this regiment should be steered, in
regard of persons, it will be plain he never dispensed with this power to more
then one at once in chief; not willing there should be any more Gods in any
Kingdom on Earth, then was in Heaven it self. To this end it may be observed,
that whenever God makes a promise to any person of a great increase of race
and posterity, he does withal (as a completing of that blessing) make them a
promise of a Monarchical or Kingly government; and that most especially to
those people of whom he will make his Church, and by whom he would have himself
more eminently served. And therefore, although we may find Ishmael and Esau
recorded blessed with a Catalogue of Princes, Kings* and Dukes, yet having
reserved to himself the more direct line of Abraham, who should be as the sand
of the sea for multitude, he does with the one promise the other, Genesis ^7. 6. I
will make Nations of thee, and Kings shall come out of thee. The like he
promises to Sarah, v. 10. She shall be a mother of Nations, Kings of people
shall be of her. The like is promised to Jacob* Genesis 35. 11. Kings shall come
out of thy l^ins. Who again* as the next I ather to the Tribes, gives it
particularly to Judah, as an high blessing to be settled on him, in ^ight of
that primogeniture which his elder Brother* had ^orfeired; namely, That this
promised S^epter should not depart from Judah* nor a Lawgiver foom between his
feet, till ^o^^ come* Gen 49. 10. in which last Promise, under the ^otion o^
Lawgiver and of Soepter in the singular number, we may well understand the King
before mentioned. And* however the P^ophetick designation of Monarchical
government to succeed as under the notion of Kings, as the adopted Father of
each Country, took not place until Moses; but that those that were the natural
Fathers of the Tribes, and had right of Government by primogeniture, continu^^
as Princes and Rulers: yet their, as he was the first that was so styled, being
King in Jes^u^ ^^^* (even as the succeeding Judges may be so well called for
that in the inter-regnum it is said there was no King in Isra^l) so shall we
^ind Moses again as expressly foretelling that they should have a King, as that
they should possess the Land. For, the words to each Promise run absolute,
Dent. 17. 14. When t^^u art come into the Land which the Lord thy God gives
thee, and sh^lt possess it, and shall dwell therein, and shall say, I will set
a King over me like all the Nations that are round about me, etc. It is not
said, If thou shall say; no such conditional, but an express duty or prophecy:
For the conjunction [ and] here used, [ and shall possess it, and dwell
therein, and shall say] makes all of them equally certain; as certain in the
blessing of Kingship, as in that of the promised Land it self. Of all which I
have formerly at large discoursed, and have briefly here premised, to
unprejudice such as are averse to Monarchy, or the acknowledgment of the power
of Kings in the Church; and shall now treat of the Church it self, and of its
proper cognizance and power, in which we shall have farther occasion to assert
this Kingly superintendencie.

CHAP. II. Of the Church Catholic, and of the power and jurisdiction of each
particular Church, and Head thereof.
THe word Ecclesia, or '(...), which we English Church, does originally import
a Company called forth, or men met together upon some special occasion. But the
Scripture treating of Religious matters, applies that notion to* Meetings made
to that end* And therefore that Assembly which Demetrius and his Craftsmen
made, is called by that name. But then farther, because to be called forth,
must presuppose some person or persons having power so to do, and also to
propound and regulate what shall be disputed of or determined in these
Assemblies; in that respect again we after find, that those things which in the
former unruly meeting could not be composed, are by the Town-Clark promised to
be determined in a more lawful Church or assembly, to be called according to
Authority. All Religions agreeing in this truth, that without observation of
Government and Order, both Church and State will quickly run into confusion.

After Christianity had a while been professed, this name by way of excellence
was appropriate to them, and those of their communion: Insomuch as in the
beginning thereof, and while the Land of Jewry did contain the whole number of
Believers, or that the Christians there or elsewhere had not cast themselves
into any proper or distinct forms of regiment; all such as stood as well
separated from the world, as associated amongst themselves by their joint
profession of the same faith, stood only distinct from the rest of the world by
the word Church, or Church of Christ* Catholickly applied, without distinction
thereof into parts in respect of any local application* But when afterward
they came to be dispersed into several Cities, so distant from one another in
place, and so different in jurisdictions, as to require some form of
Ecclesiastical discipline to be settled amongst themselves for their more
orderly service in their Religion; it came then to pass, that as those that had
begotten them in the faith, and been their spiritual fathers and instructors,
had chief authority herein, so were those their Churches and followers
distinguished by topical additions, as the Church or Saints at Rome, at
Corinth, at Ephesus, or the like. By the use of the word at such a place, and
not saying, the Church of Rome, of Corinth, of Ephesus, or the like, (as now we
do the Church of Rome, England, Geneva, etc) we are to conceive, that as the
first Believers were, in respect of this separation from the rest of the world,
in faith and some religious exercises, called by the name of a Church; so
these, in those several Cities wherein they lived, were called Saints or Church
at such a City, and not of; as betokening that they were as well but a part of
that City as to civil regiment, as also a part of the whole Catholic Church
now subordinate to some separate Authority in the exercise of their Religion.
But then we are to conceive, that although this separation of theirs from
others of the same City, both in their meetings and holy exercises; were done
in order to their Religion; yet was it not the quality of any Religion, as such
a Religion, but difference in rites and form of Worship, and in meeting
thereabouts from that other Religion which was publicly authorized in that
place, which made it preserve this name of Church as taken in its proper sense.

And therefore (as before said) we shall usually find that the Addition of the
Church of God, or of Christ, is put to distinguish, as well as to dignifie it
above other religious Congregations that were not such. And upon this reason it
is, that we never read in the Scripture, that the the word Church is applied to
the Jews, although they were a Nation separate from all the rest of the world,
both in their Religion it self, and in the Ceremonies thereof; even for that it
was all one and the same with that which the public Authority of that place
did appoint and allow. Whereas when Christianity first began amongst them, the
first Professors thereof, being but subordinately divided, were set down as a
Church or Congregation of men in that respect separate, saying, The Church, or
Church of Christ which is at Jerusalem.

Which being considered, we need not wonder why S. Paul should proceed to no
higher punishment then that of Excommunication, against a Blasphemer, or an
incestuous person, or the like, who (by the very heinousness and nature of
their sins) might be presumed not greatly desirous of their Communion; even for
that it was, at that time, all the punishment he, or other Heads of Churches
could inflict, wanting (as before noted) all coercive jurisdiction. Upon which
ground again, we find not that the Jews did ever exercise this kind of
punishment while they continued masters of their own sovereignty; but,
comprising all offenses under the same Law, they punished transgressions of all
sorts as breaches thereof: when yet afterward in the time of our Savior, that
the supreme power was in the hand of the Romans, we find them both threatening,
and actually thrusting men out of their Synagogues.

But however such notorious sinners as those might, in the infancy of
Christianity, set lightly of any Churchcensure in that kind; yet with the more
conscientious sort, who, in regard of those many promises by Christ made no his
Church, had been at first won to be of their fellowship and communion as the
only means to their salvation, it was taken as a punishment of the highest
import. And however that the then Church, for want of Judiciary power as
aforesaid, could not punish otherwise, yet since it became all that were named
by the name of Christ to depart from iniquity, and to have their conversation
such as becomed Saints, and to walk worthy that vocation wherewith they were
called, (in which respect we shall find the name of Disciples, Believers,
Saints, Church, and Christians, indifferently used to signify those that made
profession of Christ's name) It therefore became them who were to be as lights
on a hill, and to see that others light did so shine before men, that they
seeing their good works might glorify that God in whose obedience they did it,
to be very sensible and tender of permitting any thing scandalous in the eye of
the world, to be acted or countenanced by any of their profession.

In reference to which gracious promises of Salvation, Illumination,
Assistance, and the like, made by Christ to his Church, and of that degree of
sanctity wherewith those of this profession stood eminent above the rest of the
world, or of that City or place where they lived; it is no wonder if we find
that this notion of Church was still used, even after the time that the public
Authority of the Country came also to be of the same belief; especially
considering that it was more then three hundred years after Christ's birth
before any Emperor at all was of that profession, from which they quickly again
fell; and that during the said time, and a good while after, the more
considerable, and perhaps the major part of the Empire it self, (besides what
was done in other Countries more heathenish) continued still Infidels. Toward
whose conversion, and for the greater honor of their Master and his doctrine,
as they desired to become worthy Disciples by the example of their holy lives,
so d^d they withal still keep up as far as might be a communion with one
another therein, as well as a separation from others that were not of the same
belief. But yet we shall never find in Scripture, or Author of antiquity, that
was not prejudiced by particular adherence to some party, that these notions of
Church or Saints were used to separate Christians from Christians, so as to
account others (especially their fellow subjects) that publicly professed
faith and obedience to Christ, to be yet none of his Church; until such time as
the whole Church, through the goodness of God, being rid of the fear of much
harm from such as for Christ's sake were their common enemy, some separate parts
thereof began in a strange requital to seek out enemies amongst themselves:
Ambition, pride, interest, and passion causing men to forget those prime
precepts of humility, meekness, patience, brotherly love, and the like,
wherewith Christianity stood at first adorned, and whereby they (as out of a
common principle of love to Christ and his honor, as well as to one another,
according to the true intent of Religion) were piously and unanimously guided;
and now to prosecute that course which should at once hazard the honor and good
of both Christ and his whole Church, through their strife to advance some
particular Sect above the rest, and themselves in it. As if Christ's Disciples
and followers must not now be called such in regard of their faith in him, as
formerly was used; but out of belief in, and for following them rather in
things circumstantial, or by themselves called fundamental, the more to
countenance that breach of Charity which must thence ensue: hereby showing that
we have not, as the true elect of God and beloved, put on bowels of mercies,
kindnesses, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering; so as to forbear one
another, and forgive one another, if any man have a quarrel against any, even
as Christ forgave us: But have neglected to put on Charity, which is the bond
of perfectness; and to let the peace of God rule in our hearts, to the which we
are also called into one body, even this body and communion of a Church, Col.
3. 12, etc. It being indeed impossible for any but such elect as these to
escape those deceits and snares which each particular Sect, as in Christ's name,
will be ready to lay before us, saying, Lo here is Christ, and lo there is
Christ! on purpose to affright us from confidence in that Name whereby alone
under heaven we can be saved; as if salvation were not to be found in being a
Member of the Catholic Church, or any part of it, as Christian; but in that
secret Chamber, or that desert Assembly, which is now separately named and
owned by themselves.

6. This is that great misery under which Christendom has of late been so much
troubled, as well through that ambitious humor of universal rule and dominion,
whereby those of the Roman party (out of opinion of Eminency, Succession, or
the like) would advance their Head to be Head of the whole Church, (even where
his jurisdiction reaches not:) As of others also, who, in any particular
Church, are ready to make a separation of themselves; as though, in regard of
any extraordinary degree of sincerity, of worship, or sanctity of life by them
professed above others, the ancient notion of Church could now again be
appropriate to them, without notice of their Brethren of the same Religion, and
those in Authority, and perhaps more in number also; in like manner as formerly
the notion of Church was understood in opposition to those that were mere
Heathens.

7. The truth is, that Christian societies may well be distinguished from
Professors of other Religions by this peculiar appellation; their Religion
being indeed the Religion, even as their God is apparently the God. For where
they, in discovery of their mere humane extraction or wors, are, in their
precepts, wholly regardful of their own outward glory, pomp and estimation, and
that according to humane fancy and opinion; when we are by voice from heaven
taught that strict conjunction which is between Glory to God in the highest!
and Peace on earth, and good will toward men. Their Deities stand manifestly
on their Sacrifices, professing greatest love to such as are most zealous in
them, or such like kind of adoration: Ours pronounce Charity the end of the
Law, and prefer Mercy before Sacrifice; and, to encourage men thereto, our
Savior personateth the hungry, blind, naked, imprisoned, and promises even
the reward of Heaven to such as should most express their love and duty to him
that way.

8. And thereupon again, as true it is, that particular Churches cannot seclude
one another from being members of that Catholic body, while they acknowledged
the same Common head; much less can such as live within the authority, or are
members of any Christian Church or society, claim any jurisdiction apart, or
make separation therefrom, upon allegation of any extraordinary sanctity or
nearer degree of imploiment in Religious affairs; for this were to overthrow
the main scope of the Church before set down. And therefore since humane
preservation and Peace is the end of Religious as well as Civil associations,
it will therefore follow, that as each State has its rule entire and absolute,
for the better preservation of concord and order, so must each Christian State
or Church much more have the like, in as much as those precepts and directions
leading thereunto are much more apparently within their Commission; their duty
and charge being to perfect and consummate that by a religious tie, unto which
natural perfection could not reach.

9. And hereby it comes to pass, that what was virtue or vice in a bare
Philosophical account, is now called righteousness or sin. And so these
Politic societies, which; upon the former light of natural reason, took upon
them the guidance of humane actions, and were called Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, when they come to acknowledge subjection to this higher direction
and rule, are usually called Churches also. And thereupon those that were
formerly called Schismatics in respect of separation, or stubbornness to
Ecclesiastic authority, are now to be esteemed seditious and Rebels also, if
they do in any such thing disobey or oppose him that has both these
authorities conjoined. For very hard it would seem, if the same terms of
separation should still be kept up against Christian Princes and Rulers, as was
formerly; and they allowed no more honor and power being Christians, then while
they were Pagans. But we will now proceed to show what has been the sense of
the Church of England herein, according to the doctrine of those that were
eminent in it.

10. As those of the Roman party had (no doubt) a design of stretching the
Papal jurisdiction, even in temporals, by their engrossment of all spiritual
power as Catholic head, so has it been always censured by ours as an unjust
usurpation: Therefore we shall find that the late Archbishop, in his Answer to
the Jesuit, all along to disprove that claim of Universal head of the whole
Church, and sect. 25. number. 12. shows, That after the conversion of the
Emperors, the Bishops of Rome themselves were still elected or confirmed by
them, without any title of Universal head; until that John Patriarch of
Constantinople, having been countenanced in that title by Mauritius the
Emperor, (who came afterward to be deposed and murdered by Phocas) Phocas
conferred on Boniface the third that very honor, which two of his Predecessors
had declaimed against as monstrous and blasphemous, if not Antichristian. And
as he thus defends the power and jurisdiction of particular Churches, and the
chief Magistrate in them against the Pope, so does he defend the power and
supremacy of this Magistrate over all that live within the same jurisdiction:
And therefore sect. 26. number. 9. does set it down for a great and undoubted Rule
given by Optatus; That wheresoever there is a Church, there the Church is in
the Commonwealth, not the Commonwealth in the Church, and so also the Church
was in the Roman Empire. The truth is, that at first, and while some smaller
parcels of the Roman Empire only were Christians, then these* being only of the
Church, might it be said to be in the Commonwealth; first as being but a part,
and next but a subordinate part of the whole Empire, or those that had
jurisdictions therein: But after that the Government it self became Christian,
then was there no question to be rightly made, which was in which? that is,
whether the Church in the Commonwealth, or that in the Church: For that both
were one, and both to be conceived included under that name of highest honor,
the name of Church, importing as well our relation to God, as to one another.
Whereupon also, since, for some Ages, the authority of the Roman Empire did
extend it self in a manner over all Nations that were Christian, it might well
come to pass that, amongst the Writers of those times, the Roman and Catholic
Church might be taken as equivalent and alike: which to use now, is an absurd
contradiction, as implying a particular-universal; for none other it is to call
any man a Roman Catholic. At the time the Emperor of Rome had the sovereignty
or government of any Christian State, then and there had the Pope or chief
Bishop of Rome the like sovereignty in ordering of the affairs of that Church,
if the said Emperor so thought fit; and to depart from that obedience or
communion, was then (as I conceive) not Schism alone, but Sedition also. But in
case any that are neither within the Popes own territory nor jurisdiction, but
in the proper jurisdiction of some other Prince, who yields only a voluntary
conformity in doctrine and discipline to that Sea, as Spain and France, and
other free Princes now do; then are they that make alteration against the
liking of that Prince or Power under whom they live, not Schismatics against
the Pope of Rome, but against him; and if he approve of their doctrine, they
are neither Schismatics, nor Seditious: As was the case of our Henry the
Eight, and those his Subjects of the Church of England which followed him; and
for ought I know, was the case of Luther also, in respect of his subjection to
the Duke of Saxony.

11: For it is to be considered, that where the Jurisdiction does divide and
become independent, there does the notion of Church divide also; as was to be
seen in the Church of the Jews, after they fell into two distinct Governments,
to wit, that of Judah, and that of Israel. In which case although they had
still but one divine Law and prescript form of Worship to live by, yet the
Government of each Kingdom being unsubordinate, they were each of them reckoned
as a Church apart, and the good or ill Government of each of them attributed to
none but the peculiar King thereof, even as proceeding from his proper
observance or breach of the Law. And although the Primitive Churches in Saint
John's time had not yet any absolute Jurisdiction, yet since what they had was
independent, we shall find that those Reproofs and Admonitions which were in
the Apocalypse given to the seven Churches, are directed to their several Angels
or Heads, apart, without any hint or notice of subordination to any other
Catholic Head or Curate, save of CHRIST himself.

12. I must confess, that as the earnest desire and aim I have always had
toward the silencing of disputes and civil commotions in Kingdoms, has made
me the more earnest and studious in pressing the power and authority of each
Prince; so for common-peace sake again amongst Kings themselves, and for taking
off those irregularities and oppressions which each of them, by this power,
might inflict on their Subjects, I have many times entertained the thoughts of
admittance of some such power like that claimed by the Bishop of Rome: But upon
serious excogitation of the whole, I was brought to resolve, that in the plea
and condition of power the Pope now stands, the interposition of his
authority would many times rather increase, then be effectual to prevent
injustice, or silence differences; whether acted between a Prince and his own
Subjects, or by one Prince upon another. As for example; some person or order
of Princes subjects, misliking their usage, appeal to Rome, as against
injustice and oppression: He must then (to make his authority known to be
useful) determine for one party or another, as his judgment shall be engaged.
If for the King, then is he but heightened and farther warranted to do the like:
If for Thomas a Becket, or the Barons against him, as sometimes in England,
then are Subjects encouraged toward sedition and civil war another time.
Again, before he can be supposed rightly to interpose between Prince and Prince
in the justice of their quarrels, they must all of them be brought to be of the
same religion and persuasion with himself, or else equally averse, that he may
be impartial. Suppose that might be done, yet since he may have kindred and
relations, may he not in that case favor a Nephew, a Casar Borgia, or the like,
against him that has no relation? or may he not respect interest and
application, so as again to favor such an one as King John, not only above his
Barons, but other Princes too, upon resignation of his Crown to be held of him
and his successors. But that was not all; for partiality, and the like, is but
that which the Subjects of any Monarch might object against his absolute rule:
But the great difference and difficulty is, that since the absolute Monarch was
in all causes and over all persons in his dominions supreme Governor, there was
hereby a sure way for prevention of civil war and disturbance; which, being the
chief political evil, would recompense those sufferings of inferior nature,
which could but occasionally happen, and never be so general. Whereas he
claiming but Ecclesiastical power only, and it being not at all determined or
agreed upon what is certainly so, or not so, (for prevention of question
thereabouts) I saw no possible hope to attain peace by his umpirage, (if any
should say he did exceed his Commission) unless he could make himself Judge of
that too, and so by degrees, and in ordine ad spiritualia, draw in cognizance
of all matters whatsoever. When that is done, as Constantines Throne will
better become him then S. Peter's Chair; so truly if such an Universal Christian
Monarch there were, (which is not likely to fall to be he) there might much
good arise by it, as to the general increase of Christian peace and profession.
As for that other way found out by some of that side, mentioned by the late
Archbishop, sect. 26. number. 11. for advance of his Supremacy, namely by setting
up again one Emperor over all Christendom to rule in secular matters, while
himself would rule him, and them too, in what he would call spiritual, with as
supereminent splendour as the Sun does the Moon, I apprehend it still
ineffectual to peace, till those powers be joined in one person; unless the
Emperor could indeed be content (as I said) to change places with him, and
become so subordinate as not to shine in any act of Moon like power, but by the
light and leave of this his Sun. Could this in any likelihood have been
e^pected, I might happily then have given some credit to those slender
probabilities of S. Peter's primacie, and the Popes succession in the chair. In
the mean time, the usurped exercise of this his Ecclesiastic power, where he
had no jurisdiction, as a power standing insubordinate to the Prince, has
begotten that great mistake, That there might be a Church in a Church, that is,
one Christian Commonwealth in another.

13. But let us hear judicious Mr. Hooker more at large in this business of the
Church, and in answer to such as would appropriate the notion of Church to
those of their own persuasion only, (lib. 5. fol. 367.) Church is a word which
Art has devised, thereby to sever and distinguish that society of men which
professes the true Religion, from the rest which professes it not. There have
been in the world, from the very first foundation thereof, but three R^ligions:
Paganism, which lived in the blindness of corrupted and depraved nature:
Judaism, embracing the Law, which reformed Heathenish impiety, and taught
salvation to be looked for through one, whom God in the last days would send
and exalt to be Lord of all; finally Christian belief, which yields obedience
to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and acknowledges him the Savior whom God did
promise. Seeing then that the Church is a name which Art has given to
Professors of true Religion; as they which will define a man, are to pass by
those qualities wherein one man does excel another, and to take only those
essential properties whereby a man does differ from creatures of other kinds:
So he that will teach what the Church is, shall never rightly perform the work
whereabout he goes, till, in matter of Religion, he touch that difference
which severeth the Churches religion from theirs who are not of the Church.
Religion being therefore a matter partly of contemplation, partly of action, we
must define the Church, which is a religious society, by such differences as do
properly explain the essence of such things; that is to say, by the object or
matter whereabout the contemplations and actions of the Church are properly
conversant: For so all Knowledges and all Virtues are defined. Whereupon,
because the only object which separateth ours from other Religions, is Jesus
Christ, in whom none but the Church does believe, and whom none but the Church
does worship; we find that accordingly the Apostles do every where distinguish
hereby the Church from Infidels and from Jews; accounting them which call upon
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be his Church. If we go lower, we shall
but add unto this certain casual and variable accidents which are not properly
of the being, but make only for the happier and better being of the Church of
God, either indeed, or in men's opinions and conceits. This is the error of all
Popish definitions that hitherto have been brought: They define not the Church
by that which the Church essentially is, but by that wherein they imagine their
own more perfect then the rest are. Touching parts of eminency and perfection,
parts likewise of imperfection and defect in the Church of God, they are
infinite, their degrees and differences no way possible to be drawn unto any
certain account. There is not the least contention and variance, but it
blemisheth somewhat the unity that ought to be in the Church of Christ; which
notwithstanding may have not only, without loss of essence or breach of
concord, her manifold varieties in Rites and Ceremonies of Religion, but also
her strifes and contentions many times, and that about matters of no small
importance; yea, her schisms, factions, and such other evils whereunto the body
of the Church is subject, sound and sick remaining both of the same body, as
long as both parts retain, by outward profession, that vital substance of
Truth, which makes Christian Religion to differ from theirs which acknowledge
not our Lord Jesus Christ the blessed Savior of mankind, give no credit to his
glorious Gospel, and have his Sacraments, the seal of eternal life, in
derision. Now the privilege of the visible Church of God (for of that we speak)
is to be herein like the Ark of Noah; for any thing we know to the contrary,
all without are lost sheep. Yet in this was the Ark of Noah privileged above
the Church; that whereas none of them which were in the one could perish,
numbers in the other are cast away, because to eternal life our profession is
not enough. Many things exclude from the Kingdom of God, although from the
Church they separate not. In the Church there arise sundry grievous storms, by
means whereof whole Kingdoms and Nations professing Christ, both have been
heretofore, and are at this present day divided about Christ. During which
division and contentions amongst men, albeit each part do justify it self, yet
the one of necessity must needs err, if there be any contradiction between
them, be it great or little: And what side soever it be that has the truth,
the same we must also acknowledge alone to hold with the true Church in that
point, and consequently reject the other as an enemy, in that case, fallen away
from the true Church. Wherefore of hypocrites and dissemblers, whose profession
at the first was but only from the teeth outward, when they afterward took
occasion to oppugn certain principal Articles of Faith, the Apostles which
defended the truth against them, pronounce them gone out from the fellowship of
sound and sincere Believers, when as yet the Christian religion they had not
utterly cast off. In like sense and meaning, throughout all Ages, Heretick^
have been justly hated as branches cut off from the body of the true Vine; yet
only so far forth cut off, as their Heresies have extended. Both Heresy and
many other crimes which wholly sever from God, do sever from the Church of God
in part only. The mystery of Piety, says the Apostle, is without peradventure
great: GOD has been manifested in the flesh, has been justified in the
Spirit, has been seen of Angels, has been preached to Nations, has been
believed on in the world, has been taken up into glory. The Church a pillar
and foundatiou of this truth, which no where is known or professed but only
within the Church, and they all of the Church that profess it. In the mean
while it cannot be denied, that many profess this, who are not therefore cleared
simply from all either faults or errors, which makes separation between us and
the Wel-spring of our happiness. Idolatry severed of old the Israelites;
Iniquity, those Scribes and Pharisees from God, who notwithstanding were a part
of the seed of Abraham, a part of that very seed which God did himself
acknowledge to be his Church. The Church of God may therefore contain both them
which indeed are not his, yet must be reputed his by us, that know not their
inward thoughts; and them, whose apparent wickedness testifies even in the
sight of the whole world, that God abhors them. For to this, and no other
purpose, are meant those Parables which our Savior in the Gospel has
concerning mixture of Vice with Virtue, Light with Darkness, Truth with Error;
as well an openly known and seen, as a cunningly cloaked mixture. That which
therefore separateth utterly, that which cutteth off clean from the visible
Church of Christ, is plain Apostacy, direct denial, utter rejection of the
whole Christian faith, as far as the same is professedly different from
Infidelity. Heretics, as touching those points of Doctrine wherein they fail:
Schismatics, as touching the quarrels for which, or the duties wherein they
divide themselves from their brethren: Loose, licentious, and wicked persons,
as touching their several offenses and crimes, have all forsaken the true
Church of God, the Church which is sound and sincere in the doctrine that they
corrupt, the Church that keeps the bond of unity which they violate, the
Church which walks in the ways of righteousness which they transgress; the
very true Church of Christ they have left, howbeit not altogether left nor
forsaken simply the Church, upon the main foundations whereof they continue
built, notwithstanding those breaches whereby they are rent from bottom to top
asunder.

And having largely discoursed on the same argument in the beginning of his
third Book, he proceeds to reprove such, as being then members of this Church,
would annihilate her being truly a Church, and claim an independencie because
of some corruptions they conceived in her. As there are (says he, fol. 86.)
which make the Church of Rome utterly no Church at all, by reason of so many
grievous errors in their Doctrine; so we have them amongst us, who under
pretense of imagined corruptions in our Discipline, do give even as hard a
judgment of the Church of England it self. And afterward, f. 88. coming to
distinguish the visible Church into parts according to their several
jurisdictions, to the end that authority thereof might be made useful, he
farther says: For preservation of Christianity, there is not any thing more
needful, then that such as are of the visible Church have mutual fellowship and
society one with another. In which consideration, as in the main body of the
Sea being one, yet within diverse precincts has diverse names; so the Catholic
Church is in like sort divided into a number of distinct societies, every of
which is termed a Church within it self. In this sense the Church is always a
visible society of men; not an Assembly, but a society. For although the name
of the Church be given unto Christian assemblies, although any multitude of
Christian men congregated may be termed by the name of a Church; yet Assemblies
properly are rather things that belong to a Church. Men are assembled for
performance of public actions, which actions being ended, the Assembly
dissolveth it self, and is no longer in being; whereas the Church which was
assembled, does no less continue afterward then before. Where but three are,
and they of the Laity also, says Tertullian, yet there is a Church, that is to
say, a Christian Assembly. But a Church, as now we are to understand it, is a
Society, that is, a number of men belonging unto some Christian fellowship, the
place and limits whereof are certain. That wherein they have communion, is the
public exercise of such duties as those mentioned in the Apostles Acts,
Instruction, Breaking of bread, Prayers. As therefore they that are of the
mystical body of Christ, have those inward graces and virtues, whereby they
differ from all others which are not of the same body; even so again, whosoever
appertain to the visible body of the Church, they have also the notes of
external profession, whereby the world knows what they are. After the same
manner, even the several Societies of Christian men, unto every of which the
name of a Church is given with addition betokening severalty, as the Church of
Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, England, and so the rest, must be endued with
corespondent general properties belonging unto them, as they are public
Christian societies. And of such properties common unto all societies
Christian, it may not be denied, that one of the very chiefest is
Ecclesiastical Polity. Which word I therefore the rather use, because the name
of Government, as commonly men understand it in ordinary speech, does not
comprise the largeness of that whereunto in this question it is applied: For
when we speak of Government, what does the greatest part conceive thereby, but
only the exercise of superiority peculiar unto Rulers and Guides of others? To
our purpose therefore the name of Church-Politie will better serve, because it
contains both Government, and also whatsoever besides belongs to the
ordering of the Church in public. Neither is any thing in this degree more
necessary then Church-Politie, which is a form of ordering the public
spiritual affairs of the Church of God. But we must note, that he which
affirms Speech to be necessary amongst all men throughout the world, does not
thereby import that all men must necessarily speak one kind of language: Even
so the necessity of Polity and Regiment in all Churches may be held, without
holding any one certain Form to be necessary in them all, etc.

15. From all which discourse these Conclusions are plainly deducible, as
touching the preservation of Peace and Charity. First, that the imputation of
Heresy, Schism, or the like, cannot by particular Churches be so charged upon
one another, as to take from them the reality of being true Christian Churches,
whilst they hold the foundation: And much less, that any such imputation from
any the sons or members of any Church should be held of avail to take that
respect which is due unto her as a Church of Christ, and debar her from
exercising his authority on earth; and that not only for keeping of love and
union, but for preservation of Christianity it self, which is also needful to
be upheld by observation of the Rules of Society and Government in the Church,
as well as in the Commonwealth.

16. That to a Church, as now the word is applied* Polity and Regiment being
proper, that therefore no sort of persons wanting this power, but living under
it or any other Christian jurisdiction, can assume to themselves the notion of
a Church, although they should consist of such as were of the order of the
Clergy. In which condition, since the notion of Church could be no otherwise
appropriate then to import a Congregation or Assembly, it might be given to the
Laity also, as he avoucheth out of Tertullian.

17. And next we may observe what those things be that are to be publicly
exercised, and wherein the members of each Church are to have communion, and
which do fall within the Churches authority and cognizance, as Instruction,
Breaking of bread, and Prayers; that is to say, to order and regulate the
public use of Preaching, Administration of Sacraments, of Prayers, or other
form of Service or Worship. So that when any Church shall think fit to make any
new appointment in any thing of these kinds, It is not fit (as he elsewhere
says) for those that are members thereof, to ask why we hang our judgments on
the Churches sleeve? and out of stubbornness and disrespect to her authority,
to go about to persuade men to inconformity; by making them believe, that
obedience to alteration in these things is hazardous or destructive to their
salvation: Not regarding the difference which ought to be put between things of
the one and the other sort, in respect of power to change. Touching points of
Doctrine (says he, lib. 3. fol. 110, 111.) as for example, The Unity of God,
the Trinity of Persons, Salvation by Christ, the Resurrection of the body, Life
everlasting, the Judgment to come, and such like; they have been, since the
first hour that there was a Church in the world, and till the last they must be
believed. But as for matters of Regiment, they are, for the most part, of
another nature. To make new Articles of Faith and Doctrine, no man thiuketh it
lawful: New Laws of Government, what Commonwealth or Church is there which
makes not, either at one time or another? The rule of Faith, says Tertullian,
is but one, and that alone immovable, and impossible to be framed or cast
anew. The Law of outward Order and Polity, not so. There is no reason in the
world wherefore we should esteem it as necessary always to do, as always to
believe the same things; seeing every man knows that the matter of Faith is
constant, the matter contrariwise of Actions daily changeable, especially the
matter of action belonging unto Church-Politie. Neither can I find that men of
soundest judgments have any otherwise taught. then that Articles of belief, and
things which all men must of necessity do to the end they may be saved, are
either expressly set down in the Scripture, or else plainly thereby to be
gathered. But touching things which belong to Discipline and outward Polity,
the Church has authority to make Canons, Laws and Decrees, even as we read in
the Apostles times it did. Which kind of Laws (for as much as they are not in
themselves necessary to salvation) may, after they are made, be also changed,
as the difference of times or places shall require.

18. So that then we may resolve, that as the true essence of a Church (as a
Church) does depend on the doctrine and profession of the faith of Jesus
Christ, and the authority from him received; so does the essence and force of
Discipline and outward Polity depend on her authority only. It is from her
power, as a Church, that they are made of this or that form: It is not from any
form in them, as thus or thus made, that her being or power can be thought to
depend.

19. And therefore surely if the Church have power to alter and change when
they are made, as well as to make Canons, Laws, and Decrees; it must follow,
that those that are members of that Church, are also tied to obedience, Clergy
as well as others; as he ( lib* 5. fol. 391.) urges against the Nonconforming
Ministers of those times, viz. Why oppose they the name of a Minister in this
case unto the state of a private man* do their Orders exempt them from
obedience to Laws? That which their office and place requires, is to show
themselves Patterns of reverend subjection, not Authors and Masters of contempt
toward Ordinances; the strength whereof when they seek to weaken, they do but
in truth discover to the world their own imbecilities, which a great deal
wiselier they might conceal. So that we may find that he is no ways
countenancing those that think their Orders do exempt them from the common
relation of subjection, as if they had Church* power apart: But he is very
precise and peremptory in reproof of such as, in those times, thought they
might oppose the Ordinances of their then Church-Governors, upon the score of
their Function. As if because they had (as they said) received their Commission
and authority to preach, to administer, and the like, from God* that therefore
in the manner, order, and other circumstances how they should be performed,
they should not be tied to the constitutions of men, farther then they were
agreeable to the Word of God; even in such strict sense agreeable, as to find
express Texts for them; if not, their being agreeable to the general sense and
scope thereof, would not (as they taught) suffice to conform their obedience,
when as yet they could bring no Text in disproof of them. No, if they wanted
this, then they would (as he said elsewhere) make their childish appeals to the
usage of other Churches which had no authority over them at all. And therefore
I see not how any of that Order now can turn Non-conformists to our public
Communion, when (on the one hand) they cannot so much as pretend there is any
thing retained not agreeable to the Word of God, and (on the other) they cannot
alleadg the example of any one Church now in being, whose practice is
conformable to them in those things wherein they do dissent. These, I am sure,
may be justly accounted guilty of Apostacy from those Principles formerly
maintained by the famous and Orthodox men of the Church of England, rather then
such as will not, through private discontent and dislike of persons commanding
and in power, show stubbornness to the command and power it self. The which
when it is by any done, is so far from giving any reputation to them, as men of
Orders, Learning, or Gravity, that it does but discover to the world their own
imbecility, (in respect of some peevish prejudice whereby they are swayed)
which a great deal wiselier they might conceal.

20. And because, in these cases again, it is not to be supposed otherwise now
then amongst Nonconformists formerly, that is, that some having their
necessities and wants greater, or being more fearful and conscientious in open
opposition, are ready outwardly to yield to compliance, and yet do underhand
deprave and discountenance the deed it self, and that Authority which they do
obey therein. Of these he says, lib. 5. fol. 248. They do like one that should
openly profess he puts fire to his neighbors house, but yet so halloweth it
with his prayers that he hops it shall not burn. It had therefore perhaps
been safer, and better for ours to have observed S. Basils advice both in this,
and all things of like nature; let him which approves not his Governors
Ordinances, either plainly (but privately always) show his dislike, if he have
(...), strong and invincible reason against them, according to the true will
and meaning of Scripture: Or else let him quietly with silence do that which is
enjoined; obedience with professed unwillingnesse to obey, is no better then
manifest disobedience.

21. And therefore in these cases, men should not go about to disturb the
peace of the Church, that pillar and ground of truth, which for peace and order
sake, God has appointed to be obeyed in establishing things of this nature,
upon every plausible argument which by means of their abilities and learning,
they are able to bring in disparagement of any thing established by her; They
must rest obedient in all such things as they cannot find strong and
invincible reason against, according to the true will, and meaning of
Scripture, whose drift is Peace and Order; and not according to their will and
meaning only, who it may be have contrary designs; no, he disclaims all such
kind of proofs as ineffectuall in this case. For (says he) lib. 5. fol. 201.
Where the Word of God leaves the Church to make choice of her own ordinances;
If against those things which have been received with great reason, or against
that which the Ancient practice of the Church has continued time out of mind;
or against such Ordinances as the power and authority of that Church under
which we live has it self devised for the public good, or against the
discretion of the Church in mitigating sometimes, with favorable equity that
rigor which otherwise the literal generality of Ecclesiastical Laws, has
judged to be more convenient and meet, it should be lawful for men to reject
at their own liberty, what they see done and practiced according to order set
down; If in so great variety of ways, as the will of man is easily able to
find out toward any purpose, and in so great liking as all men especially have
on those inventions, whereby some one shall seem to have been more enlightened
from above then many thousands, the Church did give every man license to follow
what himself imagines that Gods Spirit does reveal unto him, or what he
supposes that God is likely to have revealed to some other, whose virtues
deserve to be highly esteemed, what other effect could hereupon ensue, but the
utter confusion of his Church, under pretense of being taught, led, and guided
by his Spirit? The gifts and graces whereof do so naturally all tend unto
common peace, that where such singularity is, they whose hearts it professes
ought to suspect it the more; in as much as if it did come of God, and should
for that cause prevail with others, the same God which reveals it to them,
would also give them power of confirming it unto others, either with miraculous
operation, or with strong and invincible remonstrance of sound reason; such as
whereby it might appear that God would indeed have all men's judgments give
place unto it: Whereas now the Error and insufficiency of their Arguments does
make it, on the contrary side, against them a strong presumption, that God has
not moved their hearts to think such things, as he has not enabled them to
prove.

22. In this last quotation he is very express concerning the power of that
Church under which we live; and that even in devising ordinances for the
public good thereof: The which to oppose is, so far from showing it self a
fruit of the Spirit, that by that dissension and discord which it must
necessarily produce, it may be suspected to have proceeded from some other
Master then the God of peace, and some other principle then the Gospel of
Peace, even from the God of this World, some powerful temptation sent by the
Prince of the air, whereby he is wont to rule in the hearts of the children of
disobedien^e. If God do not therefore in this case furnish them with one of
those sorts of invincible proofs by him set down, that is, either power of
miracle, or such strong and invincible Remonstrance as to cause all men's
judgments to give place; their opposition is to be suspected as proceeding
from affected singularity or worse.

23. For if in those things wherein controversy is, whether they be warranted
by Scripture, or by the Catholic Church, as Fathers, Councels, or the like,
such as live under any Christian authority should take upon them to be judges,
they should then usurp that proper cognizance and power which is peculiar to
the Church only; and leave her nothing to do* For since in points
fundamental, or fully agreed upon, her power reaches not, it must follow,
that to her alone it belongs, out of that variety of interpretation made of
the meaning of the Texts themselves, and out of that variety and contradiction
which is found amongst Councels, Fathers, and other Writers, to make choice of,
and give determination for what sort of doctrine or regiment she shall find,
either to have been most Catholiquely received, or to be grounded upon most
Orthodox Principles, and soundest reason: Which done, for men to say the Church
has no power to institute, or or take away, contrary to the Word of God, and
then produce no other Texts for condemning her in any particular, then what are
by others interpreted otherwise, and also after the same manner she has done
already, does certainly argue great arrogance, and stubbornness of mind, in
them that would thus apply it, although the speech in it self be most true.

24. And no less then so it is, when out of the Sentences of some Councels,
Fathers, or other Writers, the doctrine and authority of the Catholic Church
is alleged, to take off our obedience to that Church under which we live: It
being none other in points of controversy in Religion; then if in Civil suits
and debates, the parties in contention should appeal from the Laws of that
Common wealth, to the Verdict of the Civil Law, and avouch the Testimony of
Vlpian, Papinian, or the like, for the meaning thereof: Or to the Law of
Nations, and then prove there is such a Law, and to be just so construed,
because some men whom they esteem well of, have so thought. If there be no
controversy about the truth or equity of what they propound, but all men are
found to agree; why then it is a sign God did make the discovery to them, since
he has thus enabled them to prove it: If not, how can they think but
reasonable, even for peace and order sake, if not for her own sake, that that
side and determination which in this controversy agrees with the Church,
should be preferred to that which is chosen by them. And therefore if the
Church may devise new Rites, and must for Peace sake be obeyed, then certainly
when she does not devise any thing new, (by way of addition) nor so much as
retain what was before taken as scandalous in things that were ancient, I do
not see any invincible reason, no nor reason at all for Schism or separation.

25. And as for that power of mitigation what the general and literal rigor of
Ecclesiastical Laws has set down, as he spoke it in justification of what was
by the then Civil Magistrate, (or a power from her) dispensed with in the
cases of Plurality, Non-residence, and the like; so it may also truly inform
us, that if for the further enabling men in the study of Divinity, and
consequently in the gift of preaching, (nay even for their temporal maintenance
sake) these general Laws and Rules of the Church were dispensed with while the
same was still remaining and in power. Much more may men now, (out of the rule
of justice, and charity, both to themselves and others) think themselves
dispensed with the omission of some Rites and Ceremonies, and of reading the
Service Book, when as, not a dispensation alone, but a strict injunction
against the use of them is by the like sovereign power apparently made; and
that Church also whose Laws they were, has neither force or being. Charity I
say, both public and private, when as both preaching it self, and the
maintenance to rise thereby, have so necessary a dependence on the forbearance
of them. If Preachers that had other places to live on, and preach in, might
out of particular favor to them, or some other person whose Chaplains they
were, be thus dispensed with, as we know they were, and that they then readily
enough made use of it; may we not conclude that both the rule of Charity to
ones self, and of general charity to others (that may reap good by their
Doctrine) will excuse them, in a time when their own maintenance, and the
exercise of preaching, does wholly rely upon their obedience in this kind? So
that seem the thing never so strange and new, either in respect of addition, or
substraction, to what was formerly done and established, it is not by those
that are Members, and do live within the jurisdiction thereof to be disobeyed,
as out of scandal at alteration: the Church having power, as well to substract
as to institute; And therefore he says, lib. 5. fol. 196. All things cannot be
of ancient continuance, which are expedient and needful for the ordering of
spiritual affairs: But the Church being a body which dies not, has always
power as occasion requires, no less to ordain that which never was, then to
ratify what has been before. To prescribe the order of doing all things, is a
peculiar prerogative which wisdom has as Queen or Sovereign Commandress over
other virtues. This in every several man's actions of common life, appertains
unto Moral, in public and politic secular affairs unto civil Wisdom. In
like manner to devise any certain form for the outward administration of
public duties in the service of God, or things belonging thereunto, and to
find out the most convenient rule for that use, is a point of wisdom
Ecclesiastical. It is not for a man which does know, or should know, what
order is, and what peaceable government requires; to ask why we should hang
our judgment upon the Churches sleeve? and why in matters of Order, more then
in matters of Doctrine; The Church has Authority to establish that for an
Order at one time, which at another time it may abolish, and in both do well.
Then which nothing could in my opinion, have been spoken more pointing to
Peace, and silencing of disputes in our present alterations, and to the
satisfaction of such as think that those forms of Prayer and administration of
Sacraments, Ordination, and other public Rites and Ceremonies may not by a
succeeding Church and Power therein be lawfully taken away, like as they were
by a former established.

26. And that specially, if to those that have the oversight of these things,
there shall seem to be superstition incident to the use of them, through some
overvalue and mistake, which through frequent use, might be cast toward them;
as though they were indeed Fundamentals of themselves. Superstition (says he,
lib. 5. fol. 191.) such as that of the Pharisees, by whom divine things indeed
were less, because other things were more divinely esteemed of then reason
would. The Superstition that rises voluntary and by degrees, which are hardly
discerned, mingleth it self with the Rites even of every divine service done to
the only true God, must be considered of, as a creeping and incroaching evil;
an evil, the beginnings whereof are commonly harmless: So that it proves
only then to be an evil, when some farther accident does grow unto it, or it
self come unto further growth; for in the Church of God sometimes it comes to
pass, as in overbattle grounds, the fertile disposition whereof is good; yet
because it exceeds due proportion, it brings forth abundantly, through too
much rankness, things less profitable; whereby that which principally it
should yield, being either prevented in place, or defrauded of nourishment
fails. This (if so large a discourse were necessary) might be exemplified by
heaps of Rites and Customs, now superstitious in the greatest part of the
Christian world, which in their first original beginnings, when the strength
of virtuous, devout, or charitable affection bloomed them, no man could justly
have condemned them as evil: whereby it is still plain that things good and
profitable in their first institution, and settled upon good advice and great
authority, may by a succeeding age and Church be found prejudicial, and that
then that Church has power to take away and abolish that which the other did
institute*

27. And again, much to the same purpose, and in answer to such as think things
once well and solemnly established, cannot be altered, he says, l. 4. fol.
165. True it is, that neither Councels, nor Customs, be they never so ancient
and so general, can let the Church from taking away that thing which is hurtful
to be retained. Where things have been instituted, which being convenient and
good at the first, do afterward in process of time wax otherwise; we make no
doubt but they may be altered, yea, though Councels or Customs General have
received them. And therefore it is but a needless kind of opposition which they
make who thus dispute. If in those things which are not expressed in the
Scripture, that is to be observed of the Church, which is the custom of the
people of God, and decree of our Forefathers, then how can these things at any
time be varied, which heretofore have been once ordained in such sort? Whereto
we say, that things so ordained are to be kept, howbeit not necessarily any
longer then till there grow any urgent cause to ordain the contrary. For there
is not any positive Law of men, whether it be general or particular, received
by former express consent, as in Councels; or by secret approbation, as in
Customs it comes to pass, but the same may be taken away, if occasion serve.
Even as we all know, that many things kept generally heretofore, are now in
like sort generally unkept, and abolished every where. By which we may further
find, that as it is the duty of the Members of any Church to conform to such
Rights and Orders as the Authority thereof shall institute and set up; so also
can no plea of former establishment, whether by Councels or Customs, warrant
their opposition or inconformity, if the Church under which they live shall
think fit to abrogate them* when they find urgent cause to the contrary. No he
accounts it but a needless kind of opposition to urge in these disputes, the
custom of the people of God, or the decree of our Forefathers; as if for the
necessary continuance of Peace and Order, there were not the same degree of
respect due to a succeeding Church, by her present children, as was given to
the former Church, and such as were our Forefathers therein. Can we fancy that
the establishment we do now approve might be made in place of what the Church
preceding it had made before, and yet think the Church under which we live
cannot do the like, in disanulling some things made by the Church preceding us.

28. But now if all this while, it should be allowed that this power should be
in the Church; yet what and if some men's greater affection and interest cast
toward other persons then those that had the present managing of Religious
affairs, might make them conjecture that rather they then these ought in these
things to be obeyed; and what and if they might withal doubt, that him they
called the Civil Magistrate should have power to order affairs of the Church
as head thereof; we will therefore set down what he farther infers, fol.
567. The Lord God of Israel has given the kingdom over Israel to David for
ever, even to him and his sons, by a Covenant of Salt. And Job 56. 8. bringing
in that place of Cant. 8. 11. Solomon had a Vineyard in Baalhamon, he gave the
Vineyard unto keepers, every one bringing for the fruit thereof a thousand
pieces of silver, etc. He says it is true, this is meant of the Mystical Head
set over the body which is not seen; but as Christ has reserved the mystical
administration of the Church invisible to himself, so has he committed the
mystical government of Congregations, visible to the Sons of David, by the same
Covenant; whose Sons they are in governing of the flock of Christ, whomsoever
the Holy Ghost has set over them to go before them, and lead them in their
several pastures, one in this Congregation, another in that; As it is written,
Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock, whereof the Holy Ghost has
made you overseers, to feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his
own blood. And presently after to show who he means by those Overseers, he
says, The Pope has fawned upon the Kings and Princes of the earth, and by
spiritual couzenage has made them sell their lawful Authorities and
Jurisdictions for titles of Catholicus Christianissimus, Defensor fidei, and
such like. And again fol. 569. complaining of the unnatural usage of some
toward their Mother, that were natural children of this Church, under a
misguided conceit that Obedience was not due to the then Queen Elizabeth, but
to another; he says, That by this means the bowels of the child, may be made
the mothers grave, and that it has caused no small number of our brethen to
forsake their native Country, and with all disloyalty to cast off the yoke of
their allegiance to our dread Sovereign whom God in mercy has set over them;
for whose safeguard, if they carried not the hearts of Tigers in the bosoms of
men, they would think the dearest blood in their bodies well spent; and
presently after he reckons up the faults charged by the Popish party upon them,
and for which they stood excommunicated, as if they had been no Church, nor
part thereof: Viz. That the Queen had quite abolished prayers within her Realm;
that we not only have no assemblies unto the Lord for Prayers, but to hold a
Common School for sin and flattery; to hold Sacrilege to be Gods Service;
Unfaithfulness and breach of promise to God, to give it to a strumpet, to be a
virtue; to abandon fasting, to abhor consession, to mislike Penance, to like
well of Usury, to charge none with restitution, to find no good before God in
single life, nor in no well working; that all men as they fall to us, are much
worsed, and more then aforecorrupted.

28. Now, to my thinking we are again fallen into that unhappy condition, as to
have the same, or much like faults and scandals laid to the charge as well of
those that are in Sovereign power, as of those that follow them by such as out
of like zeal to former public usage and establishment, are ready upon the same
arguments to turn Recusants to the present Orders of this Church; and yet to
continue Recusants to the Popish Communion too. Not well considering how that
as in one case, they must against our change, make use of their Arguments, so
will they then be dis^ furnished of replies to them, for that change by the
Church of England formerly made, when a greater number of Ceremonies, and those
of a more general approbation, and longer continuance in this Church, were by
the authority of the Civil Magistrate (as they call him) taken away, and this
form which they now cleave unto put in the place thereof.

And least any should object (like them) nullity and invalidity to our Church
or her authority, through some scruple of the lawfulness and calling of our
present Pastors and Ministers in the exercise of their Functions, because of
the want of some Forms and Ceremonies heretofore appointed to be used in their
Ordination before they were permitted to preach, or administer, and
consequently think it unlawful to hear or receive at their hands, we shall
find him of another mind; nay though they were not at all in Orders, or
claimed any mission from Authority: For he says, lib. 5. fol 227. Nature as
much as possible inclines to validities and preservations, dissolutions, and
nullities of things done, are not only not savoured, but hated; when either
urged without cause, or extended beyond their reach: If therefore at any time
it come to pass, that in teaching publicly or privately in delivering this
blessed Sacrament of regeneration, some unsanctified hand, contrary to Christ's
supposed Ordinances, do intrude it self to others, which of these two Opinions
seem more agreeable with equity, ours that disallow what is done amiss, yet
make not the force of the Word and Sacraments, much less their nature, and
very substance to depend on the Ministers Authority and Calling, or else theirs
which defeat, disanull, and annihilate both, in respect of that one only
personal defect; there being not any Law of God which faith, That if the
Minister be incompetent, his word shall be no word, his Baptism, no Baptism.
He which teaches and is not sent, loses the reward, but yet retains the
name of a teacher, his usurped actions have in him the same nature which they
have in others, although they yield him not the same comfort. And if these two
cases be peers, the case of Doctrine, and the case of Baptism both alike, since
no defect in their Vocation, that teach the truth, is able to take away this
benefit thereof from him which hears; wherefore should the want of a lawful
calling in them that bapitze, make Baptism vain? And again, fol. 332: The Grace
of Baptism comes by donation from God alone; that God has committed the
Ministry of Baptism unto special men, it is for Orders sake in his Church,
and not to the end that their Authority might give being, or add force to the
Sacrament it self. That Infants have right to the Sacrament of Baptism, we all
acknowledge. Charge them we cannot as guilesull, and wrongful possessors of
that whereunto they have right by the manifest will of the Donor, and are not
parties unto any defect or disorder in the manner of receiving the same. And if
any such disorder be, we have sufficiently before declared, that Delictum cum
capite semper ambulat, Men's own faul's are their own harms. Wherefore to
countervail this and the like mis chosen resemblances with that which more
truly and plainly agrees: The Ordinance of God concerning their vocation that
minister Baptism, wherein the Mystery of our regeneration is wrought, has
thereunto the same Analogy which Laws of wedlock have to our first nativity and
birth. So that if nature do effect Procreation notwithstanding the wicked
violation and breach of Natures law, made that the entrance of all mankind into
this present world might be without blemish; may we not justly presume that
Grace does accomplish the other, although there be faultiness in them which
transgress the order which our Lord Jesus Christ has established in his
Church? And afterward again, lib. 5. fol. 448. That therefore wherein a
Minister differs from other Christian men, is not, as some have childishly
imagined, the sound preaching of the Word of God, but as they are lawfully and
truly Governors to whom authority of regiment is given in the Commonwealth,
according to the order which Polity has set; so Canonical ordination in the
Church of Christ is that which makes a lawful Minister, as touching the
validity of any act which appertains to the vocation. The cause why S. Paul
willed Timothy not to be overhasty in ordaining Ministers, was (as we very well
may conjecture) because Imposition of hands does consecrate and make them
Ministers, whether they have gifts and qualities fit for the laudable discharge
of their duties, or no. If want of Learning and skill to preach did frustrate
their Vocation, Ministers ordained before they be grown unto that maturity,
should receive new Ordination whenever it chances that study and industry
does make them afterward more able to perform the office; then which, what
conceit can be more absurd?

29. By those words of his, That wherein a Minister differs from other men,
is as they are lawsully and truly Governors, to whom authority of Regiment is
given in the Commonwealth, according to the order which Polity has set; we may
find him (...) against their judgments that would make Canonical ordination,
and the validity of any act appertaining to the vocation, to depend on any
separate Ecclesiastic authority. And when again he is saying, that they are
lawfully and truly Governors, to whom authority of Regiment is given in the
Commonwealth, according to the Order which Polity has set; we may presume by
the words are is, and has, he means that present Power and those present
Overseers which the Holy Ghost or Divine, Providence has placed over them, as
sons of David, as was by him before rehearsed; and so making him the lawful
Governor, whom the present Polity or Law has set. For if he should admit other
question of his lawfulness, by saying, whom Polity should set, or the like, he
should then overthrow that course before s^t down in determining the lawfulness
of Ministers sent by him, and leave no settled way for Peace or Order. He is
therefore to be understood as concluding, that as the lawfulness of inferior
Powers must for Peace and Orders sake depend on him, (who alone is to be held
the lawful and true Governor, to this end) so his can depend on none but God.
But of this more hereafter.

30. In the mean time it is to me a wonder, how those that do now so much
insist upon the necessity of their agreement with that Doctrine and Discipline
which was formerly set down by the Church of England, amongst which the
frequent use of Sermons and Sa^raments were set down as duties necessary to our
Christian profession, (if not salvation) can now be so much changed from their
first principles, as to decline those means and instruments which by the
providence of God are for the present sent us to that very end, and that only
for want of such like formality of induction or institution which the Rule of
the Church or State did in that case formerly appoint; and can now, even while
they do profess their constancy in the same belief, go about to persuade
against effectualness of administration, either in one kind or other, through
any such like objection. More likely to my thinking it should follow, that
since there is such a great necessity still remaining in the frequent use of
these things, and since such manner of ordination, induction, and other
qualifications as they themselves have received, can only warrant men to be
right hearers or receivers, that therefore it is incumbent on them as a
necessary duty to be doing hereof, for fear of that sentence, Woe if I preach
not.

31. In which case if we shall compare the cause and prosecution of
Nonconformists now in their scandal in matters of abridgment* with those
exceptions and that demeanor therein, which the former Nonconformists made
against the Churches too great imposition in that kind, we may (as I conceive)
attribute more reason and Christian charity and moderation to them, than these.
For amongst them it was held for a Maxim, That they would rather preach in a
Fools coat, then be deprived of that benefit which might come by their*
Ministry and preaching. And this the discreeter and more moderate sort did;
although the doing of a thing conceived to be unlawful by the Law of God, be
more to be scrupled at then the forbearance of a thing held lawful by the
authority of the Church, which, in the condition they then stood in, would not
suffer them to be Preachers, without actual use of the Surplice, or the like:
whereas amongst us, neither subscription, nor use of any thing in the like
kind, is by present Authority enjoined.

32. And as for those that so much stand upon the former institutions of the
Service Book, and other Rites and Ceremonies, if we should have respect only to
abolished Laws, yet do I not find that it is any where said, that no Sermon or
Sacrament shall at any time be held lawfully or effectually made or done, when
these shall not be also used: But the intention of the Act of Uniformity (as an
Act of Uniformity) must be construed, that in the times appointed for the use
of such like things, that then, for preservation of peace and uniformity in the
Church, none other but those shall be used. Does the Act any where say, or can
any presume it did mean, that no man should preach at any time a Sermon, or
come to hear others do so, unless, at the same time, the Service Book, or part
of it were read? No certainly, if we consider the injunction, as to persons, it
will be plain it lies not upon Preachers as Preachers, but upon such as had
fixed ministerial charge in delivering of the Sacraments, or the like, to the
which the Book had chief reference; and not enjoined on them neither, if they
had Vicars or Curates to do it. It is not said, if any Preacher, Pastor, or
Lecturer shall refuse; nor was ever so construed. For experience tells us, that
never any did do it when they preached, if they could have it conveniently
omitted or done by others; being, while the Law was in force, seldom read by
Bishop, Dean, or Doctor, but left to those of inferior sort, however now it be
pressed as necessary.

33. And if we consider the intent of the words directing to the use of this
Book or Form, they must be construed by way of seclusion of all other. Which
will be manifest to such unprejudiced persons as shall consider how the whole
scope of the Act does condemn such as did by speech or action derogate or
deprave against the use of the Servicebook or Ceremonies, as unfit or unlawful,
and not those that did approve them: And therefore it prescribes no punishment
to such as in obedience to Authority, do, against their own liking forbear to
use or hear it; but such as, notwithstanding the authority of the Church, do
refuse it, out of contempt of their power, or better liking to some other form;
saying, If any manner of Parson, Vicar, or other Minister whatsoever, that
ought or should sing or say Common Prayer mentioned in the said Book, or
minister the Sacraments, from and after the Feast of the Nativity of St. John
Baptist next coming, refuse to use the said Common Prayer, or to minister the
Sacraments in such Cathedral or Parish Church or other places, as he should use
to minister the same, in such order and form as they be mentioned and set forth
in the said Book, or shall, wilfully and obstinately standing in the same, use
any other Rite, Ceremony, order, form, or manner of celebrating the Lords
Supper, openly or privily, or Mattens, Evensong, Administration of the
Sacraments, or other open prayers, then is mentioned and set forth in the said
Book, etc. But then again in case they do not refuse, but have been willing and
made offer of doing it, and have been by others disturbed in the use of that,
or made to use another; why then, by the judgment of that very Act, they are
not comprised in any blame. But the punishment laid on such as should by open
fact, deed, or by open threatenings compel or cause, or otherwise procure or
maintain any Parson, Vicar, or other Minister in any Cathedral or
Parish Church, or in Chapel, or in any other place, to sing or say any Common
or open Prayer, or to minister any Sacrament, otherwise or in any other manner
and form then is mentioned in the said Book; or by any of the said means shall
unlawfully interrupt or let any Parson, Vicar, or other Minister in any
Cathedral or Parish Church, Chapel, or any other place, to sing or say any
Common and open Prayer, or to minister the Sacraments or any of them, in such
manner and form as is mentioned in the said Book* that then every such person,
being lawfully convicted in form abovesaid, shall forfeit to the Queen our
Sovereign Lady, her heirs and successors, for the first offense an hundred
marks. And so the Act goes on, prescribing still greater punishments for the
second and third offenses, by way of mulct to the Queen and her Successors.

34. But now, what if her Successors come to enact against the use of it, and
be themselves Compellers and Threateners, may we not then conclude that they
may lawfully interrupt, or at least the other be excused for being interrupted;
where before, in a Subject, it was unlawful to interrupt or let any Parson, in
the doing what was by the then Law established? So that by this very Act (as I
conceive) such as have a reverend esteem and willingness to use it, are not
only freed foro interno* but, by the Clause following, enacting, That no person
shall be at any time hereafter impeached or molested of or for any of the
offenses abovementioned* hereafter to be committed or done contrary to this
Act, unless he or they so offending be thereof indicted at the next General
Sessions to be holden before any such Justices of Oyer and Determiner, or
Justices of Assise next after any offense committed or done contrary to the
tenor of this Act; we may conlude he is freed foro externo also, and may (for
ought I can find) rest free from all danger, while obedient to the Queens
Successory, she dying without an Heir.

35. And if by reason of any Oath or Obligation received at Ordination, or
taking degrees, some should think themselves farther bound; They are also to
consider, that as neither any derived power can go beyond that which impowers
it, so are they also to presume that their intentions are alike; even to
maintain Peace and Order, by Uniformity to what is enjoined, and not to raise
disturbance by opposition. And surely, if Oaths, Vows or the like, were to be
held of force in such a case; I see not how any Jesuit or Priest could in
reason, no nor in Conscience, be persuaded to recede in any thing from their
obedience and conformity to the Papal Sea and Ceremony; when as their Promises
are not only more strict, but confirmed by Laws more ancient and general, and
which are still in the same force.

36. It is also farther to be considered that when after in the Preface to our
Bibles it is set down, That where heretofore there has been great diversity in
saying and singing in Churches within this Realm, some following Salisbury use,
some Hereford use, some the use of Bangor, some of York, and some of Lincoln;
now, from henceforth, all the whole Realm shall have but one use: And when in
the directions following that Preface it is set down; That all Priests and
Deacons should be bound daily to say the Morning and Evening Prayer, either
privately, or openly, except they be let by preaching, studying of Divinity, or
some other urgent cause: We are still to conceive that both Uniformity was
aimed at, and that the duty of Preaching was in the first place held necessary.

37. And if we go to experience, in their practice of this precept of reading
of the Service Book, then we shall find it apprehended as an injunction that
did only bind them ad semper velle, but not ad semper agere, (as Mr. Hooker
(elsewhere) speaks of Gods affirmative Precepts, as Pray continually, and the
like,) and that thereupon few could give account of their daily use of it, even
when the hindrance of preaching, studying, or the like, could not well be
alleged, as before noted. And therefore if in a time when it was commanded,
the use of it might be forborne, rather then preaching be omitted, what may we
think of them that in a time it is taken away, will yet rather omit preaching
then it; to the great discouragement and scandal of many a man in his
Christian obedience and Communion, and to the great detriment of the nation in
general: who, in a time of scarcity, are much wanting of that instruction
which might be had from men of their abilities. In which respect, as I am my
self a true lover of many of them for their learning and gifts in that kind,
so has the sense of mine own loss, as well as that of others now made me thus
large in this particular.

38. But, besides this, and the want of satisfaction how they can in this
condition uphold the Church of England in her former sentence against non*
conformity, if upon the same score they shall slight her authority themselves;
They are next to consider, what answer for their present Recusancy they can
bring, which on the other side, shall not withal justify the Recusants
themselves in their separation from our Communion also. For plain it is (as I
said before) that as the drift of all the arguments brought formerly by the
Papists against our Churches authority, was in respect of usurpation in our
Princes, and want of succession, lawful ordination, and the like in our
Priests; so was the sum of all their Doctrine that wrote in defense of what was
done by us, brought to this issue: That these things were not essential to
Salvation, or to the being of a Church: That each Christian Church, having (as
heretofore set down) a power within it self for ordering its own affairs, had
as well power to abbreviate or abrogate what was in former times, or by other
Churches instituted before, as to institute that which was new; so that the
casting out from our Service Book, and leaving out of our public Forms of
Worship, all such Prayers, Ceremonies, and Observations, as in the opinion of
those that then had power in the Church, had on the one side little or no
footing in Scripture, and which had on the other side greatest Superstition
cast toward them, was then held lawful: as by that Declaration annexed to our
Bibles, concerning Ceremonies, why some be abolished, and some retained, may
appear. And if it was then held agreeable, and the Church thought a fit Judge,
wherein Superstition was most to be feared, and what was the best way of
Reformation; how can we now change our Principle, unless we join with the
adversary to d^^^de the fact, as done by the Civil power, and Magistrate, and
with them neither own England, for a Church, nor him for head thereof? Let us
hear a little what Father Not the Jesuit, in his Book called, Charity
maintained, does to this purpose allege, in his answer to Doctor Potter; after
some dispute, Chap. 6. about the truth of our Ministry, for want of Succession
visibly derived from the Pope and Church of Rome, he says at last, Sect. 20.
But grant their first Bishops had such Authority from the Church of Rome, after
the decease of those men, who gave authority to their pretended Successors? The
Primate of England; but from whom had he such authority? And after his decease,
who shall confer authority upon his Successors? The temporal Magistrate: King
Henry, neither a Catholic, nor a Protestant! King Edward a child? Queen
Elizabeth a woman? an Infant of one hours age, is true King in case of his
Predecessors decease: But shall your Church lie fallow till that Infant King,
or green head of the Church come to years of discretion? Do your Bishops, your
^ierarchy, your succession, your Sacraments, your being, or not being
Heretics, for want of Succession, depend on this new found Supremacy-doctrine,
brought in by such a man, merely upon base occasions, and for shameful ends;
Impugned by Calvin, and his followers, derided by the Christian world; and even
by chief Protestants, as Doctor Andrews, W^tton, etc* not held any necessary
point of Faith? And from whom I pray you, had Bishops their authority, when
there were no Christian Kings? Must the Greek Patriarchs receive spiritual
jurisdiction from the Greek Turk? Did the Pope by the baptism of Princes, lose
the spiritual power he formerly had of conferring spiritual jurisdiction upon
Bishops? Has the Temporal Magistrate authority to preach, to assoil from sins,
to inflict Excommunications and other censures? Why has he not power to
excommunicate, as well as to dispense in irregularity, as our late Sovereign
Lord King James either dispensed with the late Archbishop of Canterbury, or
else gave Commission to some Bishops to do it? And since they were subject to
the Primate, and not he to them, it is clear that they had no power to dispense
with him, but that power must proceed from the Prince as superior to them all,
and Head in the Protestants Church in England. If we have no such authority,
how can he give to others what himself has not? Your Ordination or
Conse^ration of Bishops and Priests imprinting no character, can only consist
in giving a power, authority, jurisdiction, or (as I said before) Episcopal or
Priestly functions: If then the temporal Magistrate confers this power, etc. he
can, nay he cannot choose but ordain and consecrate Bishops and Priests, as
often as he confers authority or jurisdiction; and your Bishops, as soon as
they are designed and confirmed by the King, must ipso facto be ordained and
consecrated by him without intervention of Bishops, or matter and form of
Ordination: Which absurdities you will be more unwilling to grant, then well
able to avoid, if you be true to your own doctrines. The Pope, from whom
originally you must beg your succession of Bishops, never received, nor will,
nor can acknowledge to receive any spiritual jurisdiction from any temporal
Prince: And therefore if jurisdiction must be derived from Princes, he has
none at all; and yet either you must acknowledge that he has spiritual
jurisdiction, or that your selves can receive none from him. And afterward
again, sect. 22. he says; But besides this defect in the personal succession
of Protestant Bishops, there is another of great moment, which is, that they
want the right form of ordaining Bishops and Priests; because the manner which
they use is so much different from the Roman Church (at least according to the
common opinion of Divines) that it cannot be sufficient for the essence of
Ordination, as I could demonstrate if this were the proper place of such a
Treatise, and will not fail to do if D. Potter give me occasion. In the mean
time, the Reader may be pleased to read the Author cited here in the margent,
and then compare our form of Ordination with that of Protestants; and to
remember, that if the form which they use either in consecrating Bishops, or in
ordaining Priests, be at least doubtful, they can never have undoubted Priests
nor Bishops: For Priests cannot be ordained but by true Bishops; nor can any be
true Bishop, unless he be at first Priest. I say, their Ordination is at least
doubtful, because that suffices for my present purpose. For, Bishops and
Priests, whose Ordination is notoriously known to be but doubtful, are not to
be esteemed Bishops or Priests, and no man without sacrilege can receive
Sacraments from them, all which they administer unlawfully. And (if we except
Baptism with manifest danger of invalidity, and with obligation to be at least
conditionally repeated) so Protestants must remain doubtful of Remission of
sins, of their Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and may not pretend to be a true
Church, which cannot subsist without undoubted true Bishops and Priests, nor
without due administration of Sacraments, which (according to Protestants) is
an essential note of the true Church. And it is a world to observe the
proceeding of English Protestants in this point of their Ordination: For first,
An. 3 Ed. 6. cap. 2. when he was a Child about twelve years of age, it was
enacted, That such a form of making and consecrating of Bishops and Priests, as
by six Prelates and six other to be appointed by the King should be devised
(Mark well this word devised) and set forth under the Great Seal, should be
used, and none other. But after this Act was repealed, 1 Mar. Sess. 2. Insomuch
as that when afterward, An. 6 and 7 Regin. Eliz. Bishop Bonner being indicted
upon a Certificate made by Doctor Horn a Protestant Bishop of Winchester, for
his refusal of the Oath of Supremacy, and excepting against the Indictment,
because Dr. Horn was no Bishop; they were all at a stand till An. 8 Eliz. cap.
1. the Act of Ed. 6. was renewed and confirmed, with a particular Proviso, That
no man should be impreached or molested by means of any Certificate by any
Bishop or Archbishop made before this last Act: whereby it is clear that they
made some doubt of their own Ordination, and that there is nothing but
uncertainty in the whole business of their Ordination, which (forsooth) must
depend on six Prelates, the Great Seal, Acts of Parliament being contrary one
to another, and the like. So that you see all along the authority and
interposition of the Magistrate is scoffed at, and by them made ineffectual in
the ordering of the affairs of the Church; nay the Church must be no Church, if
not wholly and independently governed by the Clergy, and a Clergy too that do
particularly derive their Ordination and power from a foreign Head, and
according to Rights and Ceremonies then abolished. If none but true Priests can
administer the Sacraments, nor none but true Bishops make true Priests, nor
none but the Pope make true Bishops, (but that the authority of the Magistrate
does interpose) why then no true Sacraments, nor no true Church, by their
doctrine. And to that purpose he does put a mark upon the word devised, as
deriding the Civil power therein:

38. If we shall add to this what was (before him) observed by Father Parsons
concerning the institution of the Service Book, and objected against the
validity and use of it, as well as the power to abolish their Mass and other
Ceremonies* it will make us wary in condemning less Alterations now made by a
greater Power, while yet we shall commend conformity to a less Power, in a
matter of greater alteration. For he alleges in his Book of the Three
Conversions of England, par. 2. chap. 12. sect. 25. That the Reformation and
Service Book were made by the then Protector to Edward the sixth, (who it is
well known had no such power and sovereignty in himself as our present
Protector has.) And to this end he says: And now Candles, Ashes, and Images
being gone (as you see) there followed in the next month after (to wit, March)
that the Protector still desiring to go forward with his designment of
alteration, sent abroad a Proclamation in the Kings name, with a certain
Communion-book in English, to be used for administration of Sacraments in stead
of the Mass Book. But whether it was the very same that was rejected a little
before in the Parliament, or another patched up afterward, or the same mended
or altered, is not so clear. But great care there was had by the Protector and
his adherents, that this Book should be admited and put in practice presently,
even before it was allowed in Parliament. To which effect Fox sets down a
large Letter of the Council to all Bishops, exhorting and commanding them, in
the Kings name, to admit and put in practice this Book. We have thought good
(say they) to pray and require your Lordships, and nevertheless in the Kings
Majesty's our most dread Lords name to command you, to have a diligent, earnest
and careful respect to cause these Books to be delivered to every Parson, Vicar
and Curate within your Diocese, with such diligence, as they may have
sufficient time well to instruct and advise themselves for the distribution of
the most holy Communion, according to the Order of this Book, before this
Easter time, etc. praying you to consider, that this Order is set forth to the
intent there should be in all parts of the Realm one uniform manner quietly
used. To the execution whereof we do eftsoons require you to have a diligent
respect, as you tender the Kings Majesty's pleasure, and will answer to the
contrary, etc. From Westminster, the 13. of March, 1548. By all which, and by
much more that might be alleged, it is evident, that all that was hitherto
done against Catholic Religion for these first two years, until the second
Parliament, was done by private authority of the Protector and his adherents,
before Law, and against Law, etc.

40. And if we look farther into the Preamble of the first Statute that
confirmed this Book, by him also set down a little after, sect. 35. we may find
that the said Book was appointed first for Uniformity; and next, that it or
some other had been set on foot before by the Lord Protector in the Kings name.
The words are; Where of long time (says the Act) there has been in this Realm
of England diverse Forms of Common Prayer, commonly called the Service of the
Church, as well concerning Mattens and Evensong, as also the whole Communion
called the Mass, etc. And where the Kings Majesty, with the advice of his most
entirely beloved Uncle the Lord Protector, and others of his Highness Council,
has heretofore diverse times assayed to stay Innovations or new Rites
concerning the premises; yet the same has not had such good success as his
Highness required in that behalf. Whereupon his Highness by the most prudent
advice aforesaid, being pleased to bear with the frailty and weakness of his
Subjects in that behalf, of his great clemency has not been only content to
abstain from punishment in that behalf; but also to the intent that an uniform,
quiet, and godly order should be had concerning the premises, has appointed
the Archbishop of Canterbury and certain of the most learned and discreet
Bishops, to consider and ponder the premises; and thereupon having as well an
eye and respect to the most sincere and pure Christian Religion taught by the
Scriptures, as the usages of the Primitive Church, should draw and make one
convenient and meet order, rite and fashion of Common Prayer and administration
of Sacraments to be used in England, Wales, etc. The which at this time by the
aid of the Holy Ghost, with uniform agreement, is of them concluded, set forth
and delivered, to his Highness great comfort and quietness of mind, in a Book
entitled, The Book of Common Prayer and Administration of Sacraments, etc.

Now truly I cannot, for my part, see how we can make either the first
Imposition or receipt of this Book lawful if we stick not to our main
principle in acknowledging the present supreme Christian Magistrate to be head
of the Church, which doubtless the Protector was in the nonage of the King.
And if those elder Reformed Protestants amongst us, did well to conform to this
authority in abolition of the Mass, and other very ancient services, and that
notwithstanding the Book had been by Parliament already rejected, there seems
to me great reason to conform to what an Act of Parliament and a Protector of
more power, has determined concerning another alteration of this kind. To
think that the Book, or the Ceremonies thereby appointed, had of themselves,
(separate from that Authority, by which they were devised and imimposed) any
such inherent and divine worth, as for their own sake to claim admittance and
continuance, were plainly to contradict the act it self, and the Stories of
those times which tell us by whom it was made, and by whom commanded, and it
does plainly cross the judgment of Mr. Hooker himself, who in his answer to
Mr. Travers, fol. 471. may be found giving sentence for indifferency in the use
of these things as in themselves, by the instance of kneeling, sitting, or
walking, at receiving of Sacraments; his words are, An order as I learn, there
was tendered, that Communicants should neither kneel, as in the most places of
the Realm: nor sit as in this place the custom is, but walk to the one side of
the Table, and there standing till they had received, pass afterward away
round about by the other; which being on a sudden begun to be practiced in the
Church, some sat wondering what it should mean, others deliberating what to do,
till such time, as at length by name one of them being called openly thereunto,
requested that they might do as they had been accustomed, which was granted,
and as Master Travers had administered his way to the rest; so a Curate was sent
to minister to them after their way, which unprosperous beginning of a thing, (
saving only for the inconvenience of needless alterations, otherwise harmless)
did so disgrace that order in their conceit who had to allow or disallow it,
that it took no place. Was there indifferency and harmlesness in the use of
these things then, and now they only inconvenient, as causing distraction and
scandal to the generality of other receivers; and could Master Hooker record
without censure, the custom of that Congregation whereof he was Minister; in
receiving of the Communion sitting, (and for ought appears gave it so to them
himself) whereas yet the Service Book had appointed it kneeling; and shall we
now think of any inherent divine wor^^in the things themselves? No sure, this
would but too plainly argue them guilty of Superstition that so maintain, and
thereupon render the abolition of it both just and reasonable* Now, as the
abolition of the Mass Book was formerly, in respect of like superstition cast
toward it: For the late Archbishop, sect. 35. number. 7. punct. 5. affirms,
that himself had heard some Jesuits confess that in the Lyturgie of the Church
of England there is no positive Error: And being pressed why then they refused
to come to our Churches, and serve God with us. (In like manner as now
Conformists may be asked, now when no positive error can be objected neither)
They answered (says he) they could not do it; because though our Liturgy had
nothing ill, yet it wanted a great deal of that which was good, and was in
their Service: So that if this answer were not valuable to excuse Refusants
then, I see not how the like can excuse any now.

41. All which well weighed, I know no effectual answer to be made to such as
have been Recusants or Non-conformists, if we fall from that principle of
acknowledgement of that Supremacy which the Church then gave the chief
Magistrate amongst us, accounting him in all causes, and over all Persons, as
well Ecclesiastical as Civil, supreme Head and Governor. If upon any pretense
we forsake this hold, we not only lose the direct way to unity and peace, but
do let in error on every side to over master and confound us. And although this
power were formerly given to the chief Magistrate while they had the style of
King or Queen, yet if we shall impartially consider the intention of that Act
whereby this power was exercised by the King, we shall find that it, like all
Laws, having a regard to the perpetual conservation of Peace, Order, and
Unity, did not limit it to persons so styled only, but that it might be kept
for ever, did for ever unite it to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; that is,
to the Monarch thereof, although no King, nor more crowned, nor anointed then
some of the Roman Emperors were; and accordingly we shall find Mr. Hooker to
understand and apply it; for reckoning up the Subject whereof his eight Books
are to treat, He says, The eight is* of the power of Ecclesiastical dominion
or Supreme Authority, which with us, the highest Governor or Prince, has as
well in respect of domestical jurisdictions, as of that other forrainly claimed
by the Bishop of Rome. In which expressions of Highest Governor or Prince*
(Prince signifying the same with Highest Governor, or Governor in chief) we
may presume he meant it due to the King as Monarch, and not to the Monarch as
King. And a great pity it is that we had not the Book it self to have been
further satisfied herein, and in the power belonging to him: But for want
thereof, we will add the judgment of such others as have been generally held
most famous in their generations.

42. Bishop Andrews in his Sermon upon that Text of Touch not mine anointed,
proves at large that all persons in Supreme Power are to be esteemed Gods
anointed, although material Unction and other Ceremonies be wanting; as
primarily (he says) It was meant of such as were Patriarchs; For (says he)
fol 798. in the first World the Patriarchs were principal persons, and (as I
may safely say) Princes in their generations* and for such holden and reputed
by those with whom they lived. I may safely say it, for of Abraham it is in
express terms said by the Hethites, Audi Domine, Princeps Dei es inter nos,
Thou art a Prince of God ( that is, a mighty Prince) here among us: As indeed a
Prince he showed himself, when he gave battle and overthrow to four Kings at
once. Of Isaac no less may be said, who grew so mighty, as the King of
Palestine was glad to entreat him to remove further off, and not dwell so near
him* and then to go after him in person and sue to him, there might be a league
of amity between them. And the like of Jacob, who by his sword and bow
conquered from the Amorite (the mightiest of all the Nations in Canaan) that
Country, which by will he gave to Joseph for possession. It was near to Sichar,
well known; you have mention of it, Joh. 4. 5:

Great men they were, certainly greater then most conceive. But be their
greatness what it will, this is sure, they were all the Rulers the people of
God then had, and besides them Rulers had they none. And that is it we seek:
Pater was in them, and (...) too; Fatherhood and Government: And these two made
them Patriarchs, and unctos ante unctionem (says S. Augustine) anointed before
there was any material anointing at all. And as he said it to be properly due
to such, and none but such as were Rulers of the people of God; so because
Christian Magistracy in the latter ages was mostly executed by and under the
notion of Kings, so does he afterward prove how they were to succeed in this
right. Which done, he proceeds to censure that usurpation of power foreignly
claimed by Pope and Cardinals, who under pretense of this title would enter
common with Christian Kings; proving that thirty three times in Scripture the
terms of Gods anointed are used, and no where to be applied to any but
Patriarchs, Christ himself, or of Kings all: showing farther, that others,
Priests, Prophets, or the like, although they were anointed, and might be so
called yet were never styled, the Lords a^ointed; it may be uncti, but not
Christi. And then setting forth the Kings more proper claim to this title, as
being chief Christian head, he after asks, Who be they? If we go by the book,
Princes: why then, touch not Princes, that is, such as are in principal power,
or Rulers in chief And thereupon he after adds, to take their supposition off
that thought this Authority depended on the Ceremony of Unction, or the like,
fol. 800. This claim by the Ceremony is clean marred by this Text: For when
these words (here, were spoken, there was no such Ceremony instituted, it was
non ens, no such thing in rerum natura; that name not up til Moses. Now these
here in the Text were in their graves long before Moses was born; no meos then,
no claim by the Ceremony. And after it came up, no Priest went out of Ju^^ to
Persia to carry the Ceremony to Cyrus; yet of him says Isaiah, Haec dicit
Dominus Cyro Christo meo, Thus says the Lord to Cyrus mine anointed: And yet
never came there any oil upon his head. So that even after it was taken up, yet
the Ceremony and the claim by it, would not hold. The truth is, the Ceremony
does not any thing; only declares what is done. The party was before, as much
as he is after it: Only by it is declared to be, that he was before, and the
which he should have been still; though he had never so been declared. The
truth may and does subsist, as with the Ceremony, so without it. It may be
retained, as with some it is, and with us it is, and it may be spared as it is
with others; spared or retained, all is one; no claim grows that way. But
last of all, where it was used, as by Samuel to Saul, by Zadoc to Solomon: yet
they claimed nothing in the parties they anointed, but called them still Gods,
and never their own anointed: They knew no claim lay by it. Nay, if it had been
a Sacrament, as it was but a Ceremony: he that ministers the Sacrament, has
no interest in the party by it, but God alone; and then much less he that
performs but a Ceremony, is to plead any meos. So that every way, this claim
vanishes of Christi Pontificis.

Afterward he reproves all claim made by the people of power over them, as
though they were their anointed, or had his right to govern from their
suff^ages: And set^ forth also by diverse instances of personal failings, both
in Government and Religion, as well among the Roman Emperors as others, that no
such pretense of fault could debar the person* him that was in power, of this
privilege and title, so as to give liberty of touching him either with hand,
tongue, or pen, or the like: For (says he) It is the administration to govern,
not the gift to govern well; the right of ruling not the ruling right: It
includes nothing but a due Title; it excludes nothing but Usurpation. And he
asks the question, who is anointed? and answers it, on whom the right rests:
And so again he asks, Who is inunctus? and answers, He that has it not, that
is (as I conceive) has not this right by administration to govern, or
immediate possession of the Government. If he be a Foreigner, like the Pope, he
is to be accounted an Usurper, as meddling in another man's jurisdiction. Or if
he be (as he after instanceth) in Nimrod, one who cared for no anointing,
thrust himself in, and by violence usurped the throne, came in rather like one
steeped in vinegar, then anointed with oil, rather as a Ranger of a Forest,
then a Father of a family; he was no anointed, nor any that so comes in. These
words at first view will seem to a prejudiced Reader to contradict and
overthrow all said before in defense of the authority and respect to be given
to the chief Mag^strate: but when we shall have considered those qualifications
that debar him this anointing, and then whether it abate Subjects in their just
obedience, or him only in having just title to it; and then whether this
repulse and resistance of such an one may be made whilst he is first entering,
or afterward also, and by whom then made; we may then well reconcile him to
what was said before. For first having spoken of that sacred power which
belongs to each Christian King as anointed, he was to oppose to it all foreign
claim, whether craftily entered upon, as the Pope mentioned before, or forcibly,
as now instanced in Nimrod; especially if a Heathen, or of another Religion; in
which respect he could not be reckoned among the Christi, not caring for
anointing, or to have care of Church or Religion, which is the drift of this
Discourse. When as, if we should understand that every one that a discontented
party will call Usurpers, or do make a forcible entry, may be, by those that
live under his obeisance, withstood upon any allegation, we make him contradict
himself, in commending that submission which Primitive Christians gave to their
former Emperors, although known Usurpers, and some of them different in
Religion.

43. But he will be best understood to gainsay such kind of Liberty or meaning,
by the immediate following words. But on the other side, David, or he that
begins a royal race, is as the Head; on him is that right of ruling first
shed, from him it runs down to the next, and so still, even to the lowest
border of his issue.) so that then you find that it is not that which now is
usually called Usurpation; the possession of the government by a new Person, or
Family, that is Usurpation indeed; for how then should any amongst Christians
be thought a lawful beginner of a Royal Race, who in his possession must needs
dispossess some person of the old family which could never be supposed to want
some such relating to him in kindred, as to be apparently within the lowest
borders of this natural Issue, as he said before? And if he did do so as David
did to the family of Saul, and have not the like Divine anointing and warrant
as he had; how shall Subjects be so guided in their distinction as not mistake
and think every one a Usurper? For if such an one be a Usurper, then are
Christian Kingdoms governed by a race of Usurpers. Nay by Usurpers too, if (as
he says) right be to be derived from the first beginner of a Race.

44. And it is also to be noted, that this derivation of right from first
seizure, as though his right were best, even as David's was better then any that
followed, does contradict that fancy of prescription, as mere fancy indeed;
wherein it is made worst: or rather to have no worth at all, but that the
Successors do arrive at Lawfulness, accordcording as by degrees they shall be
removed from it.

45. And to prove his meaning to be that Subjects may not upon any such
Allegation rise or resist, we shall find him instancing in the case of Saul,
of whom he says, fol. 791. I verily think God, in this first example, of his
first King over his own people, has purposely suffered them all to fall out,
and to be found in him; even all that should fall out in any King after him, to
enforce their Position: that so we might find them answered to our hands. To
touch them in Order; they would easily have quarrelled at Saul's mis government.
Not at the first; he then was a mild and a gracious Prince. Never came there
from any Princes mouth, a more princely speech, then the first speech he is
recorded to have spoken, Quid populo, quod flet? what ailes the people to
complain? A speech worthy everlasting memory, so they complain not without
cause. But within a while, he grew so stern and fierce, as no man might speak
to him. Upon every light occasion, nay, upon no occasion at all, his Javelin
went straight to nail men to the wall; not David only, but Jonathan his Son
and Heir apparent, and no cause why. In the 13. Chapter it is said, Saul had
then been King a year, and reigned two years in Israel; yet it is well known,
his reign was forty years: Their own Writers resolve it thus, how long soever
he reigned, he was a King but two years. All the time after, he was somewhat
else, or somewhat more then a King. And they let not to tell what; applying to
Saul that of the Psalm, Tyrants that have not God before their eyes seek after
my soul. And that, Under thy wings shall be my refuge, till this tyranny be
overpast; Yet for all this Tyranny, ne perdas, says David, yet for all this he
fell not into the sin of all sins, which they stand so much on us^rping power
in things spiritual; Yes, and that would they have found too. Why? did he call
himself Head of the Church? Indeed no, Samuel did that for him; He it was that
said, When thou were little in thine own eyes, the Lord made thee Head of the
Tribes of Israel, (of which the Tribe of Levi was one) for that Samuel must
answer. But Saul went further a great deal; yea further then Oza: For he took
upon him to sacrifice in person himself; to offer burnt offerings upon the very
Altar, the Highest part of all the Priests Office: that is, usurped further
then ever did any. And all this David knew, yet it kept him not from saying, ne
perdas. They never have done with persecuting and shedding Priests blood: was
Saul's singer in that too? In that he passed: He put the High Priest himself,
and fourscore and four more all in one day to the sword, and all upon the
single accusation of Doeg; Innocent in the fact, and all Loyal to him, and all
but for a douzen of bread given to David. This could not but grieve David
exceedingly: it was for his sake; yet he says, ne perdas, though for all that.
And one case more I give in for advantage. It is well known he was a Demoniack,
one actually possessed with an evil Spirit; which is a case beyond all other
cases: yet destroy him not, Abisai, though: So that, if Abisai, in stead of
Inimicum tuum, had said, God has shut up this Tyrant, this Usurper, this
Persecutor, this possessed party, this what you will; David would have said no
other then he did, ne perdas, still. I would fain know, which of all their
destructive cases is here wanting: They be all here, all in Saul, all in him at
the time of this motion: yet all alter not the case; David says still, as he
said. If then all be in Saul, all incident, all eminent in him, nay if his case
be beyond all said it must be, that David here says. Though he be any of
these, though he be all these, destroy him not; or destroy him, and be
destroyed; destroy him, and be the child of perdition

I would be loath to deceive you; There may seem yet to want one thing. Here was
no High Priest, to excommunicate him, or give warrant to do it; yes that there
was too, for Abiathar escaped that great Massacre of Priests by Saul; and now he
was lawful High Priest. Now he fled to David thence, and brought the Ephod
with him. so as by good hap, the High Priest was with David now in the Camp,
and the Ephod too. There wanted no just cause (you see) to proceed against
Saul. There wanted no lawful Authority, the High Priest we have: There wanted
no good will in Abiathar, ye may be sure, his father and brethren having been
murdered by Saul, so here was all, or might have been, for a word speaking,
all would not serve; David is still where he was; says still, ne perdas; knew
no such power in the High Priests censure, was not willing to abuse it, cannot
see Quis, any person to do it; nor any cause for which it is to be done. That
Abisai may not do it, nor Abiathar give warrant to it, his charge is honest, ne
perdas: His reason good, Christus Domini; His sentence just, nor erit insons:
His challenge unanswerable, quis mittet manum.

46. By giving Subjects leave to rise and resist in such a case, would also be
the ready way to bring the Church and State into such a condition as to have no
King in Israel, and so bring in ^dolatry and Anarchy* which in his Sermon upon
that Text, he impu^es to that want; and therefore fol. 126. says, Our first
thanks then shall be this first, the ground of all the rest, for a King. This
very thing that there is one and that this de^ect Non erat Rex, has not taken
hold on us. The shout of a King is a joyful shout, was a true saying out of the
mouth of a false Prophet, Balaam) but forced thereto by God* That a joyful
shout, and this a woeful cry, Hos 10* 3. Nonne ideo nobis null^^ Rex, quia non
timemus Dominum. Are we no^ therefore without a King because we fear not God?
And our fear to God was not such, but he might justly have brought us to the
mise^able plight. The more cause have we to thank him, that we have one. And
when I say one, I mean first any one; for be he Nebuchadonosor, yet must we
pray for him: Or be it Jeroboam him though God gave in his wrath, yet he took
away in his fury, the worse wrath of the twain. O^ be he who he will, to have
one, is a matter of thanksgiving; for b^^^er any, then an Anarchy: Better any
one a King, then every one a King; and every one is more then a King if he do
what he lists* It calls to mind the cry of the Beasts in the Fable, when they
were in consultation to submit themselves to the Lion as to their King: For
when it was alleged, it was like enough he would do they knew not well what,
what he listed, which they had cause to fear; they all cried, Praestat unum
timere quam multos, Better one Lion do so, then all the Bears and Wolves and
wild Beasts of the Forest, as before they did. First then for this, that there
is any King, etc.

47. And therefore in sum, in what he speaks against U^urpation, he must be
also understood as all others in that kind; that is, striving to cast what
odium he can upon it, that ambitious persons might be more discouraged from
such undertakings; and not as meaning that Subjects have right to rise or
resist* upon any pretense of civil or legal right, him whom Divine Providence
has at any time brought in for to be Head of the Church. And this especially,
if they find in this man all that can be expected in him that begins a Royal
race; that is, both Election and Conquest, like as in David. He is not, like
Nimrod, a stranger by birth and relation, found to force himself in by his own
greatne^s and power, but being of the same Nation and Religion, is at first
freely chosen and followed, and that by a more n^merous and eminent party then
that which David first headed. During which time he was also undeniably signal
in those victories he obtained over such as were their enemies; by which he
might come to claim right and dominion over them, even as by election he might
claim it over he other of his own party, and so have just dominion over all.
For it is a gross mistake to think, that either Election or Conquest (the two
ways to transfer right in this kind) can be otherwise, or more truly had. For
first, if none could be thought duly elected, but where every man in all
parties did personally agree, or might be concluded to do so; this were
impossible. Nay, such confirmation were not to be expected, nor was ever had,
although that Nation or Kingdom were not divided into parties: But these that
had the ruling power in a Nation, or party thereof, having chosen their Head,
all that do then, or shall come to submit to them, must be taken as submitting
to their choice also. And then, as no one man can be elected by every one, so
can no one be supposed able to conquer every one, whereby to give him right to
govern that way neither. He must not be supposed Conqueror of his friends and
those of his own party; but having had right of dominion of them by election,
he has also, as their Head, right of headship over those they shall afterward
conquer. But of this more anon.

48. I shall now proceed to show what was the judgment of this learned Bishop
concerning the Power of this Head of the Church, and particularly in calling
Councils, or the like: And how he argues, that the right to call the Assemblies
b^longed to the Magistrate in chief, even as such. We shall find that, in that
Sermon made Of the right and power of calling Ass^mblies, he proves, that by
the two Trumpets delivered ^o Moses, the ordering of Church Assemblies, implied
by one, is as well entrusted as the other. For, says he, ( fol 202.) If these
be needful for the Camp, and for the Congregation, as it is a Civil body; I
doubt not but I may add also, every way as needful for the Congregation
properly so called, (that is) the Church. The Church has her wars to fight the
Church has her laws to make: Wars with Heresies, wherein experience teaches
it is a matter of less difficulty to raze a good Fort, then to cast down a
strong imagination; and more easy to drive out of the Field a good Army of
men, then to chase out of men's minds a heap of fond opinions, having once taken
head Now Heresies have ever been best put to flight by the Churches assemblies,
(that is) Councils, as it were by Armies of Gods Angels, (^s Eusebius calls
them:) yea it is well known, some Heresies could never be thoroughly mastered
but so. ^hen for the Churches Laws (which we call Canons and Rules) made to
restrain or red^ess abuses, they have always likewise been made a^ her
Ass^mblies, (...) ^ouncils, and not elsewhere. So that as requisite are
Assemblies for the Congregation in this sense, as in any other.

By this then that has been said it appears, that Gods fac tibi here, is no
more then needs; but that meet it is the ^rumpets be put to making. And so I
pass over to the Instruments, which is the second part. Assemblies (we said) is
reduced to motion; Motion is a work of Power; Power is executed organice, (that
is) by Instrument: So that an Instrument we must have, wherewithal to stir up
or begin this motion. That Instrument to be the Trumpet. It is the sound that
God himself made choice to use at the publishing or proclaiming his Law; and
the same sound he will have continued and used ^or Assemblies which are (as
has been said) special supporters of his Law; and the very same he will use
too at the last, when he will take account of the keeping or breaking of it,
which shall be done in tuba novissima, by the sound of the last trump. And he
holds one, or continues one and the same Instrument, to show it is one and
the same Power that continues still: that whether an Angel blow it, as at
Sinai; or whether Moses, as ever after, it is one sound, even Gods sound, Gods
voice we hear in both. They are to be twain for the two Assemblies; that
follows in the next verses: Either of the whole Tribes, coagmentive, or of the
chief and choice persons of them, repraesentative. And for the two Tables also:
For even this very month, the first day, they are used to a civil end; the
tenth day to a holy, for the day of expiation; of which this latter belongs
to the first, that former to the second Table. They are to be of silver (not to
seek after speculations) only ^or the metals sake, which has the shrillest and
cleerest sound of all others. They are to be of one whole piece both of them*
not of two diverse; and that must needs have a meaning, it cannot be for
nothing: For unless it were of some meaning, what skilled it else though they
had been made of two several plates? but only to show that both Assemblies are
unius j^ris, both of one and the same right, as the Trumpets are wrought and
beaten out ^oth of one entire piece of bullion. But it will be to small purpose
to stand much upon the Instrument: I make way therefore to the third point, how
they shall be bestowed, who shall have the dealing with them; for on them
depends, and with them goes the power of calling Assemblies. First, to whom
these Trumpets, to whom this power was granted to call the Congregation: And
then whether the Congregation were ever after so called by this power, and
these Trumpets. Where first it will be soon agreed (I trust) that every body
must not be allowed to be a Maker of Trumpets; nor when they be made, that they
hang where who that list may blow them: That is, that every man, hand over
head, is not to be in case to draw multitudes together. There will be (says
Saint Luke) Turbatio non minima, no small ado, if that may be suffered. If
Demetrius getting together his fellow- Craftsmen, they may of their own heads
rush into the Common Hall, and there keep a shouting and crying two hours
together, not knowing most of them why they came thither, and yet thither they
came: There is not so much good in public meetings, but there is thrice as
much hurt in such as this: No Commonwealth no, not popula^ Estates could ever
endure them. Nay, (...), (say both Scripture and Nature) Let all be done in
order: Let us have (...), lawful orde^ly Assemblies, or else none at all. Away
then wi^h this Confusion (to begin with;) Away with Demetrius's Assemblies. To
avoid then this confusion, some must have this power, for and in the name of
the rest. Shall it be one, or more? (for that is next.) Nay, but one (says
God) in saying, ^ibi. Where I wish you mark this: That as at the first he took
this power into his own hands, and called them still together himself: So here
he deriveth this power immediately from himself, unto one, without first
^etling it in any body collective at all.

It is from our purpose to enter the question, Whether the power were in the
whole body originally? Seeing, though it were, it is now by the positive
ordinance of God otherwise disposed. The reason may seem to be, partly
necessity of expedition; the Trumpets may need to be blown sometimes suddenly,
sooner then diverse can well meet, and agree upon it too. Partly avoiding of
distraction: The two Trumpets may be blown two diverse ways, if they be in two
hands, and so shall the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, (1 Cor. 14* 8*) and
how shall the Congregation know whither to assemble? Nay (a worse matter yet
then all that) so may we have Assembly against Assembly* and rather then so,
better no Assembly at all. Therefore, as God would have them both made of one
piece, so will be have them both made over to one person; for. [ Tibi] implies
one. Who is that one? It is to Moses God speaks; to him is this Tibi
directed: Him does God nominate, and of his person make choice first to make
these Trumpets, no man to make, no man to have the hammering of any Trumpet but
he. And there is no question, but for Aaron and his sons the Priests, they are
to call the Levites, to call the people together to their Assemblies: How shall
they warn them together, unless they make a Trumpet too? But if there be any
question about this, Gods proceeding here will put all out of question: For to
whom gives he this charge? Not to Aaron is this spoken, but to Moses: Aaron
receives no charge to make any Trumpet; never a fac tibi to him, neither in
this, nor in any other place. To Moses is this charge given: And to Moses, not,
Make thee one, (one for secular affairs, that they would allow him) but fac
tibi duas, Make thee two, make both. Well, the making is not it: One may make,
and another may have: Sic vos non vobis -- You know the old Verse. When they be
made and done, then who shall owe them? It is expressed that too; Et er^nt
tibi, They shall be for thee. They shall be, not one for thee, and another for
Aaron; but, Erunt tibi They shall be both for thee, they shall be both thine. A
third if they can find, they may claim to that: But both these are for Moses.
We have then the delivery of them to Moses to make, which is a kind of Seisin,
or a Ceremony investing him with the right of them. We have beside plain words
to lead their possession; and those words operative, Erunt tibi: That as none
to make them, so none to own them being made, but Moses. And what would we have
more to show us, Cujus sunt tubae, whose the Trumpets be, or who^e is the right
of calling Assemblies? It is Moses certainly, and he by virtue of these stands
seized of it.

To go yet further: But was not all this to Moses for his time only; and as it
begun in him, so to take end with him? Was it not one of the same privilegia
personalia, quae non trahuntur in exemplum. A privilege peculiar to him, and so
^o precedent to be made of it? No, for if you look a little forward (to the 8.
verse following) there you shall see, that this power which God here conveyeth,
this Law of the Silver-trumpet, is a Law to last for ever, even throughout all
their gene a^ions, not that generation only. And there is great reason it
should be so, that seeing the use should never cease the power likewise should
never determine. Being then not to determine, but to continue, it must descend
to those that hold Moses place. I demand then, what place did Moses hold? Sure
it is that Aaron was now the High Priest, anointed and fully invested in all
the rights of it, ever si^ce the eight Chapter of the last Book Moses had in
him now no other right but that of the chie* Magistrate: Therefore as in that
^^ght (and no other) he received and held them: So, he was made Custos
utriusque Tabulae: So, he was made Custos utriusque Tubae. But who can tell us
better then he himself in what right he held them? He does it in the third
verse of Deuteronomy. 33. (read it which way you will*) Frat in Jesh^une Rex, or in
rectissimo Rex; or, in rectitudine Rex; or, in recto Regis, dum congregaret
Principes populi, and Tribus Israel. All come to this; that though in strict
propriety of speech Moses were no King, yet in this he was in rectitudine Rex,
or in recto Regis, (that is) in this, had (as we say) jus Regale, that he might
and did assemble the Tribes, and chief men of the Tribes at his pleasure.
Herein he was Rex in certitudine* for this was rectitudo Regis, a power Regal.
And so it was held in Egypt before Moses, even in the Law of Nature, that
without Pharaoh no man might lift up hand or foot in all the Land of Egypt,
(suppose to no public or principal motion.) And so has it been holden in all
Nations, as a special power belonging to dominion. Which makes it seem
strange, that those men which in no cause are so fervent, as when they plead,
that Churchmen should not (...), that is, have dominion; do yet hold this
power, which has ever been reputed most proper to dominion, should belong to
none but to them only. Our Savior Christ's Vos autem non sic, may (I am sure)
be said to them here in a truer sense, then as they commonly use to apply ^^.
To conclude then this point: If Moses, as in the right ^f chief Magistrate held
this power, it was from him to de^^end ^^ the chief Magistrates after him over
the people of God, and they to succeed him, as in his place, so in this right;
it being by God himself settled in Moses, and annexed to his place lege
perpetua, by an Estate indefeisible, by a perpetual Law throughout all their
generations. Therefore ever after by Gods express order, from year to year,
every year, on the first day of the seventh month, were they blown by Moses
first, and after by them that held his place, and the ^east of the Trumpets
solemnly holden; as to put them in mind of the benefit thereby coming to them,
so withal to keep alive and fresh still in the knowledge of all, that this
power belonged to their place, that so none might ever be ignorant to whom it
did of right appertain to call Assemblies. And how then shall Aarons Assemblies
be called? with what Trumpet they? God himself has provided for that in the
tenth verse following, that with no other then these. (There is in all the Law
no order for calling an Assembly, to what end, or for what cause soever, but
this, and only this: no order for making any third Trumpet; under these two
therefore all are comprised.) This order there God takes, that Moses shall
permit Aarons sons to have the use of these Trumpets; but the use, not the
property. They must take them from Moses, as (in the 31. Chapter of this Book
Phineas does) But Erunt tibi, Gods own words, Erunt tibi must still be
remembered: His they be, for all that; Moses the owner still, the right remains
in him; their sounding of them deprives not him of his interest, alters not the
property: Erunt tibi must still be true, that right must still be preserved. It
may be, if we communicate with flesh and blood, we may think it more convenient
(as some do) that God had delivered Moses and Aaron either of them one: But
when we see Gods will by Gods word what it is, that Moses is to have them both;
we will let that pass as a revelation of flesh and blood, and think that which
God thinks to be most convenient.

Now then, if the Trumpets belong to Moses, and that to this end, that with
them he may call the Congregation, these two things do follow. First, that if
he call, the Congregation must not refuse to come. Secondly, that unless he
call, they must not assemble of their own heads, but keep their places. Briefly
thus: The Congregation must come when it is called, and it must be called ere
it come. These are the two duties we owe to the two Trumpets; and both these
have Gods people ever performed. And yet not so, but that this right has been
called in question, yea even in Moses own time, (that we marvel not if it be so
now) and both these duties denied him, even by those who were alive and present
then when God gave him the Trumpets. But mark by whom, and what became of them.
The first duty is, to come when they be called; and this was denied (in the 16
Chapter following, ver. 12.) by Core, Dathan, and their Crew: Moses sounded his
Trumpet, sent to call them; they answer flatly, (and that not once, but once
and again) Non veniemus, they would not come, not once stir for him or his
Trumpet, they. A plain contradiction indeed; neither is there in all that
Chapter any contradiction very nominis, truly and properly so to be called, but
only that. You know what became of them; they went quick to hell for it: And woe
be to them even under the Gospel (says Saint Jude) that perish in the same
contradiction, the contradiction of Core. The second duty is, To be called ere
they come. This likewise denied even Moses himself, (that they in his place
might not think strange of it) in the 20 Chapter of this very Book. Water
waxing scant, a company of them grew mutinous, and in ^umultuous manner,
without any sound of the Trumpet, assembled of themselves. But these are
branded too; the water they got, is called the water of Meriba: And what
followed, you know; none of them that drunk of it; came into the Land of
Promise; God swore they should not enter into his rest. Now, as both these are
bad; so of the twain this latter is the worse. The former ( that came not,
being called) do but sit still, as if they were somewhat thick of hearing: But
these latter ( that come, being not called) either they make themselves a
Trumpet, without ever a fac tibi; or else they offer to wring Moses's Trumpet
out of his hands, and take it into their own. Take heed of this latter: It is
said there to be adversus Mosen, even against Moses himself. It is the very
next forerunner to it, it pricks fast upon it: For they that meet against
Moses's will, when they have once thoroughly learned that lesson, will quickly
perhaps grow capable of another, even to meet against Moses himself, as these
did. Periclitamur arguiseditio^is, (says the Town-Clark) we have done more
then we can well answer; We may be indicted of Treason for this days work, for
coming together without a Trumpet. And yet it was for Diana, that is, for a
matter of Religion.

You see then whose the Right is, and what the duties be to it, and in whose
steps they tread that deny them; Sure, they have been baptized, or made to
drink of the same water (the water of Meriba) that ever shall offer to do the
like, to draw together without Moses's call. And now to our Savior Christ's
Question: In the Law how is it written? How read you? Our Answer is; There it
is thus written, and thus we read, That Moses has the right of the Trumpets,
that they to go ever with him and his Successors, and that to them belongs the
power of calling the Public Assemblies. This is the Law of God; and that no
Judicial Law, peculiar to that people alone, but agreeable to the Law of Nature
and Nations (two Laws of force through the whole world) For even in the little
Empire of the Body natural, principium motus, the beginning of all motion is in
and from the Head: There all the knots, or (as they call them) all the
conjugations of sinews have their head, by which all the Body is moved. And as
the Law of Nature, by secret instinct, by the light of the Creation, annexeth
the Organ of the chiefest part; even so does the Law of Nations, by the light
of Reason, to the chiefest person; and both fall just with the Law here
written, where (by erunt tibi) the same Organ and Power is committed to Moses,
the principal person; in that Commonwealth; The Law of Nations in this point
(both before the Law written, and since, where the Law written was not known)
might easily appear, if time would suffer, both in their general order for
conventions so to be called, and in their general opposing to all Conventicles
called otherwise.

49. Afterward he shows how practice ran in this point, and shows that Joshua,
the next to Moses in chief Magistracy, succeeding in execution of this power;
When he (not Eliazar) assemble all the Tribes, Levi and all, to Sichem, Josh.
24: called them together at the first verse, dissolved it at the 28. Which
being in a matter Ecclesiastical, he does (as he says) particularly note,
because it is by some objected concerning Moses, that for a time he dealt in
matters of the Priests Office. Then he does descend to the state of their
Kings, and shows particularly how they used this power till the Captivity. In
which he shows how it was used by Mordecai (when he came in place of authority)
appointing the days of Purim, and calling all the Jews in the Province
together, to the celebrating of them. After the Captivity, he instanceth in
Nehemiah his using of it, and so falls to the Maccabees, and proves it used by
those that were then chief Governors. Afterward he tells how this power was
exercised by Christian Emperors and Kings upon their first receipt of
Christianity, and instanceth in general and National Councils and Assemblies.
Amongst whom we may not only say that not only Constantine, Jovianus, and
others the prime Founders and Restorers of Christianity d^d not come in by the
election of the Senate (the way which was then held lawful) but that they, and
most others were brought in by the force of a prevailing party; nay commonly,
at first, set up by one part of the Army only; and yet the Christians in those
times gave them always the same respect and obedience which was by the Law of
God due to their Governor in chief: So that he that shall read their Stories,
and observe the legality of their entrance, will not believe (as I said) that
Bishop Andrews in what he said against such as Nimrod, did ever intend that
such like Usurpations as might by some be attributed to those, should ever take
from any that respect and subjection which did belong to the Lords anointed,
and Head of the Church.

50. Afterward the Bishop shows how Constantine and his Successors held those
Trumpets for a Thousand years after Christ and then one of them (says he) fol:
113. by what means we all know, was let go by them, or gotten away and carried
to Rome; But that getting has hitherto been holden a plain usurping, and an
usurping (no^ upon the Congregation, but) upon Princes and their Rights; and
that they, in their own wrong, suffered it to be wrung from them. And why?
Because not to Aaron, but to Moses it was said, Et erunt tibi. To draw to an
end, it was then gotten away, and with some a do it was recovered not long
since: and what? you may please to remember, there was not long since a Clergy
in place, that was wholly ad oppositum, and would never have yielded ought:
Nothing they would do, and in (eye of Law) without them nothing could then be
done; they had incroached the power of Assembling into their own hands. How
then? how shall we do for an Assembly? then Erunt tibi, was a good Text; it
must needs be meant of the Prince; He had this power, and to him of right it
belonged. This was then good Divinity (and what Writer is there extant of those
times, but it may may be turned to in him?) And was it good divinity then, and
is it now no longer so? Was the King but licenced for a while, to hold ^his
power, till another Clergy were in; and must he then be deprived of it again?
Was it then usurped from Princes, and are now Princes usurpers of it
themselves? And is this all the difference in matter of the Assemblies, and
calling of them; that there must be only a change; and that instead of a
Foreign, they shall have a Domestical, and instead of one, many; and no remedy
now, but one of these two they mnst needs admit of. Is this now become good
Divinity? Nay (I trust) if Erunt tibi were once true, it is so still; and if (
Tibi) were then Moses, it is so still; that we will be better advised, and not
thus go against our selves, and let truth be no longer truth, then it will
serve our turns. And this calls to my mind the like dealing of a sort of men,
not long since here among us. A while they plied Prince and Parliament, with
Admonitions, Supplications, Motions, and Petitions: And in them, it was: their
duty, their right, to frame all things to their new invented plot; And this, so
long as any hope blew out of that coast. But when, that way (they saw) it would
not be, then took they up a new Tenet ^traight: They needed neither Magistrate
nor Trumpet, they; The godly among the people might do it of themselves, for
confusion to the wise and mighty, the poor and simple must take this work in
hand, and so by this means the Trumpet prove their right, in the end, and so
come by devolution to Demetrius and the Crafts-men. Now if not for the love of
the truth, yet for very shame of these shifting absurdities, let these
fantasies be abandoned; and (that which Gods own mouth has here spoken) let
it be for once and for ever true; That which once we truly held and maintained
for truth, let us do so still; that we be not like evil Servants, judged ( Ex
ore propris) out of their own mouths.

Let me not overweary you; let this rather suffice. 1. We have done as our
Savior Christ willed us, resorted to the Law, and found what is written, (the
Grant of this power to Moses, to call the Congregation.) 2. We have followed
Moses's advise, enquired of the days before us, even from one end of heaven to
another, and found the practice of this Grant in Moses's Successors, and the
Congregation so by them called. It remains, that as God by his Law has taken
this order, and his people in former ages have kept this order, that we do so
too; that we say as God says, Erunt tibi, this Power pertains to Moses. And
that neither with Core we say, Non veniemus; nor with Demetrius run together of
our selves, and think to carry it away with crying, Great is Diana. But as we
see the power is of God, so truly to acknowledge it, and dutifully to yield it;
that so they whose it is may quietly hold it, and laudably use it, to his glory
that gave it, and their good for whom it was given. Which God Almighty grant,
and c. I have the more largely made recital of this Sermon, because all along
it is so express in clearing of most of those objections which are now made.
Now as it was then in answer to the Recusants and Nonconformists of those
times, in which respect I fear that what is let down toward the end thereof
touching stubbornness in conformity toward the chief Magistrate in matters of
Reformation, when it shall be by him thought necessary, will but too nearly
condemn some amongst us with apostacy and tergiversation from their first
principles, and that ex ore proprio (as he says) because they do now deny him
the exercise of that power, which hitherto themselves and the most eminent of
their party have maintained to be their due. For he shows, that since the
Church has her Wars to fight, and her Laws to make, as well as the Civil
State; that therefore it is as necessary there should be a continual power to
call and preside in all Assemblies made to that purpose in the Church, as well
as in the State: That these Trumpers are to be of one piece, Vnus juris: That
this power is from God, immediately derived unto one, without first settling it
into any body collective at all. And therefore truly if a whole National Church
can claim no Church power, no one party, or separate Order therein can,
although they should be as eminent as Aaron himself; No, both powers are
delivered to Moses, not for his time only, but as he had it, as the chief
Magistrate, so to succeed to such as should be chief Magistrates amongst the
people of God, as a Jus Regale to him that should be Rex in Jeshrune; although
in strict propriety, he be no more King then Moses was. And then he censures
such as would, in regard of their separate order sain have had a separate
power. It may be (says he) if we communicate with flesh and blood, we may
think it more convenient (as some do) that God had delivered Moses and Aaron
either of them one: But when we see Gods Will by Gods Word what it is, that
Moses is to have them both; we will let that pass as a revelation of flesh and
blood, and think that which God thinks to be most convenient. And hence he
infers, that in respect of this sole and supreme power the Church or
Congregation must not come uncalled, or refuse to come when called; that is,
must not act against, or without him, but according to his direction in Church
Affairs; these being the two duties which (he says) Gods people have ever duly
performed to the two Trumpet. No meeting without a Trumpet, like Demetrius and
his Craftsmen, out of love to any Diana of their own liking, as Nonconformists
formerly did; nor no slighting of the Magistrates call, like Core and his
Company, out of conceit of equal holiness with him, or in favor to the
supreamacy o^ some other Head, as the then Recusants did After that, instancing
how the Magistrates here, had been troubled with those of the Roman Clergy, and
with that of the Nonconforming party too, who would neither yield that he
should at all make Reformation, nor like that he had made, but would have those
Trumpets and Powers in other hands; he exhorts (as I may do) to constancy in
this Doctrine, saying, That which we once held and maintained for truth, let us
do so still; that we be not like evil Servants judged, ex ore proprio.

51. For when, as it was by the Papists usually objected against our
Reformation, that no such thing was necessary, since no such Heresy or
Superstition was in their Doctrine, or public form of Worship as was
alleged; and having in proof of them brought in diverse Texts of Scripture,
and also produced evidence of general Practice of a Thousand years for most of
them, in that Church which at that time was held Catholic: I do not for my
part find, but that the chiefest stress of lawfulness of Reformation lay, as I
said before, in asserting the power of the chief Magistrate. And that way ran
the late Archbishop of Canterbury also; who in his Answer to the Jesuit A C.
Sect. 26. number 11. fol. 205. says, Emperors and Kings are custodes utriusque
tabulae; they to whom the custody of both Tables of the Law, for Worship to
God, and the Duty to Man, are committed; That a Book of the Law was by Gods own
command in Moses his time to be given the King; That the Kings under the Law,
but still according to it, did proceed to necessary Reformation in Church
businesses, and therein commanded the very Priests themselves; as appears in
the Acts of Hezekiah and Josiah, who yet were never censured to this day for
usurping the Priests Office. That the greatest Emperors, for the Churches
honor, Theodosious the elder, and Justinian, and Charles the Great, and diverse
other, did not only meddle, now and then, but Enact Laws to the great
settlement and increase of Religion in their several times.

51. If more satisfaction be requisite to assert not one* the Kings Right to
meddle in these things, but even to show the necessity of having a King to that
very purpose, iet us see the judgment of Bishop Andrews in another place,
where he is speaking upon that Text, In those days there was no King in
Israel; and using these words fol. 122. This is not noted as a desert in gross,
or at large; but even in Israel, Gods own chosen people. It is a want (not in
Edom, or Canaan, but) even in Israel too, the want of a King. Truly Israel,
being Gods own peculiar might seem co claim a prerogative above other Nations,
in this, that they had the knowledge of this Law, whereby their eyes were
enlightened, and their hands taught, and so the most likely to spare one, others
had not like light; yet this, non abstante, their light and their Law, and that
they were Gods, own people, is no Supersedeas for having a King, of which there
needs no reason but this, That a King is a good means to keep them Gods
Israel, here, for want of a King Israel began, and was fair onward, to be no
longe^ Israel, but even Babel. When Mica (and by good reason any other as well
as he) might set up Riligions, and give Orders themselves; as it were in open
contempt of God and his Law. So that, the people of God can plead no exemption
from this, since it is his own Ordinance, to make them and keep them the People
of God. Was it thus here in the Old Testament, and is it not so likewise in the
New? Yes, even in the New too; for there Saint Peter wills them that they be
subject to the King, as to the Sovereign, or Most Excellent. And Saint Paul
goes further, and expresses it more strongly, in the Style of Parliament, and
(like a Lawgiver) says, (...), Be it Enacted that they submit themselves: And
when Saint Paul there, had in his Act said, Omnis anima; That this Act reaches
to every soul, which was enough: Yet because that seemed too general, Saint
Peter came after, and goes to the very point, and says, Gens sancta must do
thus too; That is, there must be a King even in Gods Israel. And, what would we
more? I come to the third part; And to what end a King? Quid faciat nobis? What
will a King do unto us? It it has been said already; He will look that every
one do not that which is good in his own, and evil in Gods eyes* He will in
his general care look to both parts the Eye and the Hand: The eye that men sin
not blindly, for want of direction; the hand that men sin not with an high hand
(that is wilfully) for want of correction. He will be their good Opthalmist,
with right Eye Salve, that the sight may be cured, and things seem as they be,
and not be as they seem. At the hardest, si noluerunt intelligere, but the eye
will rove and run astray, that the hand be bound to the good abearing. That
they do it not; or if they do it (as do it they will, yea though there be a
King) yet that they may not do it impune; do it, and nothing done to them for
it, and escape the punishment due unto it; for, that is the case, when there is
no King in Israel. And if, when there is one, that be the case too, where have
we been all this While? For if so, Etiam n^n est Rex, cum est Rex: Then when
there is a King, there is no King; or one in name, but none indeed. Which as it
is not good for the State, so neither is it safe for themselves. To this,
special regard will be had: Non enim frustra (says St. Paul) for they bear not
the Sword in vain: That every one do not thus. Every one, but namely (which is
the occasion of this Text) that not Mica, for Mica's fact brought ^orth this
first sight: That they were not come to this pass, that he, or any such as he
was, might set up in his house any Religion he would, and no man control him
for it. To look to every one therefore, but especially to Mica; and to care
for, all, but above all, the matter of Religion, Ne quisque videat quod rectum
est, there; that every one be not allowed to see Visions there: At least, Ne
quisque faciat, that, see what they list, they be not suffered to set them up:
But if the Eye will not be rectified, the Hand be restrained. And sure, no
where does the eye more miss, ^or the hand swerve, then in this; and therefore
no where more cause to call for a King, then for this. O^e would think this
were impertinent, and we were free enough from Mica. We are not. Even to this
day, do men still cast Images or Imaginations (all as one) in the mould of
their conceits, and up they set them, at least for their own household to
adore. And then if they can get such a fellow, as is hereafter described, a
Levite for ten Shekels and a Suit; (or because now the world is harder, ten
po^nd) they are safe, and there they have and hold a Religion by themselves.
For evident it is by this Text* setting up of false Worship, is the cause why
Kings were missed; and the redress of it, why they were placed; The cause, I
say, and the first cause of their placing, and therefore this a part, and a
principal part of their Charge. I will touch them severally. 1. A part to look
to Mica and his false Worship. Why, this is matter Ecclesiastical? It is so,
and thereby it appears (I think) that Kings have and are to have a hand in
matters of that nature: If Religion were at faul^, because there was no King;
and that one there must be, to set it right again. For is it once to be
imagined, that the cause of corrupt Religion is laid on the want of a King; and
yet when there is one he should not meddle with it; Rather the consequence is
strong on the other side, Mica thus did, because there w^^ then no King;
therefore when there is one he will look better to it, that never a Mica of
them all shall do the like Thus it went when there was no King; after, when
there was one, I find again, the not taking the High places (which were pl^ces
merely Religious where the people did Sacrifice) in pated still to the King as
his fault; and yet shall he have nothing to do with High places, or sacrificing
either there or any where else? Very strange it were, that they who are by God
himself, by an express Ego dixi ^erm^d Gods, should yet have nothing to do with
Gods affairs! And no less, that being termed by Isaiah Nutritii,
Foster-Fathers, to whose care the Church is committed to cherish and bring up,
should yet be forbidden to intermeddle with the Church* in that which is of all
fostering the principal part: Verily, when the Apostle speaks of the service
that Kings do unto God, he does not only use the term of (...) (that is)
Public Officer, but (...) too (as it were Gods Deacon o^ Servitor) by a name
peculiar to the Church Offices: and this he uses twice for one other. It can
therefore neither be denied, nor doubted of, in that Id^latry came up by defect
of Kings but that Kings were placed to pull down Idolatry, and to plant and
preserve the true Service of God. In a word, there is a King in Israel, that
there may not be a Mica in Israel. That is, that no man be suffered to set up
any form of Worship formerly used, if not now allowed, which was Micha's case
with his Teraphim, and think that through some l^gal sanctimony inherent to the
Ephod, and to that Priest that shall officiate (as being a Levite) he shall be
justified herein; and they only condemned that devise some new form to be
exercised in their private meetings, and set up some other sort of persons,
even some Son of their own to be their Minister therein: No, the use of a King
will plainly appear out of what he has said before, That Gods people or a
Church cannot be without such a Government which is necessary for them (as a
Church) even for the making and keeping them the people of God, that is for
keeping them united in one true Relgion. That to him Omnis anima, every soul is
to be subject, having power both to direct and correct; for else it would be
for Israel to have no King, when there is a King. And therefore since (as he
proved) he is to take care of Religion, and to see what forms of Worship are
set up, it is not allowed to any to set up their private imaginations now, as
Mica did his Images of old.

52. In those differences between the Nonconformists and Papists* the one in
their imaginations liking of no form or settlement made by humane Direction or
Precept, and the other attributing too much to their Images, the things
themselves so settled, that speech of our Saviors concerning the disagreement
between the Samaritans and the Jews, has by way of comparison, often come into
my miud; I have, on the one side, thought that to frame a Worship out of
opposition, and to have no reason for it, but because our Fathers did so is but
(too Samaritan like) to worship we know not what; Whilst, without due
consideration of the different degree of splendour and greatness which the
Church shall by the goodness of God have in doing these things at one time more
then another, we shall ingratefully forget to make suitable return in our
expressions and acknowledgments thereof in his Worship. But then, on the other
side again, when inward devotion is chiefly expected, to fancy that this or
that precise form might, out of any inherent worth in it self, or out of
singular opinion we have of some persons who first instituted them, be only
observed and none other, were now unreasonably to follow the example of the
Jews, in fixing all adoration in one precise place, without consideration, that
the Christian Church is not now, like theirs, included in one Nation, nor can
be presumed so tied to the constitution of any one Prince herein, as they were
to Solomon, as to exclude others of equal jurisdiction and power, from making
such alterations as they shall find suitable to that present condition they
shall be in. If upon the score of anc^ent in^itation alone we transgress the
order of that Church under which we live, then singularity and difference will
render us but Innovators; and prove us rather antic then ancient in our way of
Worship.

53. In these much more I might have alleged out of these Authors I have
pitched upon in justification of supreme Magistrates power in ordering the
affairs of the Church; but these alleged, being (as I conceive) plain and
enough for satis^action of any unprejudiced person, I have spared that labor;
and have also out of ease to the Reader, forborne quotations of many other
famous men in our Church, concurring in the same judgment; and made most
particular choice of, Mr. Hooker and Bishop Andrews, as men generally held most
famous and Orthodox in their generations; the one in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, and the other since, even in the time of our late King: They were
then, and are still for ought I know, held to be the great Defenders of this
Churches authority, and that of the ^hief Magistrate therein, against the then
Recusants and Nonconformists; and I hope their credit is not so lost, but that
their authority and yet arguments will remain of the same force still to keep
us from all inclinations either to Schism or Sedition; that we do not thereby
give the world too just occasion to say, we are indeed fallen from our
Principles through some sinister prejudice, or partial conceit of our own.

54* To direct and encourage in this constancy, let us revert to thse grounds
and reasons before laid down, let us consider that since the maintenance of
love and charity, and the preservation of mankind by peace, have so necessary a
dependence upon submision to the Authority of that Church where we live, and
since the Glory, Service and Worship of God here on earth, has again so near a
relation unto this preservation of mankind by peace, that therefore in these,
and things of the like nature (which are not of such express divine Precept, as
to be demonstrable out of the Word of God, or are not fundamental to our
salvation) there should no opposition be made to the disturbance of the peace
of ^he Church: but, to that very end, all to submit to the determination of
those that have chief power therein. Let not the crafts or designs of other men
lead us to d^quiet, so as to think, that in things of this nature, and where
controversies and differences do daily arise between Church and Church,
Christian and Christian, our salvation should be endangered while we incline to
that side that maintains Charity, by submitting our selves to those that have
the rule over us: To this end, I shall here record that remarkable speech of
Dr. Usher late Primate of Armagh; That in these Propositions which without all
controversy are universally received in the whole Christian World, so much
truth is contained, as being joined with holy obedience may be sufficient to
bring a man to everlasting salvation; Neither have we cause to doubt but that
as many as walk according to this rule (neither overthrowing that which they
builded by superinducing any damnable Heresies thereupon, nor otherwise
violating their holy Faith, with a lewd and wicked conversation) peace shall be
upon them, and upon the Israel of God. This as it was alleged by Dr. Potter,
in his Treatise called Charity mistaken (for that the Church of Rome did make
all things fundamental which she held, and thereupon excluded all from
salvation that were not of her communion) so is it by Mr. Chillingworth in his
Reply, fol* 20. held for as great and good a truth, and as necessary for these
miserable times as can be uttered: For if it should stand with men in the point
of salvation, according to that censure which each Church, or sect therein,
does put upon all that differ or descent from them, then could no one Christian
hope for Heaven; insomuch as he must necessarily be a member of some Church or
other, which in matters of Doctrine or Discipline (if not both) is by some
other Churches held so far Heretical or Sch^smatical, as to exclude all of that
communion from hope of salvation; which thing the Papists do hold concerning
all Protestants in general, and many of the Protestants hold of them again; and
do also pass their sentence as hardly of one another. But our comfort is, that
we shall at the last day, be judged by him who knows our hearts, and whether we
have not sought and followed his Truth according to the u^most of the ability
he gave us; and not left to the sentence of such, as, out of pride, prejudice,
or other interest, are so ready to put an overvalue upon their own Tenets, and
become both Parties and Judges.

55. Corcerning those aspersions of Heresy and Schism which are now so
frequently thrown by one party upon another, I have in the general observed
that where the names and notions themselves are of^nest repeated, and most
stood upon, there the Arguments used for confutation are the less, or less
weighty. It faring, in some men's discourses and writings about controversies*
as with women in their scolding; where she that can call Whore lowdest, and
oftenest, is co^ceived to have got the better of it: So (usually) there is
nothing to be perceived but a design cast toward disparagement, when the
imputation of those Ecclesiastical railing terms are used toward any, without
any remons^rance or proof wherein their ill consists, or how their Opponents
are justly to be charged with them.

56. As ^or Heresy, I do not see why any Christian man's case should be held
desperate, that in things not fundamental* cannot bring his judgment to assent
to that of another: always provided that it proceed not from, or be increased
through discontent, pride, or ^ffected singularity, and that he hold it
peaceably to himself; not seeking to disturb the peace of the Church by
publication thereof to others; for then it plainly shows that some of those
other co^r^p^ Principles had a hand in the entertainment, as well as in the
divulging of i^: And then i^ will come to pass, that that which would as in it
self, and a^ ^onsidered a^ matter of speculation, have been an error in
judgment only, being now infused into others, so as to induce action and
separation, will argue pravity in the will, and turn into Schism; which I do
look upon as a sin, not to be at any time, or in any Persons otherwise
excusable* then when the foundation of Faith or good manners cannot be
otherwise preserved* And because in all dissenting parties that live under any
Christian Authority, the name* of Schismatic is by either side cast on the
other; I do hold it for a maxim, that that party i^ only free that conforms
to the Rule set down by him that i^ Head of that place, and all the rest
Schi^maticks; Even as in State differences, all parties that hold not with the
Sovereign Power, are to be called this or that Faction, when as the other is
not to be called a Faction or Party, but rather to be looked upon as the whole,
because united to the Head.

^7. And therefore truly, if men could be once brought to put a greater rate
upon things fundamental* and a less upon superstructures; considering that the
not holding to ^^^ one bring^ on the loss of Heaven* and the too strict holding
to the other, brings on the loss of Charity, and thereby shrewdly endanger the
other also (besides that quiet we should imutually reap in the exercise of
Religion) we should preserve the State in quiet also; and prevent all those
mischiefs we now so much complain of through changes therein; The which, of
latter times have from hence chiefly taken their rise; when such as are seeking
to make themselves more glorious or powerful, do daily make use of men's too
great zeal and credulity in this kind, as the ordinary Stalking-horse*
hereunto. The instances whereof are plain enough in Christendom, especially
since it became so divided into Sect^; for the advance of any of which, as Gods
Truth, we shall ever find the notion of Reformation cried up and alleged, but
alteration in the State, and those that are in rule therein, is really brought
in. If we do but reflect on some more remarkable passages among our selves, we
may, from that small difference which was in the six Articles themselves from
the Roman Doctrine, well conclude, that the preservation of the Popes power as
Head of the Church here, was more aimed at then truth of Religion; insomuch as
a dispensation was ready to be granted for every thing, save for taking the
Oath of Supremacy. When, on the other side again, both Henry the Eighth and his
Successors, looked upon this foreign acknowledgement as a sure testimony of ill
affection to them and their Government; Nay, the Law it self came to be
resolute in that point ^oo; accounting Popery to consist in the alienating and
withdrawing of Subjects from their obedience to their Prince, to raise sedition
and rebellion, etc.

58. And so now also we find that presumption of malignancy and disaffection to
the present Government and Governor, is most taken from that great affection
which is cast to the use of this book; because, in so doing, they manifestly
decline those acts and alterations which are made by him, and do submit to what
was done by another. I have not heard that any man has been particularly
forbidden to read this Book that did in the use of it pray for the present
Sovereign power, according to the fo^m therein set down, and as always has
been used to be done toward them only that were in present Authority. If that
be not done, does it not too plainly* argue that some affection and zeal beside
that of the Book it self, does guide them in this choice? Does not the
Scripture look to the present, when it enjoin* obedience to the Powers that
are, and commands to pray for Kings and all that are in authority? Does it any
where in this case leave us to a choice by distinction, saying such as should
be in authority, or the like? And is it not a general rule, that where the
Scripture makes no distinction, neither should we? No, in this case we may
presume that the present higher Power and Kings were meant, without such
distinction; both for that they were a^ that time such as might that way have
been excepted against; and also for that the words following that under them we
may lead quiet and peaceable lives etc. must determine the prayer to be made
for that present Au^hority which we do live under and are subject unto. Nor do
I find that ever any Orthodox pen but did confess prayer for that person under
whose protection they lived, to be a duty incumbent upon all Christians,
without referment of them to distinctions and qualifications. Nay, does not the
Book it self, in that prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church militant
here on earth, interpret this Doctrine of the holy Apostle to include all, and
accordingly appointed us to pray for all Christian Kings, Princes and
Governors? and when it comes with an especially for that person who shall be at
present our Governor, ^^ i^ said, because he is the right Heir, or has best*
Title, or the like* no, it has still respect to the divine authority of the
Apostles precept: and therefore presently gives the same reason, that under him
we may be godlily and quietly governed. In which respect I cannot, by the way,
but highly commend that those frequent and full expressions which were made for
those persons that were still in chief power amongst us, as proceeding from
good principles, even the sense of honor and esteem, which was owing to that
God whose Authority he did represent amongst us; when as now we may observe
that those that have been possessed of the same party with the Protector, do
yet either wholly neglect to pray for him at all, at least to mention him
therein, and then do it so coldly and fumblingly, that partly by the falling of
their voice, partly by the conditional qualifications they mention in their
prayer for him, they give but too just cause to suspect, they are not so
rightly principled and persuaded concerning that high duty and respect which is
^^e to him in this his relation* for as it becomes not them in public
especially to censure him, so also not to insinuate any thing that might give
occasion for others to do ^o, for this will be ^o pray rather against, then for
him. But to return to the consideration of the Service Book* I say, that to
prevent those jealousies and d^ngers which might happen to some amongst us,
through too much forwardness to read, or abuse, and partialy in reading it the
said Book, I have made all the foregoing Discourse; both ^o show what is truly
fundamental and necessary in our Christian Faith, and what rule to follow in
our Christian Obedience; and to give satisfaction in that particular of taking
away the Service Book; the thing for ought I see, now most insisted upon: I
have to that end striven to evince that continual power which is continually
residing in the Head of this, and each other Church, to abrogate as well as
impose in things of that nature* Unto the confirmation whereof, I shall now
only by way of conclusion, add that Testimony of the Universi^y of Oxford,
printed in the year 164^* who in their reasons against the Discipline and
Directory in place of the Service Book, fol. 32. say, We are not satisfied how
we can submit to such Ordinances of the two Houses of Parliament, not having
the Royal assent, as are contrary to the established Laws of this Realm,
contained in such Acts of Parliament as were made by the joint consent of King*
Lords, and Commons. Nor so only, but also pretend by repeal to abrogate such
Act or Acts; for since ejusdem est potestatis destruere cujus est constituere;
it will not sink with us, that a lessor Power can have a just right to cancel
and annul the Act of a grea^er. Especially the whole power of ordering all
matters Ecclesiastical; being by the Laws in express words for ever annexed to
the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And upon what head that Crown ought to stand,
none can be ignorant. In this we see their plain concurrence in yielding the
power of abrogation of this Book to such as instituted i^, even to him that
should hold the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And as for the words following,
which by some may be thought uttered in derogation of the power now in being*
we shall examine them with other Questions of that nature in the Chapter
following.

CHAP. III. Of the imputation of USURPER, and whether i^ do take off Subjection.
WE have formerly showed the necessity to peace and union in reference to the
Glory of God to be increased and set forth by the preservation and good of men,
we have also showed the necessity of submission to Government, and particularly
commended Monarchy* as the most necessary and available means to maintain this
peace and accomplish those other benefits in society to be expected. Now since
not only Religion, but the light of natural reason do teach, that this peace
and benefit is a thing to be always followed and sought; and since without
actual submission to those Powers that are from time to time actually in being,
it cannot at no time be had, it comes thereupon ^o pass that those that are
usual disturbers thereof, being such as are either leaders or followers, have
(accordingly) names of guilt and odium ^ixed upon them; That through sense
thereof they might be discouraged from such foul and pernicious undertakings.
The one sort is of such as are ambitious to rule, and the other of such as are
impatient of being ruled. The first will be executing any power which is not
due to him in right of the place he holds, but to another who is already seized
of that Office, is thereupon called an Usurper; The other ^ort, that do resist
the power of him that is so possessed, are usually distinguished by the name of
Rebels; although, in truth, they are of such joint extraction, and so near a
kindred, as we may count them one: for as none can resist Government but they
must take upon them to judge and act in things proper thereinto; so again, none
can well usurp that does not withal rebel: And therefore, the first leading,
and the last following, and both making usually but one Society, we may call
the Usurper the Great Rebel, and the other the lesser Usurpers. These things
being so, we need not wonder why first that notion of usurpation, or to usurp,
properly signifying often using only, and taken as well in a good as bad
sense, when applied to other things, should always import evil, when applied to
the ease before re^earsed; Nay further, we may find the cause why this style of
Usurper, being in the primary intention to be fixed only upon such as
transcended the limits of their own Ranks and Callings, and take upon them to
execute that jurisdiction and power which was proper to the place of another,
should now, as out of common detestation of the thing, be continued to the
party when the usurpation is past, and he now in possession of that place from
whence the maintenance of peace by execution of this power can only be
reasonbly expected.

2 And onward, upon the same design again we may perceive the reason why few or
none should set down in plain terms, that it was lawful for men to obey him
that was an Usurper; for however the thing might have been conceived true, yet
it might be apprehended an encouragement or abatement to the odium of such as
should attempt the like. Which being so, we are not to wonder why it should
come to pass in this, as in the imputation of Tyranny, or things of like
nature, to wit, that through faction and personal interest and respect* that
which was intended for common benefit, should be many times made use of for
particular ends only; so that now usually the name of Usurper importing much
evil, like the foresaid name of Tyrant, is but the remonstrance of discontent;
and thereupon given usually to such as are in possession, however there ^i^le
be* so long as any thing can be ^ound out for the asserting of a better claim
in some other person, in whose advance themselves have greater interest and
hopes* And therefore it may be observed, that as in all alterations, the
dispossessed ^ri^ce is called Tyrant by one party, so the new one is by the
other called Usurper, by which means, contrary to the first intention of
preservation of public peace by adhering to the party possessed, it is now
thought by some just occasion to bring in rebellion and Civil War upon a whole
land, rather then their particular favorite, with his conceived better Title,
shall not be able to dispossess the other, which they now call by that name.
But as they do hereby truly make themselves Rebels by disobedience or
opposi^ion, so do they make him they obey and countenance a true Usurper
indeed* for want of possession of that place of authority unto which this
obedience and subjection is due.

2. Thus shall we find Papists and those of the Roman party, in favor to their
own Head, putting the scandal of usurpation upon all that Authority
Ecclesiastical which Christian Princes exercise even in their own Dominions;
while some again, upon the score of power claimed by the whole people, or some
coordinate order of Magistracy or representation amongst them to elect or
govern as in their right, are ready to reckon all such persons as Usurpers, and
their power as usurped, that without election or confirmation, made in such
measure as they shall approve of, take upon them the execution of Sovereign
Power; N^y, and sometimes the party possessed, for increase of the odium, is
called Tyrant also; for passion and not reason ^uli^g them in their censure,
they may upon every Act of Justice or Severity, which crosses their interests
or ^u^^^s, say that the Laws of God and the Land are broken in his regiment, as
well as in his entry. Nay, indeed if it should be granted, that he that has
possession, and thereby prejudiced another right, cannot therefore claim
obedience from those that stand by just relation subjected to that place of
power which he holds, then truly for want of actual power so to do, all acts
of Justice done and enforced in his name as Prince, would be but Tyranny in
him, however they might have been lawfully executed by another. From the evil
consequents and effects of these two opinions, the Monarchs of Christendom are
seldom free; the notions of Pope or People, and the power belonging to them,
being by discontented parties still urged as a just cause of their disturbance.

3. A third sort that make use of this scandalous name of Usurper, are of such,
who in favor to some particular person only, now out of possession, would, upon
the allegation of his right to govern, instigate those that are actually
Subjects to him, to withdraw their allegiance, and give it to him that is not
possessed at all: without regard to that public disturbance which must
thereupon ensue. And this doctrine has less of reason to plead for it self
then the other two. For first, they do it on the behalf of a whole Society of
men, or some eminent Officers amongst them whom they would have preferred
before this one person now possessed: And then they allege for themselves
both Laws of Reason and Natural equity, and also positive Divine Constitutions,
to show that this power was by such original right vested in them, and
therefore that no particular Sanction can deprive them of it. Whereas the
other, as they would have whole Societies of men ruined and disturbed by Civil
war, only to prefer and advance one single Person or Family before another,
(who in reference to the State is as like to rule well, as he or his) so have
they no allegation for it but some particular and private Laws, made at the
instance of, and during the government of this person or his family: When as in
truth, since in positive Edicts made by unequal authority, the last is to stand
and to be observed, they should of right be governed by these present
Constitutions that do authorize the party in possession, and not those that are
now abrogated and bereft of their force; even as that person or family they
were made by and for, are bereft of their power.

4. If we shall apply these things to our selves in England, and examine how
they have been generally resented by that part which was in that respect justly
called the Royalist or Cavalier; we shall find all three sorts by them
condemned as contrary to them in their original principles, which were,
maintenance of Peace and Monarchy. The first two they opposed and went against
as matters of fact, and which did already make disturbance: when as there being
then no fear how disturbance would be made by claim the other way, and finding
many Laws in force to continue their obedience to him in possession, they did
usually inveigh not only against all Usurpation in attempt, but also against
all right to possess and continue; the more to affright from, and
discountenance such undertakings. In which last respect of lawfulness to
possess or continue, they must still be understood to intend that Right which
is to be considered in relation to the party dispossessed; against whom, and to
whose prejudice (if he had right) he is only in reason to be taken as an
unlawful Disseisor. And therefore they might, by these or the like imputations,
be supposed to hope, that since in him was the fault of entrance whereby
public peace was disturbed, and it being in his power only by his quiet
resignation to do personal right again, without civil war and blood, that for
his farther incitement thereunto, they would also insinuate some unlawfulness
to those acts of obedience which shall be done unto him by such as are now
actually his Subjects.

5. To which end, and none other, we may well apply that additional Expression
of the University of Oxford before set down, viz On what head that Crown ought
to stand, none can be ignorant. For having before, page 7. alleged the Act
made 1 Eliz. 1. for restoring to the Crown the ancient jurisdiction in things
Ecclesiastical, they may by that Crown be well conceived to mean that
Ecclesiastical authority which thereto belonged: And so not only to declare
against that usurpation of power which the Parliament then took in their
enacting in such matters, whilst the Crown (and consequently the power) did and
ought to continue in him that was still reigning and actually possessed; but
they might, in duty also to the settlement and security of their present
Prince, as well as the settling of the peace of the Nation, have an aim hereby
to prevent all attempt toward personal usurpation, by implying that that Crown
ought not to be on any head but his who now wore it. But what if no such Head
be? Must not the Crown be worn? Yes sure: For as they had before recited that
Act whereby this Authority should be for ever united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm; so can we not reasonably presume it their
meaning, that those Jurisdictions which should be of continual use and for ever
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, should be understood so limited to
any one person or family, as, in defailance of their wearing of it, (which must
be supposed subject to humane chance and casualty) the Church should be
deprived of that useful power.

6. In like manner are we to understand Bishop Andrews and all other, in their
writings against Usurpation; that is, intending thereby so much more to confirm
Subjects obedience to their present Prince. For, they then supposing that
against him no such thing would be objected, and on the other side, fearing
that Tyranny or any other crime which he might fall into might be alleged as
a just excuse for insubjection, they did what they would to make the first
odious, and these tolerable. In which doing, since their aim was good, they may
be apprehended (out of duty) to be rather officiously, then truly guided in
many of their expressions that way made; and that, as they did but hereby
intend the more to conform obedience to him under whose power they then lived,
so to be exemplar herein to others; without permitting such as were now
Subjects to do evil, that good may come of it; to wrong their* own consciences
by disobedience, that another may be righted in his private Title. And if we
look in that Sermon of Bishop Andrews made of giving Caesar his due, we shall
find him acknowledging as much; for (says he) fol 91. What Caesar was this,
for whose interest Christ thus pleads? It was Tiberius, even he under whom
our Savior was (and knew he was to be) put to death; a stranger from Israel, a
Heathen man, uncircumcised, an Idolater, an enemy to the truth, etc. Where you
see that obedience and tribute is directed to be paid to one that was as great
a stranger to Israel, as great an Usurper in any legal power there, as Nimrod
could be. And however Nimrod might be thought in other things to equal him, yet
since he had no hand in putting our Savior to death, we may well think that
though it were unlawful for such as Nimrod thus to rise or reign, yet did he
not intend it lawful for Subjects to disobey, when thus up and ruling.

7. So that to take them, and all other in like sort, according to their right
meaning (that is, to be constant in their direct respect to the common peace
and benefit of the whole Society of men, without such partial eye to the favor
of any particular person or family, as to abe^ what shall be contrary
thereunto) we are to conceive, that as they had pitched upon Monarchy, as that
which by Divine and humane light was fittest to accomplish this end, even so it
was not to be supposed they would be so forgetful of their first original
ground, as to invalidate that use and benefit which by Monarchy was to be
expected; so as to give leave to Subjects to thrust him out again, as often as
the Monarch should not have been to their likeing; for this had been to
overthrow that whole foundation they had before built upon, to wit, continual
peace, by continual submission to the present Monarch. Whereas if any party of
the Subjects might take upon them to withdraw obedience when they thought their
Governor defective in Title* then, since it should seldom happen but that
there might be some objections in that respect made by some discontented party
or another, it would also follow, that for want of constant means how peace and
agreement should for every time present be preserved, that course which they
had designed, whereby it should be continually and at all times preserved,
would contradict it self, and come to nothing. And therefore having endeavored
that this peace, as they thought, should never be interrupted, even by the
course formerly mentioned, that is, laying so great imputation, and leaving
such small hopes of enjoyment on those that should attempt it, they were less
regardful to speak of any way to be taken after it was interrupted, and the
public peace now settled in another hand, lest by any express allowance of a
lawful obedience to him afterward, they should (as we said) seem to cast more
hopes and encouragements upon such like enterprises. And that their intentions
hereby were only to deter from such ambitious rising, and not from giving
obedience to any in possession, we shall not find that any name of odium is
found out, and given to such as live in subjection to Usurpers; which doubtless
they would have done, had they conceived them as guilty in their obedience, as
he in his entrance or command.

8. And if we shall appeal to matter of fact, we shall find the Cavalier party
all along constant to the sure way of preservation of public peace, by their
adherence to the party possessed, and by opposing of such, as would upon the
allegation of Usurpation, or want of title in him or his Ancestors, or for want
of Election or Authority derived from the people, make all his commands and
rule unlawful. And in order to this, was that maxim so often found in the
mouths of that party, at such time as many personal defects and imputations
were laid to the charge of the late King, That the Crown was to be obeyed and
fought for, although it stood upon a May Pole; Which speech, as it had been
taken from the Duke of Norfolk, so was it by him used in defense of his Loyalty
to his present Sovereign, whom the other party called both Tyrant and Usurper*

9. And if we do impartially look upon the reason and ground of all Politic
Constitutions of this kind. We shall find all contrary construction to arise
from mistake or prejudice. For first, is there any thing more available to the
continuance of public peace, then that submission should be continued to the
Monarch in possession? And then that there might be one always in possession,
so as to make use of this submission, and that without danger of public
disturbance, through strife about the person to enjoy it, was it not again
necessary, that by public Edict it should be beforehand appointed to whom it
should succeed, that all might be more deter^ed from seeking it? Which
succession being not by the Law of God entailed on any one Family amongst
Christians now* as amongst the Jews it formerly was on the Lineage o^ David,
will it not still rationally and equitably follow, that the possessor should
have most right of any to have this entail settled on his Family? and do we not
accordingly find that all Nations that have due regard to future peace and
quiet, have joined with the possessor in settling it accordingly? and will it
not onward still follow, that in order to maintain the first Principles, we
should be loyal to the Family so settled, ^o as to the utmost of our powers to
defend them in their possession against all opposers, justly charging them with
the imputation of Treason and Rebellion that are desturbers of public peace
in favor to the claim of any other whatsoever? But then again, will it not
from the same Principles still follow, that in case my loyal endeavors shall
not have their wished success, but that the other party shall set up another
Monarch, and that in such full possession as now to be quietly and generally
submitted to, as in the Seat of Justice, (the Laws being executed in his name,
as they were in the others before) that then present peace depending on present
obedience, and present obedience on present Power and Command, therefore I that
was before a Loyalist in maintenance of the power in being, am now a Rebel, if
I change my principles, I continue not loyal to him that is so; having in that
regard changed conditions with those that were Rebels before, who by their
adherence to the present power and maintenance of peace thereby are now become
the true Royalists.

10. If we shall examine the grounds and intentions of our own fundamental
constitutions concerning this Government and Governors, therein we shall find
them to be the same: Namely, the design of peace by submission to the present
Monarch, without regard to the style of King, or Family of which he was of. And
to this end it may be observed, that in the Act made in Henry the Eighths time,
wherein his Supremacy is asserted, it is set down 24. Hen. 8. c. 12. [Where by
diverse sundry old authentic Histories and Chronicles is manifestly declared
and expressed, that this Realm^* of England is an Empire, and so has been
accepted in the World, governed by one supreme Head and King, having the
Dignity and Royal estate of the Imperial Crown of the same, unto whom a Body
Politic compact of all sorts and degrees of people, being bounden and owen to
bear next to God a natural and humble obedience, etc.] By which words we may
easily discover some determination touching the present dispute, by observing
what is therein set down as the foundation and original of this Government; to
wit, that it is, and always has been an Empire or Monarchy as well over all
estates in it self, as independent of any other: And then as it is called an
Empire as well as Realm, so may: that He^d thereof be called Emperor, or the
like, as well as King; he whosoever he is that is at any time Monarch or Head
thereof, is he to whom all sorts of people been bounden and owen to bear next
to God a natural and humble obedience. It is no part of the fundamental Law to
appropriate it for perpetuity, to the family of Plantagenet, Tudor, Stuart, or
the like, no authentic Record, to be brought for that; that as it must be
excepted as a secondary* constitution made in order to preserve the first, he
must give it place when the other is endangered. As for the first, I conceive
that if King and Parliament should enact that this Government should be a
Monarchy no longer, it would be void, not only as contrary to the Law of God
and Reason, but as a thing without their jurisdiction, even as overthrowing
that power whereby themselves had power, or that fundamental Rule or Law
whereby themselves were made Law* makers. He that is in possession being the
present Monarch by that Law established, may by virtue of that Authority he
has over all under him* for peace sake, determine and enact that the Sovereign
Power shall descend to his Heir; and no doubt but he is therein to be obeyed by
all that are his Subjects* ^n case he be either naturally or politickly dead,
and those that were his Subjects become the Subjects of another, then the
fundamental Law that aims at continuance of peace by continuance of Monarchy,
must in like manner be presumed to determine the subjection and obedience to
this present possessor and his Family. Want of due consideration whereof, we
shall find one of the chief grounds why some of more conscientious sort, as
well of those that have, as have not been of that party, are so hardly drawn to
conceive right of things of this nature; and also for want of due distinction
and differencing of that condition, which through alteration of time, may come
to make the same person to contract a different guilt in the entrance into this
place of power, over it is in the execution of it. How a man may be an unlawful
intruder in to an Office whereunto a lawful power does belong, when yet, being
possessed, he is lawfully to be obeyed by all that stand subjected to those
that are in this place of power. For want of which due consideration, and how
those exceptions and objections usually made against the lawfulness of
Government gotten by Usurpation, are to be, as before noted, differently
understood in reference to the commander and obeyer, much trouble does many
times arise; for he though, he may not lawfully hold the place by authority
whereof he does command, yet ought he lawfully to be obeyed by the authority of
that Office which he does hold.

11. Two great faults and mistakes therefore there may be observed which do
daily administer occasion of much trouble in things of this nature, by
frustrating divine and positive Edicts of their true intent, through their
making so great a separation between those that are necessarily to this end
conjoined, that is, the power and person thereby empowered; for while some
would have obedience to the power only, as Gods Ordinance, without due regard
to the person, they make the power vain, by leaving no possibility whereby it
should be reduced into act. These being affected with so much ambition or
impatience against Church or State Rulers, are crying out with Core and his
company, You take too much upon you, and power is in the whole Congregation, in
the whole people; by which means they are about to usurp* and keep the real
execution of power to themselves, while they leave to others only the Titles
and formalities thereof. And some again, having too personal regard herein, and
striving to make the worth and value of the power depend on their affectionate
choice, do thereupon shrewdly hazard, if not wholly defect that true esteem and
benefit which is to be given unto, and expected from this conjunction. These
may be reckoned of Ephesti^ns company, that report not Alexander as King, but
the King as he is Alexander; and in justification of this their opinion, and
the attempts of their Favorites in this kind, comes the title of Usurper to be
every where so commonly applied by the dispossessed and his Favorers to all
persons in possession of power, although they might perhaps have the better
title of the two, even as among our selves in that doubtful claim between the
Houses of York and Lancaster, each party threw it upon the other on purpose to
withdraw the Subjects allegiance from his Adversary all that he could. For
although each party in presumption of his better title had agreed, that
obedience to an u^u^ped power was not lawful, especially when known and
voluntary given; when as yet prejudice would not give them leave to consider,
that when obedience to this Power commanded by its proper Officer now in actual
seizure thereof, is always both lawful and necessary, that is, always lawful
for Subjects to obey, though not lawful for him (it may be) to continue in
command.

12. And if we seriously look into the true ground of these aspersions, we
shall find both the imputation of Usurper fastened on him that commands, and
Flatterer on him that defends, to proceed from heat and prejudice alone. And
therefore they seldom go rationally to work* and show what are those evils and
inconveniences, as in order to peace and public good, that do attend on
subjection or acknowledgment of any that is now peaceably obeyed as in the
sovereign power; and that this is no way to be avoided, but by striving to
remove the person possessed: Then indeed might they have had some ground for
disobeying him themselves, and for calling others Flatterers that wrote or spoke
in his behalf. But else to write or speak in the defense of him who by the Law
of God and Reason, and present Law of the Nation is to be so acknowledged, and
in a case too, apparently tending to public peace and good, is not flattery,
but duty: whereas he that out of private or personal regard, would, to the
plain disturbance and unsettlement of the State, persuade to a present
obedience where there is not a present power, may be truly called a Flatterer
or Sel^-^eeker; both as making his address and acknowledgment where it is not
due, and by being therein swayed out of discontent of something past, or out of
hope of increase of private advantage to come to himself by the change.

13. And therefore in such like disputes as these, passion or interest will be
always subject to biass and mislead us in personal adherence, if we do not lay
aside our private respects, and heartily and conscionably look back into those
true grounds and reasons why obedience did originally come to be given to any
one man at all; being (as heretofore we showed) Gods glory by man's peace. And
this will be found the most warrantable and surest way to discover unto us that
person who at any time is to have it. And to this end I have judged it a
well-grounded Maxim, Love the King for Peace sake, and Peace for Gods sake. For
since none but God can be perfectly good, so as to be loved for his own sake
only; so all other things being good but suo modo, or according to their
relation, and that serviceableness and benefit they afford to other things
(that stand his creatures and witnesses of his goodness and glory amongst us)
they must still be personally loved and respected according to such their
present relations: whereas those that want that relation, cannot, out of any
separate respect and value that is in themselves be esteemed right objects of
that love and respect which is only due in regard of the relation it self*

14. So that the way to clear our selves of prejudices* and to understand
things aright, is to consider them in their proper ranks and conditions, and to
di^^inguish them by their proper names: Even to put a difference between such
as are justly called Usurpers, upon reasons before spoken, namely by assumption
of that power which by place belongs not to them, (as for the Woman to usur^
authority over the Man, or Subjects over their Prince) and such as do
dispossess any of the place it self; the which last are to be esteemed
Disseisors or Intrudors. For although the wrong done by the Disseisor be
greater then that of the Usurper, as to the party dispossessed; yet in respect
of their right to obedience, the first has only right herein of the two, the
other having none at all. And therefore in reference to that necessary
conjunction which is to be upheld in the union of the person with the power,
it is well to be observed how God has joined these two together to the intent
that no man, through interest or prejudice, should put them asunder. For where
he enjoins subjection to the Higher Power as his ordinance, and sets forth the
penalty of doing otherwise; he presently denotes it to be personally due, by
subjecting us to those that are Rulers: For Rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to evil; that is, they being possessed of this power, are to be
expected just avengers of Resistance, therefore called evil, because the cause
of so much evil. And then when it after follows, Will thou then not be afraid
of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same; it
is presently appropriate to that person which God in his providence has set
over us: For he (that is, this person) is the Minister of God to thee for thy
good; that is, Gods Deacon or Vicegerent in preservation of Peace by means of
this submission. And so it afterward follows, He bears not the sword in
vain; and, He is the Minister of God, etc. And as we find the power and person
thus conjoined, so that it might be always effectual to this end, it is also
enjoined in the present tense, without any exception to the lawfulness or
validity in the title to enter or rule by; when it is said, The Powers that are
(that is* the Powers in being) are ordained of God. -- He is, and He bears,
etc. And so also when we are elsewhere enjoined to make prayers for Kings and
all that are in authority, that under them we may live quiet and peaceable
lives in all godliness and honesty; these words [ that are in authority]
denoting present authority, cannot (as heretofore noted) warrant any exception
to be made by those that are to obey: For then it should not be effectual to
the leading of a quiet and peaceable li^e, nor would the duties pertaining to
Godliness be so duly and freely exercised: And we may consequently conceive,
that obedience and subjection is not to be given to such as are not in
authority, nor to Powers that are not in being. And that Text especially, where
we are commanded to fear God and the King, and not to meddle with those that
are given to change; will be expressed in obedience to the King or person in
present power and possession: For why else should we be forbidden to seek to
change him, or meddle, or join with them that would do so, in such unlimited
words? If to seek to change by way of sedition, had been thought lawful for
Subjects, upon any ground, by him that said, That against the King there is no
rising up, then surely this precept was very wrong put; especially not having
any such exception; for rather the word not should have been left out, and the
precept have been, Meddle with them that would change, or are seditious toward
it; for sedition must precede change in that kind.

15. And if we do not carry an equal and impartial respect to persons dignified
by Gods Ordinance, we show plainly we have no respect to his Ordinance at all,
but would have it an Ordinance of our own: When as the power thereby claimed,
is to be at no time of value without our approbation; and by this means fall
within the compass of Saint James his reproof, To have the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ with respect of persons. For, as in his instance, if those that
are unequal in worldly honor or title, are yet equally to be respected as they
stand equally our Christian Brethren; so also, such as are now in power, are,
for their power sake, and for the honor of him that ordained it, to be equally
respected and obeyed, however there might be a greater share of outward worldly
title in one man then another. So then we may see the way to be a constant
Royalist, is to be a constant Loyalist; not to respect the power or place for
the persons sake, but the person for the place and power sake: And thereby,
according to our duty having respect to God and his Precept, before our own. If
we do not this, he that to day was Loyal, may to morrow be brought turn Rebel
and Traitor, through that change of Families which stories do tell us have in
this thrust out one another.

17. But some would make Prescription the only way to lawfulness in
possessions of things of this nature, as well as it is for silencing of Claims
between Subjects in their private possessions; but since they have not yet, nor
cannot, upon any true ground, agree in limiting of this time, it argues the
thing it self to be but a fruitless invention: For although toward the ending
of Suits and Quarrels, each State and Kingdom do, by Laws of its own, prefix a
certain time in which possession shall in certain cases be a good plea in it
self against all other, yet this Law being positive, bears always an exception
to the Lawmakers himself, as having continual power to right himself and all
others in case of equity; according to that maxim, Nullum tempus occurrit Regi.
And therefore although it may be available to silence private titles in regard
of a superior power to appoint it, and see it executed accordingly, yet it will
not thereupon follow, that Subjects may fancy any such Laws to bind their
Prince by. And therefore when questions of this kind shall arise for
confirmation of Lawmakers themselves, I know not any Superior under God
himself, who shall ascertain this prescription, and see it executed
accordingly. And if we but mark the thing it self, in its original rise and
ground, we shall find them gainsaying themselves, and laying that very first
possession which they disallow, for a foundation of that which they would have
to be right afterward. For in such variety of times prescribed, suppose it
should be a Hundred years; when, and where must we begin to account? Must it be
from the first day of the parties secret plotting or attempt to get into this
place of power? How shall that be truly known? And if you leave that out of the
computation of unlawful action, which was most of all so, and begin to compute
it from the time of possession, then shall we want a Judge to state when that
did precisely begin; and thereupon when it shall take end, so as to say to the
Subjects, The Hundred years are now out, you have all this while been subject
for wraths sake only, now you must submit for conscience sake also; yesterday,
being but the Ninty ninth year, and Three hundred sixty fourth day since the
Family got possession, it was never made lawful till this very day* Thus they
that deny right of obedience to the possessor, do yet derive right from
possession, and by consequent, grant it to be due thereunto. And surely if men
had had that due regard to public peace which they should, and in respect
whereto it might be thought that they had prefixed a time to silence disputes
of that nature, they would not then have so far lengthened it, as to pass that
limit, wherein it was not supposable, that the dispossessed should continue at
all, or in such repute o^ power as to disturb him that had all this while been
settled; and not, on the other side, while disturbance is most to be feared,
left them at liberty for to attempt it.

17. Again, Will they make one prefixed time serve for legitimating the
Government of all new Families, notwithstanding that great difference in right
to claim, and way of entry that may be observed in them? they then become
unjust: If they make difference, then who shall be Judge concerning him who
shall really be esteemed an Usurper, amidst that great partiality which
interest or envy uses to cast that way, as well for making Usurpers that are
not, as acquiting those that are so; and again, for aggravating or lessening
the faults of such as are?

18. If we think of some foraign power, as that of the Pope, or the like, to
undertake in this kind, as he has sometime done, how shall we do for another
to place above him again, to see that particular spleen or interest have not
made him partial also: So far as to make Charles Martel and his Son lawful
possessors, notwithstanding known precedent usurpation, even while he was
Master of the Palace; and on the other side, to call King Henry the Eighth, who
was an Hereditary possessor, an Usurper, while he acknowledged not him for
Supreme?

19. Will they put it to Subjects themselves to judge whether their Prince be
at all, and how far, and in what degree an Usurper, to the end that they may
know whether, or how far obedience is to be given unto him? What hope of
agreement in their Verdict? Nay, is it not the sure way to set them at
disagreement, and consequently, to introduce Civil War? for since he should not
at all have been possessed, if the wills and power of those that opposed him,
as wanting title, could have prevailed against the greater number or power of
such as elected and helped him in, how then can we imagine that these should
now not only let go their superior power herein, which they have all this
while contended for, but also submit that equal vote they have as Subjects, to
be overborn and silenced by the desires of their enemies, in the dethroning
their friend, and admision of a known adversary into supreme power over them;
who by their past opposition, they must now expect also to be heightened with
thoughts of revenge?

20. Is it not therefore much better, and more becoming such, as have any real
love to the peace and welfare of the Church and State where they live, to
labor to distinguish and free themselves from private and personal respects
and prejudices, and ingeniously to examine all things accordiong to their prime
intention and aim, which is preservation of God glory, by preservation of men;
and preservation of men, by preservation of public peace and agreement? What
and if (for reasons before set down) some have not so plainly asserted
obedience and loyalty to an Usurper as they have to a Tyrant? can we yet
otherwise think then, that as their intention was to preserve peace in this
case to the public, notwithstanding the public it self must therein suffer;
even so, and much more must we imagine, that in this other case, where only
one person or Family does suffer, that yet they should leave men at liberty to
make disturbance in the public, as often as passion or interest should furnish
Subjects with occasion of such imputation? No certainly; had they meant that
the Subjects of any Prince now peaceably settled might under color of
Usurpation withdraw their allegiance, they would not then have so firmly
asserted that this allegiance was due to Tyrants; since that, as formerly said,
can never be practiced without Usurpation, and that in a more continued and
high measure, and also accompanied with more pernicious and dangerous
consequents then in the other. For whereas a new Prince is called Usurper, for
breaking the Law made in behalf of the dispossessed in particular, does not the
Tyrant much more break and transcend those Laws, and the Laws of God and Nature
also, in what he does in detriment to the public? And does he not daily repeat
the same breach, and newly violate them, as often as he does tyrannise? Whereas
Usurpation consists only in one act, against one single person or family of
the whole, and is not daily prosecuted like the other, to the detriment of all
in general. Let us not therefore invert the prime intention of Laws, and make
that destructive to Peace, which was purposely framed to preserve it; by the
wilful mistake of their meaning, that seem to ascribe unlawfulness to the rule
of Usurpers, or possession of Usurpers. And this we shall best do, if we do but
reflect on that different condition the same person is to be looked upon in
relation to that Prince or family he opposes or dispossesseth, and in relation
to the rest of the Subjects and Nation; and this also in reference to what
shall be by him done before he is possessed, over what it is afterward.

21. While any one is attempting thus to enter, he is doubtless to be opposed
by both Prince and people, as an Enemy not only to the Prince himself, but to
the Commonweal also in disturbing their peace and quiet: And being not yet
seized of any such place of power as to make his acts or commands warrantable,
there is nothing which is by him done in a politic capacity can be called
lawful. But if the Tables be now turned* and he quietly seated in the
Legislative power, as the other was before, then are the Subjects to turn
themselves in their obedience too, and having still respect to Gods ordinance
and the public quiet, continue on the same peace, by a dutiful submission to
him that is now Dei gratia or by Divine providence brought into that authority,
which the other did claim Dei gratia before: When yet the person thus entered,
if he be not thoroughly satisfied in the right of his possession, stands before
God accomptable for the injury done to the dispossessed, and what else shall
happen in his regiment. In which respect, as his possession it self, so the
commands thereby imposed, may well be unlawful as to the Imposer, but cannot be
so esteemed in the Obeyer: He may be called Usurper by the dispossessed, in
reference to the place by which he is empowered; but is not by the Subjects to
be so thought in the execution of what is proper thereunto: They are to look to
Possession as an evidence of Right in it self; for are not all men's Estates
else called by that name? do we not say, Such and such men are men of great
Possessions? And if Subjects shall be put to guide their obedience and loyalty
by other dark evidences, who shall show them and expound them but parties
interessed? and how shall they agree in them? Do we not, for peace sake, say in
other things, that Possession is eleven points of the Law? And will it not in
this much more follow, that it should be all twelve? There one part is left
open and free, because Appeal to the Lawmakers may make alteration: But there
being in this case no Superior on earth, it is to pass as confirmed by God
also, till he in his providence shall make alteration.

22. If this course should not hold, but their obedience and loyalty should not
be lawful, if the Prince were not lawfully seized or made so by prescription,
there would seldom any time happen, in any Nation amidst those many changes of
Families, wherein Subjects could warrantably obey, for want thereof. It was
not, I am sure, the practice and opinion of Christians formerly: They, as they
lived nearer the Apostles times, so they followed more closely their precep^s
and examples, in subjection to the parties possessed of those higher powers
they lived under. If they should have understood S. Paul's injunction of
subjection to the Powers that are, to have no enforcement upon the conscience
of any that could not be persuaded his present Prince or Emperor came in as a
lawful Successor, or by lawful election; how could they have been at all times
noted for such constant Loyalists, notwithstanding there were very few, but
either in their entry balked the election and approbation of the Senate or
people, which at first were held only lawful authorities, and as much
afterward transgressed the rule of hereditary succession, by bringing in new
families. In which cases, although to the eyes of all men it was apparent, that
force or craft set upon their present Sovereigns; yet would not they forget
their duty of loyalty to him, however their Prince might have forgot to do
justice to another. And if to this end we shall but look to our Stories, we
shall find cause enough to retract this opinion of Disobedience, being contrary
to the sense and practice of our loyal Ancestors. We will begin but from the
Conquest, because best known, although more shifting have been before.

23. Harold that preceded the Conqueror, is chosen by the Nobility, being then
the prevailing party; and though a stranger by family, is yet generally obeyed,
notwithstanding the known right heir is amongst them, even Edgar Atheling.

24. Harold is thrust out by the Conqueror by force, both a stranger himself,
and of a new family: He is also obeyed* notwithstanding the right heir is still
living.

25. His son William, surnamed Rufus, dispossesseth his elder brother Robert,
and is yet generally obeyed, although also the right heir be still living.

26. After him the other younger brother Henry possesses the Crown, against
the right of the said Robert, still living; and is yet generally obeyed.

27. Next, Stephen* by help of Londoners and Nobility, assumes the Crown; and
although he were of a new family, yet is he generally obeyed, notwithstanding
the right of succession was in Maud the Empress and her issue.

28. In the next, Henry the Second begins a new family, and in him indeed may
we may find the first true usurpation; for his own sons are taking upon them
sovereign power, their father yet living and possessed.

29. He being dead, Richard the First his son gets the Throne, and is no longer
to be called Usurper.

30. King John next seiseth on the Sovereignty against the hereditary right of
his Brothers son. In his time indeed the Pope does usurp authority to censure
and depose.

31. The next Possessor is Henry the Third* who, although the son of the said
John, is not yet cast off upon the score of Usurpation, but generally
acknowledged and obeyed* But he was much troubled with the usurped authorities
of some of his Peers and Parliaments, who would often incroach upon the
Sovereignty.

32. Edward the First is the next Possessor, generally obeyed, atlhough entering
upon the like claim, as Grandchild to King John.

33. To him succeeded his son Edward the Second, toward the end of whose time,
Prescription of an hundred years from his Great-grandfather John might only
have been pleaded to have made their obedience matter of conscience* when on
the contrary he has the most opposition of all his Predecessors, from his
wife, Peers and Parliaments, all which usurp upon his authority.

34. Edward the Third the next* was not only a Rebel, but a true Usurper, in
taking upon him to act in things of State, without and against his Fathers
leave, being still in possession: For however his claim was undoubted as to
succession, yet deserved he more then a stranger to have the odium of
Usurpation cast upon him, as being most unnatural. Yet the Father being dead,
and he possessed of the Crown, although the other had been forced to resign,
(as he could not but well know) we do not find that any man took upon him to
disobey him afterward, as Rebel or Usurper.

35. This man's Successor, Richard the Second, we shall find deposed and
dispossessed by a prevailing party, who set up Henry the Fourth as in right of
the Family of Lancaster, reckoning the other but as Usurpers; whose Grandchild
Henry the First is again dispossessed by that Family of York as U^urpers, whom
they had called Usurpers before; and all within the space of sixty years.
During which time, and that of Richard the Second, those that continued loyal
to the persons in possession, were certainly to be esteemed better, and more
conscientious Subjects then those those that opposed; who could in truth be but
Rebels.

36. Although the next, Edward the Fourth, might well be called Usurper, taking
upon him as King, while the other was yet living, and in possession of part of
the Country, and when also by the Articles made with his Father, and confirmed
in Parliament, Henry the Sixth was to reign during his life, yet is he
generally obeyed. But then, what shall we say of him, when his Predecessor
Henry the Sixth comes to be restored and repossessed again; and himself being
forced to fly beyond Sea, and after he was publicly proclaimed Usurper,
entering the Land, durst not claim any right to the Crown, as his right, but
only to the Dukedom of York (wearing also the Badge of Henry the Sixth's
eldest Son in taken of his Homage?) What shall we say, when he after in cruel
manner smo^e him on the face with his Gantlet, and caused him to be slain by
his own servants, and caused also the Father to whom ^e had formerly done
homage to be imprisoned, murdered and scornfully buried; a person so good,
that he was called by the name of the Holy? Yet do we not find but for all
this, while he had possession, he had due loyalty and subj^ction acknowledged
unto him, and the Crown entailed on his Family.

73. Against the Right of his Son Edward the Fifth, King Richard the Third
enters, and might well also be called Usurper, because he exercised Kingly
power before the other was actually dispossessed. And yet, as ill as he was
otherwise also, is he generally obeyed and fought for.

83. Henry the Seventh succeeds; but he, not taking to himself Kingly power
till he were in full possession, is not called Usurper: Although his title was
not so good as the others, (whom we are however to expect to be called Usurper
and Tyrant also, the more to dignifie the other now in possession) when as yet,
although the said Richard were an Usurper as to his Nephews, he was none to
him. Again, although Richard were dead, yet were there others living, and in
England too, of a far more lineal and legal claim to the Crown, as was the Lady
Elizabeth, Daughter to Edward the Fourth, and the Earl of Warwick, Son to the
elder Brother of King Richard, George Duke of Clarence, to whom and his Heirs
the Crown was also by Parliament given by Henry the Sixth, in case he should
die without issue, as he did. And yet further, he stood by Act of Parliament
attainted of Treason, and had his Lands and Goods with those of his followers
confiscate to the said King Richard: May he not also be called Usurper, for
that he not only exercised Kingly power before he was married to the Lady
Elizabeth, the right Heir, but that afterward he never so much as joined her
name in Acts of State and Sovereignty; when by the Law of the Land she should
have been chief, as was adjudged on the case of Queen Mary and King Philip. And
although he also brings in a new Family, to wit that of Tudor in place of
Plantagenet, yet, being in possession of the Crown, he has not the style of
Usurpation so thrown upon him, as to take off the Subjects duty of allegiance.
Nor do I think that any will commend them for Loyalty, that did after rise in
the behalf of Perkin Warbeck; although the Subjects generally thought him to be
the right He^r indeed, and no counterfeit.

39. Henry the Eighth succeds him upon the same Title, and Edward the Sixth
him, with very small dispute of their Right.

40. Queen Mary finds another Claimer to retard her possession; namely the Lady
Jane Gray. And truly had she not bestirred herself, and frighted the other
party by a much greater power, I believe the other would, with her possession,
have been generally reputed and obeyed as the legal Heir, having all the State
conformation could be then expected* For the Lords of the Council, that then
acted all public affairs, caused her to be proclaimed in London; and no worse
a man then B Ridley, in a Sermon at Paul's Cross, persuaded obedience to Lady
Jane, and invighed earnestly against the Title of Lady Mary, as witnesses
Stow, fol. 1033. And it is like he might use the same motives against the
succession of her, as are recorded by Mr. Camden (in his introduction to the
Annals of Queen Elizabeth, to have been used against the succession of her and
her Sister also.) To wit, for that the Ladies Mary and Elizabeth were by the
Act of Parliament judged illegitimate, which Act was never duly repealed
(notwithstanding that the King their Father had by the same Act declared, that
they should succeed in order after Edward the Sixth, if his issue should fail:)
and for that the said Sisters could not by the Common Law of England be
Successors Hereditarily to King Edward, because they were not Germans, that is,
of the whole blood by Father and Mother, but (as our Lawyers term it) of the
half blood, It was also signified that Henry the Eighth by his last Will and
Testament, conveyed the title of the Crown to the said Lady Mary, or the Lady
Elizabeth should marry with Foreign Princes, which might revoke the Bishop of
Romes Authority now banished out of England, and subject the English under a
foreign yoke. And to the same purpose also were produ^ed Letters Pattents of
King Edward the Sixth, made a little before his death, and signed with the
hands of many Noblemen, Bishops, Judges, and others. But all this
notwithstanding, those very Lords that had before caused her to be proclaimed,
finding afterward themselves unable to put her into full possession, they
wisely laid Title aside; proclaimed the other, and made what haste they could
to obtain her favor: Dutifully and wisely preferring that which was the sure
way to public peace and benefit (although hazardous and disadvantagious to
their own) before a more sure way to their own advance, with the loss of that
which was public.

41. What shall we now think of the lawfulness of all those transactions,
which, all along, in those times were performed to the several Princes here?
was there never any obedience rightly given but to Edward the Second, and Queen
Elizabeth, because they two only could prescribe as to the term of a Hundred
years since the Crown was usurped by their Progenitors, and this hapening to
them but toward the end of their Reigns, shall we conclude that what was done
before, or toward any other, was not legally done, and to be esteemed acts of
fear and flattery more then of Duty? How comes it to pass that the Laws made by
these several Princes, nay by Richard the Third himself, are acknowledged for
Laws of force? If possession of the Lawmakers place gave them a right to make
laws, will it not also give them a right to their Subjects obedience? Beyond
all which if we will be truly regarding the injury offered to the deposed
Family, and think our selves obliged to s^e right therein done (without regard
to the public) will it not follow, that this injury being the higher, and the
more as the party doing it was nearer in relation, or of kin to those he did
it, that therefore an Usurpation made by a stranger, is not so heinous* as
where a Son usurpeth against his Fathers likeing, as Edward the Third did* or
an Uncle against Nephews, as King John, and Richard the Third, or one Brother
against another, or the like, as is to be observed in this long story. In which
cases to allege they had consent of the people, this will not make any thing
lawful as to their taking of possession, more then it did that of Adoniah
against the liking of David.

42 Find we any in all this List of Kings, and story of changings amongst them
that left his style and claim of Dei gratia or divine providence, and stood
upon that of lawful succession; when they do still all along write themselves
Henry, Edward, or the like, By the Grace of God King of England, etc. not
mentioning at all their Fathers or Progenitors name, or the descent by which
they did at first claim: What is this (I say) but plainly to evidence to us,
that the best evidence of their right and tenure, as Gods Vicegerents, is that
attestation of his Providence, whereby they have been enabled to attain this
possession? Toward the Attainment of which, the same providence does
ordinarily make use of succession, until he has some notable work to do; and
then, sometimes of election, by bowing the hearts of the people, and sometimes
of conquest, as Lord of Hosts. Yet can I never find that however those that
were to enter, for strengthening of their party and adherents, were ready to
make use of popular exclamations against Usurpers, and to do their best to have
it believed, that the possessor was so, yet (as I said) they, being in
possession, stuck to that claim above all other. A fresh example hereof we have
in her that was Successor to Queen Mary, and the last of the Family of the
Tuedors, or indeed* of the English Nation that were Crowned amongst us. For
says Mr. Camden in his Annals of Queen Elizabeth, fol. 18. Although in some
men's opinions Bacons wisdom failed him (on whom as an Oracle of the Law the
Queen wholly relied in such matters) for that the Act of Parliament which had
excluded her, and Queen Mary from succession of the Crown was not repealed;
upon which, some seditious persons took occasion afterward to attempt
dangerous matters against her, as being not lawful Queen, yet (says he) the
English Laws having long since pronounced, That the Crown o^ce worn quite
takes away all defect whatsoever. It was by others imputed to Bacon's wisdom,
who in so great perplexity and inconstancy of Acts and Statutes, whereas those
things that made for Queen Elizabeth, seemed to be joined with the ignominy and
disgrace of Queen Mary, would not new* gall the sore which was with age skinned
over; and therefore applied himself unto that Act of the 35. year of Henry the
Eight, which in a manner provided for both their fames and dignities alike.

43. So that we find, that however Princes are, in prudence, willing to omit no
claim that may make for their admission or security, and that especially at
their first entrance; yet is seizure and possession held ever to be the
steadiest support; nay, such it is in the express verdict of Law it self. To
which end I shall here insert the opinion of him that (by Lawyers themselves)
has been accounted the Oracle of the Law since, in fuller confirmation of that
Maxim before set down: And that is the resolution of my Lord Coke, who, in the
third Book of his Institutes, f. 7, 8. in the Title of Treason, expounding the
words of N^re Seignior le Roy, says, that by le Roy is to be understood a King
regnant, and not of one that has but the name of a King. And then also he
alleadges the instance of Queen Mary, on whom, as having indeed the sovereign
power, the word le Roy was appropriate, although she were a woman, and her
husband at the same time styled King of England. And that the style or title
alters not the respect and obedience due from Subjects to Sovereigns, more then
it does from Children to the Master or Father, (in which respect a Yeoman is as
absolute in his relation as a Lord) may appear (besides) in that instance of
our Kings holding the sovereignty of Ireland under the title of Lords, and not
as Kings, till of late times; during which space they had certainly as great
authority as afterward, and the Subjects there were in the same cases made
Rebels or Traitors to him as Lord, as afterward to him as King. Afterward he
quotes in the margent, the Statute of 11 H. 7. enacting, That none shall be
condemned for any thing done in obedience to the present King or Sovereign,
(for so the words of the Statute are, King or Sovereign) He further says, This
Act is to be understood of a King in possession of the Crown and Kingdom; for
if there be a King regnant in possession, although he be Rex de facto, and non
de jure, yet is he Seignior le Roy within the purview of this Statute; and the
other that has right, and is out of possession, is not within this Act* Nay,
if Treason be committed against a King de facto, and non de jure, and after the
King de jure comes to the Crown, he shall punish the Treason done to the King
de facto; and a Pardon granted by a King de jure, that is not also de facto, is
void. By all which it will appear, that the Law directs our fidelity to N^re
Seignior, our Sovereign Lord, not confining it to the style of le Roy or King,
to whom it is only due as being actually N^re Roy, our Sovereign Lord the King.

44. By which we may see, that the intention of Common and Fundamental Law of
the Land was not, by proper Acts made at the instance of, and in favor to
particular persons and their families, to overthrow that first main design of
Public peace, which was sought by appointment of a Successor in the
Government. The which because it was to be supposed to come to the Heir of the
Possessor, therefore were Subjects sworn to Him, his Heirs and Successors*
still intending that it is not due to the Heir only as Heir, if he be not also
Successor. For if so, why did not the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy run as
Grants of Land, and of other inferior Offices of Power, To him and his Heirs,
if none but his true Heir must be obeyed after his death or removal? And
therefore the Law, by putting down that word of Successor, did (doubtless)
determine, that obedience should go along with possession, as before noted.

45. The Laws, you see, having public regard, will not be abused with these
misapplied terms of Usurper, or the like, which passion or interest (as
heretofore noted) had politickly sometimes wrested to serve as a snare to
withdraw obedience from the person already in power, when it was only due to
him that did attempt to dispossess him. And therefore they use not the term of
Usurper more in this then other cases, where he that takes possession of any
thing by fraud or force, is not called Usurper, but Disseisor, or the like;
even as here he is called a King by fact. They knew well enough how to put a
difference between the legality of their commands that are Usurpers, while they
were usurping; and theirs that are now Possessors, although they were once
Usurpers. While they are in their act of usurpation, they are to be resisted
not only as opposers of public quiet, but of the Crown and dignity of the
present Prince, which, in conscience as well as by oath, we are bound to
maintain. But then, if it happen that the Crown and dignity do by providence
fall to him that was Usurper before, the same consideration of duty and public
peace must enjoin us to loyalty where the Crown and dignity is; all actors to
his disturbance must be now resisted as Usurpers. For as the Oath of Allegiance
did personally before pass in relation to that Regal power he or his had, or
were like to have; so when the person or family comes to be changed, it must be
presumed to pass in reason to those that shall be now possessed of those Regal
powers to which it is due.

46. But because ^ome Divines may perhaps make slight of the determination of
Lawyers in this matter, I shall confirm their judgment out of plain example in
Scripture. What think we of that panishment which David the King over Israel de
jure, did inflict on Baana and Rechab for their Treason against Ishbosheth,
that was but King de facto? Nay, what think we of the doing it by this King de
jure, before he was possessed of that Crown? Again, what other plea but
Possession can justify all those of Israel for adhering to him, since the
right was in David to rule over Israel as well as Judah? To think that they
knew not that David was by God appointed Ruler over Israel, as well as Abigal,
1 Samuel 25. 30. has little likelihood; nay, it is plain that Abner knew so
much, by those words of his, God do so to Abner, and mo^e also, except as the
Lord bath sworn to David, even so I do to him. To translate the kingdom from
the house of Saul, and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over
Judah, from Dan to Beersheba, 2 Samuel 3. 9, 10. Nay, that all Israel* knew so
much, appears by their speech to David, after that Ishbosheth, Saul's son, was
dead, viz. In time past when Saul was King over u^* thou wast he that leddest
out and broughtest in Isreal; and the Lord said to thee, Thou shall feed my
people Israel, and thou shall be a Captain over my people Israel. They make no
Apology for their past obedience to another set up over them by the power of
Abner, without any choice of theirs, as may be presumed: And yet being a King
and possessed, David is so far from blaming his Subjects for obedience, that he
calls him a Righteous person, 2 Samuel 4. 11. that is to say, one that by reason
of possession ought to be esteemed righteous by such as, like Baana and Rechab,
lived under him. Nay, if possession give not to Princes right to command their
Subjects also, I see not how David, in that seven years war between the house
of Saul and his, 2 Samuel 3. 1. could be excused of that oath he made to him of
not cutting off his seed after him, 1 Samuel 24 21, 22. For however the war be
there set down as between the two houses, yet it being to be looked upon as a
National contest, it became not David, now in public charge, to prefer his
private engagement before that engagement he now had taken upon him, that is,
to preserve the common safety and liberty of his Subjects against all opposers,
however they might be well esteemed of by himself. And the truth is, that
however all Kings are pressing that an Oath of Allegiance, or the like should
be express to them and their family; yet since the whole reason for swearing to
them and their family, and in maintenance of their power, was in re^erence to
peace and public good to be preserved by their power, it must of consequence
follow, that being out of power, that then the obligation of the Oath does
attend him on whom the power now rests for preserving that public peace and
good.

47. And indeed if he should be an Usurper in any Monarchy, which could no^
prove his descent by direct lineal right from an Ancestor by God put in, or
instituted by Nature, then all the Monarchs that are or have been in the world,
except some few that by express divine appointment have ruled amongst the Jews,
are and have been Usurpers, or at least for ought appears to the contrary; even
for that they cannot, or do not derive their pedigree from Adam, in such sort
as to evince, that of all that Nation wherein they live and govern, both their
family, and they in it, ought by the rule of Primogeniture to have precedence
to that Sovereignty; according to the observation of the judicious Author of a
Treatise called, The Anarchy of a limited Monarchy, who says, f. 12. All Kings
that now are, or ever were, are, or were either Fathers of their people, or the
Heirs of such Fathers, or Usurpers of the right of such Fathers. It is a truth
undeniable, that there cannot be any multitude of men what soever, either great
or small, though gathered together from the several corners and rem^test
regions of the world, but that in the same multitude considered by it self,
there is one man amongst them that in nature has a right to be the King of all
the rest, as being the next heir to Adam, and all the others subject unto him.
Every man by nature is a King or a Subject; the obedience which all Subjects
yield to Kings, is but the paying of that duty which is due to the supreme
Fatherhood. Many times by the ^^^ either of an Usurper himself, or of those
that set him (...) Heir of a Crown is dispossessed, God using the mi^ wi^kedest
men for the removing and setting up (...) in such cases the Subjects obedience
to the Fat (...) ^ust go along and wait upon Gods providence, w^ right to give
and take away Kingdoms, and thereby to adopt Subjects in the obedience of
anotner Fatherly Power. In which as he has in the beginning* according to the
most general opinion of the Royalist, sounded Monarchy on Patriarchical Right,
so does he end like a true Royalist indeed, in directing Subjects obedience to
wait on Gods providence in the appointmeet of this their political Father, in
like manner as they do of their natural. For since right of Primogeniture and
power of Government, could not be conceived to be given to Cain out of personal
worth, but for preservation of peace; and since no one now, as David formerly,
can plead divine Right for the settlement of their Families, therefore it must
still follow, that all Families being equal as to original right; respect to
peace and obedience must in conscience cause us to submit to that Person or
Family which Divine Providence has set over us.

48. Nay and respect to the continual administration of Justice also, unto
which (doubtless) our Laws had an especial regard, when not only the public
peace is called the Kings Peace, but the Laws too are called his Laws, being
acted in his name, as well as enforced by his authority; so that to question or
abolish his power of Judicature, is not only to overthrow Peace but Justice
also. Insomuch as if none should be at any time so lawfully possessed of the
sovereign power, as to challenge obedience, no man then can expect a legal
remedy for any injury offered him by another; for how can he do me right upon
my appeal, if he may not lawfully command, and the other be not bound to
obedience? And if another be bound, why not I? Would I be righted in my own
particular by acknowledgement of his authority, and do I yet think it hand to
join with all others in the like acknowledgement whereby the whole Commonwealth
may have right? Does not protection necessarily imply and call for subjection
as perfect relatives? If I hold Land of another, either by rent or service, or
both, and do in that case think it reasonable in me to expect continuance of
that benefit which arises by tenancy; am I no^ bound to give to him of whom I
hold and have it, that rent and homage which is due to the place he holds?
And would I not (being a Lord) expect the like from my Tenants? Would I think
it proper or reasonable, that upon any of my Tenants presumption, that I was
no^ so rightly seized as they conceived I should, they might thereupon take
liberty to withdraw their acknoweldgments and services, even during the time
they hold under me? If this were permitted, and some of the Tenants licenced to
withold their Lords due upon every fair pretense they could make that way,
what great disturbance* do we think, would ensue? Does not the instance between
Nabal and David inform us, that the rule of Reason and Prudence, as well as
Gratitude do justly call for obedience, and compliance to a protecting power,
even in a case against the interest and leave of his present Prince, and while
he is neither possessed, nor so much as claiming the whole Sovereignty, and
shall we think it yet reasonable that after this Sovereign power is wholly
possessed; and has been generally submitted unto, we may then with Shemei or
Sheba, out of particular love or relation to the last person or family, as
being allied by courtesy or kindred; or out of some discontent at this,
renounce and cast off our subjection when we shall think fit?

47. Surely no; such a resolution can never find entertainment in any that is a
true Cavalier indeed; that is, one that out of a true sense of duty and loyalty
alone appeared on the side of the late King, even because he was their King,
and their present Governor in chief. I am (for my part) persuaded, that as the
most considerable body of that party consisted of the Nobility and Gentry, so
were they men of too much honor and ingenuity to join themselves that way in
hope of any private advantage to themselves; but rather resolved to hazard
their own lives and fortunes in testimony of their loyalty to their present
Sovereign. And therefore I have cause to hope that no loss by that means to be
sustained (which the chance of war must render to one side or other) can move
them to be now so inconsiderately inconstant, as to cease to be loyal at such a
time as is apparently advantageous also. All sinister construction and wresting
of principles is most to be feared from such as appeared on that party, not out
of any such conscientious principle to their King, as King, but as they stood
biased by hope of gain or preferment; such as these, finding themselves
defeated of their aims, it is no wonder if they be found hardly reconcilable
to those they conceive the Authors thereof, but mutinous against them; without
any just sense of that public detriment which must thence ensue. It being not
unlikely also, but tha^, in case the King had prevailed, those that were then
the most forward in lifting themselves for the Royal party, would themselves
have proved the Kings greatest enemies, if their covetousness or ambition stood
at any time not satisfied to their liking: no otherwise then we do plainly find
now, in some of those tha^ were most zealous on the other side, as if they were
the most godly of that party; who upon such like discontent, are found most
ready to turn enemies themselves to that party and protection under which they
fought; clearly evincing, that it was rather gain then godliness, that first
engaged them. It was for the con^^^ction of these, and such as these, and for
prevention of such dangerous doctrines and practices as they might infuse into
others, to the abatement of ou^ bounden duty, on the one hand, and the
endangering ou^ just punishment on the other, that has made me thus large in
the discovery of all those things as they stand both in conscience and prudence
considerable in themselves, separate from all personal regard and prejudice.

48. For if we be not very watchful against such like insinuations, or what our
own passions and prejudices may in these cases tempt us unto, we may quickly
mistake in our respect and censures of Gods Vicegerent amongst us, no otherwise
then St. Paul did in his answer to the High Priest, at such a time as he stood
much exasperated through sense of his present suffering under his command. But
what then? if he fall, mark how quickly he rises? If he be told by a Brother
that it was Gods High Priest, he so answered, he disputes no^ his succession or
legal election into that Office according to their former law; although he
could not but know, that these were wanting in a far higher measure then can be
now objected. But he being now in Moses seat, the Seat of supreme authority,
applies the Text of subjection and respect to him, Thou shall not curse the
Gods, nor revile the Rulers of the people: As if on purpose to leave us a
president, that no such supposition could hereafter warrant any man's
disobedience or contempt of Authority. It will therefore concern us to be very
watchful against all temptations of like kind, as that which is but too subject
to prevail upon flesh and blood. For however such things may have a religious
appearance put upon them by him that can transform himself into an Angel of
light* yet by their fruits we may know them to be none other then works of
flesh.

49. When therefore we read that this blessed Apostle, and true Saint indeed,
Saint Paul himself is finding a law in his members* warring against the law of
his mind, and bringing him into captivity unto the law of sin. Shall we, ^uch
as we, think we are free? have we not rather just cause to doubt, that si^ce
he, notwithstanding that abundant grace and revelation given him, could not at
all times discover and bear against this enmity, even against this sinister
construction, which particular interest is ready to put in, for interruption or
misleading him when he came to interpret or practice what was by God commanded
him in the law^, so much more we, on whom the ^nds of the world are come, may
well suspect and fea^ ^^is our natu^l corruption will take place, even in our
most religious performances; and that sin which was before natural only,
taking occasion by the Commandment, to insinuate it self under a religious form
will be subject to deceive, and (thereby) slay us.

50. But what need a doubt be made of our readiness to confess the prevalence
of this our original state of corruption? Do we not find it on all hands
acknowledged? Nay more, do we not find each one as for himself, ready to
confess his own imbecilitie in performance* of most holy things? as in a
general way we do; when yet again, it is as sure, that when, in such or such
particular actings or opinions, we come to raise a foundation for our
deportments, or belief, we shall then be found so precipitately and hastily
swayed, as not only to give a partial ^ear to the temptations offered by this
Law; but also, for the most part to be carried with such violence, as not at
all to search or doubt whether prejudice, interest* or other natural corruption
be therewith mingled or no. When we find in how many particulars that which had
been said of old time in the law, was by partial construction of such as lived
under it, made to serve private interest and revenge (where public good and
justice was intended) we are all of us ready enough to believe that
mis-interpretation did sure enough happen to them; when yet in ou^
in^erpretation of some Gospel Rules and Precepts, we suffer ou^ selves to be as
prejudicately led, without either due consideration of public good or benefit
at all, or else measure and apply i^ in relation to our separate credits or
benefit. We would sooner believe that such as Eliah or Elishah should transcend
their Relations, and intrude into the Gove^nors employment of dist^^buting
equal Justice, by that Rule, of an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth;
Nay, and our Saviors own Disciple^ therein follow them too, then that we, we
who can now boast so much of our Evangelical light, should in any acts of ours
show our selves any way guilty of such mistaken zeal, no, not we. Those things
belong to ou^ Enemies, those of the contrary opinion, or party to us; they, not
we, bring railing accusations, despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities,
have only a for^ of godliness, profess they know God but in works they deny
him* being abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. But
let us be wary of the Stratagems of the old Serpent, of that subtilty wherewith
he beguiled Eve, to transgress a known command, under a fair pretense of being
more like God, or God-like; We must not do evil that good may come of it.
Where God has expressly, and without exception, commanded obedience to the
higher power, or to love one another, he that breaks that precept, or hates his
Brother, is neither truly godly, nor a lover of God. Meekness, Humility,
Patience, etc. are the Gospel rules. Religion, if it be pure, will be
peaceable: But if it be contentious, it proceeds from pride. Let us therefore
(I say) be very careful to examine our own hearts, as that which is desperately
wicked, and deceitful above all things. Let us lay righteousness to the line:
do we not break a plain precept, when we* disobey or reproach our Governors,
or persecute or censure our Brother? And then, are we, on the other side, as
sure that the cause why we do it, is indeed the Cause of God, and so nearly
concerning him that it must be now, and by us done; and that without further
warrant, or else his honor will be lost? That we transgress by our disobed
^^ce, every one sees; but that we are right in our reason for doing it, none
se^s but our selves. I am persuaded that if the frame of our hearts were well
searched, that even in our most zealous and religious ways of acting to the
disturbance of others, or disobedience to Authority, it would be often found,
that it was not true piety* but pride that caused contention; and stubbornness,
and discontent to be in subjection to any other, was the true cause we became
so extremely devoted to the service of God, that, under color of some service
and obedience to a higher Power, our contempt of this might be justified. To
try whether this were so or no, le^ us strictly and impartially examine our own
aims in the search of Scripture in things wherein obedience and submission is
expected.

Do we indeed search them with a meek, patient, and unprejudiced spirit; with a
true desire to be farther satisfied in our submission and conformity, as that
which has apparently in it self directest tendency to Gods glory, and man's
good? Or do we not rather search both them and the Law, with hearts full of
anger and discontent, and a desire to find things clean otherwise, even to find
some exception how we may resist the higher power, or meddle with those that
are given to change? Why then, it is a sure sign that there is a root of
bitterness springing up, we shall therewith be defiled. If the evil spirit find
the house thus swept and garnished, find such a preparedness to evil, we shall
return but ten times more the children of wrath then before. As we see of
Baalam, that notwithstanding a plain Precept, Go not with them, Numb. 22. 2.
would yet, from a corrupt principle within, be further searching what Gods m^nd
was: Why then, being given over to strong delusions, he found an answer, Go
with them; So when we shall abuse those plain precepts given in the Scripture,
as in order to public good, and will be seeking among mystical Texts for other
contary rule^, whereby to guide our selves, will it not then be just with God
to let us hear (as he did) an answer in the night, saying, Go with them, verse.
20? But however we should mistake our own hearts, through the deceitfulness of
sin, yet if we find men to be so far progressive in the course of disobedience
and gainsaying, as to persist therein, even after that the Reformation
contended for, and all that could be reasonably expected, is now brought about,
and that against those too that were their Leaders, and did accompany them
therein, this will plainly evince to the world that they began upon a carnal
principle, let their pretensions be as godly as they will; And I fear many now
living are too plainly guilty herein. And amongst these that thus see visions
in the night: What think we of them that dream of a Fifth Monarchy? Who since
they can find neither Government nor Governor better on earth, will seek one
in heaven; Christ himself shall rule them, or they will not be ruled at all.
Why truly, when he comes to reign personally, which ought to be every good man's
prayer, I believe no Christian will be found unwilling to submit to his
Scepter, and in the mean time, I hope none will refuse to submit to that
Authority, which amongst us does most represent him.

FINIS.
The READER is desired to mend these ERRATA.
Page 6. l. 2. Oeconomical. l. 34. insert this word [ and] before and to
believe, etc. p 18. l. 8. r acknowledge. p. 22. l. 12. r. has for where. p. 23.
l. 12. eff^cted for expected. p 40. l. 29. dele Job 56. 8. p. 44. l. 31. r.
clear for there. p. 51. l. 10. d^ride for divide. p. 58. l. 5. were for now. l.
12. worth for work. l. 15. now: for now. p. 62. l. 23. r. given to. p. 77. l.
15. dele only. p. 82. l. 16: r. defect. p. 87. l. 2. r. imitation. l. 9. dele
In these. l. 25. dele yet. p 92. l. 18. r is it for it is. l. 19. r. like? for
like; l 29 dele possessed. p. 93. l7. dele it. p 97. l. ult. r. an equal. p.
103. l. 15. r. and for l. p. 104 l 4. r. so for he. l. 17. r. In case for in
case. p. 105. l. 26. r. and for are. l. 28. r. defeat. l. 31. r. respect. p
106. l. 8. dele when. p. 109. l. 2. r. ^xpress. p. 112. l. 22 r. disengage for
distinguish. p. 113. l. 15. r. up for u^^^ p. 17. l 12. r. confirmation. and l
33. read, Lady Jane Gray; and withal it was showed how dangerous a matter it
might be if the Lady.


