AN HUMBLE REMONSTRANCE TO THE KING and PARLIAMENT In the Behalf of Many
Decayed and Decaying CITIZENS and FAMILIES of London, Occasioned solely by the
Dreadful Fire of That CITY, AND Some concurring Calamitous Events of Providence
since.

JOB 19.21. Have Pity upon me, have Pity upon me, O ye my Friends; for the Hand
of God has touched me.

Per PHILANTHROPUS PHILAGATHUS.

Printed at London, 1675.

AN HUMBLE Remonstrance TO THE KING and PARLIAMENT.
May it please your Majesty, And the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament.
IN hopes there may be some Analogy in the sympathy of the Politic, as in
that of the Natural body: I have adventured to represent unto Your grave
Wisdom's consideration, the languishing Condition of those many Souls, that
still labor and groan under the Mortifying effects of that dismal Fire of
London, seconded with a War since; to the aggravation of their Losses, and
depression of their endeavors for recovery; who being (as it were) Dismembered,
are rendered useless to the Nation, but might be yet very serviceable in their
Generation, were some charitable thoughts contrived and exercised toward them.
And seeing they are numerous who have thus suffered, many of whom have known
how to abound, being reduced now to the other extreme of Want, seem Adequated
for an higher Aspect than that of particular Charity, an are therefore more
Adapt Objects for the Influences of the Head. The blessing of Almighty God
having hitherto concurred with your Counsels for the Establishment and
Prosperity of the Crown, and procuring Peace to the Nation (as at this time) I
doubt not but your. Wisdoms will conceive it an Act of Gratitude unto the same
Almighty bounty, if you shall take thought of his distressed: the sooner
compassion may move you in this respect, may be the more acceptable Offering to
Heaven, that chooses to do good, when most wanted: For that this also exceeds
the nature of a private concern, and may conduce to replenish that depopulated
City with its own Members. Neither will the number of these Objects, and the
measure of their supply, make the Work seem insuperable to so great and grave a
Council, who have already done such Wonders, for the re-composing of Loyalty.

It is very lamentable to consider how many of our Fellow Members of the Nation
and City have sunk with their Losses into despair of Restoration; and have with
their meanness of being, lost even Life it self; whilst others, weltring
themselves in Pleasures, and prodigalizing their Superfluities with greater
hazard, might, to their perpetual Renown, apply a part thereof toward the
Resurrection of their Brethren. Those yet remaining, will be the more easily
assisted, who possibly may be reserved for some eminent Service to their
Country: For they are not contemptible, because Disciplined under Affliction:
the best men having been Educated and made such, in the School of Adversity.

Most Worthy Senators, I need not have recourse to Apocryphal Chronologies for
Heroic Examples of this sort: there being enough in Sacred History of
infallible Authority, attended with a multitude of incitements, for the
encouragement of such Pious Acts. A frequent President hereof we may find
amongst our selves, namely, when His Majesty is graciously pleased to Grant
Briefs upon particular Commiserable Accidents. The same Grace which moves that,
is more loudly called upon, and with more forcible Arguments, in a Common
Calamity. The greater the Relief is which is required, the more Praiseworthy
and acceptable in the sight of God and good Men, when afforded. Those who have
been wounded under a common Judgment, are therefore no more despicable, than a
vanquished Forlorn-Hope of a Battle, who have withstood the shock intended the
main Body; and if the Divine Wrath has been suspended by the sufferings of
some, for trial of he Virtues of those who have escaped, perhaps as great
Sinners (as the others) their Condition is worthy of the more pity and supply;
and is not unlike that Justice used among Merchants, when in a Storm at Sea,
one or more joint Adventurer's Goods are thrown overboard, or otherwise
damnified, to save the whole, they reduce that to an Avarage; whereby the Loss
is made tolerable, which might otherwise prove ruinous. The Vessel of this
Nation, has for some years been conflicting and laboring under dismal and
heavy Judgments, as the Plague, Fire, and Sword, etc. and now at last she is
arrived (through Divine Blessing upon your prudent Counsels) into an Harbor of
Peace, it is hoped you will now have opportunity both to consider and repair
the Breaches that have been made upon her in these Tempests.

Most Noble Heroes, I dare not prescribe to so great a Magazine of Wisdom that
inhabits you, ways and Methods, for the raising and proportionating such
Relief, as the Necessities of those miserably-sindged Citizens calls for: not
in the least doubting, but if you shall please to look that way, the work will
be easily effected; and the God of Mercies invoked and inclined to reward it.
The vicissitudes of Providence our eyes have witnessed, does sufficiently
certify the mutability of Humane enjoyments; and should dispose us to
consider, others misfortunes may be ours; and how welcome in the like
condition, a generous assistance would be to us, such a sympathy does excite
to do accordingly. The aforesaid Sufferers are, in another respect, worthy
Objects of your help and interposition, for the stopping of the merciless fury
of their Creditors upon them; whereof the Prisons about London are severe
Testimonies; as if they had been Men marked out by Divine Vengeance, merely to
become a Prey to their insatiate Covetousness, or a Sacrifice to their Cruelty;
and this countenanced by the Law, because of Debt, without any reflection upon
the inevitable Hand of God that disabled them. Could your Eyes be in every
corner of this Nation, to behold the particular Oppressions of this nature, by
one man to another, it would move your Bowels to contrive a remedy, that might
wash off the reproach contracted upon our Christian profession for want of it.
As works of Charity and Mercy have the preference, and should be first
espoused, so that your Wisdoms in a compassionate mind, will take into
consideration the Sufferings of these Forlorn men, and thereupon select a
Committee to inspect the quality of their Losses by the Fire and Contingencies,
and of their present Griefs and Causes; without peradventure you will find
their Relief not difficult, if you shall please to recommend it to the Nation,
either by way of a Voluntary Contribution, or one or two Months Tax, according
to the Exigency of the Work. It can only thrive in your Hands; you may be a
means to recover some Languishing Souls as well as Bodies; and the recompense
of such works is unutterable. Some more worthy Pen may put you in mind of
other matters fit for your enquiry, as the re-view of some Laws made a long
time since; the reason whereof (circumstances of Time, Trade and Temper
considered) will not reach to our days; as the Statute of Bankrupts, etc. not
to omit the exorbitancy of some practices at Law, under which the Nation groans.

Most Worthy Patriots, I have with what brevity the Subject would dispense,
cast my Offering at your Feet, hoping it may meet with (...) Acceptance and
Success, as may redound to you^ ^^mortal Glory and Happiness.

FINIS.

