One Sheet (or Second LETTER) concerning the Difference in some Points which is
between our United Brethren, in order to Accommodation.
SIR,
HHaving perused the Exceptions you let me see in a Paper that Confronts Mr.
Williams with the Books of others of his Brethren, which shows the Collector to
be a Learned and Industrious man, and bent (I suppose) upon Reconciliation of
this late Breach between them, and whose Labor therefore is Accepted, and in
that generous self-denial I see in it, to be imitated: I could not choose but
take my Pen, and make my Animadversions upon them in the perusal, but without
producing or meddling at all with the Opposite Citations.

The Words (or Questioned Passages) of Mr Williams.
CHrist, where He is called a Surety, was a Surety of a better Covenant, and
therefore not of the Law of Works. For the former part of this, it is express
Scripture, Heb. 7.22. For the latter, by the Law Mr W's understands the
Covenant of Works, that was made with man in Innocence requiring perfect
Obedience, as the condition of Life. Now the Difference between this Covenant,
and that of Grace with man Fallen, does lie in this, That the same Duty is
required in both; but (speaking Largely) the one has (and so the Condition
laxed), the other had, no Mediator. And no Mediator, no Surety.

It was not a Covenant that obliged us to Die for Sin, or perfectly Obey in a
way of Merit, that He is called a Surety of. By the Better Covenant, Mr W's
apprehends the Covenant of Grace, and so speaks this. But I remember these
words of Mr Rutherford. The Lord Jesus has a Room in each Covenant, that of
Works, and that of Grace. I will add to it, A Room, but not Strictly as Surety
of either. It is the Covenant of Redemption (the Covenant of Suretiship he
calls it) that is, the Covenant between God and Christ, not the Covenant
between God and Man (of Works or Grace) wherein the foundation of this
Suretiship is to be laid. The excellency of Christ's Priesthood is set out by
this, that it was made by an Oath; The Lord has Sworn. God has Sworn, can be
no less than his Decree. Has! When was that? Why when God did Covenant with
Christ, that he should make his Soul an Offering for Sin; then was this Oath
took, then was this Suretiship, Priesthood, Mediatorship constituted and
established. Christ is a Surety according to this Covenant, (and of that of
Grace upon the account only of coincidence with it.) As to the Covenant of
Works Christ has this Room, He has undertook to satisfy for the breach of
it: And as for the Covenant of Grace (or Covenant of Reconciliation) he has
this Room, that by that Satisfaction (or Suffering) he has procured it for us.

Christ can be Bound by the Covenant of which he is Surety, to no more than
what we are engaged to do and suffer by the Gospel Covenant. This calls for Mr.
W's second Thoughts on what is already said. Christ is not bound by the
Gospel Covenant to any thing at all, That Covenant belongs only to us. He was
bound by the Law, as Man, to perfect Obedience: and by his Surety-Covenant to
suffering in regard of his Undertaking (which was not ex delicto, but ex
voluntario contractu) in our behalf. Mr. W's wont deny this, or he must explain
himself.

The calling God Creditor, and Sin Debts, is Metaphorical, and using such words
as proper, has given advantage to the Socinian. This I think judiciously
spoken. The ransom Christ gave for Sinners, is not properly a Payment, but
Satisfaction; that is, Redditio oequivalentis aliter indebiti, as Scotus has
defined it. If Christ was ex ordinatione Dei, strictly and precisely a
constituted proper Surety of the Covenant of Works, He having performed it in
our stead, we should be freed from the Penalty, and enjoy the Reward, without
any terms to be required farther on our parts; it were not just to impose any.
And if he was such a Surety (as some would have it) of the Covenant of Grace,
then must he perform those our terms, and so believe and repent for us, which
is the true Antinomian consequence of it. But when he becomes a Surety only
upon his Covenant with God, and so has a Room only, in either Covenant with
Man, he has so mediated his Work, that we are reconciled to God, and God still
requires our Duty.

Though in Gal. 4.4, 5. it is said, that Christ was made under the Law, it is
not meant of the Moral, but Ceremonial Law. I have not Mr. W's Books now to
examine the Quotations, but I am verily persuaded that Mr. Williams, upon
recollection, and Dr. Bates, who says otherwise, and orthodoxly, will both
agree in this Position (Mr W's differing I guess only as to the meaning of this
particular place) from another Third. All Men being born under the Law, and
Covenant of Works, Christ Man must be under the same. I believe further, that
both the one and the other will agree also, that Obedience to the Moral Law was
the Condition of the Covenant of works which Man Christ, as Man, was obliged
to, that he might himself have right, jure and merito federis Operum, to Life
eternal.

There is no change of Person between Christ and the Elect, Of this particular
Point of Commutation, I have 9 Pages on purpose against Dr. Owen, in my Book
called Peaceable Disquisitions.
or betwixt him and Believers. Here Mr. W's must have line. He will not
certainly deny but that Christ died ((...)) for us so as that it was loco
nostro, in our stead, and allow a Commutation of Person so far, that he dying
for us, we shall not therefore be damned our selves: but not such a
Commutation, as that we are to be reckoned to have obeyed, suffered, and
satisfied in his Person, so as to be our own Redeemers; which is that he means,
and being therefore at some little loss here, I will (craving his Pardon) lend
him my Hand. It is not only bono nostro, but loco nostro, in our stead (as
Grotius has evinced) that Christ died for Sinners. Well then. In our stead;
that is, Not in our Person strictly, but in the Person of a Mediator, says Mr.
Baxter: In our stead, that is, as a common Person ex re gesta, but not a common
Person ex fictione suppositi, as Mr. Woodbridge has wrung it out more
elaborately from his studying the Civil Lawyers.

There is a change of the Penal sanction of the Law: the Gospel-Law does not
denounce Death for the same Sins, and for every Sin, as Adam 's Law did. The
words of Mr. Williams here, and Dr. Bates, are indeed plain contrary, but it is
some Slip only I believe, and in the bottom sense both will reconcile easily.
Distinguish we therefore with care between what the Gospel requires sub ratione
officii, and what it requires sub ratione couditionis: between the Duty and the
Condition of the Law of Grace, or Covenant of the Gospel. Sub ratione officii,
the Gospel requires all that, and no less than that, the Law of Nature does
(for the Law of Nature and Remedying Grace are both parts of Christ's Law, and
no Sin against That, but is also a Breach of His, and makes us liable to
Death): But the Gospel sub ratione Conditionis, requires only Sincerity,
consistent with Human Frailty and Imperfection: so that when we sin against any
Precept of Christ's Law, (the Law of Nature which is founded in God's Nature,
and ours being unchangeable) and thereby were Condemnandi, we sin not yet
against it as a conditional Covenant, by nonperformance. And so long as the
Condition is, when the Duty is not performed, by the Grace of that Covenant, we
are pardoned and saved.

There are three things more (leaving the rest of it) wherein this Paper taxes
Mr W's for differing with another of his Eminent Brethren. 1. That Christ
purchased the Covenant of Grace. 2. That its Condition is an antecedent
Condition. 3. That Faith and Repentance are not Covenant Blessings.
For the first of these, I have already affirmed it. And when the Assembly's
Confession tells us of a First Covenant with Adam, of Works: and upon his Fall
of a Second, of Grace; and that this is called a Testament in reference to
Christ's Death the Testator, it is a Wonder to me if any United Brother, in
opposition to Mr W's shall gainsay this, not withstanding what is in their
Larger Catechism. That Covenant which God promises to make with the House of
Israel in Christ's days, and the Apostle calls a New Covenant, is not made with
the Elect in Christ from Everlasting. For the second, such a distinction, as of
an Antecedent Condition and Subsequent, in the Doctrine of Election, where it
is not God's foreseeing that we will believe and repent makes him choose us, but
his choosing us makes us believe and repent, may do some Service; there is
indeed a Subsequent, no Antecedent Condition here: Likewise in the Doctrine of
Works, Good Works is a Consequent Condition to what Faith is Antecedent,
because Good Works do justify our Faith: But as for this Point of the
Covenant, when we say Faith is the Condition of it (understanding it of the
Covenant of Grace made with fallen Man), if we do not make it such a Condition
as antecedes the Benefits, and that which being performed gives right to them
(that we may not mince the matter), it is but trifling, to maintain that it
has any Condition at all. For the third, I pray understand these
Covenant-Blessings, of the Gospel Covenant (the Covenant of Reconciliation made
with Man), and the Absolute Promise of the First Grace, or the giving a new
Heart, to belong to the Covenant of Redemption, or God's Engagement to his Son,
that he shall have a Seed, that Nations shall be brought in, and the like, and
that therefore he will give it, (this new Heart, or First Grace) to the end
that his Elect may in their time enter Covenant (the Gospel Covenant) with him,
and not as if they were in Covenant before, and so God gave Faith (this new
Heart or First Grace), as one of the Benefits of it. Understand him thus, and I
apprehend the better end of the Staff to be in Mr Williams's Hands.

I will say no more therefore to this Paper, but I will write my Sheet out, for
my own sake. I know, for God to require Faith on our part, to bring us into
Covenant, and yet promise it, to require a Condition and yet give it, may sound
strange to Human Reason: but when the Language is so frequent in Scripture,
Circumcise your Hearts, make them new, walk in my ways, and yet the new Heart
is God's Work, and it is he causes us to walk in them, the sound is not harsh
in those Ears that are used to it. It is yet a thing something harder of
digestion, to say, That God does not only give, but Christ has purchased the
Condition for the Elect by his death, and not for others, who yet are bound to
the performance, or must perish, while the Gospel Covenant is preached to one
as well as the other. This has made me in my Letter to Mr W's deliver my
Opinion for Universal Redemption, accounting that the First Grace, or Condition
of the Covenant, flows from Election, and not (as the Benefits do) from the
purchase of Christ's Redemption. Unto what I have therefore said there against
the common Cry of our Divines, That Christ's Redemption must not be held such
as that when the Work is done it might be possible that none might be saved,
and so he dye in vain; and I have answered, it is but an idle Complaint,
because Election takes care of that: I do now add, as glad of the occasion and
room,

Nor have we need to deny to them, that Christ in his dying for All did intend
the Salvation only of his Elect, for Christ being God with the Father, and
having decreed from Eternity that such and such shall be saved, he must intend
still what he decreed; but this draws no implication on the point, seeing there
is the Intent or End of the Redeemer, which must be distinguished from the End
of the Redemption it self. There is Finis Operis and Finis Operantis, Finis
Redemptoris and Finis Redemptionis; the Intent or End of the Doer, and the End
of the Work done. The End of Christ is so to dye for all the World, as that
some of the World, to wit, those that believe in him, (that is the Elect) may
be saved: The End of the Work of Redemption it self is the making satisfaction
to God's Justice, so that He may in Honor, or Righteousness, deal with the
World otherwise than his Law required, which is to pardon and save whom he
will, and upon what terms he will. For, seeing the price of our Redemption, or
Ransom which he paid (that is his Obedience unto Death) was properly a
Satisfaction (not debiti solutio), which Christ therefore might choose to lay
down, and God might have refused to accept; the benefit we have by it is not
such a present legal discharge, as in payment of a Debt where one is bound for
another, upon which there is nothing farther can be required of the Debtor; but
a discharge upon such terms as pleased the Father and Son to agree upon, and
offer to the World by the Gospel. And this is the Will of him that sent me,
that every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting
life. In the Work then of Redemption it self, this is all Christ has to do, to
reconcile the World to God, so as to obtain the Grant of a general Conditional
Pardon: There is other Work for him to do, in regard to his Elects performing
the Condition. Him has God exalted to be a Prince and a Savior. As a Priest
and Savior he did his satisfactory redeeming Work: but as a King and Savior
he gives Faith and Repentance, and upon our Repentance Remission of Sins. What!
was our Lord Jesus, think you, a Man of one business? Had he but one Work from
his Father to do, and now has no more? When he strayed from his Parents at
twelve years old to dispute with the Doctors, wot you not that he was then
about his Father's, business? And was that business, the Work of Redemption?
What! was the work of his three Offices, King, Priest, and Prophet, all but one
Work? Nay, was not the Impetration of our Redemption, or reconciling God to us,
one Work, and the reconciling us to God and Application thereof another? He
laid down his Life to Redeem us: he rose from the dead to Apply this Redemption
by working in us (through the Spirit) the Condition which he requires in order
to the benefits purchased; and which ( having then received all Power) he gives
forth to whom it is decreed, as the dispenser of the Treasure, of his Father's
Election.

This was that, I say, he covenanted with his Father for, that performing of
the Law of Mediatorship, as to the laying down his Life for Sinners that
whosoever believes in him may be saved; he should upon his rising be exalted to
this farther Office, to be Prince and Savi^ur, to give this Faith, or
Condition, to whom he pleases, for their salvation.

That this is so, and must be so, let us consider. No Man can rationally
apprehend that any bene^its Christ has purchased for him (or at least any
Saving benefit) can be his, unless Christ be his, Christ must be ours if his
Benefits be ours. Christ is given with his Benefits. He that has the Son has
Life, and he that has not the Son has not Life. Now I argue, seeing it is
Faith makes Christ ours, or unites us to him, and before we have Faith we have
not Christ, who is had, or made ours, by Faith; this Faith it self cannot be a
Benefit purchased for us by him, because then we must have one of his purchased
Saving-benefits before we have Him. We must have Faith (I say) before we have
Christ. Faith is this Condition. The Condition consequently is not, cannot be,
one of the Benefits flowing from Christ's Purchase, but such a Gift (an
absolute Gift) as Christ himself is, arising merely from God's free Breast
altogether.

To inculcate this yet a little, the common Opinion of the Orthodox is, That
the Gospel Covenant is conditional; That Faith therefore must antecede the
Benefits; and yet that Faith, or the Condition it self, is purchased by
Christ's Redemption for the Elect, as well as the Benefits upon condition. When
the Question then is asked, Whether the Elect have any Benefit (any
Saving-Benefit) by Christ's death before they believe, it is such a puzzling
and indeed posing Question, as must lead us either into that Point of
Antinomianism, that we are in Christ, and justified, before Faith: or else into
this Solution.

And here let me turn and look back, upon occasion of these Third Thoughts on
my late Book of Justification. To understand aright St. Paul's Justification by
Faith, we must consider with whom it is he contends. The Jews (as the best
skilled in Rabbinical Learning, does tell us) did generally maintain the
Doctrine of Freewill, not doubting but every one could do as God commanded, if
he would himself This is the meaning of that Jewish saying, All things are in
the power and disposal of Heaven, except the Fear of God; for that they
believed was in their own.
, they having no Notion (as Pelagius at first) of Grace [All that God has
spoken we will do]: and having received the Law from God's Mouth, (the
Excellency whereof was their Glory) they supposed in the observation of the
outside, that they kept it, accounting the Reward promised therein due to them
thereupon from God, as what in Justice they merited for their Deeds; insomuch
as some thought themselves so righteous as not to sin at all, or need Pardon
[Touching the Law, blameless]; and others that sinned, being licked whole by
Sacrifice, they thought all well, boasting themselves as the Only People, the
Only Righteous in the Earth. Not to mention what we all know out of the Acts,
that some of them that were Converts to Christianity did yet remain of the
opinion, that their Law was to be kept. The Apostle now sets himself against
these Jews, and lets them know that no man, neither Jew nor Gentile, is
Righteous in God's sight (whatsoever they were in their own) but that all have
sinned, and need that Messiah they expected, to make Reconciliation for their
Sins; That our Lord Jesus Christ being that true Messiah, by his Death
answering their Legal Sacrifices, has born the Curse of the Law, and so
redeemed us from it. That Gods undeserved Goodness here in accepting of
Sinners, through this meritorious Sacrifice of his, to Pardon and Life, upon
Condition, which he gives the Grace also to perform, presupposed, and by me
acknowledged: it is another Righteousness, and not that of the Jews (not that
Paul calls his own, as a Jew), or not a Righteousness of Works [perfect Works],
but a Righteousness of Faith, which makes the Reward only of Grace [of Faith,
that it may be of Grace]; of Faith, but a true Faith working by Love, (which is
an internal Righteousness though imperfect, and not as the external Works of
the Jews was) is that Righteousness of God in opposition to the terms of the
Law, whereby we are justified and saved.

The Apostle (I observe) in one place speaking of Faith, calls it the Obedience
of Faith; the same word if you compare one Text [ Romans 11.30, 31.] with the
Margin, signifying both to believe and obey. And the People believed God and
his Servant Moses. I will conclude hereupon, that Christ's Redemption in the
immediate fruit thereof, which is the Grant of a General Pardon through his
Satisfaction to all the World on Condition, being laid as a foundation, To be
justified by Faith is to be justified by performing that Condition. To be
justified by Faith (believe me at part^^^) is in St Paul's Mind to be justified
by the Obedience of Faith (...) is (in Paul's mind I say, opposing the Jew) by
embracing the C^^^stian Religion, and living according to it.

Sir, The Design, Sum, and End of this poor Sheet of mine, and the printing of
it, comes all to this. Opinionum variet as, and Opin^^^ium Unit as, non sunt
(...). In God's Name therefore, do you and your Brethren unite, and reunite
(as much as you will) is Practicals, but forbear, and bear with one another in
Opinions. And I pray those who have my late mentioned Book, where they find in
the end, a Letter to Mr. Williams, that they will please to stitch this Sheet
to it.

John Humfrey.

London, Printed for T. Parkhurst near Mercers-Chappel, 1695.


