THE NONCONFORMISTS RELIEF Prepared against the SESSIONS Of the Next JUSTICES
In London or in the Country.

By a Follower of Peace, and Lover of Sincerity.

Romans 13.1, 2. Let every soul be subject unto the higher Powers: For there is
no Power but of God; the Powers that be, are ordained of God.

Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1678,

THE NONCONFORMISTS RELIEF.
WHereas there is an Oath required of every Nonconformist Preacher that lives
in a Corporate Town, which has been an occasion of scruple, or of trouble to
many, when really the contents thereof at the bottom are nothing else but the
giving security to the State of our fidelity; I, who am one of the meanest
among my Brethren, after some long consideration of what is like to edify, or
offend the most, do, upon the account of what is just and right, and not only
what is prudent, (having first satisfied my doubts) humbly present my self
(though none of the first) to obey what is commanded.

For the due performance whereof, with a good conscience, I will lay down my
rule upon which I go, and I must then act according to it.

The rule I have to lay down for our submission to this and the like
Impositions is, that forasmuch as the Law is the Will of the Lawgiver, or
Declaration of his Will, we are to consider impartially what the intent or
purpose of the major part of the Parliament (which consists of the King and his
two Houses) is, or was, that we should yield to, in our compliance with them in
such or such an Imposition, and if we can submit to it in that sense which we
verily believe to be their mind or meaning, we are to do it: and if we cannot,
we are to suffer. If we take their words in any sense of our own, (though never
so rational) which we believe in our consciences is, or was not their meaning,
we prevaricate with the Law, and are profane or loose in our obedience: and if
we make any scruples which our conscience tells us are besides their purpose,
or not to be made in equity according to their mind or meaning, we are
injurious to the Lawgiver, and ought to lay down such hard constructions. Here
is the true latitude (or Middle way) we are to walk in, in our resolution of
such cases.

This rule therefore being laid, I must do two things for the practice of it. I
must first give the sense of the Oath according to what I sincerely believe to
be the intent of the Imposers, without wrong unto them, or my own
understanding: and I must then apply my self to the taking of it. Only I must
carefully premise this, for avoiding all offense to the Higher Powers, that I
do not take upon me (as no one can) to put a meaning on the Oath, which I know
I must take in theirs; or to determine and say, This is their meaning: but to
say, I believe this to be their meaning, which is necessary to determine for my
own self, that I may act in Faith in what I do.

For the true sense then, or interpretation of this Oath, here are three parts
or clauses of it.

The first part is, I swear that it is not lawful to take arms against the King
upon any pretense whatsoever. In which clause we are to conceive in the first
place (as I am satisfied for my self) some such words as [ I hold, or, I
believe] are to be understood, which may appear from some other Act where they
are supplied in the like Imposition, I swear that I hold it unlawful to take
arms against the King; and in the next place by the words Upon any pretense
whatsoever, as we are to understand no less doubtlesly than upon any cause, or
in any case, Vlla ex causa; so we are not to screw up those words so high, as
if no case or cases could be invented to put exception against the universality
of the proposition, but that there is no such case or cases obvious, so as to
come into the mind of the Lawmakers, (and no such consequently as by the intent
of the Law we should object to our selves in the taking this Oath,) or no such
to be put with regard to our King; so that if this position be received by us
as it is stated and held by the most learned Assertors of the power of Princes,
and maintainers of this Tenet it self, we are to conceive it their minds we
should yield to it as indefinitely true, without nicety, and too scrupulous a
disquisition. I will explain my self a little further. This position may relate
either to the Kingly Power in general, or to the Person of the King. As it
relates to the former, it suffices to the meaning that we hold it as others
against rebellion have maintained it. That is, I suppose, the Majority of
Voters (if their minds could be asked) would desire no more of us. As it
relates to the latter, I believe the meaning to be no less than this, that
there is no case to be put, or no cause in the earth to be found out, that will
warrant our taking arms against our present Sovereign Charles the Second. And
this I heartily believe, and am ready to swear to it.

The second part is, And I do abhor that traitorous position of taking arms by
the authority of the King against his Person, or any commissionated by him. In
this clause I understand by the word, abhor; in the cool sense, I disclaim, and
I count the Position traitorous if it be used to rebellion: But it is not, I
suppose, once to be conceived, that it was the intent of the Parliament, (the
most of the Members) or of his Majesty himself, to advance any arbitrary
Commissions above Law in any point by these words; and consequently that by
those commissionated by him, we must understand such only as are Legally
Commissionated, and in the Legal pursuit of such Commissions. A Commission not
Legal is no Commission, and no man can be justified if he act otherwise than
his Commission. And by this interpretation only, which I am fully persuaded
(upon the account mentioned) was the sense of the Lawgiver, are the most
material objections taken off, that have been alleged against this Oath by
any. And fit advice also has been taken in the whole case.

The third part is, And that I will not at any time endeavor any alteration of
Government either in Church or State. In this clause, By Government, we must
understand, out of doubt, the present Government, and that only; which in the
State is Monarchy, in the Church Episcopacy: And we are not to imagine that it
was the intent of this Act to deprive any English man of his freeborn right,
to choose Parliament Men whom he thinks meetest, to inform them of our
grievances, to petition them, and to concur with them as our Representatives
(which vertually we must needs do) in every Act that passes for the repealing
old Laws, and making now, and consequently if it should seem good to the
Parliament to make any reformation of Religion, so long as it were carried on
in an orderly way by the consent of the King and the two Houses, there is
nothing in such an Endeavor of any man in his place and calling but what is
warranted by the fundamental Constitution of the Realm; so that by this
Endeavor here abjured, we must understand such an Endeavor only as is not
warrantable by the Constitution. Such an Endeavor we may suppose the
Parliament intended as was used in the late times, when they went about to
remove Episcopacy without the consent of the King, and against it. Such an
Endeavor we abjure. That is, we will not endeavor by any means at all to
remove the King from his Throne, because the Constitution of the Land is to be
governed by a Monarch, and we will not endeavor to alter Episcopacy, or reform
the Church in any way or manner, but what is warrantable by the Law of the
Nation; that is, by a Convocation, or Act of Parliament.

This is what I believe to be the true meaning of the Imposer; and in this
meaning I thank God, that with a conscience fully persuaded, and an honest
intention to the Public, as to my self, I do address my self to the words
ensuing.

J. A. B. do swear that it is not lawful to take arms against the King upon any
pretense whatsoever: and that I do abhor that traitorous Position of taking
arms by the authority of the King against his Person, or against those that are
commissionated by him in the Pursuance of such Commissions: And that I will not
at any time endeavor any alteration of Government either in Church or State.

JOHN HUMFREY.

Reader,
I Bless God I have a good conscience in Printing this Paper. I am sensible
into how many streights many Ministers, and many good Men in several
Corporations have been, and may be still brought, in regard to this Oath, or
some like it. If there be difference, every man who is concerned, is to look to
his own conscience. I have laid him down his Rule, and he is to be true to it,
and to his own Soul; and if he be in doubt in any point, he must forbear. For
my own part, I am so well satisfied about this Oath, that although I see not
the Ends of Divine Providence in the general affairs of my life, who am one
still on the wrong side of the hedge; yet do I not think my self born into the
world to no purpose, so long as I have lived to do this. A matter so small (I
count) in it self, and yet so momentous in regard to the Public; in the
security of the Government, and the quiet of honest people. I do not subscribe
my Name as one now actually swearing to the Oath, but as the Author of the
Paper. But I intend to take this Oath for ought I know to choose, whether I
need it or no, and much more if I do need it, after I have published thus much;
unless I see more reason than now to the contrary. The sum of the matter is, I
am content for my own part to engage my self to have no hand in any rebellion,
whatsoever happens; I am resolved upon it, I will be no Rebel by the Grace of
God.

J. H.

FINIS.

