Humble Requests both to Conformists and Dissenters, Touching their Temper and
Behavior Toward each other upon the lately passed INDULGENCE.
1. THat we do not over-magnifie our Differences, or count them greater than
they truly are. I speak now of the proper Differences which the Rule it self
makes, to which the one sort Conforms, the other Conforms not. Remember that
there are differences on both parts, among themselves, incomparably greater
than these, by which the one sort differs from the other. There are differences
in Doctrinal Sentiments, that are much greater. How unconceivably greater is
the difference between good men and bad! between being a Lover of the blessed
God, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and an Enemy! a real Subject of Christ, and
of the Devil! have we not reason to apprehend there are of both these, on each
side? Let us take heed of having our minds tinctured with a wrong notion of
this matter, as if this Indulgence divided England into two Christendoms, or
distinguished rather between Christians and Mahometans, as some men's Cyclopick
fancies have an unlucky Art to represent things, creating ordinary men and
things into Monsters, and prodigious Shapes at their own pleasure. It has been
an usual saying on both sides, That they were (in comparison) but little things
we differed about, or circumstantial things. Let us not unsay it, or suffer an
habit of mind to slide into us, that consists not with it. Though one must not go
against a judgment of Conscience in the least thing; yet let us not confound
the true differences of things; but what are really lesser things let them go
for such.

2. Let us hereupon carefully abstain from judging each others states Godward
upon these differences. For hereby we shall both contradict our common rule,
and our selves. When men make Conscience of small and doubtful things, on the
one hand, and the other, about which they differ, Blessed God! how little
Conscience is made of the plainest and most important rule, not to judge one
another for such differences? Rom 14.3, 13. Why of all the parts of that Holy
Book is this Chapter only thought no part of Gods Word! or this Precept so
variously enforced in this Chapter! and so awfully! verse 10, 11. But why do
thou judge thy Brother? or why do thou set at naught thy Brother? we shall
all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. For it is written, As I live,
says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to
God. Is it a light matter to usurp the Throne of Christ, the Judgment Seat of
God? Yet how common has it been to say, Such a one Conforms, he has nothing
of God in him? Such a one Conforms nor, it is not Conscience but Humor? God
forgive both! Had they blotted Romans 14. out of their Bible? It Is plain by the
whole Series of discourse, it is the judging of men's states, and by such small
matters of difference, that is the thing here forbidden. Otherwise that there
is a lawful judging of others, who knows not? some few things contained in this
Chapter [ To receive one another, ( i. e. as Christians, or as such whom God
receiv^s) notwithstanding remaining doubts about such small matters, not
determining such doubted things in Bar to the doubter. Verse 1, 2, 3. Or not to
lay stumbling blocks in each others way. Verse 13. Not to do the doubted thing,
with a mind still unsatisfied, verse 5.23. Not to censure either him that does
or forbears, not admitting an hard thought of him, or less favorable, than
that what such a one does, he does to the Lord, and what the other forbears, he
forbears it to the Lord, verse 6.] These two things I say, put in practice, had
taken away all differences, (that we are now considering) or the inconvenience
of them long ago. And we shall still need them as much as ever.

3. Let us not value our selves upon being on this or that side of the severing
Line. It Is Jewish, yea Pharisaical to be conceited, and boast our selves upon
externals, and small matters; especially if arbitrarily taken up, and is it
self an argument of a light mind, and incomprehensive of true worth. Though I
cannot sincerely be of this or that way, but I must think my self in the right,
and others in the wrong that differ from me; yet I ought to consider, this is
but a small, minute thing, a point* compared with the vast Orb of knowables,
and of things needful, and that ought to be known. Perhaps diverse that differ
from me are men of greater, and more comprehensive minds, and have been more
employed about greater matters; and many, in things of more importance, have
much more of valuable and useful knowledge than I. Yea, and since these are not
matters of Salvation we differ about, so that any, on either side, dare
considerately say, He cannot be saved that is not, in these respects, of my
mind and way, he may have more of sanctifying, savoury knowledge, more of solid
goodness, more of grace and real sanctity than I. The course of his Thoughts
and Studies having been by converse and other accidents led more off from these
things; and perhaps, by a good Principle been more deeply engaged about higher
matters; for no man's mind is able equally to consider all things fit to be
considered, and greater things are of themselves more apt to beget holy and
good impressions upon our Spirits, than the minuter and more circumstantial
things (though relating to Religion) can be.

4. Let us not despise one another, for our differing in these lesser matters.
This is too common, and most natural to that temper that offends against the
foregoing caution. Little spirited Creatures valuing themselves for small
matters, must consequently have them in contempt that want what they count
their own only excellency. He that has nothing wherein he places worth,
belonging to him, besides a Flaunting Peruque and a Lac't Suit, must at all
adventures think very meanly of one in a plain Garb. Where we are taught not to
judge, we are forbidden to despise, or set at naught one another upon these
little differences.

5. Nor let us wonder that we differ. Unto this we are too apt; i. e. To think
it strange, (especially upon some arguing of the difference) that such a man
should conform, or such a one not conform. There is some fault in this, but
which proceeds from more faulty causes. Pride too often, and an opinion that we
understand so well, that a wrong is done us, if our judgment be not made a
standard and measure to another man's. And again, ignorance of humane nature, or
inconsiderateness rather, how mysterious it is, and how little can be known of
it: How secret and latent, little Springs there are, that move this Engine, our
own mind, this way or that; and what bars which (perhaps he discerns not
himself) may obstruct, and shut up toward us another man's. Have we not
frequent instances in other common cases, how difficult it is to speak to
another man's understanding. Speech is too penurious, not expressive enough.
Frequently between men of sense, much more time is taken up in explaining each
others notions, than in proving, or disproving them* Nature, and our present
State, have, in some respects, left us open to God only, and made us
inaccessible to one another. Why then should it be strange to me that I cannot
convey my thought into another mind? It Is unchristian to censure (as before)
Such a one has not my conscience, therefore he has no conscience at all; but
it is also unreasonable and rude, to say, Such a one sees not with mine eyes,
therefore he is stark blind. Besides, the real obscurity of the matter is not
enough considered. I am very confident an impartial, and competent judge, upon
the view of Books, later, and more ancient, upon such Subjects, would say,
there are few Metaphysical questions disputed with more subtlety, than the
controversies about Conformity, and Nonconformity. Blessed be God, that things
necessary to the Salvation of Souls, and that are of true necessity, even to
the peace and order of the Christian Church, are in comparison so very plain.

Moreover there is besides bare understanding and judgment, and diverse from
that heavenly gift which in the Scriptures is called grace, such a thing as
gust and relish belonging to the mind of man, and I doubt not with all men, if
they observe themselves, and which is as unaccountable, and as various, as the
Relishes and Disgusts of sense. This they only wonder at, that either
understand not themselves, or will consider no body but themselves. To bring it
down to the present case. As to those parts of worship, which are of most
frequent use in our Assemblies (whether Conforming, or Non conforming) Prayer,
and Preaching, and hearing of Gods Word: Our differences about these cannot,
but in part, arise from the diversity of this Principle, both on the one hand,
and the other. One sort do more savor prayer by a foreknown form; another that
which has more of surprise, by a grateful variety of unexpected expressions,
And it can neither be universally said, it is a better judgment, or more grace,
that determines men the one way or the other, but somewhat in the temper of
their minds distinct from both, which I know not how better to express than by
mental taste, the acts whereof (as the objects are suitable or unsuitable) are
relishing or disrelishing, liking or disliking. And which has no more of
Mystery in it, than that there is such a thing belonging to our natures as
complacency, or displicency in reference to the objects of the mind. And this,
in the kind of it, is as common to men, as humane nature, but as much
diversity'd in individuals, as men's other inclinations are, that are most
fixed, and least apt to admit of change. Now in the mentioned case, men cannot
be said to be universally determined either way by their having a better
judgment; for no sober man can be so little modest, as not to acknowledge, that
there are some of each sentiments, that are less judicious, than some that are
of the contrary sentiment, in this thing. And to say that to be more determined
this way, or that, is the certain sign, or effect, of a greater measure of
grace, and sanctity, were as great a violation both of Modesty and Charity. I
have not met with any that have appeared to live in more entire communion with
God, in higher admiration of him, in a pleasanter sense of his Love, more
humble fruitful lives on Earth, or in a more joyful expectation of eternal
life, than some that have been wont with great delight publicly to worship God
in the use of our common prayer; and others I have known as highly excelling in
the same respects, that could by no means relish it, but have always counted it
insipid and nauseous. The like may be said of relishing or disrelishing Sermons
preached in a digested set of words, or with a more flowing freedom of Speech.
It were endless and odious to vye either better Judgments, or more pious
inclinations, that should universally determine men one way or the other, in
these matters. And we are no more to wonder at these peculiarities in the
temper of men's minds, than at men's different tastes of Meat and Drinks, much
less to fall out with them that their minds and notions are not just formed as
ours are; For we should remember they no more differ from us, than we do from
them; and if we think we have the clearer light, it is like they also think they
have clearer. And it is in vain to say, Who shall be judge? For every man will
at length judge of his own notions for himself, and cannot help it; for no man's
judgment (or relish of things, which influences his Judgment, though he know it
not) is at the command of his will; much less of another man's. Therefore,

6. Let us not be offended mutually with one another for our different choice
of this or that way, wherein we find most of real advantage, and edification.
Our greatest concern in this world, and which is common to us all, is the
bettering of our Spirits, and preparing them for a better world. Let no man be
displeased (especially of those who agree in all the substantials of the same
holy Religion) that another uses the same Liberty, in choosing the way most
conducing, in his experience, to his great end, that he himself also uses,
expecting to do it without another man's offense.

7. But above all, let us with sincere minds, more earnestly endeavor the
promoting the interest of Religion it self, of true reformed Christianity, than
of this or that party. Let us long to see the Religion of Christians become
simple, primitive, agreeable to its lovely Original State, and again it self,
and each in our own Stations contribute thereto all that we are able, Laboring
that the internal principle of it may live and flourish in our own Souls, and
be, to our utmost, diffused and spread unto other men's. And for its externals,
as the ducture of our Rule will guide us, so gradually to bend toward one
common course, that there may at length, cease to be any divided parties at all.

In the mean time, while there are, let it be remembered that the difference
lies among Christians, and Protestants, not between such and Pagans, Let us
therefore carry it accordingly toward each others, and consider, our
Assemblies are all Christian and Protestant Assemblies, differing in their
administrations for the most part, not in the things prayed for, or deprecated,
or taught, but in certain modes of expression. And differing really, and in the
substance of things, less by mere Conformity, or Nonconformity to the public
rule of the Law, than many of them that are under it do from one another; and
than diverse that are not under it. For instance, go into one Congregation, i.
e. a Conforming one, and you have the public Prayers read in the desk, and
afterward a form of Prayer, perhaps, used by the Preacher in the Pulpit, of
his own composure, before he begins his Sermon. Go into another Congregation,
and Prayer is performed without either sort of form, and perhaps the difference
in this is not so great. It may be the Conformist uses no preconceived form of
his own, and the Nonconformist may. Both instruct the people out of the same
holy book of Gods word. But now suppose one of the former sort read the public
prayers gravely, with the appearance of great reverence, fervency, and pious
devotion; and one of the latter sort that uses them not, does however pray for
the same things, with judgment, and with like gravity and affection, and they
both instruct their hearers fitly, and profitably: Nothing is more evident,
than that the worship in these two Assemblies does much less considerably
differ to a pious and judicious mind, than if in the latter, the prayers were
also read, but carelessly, sleepily, or scenically, flauntingly, and with
manifest irreverence, and the Sermon like the rest: Or than, if in the former,
all the performance were inept, rude, or very offensively drowsy or sluggish.

Now let us show our selves men, and manly Christians, not swayed by trifles
and little things, as Children, by this or that dress or mode, or form of our
Religion, which may perhaps please some the more for its real indecency. But
know, that if while we continue picquering about forms, the life be lost, and
we come to bear the Character of that Church, Thou have a name that thou
live, and art dead, we may ere long (after all the wonders God has wrought
for us) expect to hear of our Candlesticks being removed, and that our Sun
shall go down at Noonday.

The true, serious Spirit, and Power of Religion and Godliness, will act no man
against his Conscience, or his rule understood; but will oblige him in all acts
of worship (as well as of his whole conversation) to keep close to
Gospel-prescription, so far as he can discern it. And that, he will find,
requires, that in subordination to the divine Glory, he seriously design the
working out the Salvation of his own Soul, and take that course in order
thereto, put himself under such a Ministry, and such a way of using Gods
Ordinances, as he finds most profitable, and conducing to that great end, and
that does his Soul most real good. If you are religious, or of this or that
mode or way of Religion, to serve a carnal design for your self, or your party,
not to save your Soul, you commit the most detestable Sacrilege, alienate the
most sacred thing in the World, Religion, from its true end; which will not
only lose that end, but infer an heavy vengeance. Yea, and it is too possible to
transgress dangerously by preferring that which is less, though never so
confidently thought to be divine, before that which is greater, or separately
from its true end. You greatly prevaricate, if you are more zealously intent to
promote Independency than Christianity, Presbytery than Christianity, Prelacy
than Christianity, as any of these are the Interest of a Party, and not being
considered in subserviency to the Christian Interest, nor designed for
promoting the Edification and Salvation of your own Soul. But that being your
design, Living Religion will keep your Eye upon your end, and make you steady
and constantly true to that; and to your Rule, without which you can never hope
to reach your end.

Now hereupon, such as conform to the public Establishment, and they that
dissent from it, may differ from each other upon a twofold account. Either 1.
As judging the contrary way to be simply unlawful: Or, 2. As judging it to be
only less edifying. It Is not the business of this Paper to discuss, who herein
judge aright, and who wrong; but supposing their judgment to remain as it is
(which they themselves however should examine, and if it be wrong rectify) I
shall say somewhat to each of these cases.

To the former, while your judgment continues as it is, it is true, you cannot
join in worship with the contrary minded; but nothing forbids, but you can be
kind, conversable, courteous toward them; and your common Christian Profession
(besides the Rules of Humanity) oblige you so to be. Yea, and even to converse
with them as occasion invites, more intimately as Christians, the visible marks
of serious Christianity appearing in them.

To the latter sort it is acknowledged, you cannot constantly join in worship
with those of the contrary way; because you ought ordinarily to worship God in
that way which you judge to be best, and most agreeable to the divine Rule,
(though you are not obliged utterly to abandon any for its imperfections or
corruptions, that is not corrupt in the very essentials:) And that you ought
most frequently to attend on that which you find to be most edifying to your
own Soul. As that should be your more ordinary Diet that best agrees with you.
And that way therefore you must most constantly adhere to, which is most
grateful and savoury to you; because you cannot so much edify by what you less
relish. But your judgment and latitude will well allow you sometimes to
frequent the Assemblies with which you hold not constant Communion. And if it
will allow, it will also direct you thereto for a valuable end; as that you may
signify you ordinarily decline them not as no Christians, or their worship as
no worship; but as more defective or less edifying; and that you may maintain
love, and both express, and beget a disposition to nearer Union. And if our
Rulers shall judge such intercourses conducing to so desirable an end, they may
perhaps in due time think it reasonable to put things into that state that
Ministers of both sorts may be capable of inviting one another occasionally to
the brotherly Offices of mutual assistance in each others congregations. For
which, and all things that tend to make us an happy people, we must wait upon
him, in whose hands their hearts are.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the
lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel; And Sold by Richard Janeway in
Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster Row, 1689.


