Infants Faith, AND RIGHT TO BAPTISM, Proved from Scripture; WITH THE Chief
Objections against it Answered.

By John Hunt, Pastor of a Particular Congregation in Northampton.

Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to
this Word, it is because there is no Light in them.

Joh. 5.34. I receive not Testimony from Man.

2 Timothy 4.3. For the time will come, when they will not endure sound Doctrine.

Joh. 12.48. The word that I have spoken, the same shall Judge him in the last
Day.

LONDON, Printed by R. Janeway, and Sold by the Author.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian READER,
THou may well wonder, that in this Day, when the World can scarce contain
the Books already Written, that this Little Piece should crowd in among the
rest under my Hand: And more especially, on such a Subject, as has been so
Frequently and Learnedly insisted on by so many Worthy Servants of Christ; who
have been daily bringing out of their Treasury concerning this Matter,
contained in this Book, things New and Old; and what can the Man say that
comes after the King? But though it may seem strange on this Account, yet I
hope some Satisfactory Reasons may be produced why I have engaged in this Work.

For since the Providence of God has cast my Lot at Northampton, it has no
little concerned me, to see how Generally the County is Infected, not only with
Anabaptism, but also with those many and gross Errors, which commonly that
Doctrine is an inlet into; and especially, with that Soul-damning Error of
Free Will: And not only so, but even some among my own Flock, over which the
Holy Ghost has made me Overseer, (though, Blessed be God, far enough from the
Doctrine of Free Will) are dissatisfied about Infants Right to Baptism: And for
the sake of those I have Printed this; not designing it, if possible, to be
exposed beyond the extent of my Church; and if it goes further, I would have
the Reader look upon it as having strayed beyond its designed Bounds.

And could no other Reason be given but this, I think it may excuse me; for
since God has set me a Watchman over this Flock, I think my self bound (as
ever I hope to give up my Account with Joy) to take all the Care of them I can,
and to do my utmost to reduce such as are wandering, and to establish such as
are wavering; and to keep the Plague out of their Head, as well as their Hands,
from being Defiled: Judging a Blind Eye, worse than a Lame Foot. Errors in
Judgment are like to be an inlet into continual Errors in Practice.

And as some of my People stand in need of information in this Point, so there
are some that desire to be informed; which is no small Motive to me to Write:
And because I love not to spend my time in my Pulpit in Controverted Points, I
have therefore exposed my Sentiments to the meanest Capacity that can but Read.

But besides all this, I have been importunately urged by several Friends, whom
I highly esteemed, to Print this, (having seen the Copy) who hope it may be
Serviceable to the Church of God in the Neighboring Parts; and though I love
to live an obscure Life, and never could entertain one thought of appearing at
so public a Post; though frequently, in other Cases, urged thereunto: Yet for
these Reasons, I have been prevailed upon; and while I find my Mind so
strangely changed in this respect, I would hope I have the Mind of God in it.

READER, Though I have not studied to please this wanton Age, having never
affected Novelties in Matters of Religion, but rather to stand and enquire for
the Good Old Way; and to Contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints; Yet I doubt not but much of what is contained herein, will seem new to
most Vulgar Capacities. But as I judge it not safe to embrace any thing because
new, (as is the Custom with many in our Day) for thus we may be ever learning,
and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth: So on the other Hand, I
judge it dangerous to reject any Truth proved to be so from Scripture, because
it seems new, or above our reach: But however strange it may appear, I could
have cited several worthy Authors of my Judgment; but I receive not my
Testimony from Men.

If therefore I have not proved what I have laid down from Scripture, then
reject it; but if I have, you are bound to receive it; and not to look upon it
as mine; and must own, it is through your ignorance if it seems strange unto you.

I have not studied Eloquence in Composing of this; nay, rather I have studied
to shun and avoid it, and to speak in the Demonstration of the Spirit of God;
comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual; that so the ensuing Discourse might
the better suite with those for whom I designed it. I hope, Reader, thou will
find that I have managed this Discourse with all Mildness and Moderation; and
have only put a Genuine Construction on those many Texts I have cited; and yet
I cannot but fear this will enrage some Men, who are lovers of a Party, more
than lovers of Truth; who can easier cry up their own Opinions than solidly
confute other Arguments.

As I did not intend in Writing this, to Enter the List with any in a Public.
Debate, or to provoke any to make a Reply; so, if contrary to my expectation,
any of the common Disputants of our Age shall think good to Answer it, I design
to take no further notice of it, than to Read it; not doubting but they will be
found to oppose God as well as me, in the Judgment of any who esteem the
Scripture as the Word of God, or prefer it above their own Fancies; and that
while they open their Mouths to oppose the Truth so clearly proved; they will
but belch out their Arminian Tenets; and as Raging Waves, foam out their own
shame, and be as unsuccessful in their Attempts, as those who never would cease
endeavoring to set up Dagon, in opposition to the Ark; till only the Stump
remained. But however this may inrage others, who know not what manner of
Spirit they are of; yet if it may but profit my own Flock, I have gained my
chief Design. Which that it may, shall be the Earnest and Continual Prayer, of
him who bears a dear Love and Affection to their Souls; and who is willing to
serve the advancing the Interest of Christ in the meanest Place in his House;

John Hunt.

Infants FAITH AND RIGHT TO BAPTISM, Proved from Scripture, etc.
THE Consideration of the unhappy Differences, which are this Day among the
People of God, about the Doctrine of Infant Baptism; (whereby God is much
dishonored, and the Adversaries Mouths opened, to reproach the Ways and People
of God; whereby much time is spent in Controversies, which might be better
improved in giving diligence To make our Calling and Election sure; and in
helping each other forward in the way to Heaven; has moved me to try, if by
the Blessing of God on my weak Endeavors, I might be that happy Instrument, to
put an end to that Controversy: For it is pity such as agree so in
Fundamentals, should so much differ about Smaller Matters; and that they who
hold one Lord, and one Faith, should not hold one and the same Baptism all
respects: And though enough has been Delivered and Printed on this Subject by
diverse worthy Lights, to satisfy any impartial Reader, and clear
Understanding; yet because many have not time to Read, or Money to Buy, or
Capacities to Understand large Volumes; I shall add this short Tract, as a Mite
to the former Treasury: In which I shall Study both Brevity and Plainness of
Speech; to tho End that, if possible, I might not overreach the meanest
Capacity; since it is for the sakes of such, I design this; and therefore to
prevent tediousness, I shall sum up all I shall say, as to the Subject of
Baptism, in two Arguments more generally.

First, Argument in Defense of Infant Baptism is this; If we Gentiles do come
in the room of the Jews then we must partake of their Privileges; but we
Gentiles do come in the Jews room, therefore we must partake of their
Privileges. The Major I must take for granted: For how, or to what end do we
come in their room; unless we partake of their External Church Privileges? One
of which was Circumcision. Romans 3.1,2. What advantage then has the Jew? Or
what Profit is there of Circumcision? Much every way, etc. which Ordinance was
to be administered unto Infants of Eight Days Old; in the stead of which God
has appointed the Ordinance of Baptism, as is clear from that plain Text, Col.
2.10,11,12. And ye are complete in him, which is the Head of all Principality
and Power. In whom also ye are Circumcised with the Circumcision made without
Hands, in putting off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of
Christ: Buried with him in Baptism, etc. In which place the Apostle is
encouraging the Believing Colossians to stand fast in opposition to those false
Teachers, who would Preach the Law as a Covenant of Works, or at least mixed
Law and Gospel together, in opposition to whom, he tells them they were
complete in him, that is, in Christ; and however these false Teachers might
pretend a necessity to keep the Law, yet he here lets them know, forasmuch as
Christ was made under the Law, and did bring in an everlasting Righteousness,
and that he did in their room and stead; hence they that believed were complete
in Christ their Head, and so under no Obligation to keep the Law, as a Covenant
of Works, Christ being the End of the Law, (in that respect) to every one that
believes.

But lest those false Teachers should prevail to draw away Disciples after
them, by urging the necessity of Circumcision, he tells them they were
Circumcised with the Circumcision made without Hands, or had received the End
of Circumcision; for that signified a necessity of the Heart being Sanctified,
Rom 2.28. which Grace of Sanctification, as well as Justification, they
received from Christ, and so were complete in him; but that they should not
think themselves inferior to them for want of the external Seal, he tells them
they had the Seal of the Covenant also; and though not the same, yet a milder
in its room; Buried with him in Baptism. Nor do I see what other design the
Apostle can have in these words, but to prove, that Baptism to us, comes in the
room of Circumsision to the Jews; and that you may see that this is not my own
private Sense of these Words, I shall cite another Witness or two to confirm
it. Of the same Judgment is the Learned Paraeus; says he, Quod Apostolus
precedente versu, de Externa and Interna Circumcisione dixit ad Institutionem
and Consolationem fidelium, contra pseudo-Judees; eadem nunc applicat ad
fideles in Novo Testamento, in quo Circumcisioni successit Sacramentum
Baptismi, i. e. That which the Apostle had said in the foregoing Verse,
concerning External and Internal Circumcision, for the Instruction and
Consolation of Believers against the false Jews, he applies the same to
Believers in the New Testament, in which the Sacrament of Baptism does succeed
in the room of Circumcision: Of the same Judgment is Calvin, Aretius, and many
more; whose words for brevity sake I shall omit, and come to my Minor
Proposition.

Minor. But we Gentiles do come in the Jews room; which I prove from that plain
Text, Romans 11.19,20,24. Thou will say then, The Branches were broken off, that
I might be graffed in. Well: because of Unbelief they were broken off, and thou
stand by Faith, be not high-minded, but fear. For if thou were cut out of
tho Olive Tree, which is wild by Nature, and were graffed contrary to Nature
into the Good Olive Tree, etc. Now our Graffing in, must answer to the Cutting
off of the Jews; or else the Apostle missed of his Scope and Design. Nor was
their breaking off, a breaking off from a real Union with Christ, as some of
the Anabaptists have in my hearing affirmed, to avoid the force of this Text;
but from External Church Privileges. Now, since the Infant Seed of the Jews
had a Right to Circumcision; if then we Believing Gentiles do come in their
room, and Baptism in the room of Circumcision, as I think I have sufficiently
proved (if Scripture may determine the Matter) then we and our Seed must have a
Right to Baptism under the New Testament, as the Jews and their Seed had to
Circumcision under the Old Testament: But notwithstanding the Scripture is so
clear for this, yet that no doubt may remain, I shall answer such Objections as
may possibly be made against it.

Object. 1. If we come in the Jews room, then all the Children in the Nation
ought to be Baptized; since all the Children in the Jewish Nation were
Circumcised: But according to your Practice all ought not to be Baptized;
therefore from your Practice we may Judge you do not think we come in their
room.

Answ. All that can be truly inferred from hence is this, That as all in their
Church, which was National, were to be Circumcised; so all in our Particular
Churches ought to be Baptized; and this is no more than I earnestly contend for.

Object. 2. But if we come in their room, then we must be a National Church, as
they were, or else how can we be said to partake of their Privileges?

Answ. It was not of the Essence of the Jewish Church, that it was National;
nor was it any Privilege above what it would have been, had it been divided
into particular Churches as we are. I grant, that so long as the Temple stood,
which was a Type of Christ, so long God required they should meet to worship
him there; which might serve to show how the gathering of the People should be
unto Christ: But now, though it was their Privilege that they might Worship,
yet it must needs be burdensome to come from all Parts of the Nation to Worship
at the Temple, and at such expense: But now God has eased us of this burden,
while he has appointed Particular Churches, where we enjoy all the Worship of
God, with as great a Promise of the Presence of God as they had in the Temple,
Matt. 18.20. So that we only want (if I may so say) the Inconveniency of the
Worship. God has not now confined us to Places; John. 4.20,21. The hour comes
when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem Worship the
Father; that is, with respect to Places. And yet though we are not confined to
their Place of Worship, yet we are said to be graffed into their Olive; and as
for such as lay such stress on this, as if it was impossible we should come in
the Jews room, unless we were a National Church, I would ask them this
Question, Do you believe that the Jews shall in time be brought home again, and
Ingraffed into their own Olive, from which they have been so long broken off?
And further, Whether you think at that Day, they shall Worship God in the
Temple, and offer Gifts and Sacrifices, as once they did? Now that they shall
be restored and brought home again, is clear from Romans 11.12,15,26. Now if the
Fall of them be the Riches of the World, and the Diminishing of them the Riches
of the Gentiles; how much more their Fullness? For if the casting away of them
be the Reconciling of the World: What shall the receiving of them be, but Life
from the Dead? From these and the following Verses it is most clear, that the
Jews shall be one Day restored, and it is that which we now are expecting; but
that they shall then Worship at the Temple, when it has been demolished so
many hundred Years; and that they shall offer Sacrifices, after they come to
Believe that Christ the great Sacrifice is offered, or that the Tribe of Levi
should only Minister before the Lord, when all the Tribes have been so
shattered and confused in this Dark and Gloomy Day, all seem to me to be things
incredible. Now if they shall be graffed again into their own Olive (as the
Scripture affirms) notwithstanding so many, and so great alterations in their
Worship, as we have good ground from Scripture to believe there will be; Why
may not we Gentiles be said to come in their room, though we are not confined
to all the Circumstances of their Worship, and since we want nothing that was a
Privilege?

And more especially, if we consider that we have good ground to believe that
their graffing in again, will be no more than to bestow those very Privileges
on them, which we Gentiles do now enjoy; as seems clear to me from Romans 11.31.
Even so have these also now not believed; that through your Mercy, they also
may obtain Mercy. Mind, that through your Mercy, or the Mercy of God to you,
they also may obtain Mercy: As if he had said, the consideration of your
Mercies, or the Privileges which you enjoy under the Gospel, shall be a means
not only to convince them that the Messiah is come, but shall also stir them up
to embrace the same Faith, that so they may partake of the same Mercies with
you. So that it seems evident, not only from Scripture, but Reason it self;
that when the Jews come to be Restored, it will only be to share with us
Gentiles in our Privileges: And yet this is called in Scripture, a graffing in
again. So that there is no more necessity for us to be confined to all the
Circumstances of their Worship, in order to our coming in their room; than for
them to be confined to all the Circumstances of their wonted Service, when
graffed in again: Nor does it seem credible, that when they are graffed in
again, they shall enjoy neither Circumcision, nor any other Seal in its room,
and that their Privileges should be less under the New Testament Dispensation,
than under the Old; that God should own their Seed then, and reject them now.
Sure I am, this would in all probability, be a great Block in their way, to
prevent their embracing the Gospel. Circumcision was an Ordinance of high
esteem with them, as we may judge by their cheerful undergoing so much pain and
smart as it occasioned; as we may gather from Ex. 4.26. A Bloody Husband thou
art, because of the Circumcision. But now, if we can convince them that we have
a milder Ordinance, and Seal in its room, this may have a great Influence upon
them, by tsie Bleffing of God, in order to the bringing them in.

Thus I have finished my first Argument, and should I add no more in Defense of
the Doctrine of Infant Baptism, it might suffice; unless Persons are resolved
to shut their Eyes that they might not behold the Light, since I have clearly
proved from Scripture, that we Gentiles do come in the Jews room, and Baptism
in the room of Circumcision: But to the end there may not be left one Stone
upon another of that Strong Hold, which the Anabaptists have raised against
this Truth, which may not be thrown down, I shall raise one. Argument more as a
Battery against it, and shall add no more: And indeed I think I need add no
more, being satisfied these Arguments will be as a twofold Cord that will not
easily be broken. Now the great Objection of the Anabaptists, against Infant
Baptism, is founded on such Scriptures as hold forth Faith as necessary in
order to Baptism; as Mark 16.16. He that Believes, and is Baptized, shall be
saved, Acts 8.37. And Philip said, if thou Believe with all thy Heart, thou
may. Acts 18.8. And many of the Corinthians hearing, Believed, and were
Baptized. And from these, and such like Texts, confidently conclude, that
because none but Adult Persons have or can have Faith, therefore none but such
ought to be Baptized: And if I mistake not, here lays the stress of all their
Arguments.

Now for the preventing any mistake, (that none may suppose the Difference to
be wider than it is) if it be enquired there some Adult may not be Baptized; I
grant they may; provided they never have been Baptized in their Infancy; and
yet this may rationally be Inferred from such Texts; for those that Believed
and were Baptized, had never before been Baptized, nor had they made any
Profession of Christ before then, that we know of; the Text seem to prove they
were Baptized immediately upon their Confession of Faith; and should I meet
with such, I should think my self bound from such Examples to Baptize them. So
that we agree with the Anabaptists in this, that some Adult ought to be
Baptized. But the Grand Question in Debate is, whether some Infants ought not
to be Baptized as well as Adult; this the Anabaptists deny, and I affirm, and
prove thus, from this following Argument; and it seems cogent.

Argument 2. Those that the Scripture give us good ground to hope are
Believers, may and ought to be Baptized; but the Infant Seed of Believers are
such as we have good ground from Scripture to hope are Believers; therefore
such may and ought to be Baptized. All that I can conceive can be said against
my Major Proposition is, to deny that we are to Baptize any upon hopes that
they are Believers; and to affirm that we ought to Baptize none but such as we
are sure have true Justifying Faith. But sure I am such an Objection savours of
high Presumption; since this is to pretend to be Wiser than the Apostles, and
as Wise as God himself. First, Wiser than the Blessed Apostles; as you may see
by comparing Acts 8.13. with 22.23. where you read of one Baptized that was in
the Gall of Bitterness, and Bonds of Iniquity; and yet we cannot be so
uncharitable as to think they had no hopes of him when they Baptized him: But
if any should so judge, it makes the more for me; for if the Apostles
themselves Baptized such as they had no hopes had true Faith; then sure we may
Baptize such (...) we have good ground to hope (...) Faith: But if they had
Hope, it is evident it was but Hope, unless he could lose his Faith, or have
Faith, and at the same time be in the Gall of Bitterness and Bonds of Iniquity;
neither of which could be. Secondly, This is to pretend to be as wise as God
(at least in this point) since he only that works Faith can infallibly judge
where it is. It Is peculiar to God to search the Heart, where Faith is seated;
the Lord only knows who are his; we see the best of Churches have been mistaken
in taking in of Members. The Apostles did not know Judas to be a Hypocrite,
till he betrayed his Lord, (unless we can suppose they would take in known
Hypocrites). And I would ask my Friends, the Anabaptists, if they themselves
have not Baptized some as Believers, who have afterward discovered themselves
to be in the Gall of Bitterness. So that (in a word) if we must Baptize none
but such as we are sure have true Justifying Faith, we must Baptize none in
this World: For though many have such a Faith, yet no Man can infallibly tell
(the Anabaptist themselves not excepted) who they are. This is that new Name
which none knows but God, and them that have it. So that I think it needless to
add any more to confirm the former part of my Argument, viz. That we can only
hope that this or the other Person has true Faith.

Minor Proposition. But the Infant Seed of Believers are such, as we have good
ground from Scripture to hope are Believers. Now if any thing of force be
Objected, it must be against this; and therefore I shall labor the more to
confirm it: But before I come to the Proof, I must add a Caution, that when I
speak of Faith in Infants, I mean Habitual Faith; for though it cannot on good
ground be denied but that some Infants may actually Believe, since God is able
to cause them so to do, and has no where in his Word declared he will not; yet
it may easily be proved, that some Infants have Habitual Faith; and that will
render one as truly a Believer as the Act. He that has the Habit of Faith, is
a Believer, though asleep, and so as incapable of Acting Faith as an Infant;
having (during that time) no more use of Reason than a Child at the Breast, nor
perhaps so much; for an Infant has so much Sense as to know when it is Hungry,
or to Cry for Food; and if it be in Pain. But let a Man be never so Hungry, or
in Pain; yet when asleep, he is unsensible of either: And yet such may be
Believers in the mean time, they having the Habit of Faith. Now by the Habit of
Faith in Infants, I mean a Principle of Grace, or Internal Renovation which is
wrought in Regeneration; for Regeneration is an infusing the Seeds of all Grace
into the Soul, and consequently of Faith. This being premised, I come to lay
down a Proposition for the clearing the Way to that which I intend more largely
to insist upon.

Proposition. That Infants are capable of having the Habit of Faith wrought in
them: And though we cannot from hence conclude that all such have it, yet it is
a good Foundation for my following Argument: And because in all Cases the
Foundation had need stand fast, I shall therefore confirm it; that Infants are
capable of Grace, is not my Judgment alone (however strange a Doctrine it may
seem to some) for I have the Judgment of all the Church of England on my side;
their Words after Baptism are, Seeing now, Dearly beloved Brethren, that this
Child is by Baptism Regenerate, etc. And again, We yield thee most hearty
thanks most merciful Father, that it has pleased thee to Regenerate this
Infant by thy Holy Spirit, etc. Now though I am far from being of the Judgment
which they seem to be in this, that all that are Baptized are in that Ordinance
Regenerated, and so consequently many fall from Grace. My Soul abhorrs that
Popish Doctrine, that Baptism confers Grace, ex opere operato, from the
Work-wrought; but while they thank God for the Work done, it is evident they
suppose them capable of having that Work wrought in them; and so far I agree
with them. But because the very citing any thing from the Church of England,
may make some giddy-headed People (who have more Zeal than sound Knowledge)
nauseate what I have said. I shall therefore proceed to prove, that both they
and I have Divine Testimony on our side in this, that Infants are capable of
Grace; and I shall make use of plain Scripture, since the Anabaptists pretend
so much delight in it; and I shall produce several Instances, that in the Mouth
of two or three Witnesses, this truth may be established. Jer. 1.5. Before thou
came out of the Womb, I Sanctified thee; and Luke 1.15. of John it is said,
He shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his Mothers Womb; and then no
doubt Sanctified. And of Christ it is said, verse 35. That Holy Thing that
shall be born of thee, etc. mind, born of thee, was Holy when Born: From whence
it is past all dispute, (unless we dare dispute with God) that Infants, even in
the Womb, and as soon as Born, are capable of Grace; nor does it seem harder to
me to conceive, that Infants should have Grace wrought in them than Adult,
since the latter are purely passive in the Work, and so may the former be. If
it was a Work of Reason, or performed by Humane Power or Policy, something
might be said, but it is not, Ephesians. 1.19. Nay, according to our apprehension, it
seems harder to work Grace in Adult than in Infants; for as a Tender Plant is
more easily eradicated than a Grown Tree, so in this Case, Sin by Custom and
Continuance gets root; and though all things are equally possible to God, yet
to change an Old Sinner is most difficult in it self. We may conceive a greater
opposition in the Heart of Grown Persons to a Work of Grace than in Infants:
The longer we have been wedded to Sin, the more unwilling we shall be to give
it a Bill of Divorce, and put it away. So that Infants are as capable of Grace
as Adult, and more capable, as to the Humane Conception of any, unless
Arminians. And though it is said Faith comes by hearing, yet that only points
out the ordinary way of God's Working Faith in Adult. This directs us to our
Duty, but sets no bounds or limits to his Power. God can work Faith other ways
than by the hearing of the Ear, if he will. Thus having cleared my Proposition,
that Infants are capable of Faith, I now come to confirm the Minor Proposition
of my Argument, which was this, That the Infant Seed of Believers are such, as
we have good ground from Scripture to hope are Believers. Before, I proved
Infants were capable of Faith; now, I come to prove, some Infants have Faith;
which I prove thus.

Argument. If some Infants get to Heaven, then some Infants have Faith: But
some Infants do get to Heaven, therefore some Infants have Faith. It Is possible
that the Anabapatists may say, That there is no necessity for Infants to have
Faith, in order to their getting to Heaven; but I am loath to resign up such a
Gospel Truth, merely because they have said it. I shall lay down nothing but
what I shall prove from plain Scripture, and I shall expect the same of them;
especially in Matters of such grand Import. And sure I am the Scripture no
where affirms any such thing, that any can get to Heaven without Faith-Nay,
Nay, I am certain, the whole Current of Scripture does, in most express terms,
run directly contrary thereunto; as I shall show anon. So that we cannot open
our Mouths in Defense of such a Notion, unless we dare even fight against God.
I grant indeed, there are some Secrets in God's working in Infants; yet this
makes nothing against the Truth of the thing, because we cannot comprehend it.
We cannot conceive the manner how God works Grace in Adult, unless very
imperfectly, As, John 3.8. the Wind Blows where it lists, and thou hear
the Sound thereof; but can not tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes;
so is every one that is Born of the Spirit. Mind, every one; Adult as well as
Infants; where Christ himself makes it as hard, to know how God Regenerates, as
to give Account of the Wind, which has puzzled our wisest Philosophers: We may
feel the Wind refresh us, and see the effects of it, but cannot tell exactly
how it is caused. So in this Case, we may find and feel the refreshing
Influence of the Spirit in our selves, and may see the effects of it in others,
yet can no more comprehend the manner of his working, than we can conceive how
the Body is formed in the Womb of her that is with Child. Eccles. 11.5. There
you have these two compared. Why then should it be thought incredible that God
should Work Faith in Infants? Though we cannot fully comprehend his way of
Working, God can make use of various ways to effect one and the same thing,
though in the mean time he gives us no account of his Matters; His ways are in
the deep Waters, and his Footsteps are not known. And sure I am, if we must
believe nothing but what we can fully comprehend, the Articles of our Faith may
stand in less room; for what can we say as to the Trinity; we are bound to
believe such a thing because God has revealed it; but alas how little can we
comprehend, of Three in One, or to the Hypostatical Union of Two Natures
Personally united? What shall we say as to the Resurrection of the Dead? Of the
Joys of Heaven, or the Torments of Hell? If nothing must be Believed but what
we can comprehend, we must blot out these and many more Articles of our Creed.
Is not this the way to Atheism, if we must not believe God to be, unless we can
comprehend him, since it is but a little portion we have heard of him, Job.
26.14. and since none can by searching find out God to Perfection? This is to
prefer the Light within, or Carnal Reason above the Word of God, if we must not
believe God's Word, unless we can comprehend it. Nay, this is to make a Man
worse than a Beast, while he must not believe that which he sees: Hence we must
not believe such a thing as the Tide or Sun; since though it is easy to see
both, yet we cannot fully comprehend either. Nay, at this rate, we must not
believe our selves to be Creatures, since we cannot tell how we were formed in
the dark Recesses of the Womb; for we are said to be wonderfully made. In a
word, by this Rule we must believe nothing, because there is nothing but what
does in some respect or other exceed our shallow Understandings. This is a Rule
to be observed among all that profess themselves Christians, whatever God
reveals we are to believe; though it be as far above the reach of our Reason,
as the Heavens are above the Earth; since it is impossible for God to Lie, and
Blasphemous for us to suppose he should; and worse to suppose God to Lie, than
to suppose him not to be; As once Plutarch said, Malo de me dici nullum esse
Plutarchum, quam malum Plutarchum. I had rather, said he, Man should say I am
not, than say I am wicked. And therefore since God has in his Word set forth
the necessity of Grace and Faith, in order to our getting to Glory, we ought to
Believe the one, or to Despair of the other. -- Some time since I was reading a
Book put out by one of the most Learned of the Anabaptists; and in that he
owns, the Sins of Children are done away; and that some such, if not all such,
do go to Heaven; but most boldly affirms, they are not done away in
Regeneration. But sure that Gentleman would have done well to have told us
which way they are cleansed, and not to leave so many tenderhearted Parents
mourning for their deceased Infants, as those without hope, as they must needs
do if they are not capable of Regeneration; or if they cannot tell some others
way, how they may be fitted for Heaven. But I perceive that Gentleman was
resolved none should know his newfound way but himself, let the effects be
what they will. But though he is thus unkind, his Dear Brother Mr. C. seems to
be a Man of a better Spirit; and though he seems to agree with him in the
former, yet he tells us (if we will believe him) how Sin comes to be destroyed
in Infants; and that is, says he, by the Righteousness of Christ imputed to
them. An Answer no doubt pleasing to the Ignorant sort, that will Swallow down
any thing, true or false, that has but the Name of Christ, or the
Righteousness of Christ annexed to it: But sure this bold Asserter had
forgotten that Text, Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony, if any Man (an
Anabaptist not excepted) walk not according to this Rule, it is because there is
no Light in him; or rather, I have reason to judge, he was resolved his own
Fancy should guide him in this Matter. Now I would fain know where this Author
can prove from Scripture, any imputation of Christ's Righteousness to any but
Believers. I am sure he cannot; and till he can, however fond he or his
Brethren may be of his Notion, it not agreeing with the Rule in God's Word, we
are bound to look upon it as arising from the Darkness his own deluded Fancy.
Since I have been a Student in Divinity, I have been taught, both out of God's
Word, and from our most Worthy Authors, that the imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ had respect to the removal of our Guilt; and that it
was the Work of the Spirit within us, to remove the Filth, and destroy the
Power of Sin. Tit. 3.5. By the washing of Regeneration, and renewings of the
Hely Ghost: Hence we are said to be born of the Spirit. Justification and
Sanctification, though inseparable, yet are widely distinguished by all but
Papists, and such as do adhere to them: Sure this Gentleman had strangely
forgot the great difference between our Title to Heaven, and our Meetness for
Heaven; unless he looks upon our Claim to rise from our Meetness. The
Righteousness of Christ, though it gives us a Title to Heaven, as we do
apprehend the Person of Christ by Faith, yet it does not take away our Filth
any other way than by way of Purchase. It Is the Spirit of God in us that is the
Efficient, and that is the thing we are enquiring into. Why then does this
Author thus beguile his unwary Reader, when he is enquiring how Sin comes to be
subdued, he tells him how Sin comes to be pardoned. As if a Pardon to a
Malefactor would change his Heart, or as if that Promise of a new Heart added
to Forgiveness was a Promise of little worth; I know not what it is to him, I
am sure it is precious to all Saints; what does this imply, but that the
Righteousness of Christ was imputed to Infants, to the end they may go to
Heaven reeking in Sin; and that they might be exempted from Regeneration? But
to put all out of doubt, I come now to prove there is a Necessity for Infants
to have Faith (in the Sense aforesaid) if ever they get to Heaven, whatever
such bold Men may say to the contrary, who care not how much they say, and how
little they prove. Let God be true, though all such are found Liars. Now there is
a twofold Necessity for Infants to have Faith, in order to their getting to
Heaven, one arising from God's Ordination and Appointment, the other from the
Corruption of our Natures, as we come into the World.

First, From God's Appointment and Ordination, he has made this the way, and
the only way to Heaven, Mark 16.16. He that believes not shall be damned. I
think that is plain Scripture, since it is so defired by the Anabaptists; and
the Expression being Indefinite, is equivolent to a Universe. He, that is, any
he, High or Low, Rich or Poor, Adult or Infant. So John 3.3,5. Verily, verily,
I say unto thee, except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.
And then adds by way of Explanation, Except a Man be born of Water, and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Now Regeneration is an
Infusing the Principles of all Grace into the Soul, as the Learned Pemble
observes, (one Grace not being the Cause of another,) and if of all Grace, then
of Faith, for that is a Grace.

But perhaps the Anabaptists may object, that by the Word Man we are to
understand Adult only, yet at best this is but a bare Conjecture, which in
others Cases is contemned by them; and therefore with their Leave, or without
it, I shall tie them up to the same Measures: For it seems unreasonable to
contemn this in others, which we allow in our selves, especially in Matters of
Religion; may we not by the same Rule exclude Women? And then I know no
Scripture to prove a Necessity for them to be regenerated. But lest this should
not suffice, (for by this time I may suppose the Anabaptists to be like a Man
drowning, that catches hold of every Straw to keep him from sinking) I shall
therefore prove from Scripture, that the Word Man often takes in Women and
Children, without Distinction of Age or Sex; and to this end I might multiply
Texts, but I shall only give you Two for many. The first is, Genesis 6.7. I will
destroy Man. Now it is well known that all the old World was destroyed, both
Men, Women and Children, excepting those few in the Ark, and yet only Man is
mentioned. So John 16.21. A Woman, when she is in Travail, has Sorrow, because
her Hour is come; but as soon as she is delivered of the Child, she remembers
no more her Anguish for Joy that a Man is born. Mind that which in the
beginning was called a Child, is after called a Man; nor can we once suppose
that we come grown Men immediately out of the Womb; and yet this may be as
easily proved as the former. And as the Word Man sometimes is of this extent,
so it is most evident it is so here: For the Word (...) in the Greek signifies
any one. Beza renders it Aliquis, any Body, or any one. But
notwithstandstanding all that has been said, I lately saw a Piece, put out by
one of the Ablest of the Anabaptists, in which he will prove that Christ in
that Place meant Adult only; and he proves it thus. It must be so, because
Nicodemus understood him so; but to me it seems strange, that any, unless one
as ignorant as Nicodemus, of the new Birth, should think such a blind Idiot as
he, a meet Judge of Christ's Meaning; and infallibly to conclude it must be so,
because he understood him so, as if Nicedomus was an infallible Judge of this
Matter. That Nicedomus understood him so I cannot deny; but if that must be his
meaning, because he understood him so, then we must conclude Christ meant a
natural Birth also, for so Nicodemus understood him, Verse 4. Can he enter the
second time into his Mother's Womb, and be born; which was a gross Mistake, as
is clear from Verse 5. Which Words are a Reproof of his Ignorance and Carnal
Conceptions, and an Interpretation of Christ's own Words; and might he not
mistake as to the Subject, as well as concerning the Nature of the thing? Sure
I am that Cause is like to be lost, that has no better Witness than an
ignorant Nicodemus; and we may suppose the Anabaptists at a Loss, when the
ablest and most learned among them are forced to summons in Nicodemus as a
Witness; for though they must own him to be a poor Evidence, if they will believe
Christ, ( Verse 10.) Art thou a Master in Israel, and know not these things?
(and they that do not know things are unmeet to prove them) But either this
Person put more Confidence in Nicodemus than Christ, or else knowing his Cause
was almost gone, would rather cite Nicodemus (concerning which, he knew neither
what he said, nor whereof he affirmed) rather than have no Witness; but it is no
wonder to see the most Learned of the Anabaptists run into such gross
Absurdities, and to be at such a Loss in such Mysteries; for if Learning could
teach a Man the Mysteries of the Gospel, Nicodemus had not been so grossly
ignorant of Christ's meaning; and I leave it to any Judicious Person to
determine, whether we have not as good Ground, and better, to judge that this
Objecter was of the same Mind of Nicodemus, in understanding it to be a natural
Birth, then to conclude, that because he understood it, as spoken of Adult
only, therefore it must be so; for we may suppose, had not this Doctor had
great Confidence in the Infallibility of Nicodemus, he would never have
ventured that Cause which was as dear to him as his Life upon his single
Evidence, and especially in such a Cause, wherein he had so many Hundreds
opposed him; and sure, had he judged him in a gross Mistake, as to the Nature
of that new Birth, he would never have put such Confidence in what he said with
the same Breath, as to the Subject; and as we have infallible Ground to
conclude, (from his own Words) that this Objecter is far from believing any
Necessity or Possibility for Infants to be regenerated, so I think I do him no
Wrong, if I suppose it is his Judgment, that there is no more Necessity for
grown Persons to be regenerated; for of this Judgment was his trusty and
well-beloved Friend Nicodemus; for had Nicodemus once supposed that grown
Persons (any more than Infants) must be born again Spiritually, he would never
have mentioned such a gross Absurdity as to be born again Carnally, but taking
it for granted, that Adult (to give the Objecter his Sense) could not be born
again Spiritually, absurdly supposes it to be meant a Carnal Birth; and why we
may not suppose the Objecter to be of his Judgment in the one, as well as the
other, (especially since he puts such Confidence in him) I see not; and now I
leave it to my understanding Reader to judge, whether we have not better Ground
to believe, that under the Word Men, Children are comprehended, because the
Word signifies both, than to conclude Christ only meant grown Men, because
Nicodemus understood him so, since it is past all dispute the Word signifies
so; but whether Nicodemus did rightly understand Christ's meaning, may justly
admit of a Debate; nay, it seems almost past all Dispute he did not, by his
gross Mistake about other Passages relating hereunto.

Thus I have, I hope, sufficiently proved a Necessity for Infants to have
Faith, if they get to Heaven, from God's Appointment; and what can be more
cogent to confirm any Point, than the express Mind of God? And I am certain,
had the Anabaptists such-clear Proof, that no Infants ought to be Baptized, as
I have given to prove, that all Infants that get to Heaven must have Faith,
they would soon cry Victory; nor should I ever hold up my Weapons against them,
(was it so) lest happily, by so doing, I was found fighting against God himself.

Secondly, There is a Necessity for Faith in Infants, (if they get to Heaven)
arising from the Corruption of their Natures: Which though the Anabaptist may
probably deny, yet I doubt not but to confirm this also from Scripture. When
Adam had sinned, by eating the Forbidden Fruit, he was immediately seized with
a Spiritual Death, according to the Commination, in the Day thou eatest thereof
thou shall surely die: And Adam being a public Head and Representative of all
Mankind, this Spiritual Death is intailed on all his Posterity. Hence we are
said to bear the Image of the Earthly; nor is this true of Adult only, but of
all his Posterity, 1 Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all die. Mind, all die, Infants as
well as grown Persons; and this I shall further prove from most express
Scripture, Ephesians. 2.3. And were by Nature the Children of Wrath, even as others.
Genesis 8.21. For the Imagination of Man's Heart is evil from his Youth. The Evil
in our Hearts is the Cause of all the Evil in our Lives. Hence Foolishness is
said to be bound up in the Heart of a Child, Prove. 22.15. It is so bound up,
that for a while it may not discover it self, yet is in his Heart. See Psalm.
58.3. The Wicked are estranged from the Womb, they go astray as soon as they be
born, speaking Lies: That is, they have a straying Principle as soon as born.
Once more, Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my
Mother conceive me. So that by Nature we not only want a Title to Heaven, but a
Meetness also, Col. 1.12. Giving Thanks unto the Father, who has made us meet
to be Partakers of that Inheritance of the Saints in Light: Implying that by
Nature they were unmeet; and if Children are not thus corrupt by Nature, how
came they to die, since the Wages of Sin is Death. Now if Death reigned, as the
Apostle says, from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
Similitude of Adam's Transgression, (that is, Infants that had not sinned
actually) then it must be, because they were Sinners in Adam, and had the Seed
of Sin in themselves habitually, for the Guilt of Adam's Act is not transferred
to any of the mere Sons of Men, but such as partake of his Image also; and I
dare be bold to say (and can abundantly from Scripture prove) that the Seed and
Spawn of all our Actual Sins are in our Hearts before we commit one of them;
for as in Grace there must first be the Habit, and then the Act; so in Sin, the
Heart is first Wicked, then the Life. The Tree is first evil before the Fruit
is; so Mat. 12.33,35. Now if the Nature of all is so corrupt, as I have proved,
then it is impossible for any thus corrupt to get to Heaven without an inward
Change, for what would Heaven be to an unregenerate Soul? What would the Works
of praising God be to one that hates God? Or what would Holy Company be to such
as are dead in Trespasses and Sins, and to every good Word and Work reprobate?
But least this should not suffice, I shall prove from Scripture, that such
cannot get to Heaven in an unchanged State, 1 Cor. 15.50. Now this I say,
Brethren, that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does
Corruption inherit Incorruption. Where we must not understand the Word Flesh
Physically, or in Point of Being; for so we believe Christ is now in our Humane
Nature in Heaven. We believe also the Resurrection of the Body, when the
Saints shall in their Flesh see God, Job 19.26. But Flesh here must be
understood morally as corrupted; as Gal. 1.16. Immediately I conferred not with
Flesh and Blood; in which Place he means he did not hearken to the corrupt
Reasonings of the Flesh: That this is the meaning, seems clear; for in the
foregoing Verse he had been mentioning our Earthly Image, which consists in the
Depravity of our Nature, and then concludes, That Flesh and Blood, that is,
such as retain that Earthly Image, cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; so Heb.
12.14. Without Holiness no Man shall see God, (...), no one, no Body, as it
signifies. Nor is it to be understood of actual Holiness in our Conversation
only; for should a Man die the same Moment that he closes with Christ, he shall
as surely see God to his Comfort, as if he had lived a holy Life never so long,
our Title to Heaven arising from our Union to Christ, and not from our
Holiness, though never so great; nor do his good Works so properly render him
meet for Heaven, as that Holy Principle, from whence they proceeded: A clear
Instance we have in the Thief on the Cross that was converted, and in Heaven in
a few Hours. By his embracing of Christ, he came to have a Title to Heaven, and
his inward Change of Heart rendered him meet for Heaven, notwithstanding he had
no time to spend in a Holy Conversation. From all which it does appear, that as
we are corrupt by Nature, so this Nature, till renewed, can never enter into
Heaven; nor do I see what the Anabaptists can say to this, unless they deny the
Corruption of our Nature; and I perceive some of them have fled thither for
Refuge: But this is so confuted by the former Scriptures, that I judge it
needless to add any more; and I cannot but wonder how such as pretend so high
an Esteem for plain Scripture, dare cast such Contempt on those many plain
Texts I have cited, (and more that I might cite) to prove the Corruption of our
Natures, as we come into the Would. This gives us sad ground to Fear, that
whatever high esteem such may pretend to plain Scripture, when it seems to make
for them; yet they prefer their own Fancies before it, when it really makes
against them. Thus I hope I have sufficiently proved a necessity for Infants to
have Grace, if ever they get to Glory. I come now to the close of my Argument.

Minor Proposition. But some Infants do get to Heaven. Now I need not spend
much time to prove his; for I hope the Anabaptists will not be so uncharitable
as to Sentence all Infants to Eternal Destruction, rather than receive the
Truth of the Gospel: And indeed I find some of them so far from denying that
some Infants get to Heaven, that they rather believe that none miss of Heaven.
But if any of the rest of the Anabaptists should so far differ from their
Brethren as to deny it, yet it is our comfort the Scripture does in most express
words affirm it, Mat. 19.14. Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; not that the
Kingdom of Heaven consists only of such, but that some such are of that
Kingdom. By the Kingdom of Heaven, says Marlorate, we must understand the
Eternal Felicity of the Elect. Some indeed understand it of the visible Kingdom
of Christ on Earth: But such do not understand it so in opposition to their
Eternal Felicity; and indeed if some of such as are in Christ's Visible Kingdom
here on Earth do not get to Heaven, I know not who shall come there, Visible
not being opposed to Invisible; but only distinguished from it. So that since
some such do get to Heaven (as I have proved) but none get to Heaven without
Renovation, hence it unavoidably follows, some such are renewed; which
Renovation takes in the Seeds or Habit of Faith, and all other Graces. And thus
have I confirmed my Argument, which I am confident stands so firm on Scripture
ground, that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against it. All I shall add
shall be to Answer some Objections that may be made by some against it; though
indeed the truth is so clear, that Objections are not worthy to be heard, much
less to to be answered. But to the End that things may be made plain to the
meanest capacity, and nothing wanting for satisfaction to such as desire it, I
proceed.

Object. 1. We see no such Ground to hope such have Grace. Do not we see that
oft-times the Children of Godly Parents prove wicked; which they would not have
done, if they had Grace in Infancy, unless they fall from Grace; which we may
suppose you do not Believe.

To which I answer, That some Children of Believing Parents do prove Graceless
and Wicked, by too sad experience we find true: Nor can we from hence infer,
that such fall from Grace; for I know none that hold that all such have Grace,
I mean of Unbaptized Infants; for as to Baptized Infants, the Papists and
Church of England both hold, That all such have Grace; though for my own part,
though I hope well of all such as are Baptized, de jure, of right; yet to affirm
that all such have Grace, I dare not; neither do I think any from Scripture
have good ground so to do. Should none have Grace (among the Seed of Believers)
but such as Die in Infancy, or who do in time appear Gracious, but know not so
exactly the time of their Conversion, who may be supposed to be wrought upon in
Infancy, they would amount to a vast number: And perhaps as many by the Rule of
Proportion as may be found to have Grace (in the great Day, when all must be
weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary) in our particular Churches. But if we
must not hope of any, because some prove wicked; what shall we say of Adult
Professors, who are Members in Churches? Do not many of them prove Hypocrites?
Must the Eleven therefore be condemned for Hypocrites, because a Judas was
among them? Would not this be to Judge before the time? Sure I am, at this
rate, we must hope of none, Adult or Infants. But if you say, notwithstanding
some professors prove Wicked, yet we are to hope well of others, till such time
as their Wickedness discovers it self: So say I as to Infants; though some
prove wicked, yet till others appear so, we ought to hope well of them, if we
see nothing that does cut off our hope; and not so to do must be judged the
greatest uncharitableness.

Oject. 2. But Adult Persons make a Profession of Christ, so do not Infants.

Answ. All their Profession is but the ground of our hope of an inward Change;
and was it possible to see the Heart unrenewed: Whatever Profession such a one
might make, it would be a Sin to Baptize such a one. So that if we have but
good ground to hope they have Faith, be it by Profession, or otherwise it
matters not. If the Objecter say, it is his bare Profession gives a right, then
they give away the cause they have so contended for; since Faith and Profession
are not only distinct, but separable. If they say, Faith gives them a right,
this makes for me; as I have proved: If they say, it is Faith as Professed, and
no otherways, this is evidenly to lay more stress upon their Profession than
Faith; since whatever other ground we have to hope they have Faith, yet without
a Profession of that Faith, they must not be Baptized.

Object. 3. This makes Baptism a Regenerating Ordinance, which is not a Truth.

Answ. I have reason to think this a mere Cavil, and a wilful Mistake of the
Objecter. For my own part, though I am for Infant Baptism (and am fully persuaded
from Scripture I have good reason so to be) yet I must again declare, I am far
from approving of that Popish Doctrine, that Baptism conferrs Grace from any
Virtue in it; though I cannot deny but God may work Grace in some in that
Ordinance.

I believe some have Grace that never were Baptized; and that some are Baptized
that never had Grace, both of Adult as well as Infants: Nor does our practice
give the least countenance to believe that this Ordinance Regenerates. Nay it
seems clearly to hold forth the contrary, since I do not pretend to Baptize to
the end they may be Regenerated; but in hopes they are already so. There must
first be a Right before they partake of the Seal But I expect some should say,
to what end should Parents bring their Children to this Ordinance, if they hope
they are Regenerated before? Answer, If the Objecter be an Anabaptist, I answer
him, to the same end they bring their Adult, whom they own to be Believers; but
if of another Judgment, I answer, to the same end Adult Believers come to the
Lord's Supper after they are in Christ; and that which will serve for an Answer
to the one, may serve as an sufficient Answer to the other. There may be a
necessity of doing a thing in order to our avoiding Sin, when there is not a
necessity to do the same in order to avoiding of Hell. For instance, A Saint is
bound in his own Person to fulfill the Moral Law perfectly, in order to his
avoiding Sin, but not in order to his avoiding Hell: If he was, who then could
be saved? And if no other Reason can be given, but because God will have it so,
it is sufficient to justify our practice: But to this I add, (ex abundanti)
that as a grown Person, who has Grace, stands in need of Prayer, Preaching,
and the Lord's Supper, for to strengthen his Grace, they being appointed to
that end: So though we were sure Infants had such Faith as we Baptize, yet we
ought to Baptize them, for the strengthening of that Faith, and to look on it
as our Privilege as well as Duty.

Object. 4. If we may Baptize Infants on this ground, then we may Baptize the
Infants of Unbelieving Parents; for we have the same ground to hope of them:
And further, we find such were Circumcised; but you do not Baptize such,
therefore you ought not to Baptize others.

Answ. Though I cannot deny but some such may be Saved, and so consequently
must have Grace; yet this no way weakens my Argument laid down, as I shall
prove by another Argument, thus, -- Those to whom God has made special
Promises, of them we have special ground to hope: But the Infant Seed of
Believers are such to whom God has made special Promises; therefore of such we
have special ground to hope. The Major is clear: For though we cannot from
hence infallibly conclude the certainty of the Salvation of all such, (the
Promise respecting the External, as well as Internal part of the Covenant) yet
sure I am such Promises give more ground to hope, than where he has made none;
and for any to deny this, is no better than to charge God with mocking of his
Dear Children; since in their Judgment all the Promises God has made to their
Seed, will not afford sufficient ground so much as to hope concerning their
future Happiness. And sure I am, if there is no ground to hope of them, there
is none of others; and so all must (in their Judgment) perish.

Minor Proposition. But God has made special Promises to the Seed of
Believers. First, He has made Promises unto such, Genesis 17.7,8. And I will
establish my Covenant between thee and me, and thy Seed after thee in their
Generations, for an Everlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee, and thy Seed
after thee. So Acts 2.39. For the Promise is to you and to your Children, etc.
Which Promise being renewed in the New Testament, and so many hundred Years
after it was given to Abraham, proves it was no bare Promise of the Land of
Canaan, as some vainly suppose. Secondly, I say, special Promises; I mean such
as are not made in common to the Seed of Unbelievers; and I challenge any to
show me one such promise made to them. For though I cannot deny but some such
may be Saved; yet I see no more ground to hope of such dying in Infancy, than
of the Infants of Heathens; there being no more Promise to the former than the
latter, according to the best of my knowledge, in Scripture. Nor can we
conclude, (as was Objected) that because the Seed of Unbelievers as well as
Believers were Circumcised, (suppose it so); that therefore the Seed of all,
both Unbelievers as well as Believers, must be Baptized, no more than we can
conclude, that it is lawful for Women to Baptize, because Zipporah Circumcised
her Son. There was no fixed Officer in the Jewish Church (as Mr. Strong has
observed) to administer that Ordinance; and then no wonder if there was some
Maladministration as to the Subject: But suppose it was the Will of God it
should be so in that Day, it does not follow it must be so now: Though Baptism
comes in the room of Circumcision, for the same God that had power to Change
the Seal, may, if he will, Change or Limit the Subject also. But is Objected by
some, That the Promises were not made to Abraham's Natural Seed, but Spiritual.
For it is said, Gal. 3.29. If ye are Christ's, then are ye Abraham 's Seed, and
Heirs according to Promise. And from hence conclude, there is no ground to
Baptize the Natural Seed of Believers as Believers; because the Promise is not
made to them as Natural Seed. To which I Answer, Had this Objection been
brought against the Corrupt Practice of such as Baptize the Infants of such
Parents as are openly Profane (for it is evident Circumcision was first
instituted to Believing Abraham) I think it would have been unanswerable,
because there is nothing of Christ appears in such Parents; no, not so much as
a Profession; and how such Infants can be supposed to stand in the Place, or
partake of the Privileges of Abraham, unless one of their Parents stood in
Abraham's room, I see not. But since the Objection is made against such as only
Baptize such as have Believing Parents, I must further Answer, The forecited
Scripture seems not in the least to oppose the Truth I have laid down; as will
appear, if we consider the Apostle is there speaking to Adult Gentiles; and
does assure them, that though they were not the Natural Seed of Abraham, and so
could not on that account lay claim to the Promise, either to themselves or
Children, as they might have done had they been so; and their Conversations had
been becoming the the Gospel of Christ, yet by Virtue of their Relation to
Christ, or their believing in Christ, (though not of Abraham's Natural Seed)
they shall partake of Abraham's Privileges: And as at the first, the Promise
was made to Abraham and his Seed, so when the Gentiles came to initiate the
Faith of Abraham, the Promise should be to them and their Seed, as it was to
Abraham. Now the Promise at first reached unto Abraham's Natural Seed, as is
clear from Genesis 17.7,8,9,10. Now we cannot suppose the Seal to be applied to
any but such as the Promise was made to. But such as were Eight Days Old were
Circumcised; therefore to such the Promise was made: For though I grant that
all in Abraham's House were Circumcised, both Old and Young; the Adult being
such, as we may suppose, were at least Professors: For it is said of Abraham, he
would teach his House; yet it is evident none were excepted, if but Eight Days
old. So that this Text strongly confirms my Argument; for if upon our Believing
we come to be Abraham's Seed, and to partake of his Blessedness, as in Gal.
3.9. then it follows by an undeniable consequence, that as the Promise at first
was made to Believing Abraham, and his Natural Seed, so it must he continued to
us Believers, and our Seed; or else we are not Blessed as Abraham; for it was
no small part of his Blessedness that the Promise extended to his Seed. But to
put all out of doubt, if the Promise was made to a Spiritual Seed, then it must
be to such as we are sure are Spiritual, or to such as we have good ground to
hope are so. If you say the former, then we must Baptize none, either Old or
Young; because (as I have proved) we can-never infallibly tell who are
Spiritual, it being only proper to God, who is the Father of Spirits, to know
that: But if you say the latter; that is, such as we have good ground to hope
are Spiritual, then the Infant Seed of Believers must come in; since I hope I
have sufficiently proved we have good ground to hope such are inwardly renewed;
and if such as are renewed and born again by the Spirit, and have the Image of
God Engraven on their Hearts, may not be reckoned for a Spiritual Seed, I know
not who must. So that till my former Argument is overthrown concerning the
necessity for Infants to be Regenerated, and the good ground we have to hope
some are so on the account of the Promises made to them; I say, till then all
that is here added is of no Force.

Object. 5. But we have no Instance in Scripture of any Infants ever Baptized;
therefore we have ground to think such ought not to be Baptized, for we cannot
suppose the Apostles were wanting in their Duty in that Case.

To which I answer, Though we have no express Instance of any Infants Baptized,
yet we have some Texts, that will, I conceive, infallibly prove either that
some then were Baptized, or at least now ought to be Baptized. It Is said of the
Jailer, Acts 16.33. He was Baptized, he and all his straightway. Now we have
good Ground to believe, that all his takes in Children, and that some of these
all were little Children, or at least so small, as not to be able to make a
Profession of their Faith; but suppose they were able, yet there is no express
mention made that they did so before they were Baptized. It Is said, indeed he
spoke to them the Word of the Lord; but we cannot from thence conclude, they
that heard believed; it is said indeed, after that he rejoiced, believing in God
with all his House, but this was after he and all his were Baptized. But there
is one Text more that will be as a sharp two-edged Sword, which will wound the
Anabaptists, let them defend themselves with all the Subtilty they can. Acts
16.15. of Lydia, And when she was Baptized, and her Household, etc. Now the
Enquiry is, who this Household were? But let them be who they will, yet the
Anabaptist will not reckon little Children among them, because none such are
mentioned; but if so, then because neither Husband, Servant, nor Kindred, are
mentioned, therefore there was none. And thus the Anabaptists have (by an Art
never before heard of) reduced this Household to just no Body but Lydia, and her
self; but I will suppose (and I can do no other) that in this Household there
were more than Lydia. And, First, I will suppose some of them Children, as I
have good ground to do, from the use of the Word in Scripture; and I find some
of the Anabaptists do not deny this, only say Lydia was too old to have young
Children. Now if there was any young Children in this Household, as we have
ground to suppose, then here we have an Instance of such Baptized; but I will
suppose, those Children of Lydia's, as the Anabaptists affirm to be grown up;
then I ask by what Claim they were Baptized? Now that her Household were
Baptized, the Word expressly affirms; if they say, as they were Professors, I
deny that, and it lies on them to prove it; there is not one Word of their
believing, or any of them, either before or after they were Baptized; and had
they made any Profession, we have ground to think some mention would have been
made of it; but since the Scripture is silent, though the Anabaptists should
never so boldly affirm it, yet I am confident scarce any, but those of their
own Persuasion, will in the least regard what they say. If they were Baptized,
as being related to Lydia, though they made no Profession themselves, then this
overthrows the Practice of the Anabaptists; since here are some Baptized that
made no Profession of their Faith; and also it gives us the Cause, by an
undeniable Conclusion; for if such Children as are Adult, but no Professors,
yet have a Right to Baptism on the Account of their Relation to a Parent that
did believe; then it follows, that what belongs to any Child, merely as the
Child of such a Parent, belongs to all the Children of the same a Parent: But
it may be some may say this Household were all Servants; but if they were, yet
here is not a Word of their Faith or Profession: And then I conclude, that if
Lydia's Servants were Baptized, by Virtue of that Relation to Lydia, much more
should her Children be Baptized, standing in a nearer Relation to her. Thus I
have shown you there are some Texts that afford us good ground to think some
Infants or little Children were Baptized; but yet if there were not any such
therein contained, yet the same Scriptures do afford undeniable Consequences,
that some Infants have a Right to Baptism, as I have proved at large. But
suppose no Instance in Scripture could be given of an Infant Baptized, or any
thing like it; yet if I prove from Scripture they ought to be, it is a
sufficient Warrant for us so to do; and I conceive I shall extort a Consent to
this from my Brethren from this following Consideration, That there was a time
when no Instance could be produced of any Adult that had been Baptized; I mean,
in its first Institution; as Abraham could produce no Instance of any that had
been Circumcised. Now then according to this Rule none must be Circumcised or
Baptized, because no Instance could then be produced of any that had; but you
must say, Though no Instance could be given of any Adult that had been Baptized,
yet when God made it known to be his Will, that so it should be, it was
sufficient to justify their Practice in so doing. So say I as to Infants, though
no Instance could be given of any Infant that had been Baptized, yet if God
has made it known to us in his Word, such ought to be, it is a sufficient
Warrant to us so to do; and whether I have proved some Infants Right to Baptism
from Scripture, I leave it unto any Understanding, Impartial, and Unprejudiced
Reader to judge; and I must tell you, if I have proved their Right to this
Ordinance, it is far more than if I could produce an Instance, or many
Instances, of such as had; for Right will be Right; but it is possible the best
of Men (being imperfect) may fail as to some particular Fact. Hence we say, a
facto ad jus non valet Argumentum; that is, we cannot from the Fact conclude
the Right of the thing. We are not to imitate David in his Adultery, nor Peter
in his denying Christ, though the one was a Prophet, and the other an Apostle.
For though it cannot be denied that they did so, yet the Scripture proves they
ought not to have done so; and if the Apostles in Baptizing of Adult, and not
Baptizing Infants, (suppose it to be so) did not do the former, and omit doing
the latter, upon the Account of the Right the one had, and want of a Right to
the other, though you could produce a Thousand Instances, we are no more bound to
imitate them, than to imitate David in his Adultery, or Peter in Cursing and
Swearing; because we are not to live by Examples, but Laws; nay, as
notwithstanding such sad Instances in Scripture, we have Liberty, and are bound
(not only not to imitate them, but) to act contrary thereunto; so could you
prove, that the Apostles never Baptized one Infant; yet if I can prove from
Scripture, (as I hope I have) they ought to be Baptized, we ought in this to
act contrary to their Practice, and not make one Sin an Inlet into another;
since the Right of the thing is more than if you could produce as many
Instances as there are Stars in the Firmament without this Right. Let not any
think I do this to reflect on the Practice of the Blessed Apostles, God forbid;
for I am confident they were not wanting in the due Administration of any
Ordinance in God's House; but I do it to show, that the Right of this Ordinance
is more than barely the Action; and that you may see how unreasonable it seems
in the Anabaptists to make such a noise about one Infant Baptized, when we can
produce that which is more than a Thousand Instances, simply considered; the
Apostles did first consider their Right before they Baptized any.

Obj. 6. But we find no Command in Scripture to Baptize such, and so have good
ground to believe it is not the Mind of God such should be Baptized.

A. There is no need of a Positive Command, or an Express Scripture, in so many
plain Words to affirm a thing, in order to the proving a Duty or Truth. We have
a Matter of as great Concern, as the Baptism of Old or Young, proved by Christ
himself by a bare Consequence, and that is the Resurrection. Mat. 22.31,32. But
as touching the Resurrection of the Dead, have ye not read that which was
spoken to you of God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob: God is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living. This
Scripture he cites from Ex. 3.6. to prove the Resurrection, and yet not one
Word of the Resurrection mentioned in it, but proves it by Consequence thus;
That because God is the God of Abraham, but not the God of the Dead; therefore
Abraham must live, not only in his Soul, but the Body, they both making up but
the whole of Abraham. And if nothing must be received as a Truth, but what we
have a plain Scripture for in so many Words, how will my Friends, the
Anabaptists, prove, That the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to any of us,
since (though we have Scriptures that will prove it as to the Substance, of it
yet) I know no Scripture, which in so many plain Words does affirm it, but
perhaps some of the Anabaptists will rather reject this as a Truth, than admit
of Infant Baptism; and as to Doctrines, so in Point of Duty. There is no
Necessity of an express Command to make it a Duty; to illustrate this, if God
command us to be Charitable to poor Saints, though the Command makes no mention
of any expressly by Name, yet when we see such in Wants, we are bound to relieve
them, and cannot omit it, (if able) without Sin; it will not excuse us to say,
I am not commanded to relieve such by Name; so though Sinners are not called by
Name to come to Christ, it is their Duty to come; so when God commands us to
Baptize all such as we have good ground to hope are Believers, if some Infants
are found in that number, we are as much bound to Baptize them as any others,
as if mentioned by Name. God once commanded Circumcision to the Jews and their
Infant Seed; but if in the New Testament he has declared (as I have shown)
that we come in the Jews room, and that Baptism comes in the room of
Circumcision, that Command of Circumcising Infants does as much enjoin the
Baptizing of Infants: And no wonder Infants are not mentioned expressly in the
New Testament, as the Subjects of Baptism; for since Baptism comes in the room
of Circumcision, the Subjects of that Ordinance were so well known, they needed
not to be again mentioned; if an express Command is so necessary, I would know
what Command the Anabaptists can produce (or instance either) for to Baptize by
Dipping. I am certain they can produce no such Command in Scripture; but they
will reply, Though they have neither Precept or President, yet because the Word
signifies so, therefore they do it so, say I, (to say nothing now, how
variously that Word is used) as to Baptizing Infants. Though we have no express
Precept in so many Words or President, yet because we have many Words, and
great part of some Chapters too in Scripture, that signify to us that some
Infants have been, and ought to be Baptized, therefore I do it; and why
Significations and Meanings in Scripture may not be allowed to us as well as
them, I see not.

And thus, having produced plain Scripture for Infant Baptism, (since nothing
less will do) or at least I conceive as plain as can be produced to Baptize
Adult, I shall conclude this Point (touching the Subject) with a reasonable
Request to my Christian Friend the Anabaptists, which is, that either they
would receive the Doctrine laid down, or give some plain Scripture, to prove
something of what I have laid down to be falfe; and if they will not comply
with my Request, that which I have often feared will too evidently appear to be
a Truth, that it is Love to a Party (more than to the Truth) that has made
them so earnestly contend; I have often observed, it is no easy Matter to
convince some Men of Truth; when they have been accustomed to Error, they scorn
to be informed by others; the Pride of their Hearts makes them shut their Eyes,
that they will not see; (and we say none are so blind as they that will not
see) and if this Spirit, or Ignorance, do not prevail with my Reader, I hope he
and I shall be both of one Mind for the time to come, which will be the Joy of
my Heart; yet not so much, that I have gained the Cause I have been contending
for, as that this unhappy Controversy is like to be ended, and my Friends, the
Anabaptists, brought to the Acknowledgment of the Truth, as it is in Jesus.

Having finished my Discourse as to the Subject of Baptism, I designed at first
to proceed no further, but to the end that nothing may be wanting, for the full
Satisfaction of such as desire it, about the whole of Baptism, I shall make
some brief Enquiry as to the manner how this Ordinance ought to be Administered,
whether by Dipping only, or otherwise; for I never expect that the Anabaptists
should resignup their beloved Errors, so long as they have any thing which
looks like a Strong Hold to shelter them: And therefore knowing how earnestly
they contend about the Manner how, as well as the Subject who, I shall a little
insist on that also. And though perhaps my Reader may cry Victory before he
read any further, yet I would desire him to forbear Boasting, at least till he
put off the Harness; lest all that hear him in the end Laugh at him. Now the
Grand Plea of the Anabaptists for Dipping is, the word in the Original
signifies so: But what if the only Reply to them in this Case, should be the
same they give to us in other Cases? Give me a plain Scripture, since,
Significations, and doubtful Meanings, are of no force with them: But referring
my Reader to the late Portsmouth Disputation about the Signification of the
word, by Mr. Chandler, etc. not being willing to trouble my Reader with any
thing of this Nature in my Book which he may read in another: I shall keep to
plain Scripture, since that is most like to convince the common sort of
Readers, and shall consider, if the Greek word (...) as it is used by Christ
and his Apostles, (whom we must suppose well knew how to use proper words to
express their meaning) can with any show of reason always signifies Dipping
under Water; but to prevent all mistakes, (and that the difference may not be
by any supposed to be greater than it is) if it be enquired, whether it may not
in some case be lawful to Baptize by Dipping? I grant it may; but the Question
is, whether we may not as lawfully Baptize some other way? This the Anabaptists
deny, and I affirm; and hope I shall prove by these following Texts, Acts 1.5.
John Baptized with Water. Now, while it is said with Water, not in Water, it
seems to imply he did not Dip them, only made use of Water in that Ordinance;
for how improper would it be to say, I Dipped such a thing with Water? But not
at all to say I washed, such a thing with Water, when we only sprinkle it, or
throw Water upon it: See another Text, Mark 7.4. And when they come from the
Market, unless they wash they Eat not. Those words, unless they wash, are
(...), unless they Baptize; and the Words of Tables in the end of the Verse is,
(...) of Beds: Now it is scarce consistent with Reason to suppose that they
should so frequently dip their Beds: If they did, we may suppose them very
unfit to lie on for some time. The Pharisees had such a proud conceit of
themselves, that they thought if they did but deal with others they are defiled
by so doing; and therefore after they came from the Market, they were to wash
their Hands with which they had delivered any thing to, or received any thing
from others; but that they should on all such occasions Dip themselves wholly
under Water, seems to be both incredible and ridiculous; and yet this is in the
Original called a Baptizing, as you have heard. All I have found answered to
this, is, that in washing they Dipped their Hands, and so it was Dipping still,
though not the whole Body: To which I answer, In washing our Hands we are not
wont to Dip them, unless some part of them: So that all they can from hence
infer, is, that some little part of the Body ought to be Dipped in Baptism, as
much as the Hands or Fingers end; why then do the Anabaptists impose Dipping
the whole Body, and hazard the Life by so doing, when it might as well be some
little Part of the Body only? If they love Peace, why do they not show
themselves willing to comply with us as far as they can with a good Conscience,
since they are forced from this Scripture to own there is no necessity from the
signification of the Word, to Dip or Plung the whole Body under Water.

Another Text to be considered, is 1 Cor. 10.2. And where all Baptized into
Moses in the Clouds, and in the Sea. But can we suppose they were dipped in the
Cloud? On the other hand, does not the falling of the Rain from a Cloud most
exactly answer to our manner of Baptizing? The chief Reply I have met with to
this, is, That if the Cloud rained on them while they were going through the
Sea, then they could not be said to go through on dry Ground, as the Text
affirms. To which I Answer, They that are so careful of the Sense of the Text
in one thing, should also of another; for as it is said, They went through on
dry Ground; so it is said, They were Baptized in the Cloud; and sure it must
mean, some Water came from the Cloud, either to plunge them, or to wash them,
or else how could it be called Baptism? Can any be Baptized without Water? I
doubt not but if this Scripture would but have countenanced Dipping, as well as
some other Washing, the Anabaptists would never have stood on the dry Ground.
But what a poor Reply is this, That the Rain could not fall on them; because
it is said, They went on dry Ground? As if that Mighty God who made a Way for
them through the Deep, that the Water (even to a Miracle) stood as a Wall to
defend them, could not cause also that the Ground should be dry,
notwithstanding some shower might Fall. As if he that dried up the Ocean, could
not also dry up some Drops. Suppose the Rain from the Cloud did fall on the
Ground, might they notwithstanding go on dry Ground? Yes sure, without a
Miracle: We read Genesis 8.14. The Earth was Dried; where the Word Dry, is opposed
to the Flood, and not to all Moisture; for it is scarce credible, in an
ordinary Way, that after the Earth had been so long soaked by such an unheard
of Flood, it should within so few Days be so dried, that it should not have so
much Moisture as a small shower of Rain might occasion. When it is said the
Earth was dried, it shows that the Flood was so far gone that they might walk
upon it. So the Israelites, though some Rain might fall on them, yet might
properly be said to go on dry Ground; because no doubt but the dry Ground is
opposed to the Sea, that was wont to overflow that place.

See what poor shifts the Ablest of the Anabaptists are forced to make use of
to support their tottering Cause: Sure I am, it gives any rational Man cause to
suppose they are at a loss, when they can make no better a Reply than thus: See
on what slender Grounds they can oppose the plainest Scripture when it makes
against them; as if they were resolved to follow their own Fancies, let the
Scripture say what it will. Thus you see the Word will justify our way of
Baptizing; and if so, then the Anabaptists can never justify their Separation
from us, or Calumnies against us on that Acount: But because there are some
Scriptures which are urged as presidents of Persons Baptized by Dipping, I
shall therefore weigh them in the Balance, and see if they are not wanting, to
that End for which they are brought. The first Text I shall mention is Romans
6.4. where we are said to be buried with Christ in Baptism; and so they
conclude, that as Persons when Buried are put under the Earth, so when Persons
are Baptized, they should be put wholly under the Water. But here they would do
well to consider this is but a Metaphor; and it is a known Maxim, Similitudes
will not run on all four; but if this Metaphor must hold good in all things,
then let the Anabaptists be careful that the Party Baptized lie as long under
the Water, as the Dead do under the Earth, before they Rise again; but if you
say the comparison will not hold good in that, then by your own Confession not
in all; and so proves nothing to the point: But if a Burial may serve to set
forth Baptism, this makes for us; for as in Burying a Person, they throw the
Earth upon him; so we in Baptism throw the Water on the Party Baptized. Another
Text is, Acts 8.38. And they went both down into the Water; and so draw a
Conclusion, (such a one as it is) that because he went down, therefore he was
Dipped: But here I must remind my Friends this is not a plain Scripture to
prove Dipping; nor will it afford any more than a poor consequence, (such as I
am sure they would reject with the greatest scorn and derision, if brought
against them) to conclude, because one went into the Water, therefore under the
Water with their whole Bodies, when they might as truly be said to go into the
Water, if their Feet were but in^ as if under the Water with their whole Body;
and no wonder that it is said, they went down, since Water usually lies in some
bottom; and they that will have it, must go down for it. But now that this
going down was not a Dipping, is so clear even from the Text it self, that all
that do not wilfully shut their Eyes, must needs see it. It Is said, They went
both down; and what is said of the one is (in that respect) said of the other.
So that if from hence it can be proved that the Eunuch was Dipped, it proves
that Philip was Dipped also: From whence I frame an unanswerable Argument from
the Words, that the Eunuch was not Dipped. Thus the Eunuch went down no more
under Water than Philip: But Philip was not Dipped, therefore not the Eunuch.
The Major is clear, for it is said, both went down; and if any Scripture can be
produced to prove the Eunuch went lower into the Water than Philip, I will
believe it: But sure I am this Text is silent, nay, it seems to speak the
contrary; for it is said, both went down; which Words seem to imply, both went
equally down. The Minor I conceive will by most readily be granted, that Philip
was not Dipped: And before I would have the Anabaptists believe he was, I
desire them to prove it; but though I doubt not but they can produce many
Instances of Baptized Persons Dipped among themselves; yet I am ready to
believe should they search the World through, they could not produce one
instance of an Administrator Dipped. If they think Philip was Dipped, why do
not they then imitate him? That the Baptizer, as well as Baptized are Dipped.
But do they thus? No, they bind heavy Burdens to lay on others Shoulders, but
care not for bearing any part themselves. But I wonder how such as pretend to
walk so exactly by Scripture Rule, dare thus mangle it, while they force it to
speak in what Langnage they would have it; while they readily embrace what of
it seems to make for them, and in the mean time trample under Foot what does
really make against them. They own that Philip was not Dipped: The Text says
not one word of the Eunuch's going lower than he, into the Water, but much
rather proves the contrary; and yet notwithstanding all that this, Scripture
speaks against it. Such is the Love of the Anabaptists to Dipping, that the
poor Eunuch, will he, nill he, down under Water he must go, whatever becomes
of him. He went down into the Water for his own Profit and Pleasure, and they
will force him down under the Water for theirs; but I Will soon bring him up
again, if they will but have Patience to stand by till I open another Word in
that Text. It Is said, Both went down. Mind, both were active in going down;
from whence I form an Argument to prove this going down was not Dipp^g in
Baptism; thus in Baptism the ^a^y Baptized is passive; but in this the Eunuch
was not passive; therefore in that Action of going down (...) was not Baptized:
So that in Baptism the Party to be baptized is passive. I need not stand to
prove, since I know none that do affirm that a Persen may in Baptism Dip
himself: And if going down is not an Action, I know not what is; so that
instead of Pr^ng from this Text that the Eunuch was Dipped, they have, I am
sure, Plunged themselves deep enough into an Ocean of Nonsense, which perhaps
may do them more harm (if they have not a care of themselves) than ever the
Eunuch's going down is like to do them good. But now if we take this Text in
its Genuine Sense; it seems to be this, That they both went down into the
Water, to the end that Philip might Baptize the Eunuch, but in what manner
this Scripture is silent; but it seems most likely by throwing some Water upon
him, as we do on those whom we Baptize: And now I leave it to my Reader to
judge, whether, this Text (they have so gloried in) will so infallibly prove
Dipping; or rather, whether it will not infallibly prove the contrary: But if
this is not sufficient to prove it, perhaps some other may; and therefore I
come to consider of the next, that so all their Ministers may be heard speak
before their Cause is lost.

Another Text, much urged, to prove a Necessity of Dipping, is Mat. 3.16. And
Jesus, when he was Baptized, went up straightway out of the Water; and so
conclude, that because he went up, therefore he had been wholly under Water.
But sure I am, if we observe the Words, we shall see but little, if any Cause,
to suppose, that in that coming up, it was a rising from under Water in
Baptism; for it is said he went up, was still active. It Is not said he was taken
up; and I have shown you the Person is Passive in Baptism; and further, it is
observable, it is said he went up when he was Baptized: His going up was an
After-Act; now the Anabaptist cannot deny but the coming up out of the Water,
as well as going down into it, is a Part of Baptism; for in that Text they so
urge; where it is said, We are buried with him in Baptism. Then he mentions
Christ's rising again: If then his going up was after Baptism, (as says the
Text) then it can never prove a Necessity for us to go down in Baptism; it
seems clear to me, that this going up was not a rising up from under the Water,
but a going up from the Water, after he had been Baptized; for we cannot
suppose he could live always there; but how he was Baptized before he came up,
we know not; if it was by Dipping, this Text will not prove it, no, not by
Consequence. The last Text I shall mention, is John 3.23. And John also was
Baptizing in Enon, for there was much Water there; and conclude, because there
was much Water, therefore they were Dipped; but still I find my Friends, the
Anabaptists, harping on the same String, (though exceedingly out of Tune) as if
they were resolved to build their Faith on bare Consequences; a pretty
Inference, there was much Water, therefore they were dipped; what may not a Man
conclude at this rate? Even what he will, from what he will; as if it was not
possible for to Dip our Hand where there is much Water, unless we tumble in
over Head and Ears. If I cannot come where much Water is, unless I am dipped, I
shall be more aware of it for the time to come; may not a Man as well conclude,
because he saw one lighting of a Candle at a good Fire, therefore he is
undoubtedly burnt to Ashes? I think he may as well so conclude, and better,
since it is certain the Fire was hot enough to burn the one, if he went into
it; but it may on good ground be questioned, whether that Water was deep enough
to dip the other, had he gone into that. For though it is said there was much
Water there, yet it is most certain, that Water which was counted much with
them, would be counted but little with us; for it is reported by such as give us
the best Account of those Countries, that Water is so scarce in those Parts,
that a Man may go Seven Days Journey sometimes before he finds Water enough to
drink; and therefore, almost to a Miracle, those Inhabitants are able to live
with little or no Drink: And sure I am, our late Writers on this Subject have
given good ground to believe, that Water was not so much as the Anabaptists
suppose it to be. But if it was Deep enough to Dip, yet here is no mention
made, that they were so; and our Enquiry is not, whether they might possibly
have been Dipped, but whether they were so; and therefore till this or some
other Scripture speaks more plainly of this Matter, I would desire the
Anabaptists to be silent concerning it. All that this Text proves, is, that
much Water was there, but how much they made use of in Baptism, it mentions
nothing of that.

And now I have considered such Texts as seem to make for Dipping, I desire my
Reader to consider well of two Texts that seem to make against it, that so we
may see how far the Scripture does prove an absolute Necessity for Dipping in
Baptism: One is, Acts 16.33. And he took them the same Hour of the Night, (that
is, at Midnight, Ver. 25.) and was Baptized, he and all his straightway: For
though we cannot infallibly conclude they were not Dipped, because it might be
possible; yet sure I am we may as well conclude from hence they were not
Dipped, as they could conclude they were, because there was much Water there.
It Is said, at Midnight, he and all his were Baptized; now we cannot well
suppose, that they should rise, and be plunged in a River at Midnight. But
suppose they were willing, yet (since Water was so scarce, as I have hinted) it
may justly be questioned, whether there was Water enough near at Hand to Dip,
for we cannot suppose them to go far at Midnight to seek for such a Water; but
there is one Text more, which seems as if it were given on Purpose to confute
the Necessity of Dipping, in Acts 8.36. See here is Water, what hinders me that
I may not be Baptized? Observe he does not say, here is deep Water, or much
Water, but only Water; supposing, that if there was but Water, be it more or
less, there could be no Hindrance, why he should not be Baptized, on that
Account, as to the Element. Had an Anabaptist been there, no doubt but he
should have had a sharp Rebuke for his Ignorance, thus: What hinders? Why,
it is not deep enough; but Philip never in the least opposes him, but seems
rather to answer by way of Concession, If thou believe, thou may; as if he
had said, True indeed, if there is but Water, there can be no Hindrance on
that Account. But some may say, This was a deep Water of which he spoke.
Answer, I desire the Anabaptists to prove that. But suppose it was so, yet here
is no mention made of that, as not at all material to his present Purpose. Now
the Eunuch no doubt being informed by Philip, as well touching the Manner of
the Ordinance, as the Necessity of it, would in all Probability (had Dipping
been the only way) have said, See, here is Water enough to be Baptized in; but
since he only mentions Water, and Philip seems to consent to him, I frame an
Argument thus; If nothing can hinder a Person being Baptized (as to the
Element) where there is Water, then Dipping is not absolutely necessary; but
nothing can hinder where there is Water, therefore Dipping is not absolutely
necessary; the major is most evident, for there may be Water where there is not
enough to Dip any one in. The minor is clear from express Scripture; See here
is Water, what hinders? etc. Clearly holding forth, that the not being deep
enough to Dip in, could not hinder; for though it is by way of Interrogation, yet
it carries in it the Force of an Affirmation. So that though we see from hence
some Water is necessary, yet this Scripture gives us not the least Countenance
to believe, or think, that much Water is necessary; but does in Words next to
most express Terms prove the contrary unto us.

Thus, I hope, I have not only proved from Scripture, that some Infants have a
Right to Baptism, but also have given good Proof, that our Way of Baptizing, by
throwing or pouring Water upon the Face, is according to the Mind of God; or at
least have given as good Proof for that, as can be given for Dipping, and
better; and since the Scripture does as well approve (to say no more) of our
Way of Baptizing as of Dipping, does not the Law of God and Nature direct and
excite us to use that Way, which may be least hurtful to our Bodies? For if God
give us but equal Liberty to Baptize, by Dipping, or some other more safe Way,
we ought to avoid Dipping, (especially in our cold Climate) since we cannot Dip
in the Winter Season, especially without endangering our Lives; so that of
Necessity the Ordinance must sometimes be long deferred, and I am sure we have
no President for that. Lydia and her Household, the Jailer and all his, were
immediately Baptized, when those two believed; but now if we were to imitate
them (and should Baptize, by Dipping) we must extremely hazard the Lives, even
of Adult in the Winter; and whether of these three we should choose, to Baptize
by throwing Water on the Face, since the Word of God approves that Way as well
as any other, or Dip them in the Winter Season, (when we have no express
Precept, or President in Scripture so to do) and so endanger the Life, or
sinfully to deferr the Ordinance, I leave it to you to judge; by long deferring
the Ordinance, we certainly Sin, by Dipping or Plunging the Party under Water,
may, under some Circumstances, be in Danger to commit Sin (to say no more) but
to Baptize, by pouring on of Water, carries no Appearance of Evil in it.

I have heretofore, for some time, preached occasionally in Burnham, in the
Hundreds of Essex, where there were many Anabaptists, (though at great Variance
among themselves, one Party most vehemently accusing another, because one Party
Baptized any that were Adult, if they desired it, whether they were Believers
or not; by reason of which, they, in a small Village, set up Meeting against
Meeting, whereby I see they are fallible in some things, and so may be in
others) and there I was informed by one that well knew it, that some Women
being persuaded to be Dipped soon after Childbearing, were immediately taken
ill, and never recovered.

I hope I have said enough as to the manner how this Ordinance may and ought,
under our Circumstances, to be administered, and now desire my Christian
Friends, the Anabaptists, to prove, that the Word is never used to any other
End, than to signify Dipping or Plunging the whole Body under Water; or
because they went down into the Water, or were where much Water was, that
therefore of Necessity they must be dipped; but if none of these can be proved,
(as I am most certain they cannot) I hope they will no more contend about this
Point, but will see it their Duty to comply with us in our way of Baptizing,
since they cannot thus hazard their Lives, by Dipping, without tempting of God;
since we may as lawfully use some other way, less dangerous to the Body. But if
I cannot prevail in this, (yet since we have so much to say, in Vindication of
our Practice) I hope they will suspend their Uncharitable Censures, which I
find them so prone unto; may I judge of some Men's Spirits by their Writings;
the Poison of Asps seems to be under their Tongue. It Is not long since I saw a
Book put out by one of the most eminent of the Anabaptists; who writing against
one of ours, who for Piety, Gravity, and Ministerial Ability, deserved to be
more Honorably treated by him, (however in that Point differing from him); and
in that he charges his Antagonist with Railery and Unbecoming Language, telling
him how unlike such a Spirit is to do good in Controverted Points; and Promises
by the Grace of God to discover no such Spirit in his Writing against him. But
this Gentleman had either a Bad Head, or a Malicious Revengeful Heart, for
within a few Pages, instead of Confusing him, (which he has discovered himself
in the Judgment of most to be unable to do) he falls into such Scurrilous,
Filthy, Abominable Language, as for modesty sake I omit, rendering much more of
that Nature than ever he had received. From whence I have cause to fear that
Gentleman was not much influenced by the Grace of God, while he no sooner
scarce resolves, by God's Grace, against a known Sin, which he pretends to
abhor, but commits it again and again deliberately, and seemingly with the
greatest delight; and rather than conceal his Wit in making a Jest, will commit
a Sin to the Dishonor of God, and Wrong of his own Soul. It would have been
well for that Gentleman if he had never Promised by God's Grace, unless he had
had more Grace to perform his Promise; while he, like that Disobedient Son,
said, I go, but went not; it will be well for him, if such as are no more
esteemed by him than Publicans, do not get into the Kingdom of God before him.
I hope my Writing does not in the least savor of such a Spirit, and therefore
desire my Friends, the Anabaptists, impartially to weigh what I have laid down;
and if it will not hold weight in the Balance of the Sanctuary, reject it; if
it does, let it not be rejected because of the weakness or unworthiness of the
Instrument; but rather let it be received because it is the Mind of God. If you
receive Light into any Truth herein, bless God for it: But if through my
weakness I have laid down any thing Erroneous, then I desire that in as mild a
Spirit they confute me with solid Arguments from Scripture; which Confutation
shall not break my Head, or inrage my Heart, nor I hope, cause me to speak
unadvisedly with my Tongue, but shall be as a precious Ointment to me. I long
to see more clearly into the Truth (acknowledging I know but in part, and so
can but Prophecy in part); and if God will make use of an Anabaptist to inform
me, to the end I may know the Ways and Truths of God more perfectly, I hope I
shall rejoice. I must confess, in the reading of some Authors of the Anabaptist
Persuasion, I have been so far from being convinced that I am in an Error, that
I am the more confirmed in my present Sentiments, while I find that in their
Endeavors to confute us, they wrest the Scripture, and most grossly abuse
Authors they cite for them. Sometime since I read an Author on this Subject,
supposed to be Mr. Danvers, whom upon Examination I find dexterous at abusing
Authors, as if he was resolved to confirm his Opinion from Antiquity, per fas
aut nefas, right or wrong; he there cites Calvin against Infant Baptism, (I had
almost said Calvin against himself) on his Exposition on Mat. 3.6. thus, That
Men may rightly offer themselves in Baptism; Confession of Sins is required,
otherwise the whole Action would be nothing else but sport: But leaves out his
words immediately following, (no doubt on purpose, knowing otherwise his Cause
had been betrayed, and his abuse of that worthy Author discovered) his Words
are these, Porro notandum est de Adultis hic verba fieri; that is, Let it be
noted, I am speaking here concerning Adult: And who differs from him in this?
Not I. But as to Infant Baptism, I could weary my reader to cite passages to
that purpose; especially out of his common places; but his Judgment is so well
known, I may spare my Labor: Had this Author had as much Honesty as Learning,
I am persuaded he would have cited the whole passage of Calvin's. If no Body
could have read Calvin in Latin, how miserably would this Author have beguiled
his Ignorant Reader. The same Author has filled his Book almost with citations
of Authors; but if he has dealt no better with them, than he did with Calvin,
(as it is certain he did not with some of them) no wonder he concealed his Name,
lest on this account it should be rendered hateful to the World. Why did he not
cite that whole passage of Calvin's? May not Scripture it self be turned into
Blasphemy at this rate? I do assure my Brethren, the Anabaptists, such Men as
these will never strengthen their Cause were it never so good. It Is a poor
shelter to make Lies our Refuge, and under Falsehood to hide our selves; and no
commendable practice to force Men to speak in Vindication of that when Dead,
which they abhorred, wrote against, and always spoke against while Living.

And therefore I would desire my Friends, the Anabaptists, that if they will
again Write in Vindication of their Sentiments, that they would not always
employ the most Learned, but the most Gracious; and that they would fix on a
Man of Good Report, a Man Fearing God, and Hating Wickedness; not a Slanderer,
or a Reviler, but on such a one who Labors to keep a Conscience void of
Offense toward God and Man; for though for my own part I am persuaded many of
the Anabaptist Persuasion are Persons dear to God, (I mean of those that are
against the Doctrine of Free Will) and that what some of them hold is out of
Tenderness of Conscience; yet that wicked Spirit which has discovered it self
in some of their Writers, has caused the rest to be the worse thought of,
while in their Writings they seem liker unto Men acted by their own Spirit
striving for a Party, than contending for Truth by the Spirit of God, I would
in all Love to my Friends, the Anabaptists, caution them in one thing, and that
is, to beware of putting too much Considence in their own Writers, especially
in citing old Authors; for they often cite this and the other of the Fathers,
speaking for Believer's Baptism, and by this Means beguile their unwary Reader,
with a strong Opinion, that they were against Infant Baptism; (one Instance of
which I have cited out of Mr. Calvin, to prove this) as if he that was for
Baptizing Believers, who never were Baptized before, (which is as many of them
do certainly mean) must needs be against Infant Baptism; which is as unnatural
a Consequence, as to conclude, if a Man loves his Wife, therefore he must hate
his Child; whereas his Love to his Wife is no Hindrance to his loving his
Child. For my part I am for Infant Baptism; but withal, I am as much for the
Baptism of grown Believers, if never Baptized before. So that these two do no
ways contradict each other; I leave this as a Caution for my Friends for the
time to come. I shall hasten to a Close, and sum up all in a Word of
Exhortation to my Christian Friends, the Anabaptists; that if they see any
weight in what I have said, or cannot from Scripture confute me; that then they
would embrace this Doctrine, and practice accordingly; for it is dangerous
living in Neglect of that which God in his Word reveals to be a Duty, as is
clear from Exodus 4.24. There you read how God sought to slay Moses, because he
had but neglected to Circumcise his Child, longer than the time appointed. Though
Moses was dear to God; though the meekest Man on Earth; though intimately
acquainted with God; yet he had died, if his Son had not been Circumcised; and
what ground we have to think that God will more approve of our Neglect of
Baptism as to the Subject now, than he did the Neglect of Circumcision, as to
the time then, I see not; for as God appoints no Ordinance in vain, so he
cannot bear to see them neglected or despised, though by his own People.

And sure I am, such Parents not only offend God by so doing, but seem to be
without all natural Affection to their Seed. Even the Sea Monsters will draw
out the Breast to their young ones, Lam. 4.3. And they seem Monsters of
Parents, that can deny such a Privilege to their own Children, and so rob them
of their Birthright. Such may fitly be compared to the Ostridge, a filly
Creature, Job 39.16. who is said to be hardened against her young Ones, as if
they were none of hers. Suppose a wicked Parent have godly Children grown up,
and should confine them from the Ordinances of God's House, (though he could not
destroy their Souls thereby, yet because he did what he could in order
thereunto) any godly Person would judge such a one an unmerciful Parent; how
much more may believing Parents be so counted, while they deny the Infant Seed
the Ordinance of Baptism, which God has given them a Right unto, though they
cannot destroy their Souls. So that as you would not be charged for not having
natural Affection, as you would not contract Guilt upon your Souls, and pluck
down Judgments upon your selves, by not walking in all the Ordinances of the
Lord blameless, bring your Infant Seed to be Baptized, be found in God's Way,
doing for them what you can, and then you may with the more Comfort expect God
should do for them that which you cannot; and that while you lay them at the
Pool side, the Waters may be made healing to their diseased Souls; for we can
never, without Presumption, expect the Blessing of God, in Neglect or Contempt
of those Means he has appointed, in order to enjoy it.

Were your Children sick Corporally, Nature would stir you up to use the Means
which God has appointed in order to their Recovery; and if you believe your
Infant Seed stand in need of Mercy, one would think Grace should excite you to
use the Means which God has appointed for the Good of their Souls, that so
they may not curse you in Hell, for not doing what you might do, and ought to
have done, in order to the bringing them to Heaven.

Obj. But against the Practice of this Duty I have heard some argue thus: Though
they cannot answer the Arguments brought to prove it a Duty, yet they cannot
see into it; and because whatever is not of Faith is Sin, hence conclude it
would be Sin in them so to do.

Ans. Suppose it is so, I would ask such whether it may not be a far greater
Sin, that it is not of Faith? Or do you think that your Sins of Ignorance (when
Light shines so clear) must not be accounted for? Paul has declared, that once
he was so ignorant, that he verily thought he ought to do many things contrary
unto the Name of Jesus; as in Acts 26.9. And he did so, and made Havoc of the
Church, and Blasphemed. And here we will suppose it would have been his Sin,
not so to have done, because he verily thought he ought; and so, had it been
absolutely a Duty, he would have neglected it. But I would ask such Objectors,
if they think it was not his Sin, that he was so persuaded? Nay, was it not a
far greater Sin than we can once suppose it to have been, had he in that Case
acted contrary to his Faith or Persuasion? If you deny it, you are guilty of as
great Blasphemy as ever he was. Well then, it seems there is Danger of Sin on
either Hand; thou may (we will suppose) sin in doing it, and thou may sin
also in not doing it. Now in this Case there is a Rule for ever carefully to be
observed, That when two Evils lie before us, and one of them cannot possibly be
avoided, the least is to be chosen; and if this Rule is to be observed, then to
me it seems far safest for such to Baptize their Infant Seed, since their doing
that which they are not fully satisfied in, may be but accidentally a Sin, but
their not doing that which God has made known to be a Duty, (whether they,
through Ignorance, see it to be so or no) is directly a Sin; and more especially
is it safest for such as are Members in such Churches, where the Pastor and
Majority of the Church are of that Judgment, because then by not doing it, they
not only are in Danger (to say no more) of contracting Guilt to their Souls, by
not being found in their Duty, but hereby take the ready way to cause Strife
and Contention in that Church, whose Peace they are obliged to seek, if our
Persuasion touching the Lawfulness of a thing will make it Lawful; then this is
to measure our selves by our selves, and to esteem our own Fancies above the
Word of God. Since let the Word of God hold forth what it will, it no ways
obliges (in those Person's Judgment) unless I am persuaded it is a Truth. Cursed
Doctrine! What is this but grand Quakerism, to prefer the Light within before
the Word of God in the Scripture? But if (as Christ says) the Light within be
Darkness, (as sure it is when it opposes the written Word) then how great is
that Darkness?

Thus, Christian Reader, I have in all Plainness of Speech taken Liberty freely
to express my Sentiments about the Doctrine of Infant Baptism; and whatever the
Effects may be, if I know my Heart, I designed nothing in it but God's Glory,
and thy Good, and to put an end to our unprofitable Differences; and should I
miss my Aim in this latter Respect, yet I hope this will not indirectly cause
our Differences to be wider; for what if we cannot fully agree in this, yet
since we agree many of us in Fundamentals, and hold one Lord, and one Faith,
this Consideration should surely more unite us, than our Differences in smaller
Matters should divide us; we cannot suppose, while so much Darkness remains
upon our Understandings, that we should all be fully of one Mind in all things,
any more than we can suppose we should all be of the same Complexion, or
Stature of Body; but as it is enough, in order to bring us into a rational
Converse, that we are all Men and Women, though we may vastly differ in Features,
and Proportion of Body; so it should be enough to reconcile us in Love and
Affection, that we are Christians, though not in all things of the same Mind, and
same Judgment, and that we are all Fellow-Travellers to the New Jerusalem. Though
we may not walk in the same Path, or tread exactly in each others Steps, sure I
am, when we get to Heaven, we shall sweetly agree. O desirable Day! when
Ephraim shall no more envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim; when we who now know
but in part, and see but darkly, shall then see Face to Face, and know even as
we now are known; when all our dark and confused Conceptions about the
Mysteries of the Gospel shall all vanish and disappear, as the Mists and Fogs
before the rising Sun. And when that time (much of which was spent in Striving
and Contending) shall wholly be spent in Praising and Admiring him that loved
us, and washed away our Sins in his own Blood; how shall we then all be
employed (who are Saints) in the same Work, sing all the same Song, all joined
in the same Assembly, all behold and love the same Object? Yea, how shall we
then hugg and embrace each other, as Fellow-Heirs of the same Kingdom, and
Children of the same Father, and Members of the same Body. I am fully satisfied
our Differences are not so great here, as our Love to one another will be
there; we shall no more strive about the Way, when we enjoy the End.

And since we are so unlike fully to agree here, and so certain to agree there,
how should it make all the sincere Lovers of Peace (who have been mourning for
these Divisions which are among the People of God) cry out with the most
Earnest and Longing Desires, come Lord Jesus, come quickly? Amen.

FINIS.
A QUESTION Briefly Handled, CONCERNING What State or Condition the Soul is in,
in the very Act of Coming unto Christ.
A QUESTION Briefly Handled, CONCERNING What State or Condition the Soul is in,
in the very Act of Coming unto Christ.
READER, we live in a Luxurious Wanton Age, when many, even of Professors, who
instead of Offering Violence to the Kingdom of Heaven, instead of giving all
Diligence to make their Calling and Election sure; who instead of earnestly
contending for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, are spending most of
their Precious Time no better than those Athenians, Acts 17.21. either to tell
or to hear some new Thing. To mention all those new Opinions which have been
vented of late by Men of Corrupt Minds, Reprobate concerning the Truth, would
be tedious to me to Write, and unprofitable to you to Read. I shall only
Discourse Briefly upon one, which is this, That Sinners wreeking in their
Lusts, must come to Christ as they are. It Is too well known how this Notion
has been spread abroad of late, and received too even with such full
satisfaction and content, that it is a Gospel Truth, that by such all others
are despised as no Gospel Preachers, that dare open their Mouths to oppose it:
And sure I am, when Error thus abounds, it highly concerns such as are set for
the Defense of the Truth, to open their Mouths in Vindication of it. I confess
I have a long time only bewailed these things, to see the Truths of the Gospel
Despised, and Precious Souls lie Entangled in the Snare of the Devil, and
unwilling to be delivered; But while I refrained my Speech the Fire kindled;
and now of necessity I must speak in Defense of the Truth as it is in Jesus,
come on what will; and I do it for these Reasons.

First, Because I have been judged Erroneous by some (who have been too empty
of Knowledge, or full of Prejudice) who have heard me oppose this Doctrine, who
I have reason to think are no less concerned than those Ephesians, Acts 19.34.
who without consulting the Truths the Apostle had Preached, or proving the
Lawfulness of their Idolatrous Practice, cry out like Madmen for the space of
two Hours, Great is Diana of the Ephesians; and no wonder, because they Lived
upon the Silver Shrines; and had their Goddess been contemned, their Craft had
been ended. And since I have delivered my Sentiments on this Point, it stands
me in hand to Vindicate it, since I have Truth on my side; for otherwise I
should rather take shame to my self: And since it must needs be difficult for
any, or at least for most to judge of such deep Mysteries and Niceties upon a
Transcient hearing, I am willing to expose my Sentiments, that so I may either
silence my Opposers, or they may shame me. For my part, as I never durst utter
any thing rashly in so weighty a Point, before I had exactly weighed it in the
Balance of the Sanctuary; so I am so far from recanting any thing I have
delivered on this Point, (notwithstanding all the Calumnies of my Adversaries,
whose Eyes the God of this World has in part blinded) that I hope I shall be
able to defend it to my last Breath; and I am the more encouraged to defend
this Truth, That no Man can or ought to come to Christ in his Sins, by the good
Success I have had in many private Conferences about it; for I never yet
Conversed with any that opposed it, but either I have convinced them of their
Error, and brought them to embrace the truth they once despised, or at least so
stopped their Mouths that they have been able no longer to be Gainsayers; and
indeed what can be said against the Truth? That will stand, when Errors will,
like the Chaff, be driven away: Errors are but Windy Doctrines.

Second Reason moving me to clear this Point, is, because it is so weighty a
Doctrine, and even the turning Point of Christianity, the Foundation Stone of
all the Building; and Errors in the Foundation are dangerous; what greater
concern than to know how a Soul must close with Christ? Since that Soul that
closes not with him, shall never be Saved by him: For he that Believes not
shall be Damned, Mark 16.16. And how unmerciful must that Minister be to Souls,
and unfaithful to Christ, that can see a Multitude at once running on with
such a Lie in their Right Hand, and not inform them. If we see one going to
Drink down some Deadly Poison, though the Person through a Distempered Brain,
or by violence of some strong Temptation desire to Drink it; yet if we know it,
and do not our utmost to prevent it, we cannot be clear of his Blood; so when
we see Persons imbibing Damnable Doctrines, we ought speedily to provide an
Antidote, and that though we cannot inform all in all the deep Mysteries of the
Gospel, by reason of that gross Darkness that has covered many; yet that we
might not shun to declare the whole Counsel of God, whether they will hear, or
whether they will forbear.

Third Reason, Because the Error I oppose, not only passes for a Truth with
many, but for such a Truth as does most magnify the Grace of God, and so is
like to do the more harm. When Error appears with a bare face, it will seem so
Deformed, that but few will fall in Love with it; but when the Devil wraps
himself in Samuel's Mantle, it is hard toknow him. This Doctrine sets up
Free Will by Craft, and that under a Notion of Free Grace; and though nothing
differs more than those Two yet the Patrons are minded to let the World see
what they can do by Art; and whether they cannot make some take bitter for
sweet, Is. 5.20. But because that Monster of Free Will is but of low esteem
with some, therefore for love they have to this Creature, they have bestowed a
new Garb upon it, and have changed its Name too; calling that which always went
by the Name of Free Will, now Free Grace; whereby they have so altered the
Property of the thing, that the owners thereof scarce know it; and so Gild over
their Poisonous Pill that it may go down the better.

Fourth, Because this Doctrine I oppose, suiting so with our Corrupt Nature, is
like to infect the more: But I shall not stay you any longer at the Threshold,
but lead you into the Point before us. But that our Differences may not seem
greater than they really are, I shall lay down some things, as Cautious to
prevent mistakes; for I am persuaded that most of our unhappy Differences do
arise from a want of a right Understanding of each others Terms; and therefore
observe carefully.

1. The Enquiry is not concerning the State and Condition which Christ finds
the Soul in, when he first comes to take hold on us by his Spirit, in order to
Regenerating of us; if it was, I would readily grant, he then finds the Soul
wreeking in Sin indeed, without the least propensity or inclination to do Good;
yea, to every Good Word and Work Reprobate, with a strong inclination to Evil,
in a Dead, Blind, Ignorant, Senseless, and Stupid Condition, in the Snere of
the Devil: In this State we all are by Nature, and consequently in this State
he must find all when he comes to Change their Nature, our Natures being all
the same, as derived from one Common Root; though our Actions may differ
according to the various Temptations we may meet with. But it is about the Souls
coming to Christ; between which a clear distinction must be made; for though
Christ enable us to come to him, or believe in him, yet he does not Believe for
us to excuse us: The Act of coming is ours, and till the Soul thus come the
union is incomplete; I grant when Christ comes thus to the Soul, that Soul
shall come to Christ; yet his coming to us, is not our coming to him, though
the Cause of our coming: Things that are inseparable, must not be confounded;
the Humane and Divine Nature are inseparable in Christ; yet the Divine is not
the Humane, nor the Humane the Divine: So in Marriage, the Man consents to the
Woman, and the Woman to the Man; but yet the consent of the Woman is not the
consent of the Man. So in this Case, Christ is first willing, and he makes us
willing, yet his Will and our Will are distinct.

2. Nor are we Enquiring by what Power the Soul is enabled to come to Christ;
for though I have just cause to question, whether those that differ from me in
the other, will agree with me in this; yet for my own part, though I plead for a
mighty Change wrought in order to our coming to Christ, yet I freely
acknowledge this Change to be of God; and that the very Seeds of our Life of
Sanctification are from Christ working as a most free Agent in us, and that it
is a mighty and irresistible Power by which he works.

3. Nor are we Enquiring what Virtue there is in this Act of coming in order to
our Justification or Glorification: For though I believe, and the Scripture
affirms, that unless we Believe, we shall never be Justified nor Glorified, yet
I believe both are according to the Riches of God's Free Grace: It is
Free Grace that works this Change, enabling of us to come; and it is Free Grace
that we are accepted when we do come.

But positively the Enquiry is, whether there is such a thing as a Change
wrought in the Soul, in order to our coming to Christ? Or whether we must come
as we are, in a Natural and Unregenerate State, wreeking in the Filth of Sin,
and Power, and Dominion of our Lusts? Or whether the Drunkard, Swearer, etc.
can or ought, without any Change, to come in those Lusts to Christ? So that the
Question is, whether a Sinner can or ought to come to Christ in his Sins? But
before I affirm or deny, I must further explain, if possible, what we mean by
coming, and what by coming in our Sins, lest my Opposers, when not able to
stand their Ground, should slip out at some Backdoor. Now, by coming to
Christ, I understand believing in Christ according to Scripture Dialect, Isa.
55.1. Mat. 11.28. and to put all out of doubt, I have been assured again and
again from the Mouths of those that differ from me in this Point, that they
mean nothing else; and by coming in Sin, I understand it, for one utterly
devoid of any Principle of Grace, one in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bonds of
Iniquity, and not one that only falls into Sin: And so I have also been assured
by my Opposers they mean; and indeed we cannot understand it otherwise; for
though the best of Saints have Sin, yet the least of Saints is not a Sinner. I
distinguish between Actions and a State, a Sinner in this Sense is not opposed
to Perfection, but to Sincerity: So that in the most plain Terms, the Question
lies thus, Whether a Person utterly devoid of all Grace, and under the Power
and Dominion of Sin, can or ought to believe in Christ in that State, before
any Change be wrought in him? This some affirm, and I deny: And in speaking to
this Point, I shall prove none can come thus in their Sins to Christ; and then,
that none ought to come thus in his Sins to Christ. I prove the former from
most express Scripture, Ephesians. 1.19. And what is the exceeding greatness of his
power to usward who Believe; and if we cannot believe without this Power, then
not as we are; for all are not acted by this Power, John 6.44. No man can come
unto me, except the Father which has sent me draw him. Now I would ask if all
Men are thus drawn? If not, you give away the Cause; if you say they are, then
it follows that all must actually be Saved, or else some are able to resist
those drawings; the latter of which is Grand Arminianism, the former many
degrees worse. So John 15.5. For without me ye can do nothing. Now I would ask,
if coming to Christ is not something? Nay, is it not the most noble act the
Soul can put forth; and that which is most pleasing and acceptable to God? And
if so, the Text says, without Christ we cannot do it. Now I would ask, if every
Man has Christ in him, as the Quakers affirm? If you say he has, you show
what you are; if not, then when assisted by Christ we do not come as we were.
Thus you see how expressly the Scripture is on my side; and whether we may most
safely trust that Word of God, or the Deluded Fancies of Men, judge ye.

And as I have proved it from most express Scripture; so I shall further prove
it from those Metaphors the Scripture uses to express it: As first, It is
frequently styled a Coming; a Metaphor or borrowed Expression from a Man
walking from one place to another. And from this two Considerations offer
themselves for the confirming and illustrating the Truth, I have affirmed; for
as no Man can act corporally till he is first alive; so no Man can put forth
such a vital Act as believing in Christ, till Christ has first infused into
him a vital Principle; and till then, a Dead Man may as well walk, as a Man
Spiritually Dead come to Christ. Now then I ask, have all Men such a vital
Principle? If you affirm it, you oppose the Scripture, Ephesians. 2.1. if you deny
it, then you either give me the Cause, or affirm a Dead Man can walk: And
further, in all Corporal Motion, there is the Term, from which and to which; so
in the Spiritual Motion of the Soul to Christ, we come from Sin to Christ. And
now I have proved this from Scripture, I shall cite some Authors of my
Judgment, that so my Reader may see it is not only my Opinion: And I shall only
cite such as the Patrons of this Opinion seem to admire as well as I, that so
you may see how they not only oppose the Scripture and me, but also those
Authors which they seem to confide in more than either, that so you may see how
these, like Madmen, even tear themselves. The Learned Pemble is of my Mind in
his Treatise of Grace and Faith; and there spends many Pages to prove that the
habits of all Grace are infused into the Soul in Regeneration, before an Act of
Faith can be put forth by that Soul; and why these Men should not as well
believe him in this, as well as in his Notion of Eternal Justification
(especially since he has clear Scripture on his side for the former, but not a
word for the latter;) seems strange to me: But indeed I need not wonder, since
they that thus pick and cull this Author, taking what suits with their Opinion,
and rejecting the rest, do serve the unerring Word of God no better: And if
they dare serve Paul so, it is no wonder if they deal so with Pemble. Dr.
Goodwin is on my side; in his Treatise on the Ephesians, he has these words,
It Is affirmed, says he, by Sound and Able Divines, and that on good Ground,
that the Principles of all Grace are infused into the Soul before the Soul can
put forth an Act of Faith; with several passages to the same purpose, which for
brevity sake I omit. Dr. Owen gives abundant Testimony to the same Truth; in
his Treatise on Justification he says thus, Justifying Faith is not to be
found in any but those whose Natures are renewed, and in whom there is a
Principle of all Grace. Thus you may see in a little how far these Divines were
from this Error. But because I have not to do with professed Arminians, but
with such as privily bring in this Erroneous Doctrine, I shall therefore come
to consider what their Pleas are, and in Answering of them I shall further
clear the Point I am upon; and then I shall answer some Questions.

1. Some I have heard say by coming in Sin, we mean such must be sensible of
Sin, and so come.

Ans. If such mean as they say, why do they not always explain their meanings?
And sure I am, if this is all such mean, such Preachers are miserably mistaken
by their Hearers, who hereupon conclude they must come without any Change. It Is
well known how, with some, Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion; and I am well
satisfied this is but a Jesuitical Shift, that when they cannot justify that
rotten Notion of coming to Christ in their Sin, then they tell us (if we will
believe them) they mean only sensible of Sin; but this Notion shall never be
heard of till no other Answer will serve: But what Soul-cousening is it to say
one thing and mean another; suppose they do mean so, Pulpits should be places
to to Explain things in. But that this Cobweb may not cover such Deceit,
consider when they say, we must be sensible of Sin; they mean, either that they
have some Sin adhering to them, or else that they are sensible they are in that
Moment in a Sinful Unchanged State: If they mean the former only, they give
away the Cause; for we are enquiring into the State; and certainly if not in a
Sinful State, it is because in a Changed State, unless some do not come into the
World in such a State, and so need no Change; but if by being sensible of their
Sin, they mean a Sinful State; then they are sensible of that which is, or is
not; if sensible of that which is, then they openly declare such are in an
Unchanged State, only add a Sense to the thing it self; if they say they are
sensible of a sinful State, when their State is not so; then this is no less
than to affirm that a Delusion is the only Qualification prerequisite in order
to our coming to Christ:

2. But some may say, we own it is Christ that brings us, and so we do not rob
Christ of his Honor, or Arrogate any thing to our selves as you suppose, but
we affirm he brings us unto himself in our Sins. To which I answer, it is not
enough to honor Christ, to say he does a thing, unless the thing done be well
done; it is far from being an Honor to Christ to make him the Author of Sin:
But to come to a more direct Answer, I lay down this Proposition, That some
things are impossible to be done by God himself; the Scripture affirms it is
impossible to God to Lie, and that he cannot deny himself; whatever is sinful
cannot be done by that God that is Goodness it self; nor does this inability
arise from weakness, but strength. Some things are contrary in Nature, and so
cannot be done, as to make it Dark and Light at the same time, and in the same
place; to make a Man Dead and Alive at the same time, and in the same respect.
Now I shall enquire whether it is not impossible, under one or both of these
Considerations, for a Soul to be brought to Christ (though by the power of
Christ) in his Sins as aforesaid: I shall not now insist on the former, how far
such a Work would savor of Sin; but sure I am in the latter Sense it is
impossible; and for the clearing this, Consider, our coming to Christ is an Act
of the Will; we are willing to renounce all confidence in the Flesh, and to
rely alone on Christ. Now I would ask whether this Will is in all Men by
Nature; if such deny it, then where this Will is, there is a change wrought in
that Soul, and a great change too, Psalm. 110.3. A willing People in the Day,
etc. If such say this Will is in Men by Nature, then they not only prove
themselves Arminians, but virtually deny what before they affirmed, that they
come by the power of Christ: But if they say, though unwilling by Nature, yet
they are made willing by the Power of Christ to come, yet without a Change in
the Will, this is a grand contradiction in Nature to say, that a Person who is
unwilling, should be made willing, and yet no change made in his Will; and yet
this gross absurdity my Opposers will unavoidably hereby pluck down upon their
own Heads; I think it is safest to attribute the Work to Christ in such a
manner as may not in the least savor of Sin, or carry in it the least
absurdity or contradiction. But now Christ can no ways be chargeable with Sin
in bringing a Soul from Sin; nor is it the least contradiction to say a Man of
unwilling is now changed and made willing; or for a Dead Man, when made alive,
to act and move; it would have been strange to see Lazarus have risen and
walked while Dead; but not strange at all to see him walk when Christ had
quickened him: So in this case.

3. But say some, when we press Sinners to come to Christ in their Sins, we do
not mean that they can so come, but that they ought so to come: And forasmuch
as this Reply has the fairest show of truth; I shall consider what of truth it
really has in it: Now to this I answer, by making this necessary distinction,
it is one thing for it to be the Duty of Sinners to come to Christ, another
thing to come in their Sins to Christ: And though I readily grant it is the Duty
of such as are in their Sins to come, that is, to cease to do Evil, and to
learn to do Well; and by the strength of God's Grace to leave the Sins they now
are in, yet I absolutely deny it is their Duty to come in their Sins. Though I
do not expect all should reach this, who are not used to distinctions. I shall
endeavor therefore to illustrate this to you thus; it is one thing for it to be
the Duty of an unchanged Person to come, another for that Person to come
unchanged. It Is the Duty of Sinners to keep the Law, but not to keep it in
their Sins: It Is the Duty of a Man Drunk to praise God, because he is not in
Hell, but it is not his Duty to praise him Drunk: His praising denotes the Work,
his praising of him Drunk would denote the manner how he should perform the
Work, and if this should be granted, it would as much be such a Person's Duty
to be Drunk, when engaged in that Work, as to be engaged in that Work.

To illustrate this, God has made it our Duty to Praise him, and to Worship
him in Spirit and Truth; the Worship denotes the Work, to do it in Spirit is
the manner of Working, and one is a Duty as well as the other; so that though it
is the Duty of a carnal Man to Worship God, yet not to Worship him carnally. So
though it is the Duty of Sinners to come, yet not to come in their Sins; for
this would make Sin a Duty; there may be a great difference in Sense, when
there may be but little in Sound. To give you an Instance, whole Christ is one
thing, the whole of Christ is another thing; the Protestants own whole Christ
to be everywhere; but Hundreds have chose rather to burn at a Stake than to
own the whole of Christ to be everywhere: But I suppose the Patrons of this
Opinion will never suffer much for Truths no clearer distinguished than thus;
though to any understanding Person the difference is exceeding great; but
unless a Man can find some Men's Understandings as well as Truths, the Truths
they prepare and explain to them will be but assom any Pearls cast before
Swine, which will rather Enrage them, make them turn again and rend them, than
be profitable unto them: So Christ assumed the Nature that was Polluted, but
not the Pollution of that Nature.

But to put all out of doubt, I shall come in a more familiar Style to prove,
that though it is undoubtedly the Duty of Sinners to come to Christ, or believe
in Christ; yet it is not so much as their Duty to come in their Sins to Christ;
the great difference between which, I hope by what has been said you now will
understand: For as I have hinted, when I say it is the Duty of a Sinner to come,
it denotes no more than thus, that it is his Duty to come from Sin to Christ;
but for any to come in their Sins to Christ, denotes they must bring their Sins
to Christ; which is as impossible as to bring the East and West into one Point;
the disagreement between Christ and Sin not being so little as many do imagine,
What Communion has Light with Darkness? Christ is well pleased to see a Soul
come from Sin; but it is impossible for a Soul to come in Sin, nor is it his
Duty so to come; which I prove from these following Arguments.

Argument 1. That which no Man was ever able to do, is not so much as our Duty
to do; but no Man was ever able to come to Christ in his Sins, therefore it is
not so much as our Duty so to do. My Major I conceive will be granted, only
carefully observe, I say that which no Man ever was able to do; I do not say
that which no Man is now able to do, is not his Duty: For if we consider Man in
his fallen State, so many things are his Duty to which he has no strength to
do, and God may justly condemn him for not doing them, because his Inability
was procured by himself; but God commands us to do nothing now but what Adam
had Power to perform, if God had but made it known to be his Duty: And for any
to deny my Major Proposition, would be to affirm, that God has given Man a
Law, which was absolutely impossible to be kept, and damns his Creatures for
not obeying of it, which has too harsh a sound to be received for a Truth.
Minor Proposition: But no Man ever was able to come to Christ in his Sins. That
we who are in a fallen and unregenerate State cannot come to Christ, while
such, I hope I have sufficiently proved; and it is impossible that Adam should
have Power to come in Sin before he had committed Sin. Therefore I conclude,
that though it is the Duty of Sinners to come from Sin to Christ, or to believe
in Christ, because Thousands have by Grace been so enabled to come, and Adam
had once a Power to believe any thing that God should reveal; yet because never
any was able to come to Christ in his Sins, therefore it is not so much as a
Duty so to do; for though God has sent many Sinners to Hell, for not coming to
Christ, yet I am confident he never sent one Soul to Hell for not coming to
Christ in his Sins; for this would be to damn Souls for not continuing in Sin.

Argument 2. He that ought to come to Christ in a sinful State, ought to
continue in him in the same State; but no Man can continue in Christ, and a
sinful State. Therefore no Man ought to come in a sinful unrenewed State to
Christ. The former part of my Argument is clear from Col. 2.6. As ye have
therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord; so walk ye in him. Now you know the
present Enquiry is, what State and Condition the Soul is in when by Faith it
receives Christ. Say some, in an unrenewed State, without any Principle of
Grace, (miserably forgetting that this coming is it self a Grace) and under the
Power and Dominion of Sin; then says the Text, So walk ye in him. Minor, but
none that receive Christ can or ought to continue in Sin, 2 Cor. 5.17.
Therefore if any Man is in Christ, he is a new Creature. So Romans 8.10. If
Christ be in you, the Body is dead, because of Sin, etc. So that of necessity
the Opinion I am confuting must be false, or the Word of God not true. But for
the more full Satisfaction of the weaker sort, who can easier raise Objections
against the Truth, than understand what it is, I shall come now to answer some
Questions.

Quest. 1. Must not Sinners be invited to come to Christ? Is not the Gospel
sent to Sinners?

Ans. Though the Gospel is sent to Sinners, yet not to encourage them in Sin; and
though Sinners must be invited to come, which Work of inviting I hope, while I
live, I shall be employed in, yet sure I am, though Sinners must be invited to
come, yet not to come in their Sins, as aforesaid; and such as do so invite
them, I am sure have no Commission in God's Word so to do. I know a Text, which
invites such as labor, and are heavy laden, to come, Matthew. 11.28. which
certainly implies a Change. I know a Text, that invites the Thirsty to come,
which still implies a Change. I know a Text, which says, Wash ye, make ye
clean, come now, Isa. 1.17,18. denoting such a Work must be wrought in us
before we come, though not by our Power. I know a Text, which says, Let the
Wicked forsake his Way, and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and let him
return, Isa. 55.7. denoting a Necessity of a Change in Heart and Life, when we
return; but I know no Text that either invites or commands Sinners to come to
Christ in their Sins; and let the Patrons of that Opinion produce but one such
Text, and I shall acknowledge my Ignorance, and do promise for ever to be
silent, and vindicate this Point no more.

Quest. 2. But must not Sinners come to Christ as Sinners?

I answer, If by these Words, as Sinners, you mean such as are utterly devoid
of any Principle of Grace, (for that is the Enquiry) then I hope I have
sufficiently proved such cannot so come. But if you mean such as only have the
Remainders of Sin in them; so such may come, or none must come; but I have
shown you how the Remainder of Sin in the Regenerate does not properly
denominate them Sinners; nor is this any thing to the Point in Hand, for I am
discoursing of the Power of Sin in an unregenerate Soul; he that is Born of
God, sins not; that is, not with Delight and Approbation; therefore it
savours of most gross Ignorance, thus to style Saints Sinners, because not
perfectly free from Sins, when God himself makes such a vast Difference between
them. So that these things being laid down, my Answer is, We are not to come as
Sinners in the Sense aforesaid.

Quest. 3. But must not we bring our Sins, and lay them on Christ? If not,
where must we lay them?

Ans. Forasmuch as this is judged an unanswerable Plea by some, I shall labor
the more clearly to answer it; and the rather, because it is such weighty
Concern; we all come into the World in Sin, and have multiplied our
Transgressions, as the Sands, which lie as a heavy Burden upon us, ready to
sink us into Hell; and it highly concerns us to know how to have this Burden
removed; nor is any thing more dangerous than to make a Mistake in this Case.
Now I grant God the Father did once in a way of Sovereignty lay all the Sins of
all the Elect on Christ, imputing the Guilt of all those Sins to Christ; the
Scripture is clear to prove this, Isa. 53.6. And the Lord has laid on him the
Iniquity of us all. He came to finish Transgression, and to make an end of Sin;
He stood in our Room and Stead, and bore the Curse due to the Elect, that they
might not for ever lie under Condemnation; and to this dying Sacrifice we must
look for Comfort, as appointed thereto of the Father, under the Sense of Sin;
for without shedding of Blood there is no Remission. This is that Escape Goat
that must bear our Sins into the Wilderness; nor is there any other Way for our
Sins to be pardoned. But though God imputed the Guilt of Sin to Christ, to the
end that he might make Satisfaction to Justice, yet God himself did not lay the
Filth and Dominion of Sin upon Christ; and that is the Point in Hand. Hence he
is said to be without Spot, Heb. 9.14. and 1 Pet. 1.19. He was a Sin-Offering
indeed, but not a Sinful Offering. If Christ had no Spot, then no Filth; for
that will make Spots where it is, or else it would not be Filth. But though God
did once lay Sin on Christ in the Sense aforesaid, yet now it is impossible Sin
should be laid upon him by us; and those who presume to pretend such a thing,
do evidently declare they look upon him not to have completed his Work; and
though the Scripture affirms, that by one Offering he has for ever perfected
them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. yet those Persons are for laying Sin upon
him again, (and that in such a manner as God himself never did) and so do what
in them lies to crucify the Lord afresh, and to put him to open Shame, and to
render all he has done as imperfect, and so virtually overthrow the very
Foundation of our Salvation; since if Sin be laid upon him again, he must
suffer for it again; since Sin was never laid upon Christ to any other end than
to satisfy the Justice of God for it; and as this was the end, so either
Christ has fully satisfied Justice or not; if he has, then no more Sin can be
laid upon him, unless he must pay the Debt twice, which is not consistent with
Justice; but if they say Christ has not, then they declare their cursed
Heresy.

And as for those who are so confident, that their filthy Lusts must of
Necessity lie on Christ or them, I would ask them this Question, where will
those Sins lie at Judgment? For it is expressly said, Heb. 9.28. He shall appear
the second time without Sin unto Salvation; then since he will not then bear
them, they are like to return to them again. It Is a most gross Mistake to think
Christ cannot come to us, and by his Spirit wash us in the Laver of
Regeneration; but the Filth which he washes off from us must defile him; as if
a Physician could not cure another, but the Disease must return upon himself;
Christ by his Spirit destroys the Power of Sin in us, but we can in no
Propriety of Speech be said to lay our Sins upon him.

But because there are some few Texts which seem to some to favor the Point I
have been confuting, I shall cite them, and see how far they will prove the
Point. One is in Isa. 42.18. Look ye blind; here say some, such as have no
Sight must look. To which I answer, I own many things are commanded which we
cannot do; but this is not the Point; but the Question is, whether these blind
ought to look without Eyes? Which to affirm, would be a grand Contradiction;
for if he looks, it must be with his Eyes. When God commands Sinners to look,
they must look with their Eyes; for as a Visive Faculty is necessary, in order
to our looking, so in this Case there must be a Power wrought in us by God,
whereby we are able to look, before we can by Faith look unto Christ.

Next Text is Romans 4.5. there God is said to justify the Ungodly; from whence
some argue thus: If in the Act of justifying us God finds us ungodly, and yet
we are said to be justified by Faith, then it seems evident the Soul is ungodly
when he believes. I am satisfied this Text has been no little abused in our
Day, while it has been molded into what Form some please to promote their own
Interest. The Apostle tells us some Scriptures are hard to be understood, and I
am persuaded this is one of them; nor do I much wonder if the Ignorant wrest
it; I shall labor therefore to clear this sweet Portion of Scripture, that so
you may know the Truth, as it is in Jesus. Now the great Enquiry for the
clearing this Text, is to know what we are to understand by the Word Ungodly;
and I shall show you, First, Negatively, How we are not to understand it; and,
Secondly, Positively, How we must understand it. First, Negatively; By ungodly
we are not to understand one utterly devoid of all Grace; and this will
abundantly appear both from the Context and Text it self; you will find in the
foregoing Verses this Instance is taken from Abraham; from whence it is
evident, and I think past all Dispute, that if by Ungodly we are to understand
such as have no Grace, then it will follow, that Abraham had then no Grace; but
that cannot be supposed, for Abraham had then been a Believer many Years, and
yet is said to believe in him that justifies the Ungodly. And this appears
further, even from the Text it self; for here is believing set before Ungodly;
so that this Ungodly Person must be one that has Faith, and consequently, not
one without Grace; for Faith is it self a Grace; so that this Text is so far
from proving Justification before, or without Faith, that it strongly proves
the contrary; because this ungodly Person is before styled a Believer; and such
as lay so much Stress on the Order of the Words, as to conclude, that because
the Word Justify is set before Ungodly, that therefore the Person Justified
must be an unrenewed Man, would do well to consider here is Believing set
before the Word Justifies. But to show you in the next Place,

Positively, By Ungodly I understand one that is Legally so; one that has not
any Righteousness inherent in him to answer the Demands of the Law; and thus a
Person is renewed Ungodly: For since the Law requires perfect and perpetual
Obedience, hence we who are now renewed, having been heretofore unrenewed, and
now in part defiled, hence it is impossible, but that we must in a Legal Sense
be Ungodly. This Text strongly proves, that the Grace of God in us is not that
for which we are justified: Therefore to me it seems a gross Mistake to affirm,
as some do, that God accepts of our sincere Obedience in the room of Adam's
perfect Obedience; for this is to set up our selves instead of Christ. God will
not justify any but upon perfect Obedience; either inherent in us, or imputed
to us; not in us, for you see the Law pronounces Believers ungodly Men; so that
of Necessity we must look beyond our Grace, for that is imperfect, even to that
complete and spotless Righteousness of Christ; nor am I fingular in my Sense of
this Text, for I have the Reverend and Learned Doctor Goodwin on my side, in
his Exposition on part of the Ephesians; Part I. Page 389. says he, The
meaning is not one that has no Grace, for then Abraham should not have been
saved: He instanceth in him; and adds, To believe on him that justifies the
ungodly, these are the Terms on which he must believe. First, These are the
Terms on which he must believe all his Days; so that you see the Doctor was far
from understanding Ungodly here, for one without Grace, unless you can suppose
a Believer may live all his Days, and have no Grace; and he gives the Reason
elsewhere, why such as believe, and have Grace, are termed Ungodly; because,
says he, they are in themselves legally so. Thus you see this Text makes
nothing to prove that a Person can believe, while in an unrenewed State, but
much to the contrary. Thus I have at large cleared this Scripture, and have
answered all such Questions as I know proper to the present Point; and doubt
not, after all, but this Doctrine of Sinners coming in their wreeking Lusts to
Christ, will appear to be erroneous to all, but such as are under the Power of
their Lusts, and no more pass current for a Doctrine of Free Grace, as it has
done; nay, this is so far from being a Doctrine of Free Grace, that it is grand
Arminianism, and a setting up of Free Will; which will appear to any
understanding Reader, if we consider that the Soul in coming to Christ, moves
from a Gracious Principle, or a Natural Principle; if from a Gracious
Principle, then the; Soul does not come wreeking in his Sin to Christ; for it is
a grand Contradiction to say a Sinner is a Gracious Person; but if they say the
Soul moves from a Natural Principle, this is a grand Free Will, as ever
Arminius himself delivered. The Substance of this Question is, whether the
Union between Christ and the Soul begins on Christ's Part or ours? Or whether
without any Priority in Nature, the Soul from a Natural Inclination, and
Christ, do mutually consent; they who say the Soul comes in its Sin, make the
Union to begin on Man's Part; they that say the Soul acts in that Case from a
renewed Principle, do own the Union to begin on Christ's Part; they that say
they both consent together as aforesaid, attribute as much to Man as to Christ,
and by so doing, discover themselves to be no sincere Friends to the
Bridegroom, but rather, Judas-like, betray Christ with a Kiss; and whether of
these does most magnify the Grace of God, to affirm the Union begins on Man's
side, or that Man Naturally consents to Christ, at the same time with Christ;
without any Priority in Nature on Christ's side; or they who affirm as I do;
that our consent to Christ is the effect of his consent to us, I must leave it
to my Reader to judge.

Or the Substance of this Question is this, whether the Soul is first Active or
Passive? They that affirm that the Soul comes to Christ in its Sins unrenewed,
make the Soul first Active; they who say the Soul acts as a renewed Soul, make
it first Passive; which is such an undoubted Truth, that I dare venture my
Salvation on it; and I hope I have clear Scripture on my side, John 5.25.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, the Hour is coming, and now is, when the Dead
shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall Live: Which
cannot be meant only of the Resurrection of the Body, because it is said the
Hour now is; but it has respect to the quickening of the Soul from the Death
in Sin: And it clearly proves that Christ finds the Soul Dead, when he comes to
put forth this Quickening Voice; for look, as with Lazarus, Christ calls him
while Dead, Lazarus come forth; and by this Call infuses Life into him, and so
enables him to come forth: Had another called, he might have wasted his Lungs
in calling, before he would have stirred. So Christ calls us when Dead in Sin,
and with the call puts Life into us, and so enables us to hear and obey his
Voice, Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened, etc. Then it seems Christ quickened
them; and indeed if he do not, we cannot; and as Gahazi could only lay the
Staff on the Face of the Child, but could not put Life into him till the
Prophet came, 2 Kings 4.31,32,33. so till Christ the great Prophet bring home
the Word to the Heart, we call and cry in vain; we can but Prophecy over dry
Bones, but that Breath that quickens them is from the Lord, Ezekiel. 37.5. Hence
Christ the Second Adam is called a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. And to
prove yet further, that the Soul is first Passive before it is Active. We have
another most clear Text, Ephesians. 2.10. For we are his Workmanship created in
Christ Jesus, etc. Mind, we are created. Now you know that in Creation we were
Passive, as the Clay in the Hand of the Potter: Man cannot be supposed to have
any Hand in Creating of himself; so that as Man was first purely Passive in the
Hand of God, and must receive a Natural Life, before he could perform a Natural
Action; so is the Soul as purely passive, while God infuses the first Grace
whereby the Soul is enabled to put forth that vital Act of coming to Christ; so
Romans 10.20. I was found of them that sought me not: I was made manifest unto
them that asked not after me.

I cannot but pity such deluded Souls as receive the Doctrine I am confuting
for a Doctrine of Free Grace, who are ever Learning, and never able to come to
the Knowledge of the Truth. It Is a sore Judgment to be given over to believe a
Lie, and to be left to feed on a Stone instead of Bread, and not to be able to
discern between a Fish to nourish us, and a Scorpion to sting us. I have
observed one great difference in Doctrine among some Dissenters, whereby
Meeting is set up against Meeting in the same Town, to the great dishonor of
God, and hindrance to Religion lies in this. Some affirm what I have proved,
and are therefore termed Dark, Legal, Muddy Preachers; the others look upon
themselves to be the only Gospel Preachers, because they cry down all
Qualifications in the Soul when it comes to Christ, Gracious ones not excepted:
But who will be best able to defend their Doctrine at the Great Day, I hope, by
what has been spoken, you will be able to Judge, if they mean what they say,
or indeed know what they say. The difference between us is this, they own
Christ to be the Purchaser of all our Benefits, so do I; but here we differ,
they say we must go to him in all our Sins for them; I say, he that purchased
them, does enable us to come to him, and so I attribute the Application to him
also; and now judge who Preaches Free Grace most clearly; I make Christ the
Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End; they make him only the Beginning;
and affirm, that if Sinners do not come as they are, they must be Damned. If
Christ saves none but such as come to him thus in their Sins, that is, by their
own power, (for if Sinners are acted by the Power of God, then they do not come
as they are) what a Remnant will be saved? A Remnant did I say? Nay, I dare
affirm, if that be true, not one Soul shall be saved: Man is naturally
unwilling to come to Christ, John 5.40. And ye will not come to me that ye
might have Life: Which Text only proves there is a Will in Man not to come to
Christ; though it be for Life, they will Die rather; and how hard a thing do
Ministers find it to persuade Souls to come to Christ. Now if this is the
Nature of all, then those whose Wills are not changed will never come; and if
their Wills are changed by a Divine Power, and they so enabled to come, then
they do not come in their Sins in an unchanged State; only God can change the
Will, as in Psalm. 110.3. They shall be a willing People in the Day of thy
Power: How little is Christ beholden to such who would frustrate his design in
Dying? He expected a Seed for to serve him as the effect of his Sufferings: But
at this rate, he must have none unless they come to him upon the weak Legs of
their own Free Will. They will give Christ the Honor to lay down his Life for
the Sheep, but deny that it is he which goes into the Wilderness to seek them;
or that it is he that brings the Lost Sheep home upon his Shoulders. No, say
they, the lost Sheep must come home of it self or Perish; The Son of Man is
come to seek and to save that which was lost, Luke 19.10. And they who own him
to be a Savior, and deny him to be a Seeker, do virtually deny him to be a
Savior: For as it is observed of Sheep, when once they stray from the Fold,
they never return again of themselves; so now we are gone astray from God; if
he will Save us, he must Seek us; hence Jeremiah 2.24. Man is compared to the
Wild Ass, to denote, I conceive, thus much, that as that Creature will never
come to Hand, till such time as she is in Pain to bring forth; so Man will
never return from his Wilderness State, till he feel the Pangs of the New Birth
in his Soul.

Now though I cannot but hope many that differ from me in this Point are dear
to God, (holding this Notion out of Ignorance or Blind Zeal) and that they are
upon a good Foundation, yet I am verily persuaded this Doctrine they defend,
will be found in the Great Day to be but as Hay, Wood, Stubble; or, if
possible, some more Cumbustible Matter.

Notwithstanding I have thus clearly stated and proved this to be a Truth from
Scripture, that none can or ought to come to Christ in their Sins, yet I doubt
not but many who never were led into the Knowledge of their own Hearts, to see
their Natural Enmity against Christ, and Utter Inability to perform any Duty
Spiritually, will be so far from setting to their Seal that this is true, that
they will be but the more exasperated. We read in Acts 7.54. that when the
Apostle had reproved those Jews for their Sin in Crucifying Christ, to the end
it might not be their ruin, they were cut to the Heart; but instead of Blessing
God for such a Faithful Reprover, it is said, they gnashed on him with their
Teeth. Man is Naturally prone to set up himself, and when he cannot make
himself the Purchaser of his Salvation, he would have a Hand in the
Application; and how unwelcome shall a Faithful Minister be to such, when they
come to beat down their Carnal Confidence, and to spoil their Glorying in the
Flesh? And how hard for a Minister who shuns not to declare the whole Counsel
of God and whose design is that Christ alone may be exalted, to Preach such
Doctrine as this, but by and by some will be offended?

Such Doctrine as this would not be received from Christ himself by some, was
he now on Earth, John 6.65,66. And he said, Therefore said I unto you, that no
Man can come unto me, except it were given him of my Father. From that time
many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him. Mind, no sooner
had he told them in plain words what I have been proving, but from that time
many went back, and walked no more with him. Now, if I am judged Erroneous, yet
I hope such as differ from me in this Point will not judge Christ so; yet why
Christ should be judged a true Witness, and I a false Witness, for relating his
very Words, I see not; but if I am, yet it more encourages me that Christ is on
my side, than it shall discourage me, though all the Devils in Hell wore
against me; being fully satisfied that he will be the Judge at the Great Day,
not only of our Lives, but of our Doctrines; nor will any Doctrines pass for
Truth then, if they have not a Divine Stamp upon them; and sure I am, this
Doctrine I oppose has none. I am satisfied, if those search the Scripture from
Genesis to the Revelation, they can find no Text written, to prove that Sinners
can or ought to come to Christ in their Sins; though many Texts prove it the
Duty of Sinners to come. But to take a review of the forecited Text, and to see
who they were that forsook Christ for delivering such Doctrine; you may see,
Verse 64. Such as believed not; none else: Christ turns him to the Twelve, Will
ye also go away? Peter, on the behalf of the rest, replies, Lord, to whom shall
we go? Thou have the Words of Eternal Life. As if he had said, Lord, do thou
think we are so unacquainted with our own Hearts, as to go from thee for
delivering that Truth, that (...) who have but tasted thou art Gracious have
experienced? These are the Words of Eternal Life, and therefore thou may as
well ask us, whether we are willing to miss of Life, as forsake thee for these
Truths sake. Thus you see, however contemptible this Doctrine was then to those
that believed not, or may be to such whose Eyes are not yet opened, or at
least, who see no clearer into Divine Mysteries than he who saw Men as Trees;
yet this was judged such a Fundamental Truth to the Twelve, that it behoved
them, as they tendered the Salvation of their Souls, to receive it.

In a word, and I shall close. Though those that differ from me in this Point,
may for my good will become my Enemies, because I tell them the Truth; yet in
love to their Souls, I would have them consider, whether this Doctrine they
defend, does not exclude the Spirit of God from having any hand in the
Application of the Benefits purchased by Christ to the Soul? And if it does, I
hope you will see it to be an Error indeed. Now I think none dare deny, but
that upon our coming to Christ, his Benefits are applied to all. Now the
Question is, how or by what power the Soul is enabled to come? Say I, as
renewed and born of the Spirit, Tit. 3.3,5. say they, (though without one
Syllable in Scripture to prove it) no, the Soul comes wreeking in all his Sins,
unchanged, unrenewed; and if so, then judge if this is not to exclude the
Spirit wholly from having any hand in this Work? For if such as come to Christ
have the Spirit, then they do not come as they are in their Sins.

Let me close all with a Word to you my Auditors, and especially to you my
Brethren; I chiefly designed what is contained in this Book for you; that you
may be established in the Truth as it is in Jesus. Take you heed of rejecting
Sound Doctrine, lest God give you over to believe a Lie. It Is the Truth must
make you free: Stand you therefore and Enquire for the good Old Way, and walk
therein, and you shall find rest to your Souls. Contend you earnestly for the
Faith once delivered to the Saints. Beware of such pretended Lights as do not
shine forth in God's Word. In a word, if I have delivered nothing in this Book,
but what I have proved from Scripture, then I hope you will see it your Duty to
receive these Truths. It Is sad when any Love Darkness rather than Light. But if
any of you, after all my Labor for your sakes, should reject these Truths, I
leave this Book, not as a Legacy, but as a Witness against you at the Great Day.

FINIS.

