THE Peaceable Design; BEING A MODEST ACCOUNT. OF THE Non-conformist's
Meetings, With some of their Reasons for Nonconformity: And the way of
Accommodation in the matter of Religion.

Humbly proposed to public consideration by some Ministers of London against
the sitting of Parliament in the Year 1675.

Printed in the Year MDCLXXV.

TO THE READER.
WE humbly Judge our Circumstances have made it something necessary to give the
World a Taste of some of those many reasons which have prevailed with us to be
averse to that conformity which we are called to by Law: Which had it sprung
from any Disloyal or Rebellious Principles, could not have been consistent with
that inward Peace which we must judge our great concernment to be solicitous to
maintain. We hope (save in the matters of our God) the Principles which are
truly ours, will urge us to be subject unto Authority, and we do here profess
that it is our full persuasion, that the Powers in being are of God, and that
should we do any thing derogatory to their due Honor, Rule, and Interest, it
would be wickedness to be punished by the Judge, and introductive of our
Eternal ruin and damnation. We are not unmindful of the high charges which are
laid upon us to Honor the King, and to be subject to the Higher Powers. And
God forbid that we should ever desire or design to enter into the Tents of
those who are inclined or love to smite authority with either hand or tongue,
or to supplant the Throne which God has honored, and guarded both by Laws,
and providence. We cannot think the Sword well placed in Peter's hands, nor that
the Tongues or Hearts of any should be inflamed with rage, nor exercised with
an arbitrary censoriousness of Rulers actions, seeing we neither can, nor is it
fit we should stand upon equal ground with them. But we hope it cannot (and
that it will not) be charged upon us as our crime, or as the production of
insolence, to tell the World wherein, and how we are distressed, nor to make
our modest offers and proposals, and humble supplications, as on the Knee unto
our Rulers, in whose power God has placed it to alleviate or remove our
burdens, And it is their help and pity we earnestly implore: Our perplexities
are afflictive, and our burdens heavy on us: The reasons of our Nonconformity
we in part offer modestly to our Superiors, and as prostrate Supplicants at
their feet, we crave their consideration of them: The Souls of Men are
precious: Gods Honor is our undoubted Interest and End: Our own Liberty to
Preach Christ (not Sedition, Treason or Rebellion) is dear, and would be
grateful to us: And the Character of our Consecration to God in the Gospel of
his dear Son engraven on us at our Ordination, we take to be indelible. And we
doubt not but that all who are acquainted with the Laws of Christ, will own his
charge upon us to be indispensible. If we be dissatisfied about imposed terms
of this our Ministerial Liberty, we crave the Resolution of this weighty Case
from our judicious, learned and serious Fathers and Brethren in the Service of
the Gospel. We hope we are not too obstinate to receive convincing evidence and
information from them, only when we have but named some things as we pass,
which are of more general notice, (such as two of those three Heads laid down
p. 20, 21.) we deplore a disquisition or satisfaction heartily suitable to their
importance, and the Volumes of dispute that have been writ, and might be
pointed to by us for enlargement. We seriously promise them a quick and full
retreat from our mistakes, and hearty compliance with them, when they offer
what is truly fit to satisfy our doubts about matters in dispute betwixt them
and us. We have long born with patience many a smart reflection on us from both
the Press and Pulpit, together with all the severities to which we have been
exposed by virtue of those Laws that have been made against us: And yet resolve
to use no other Weapons than Prayers and Tears, the ancient Weapons of all
afflicted Christians, nor shall our minds be (we trust) at any time exasperated
into illegal courses, for our own relief; for such unwarrantable and justly
condemned Principles we disown. And we hope our peaceable principles, tempers,
and demeanors will not turn to our disadvantage. We have here laid our Case and
Reasons a little open, together with some proposals for a desired accommodation
for our joint promotion of that Work which is professed to be dear unto us all,
that so the prosperity and strength of Church and State may be promoted by us
all, without occasions of, or inclinations to, those mutual animosities in the
Church, which will become the sport, and strength, and great advantage of
foreign and domestic Enemies, and our great shame and disadvantage here at
home.

As to the Materials of this short Treatise, they have mostly been derived from
a late Author, whose Spirit in all his Writings has breathed Peace at such a
rate, as that we think we may entitle him to the Character which St. Paul once
fixed on Timothy, that he naturally cares for the Peace and Welfare of the
Church of Christ, and in that part especially which God has seated in these
His Majesty's Dominions. We humbly deprecate all Men's displeasure, and crave
the pardon of that excellent person, (whose Words and Actions seem weighed and
governed still by His tender Conscience) that (two or three of us) have so
boldly and freely used his Writings, without engaging his personal
concernedness in the publication of these Sheets, wherein we do assure the
Reader, That he had no hand as to the Printing or Publication of them, whatever
other use be made of him as to his Books and Papers. Reader, consider what is
here offered to thy perusal, and weigh the whole matter in an equal Balance
and pray with us that the entire interest of Holiness, Truth, and Concord may
be established, and promoted to Gods Glory, and the complete felicity and
security of His Majesty, and of the Church and State in these His Dominions.

ERRATA.
Page 1. l 7. dele of 11. l. 14. add only, p. 2. l. 5. add our, p. 3. l. 24.
for the r. that, p. 4. l. 11. add lay, l. 12. dele lay, p. 6. l. 6. add of, p.
9. l. 4. add Schoolmen. p. 12. l. 19. for contain r. contained, p. 16. l. 13.
for and r. or, p. 26. l. ult. add book, p. 30. l. 4. for the r. that, p. 32.
l. 6. add against his person, p. 35. l. 3. for People r. Parliament, p. 46 l.
10. for Impurii r. Imperii, p. 46. l. 14. add strong, p. 46. l. 20. for Impurii
r. Imperii, p. 47. l. 16. for dinguish r. distinguish, p. 52. l. 18. for sins
r. lives, p. 53. l* 1. add be, p. 61. l. 21. for enfoying r. enjoining, p. 65.
l. 18. add not, l. 19. for case r. ease, p. 66. l. 14. for that r. as, l. 15.
for as r. that, p. 67. l. 7. add Church, p. 76. l. 5. add should be all, though
they cut themselves with Lances, p. 76. l. 9. for this r. things. p. 78. l. 1.
add of Pride, p. 80. l. 9. for word r. work.

THE Peaceable Design:
IT is the happiness and birthright of the People of this Nation, that if they
lie under any grievance, they may have recourse to the Parliament. There is no
burden whereof we ought to be more sensible of than that which lies upon our
Consciences: We do humbly hope therefore that it will not be ill taken if we
crave the liberty, to show at least what ails us; To make our apology for that
wherein we seem to offend, and to offer something for a general redress:
especially seeing a little collection out of some late papers (though several)
of one person alone, will serve this triple occasion.

There are diverse sorts of Nonconformists, and they have their Meetings we
know, not all on the same reasons.

There are some who have been, and are for Parochial Churches, who are
satisfied with their constitution, and if they might have freedom would still
choose them: And there are others that are in their Inclinations for the
Congregational way only. For our parts who have put this Paper together, we
profess our selves of the former sort, and do here declare in the behalf of our
selves and others of our Brethren, that we do not go from the Parish Church in
opposition to it, as if such Congregations were no Churches, being very deeply
sensible when our Lord has commanded that the Tares should not be plucked up
for fear of endangering even but some of the Wheat, what a grievous displeasure
it may like to be to him, if we should go to root up all the Wheat for fear of
the Tares, which to Un-church whole Parishes, were to do: Nor is it out of
affectation, pride, vanity, ostentation, faction, or self-advantage that we do
it, we could not answer such a charge against us, if we did so.

Two things therefore we will acknowledge, that our Parish-churhes are true
Churches: And that it is our duty consequently to desire and endeavor their
union and prosperity. And what would any Conformist have of us more, unless it
be also to join with them there in the participation of the Ordinances, which
some of us refuse not neither, upon convenient occasion. Well, upon what ground
then shall we offer our apology for the cause we undertake? why we will give it
impartially. As we grant those two things to be our duty, so must we assume
that which will not, and can not be denied us, that it is the duty likewise of
those who are set apart to the offiice of the Ministry (supposing them every
way to be sit and called) to preach the Gospel by way of discharge of the
office. We have the Apostles express authority and example for this, who when
they were threatened, and commanded to speak no more in Christ's name, have left
us their answer on Record, We ought to obey God rather than Man. We have the
precedent also of the first three hundred years after these Apostles when the
Gospel was never preached, but contrary to the will of the Magistrate, that is,
against the Laws and Edicts of the Emperors: Now we must down this rule, that
when two duties lay come together, so that we cannot perform the one but we
must omit the other, the greater duty must take place of the less. The rule
apears in its own light, and also from Scripture, I will have mercy (says God)
and not Sacrifice. What is the meaning, but that when acts of righteousness and
mercy fall in, such duties as that of sacrifice, which are less, must give way.
Here then is our case plainly, which of these is the greater duty? We are to
seek Unity, and to preach the Gospel. If we keep our Parish-Churches, we must
not preach the Gospel, if we preach the Gospel, we must go to these private
Meetings: which of these is indeed of greatest moment to the glory of God, and
the Peoples salvation? In general, which is the greatest matter, that the
Gospel of Christ Jesus be preached, or the Union of our Parish Churches be
promoted? In particular, whether shall any one of us who have a call on
occasion to preach at such a time, place, or company, do more service to God,
by going and doing it, or by refusing and going to our Parish Church for the
sake of unity, for which we have still other seasons? And which is the greater
evil, to have the people of a Parish only divided into several places to hear
the Ministers of both persuasions preach to them (when this too shall not
hinder them being parts still or members of the same Parochial society;) or
that all the Preachers and Ministers in the Nation but those only who Conform,
should have their mouths stopped, and Talents buried? How! when there is so many
of them? so many of them truly serious and painful laborers? so many of them
that actually do so much good, and the everlasting welfare of thousands men's
souls depend upon it? What is Parochial Union in comparison? we will appeal to
the Consciences of every upright equal person, (whether Conformist or
Nonconformist) that fears God, to give Judgment. The preaching of the Gospel,
and particular Assemblies are of Divine: Parochial Churches are of Humane
institution. That which is Divine, is undeniably to be preferred before that
which is of humane apointment. For the great charge then against us of Schism,
we answer. Schism is a causeless separation of the Churches union, a causeless
separation from her Communion, the Communion of a Church whereof we are
Members, or should be. Let any learned Man that has read any thing about
Schism, tell us, if we do not define it right, by a separation that is
causeless; for if there be a cause, the separation will be justified, as it is
between us, and the Church of Rome. Now when the Case between the Conformists
and us is so open, and in the face of the Sun, that unless we set, and keep up
these honest Conventicles, the whole Generation of these Nonconformist
Ministers must be laid aside from the Exercise of their Office, for ought we
see as long as these Men do hold, whatsoever in the mean while becomes of the
Souls of so many Multitudes: What Apology, Defense, or Account do we need more,
but this only, Is there not a Cause? they are the words of David to his surly
Elder Brethren, who are offended only for his being about the Business he was
sent. And David said, what have I done? is there not a Cause!

To this Apology we know it will be said by the Episcopal Party, (for nothing
else that we know can be said to any purpose) But you may conform. If so, we
must then desire of some one or other of the Learned and Conscientious among
them to contribute but this one thing toward it: A little thing we may think,
if they could do it. It is only to answer the Sheet which was tendered to the
Parliament about two or three Sessions ago, for taking away the Subscription
and Oxford Oath, and which shall be in order therefore by and by repeated. We
would give all the Money in our Purses, with a Tax, or without any, upon
condition that the Parliament would either have such Arguments of ours
answered, or else repeal their Impositions.

There are Three things enjoined in the Act of Uniformity. Reordination. The
Declaration. The Subscription. As we have borrowed thus much already from a
late Paper of the Author now intimated: So shall we make use of others of the
same person, in the which follows.

We begin with the Threshold, Reordination. It must be acknowledged by both
Parties, That Re-ordinvtion is an uncouth thing, quite against the Hair of the
literate World, whether Fathers, Councels, or Modern Divines, Protestants and
Papists; and put usually into the same Predicament (and more especially by
Austin) with Re-baptization. If the present Bishops therefore in the imposing
of it, would have stood by it, and maintained the Lawfulness of it, as being
neither against the Law of Nature, nor positive Institution; but as having
rather the Examples of the Apostles, and of Paul and Barnabas more particularly
for it, with what else by some is urged, against the stream barely of humane
Authority, this would perhaps have looked handsome, and the ingenuity of it
would have been notable: But when they would generally have it imposed, and yet
disown it, and be ashamed of it, in so much as though there be few or none
ordained by Presbyters, but believed the validity of that Ordination, they
would have our former Ministry to be null, and make us contented in effect to
be held but usurpers of holy things, Sacrilegious persons, and all our
Ministerial Acts void, as the Acts of mere Laics before, it is really so
intollerably vile, as no mortal flesh is able to bear. It is true, there is one
Instance from Antiquity out of Athanasius, of some persons with Ischyras among
them whom they would not allow (as these hold) to be Ministers; because one
Coluthus, that ordained them, was only a Presbyter. Unto which may be added,
the Story of the purblind Bishop, 2. Council. Hispal. 3. Can. 5. circa An. 656.
But we answer with Dr. Field on the Church in his Fifth Book, It is one thing
what they judged according to their Ecclesiastical Canons; and another what
they ought to judge according to the Word of God. The Scripture makes no
difference between Bishop and Presbyter, the Superiority and Inferiority
arising after in the Church: And when we are made Christ's Ministers, and put in
office by him according to his Word, how shall that Authority be vacated for
something wanting only in the Constitutions of Men? Here is a matter of
Infinite wrong, which the opinion of these Men do us. It takes away the Office
Christ has given us, and holds it null. If it was a grievous thing in the late
times to put one of these Ministers out of his place, what is it to put so many
of us out of our Office? There is no Person almost of Spirit, but will be ready
to part with his life as soon as the Honor he holds from the King; and shall
not the Ordained Minister maintain the Right which he holds from Christ? When
so many eminent Predecessors to these Bishops, and other Defenders of this
Church have maintained Presbyterian Ordination: When the Reformed Churches
abroad have no other: When the Case was such as that there was no other to be
had here in the late times* When not we alone then are concerned only in the
wrong, but our Lord and Master, whose cause it is, and whose business we are to
do, and the Souls of so many people: We cannot but appeal to the Higher Powers
in a matter of so great right and wrong as this is. For we are contented to
have it revised, and judged, whether the Diocesan Bishop be distinguishedly
named in Christ's Charter for Ordination, as he is in the Canons of Men: Or when
we have been ordained already, as Timothy by the laying on of the hands of
Presbytery, whether the Lawn be de Essentia to the Ceremony, and the Hands
avail nothing without the Sleeves on.

The next thing is the Declaration. I A. B. do here declare my unfeigned assent
and consent to all and every thing contain-and pr^scribed in and by the Book
Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and the form of Ordaining Bishops,
Priests and Deacons. That is assent to all and every thing contained in, and
consent to every thing prescribed by these Books. Sirs, There was a time, when
that the Nation had the hopeful overture of a Concord between the sober of two
parties, and the Hearts of most Men were in preparation to receive it. But
alas! instead of such a Gracious and Blessed Issue as was expected, lo here
the straight injunction of an Assent and Consent to all Conformity, and every
thing of it, new and old, to be approved and obeyed, or else one part of the
Ministry must be immediately turned out. How can those now whose Judgments are,
and have been still for moderation between both opinions in times before as
now, be able to come over to one side altogether on such terms as these. How
can they (we say) make so short a turn as this, without the hazard of some
sprain to their Conscience, if they do it? We cannot tell you perhaps, nor are
willing to declare the Impressions we have upon our Spirits against a going
back from that more Spiritual Plain, and simply zealous Service of Almighty
God, in the way we were in, and Reformation we sought, unto that something we
are not used to, and fear, to wit, unto a form of Worship and Discipline, that
carrying a countenance of both, but being rather only a kind of Idols thereof,
does seem to us, by the show, pomp, and complement of the things it contains
not, to undermine the Life, Power, and Efficacy of one and the other. We cannot
tell you perhaps what moves us so much from within, whether fear of Popery
returning on us, or aliquid (...): But we will produce Two or Three Instances
apiece, against Assent, and against Consent to that which is enjoined, that we
may approve our selves to the Consciences of all, as well as our own, in
refusing this Declaration.

For our Assent. In the Athanasian Creed we find this passage, Which Faith,
except every one does keep whole, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly.
One of the Articles of this Creed is this. The Holy Ghost is of the Father and
the Son. In this Article we know the Greek Church has differed from the Latin,
and held, That the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father only. If we give our
Assent then to every thing or passage contained in this Book, we must believe
the Greek Church undoubtedly damned. And what if some of the Non-conformists
(as well as of Conformists) do believe it not impossible, but that some
Heathen, and professed Socinian may be saved? What if they cannot think
otherwise in regard to the Goodness of God, but that whosoever he was, or is,
that walked, or walks up to his Light in sincerity, with a general Repentance
for his unseen Errors, must by virtue of the Covenant made with Adam fallen, and
Noah, no less than the Jews were by the same confirmed with Abraham, be in a
state of acceptance with God, not conceiving but both alike (for ought they
see) were ignorant of their Redemption by the Blood of Christ, or the means how
their Peace was made with him? (...). We have shown before that Christ is the
first begotten of God, the Divine Reason, Wisdom or Word, whereof the whole
kind of Men, or the whole stock of Mankind do partake; and whosoever lives
according to reason, are Christians, though they be accounted Heathen, and
without God, such as Socrates, Heraclitus, and the like, Justine Martyr in his
second Apology for the Christians: We do not say we receive this, nor deny it:
But we are ready to say what was Luthers saying, We hope God will be merciful
to such a one as Cicero, but our Duty is to abide by the Word. And yet cannot
this little Candor it self be used, if we must be forced to declare, that
whosoever believes not the Athanasian Creed, must undoubtedly perish. Not that
other Non conformists generally make any scruple in this: But what do those
sober and learned Doctors of the Church think of it, who have a name given them
upon this account, that though they hold some things that agree not with her
Articles or Homilies, yet they can conform to them, or have a Latitude to do
it? I A. B. do declare my unfeigned Assent and Consent to every thing contained
in the Book of Common Prayer; and yet I A. B. do declare that I Assent not to
that passage in the Athanasian Creed. Again, I A. B. do profess that a Heathen
may be saved; and yet I do libenter and ex animo subscribe to the Article among
the thirty nine, that does pronounce him accursed, who dares hold such an
opinion. We are not ignorant indeed, how some would blend the two terms Assent
and Consent, and then interpret them by the words [to the use] in the Act: But
this is a shift which will not satisfy all persons, and many desire to use no
shifts. If these words [to the use] had been put into the Declaration it self,
it had been better: Yet if they had, Assent is proper to the Truth, and Consent
to the Use. And yet moreover, how can a Man unfainedly consent to the use of
any such Particular which is false, and which perhaps he even abhors, that the
Wise and Ingenious of his particular persuasion should think he believed.
Another Instance shall be this. In the Service on the Gunpowder-Treason, we
thank God for preserving the King, and the Three Estates of the Realm
Assembled. It is a difficult Point now in the Politics of England, Whether the
Three Estates be, the King, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons: Or
the Lords-Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons. The late King made no scruple in
his Answer to the nineteen Propositions to reckon himself one of the Three
Estates: Neither was there any we know that durst account the Three Estates of
the Land to be dissolved, when the Bishops were turned out of the House by an
Act. We cannot tell therefore of what Consequence it is to the fundimental
liberty, constitution, and state of the Kingdom, to yield unto the insinuation
of such a thing as this in our Prayers. No Man can give his unfeigned Assent to
any thing he knows not, and understands not. This is a thing we do not know
that the Bishops are indeed one of the Three Estates of this Realm. Whether
they be or no, we dispute not; but till we are better satisfied with them and
their station, we are afraid that any snare should be laid for the people in
the Exercise of their Devotions unto God. We must mention one Particular more,
which is our general Exception. In the new Book there is inserted several
Passages that make the Bishops a distinct Office and Order from the Presbyter.
We need not name the Words, for they are put in more than once de industria.
They would not be content with a difference in Degree and Eminency; but they
would have us declare to a jure divino distinction, disproved by learned
Doctors among the Papists, and among the Episcopal Men, as well as the Reformed
Churches. Now we humbly beseech the Parliament to consider, whether the Bishops
have dealt heartily with us to get such a Condition imposed on the Presbyterian
to the keeping of his Ministry, as not only Bishop Davenant and Usher, but such
as Dr. Field and Francis Mason must have been turned out for Non-conformists
upon the same. There are Two Orders Ecclesiastical, Presbyteri and Diaconi.
When we say Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, we name but two Orders, yet three
Degrees. Mr. Joseph Mede disc. V.

For our Consent. We will name three things likewise (and but name them) more
indefinitely. There is the Hierarchy, or Bishop invested with sole power of
Ordination, and Jurisdiction. There are the Ceremonies, in general so often
disputed. There is the Imposition it self of things not necessary, the occasion
of stumbling to many good Men, and cause of our divisions. If we give our
unfeigned consent to all and every thing prescribed by the Book of Common
Prayer, and the form of ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons, then must we
give our approbation (we suppose) to these things amongst others. But if the
Two first are disputable, we are past doubt in the last, that to impose things
that are inductive to others to sin, and yet not necessary, is unlawful. What
Charter has Christ given to the Church to bind Men up to more than himself
has done? Says Stillingfleet, with much more to the purpose, in his Epistle to
his Iranicum? We will not speak so laxly altogether* as he does there; but when
we distinguish the Imposition and Submission, this we are fully persuaded of in
Conscience, that the Submission to the things imposed may perhaps be
maintained; the Imposition of them is not to be so, neither by that Dr. nor by
us; For if we build again the things we have destroyed, we make our selves
transgressors. It is not (Sirs!) the serving God by a Liturgy, or the reading
Common Prayer in the ordinary daily Service that makes us Non-conformists,
though it be this only lies in the view of the inconsiderate many, and though
there are some things we except against the occasional Offices, which by and by
may be named. We are sorry if any have given cause for such a scandal which
tends to the breaking of the Concord and Charity which ought to be maintained
equally between the Brethren of our private, and of the Parochial
Congregations. We should be ready to do any thing we could to the healing this
scandal. But there are matters of another moment, which if we had liberty to
open to the World at large as our cause requires. We doubt not but that it
might come to see, whether we have reason to stick at conformity or no. There
are few of us who are not sensible in some measure of the corruption which has
crept into the Church in regard to the discipline or government of it by the
Hierarchy and Diocesan Bishop so much degenerated since Cyprians time from the
primitive simplicity: And there has passed a solemn Oath over the Nation,
engaging the main Body of it to the endeavor of a Reformation. Now when the
same government is returned upon the Land with all its former corruptions, and
more heavy Injunctions, if we should generally submit again to it without
obtaining any amendment, composition, or abatement, we dread to think on it,
with what faces they shall be able to stand before God, who have lift up their
hands to him for things quite contrary in the late Revolutions. But to proceed,
at last, Besides the matter of this Declaration, the strict prescription as to
the form of words is more especially to be noted, That this Declaration be made
in these words and no other. And what if a Minister would read the Book of
Common Prayer without this Declaration? Or what if he would declare to the
contents of the Book in other Expressions? Why should these crooked SS's be
ramm'd down the Throat to choke any? If we were put to declare in this form of
words to any Book we know of this Bulk, even to the Bible it self (as to any
Copies we have yet seen of it) we must, for ought we see, still stick out. It
is said in the Kings, That Ahazia was two and twenty years old when he began to
Reign, and in the Chronicles, that he was two and forty: Both these cannot be
true: If we were put therefore to Declare in these words, and no other, I A. B.
do declare my Assent to every thing contained in our Bible, we should be
gravel'd: For we cannot Assent to the Truth of both these places in the
English, nor Consent to the error of the Transcription or Translation, when we
know not otherwise how to reconcile the contradiction in them. In Psalm. 105. v.
28. our Psalter reads the words thus, And they were not obedient to his Word;
our Bible reads them, And they rebelled not against his Word. We argue here.
One Particular contained in the Book of Common Prayer is the Translation of the
Text. But if the Translation be true in the Psalter, it is false in the Bible:
And if it be true in the Bible, it is false in the Psalter. That they rebelled,
and rebelled not, no Man can give his Assent. We know indeed how the words may
be true in both Translations, as to the minds of the Translators, the one
referring them to Moses and Aaron, and the other to the Egyptians: But we urge
this more strictly. The mind of the Text it self, of the Holy Ghost, or David's
mind whose Psalm it is, was but one: While the Translators then are contrary in
their minds, both of them cannot have David's mind; and so one of the
Translations must have that meaning which is false. And why must we be made
then to give our Consent that both these Translations should be used, when the
false may be amended by the right? We mention this little thing among many
others that have been objected by Non-conformists heretofore, to show the
insuperable encumbrance of these continued Injunctions. There is one such a
little thing more, which perhaps has not yet been publicly offered. It is the
Rule prescribed us for the finding out the moveable Feasts and Holy Days.
Easter Day, on which the rest depend, is always the first Sunday after the
first Full Moon, which happens next after the one and twentieth day of March.
Now examine this Rule for the last Year 1674. and you will find the first Full
Moon after the 21th. of March was upon the 10th. of April, and consequently if
this Rule hold good, the next Sunday, which was April the 12th. should have
been Easter Day: But Easter Day was upon the 19th. of April, as the Table for
40 years in the Common Prayer does tell you, as well as our Almanacks did.
Well! And how then shall we declare our Assent and Consent to all and every
thing contained in this Book? The Table is in the Book, and the Rule is in the
Book. If the Rule be true, the Table is false: If the Table be true, the Rule
is false. It is a grievous Case, that we must be turned out of our Living,
because we cannot give our Assent and Consent to Both.

Having mentioned these lesser things in the way, we shall perhaps be blamed,
if we neglect some other, that are of more notice and moment with our Brethren.

In the Office of Baptism, the Parents are not admitted to covenant for their
Children, and how shall the Infant answer Credo, Abrenuntio, out of the mouth
of the Godfather? It is the Parents being in Covenant that gives Title to the
Child's Baptism, and unless the Father or Mother make such a profession, as that
we can probably judge the one or the other thereby to be in Covenant, we cannot
(some of us) admit the Children to Baptism, nor themselves to the Lords Supper.

In the Burial; how shall we be able for our lives to say of every one that
dies Un-excommunicate in the Parish, that God of his great Mercy has taken his
Soul unto himself, with such like Expressions? Or that it is certain by Gods
Word that every Child Baptized before Actual Sin, is in a state of Salvation?
Let our Learned Gataker be consulted, De Baptismatis Infantilis vi and
Efficacia, and then judge of it who will.

In the Service for the Holy Days, there ale the most of us not agreed upon the
Lawfulness of such days, Six days shall thou labor: But above all the rest,
there is one thing in S Clements day prescribed by the New Common Prayer Book,
that we wonder how those themselves that put it in can give their consent to
it, which is, the change of a profitable Chapter in Esaias for the Story (God
defend us!) or Bell, and the Dragon?

There is lastly the use of the Cross, a complete Institution of it self,
brought in or added to the Ordinance of Christ, appearing to be of the same
nature and end. This, we doubt, does entrench upon his Kingly Office, and must
humbly therefore offer one reason for the removal, which we solicit
whatsoever be done in other matters. The Ceremonies in use amongst us (says Mr.
Hooker) are retained in no other respect saving only for that to retain them is
to our seeming good and profitable. To which purpose, We are content with these
only (says the Common Prayer Book) as be apt to stir up the dull mind of Man to
remembrance of his duty, by some edifying signification. But the Cross being a
Ceremony applied to Children who are incapable of having their minds stirred up
by any thing signified thereby, it is manifestly retained without their profit.
We will enforce the Argument. By the same reason as we retain the Cross in
Baptism, the other Ceremonies in Popery which are left may be readmitted. As we
use the Cross to signify that the Child must fight manfully under Christ's
Banner, we may use the Chrism wherein the Cross was used to be made, to
signify the Christians anointing to the Combat, and so forward. There is
nothing can be replied hereto in good earnest, but that it is true if the
Church pleased to enjoin it, so we might. We urge consequently, By the same
reason as the Church has relinquisht the Chrism in Baptism, it may leave the
Cross also, that is only if it please so to vote in a needful Convocation. And
that it should do so, there is cause enough, if there were nothing else, to be
said but this only, that as for all other Ceremonies enjoined, the Conformists
may plead, that they are but Circumstances of Worship, wherein the Church has
proper Authority to appoint what is decent and orderly: But for any solemn
entire Rite, which is no Circumstance of the Ordinance unto which it is
appended, or any ways in genere necessary thereunto, if this also be enjoined,
we shall have no bottom or banks set to the appointment of Ceremonies, how far
this Sea shall go, and no farther than so.

We will heap no more matters of this kind, for they are infinite: And it is
some relief to our thoughts, that the Parliament (we thank God) did come to be
a little sensible of it, in so much as they were near content one Session to
Cashier this Declaration quite. There does remain now therefore the
Subscription, and this question which will arise upon it. Whether there be not
as good reason, in regard to the most sober Consciences, to take away this
subscripttion in the Act of uniformity, and the Oath in the Oxford Ast, as well
as the Declaration of Assent and Consent? and here making first our humble
Protestation, that we intend nothing hereby but loyally to the Government, we
must present the Sheet before mentioned to their renewed consideration.

The Subscription is this. I A. B. do declare, That it is not lawful upon any
Pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the King. And that I do abhor that
Traitorous Position of taking Arms by his Authority or those Commissionated by
him: And that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is
now by Law established. And I do declare, That I do hold there lies no
Obligation upon me, or any other person, from the Oath commonly called the
solemn League and Covenant to endeavor any change or alteration of Government
either in Church or State: And that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath,
and imposed upon the Subjects of the Realm against the known Laws and Liberties
of this Kingdom. The Oath this. I A. B. do swear, That it is not lawful upon
any Pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the King. And that I abhor that
Traitorous Position of taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or
against those that are Commissionated by him in pursuance of such Commissions.
And that I will not at any time endeavor any alteration of Government either
in Church or State. In this Oath and Subscription, we have the matter, and the
form of words; that is, the Substance, and the Composure. The one whereof, and
the other in both are liable to the ensuing Exceptions. Which we desire may be
taken with Candor in respect only to our design, that is as argumentative for
the removal of these Injunctions: Not as peremptorily definitive of our own
judgments, and much less of others above our Sphere in all the Cases contained
in them.

To begin with the Oath. Here are three parts of it. The first part appears not
(for we speak it humbly only, and argumentatively) consistent with Judgment;
the second with Truth; nor the third with Righteousness.

We will take up the last part first. And I will not endeavor any alteration
of Government. There is no Government on Earth so perfect that it has need of
Laws like the Medes and Persians. Government may be considered in the
Administration or the Constitution. The word Government here is set down
indefinitely, without distinction. Alteration of Laws, and so Government in the
Administration, is as necessary many times upon emergent occasions to the Body
politic, as the fresh Air is to the natural. This Oath was brought into the
House to have been made Common. It were not a thing righteous to have had that
engagement laid on persons in such a capacity: It is not righteous to have it
laid on any that are Freeholders; and free Subjects as we are. The
Constitution of our Nation, as Parliamentary, is such that no Law can be
established or repealed, but it must pass the House of Commons, and so the
whole Body does concur in their representatives to every alteration of
Government (or in the Government) that is made, if it be legal: And no house of
Commons are chosen but by the people. Every Englishman is inte^^^^d to be there
present, either in person, or by procuration, and the consent of the people is
taken to be every man's consent, says Sir Thomas Smith de Rep. Angl. l. 2. c. 2.
Nay, while the King consilio and assensu Baronum leges olim imposuit universo
Regno, by the counsel and assent of his Barons did give Laws to his whole
Realm, consentire inferior quisque visus est in persona Domini sui Capitalis
prout hodie per procuratores Comitatus, every Inferior seemed to consent in the
person of his chief Lord, as now they do by their Burgesses and Knights of the
Shires, says Sir Henry Spelman. This is so true, that in this sens^^^^ is, that
the Laws that pass are said to (...) Quas vulgus elegerit, Which the people
s^^ll choose. Now then if every free Subj^^t has a fundamental liberty to
choose K^ights and Burgesses, and accordingly to inform them of their
Grievances, and petition them for Redress, and in them, as their
Representatives, do consent to the alteration of Government and Laws (if there
be any) as profitable to the Nation. How can such an Oath be imposed on him,
That he will not endeavor any alteration, as this is? Is not choosing
Burgesses, informing them, petitioning them, acting and legal^y consenting in
them to that end an endeavor? and that as much as can be in their Place and
Calling? And no more than an Endeavor in their Place and Calling was
challenged by any. It is true, the new Laws may be made, and old repealed,
without alteration of the Constitution: But not without alteration of
Government; because Government takes in both the Administration and the
Constitution. Let us suppose therefore the word Government confined only to the
Constitution. There is the Constitution of the Government in the State, which
is a Legal Monarchy, and this indeed we are so far bound from endeavoring to
alter, as that we think it is not alterable by the King himself and Parliament;
because that Supreme Power for the Administration must be supposed in all
Communities, to be derived from, and held by the Constitution. But as for
Government in the Church, we are to know and acknowledge, that the Constitution
hereof it self is but a Law of the Administration, in reference to the State.
And consequently when all Laws for the Administration are liable to the
Regulation of Parliaments, the great question will remain, how those Men who
are Presbyterian or Independent in their Judgment, and think Episcopacy against
the Scripture can be abridged the Endeavor only aforementioned, (which
consists but in choosing Representatives, and doing no more than the
Consitution allows) in order to the prosecution of what they think themselves
obliged to in Conscience, both by Oath, and the Word of God? Is not the
foundation Liberty of the whole People, and our selves with them here in
danger? Judge ye that are wise. And what an anointed Plot have we had here on
the Nation, that Allegiance in effect should be sworn to the Bishops, as well
as to the King?

For the Words then (or Form) we wonder at this Rigor in the Compiler, that a
Man must swear not to endeavor any Alteration. Had it not been enough to be
engaged, not to endeavor the Alteration of the Substance of our Government,
Episcopacy in the Church, and Monarchy in the State, but must it be not any
Alteration? It were well we were so absolutely perfect. And again, must they
not at any time endeavor any alteration? What if times should turn, and we be
in as great a confusion as we were, or any the like chance or change come? Must
these Men be bound up that they cannot endeavor to reduce back this Government
that we have? No, not the King and Bishops, if the Iniquity of the times should
put them out; for they have sworn, they will not at any time endeavor any
alteration in Church or State. Sirs! The matter of this obligation being
against the fundamental Freedom of the Subject and Parliament, and the words
you see so ensnaring, and that against the duty all owe to the public good: We
offer it you to consider in the first place, whether this last part be
according to Righteousness.

For the middle part of the Oath. Here is a position of taking Arms by the
Kings authority against any Commissionated by him, which must be sworn to, as
abhord and traitorous. There is now a Case in the mouths of all the
understanding Refusers of the Oath and Subscription. Suppose some Writ sued
out, and comes to the Sheriffs hands, and suppose some to oppose the Execution
by the Kings Personal Command or Commission, and he thereupon raises the posse
Comitatus upon them. We will ask here, whether the Sheriff acts not herein by
the Kings Authority? We think it cannot be denied. By the Kings Authority is
all one as by the Law, or in the Name of the King according to Law. And when he
can act so against any for all their Commission, and the Law will bear him out,
how is this position in this Case traiterus, and to be abhord? for our parts we
do resolutely believe that it was not ever the intent of the Parliament in this
Oath, or the Subscription, (as to the Major part we may be bold) to advance the
personal Will or Commission of the King above Law, which were to make his power
despotical, and not Royal. Non est Rex (says Bracton) ubi dominatur voluntas,
non Lex, He is no King that governs by his will, and not by the Law. And how
this position indefinitely (without exception of this Case at least) must be
sworn to as altogether traitorous, we are to learn. What if any should come
with a Commission under the Seal to raise Money without an Act of Parliament,
and by virtue of such Commission shall seize our Goods, rifle our Houses, and
ravish our Wives? May not the People, or our inferior Magistrates, or the
Sheriff for the County, withstand such violence? May not the Constable alone by
a Warrant from the Justice to keep the Peace, raise the Neighborhood, and do
it? If he may, or the Sheriff may, it must be in the Name of the King, or by
Authority of the Law; and then is there some Case or Cases where Arms or Force
may be raised by the Authority of the King against such as are Commissionated
by him, though never against his own Sacred Person. Suppose again that Papists
or Fanatics should either by Power or Surprise, at any time get the King into
their hands, (as the Duke of Guise once dealt with the French King) and prevail
with him for fear of his life to grant Commissions under His Hand and Seal
destructive to the Church and State, must the Nation be remediless in this
Case, and so the King and Kingdom ruined by these Commissions? Nay, what
security has the Nation, that a Lord Keeper may not prove Traitor to his King,
and Country? If we may suppose such a thing possible, what if such a Lord
Keeper should under the Broad Seal grant Commissions to disband His Majesty's
Life Guard, deliver up the Navy or Seaport Towns, seize the Tower or places of
strength; in what a Condition were the King and Kingdom brought, if the
Subjects hands be bound up by an Oath not to resist or take Arms, against the
execution of such Commissions: Suppose but so long as till they understand his
design, for by that time, the whole Nation may be past recovery. We are
offended at the sense, and stand amazed at the horror of those sad
Consequences into which the Imposition of such like Tests, or Injunctions as
these, (if not timely retrenched) may lead our Posterity. The Courts of Law can
avoid the Kings Charters or Commissions which are passed against Law, for the
King is subject to the Law, and Sworn to maintain it, says Judge Jenkins in his
Works, p. 48. As for the form then of the words, I abhor this Traitorous
Position, they are harsh, the word abhor especially is a word of interest and
passion, a cooler word, as I disown or disallow, might have served. Some of the
more Grave (as Calamy particularly) were much offended at that word. A Man may
say a thing is unlawful in his Conscience, when he cannot say according to
truth, I abhor it. There is never a Gentleman in the Land but may swear truly,
that he believes it unlawful to company with any other Woman as his own Wife;
but if each one was put to swear he abhors it, we suppose some very good Sons
of the Church, as well as our Brethren, would be found willing to be
Non-conformists to such an Oath. Well Sirs! when these words Abhor and
Traitorous are so harsh in the Composure, and when such Cases as above
mentioned may be put as to the position in the matter of it, wherein it seems
justifiable, and without offense: We offer it in the next place to
consideration, whether this middle part of the Oath and Subscription be
according to Truth.

For the first part, We have a large Assertion roundly sworn. The Oath and
Subscription runs not only, that it is not lawful to take Arms against the
King, or that it is not lawful on any pretense, but on any pretense (or cause)
what soever. The Grammatical literal construction of that word seems to
intimate no less than that this Proposition must be held without restraint or
limitation. Amongst the most emment of Authors which have wrote of the Power of
Princes, and established it against Resistance in their writings on this
Subject, we suppose there are sew or none to be valued above these Three,
Bareley, Grotius, Arnisaeus. And we shall und, that they have all their
restrictions or cases of Exceptions in the maintenance of this Tenet. And how
shall any be over earnest here in punishing the Refuser, when if the matter be
well scanned, the reason perhaps, why he refuses, will be sound only because he
has read more then some others that yield their submission. We begin with
Barcley, that is William Barcley, a Scot and Counceller to the French King, who
writes against Buchanan, Boucher, and other Monarchomachists, as he calls them.
This learned Man endeavors to make his Prince to be above the whole People,
that consequently no Arms can be taken against him: Nevertheless, when he comes
to put some pressing Cases, he thus limits himself. Quid ergo? nulli ne Casus
incidere possunt, quibus populo in Rigem arma capere jure suo liceat? nulli
certe quanidiu Rex manet. What then? Can there no Cafes happen, wherein it is
lawful for the people to take Arms against the King by Right? None certainly so
long as he remains a King. There are Cases indeed he accounts in which a King
does Exuere personam Regis, or Dominatu se exuere, Put off the Person of a
King. And particularly ( l. 3. c. 16.) he mentions Two. Si regnum alienet, si
Rempublicam evertere conatur. If he go to alienate his Kingdom, if he go to
overthrew the Commonwealth. We cannot tell how to approve this Doctrine; the
Papists use the same we know in another Case, we may not fight against our
King; but if the Pope Excommunicate him, he shall be no King with them. Let us
come to Grotius, and first quote him in his Judgment of Barcley, lest you may
think else we mistake him. Barclaius (says he) Regii impariilicet assertor
fortissimus huc tamen descendit, ut populo and insigni ejus parti jus concedit
se tuendi adversus immanem saevitiam. Barcley, though the most assertor of
Kingly Government, does come to this, that he grants a Right to the People, or
the most eminent part of them, of defending themselves against intolerable
oppression. For himself then after he has asserted this Tenet, Summum impurium
tenentibus jure resisti non posse; That the higher Powers may not lawfully be
resisted, from Scripture, Antiquity, Authority, and Example, to as much purpose
perhaps as any, he descends to put seven Cases, wherein he does Lectorem
monere, ne putet in bane legem delinquere eos qui revera non delinquunt; Warn
his Reader, lest he mistake some for delinquents that are not. For Arnisaeus,
he has wrote Three learned Books of Politics. De Jure Majestatis. De Doctrina
Politica. De Authoritate principum in populum semper Inviolabile, seu, quod
nulla ex causa subditis fas sit contra legitimum principem arma sumere. That
the Authority of Princes over the People, ought to be inviolable, or that it is
lawful for no cause to take up Arms against our lawful Prince. Here then we
have our Tenet, in the state whereof he comes in the issue to dinguish between
Rex and Tyrannus, a King and a Tyrant, Tyrannus in Titulo, and Tyrannus in
Exercitio; A Tyrant in Title, and in Practice: And Tyrannus in Exercitio, A
Tyrant in Practice, he accounts does Excidere de Jure, etsi Haereditario, Fall
from his Right, though Hereditary. Traditur Respublica Principi in eum finem
(says he) ut illi praesit in salutem omnium, a quo si prorsus desciverit, etiam
de potestate cadit, quum non alto fine sibi commissum habebat. The
Commonwealth is delivered to the Prince, that he should rule over it for the
common safety; from which if he depart altogether, he falls even from the Power
it self, which was committed to him only for this end. We do not give our
consent to, not pass our censure upon the words we cite, but by such
Testimonies as these without naming others, we would convince those persons who
were the Compilers of these Declarations to be subscribed, or sworn, with some
resentment and shame, that when the temperate sense and meaning of them is such
as we were not like to boggle at, they should be yet composed so in terminis,
as to be obnoxious to so grand Exception. For the form then yet of the Words. I
A. B. do swear that it is not lawful, etc. Here is an Oath to the matter of a
Proposition questioned, to the determination of a Point of Conscience, and that
diversely decided. An Oath should be to a matter of fact, and cannot be taken
but to that whereof we are certain. To require of Men therefore to swear to the
verity of a Doctrinal Proposition, is not according to Judgment, being a thing
impossible, because no Man is insellible. Now then Sirs! When here is such an
Erratum in the Composure, as the want of the words I believe, or the like, I
swear that I held or believe, that it is not lawful, etc. and so material an
Exception, as the Judgment of the most learned in general comes to, against the
Substance in Terminis, of the first part of this Oath, which yet gods down
ordinarily without chewing; we humbly oder it in the third place to be
considered how this Oath can be taken either in Truth or Judgment. An Oath must
be taken in Judgment, in Truth, and in Righteousness. The first part (we argue)
is not according to Judgment; The second not according to Truth; The third not
according to Righteousness. We speak it humbly by way only of Argumentation (as
we have said) craving pardon if it offend, for the manner of the Expression. We
proceed to the Subscription conjoined, which has we count Two Parts. The one
is the purport wholly of the Oath; whereof therefore we shall add no more but
this, That when the matter of the one, and the other in the former part, is
such as enters the foundation of Politics in general, and the Laws and State
of the Land in particular (which is (...)), a Kingdom regulated by Laws, as Sir
Thomas Smith has it: Rex sub Deo and Loge, The King is under God and the Law,
says Hooker and Brecton:) So that it requires the skill ^f the greatest Judges,
Sergeants and: ages of the Law to determine the Cases included in it, every
poor silly Minister is put to decide the same for himself, and to have that
evidence therein, as to be able to take his Cath, or give his Hand to the
certainty of it. the other part of the Subscription concer^^^s the Covenant,
where the words [nor any other] are such a Ford (that as to the Consciences of
all not thoroughly Episcopal) so far as we see is unpassable, it is nothing to
some of our selves to subscribe, there lies no obligation on me from the
Covenant to endeavor any alteration of Government, because we never took it,
and was against our Consciences, and we can conceive for others in a private
capacity, what have they to do with Government? No Oath can bind to sedition
and disobedience. But as for such as are in a public capacity, and can act
lawfully toward Reformation in their place, what shall we say to those? One
way there is indeed, will strike off all quite, and that is to hold the present
Government established to be Jure Divino altogether, so that any alteration is
sin. He that holds thus, may affirm clearly, that though a Man swore he would
endeavor to alter the Government, it binds him nothing, let him be in what
capacity he will, the least afteration is unlawful, and he must therefore
repent of his Oath, and not perform it. But if a Man hold, that the
Presbyterian Government is rather Jure Divino, or that neither Episcopal nor
Presbyterian is Jure Divino, or that Episcopal Government is well, yet that
ours, as it is not, is not altogether so well, but that something may be
altered for: ^e better: We wo^^^^ (...) ^^in be informed how such a Man can
absolve him who is in a public capacity (as a Parliament Man) from his
endeavoring so much according to time and prudence, if he has sworn before
that he will. It is in vain to hide where the water sticks. There are some
cannot tell how to absolve one other for their sins. They say not there lies an
obligation upon any other to do as they have sworn, for fear it be dangerous;
and they dare not say there lies none, for fear of their Consetences. As ^o our
selves this we may say, that we desire to be instructed, and this we will say,
that it is an hard thing to put on it to say, that there lies no obligation
upon any other but our selves whether there does or no. We will therefore close
up our reasons for Nonconformity, with this one Note only. If there be so many
difficulties in one of the things only, which is required to Conformity, what a
River has he to wade, that must pass through All together that belongs to it?
We descend to some Proposals for concord or mutual quiet to the Nation, under
these Differences: And here also we are accommodated with our Plough and Heifer
from the same Author. Secundae cogitationes prudentius and moderatius
consulunt, and prudentius quia moderatius.

It has pleased His Majesty by several Gracious Overtures to commend an union
of his Protestant Subjects to the consideration of Parliament. A Design full of
all Princely Wisdom, Honesty, and Goodness. In this Achievement there is a
double Interest (we apprehend) to be distinguished and weighed, that of
Religion it self, and that of the Nation. The advance of Religion does consist
much in (...) unity of its Professors both in Opinion and Practice to be of one
(...), and one, heart, and one Way (in (...) Worship) so far as may be (...) ^o
the Scriptures. The acknow^^^^ of the Nation, does lie in the Free (...) F^ou^^
thing of Trade; and uni^ing the whole Body in the Common Bene^^ and ^^pendance
on the Government. The one of these bespeaks an established order and
accommodation; the others (...) speaks Indulgeare Liberty of Conseience, or
^^lleration: for while people are in danger about Religion, we dare not launch
out into Trade, (say they) but keep our Monnys, seeing we know not into what
stre^ghts we shall be driven, and when in reference to their party, they are
held under severity, in is ^a^ie to those who are designing. H^ads, to mould
thein into Wrath and ^a^^ion: which without occasion will melt and dissolve it
self into bare diffent of Opinion, peaceably rejoicing under the enjoyment of
Profection.

The King we know is concerned as Supreme Governor, and as a Christian
Protestant Governor. As he is King he is to seek the welfare of the Nation;
as he is a Christian, the flourishing of Religion, and the Protestan Religion
particularly is his Interest, as (...) ^ingdom does lie in Balance (he being
^he chief Party) with its Neighbor Nations.

The Judgment now of some is for a comprehending Act. Which may take in those
who are for our Parochial Chaurches, that severity then might be used for
reclaiming all whosoever separate from them: The Judgment of some others is for
a free and equal Act of Grace to all Indifferently, (the Papists with most
excepted) whether separalists or others) abhorring Comprehension, as more
dangerous to them on that account, mentioned, than all the Acts that have
passed. Neither of these Judge up to the full Interest of the King and Kingdom
as is proposed. It becomes not the Presbyterian, if his Principles will admit
him to own our Parochial Churches, and enjoy a Living to be willing to have his
Brethren the Independants given up to persecution: And it becomes not the
Sepanatisis, if he may but enjoy his Conscience, to repine or envy at the
Presbyterian for reaping any further Emohiment, seeing both of them (supposing
the latter may do so) have as much at bottom as can be, in their capacities,
desired of either. It is an Act therefore of a mixed Complexion, provividing
both Comprehension, and Indulgence for the different Parties, must serve our
purpose.

And to this end (as we may humbly hope) was there a Bill in the House, A Bill
for the ease of the Protestant Dissenters in the Business of Religion. Which
that it may (some time or other) be cast into this model, we must present the
same yet, under a little further Explication.

There are Two sorts (we all know) of these Protestant Dissentors: One that own
the establish^d Ministry, and our Parish Congregations, and are in capacity of
union upon that account, desiring it heartily upon condescension to them in
some smaller matters: The other that own nor our Churches, and so are incapable
of a Conjunction, who do not, and cannot desue it, or seek it. For the one.
That which we propose is a further latitude in the present constituted order,
that such may be received and this we call Comprehension or Accommodation. Let
us suppose that nothing else were required of a Man to be a Minister of a
Parish, than there is to the Parishioner, to be a Member of the Parish Church,
as part of the National. If a person Baptized will come to Church, and hear
Common Prayer, and receive the Sacrament, and does nothing worthy of
Excommunication, he is, he may, he must be received for a Parochial Member: In
like manner if a Minister first ordained (and so Episcopally or Classically
approved in his abilities for that function) will but read the Book of Liturgy,
and administer the Sacraments according to it, and does nothing which deserves
suspension (we appeal to all indifferently sober) why should not this suffice a
Man for the enjoying his Living, and exercising the Office unto which he is
called) and what if some ^itt^e omission here and there to salve a scrupulous
Conscience (so long as the main Body of the Service be still read) were
tolerated, would it do hurt to any?

For the other, there is indeed nothing that can be done to bring those in, and
join them with us in Parochial union. Yet is there this to be proposed, that
you bear with them, and let not any be persecuted merely for their Consciences,
and that we call Indulgence or Tolleration. If the Presbyterian now may be
comprehended, he will be satisfied to act in his Ministry without endeavoring
any Alteration, otherwise of Episcopacy: If the Congregationalist be indulged,
he will be satisfied, though he be not comprehended, for that he cannot submit
unto; and so shall there no dis-obligation put on any, but all be pleased, and
enjoy the ease of such a Bill. Let but the Grounds of Comprehension be laid
wide enough to take in all who can own and come unto the public Liturgy, (the
Conformist then we may suppose well the greater weight of the Nation) and when
the Countenance of Authority, and all State Emoluments are cast into one Scale,
and others let alone to come on it, without persecution to inflame them, or
perferment to encourage them, (especially if one Expedient be used which shall
not pass unmentioned in the close, that such as come in may find it really
better to them to be a Priest to a Tribe, than a Levite to a Family) we need
not doubt but Time, the Mistress of the wise and unwise, will discover the
peaceable Issue of such Counsels.

And here let us pause a little; for we imagine we see what s^^si^ies are
hanging on the F^es of the Parli^ment (...) at this motion. What Prejudices and
Impressions we mean have been laid on the Members by former A^^s. (...) a
Speech delivered by the (...) cellor in Chrisis-Church-(...) (...) to the
Parliament there (...) ^^^^lars assembled, wherein (...) of contriving the
Oxford Oath, an^ (...) quently of like former Impositions, (...) most
Magni^^^^, as well a^ Sp^^^sili^y enough arroga^^^ (...) It was, it see^^,
(...) of that Great Man, to root those, Prime^ples out of Men's minds, upon
which the late Wars (as he sup^^^ (...)) were built; and he would do it by this
Invention, to wit, the imposing upon them new Declarations. Oaths,
Subscriptions of a Strain framed contrary to chose Principles. We do ^emember
now the Sentence of Esdras to the Apologue of the Angel, where the Wo^ds and
Seas would encounter one another. Terily (says he) it was a foolish purpose:
For the Trees could not come down from the Hills, nor the Waves get up from the
Shoares. We must say the same of this Policy. It was really a great vanity to
think that Folks should be made to swear away the^ thoughts and beliefs:
Whatsoever it is we think or believe, we do think it, we do believe it, we must
believe it, notwithstanding any of these outward Impositions. The Honest Man
indeed will refuse an Injunction against his Conscience, the Knave will swallow
it, but each retain their Principles, which the last will be likelyest to put
^^^o any villainous practice. On the contrary there is nothing could be advised
more certain, to keep the Covenant, and such Principles alive in Men's Hearts
and Memories, than this perpetual enjoying the Renuntiation of it. Nor may you
wonder, if that Lesson sink deep into Man's flesh, which you will teach them
with Briars and Thorns, as Gideon taught the Men of Succoth. Besides, it is the
most unpolitick thing that ever could have been, for such Contents as are of
that dangerous Consequence to Majesty, and the Government, to have them once
disputed or brought into question, to be put into these Declarations, Oaths,
and Subscriptions, which necessitates the Examination of them to so many. It
was the wisdom of the ancient Church instead of contention about the Jewish
Ceremonies to take care they might have an Honorable Burial: And we dare say,
if that Great Lord Chancellor had but put off his Cap to the Covenant, and
bidden it a fair adieu only, he should have done more toward its Extirpation,
than by all this iterated trouble to Men's Consciences. And if it shall
therefore please the succeeding Ministers of State instead of going to root out
the Principles of Innovation which are got into people, by this means (which is
no means to do it, but the means to river them more into us) to endeavor
rather to root out the Causes from us, which make Men willing to entertain such
Principles, and desire change: We suppose their Policy will prove the sounder.
The way to establish the Throne of the King is this, to make it appear, that
all those Grievances, and all those good things which the people in the late
times expected to be removed, or to be obtained by a Commonwealth, or a change
of the Government, may be more effectually accomplish^d by a King in the Acts
of His Parliament.

We are sensible how our Theme rises upon us, and that we begin to shoot wide.
We take our Aim therefore again, and Two things in earnest we would expect from
such a Bill, as the sum of what is necessary to the end of it, our ease, if it
be made to serve the turn. The one is, that Bishop Land be confined to his
Cathedral; and the other, that Chancellor Hyde be totally expelled our Acts of
Parliament. By the first we mean, that the Ceremonies in the ordinary Parish
Churches be left to the liberty of the Minister, to use or use them not
according to his Conscience and Prudence toward his own Congregation: And by
the latter that all these new devised Oaths, Subs^riptions and Declarations,
together with the Canonical Oath, and the Subscription in the C^n^ns be
suspended for ^^e time to co^^^. If that be too mu^^^ we shall content our
selves with a mo^^^^r motion that whatsoever these Declarations be that are
required to be ma^le, s^bs^^ibed* or s^^orn. they may be impos^^ only as to the
matter and end, leaving the taker but free to the use of their own Expressions.
And this Expedient we gather from the Lord Coke, who has providently as it
were against such a season laid in this Observation. The form es the
Subscription set down in the C^nons, ratis^^^ by King James, was not expressed
in the Act of the thirteenth of Elizabeth. Inst. part. 4. c. 74. And
consequently, if the Clergy enjoyed this freedom until then, in reference to
the Particular therein contained, what hinders why they might not have the same
restored in reference also to others?

It is true, that it may seem hard to many in the Parliament; to undo any thing
themselves have done: But though this be no rule for Christians, who are
sometimes to repent as well as to believe. If they be loath to Repeal any
thing, what if they shall only interpret or explain. Let us suppose then some
Clause in this Bill, or some new Act, for Explanations. If any Nonconformist
cannot come up to the full meaning and intent of these Injunctions rightly
explained, let him remain in Statu quo, under the state only of Indulgence,
without benefit of Comprehension; for so long as those who are comprehended,
may yet enjoy that Case as to be indulged in some equal measure answerable to
His Majesty's late Declaration, whether Comprehension be large or narrow, such
terms as we obtain are pure advantage, and such as we obtain not, are no loss.
But if any does, and can honestly agree to the whole sense the Parliament
intends in such Impositionr, why should there be any obstruction for such a
Man, though he deliver himself in his own words, to be received into the
established order with others, unless Men will look on these Injunctions only
to be continued for Engines of Battery to destroy the Nonconformists, and not
as Instruments of unity to edify the Church of God.

We will not leave our Congregational Brethren neither, so long that we have
something more as may be said for them, not ordinarily considered by any. It is
this, That though indeed, they are not, and cannot seek to be of our Churches
as they are Parochial under the Diocese or Super-intendency of the Bishops: Yet
do they not refuse, but seek to be comprehended within the Church, as national
under His Majesty. We will explain our selves The Church may be considered as
universal, and so Christ alone is the Head of it, and we receive our Laws from
him: Or as particular, and so the Pastors are Heads, Guides, or Bishops over
their respective Flocks, who are commanded therefore to obey them in the Lord:
Or as national, which is an accidental and external respect to the Church of
God, wherein the King is to be acknowledged the Supreme Head of it, and as we
judge no otherwise; For thus also runs the Statute, That our Sovereign Lord
shall be taken and reputed the only Supreme Head in Farth of the Church of
England, called Ecclesia Anglicana. Now if it should please the King and
Parliament to allow and approve those separate Meetings, and stated places for
Worship by a Law, as His Majesty did by His Declaration, we must Profess that,
as such Assemblies by this means must be constituted immediately in ^egral
parts of the Church as national, no less than our Parish Congregations: So
would the Congregate Churches (at least those that understand themselves) own
the King for Head over them, in the same sense as we own him Head over ours,
that is as much as to say, for the Supreme Coercive Governor of all, (in this
accidental regard) both to keep every several Congregation to that Gospel Order
themselves profess; and to supervise their Constitutions in things indifferent,
that nothing be done but in subordination to the Peace of the Kingdom.

Well, let us suppose then a liberty for these separate Assemblies under the
visitation of His Majesty and His Justices, and not the Bishops: We would fain
know what were the evil you can find in them. If it lie in any thing, it must
be in that you call Schism. Separation then let us know in it self simply
considered is nothing, neither good nor evil. There may be reason to divide or
separate some Christians from others out of prudence, as the Catechumeni of old
from the fully instructed, for their greater edification; and as a Chapel or
two is added to a Parish Church, when the people else were too big a
Congregation. It is not all division then or separation is Schism, but sinful
division. Now the Supreme Authority as national Head having appointed the
Parochial Meetings, and required all the Subjects of the Land to frequent them,
and them alone, for the acknowledging, glorifying, or national serving and
worshipping the one only True God, and His Son, whom we have generally received,
and this Worship or Service in the nature of it being intrinsically good, and
the External order (such as that of time and place, and the like Circumstances)
being properly under his Jurisdiction, it has seemed to us hitherto, that
unless there was something in that order and way prescribed, which is sinful,
and that required too as a condition of that Communion, there is no man could
refuse his attendance on these Parochial Assemblies, without the sin of
disobedience: And consequently his separation thereby becoming sinful, proves
Schism: But if the Scene be altered, and those separate Assemblies made legal;
the Schism in reference to the national upon the same account does vanish.
Schism is a separation from that Church, whereof we ought, or are bound to be
Members: If the Supreme Authority then loose our obligation to the Parish
Meeting, so that we are bound no longer, the iniquity, (we say upon this
account) is not to be found, and the Schism gone. Lo here, a way ^p^ned for
the Parliament (if they please) to rid the trouble and scruple of Schism (at
once) out of the Land. If they please not, yet is there something to be thought
on for the Separatist in a way of forbearance; that the innocent Christian, at
least, as it was in the time of Trajan, may not be sought out unto punishment.
Especially when such a Tolleration only is desired, as is consistant with the
Articles of Faith, a good life, and the Government of the Nation.

But what shall we say then to the Papists, which is the Objection hit still in
their Teeth that plead for moderation? Why, we will not baulk the delivery of
our opinion. There are Two parts we profess of that favor or condescension we
seek from the Higher Powers: The one consisting of a Composition with those
whose Principles are fit and capable of it: And the other consisting of
forbearance toward those whose Principles will allow them no more. The Papist
in our account is but one sort of Recusants, and the conscientions and
peaceable among them must be held in the same Predicament with those among our
selves, that likewise refuse to come to Common Prayer. It is true, we have Laws
very severe against the Jesuit, and Seminary Priest: But this we suppose to be
upon the ground of State Interest. The Supremacy of the Pope, and the Authority
of the King are inconsistent in this Land: The Priest and Jesuit are taken by
Law as Factors for the Pope; and an undermining the Government in all States is
a Capital Crime. But as for the common Papist, who lives innocently in his way,
he is to us as other Separatists, and so comes under the like Tolleration. That
is, he is not to expect to have power or trust, being not of the Religion of
the State; but he may hope for the enjoyment of his Conscience as we, without
wrong or oppression. And indeed if it be only Liberty of Conscience that he
seeks, this will be sufficient, that he is not troubled, nor we. If he desires
more, he stirs us all presently into Jealousy, and no wonder if we be very
sollicitous to have Popery kept out of Dominion, or our selves from Fire and
Faggot, how gentle and equal soever we be to it, and to all parties alike under
a safe Subjugation. For as the Roman Catholic we suppose will consider that to
go to bring in a Religion upon a people that are no more prepared for theirs
then we are in this Nation, were the committing of a Rape upon the public
Conscience, and possession being got without our good wills would not likly be
long retained: So are we to remember the common rule of Christianity toward
them, and to all Men, that we must do as we would be done by, and that, with
what measure we mete to others, if shall be met to us again.

And now we turn us to the Houses. My Lords and Gentlemen! We suppose you
honest Persons that would not depart from this Catholic Rule, that would not
wrong any, and if you did, would make them recompense. There have been very
hard Acts passed, which when the Bills were brought in, might happily look
smooth, and fair to you: But you saw not the Covert Art, secret Machination,
and purposely contrived Snares against one whole Party. If such a form of words
would not, another should do their business: By this means, you in the first
place your selves, some of you were overstript: Multitudes dispossessed of
their Livings: The Vineyard let out to others: The Lord Jesus the Master of it
deprived of many of His Faithful Laborers: And the Poor Sheep (what had they
done?) bereft of their accustomed Spiritual Food, to the hazard of their
Eternal Souls. Among many Arguments therefore for Liberty in other Papers, from
Policy, Convenience, Reason of State, and Reason of Religion, we have this one
to offer you of a more binding Nature, an Argument from Justice, Righteousness,
and Restitution to the wronged. It is true, that the Places they once had, are
filled and disposed of: But there are others enough. There are many of those
who possess theirs, do also keep their own, and keep more. There are many who
are Canons, Deans, Prebendaries, that are also Parsons, Rectors, Vicars: Who
have Benefices and Honors by Heaps, and by the Bushel. If it shall please you
therefore in this Bill on the Anvil, or in another to take Cognizance of
Pluralists, that for the preventing an idle, scandalous, covetously overgrown,
unprofitable Ministry, every Man who has more than one cure of Souls, or one
dignity, shall give them up into a Public stock, or to a general distribution,
you shall do the Church right, and the Ejected right, you shall give such
Drones their due, and God His due, and strew the way by this means, for making
your Grace intended in this Bill, of signification. In the Name of God Sirs,
let us move you to this; if it were only hae vice, for a present needful
conjunction of us at this season. We see the Jaws of the Jesuit, and the
Sectary opening upon us; If the sober Protestant Interest be not united, we
perish. We know who will be ready to stamp here, and throw dust in the Air; for
it is these Sons of the Horsleech, whose Voice is give, give, that will never
be contented with a single Portion. A Dignity therefore with a Living, let them
be allowed: But one Dignity, and one cure of Souls. it is therefore this hard
Objection at the bottom, the Priests covetousness, and corruption, rather than
their dispute about this indifferent, that really hinders the Churches Peace
and Prosperity.

We shall therefore for the gentle enforcement of this, humbly offer you some
Reasons.

It is manifest, that Pluralists were allowed in the Church at first upon the
account only of necessity; because they had not Ministers enough that could
Preach to the People. They could get some to Read, but none to give them a
Sermon: And upon this account, they admitted one to be Pastor to several
Congregations. But now the Land does abound with so many Ministers, who have
never a cure, and such as are no less learned, and more painful in Preaching,
than those that have three or four. We will plead with these Men before Heaven,
and before you who are the Heads of our Tribes assembled, that it is not pious,
not fit, nor political, (that is not for the common good) that this Custom
should continue, when the Reason is ceased; especially when so many of those
that are put out have Families, and scarce Bread to subsist.

It is a saying since the times of Constantine, That when the Church had but
Wooden Chalices, it had Golden Priests; but when they had Golden Chalices, and
rich Benefices, they had Wooden Ministers. That Religion brought forth Riches,
and the Daughter has devoured the Mother. It is pity that Men who are called
to this Function, which requires them to be Examples to others of humility,
lowliness of mind, self-denal, and mortification, should be lead so much as
they are into the temptation idleness, and excess by their preferments. For as
it has been reflected upon by some of the House; and other Gentlemen who
served the King without repairs, as an error of the State in the late
Restoration of Episcopacy, that the profits of the Church Lands for twenty
years together should be bestowed at once on a few single persons, which would
have leisurely requited a great many: So are they really as little pleased to
have the Priest, who was perhaps a while ago, their Servitor at the University,
or Tenants Son, or something meaner than they will say, should by the sudden
accumulation of so many places as he has had Simonically or Gratuitously
conferred upon him, be huffed up to that pompous height and vanity, of his
Coach and Liveries, as makes him to become the very envy of of his Patron, and
scandal to his profession.

It is true, that the Nobility Spiritual and Temporal have the Prerogative to
capacitate a Minister according to Law for diverse Livings: But when Jesus
Christ the great Master of the Vineyard does command their labor, and that
they feed the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers, there
is no such privilege to be urged, but in the nature of the thing it is void.
There there is no Custom, no Right, no Law, if the King, Lords, and Commons, if
the whole World should agree to make it, that can be of force against the
Gospel. Nulla datur potestas ad malum.

There are few of you who are Protestants in either Houses without jealousy,
that the Romanists were borrowing an Helve for their Hatchet out of the Wood of
the Fanatics; and that if they came to obtain their purpose: It is not hard to
conjecture, which Trees were like to go down, one after another. As those Men
of the Church therefore are so willing you should do something for the security
of your Religion and them, it is meet that they should be ready to contribute
to it. That they who preach the Gospel to others, should be persuaded to put
the great duty of it, which is self-abrenuntiation into practice themselves.
For that Man is not sit to be a Minister of Christ, or admitted into His
Vineyard at all, that does not look more to his Word, than to his Penny, and
seeks not the welfare of Jerusalem above his advancement; and had not rather
convert one Soul, than get two Livings, and have a Prebend to spare. According
to what every Man's mind is most upon in his Sphere (the public, Interest, or
his own) such is his value more or less.

However this be, whether they are willing or not, there is an universal
eminens dominium in the Supreme legislative Authority that puts an end to all
Cavil (if there arise any) de jure privatorum: And we will conclude with this,
that whatsoever things, are therefore substantially profitable for the
Community, and are retarded only by the interest of private persons, these are
things most truly worthy the Consultation of Parliament. God Almighty keep
alive the true English, public Spirit. God preserve the Protestant Religion,
and the person of the King. God prosper an Accommodation.

We of the Kings Party (says Judge Jenkins) did, and do detest all Grievances
of the People, as much as any Men living. In his Lex Terrae.

It is a certain Truth, This Kingdom without an Act of Oblivion, and a meet
regard had to tender Consciences, will unavoidably be ruined. In the Armies
Indemnity.

I say again, That without a Gracious general Pardon from His Majesty, and a
favorable regard had to tender Consciences, there will be neither Truth nor
Peace in the Land, nor any Man secure of any thing that he has. In his Cordial
for the good People of London.

And again in His Declaration for Trials of Treasons, and all Capital Crimes to
be by a Jury, They that love this Commonwealth, will use all means to procure
an Act of Oblivion, and tender Consciences a just and reasonable satisfaction,
else we must all perish first or last. (...).

FINIS.

