THE Middle-Way In One Paper of ELECTION and REDEMPTION.

With Indifferency between the ARMINIAN and CALVINIST.

By J H

Doing nothing by Partiality.

1 Timothy 5.21. LONDON, Printed for T. Parkhurst, at the Three Bibles in
Cheap Side. 1673.

OF Election, or Predestination.
THe design of these Papers is to offer to such as will consider, and can tend
to receive, or cultivate what is offered, some Notices of truth which lie upon
my mind about several matters, that, by the Communication of the little light
I have, I may fetch in more to my own understanding from others: and also by
the Partiality that appears so often in the doctrine of the Orthodox, I may
promote some general kind of condescension in all persons to a more favorable
opinion of one another: the proper consciousness of our own most miserable
palpable blindness in most things, and several points of Religion, (wherein
many times we are indeed but the more blind, because we think we see), being
enough methinks to make every mortal, even with shame and confusion, to be
ready either to have a little higher estimation of his Brother that differ from
him, or a little less indignation at any such difference, or distance in his
way and judgment.

I will begin with these heads. Of Election, and of Redemption.

It is the general opinion of Divines, that God from all eternity fore knows
all things, and, That, there are a certain number of persons determined by Him
that shall be infallibly brought to glory. For declaring this Decree, they do
go several ways. In the general, they may be reduced to two: the way of
Absolute; and the way of Conditional Election. Of either way there are two
sorts. In the Conditional way; The first sort do conceive, that God foresees
who they be that will live godlily and keep his commandments, and them he
chooses to salvation; while those he foresees will be wicked, he decrees to
damnation. Vnde Apostolus (say they). Quos praescivit, hos and praedestinavit.
From whence the Apostle Whom he did foreknow, them he also did praedestinate.
The second sort, perceiving this to be contrary to Scripture, with makes
Election to be of grace and not of works, do say thus: That God foresees who
they be will believe, and so choosing them as being in Christ through faith,
decrees to give them grace, which will lead them to salvation: and those that
he foresees will not believe, he decrees to leave them, as out of Christ, to
Condemnation. Non elegit Deus opera cujusque in praescientia quoe ipse daturus
est; sed fidem elegit in praescientia, ut, quem sibi crediturum praescivit,
Ipsum elegerit ut Spiritum sanctum daret, ut bona operando etiam vitam aeternam
consequerentur. God did not choose the works of any in his foresight which
himself was to give, but he chose faith in his foresight, that, whom he
foreknew would believe, he might choose them, to give the holy Spirit unto;
that by doing good works they might obtain eternal salvation. Augustine, in
libro expositionis quarundum propositionum ex epistola ad Romanos. Again, Quos
Deus suos fidei opere futuros esse praenovit, hos praedestin^avit ad gloriam.
Those who God foreknew would become his through their believing, he elected
unto glory. De praedestinatione Dei. c. 5. The former opinion, is the way of
the Pelagian; the latter, of the Arminian. Which yet I set not down after the
more subtle times of Arminius himself, but those of Augustine according to
these cited passages; the one of which he afterward expressly retracted; and
the book it self out of which I fetch the other, I believe either to be
spurious, or to have got abroad from him unawares, before he had reveiwed it.
The Orthodox therefore, such as we account the Synod of Dort, do declare for
the Absolute way, in opposition to both these. To wit, that God without
consideration either of man's faith, or good works, but merely according to the
counsel of his own will, not rendering his reason to us, has determined to
give that grace to some persons whereby they shall effectually be saved: and to
leave others to the freedom of their own wills, that they may be judged at the
last Day according to their deserts. In this way, there are likewise two sorts
of Doctors. The one teach, that God looks on men without any consideration of
sin at all, in their state before the Fall, in this decree of his grace to
some, and not to others: The other teach, that God looks indeed on men all
alike without consideration of desert, but not without consideration of sin, to
wit in their fallen estate; and so decrees his mercy to some, and justice to
others. Note here, that our Divines of the former sort do not say, that, God
decrees damnation to any without consideration of sin (nor salvation indeed
without consideration of faith and repentance): but, Decree's the giving or not
giving saving grace to keep them from sin and damnation, to whom he pleases,
without any consideration in man whatsoever. For, Predestination, say they,
being an immanent and eternal act of the Divine understanding and will, cannot
be conceived as dependent upon any foreseen temporal acts of man's free will.
Note also, that St. Augustine who was the first set up for the Absolute way,
and yet not till his latter writings, does declare for the second sort of this
way. Caeteri autem ubi nisi in massa perditionis justo divino judicio
relinquantur? The rest that are not elect, are left according to Gods just
judgment, in the mass of those that are fallen, unto perdition. De bono
perseverantiae. c. 14. The one of these opinions is called the Supralapsarian
doctrine: the other, the Sublapsarian. Which are names indeed may make a
rumbling to many that know not what they signify, but so long as they come into
one and the same Consequent, which alone is to be regarded, the difference is
not of moment to disturb any.

And what is the Consequent then of these Doctrines, which is fit to be
enquired? The Consequent of the first doctrine, that Election is ex praevisis
operibus, of works foreseen, must be this, that the good life or good works of
men therefore do arise from their own free wills, and that the grace of God is
given according to their merits. This was the main opinion doubtless which the
Church condemned in Pelagius. From whence indeed those two other followed,
that, Man may therefore choose whether he will ever commit any sin; and, That
he must be free from original corruption. Tria sunt quae maxim adversus eos
catholica defendit ecclesia, Vnum est, Gratiam Dei non secundum merita dari,
quoniam Dei dona sunt. Alterum est, in quantacunque justitia sine
qualibuscunque peccatis neminem vivere. Tertium est, nasci homines peccato
primi homnis obnoxios. There are three things especially which the Catholic
Church defends against the Pelagians: One is, that the Grace of God is not
given according to man's merit: Another is, that there is no man, how great
soever his righteousness be, that lives without some sins. The third is, that
men are born liable to the guilt of Adams first transgression. De bon. persev.
c. 2. The consequent of the second opinion, that Election is ex praevisa fide
of foreseen faith, is, That although our good works are indeed the fruit only
o^ Gods Spirit, and to be ascribed to Gods grace; yet must our frith, upon
which the Spirit or this grace is given, or by which it is impetrated, as that
Father speaks, be both in our own power and from our own will; as being that,
and that alone in man, that makes the difference between one and another; or
the reason why God should choose such a one to give him his grace, and pass by
the other. And this doctrine, with the Consequent of it, must be acknowledged
to be St. Augustine's in his first writings, which he chose no doubt as the
most moderate then in the Church, which (as we may judge by Prosper, and
Hilary's Epistles to him) was never used to define election otherwise than
secundum praescientiam, according to foreknowledg, till his days. And this was
the reason that those of Marsilia ( ad quorum authoritatem non sumus pares,
says one of those Epistles, quia multum nos et vitae meritis antecellunt and
sacerdotis honor) were so offended at that Father for his change. And from
hence does Arminius profess some-where, Non stamus Augustino, We stand not
with Augustine: for which this also, as I remember, is his reason. Quia sibi
ipse non stetit, because he stood not to himself. The Consequent of the other
two doctrines which belong to Absolute election, and come in this repect, I
have said, bat to the same, is, on the contrary hand, That neither our good
works, nor our faith it self, nor indeed any good that is in man, is of our
selves but of the operation of God, or of his Spirit, who does at first excite
our wills to Faith and a holy life, and by his continual assistance carry us on
in perseverance unto the end, that we may be saved; so that, the whole
business: of our salvation first and last must be ascribed to Him alone. And if
any ask the reason then why he gives not the same grace to others as to his
Elect, he shall find these words still in St. Augustine's mouth. And who art
thou that reply against God? May he not do what he will with his own? Has
not the Potter power over his clay. O the depth of the knowledge and wisdom of
God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! It
were but jniury to quote a sentence or two out of the Father for this, which is
the designed contents of several of his last books. See de Praedestinatione
and gratia. De correptione and gratia. De praedestinatione sanctoram. De bono
perseverantiae, to name no more.

The great difficulty now in this Consequent of Election which appears, does
undoubtedly lie here: If neither the faith nor good works of man do spring from
his own free will, but from the grace of God and Election, then may the
unbeliever and wicked excuse themselves, and say, It is not long of themselves
that they believe not, nor obey, but the cause is in God who gives them not
faith and obedience, and they cannot help their own reprobation. They will not
say that, Reprobation is any other than a negative decree, which infuses no
malice in them, but it denies them that grace which Election gives others: and,
if it be not in their power to believe and repent without that grace, How can
they be condemned for their not believing and repenting? This difficulty I am
assured did stick so fast upon this Father in his first writings, that I do
hardly think him quite out of the gravel in any of his last. Let us turn to
his book De spiritu and littera. In his one and thirtieth Chapter, he offers
the question, Whether faith be in man's power, and determines that it is, and
must be so? Upon this in his thirty third chapter he comes to another question
which is put to the quick, Whether the will whereby he believes, be therefore
of himself, or of God? If it be not of our selves (says he) but of Gods gift,
then may man say (according to the objection proposed) that he believed not,
because God gave him not the will. If it be of our selves, How can that text of
the Apostle, what have thou, O man, thou did not receive, be true; seeing
this will to believe he has of himself? For the extricating us out of this
distress, he yields to the first, and seems convinced, that faith must be both
in our own power, and of our selves, for that reason. Dicit Apostolus, Idem
Deus qui operatur omnia in omnibus: nusquam autem dictum est, Deus credit omnia
in omnibus. Quod ergo credimus, nostrum est: quod autem bonum operamur, illius
est qui credentibus dat Spiritum sanctum. In his Exposition upon the Romans.
The Apostle says that God works all in all, but never that he believes all in
all. That We believe therefore, it is of our selves: but that we do good works
it is of him who gives his holy Spirit to them that believe. To the last
therefore he chooses to answer: Liberum arbitrium naturaliter attributum a
Creatore animae rationali, illa media vis est, quae vel intendi ad fidem, vel
inclinari ad infidelitatem potest. Et idco, nec istam voluntatem qua credit
Deo, dici potest homo habere quam non acceperit, quandoquidem vocante Deo
surgit de libero arbitrio quod naturaliter cum vocaretur accepit: Vult autem
omnes homines salvos fore and in agnitionem veritatis venire, non sic tamen ut
eis adimat liberum arbitrium, quo vel been vel male utentes justissime
judicentur. The substance is, that, The will whereby we believe may be said to
be received of God, although it proceed from our selves, because the faculty
from whence it arises, is received from him; that is, Because the nature we
have, is of our Creator, the will which is of nature, is of Him.

This does not satisfy me, for these reasons. 1. That which the Father says as
to the voluntas qua credimus, The will whereby we believe, I take to be the
same which Pelagius said as to the voluntas qua been operamur, The will whereby
we do good works. But if this text, and such as this, be good against
Pelagius, they must be good against Augustine here, that neither is our faith
of our selves, upon the same account. The truth is, The judgment of this Father
while he wrote this book, is this. The Spirit is given to a man upon his
believing. This Spirit infuses grace, charity, or justification. This charity
is that which disposes to good works. Good works therefore (he counts) must be
of grace and Gods spirit, and to follow justification which is with him this
infused grace: But as for believing which is the first thing upon which the
Spirit it self is given to infuse this grace, from whence our good works do
spring; this must arise, he accounts, from man's free will, or else the fault
will not be in himself (which is the argument convinces him), but it must lie
on the will of God only, that he has not the spirit, and so no grace, and so
does not well, and is not saved. Whether this argument be irrefragable or no,
we shall see by what will follow. 2. There are two questions raised together by
the Apostle, Who makes thee to differ from another? and, What have thou, O
man, that thou did not receive? The chief difficulty lies in answering the
former question; for, by that is the second to be regulated. Now if that we
have from God is only this middle faculty, which we may use to believe, or
not, Who is it makes the difference in one man's using it to faith, and
another's to infidelity! That which is the less, the Posse velle, The power to
will shall be of God (that is, of Nature, and so of God): but the Ipsum velle,
The will or willing it self, which is the greater, and which indeed saves us,
shall be of our selves. 3. The Scripture is express concerning faith. -- and
that not of our selves, it is the gift of God. If the word (...), there,
referrs to the whole sentence, we have other texts. No man comes to me, that
is, believes in me unless the Father draw him. To you it is given not only to
believe, but to sufther for his name. This is the work of God that you believe.
Who has first given to him? Of him and to him are all things. I obtained mercy
That I should be faithful, not Because I was faithful. But ye believe not,
because ye are not of my sheep. Again, As many as were ordained to salvation,
believed. It seems here that the cause why some believe and some believe not,
is their being, or not being of the number of those who are ordained to be of
his flock. The like text in reference to works, as these to faith, is that to
the Ephesians, He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world that
we should be holy. It is not therefore man's faith or holiness is the cause of
Gods Election, but it is Gods election is the cause of man's holiness and faith.
A prime and eternal cause (say our Divines) cannot depend upon the self same
temporal effects which are thereby caused. If therefore the Ordination of God
be the cause from whence man's faith and holiness are derived; his
foreseen-faith, or foreseen-works are not to be imagined antecedent causes,
merits, conditions, or motives unto the Divine Predestination. 4. We have St.
Augustine acknowledging himself to have bin herein in an error: So that these
arguments must be no longer against Augustine, but against those who have taken
up that opinion he forsook. In nullo gloriandum est, dixit Cyprianus, quoniam,
nostrum nihil sit. Quod ut ostenderet adhibuit Apostolum, Quid autem habes,
quod non accepisti? Quo praecipue testimonio convict us sum cum errarem, putans
fidem qua in Deum exedimus, non esse donum Dei, sed a nobis esse in nobis: and
per illam nos impetrare Dei dona, quibus temperanter, and just, and pie
vivamus in hoc seculo. Quem errorem nonnulla opuscula mea satis indicant. It
was the saying of blessed Cyprian, that we may glory in nothing, because that
which is ours is nothing. This he proved by the words of the Apostle. By which
testimony I was first convinced when I erred, thinking that faith was of our
selves, and then good works obtained by it. Which error several of my former
pieces do sufficiently show. De praedestinatione sanctor. c. 3. I wish he had
mentioned the book here which I am citing, as he does one or two other, that I
might have known his solution to the difficulty which himself has urged, but
left unanswered upon our hands.


To return then to the Father's question, Whether the Voluntas qua credimus,
The will whereby we believe, be of our selves, or God's gift? I must not choose
the first with him in that book, but the last according to other of his works.
Nevertheless, we must carefully distinguish the two things whereof he has made
two questions, Vtrum fides in nostra constituta sit potestate, Whether faith be
in our power, in one chapter: and, Vtrum voluntas qua credimus donum sit Dei,
an ex liberate arbitrii, Whether the will whereby we do believe, be the gift
of God, or the effect of our own liberty, in another. I do apprehend here, that
both these two things are to be held, That faith is in our power, and That the
will whereby we believe is not of our selves, but of Gods grace or gift. The
holding both these is that which cuts the thread of all difficulties in this
matter. For the one, That faith is in man's power, we are beholding verily to
that Father. A thing is in a man's power, which he may do if he will. Hane
dicimus potestatem, ubi voluntati adiacet facultas faciendi. When he accounts
Faith then to be in man's power, he understands this, That he may believe if he
will. And this is a truth of great necessity, yet has difficulty: But when he
proceeds hereupon so far, as to make the will therefore whereby we believe to
be of our selves, it was a step which himself saw need, to draw back. There are
many things that are possible, which yet never shall be, as this Father himself
gives instances of, upon another occasion, in the first chapter of this book.
There are likewise many things which a man can do, that yet he never will, or
is like to do without some special cause moving him to it. Such is the
business of man's Conversion. There is no man (we are to hold with him) but he
may believe, I will add, repent, and be saved, if he will: yet is this to be
known and held also, That there is no man for certain ever will, unless it be
from that one special cause which is Gods grace, or the Spirit's motion that
works his heart thereunto. Now then, Shall a man remain an unbeleever, and
impenitent and perish, the fault shall lie upon himself, and God shall be just,
because we place faith in his own power. He may believe, and repent, and be
saved, if he will. If God would and he will not, he may thank himself. Again,
if he do believe, and repent, and is saved, he shall have no cause to boast or
glory in himself, because that though he might believe and repent if he would,
yet would he never have repented while the world lasted, he would have bin
damned first, if it had not bin for the grace of God that wrought him over,
after he had stood so long out. And this is a sad truth I grant, which needs
not the proof of one or two single texts, when the scope of the whole Scripture
which attributes our destructon to our selves, and our life and help unto God,
does seal to it. Who is it has made thee to differ? Of him we have the will
and the deed. By grace, ye are saved.

You may say, If the will then be of God, why does he not give the will, as
well as the power to all, seeing he would have all men to be saved? I answer in
the first place what Augustine has before, that God will have all men to be
saved and come to the knowledge of the truth; but yet so as the free will of
man be not destroyed. My meaning though, is not as I take the Father's to be
there, as if the will in believeing could not be of God (of unwilling making
man willing) but this freedom were lost; when I doubt not but the case is the
same in believeing as in well-doing, where man's free will, and Gods grace would
stand together always in his account. I say farther, God will have all to be
saved in vouchsafing the means to all, to be saved if they will. This appears
in these three particulars. 1. That he has given his Son to dye for all the
world. 2. The Lord Jesus has by his death procured the New Covenant, or such
terms upon which Salvation may be had, as are possible to all the World. This
is a point to be known, that there is this difference between the Covenant of
Works, under which we are by Nature, and the Covenant of Grace, unto which we
are Redeemed; that, The condition of the one, as to our fallen Estate is
Impossible, and the condition of the other is Possible. If it be not possible,
or in Man's Power to perform if he will, then has Christ done nothing for the
World, but died only for his Elect. For, To procure a Benefit on a Condition
that is impossible, is all one, as to procure no Benefit at all. 3. There is
sufficient light by the Gospel, or by other means from within and without, to
instruct all men, so that if they be not wanting to that Light, they may be
saved: And thus are we to make good this Truth, God will have all to be saved,
if they will of themselves; which yet does not hinder, but he may will the
Salvation of some more than so, that is, not only if they Will of themselves;
but if they Will by his Grace, which he gives, or refuses to whom he pleases.
Cur autem illum adjuvet Deus, illum non adjuvet: Illum tantum, illum non
tantum; istum illo, illum isto modo, penes ipsum est, and aequitatis tam
secreta ratio, and excellentia potestatis. But why He helps this man, and not
that? this man so much, and that man not so much; this man one way, that man
another; we must leave it to Him, whose Power and Wisdom is above our reach. De
peccatorum meritis and remissione, l. 2. c. 5.

I know indeed, The Scripture speaks ordinarily of a Cannot; but there is a
Cannot which denotes an Impossibility, and a Cannot which denotes an
Indisposition only. In the Parables, the Steward says be cannot digg; and the
Man in Bed, he cannot rise. In the same sense the Scripture says, We cannot
come to Christ, unless we be Drawn: and we cannot learn to do well, that are
accustomed to do evil. When a man is so disposed against any thing, as that he
certainly never will do it under that disposition, it is common for us to say
he cannot; as of the Idle person, we say, he cannot work; of the Abstemious, he
cannot drink. The Scripture accommodates it self to our Language: He that is
born of God, cannot sin, says the Apostle: That is, he is under that
disposition through the New Nature, that he can no more find in his heart to
live in any deliberate course of sin, than the Wicked can endure to come up to
an Universal unreserved Resignation of himself unto God. Thus are we to
understand such Texts. St. Augustine, I remember, in the book last quoted,
which he persues, De spiritu and litera, is very wary of denying a Possibility
to a man, even of living without sin, when he is industriously proving that
none in Earth but do sin; and there are some learned Divines stand much on
this, that we have our faculties, and the object sufficily proposed; and
therefore a Natural Power to every thing which is our duty. But the Father is
more cautious, who distinguishes between what we can do by Nature, and what by
Grace: Without me, says Christ, ye can do nothing; and through Him, says the
Apostle, I am able to do all things. By Grace he thinks it safest to hold that
Possible, which by Nature, or to our bare natural strength and faculties, he
doubts-not to count Impossible. There is a medium therefore between both. They
that dare say, If it be the duty of a man that is without Grace, to live
perfectly, it is possible; or, That it is in the power of man, in the state of
Nature, without Grace, to keep all Gods Commandments, and live without sin,
because it is his Duty, are too boisterous on the one hand; for, Augustine does
manifestly account this to be the extremest Pelagianism; and the Father, I
count, in framing this distinction for this purpose, is too tender on the
other. It is true, a man has his Natural Faculties, and the Object may be
revealed, but these faculties are corrupt and unsuitable to the object. There is
Nature then, and corrupt Nature. The Scripture speaks of Man as he is; and that
is impossible to Fallen Nature, which to Original Nature was possible. The Law
it self nevertheless, being founded in Gods Nature, and Man as Created after
his Image; is unchangable, and cannot cease to require of all men, what it did
at first of Adam, when given in Innocence. It is the duty consequently of every
body, whether he has Grace, or has not, To keep this perfect Law of our Maker
entire; but we are not to affirm it to be Possible, or within the power of any
whatsoever. No certainly, seeing the Scripture tells us so often, and so
flatly, that, By the deeds of the Law, no flesh living shall be justified:
Seeing there is no man but is born in original sin, which he cannot help; and
the Apostle calls Concupiscence, sin; and seeing the Grace of God, or the
Spirit, is not given to any for their fulfilling the Law of Works, but the Law
of Grace (which is a point not considered on by Augustine, I take it, and most
others), we must choose rather to say that the whole duty indeed of man,
according to the Law of Works, (take it together) is Impossible; for, so does
the Apostle, I account, intend in that expression, (...). That is as much as to
say, The Law in that, through the weakness of the flesh, none is able to
perform it, cannot possibly justify any. The impossibility lying on us in
regard to the performance, not in it. True, it were possible through such an
extraordinary measure of the Spirit as the Man-Christ had (not to leave
Augustine quite), but that measure being not to be given to any body else, it
is best said, to be Impossible, even by the strength of Nature, and by Grace
(according to its ordinary measure on Earth) Impossible; when yet, as for the
terms of the Law of Faith, I hold it fit still, to say, they are Possible to
all; though there is none do perform them, but by Grace.

Upon this, there is one thing needs must yet be spoken to, for it has stuck
some time upon my self. It is this; when Augustine is telling us that Faith is
in our power, he offers us this Reason, Because a man may believe, or not
believe, he accounts what he will. Hoc quisque in potestate habere dicitur,
quod, si vult, facit; si non vult, non facit. Vide nunc utrum quisquam credat
si noluerit, aut non credat si voluerit. That every man is said to have in his
power, which, if he will, he does; and, if he will not, he does not. Consider
now, whether there be any that believe if they will not, or do not believe if
they will. The contrary to this I judge is certain, that there are some things I
cannot believe though I would, and some things that I cannot but believe,
though I would not never so fain. From whence I should oppose therefore that
Faith then, whatsoever else is, cannot be in man's Power, no more than it is of
his own Will. For satisfaction to which, I acknowledge that there are Doctrines
or Propositions which are true, that many a man cannot believe if he will; nay
perhaps some Articles that the Ancients have imposed as necessary to Salvation.
I say, I acknowledge that a man cannot make himself to believe what he will, nor
otherwise than he does believe; nevertheless, I do apprehend that that-Faith,
which is the condition of the covenant of grace is indeed in man's power. I
apprehend that whereas the conditions of the Covenant of grace are, and must
be, such as are possible, there is no man who believes as much as he can; but
his will shall be accepted for whatsoever is required more, which he cannot,
and which is not given. Or else we had a good have bin left still to the
covenant of works. The condition then of the Covenant of grace, or those ^erms
which remain of necessity of salvation, does not lie in an assent to every
doctrine and article which is true in the Christian religion, but to so much as
serves to bring a man unto Christ, or unto God, Without faith it is impossible
to please God, for he that comes unto him must believe that he is, and that he
is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. And such a faith as this, will
the light of Nature instruct every man to. Though where the Gospel is preached,
the belief of Christ also, in his person, offices, word, and works, will and
must necessarily follow, seeing, To whom much is given, of him shall much be
required. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Unless ye believe I am he, ye
shall dye in your sins. Now, let us bring that faith a man has to the test. If
my believing of God, or Christ, that he will be good to me if I repent, does
produce this repentance, then is my faith saving and effectual: if it do not,
then is the fault in my will. When it lies on my will then, it is in my power:
yet if I will I must hold it to be still of the grace of God. Huc valere debet
tota Dei notitia (says Calvin), ut omne bonum ab illo petere, and illi
acceptum far discamus. To this purpose does the whole knowledge of God which
is taught us in Scripture conduce, that we should learn to seek all our good
at his hands, and live in the return of our thank-fulness to him.

When God made man, he must know the end of his work He must foresee what man
will do, what his posterity will do, all that they will do, the end of all.
When God foresees the actions of man, it must be conceived in the order of
nature that they will be, before he foresees them: and, if they will be, they
must have some cause, and that cause must depend on the first Cause, and so all
be resolved into God's will. It is true, that he foresees also what is possible
as well as future: but a thing is possible only, because he will it not; and
future because he wills it. I say not, that this inferrs a Physical determinate
influx into every act of man, which, proceeding from his free will is sometimes
good and sometimes evil: it is sufficient that there is such a complexion of
circumstances provided, as that a vaga moralis infallibilitas, a moral
indetermined certainty as to the event, shall arise out of the whole together,
according to his eternal counsel. As for sin or evil; it is a defect of Entity
or good, a privative no positive thing, and so is of our selves, and not of
Him, as Augustine against the Manichees, and the Schools after him have it.
What follows now upon this, but that there is not an act of a man's whole life,
or will, so far as either sub genere Entis, or sub genere Morum it is good,
but it must be of God.

And what then is there to mate that Father's doctrine of Election, as it is
laid on this fonndation? Let us give the mind its greatest liberty. One may
think. As there are some things which are not possible, and it is no derogation
to Gods power to say he cannot do them: so may there be some things non
scibilia, not knowable, and it shall not derogate from his Omnisciency to say
he foreknows not them. Such things as are left altogether to the will of a free
agent, may be thought such. There are some things depend on man's will, which
God determines; and here he foreknows men's wills, because he knows as well as
does, whatsoever he will: and there are some things depend on man's will which
we are to conceive that he determines not, but will have contingent; and here
to make God such a one as that he must foresee every thing whether he will or
no, and that a contingent to him shall be impossible though he would have a
contingent, does seem to be an affront to his Majesty, rather than a
perfection. To this purpose we read that when God saw that the thoughts of man's
heart were evil continually, it is said it repented him that he made man. And
we have many expressions of the like import. O that my people had bin thus and
thus, or would be thus and thus! Thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow
to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil. And why may
we not frame our notion of God from such texts of Scripture as these, as well
as from others, and rather than from the definition of the Schools? Especially
if we can make God more lovely to our selves and more adorable, than by their
conceptions. There is nothing that God does will now, but what he did decree
always. And why so? Because, the Schools say, there will else be composition in
God, the composition of an essence and accident, and God is a pure act, and ens
simplicissimum. But what if the Conceptions of those holy men, who would have
God like to man in regard of the Scripture expressions (wherein they were so
zealous, as we have a famous Ecclesiastical story about it), should not be so
injurious on one hand to the Almighty, as such Conceptions as these on the
other, which do quite puzzle our Intellectuals, and leave us without any quick
sense at all of him? It is certain that God is Good, Righteous, Unchangeable:
but we must have a Conception of goodness, righteousness and unchangeableness,
and that which is agreeable to that herein, which we esteem perfections in our
selves, before we attribute them to him. When we make God then to be always
gracious to those that do well, and displeased with evil, and so brings, or
determines to bring a Judgment on one, and bestows a Blessing on another,
according as he sees at the present the Provocation of the one, and Obedience
of the other, without any other determination before, besides that of his Law;
why is not this an Unchangeableness, more worthy the Divine Excellence, than
that, by which he being conceived a pure act, must be made never to will any
thing else, than what he wills at once from all Eternity?

Upon the like Hypothesis as this, one may also propose a suitable notion of
Praedestination. To wit, that the Scripture being skanned to the bottom,
Election perhaps may be found indeed nothing else but Gods determination to
save Men and Women by the Covenant of Grace, and not by the Covenant of our
Greation, or by the Righteousness of God declared in the Gospel, and not by the
Righteousness of Works. This definition should be founded on such Texts, where
the purpose of God, according to Election, is said to be not of Works, but of
him that calls. And He has called us not according to our works, but
according to his purpose and Grace. It should be founded also on the instances
of Isaac and Jacob, in whom the Children of the Promise are Elected, in
opposition to the Children of the flesh; that is, those that look for
Justification by the deeds of the Law. And thus have we the example of the Jews
rejection upon that account. And thus when a Pharisee has lived so
Righteously, that as to the whole Law he is blameless, and so trusts to his
Righteousness, shall say, And why am I rejected for all this, and such a
Publican only for his repenting and trusting on the mercy of God, through
Christ is accepted? it may be answered, the reason is plain, because it is God
that makes the difference, by decreeing and appointing what terms he pleases,
upon which one shall be saved, and not another. Has not the Potter power over
his Clay, of what sort he will, to make Vessels of honor and dishonor? so
that it is not of him that Wills, or Runs; it is not upon such terms as a
man himself sets, or would set, of works; but it is of Grace, of him that
shows mercy. Well! But what would be the Consequent of such Doctrine as this?
Why the Consequent, no doubt, must be the same in effect with the Pelagian,
which is Universal Grace, and Free will to purpose. But I confess my self to
have imbibed the Doctrine of St Augustine from my younger years, that I am
convinced by it, believing that nothing can be set up against it with any
strength, which is short of Vorstius; while Pelagius and Vorstius both, are
names we know that do so male audire, Are of such ill report in the Church, as
the Arminians themselves will not bear. For our apprehensions then of God,
according to the Schools, it must be acknowledged, that he is said in holy
Scripture, to dwell in the Clouds and thick darkness; and into such darkness,
or those Clouds, will I account indeed that he is put, while he is made to be
actus purus, and wrapped in their notions, which if they served no other, they do
yet serve this end; even most reverendly and exceedingly to hide him from us,
and render him thereby, but as he is, very truly incomprehensible to us.

To reflect then back on the difficulty before, as to the Consequent of
Election our way, if any say they are not satisfied with what I have said,
because a power never produced into act, is as good as none. I answer, if I
propose that which they would have, and it be all can be had, there is a
measure in things, which when we have set in any point so, as the Determination
cannot be passed, but we shall run into the extremes on one side, or the other,
which we seek to avoid, we ought to be satisfied. Especially when such a power
alone as this, which in the effect, without Grace, is none, will do our work.
If we allow not a power to man, how shall God be just, how shall God condemn
any (which is that lies at bottom still of of what is said) for not doing that
which was not in his power, or which was not possible? If when a man has
Power, he does also exert that power, and wills of himself; how shall such
Scriptures be true which have been urged? It is God that makes us to differ. Of
him we have the Will and the Deed: Nay, such Texts more especially, as speak
expressly of a Cannot, when the true intent and meaning of them is this, that we
do not, and never will (as I have had it before) till God prevents us by his
effectual Grace. Without Christ we can do nothing. All our sufficiency is of
God: No man can come to him unless he be drawn. Si non est liberum arbitrium
quomodo Deus judicabit mundum? Si est liberum arbitrium, quomodo salvabit
mundum? If man have not Free Will, how shall God judge him? If he have, how
shall he save him? This is the difficulty of the Father. If then there be such
a liberum arbitrium to be found out, which quodam modo is sine libero arbitrio,
such a power, as in the effect is no power; that is, such as without Grace
(which also is efficacious) comes to nothing, then can we decide this business
for him. Suppose a Magistrate for some fault shall cut off a Malefactors hands,
and then command him to write, and promise him great things if he will, and
threaten him if he do not write, can we think this Magistrate serious? Is this
becoming a righteous and good man? If you grant not man to have power, why do
you Preach? why do you Exhort? If you will give him more than this (I must
persist), why do you Pray? why do you ask Grace of God? what is it to ask his
Grace, but that God would incline the will? Alunt quorsum vocare hominem ad
praestandam conditionem quam implere nequeat? It is objected, why are men
called to that condition they cannot perform? Respondeo, posse, and non posse
eam implere. Non possunt nisi datur posse possunt tamen quia quod non possunt,
pravitati eorum debetur. I answer (says Conyer), They cannot, if it were not
given (that which is only of Nature is given), but they can, because it is to
be attributed to their wickedness alone, that they cannot. They can, and they
cannot, Thus others say: They can, and they wont I say. Only in regard this
wont is never changed in any, but by special Grace; the Scripture (I have said)
calls it a cannot. That is, it is a can in it self, but a cannot in the effect;
it being in effect all one when you never will, as if you could not. What? when
the Scripture says, they cannot, do I then say, they can? yes, because my can,
and never will (I affirm) is the Scriptures cannot. But there are some of you
believe not. Therefore I said unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it
be given him. Some of you, notwithstanding all my Preaching and Miracles,
believe not; therefore I said unto you, you cannot. And this interpretation (I
must add) accords with the Ancients. Non potuerunt, hoc est noluerunt. It a
nonnunquam potestate pro voluntate utitur. Chrysostom on Jo. 12.39. So
Augustine. Non poterant quia nolebant, quippe eorum voluntatem praevidit Deus.
Hoc autem quod dicit, non potuerunt credere, significat, noluerunt. Nam malus
and improbus homo non potest credere quam diu talis fuerit, mala scilicet
eligent and volens Thophylact. Mundus odisse vos non potest, and Quomodo
potestis bona loqui cum sitis mali? Quo pacto quidquam horum impossible est,
nisi quod voluntas repugnat? Nazienzen. Impossible dicitur quod, rarissime
contingit, according to one, quod difficilime per ficitur according to another.
See Ruiz on that head, Impossibilitatem been operandi Patres abhorrent, etiam
quamdiu illam sonat express cortex Scripturae. Ad quest 23, and 24. Ex part
prima S. Thomae. Disp. 39. Sec. 8.

And here I cannot but insert the mention of a late Discourse about Natural and
Moral Impotency, or Natural and Ethical power, which terms do express this can
and cannot with so much dexterity, though my self use them not, because my
Papers were on the Anvil before that book came out. And there is something
therefore, I find, I have already, and after, puts me in mind of two things I
want in that singular pretty Tract. One is, a little more tenderness in that
inculcated assertion. The more moral Impotency, the more inexcusable. I believe
the Author was himself of a healthful mind, and not sensible of those imbred
inclinations, and sickliness which some soul are born with, and no strivings
against it will utterly subdue, till death. There are besides certain
impressions and wounds sometimes on the imagination that are incurable. I do
not doubt now, but God, who is most wise and good, who knows our frame (as
the Psalmist speaks), and remembers we are but Dust, will consider the several
Conditions, Complexions, and Temptations that every man is obnoxious to in this
life; and that there will be grains of allowance for some moral Impotency at
the last day. Non sine magna nostra utilitate relinquitur nobis materia
certaminum ut humilietur sanctitas dum pulsatur insirmitas. It is not without
our great benefit, that God does leave in his Children, matter for their
spiritual Combat, that they may be humbled in their Piety, while they are
assaulted with their infirmity. Ambrose. De vocatione gentium. The other thing
I want, is, a distinction in regard to that principle of his, and indeed
foundation, which he insists so much upon throughout the book. That which is
our duty must be possible. It is certain that perfection is still our duty; and
it is enough for us only to make whatsoever is necessary to our Salvation to
be in our power. Distinguish we must therefore between the Law of Works, and
the Covenant of Grace. We are indeed to maintain the condition of the one to be
possible for good reason; but as for what is required in the other, though it
be still our duty, and must remain so eternally (for Good and Evil according to
Nature, can never be changed), we are not to deny in our fallen state, to be
impossible. Which has been before Noted.

To return, There is a point near a kinn to the matter in hand, of great
difficulty, what part the will of man does bear in our good acts. That the
beginning of all that is good, comes from God, who by his preventing Graee,
works in us at first (as the Schools speak) without us; and, That when the will
is excited, he does work also with us, by his operating, or cooperating Grace,
as the principal cause still, and consequently, That the whole good which is
done, upon that account, is to be attributed to him, we shall find yielded by
the School men, as well as tendered by St. Augustine, Prosper, Fulgentius, and
the like Fathers. Totum bonum est Deo tribuendum, quia totum Dens operatur. See
Ruiz. De Deo operante; and libero arbitrio, Sec. 1. On the other hand, That
being acted, we act, and so concur with Gods Grace; That it is we Believe,
Repent, and not God: We that work out our Salvation, though he gives the will
and the deed: We who walk in his Statutes, though he puts his fear in our
hearts to do it: and so We accordingly, who are bid to make our selves new
hearts, which is his work out of question; this is also undeniable in
Scripture. Deus est qui operatur -- cum procul dubio, si homo ratione utatur,
non possit credere, sperare, diligere, nisi velit: nec pervenire ad palmam,
nisi voluntate cucurrerit. It is God works in us, when beyond doubt, there is
no man uses his Reason, but it is himself also that wills. Aug. Enchir. c. 32.
Vt velimus, and suum esse voluit and nostrum, suum vocando, nostrum sequendo,
in another book. It is God then according to the determination of the schools,
that is the principal cause, and the will of man the less principal, partial,
secundary cause, of our good actions. His part indeed is such to which all the
glory is due, and yet ours such as the good works are reckoned ours, and we
shall be rewarded for them at the last day. When Calvin therefore seems here to
oppose, I find him thus treated. Supponebat haereticus hominis arbitrium itae
divina praedestinatione regi, ut quamvis operetur spontanee, nihil tamen agat
ciun potestate non agendi, sed agatur Dei operatione, That heritick Calvin
(says the now named learned Jesuit out of Stapleton) supposed the free will of
man to be so governed by praedestination, that though it does act
spontaneousty, yet it acts not with a power of not acting, but it is acted by
the operation of God. Well! what is the difference between them? Does Calvin
indeed go to evacuate that free will man has by nature? no such matter. Does
he make the will to act so by Gods operation, as to have no operation of its
own? I think not so. But I will tell you where the water sticks. It sticks
between the Schools and Calvin, where it does between the Arminians and
Calvinists, and that is upon the point altogether of resistibility or
irresistibility. The work of grace is understood by Calvin and the Calvinists
to be such, as leaves not any power in the will to resist, or of not acting.
They do stand so much on the bare term of Gods drawing us, as it leads them to
speak with excess. The truth therefore is to be thus decided. We are to hold
with the Schools and Arminians, that the will has still power to resist, or
not to act, for man's nature is destroyed else: but we are to hold with the
Calvinist, that though it has power, it never will, or does resist, but will
most certainly act, when it is acted by Gods electing grace. As in the case
before of the Reprobate (I have said), a man has Power to believe, and repent,
so that it is his fault, and he is justly condemned, if he do not, when yet he
never will, for want of this grace: So in the case of the Elect, a man has
power to resist, and not to act, but he will believe and repent infallibly, and
never resist, when he is wrought upon by it. The reason is, because God by his
praedestination of such a person to life, does prepare a Vocation so Fit, and
suited to his temper, condition, and the circumstances he is in, as it shall
inevitably carry the will (which by the way does reconcile the Certainty of the
one, with the Liberty of the other, according to St. Augustine's intention),
when the same means shall be used to a person not elect, but being not suited
to his state, they have no such event: Even as the same physic given to two
bodies diversely disposed, has an operation upon one, and does the other no
good. In short, the grace of God is resistible with the Arminians, in regard of
power: it is irresistible with the Calvinists, in regard of the effect. The
will does ever retain its Physical power to act, or not act; when yet it is
made Ethically impotent (to use once the Author before) to resist. Quisquis
andet dicere, habeo ex me ipso fidem, non ergo accepi, profecto contradicit
apertissimae veritati: non quia credere vel non credere non est in arbitrio
voluntatis, sed in electis praeparatur voluntas a domino. If any dare say I
have faith of my self, and therefore did not receive it, he does for certain
contradict the truth. Not because that to believe or not believe is not in the
power of the will, but in the Elect the will is prepared of God. Aug. De
Praedes. Sanc. c. 5. We may add St. Ambross (or Prosper rather). Qui ad
obediendum sibi ipsum velle sic donat, ut etiam a perseveraturis illam
mutabilitatem, quae potest nolle, non auferat. In one of his two books, De
vocatione gentium.

The sum is, where a man believes, repents, and is converted, the difference
is made between him and the reprobate. This is acttuall, or created
praedestination. Man concurrs in this work: nevertheless, in regard that it is
not through his own strength, or through that grace which is universal, or
common to the Reprobate with the Elect, but through that grace which is
peculiar and prepared by increated predestination for him, it is not of
himself, but of God, that he is made to differ. And if it be granted, that it
is in his power to hinder the difference, while grace is making of it, seeing
it is in his power still not to act: but yet be asserted also, that the decree
working infallibly, carrys the will, that it never is, or shall be hindered
when that works: I do not see but this controversy about Gods operation, and
man's free will, may be agreed. How is it said (says Augustine), it is not of
him that wills or runs, but of God that shows mercy? If it were to be
understood only because it is of both, then might we say it is not of God
likewise that shows mercy, but of him that wills and runs. But when no
Christian dare say so, it remains (says he) to be so understood, Vt totum Deo
detar, qui homini voluntatem bonam and praeparat adjuvandam, and adjuvat
praeparatam; That the whole be given to God, who both fits the will for his
help, and then helps it, being made fit. Enchiridion ad Laurentium, c. 32.

As for the way of the Papists, that is, which the Trent Council does tread, it
seems to me verily an invented, forced way. They would avoid the censure of
Augustine, and former Councels which condemned Pelagius, yet in effect do
entend but the same thing. They say, therefore, that God does vouchsafe his
grace to all; with this grace some co operate, and some do not. Those that will
cooperate with it God fore-sees, and praedestinates them: those that
cooperate not, he rejects and condemns. By this means they will avoid making
their own works to be the cause of their Election, seeing they can attribute
all to this sufficient assistance; when yet the consequent of their opinion
comes to one, that it must lie in the will of man which co operates, or
co-operates not with this assistance, to make the difference, why one is chosen
and saved, and not the other. That which is said by the Pelagian, placing Grace
only in Doctrine, or the Gospel, is more single I take it than this. It is
true, there are some others besides the Papists, are willing to hold Election
to be of Works, or of Faith foreseen, who will yet deny the Consequent, that
our Faith, and and good Works therefore must arise from our own free wills, and
be meritorious; because they will suppose them so foreseen, (which the Papist I
suppose say too) as to be wrought in us, or performed by Gods grace. But let me
ask then, what they mean by this Grace? If they mean such as in effectual, and
determins the will, and so is peculiar to the Elect, Lo here the Doctrine of
absolute Election: If, they mean such only as leaves the will in aequilibrio,
to be determined still of it self, then the matter returns to the former issue.
I will therefore close up this point of Election with the observation of that
very judicious person that wrote the Council of Trent. who having set down the
debate of the Doctors about it, and divided them into two opinions, which comes
in effect (without reciting the whole) to the tenants of absolute and
conditional Election, he gives us his judgment. The first Opinion (says he)
which is Augustines, as it is mystical and hidden, keeping the mind humble, and
relying on God without any confidence in it self; knowing the deformity of Sin,
and excellency of Divine Grace: So was the second plausible, and popular,
cherishing Humane Presumption, and making a great show; and it pleased more the
Preaching Friars, than the Understanding Divines. The Defenders of this, using
Humane reasons, prevailed against the others: But coming to the Testimonies of
Scripture, they were manifestly evercom. I descend not to the more minute
Disputations, De praedeterminatione physica, between the Dominicans, and
Franciscans; or De scentia media, among the Jesuits, which are of lower date (I
count) in the World, and ought not to make us trouble. I leave also the
Jansenist and Molinist to that Bone; Haec praedestinatio Sanctorum nihil aliud
est quam praescientia scilicet, and praeparatio beneficiorum Dei, quibus
certissime liberantur quicunque liberantur. This Predestination of the Saints,
is nothing else but the Foreknowledge, and Preparation of those Benefits of
God, whereby they are most certainly saved, that are saved. Aug. De bono, pers.
c. 14.

There are two Opinions yet I shall mention, which are singular; I do not think
them true, yet am I pleased with any intent for composing the Scripture. The
one is that, ascribed to Catarinus at Trent, to Occam, and others; That there
are indeed some few Persons, who are Elected Absolutely; of these God takes a
special care that they never fail; as we read of Peter: But that the rest of
Mankind are left to universal Grace, and the liberty of their wills, under a
Conditional Election, and Reprobation. The other is an Opinion of a Learned
Doctor of another Profession, very Studious of the Holy Writings; who is often
telling me when I see him, That, Election is only to a Church State, and
peculiar Privileges: But that we read of a Common Salvation.

Of Redemption.
I Do not remember any thing in St. Augustine that is peculiar about this
Doctrine: Only I take notice from several passages, that he goes still the
Narrow Way: That the Elect only are redeemed: That none but those who are
brought into the Church, by receiving all her Articles, and being Baptized, can
be of that Number. That no Heathen, no Heretic, no Separatist from the Church,
no Donatist, no Infant, though of Believing Parents, that dies unbaptized, can
be saved. I must confess here I am not of the mind with this Father. And, as I
apprehend, that Justine Martyr, and some such Ancients, who were Philosophers
as well as Christians, have spoken more nobly than thus: So do I think that he
goes not here the way of the Scriptures. There is the universal Grace of God;
and special Grace of God, I count, held forth therein: and both consistent with
one another. When Christ says, He came to save the World, that The Father so
loved the World, as to give his Son, That he tasted Death for every Man, and
the like; let not any think, but the Grace of Redemption does concern all the
World: And when we yet maintain special Grace with this, let not any confine
the same to this or that Sort or Sect of Religion, but let him judge rather,
that the Elect are scattered throughout the Earth; and it is God alone knows
who are his. There is the universal Grace of Origin, that all at last shall be
saved, of Pelagius, of Arminius. There is also gratia universalis aqualis and
praecedanea, of John Camero; we are not bound to maintain either of these: but
there is Gratia universalis simpliciter, which if we maintain not, we must
leave our Preaching, and the Gospel. The Followers of Truth and Mediocrity will
be afraid to hold any other universal Grace, but such as I suppose St. Ambrose
holds in his Books, De vocatione Gentium; that will agree well with the special
Grace also and Election of St. Augustine; that is, such only, I count, as may
justly lay the blame of man's Sin and his Destruction, altogether on himself,
when it gives the whole Glory of his Salvation unto God. They that observe
lying vanities, for sake their own mercy.

For my proceeding on this point, it is not suitable to my purpose to be
critical upon any words in the original Languages that Redemption is expressed
by: or, to pretend to curiosity in the Laws and Customs of the Jews or other
nations about Redemption at large, which might be alluded to: I will rather
leave this Note in my way, that, as the curious oftentimes are least apt for
plain things, so must I say, that whatsoever notion is offered upon this or any
other head of Divinity by any, who perhaps are of more exquisite learning and
search in some things than others are, if when they are sufficiently declared,
they are not apprehensible by common and ordinary people as well as themselves,
I do account them little worth in the Christina Religion. They were plain men
who at first Preached the Gospel, and they were plain men for whose sake it was
Preached, and is Written. When I see evidently that there must go more skill
to the finding such or such things out, more learning, subtle distinction, and
wit, that, I believe, any of the Apostles if they were living ever had, I
cannot but think presently, There is none of Christ's disciples would have
delivered this, and it matters not my salvation whether it be so or not.

Neither do I entend a Common place upon this, or other of the Heads which I
treat on, but an Exercitation only, in order to my particular design: you must
not expect any more. There is one thing then I account here to be mainly of
necessity or moment; and that is, the understanding our Redemption by Jesus
Christ but so, as that we may be solidly able to fix upon what that is which
indeed accrewes to man from it, or which we may avouch for the immediate and
uncontrolable fruit, or benefit, to us by it. I will not therefore make many
words. The Redemption of man by Christ, I humbly conceive, does lie chiefly in
this, The delivery of him from the Law as it was a Covenant of works, that is
requiring of him such conditions as he is not now in his fallen estate ever able
to perform; and so must inevitably perish, if he were not delivered from it.
When the fullness of time was come (says the Apostle) God sent his Son, made
under the Law. etc. The Law as given to the Jews was a representative of the
Law of Nature or Covenant of Works: and in Christ's redeeming the Jews from it
as given by Moses, he does redeem the World from that covenant which it
represented, and there, I say, does lie the chief point of our Redemption. That
very thing then, or that great immediate effect or benefit which accrewes to
man from Christ's dying for him, is his having other terms procured upon which
he may be justified and saved, than those which by the Covenant of nature were
due from him to obtain that end. For, God so loved the World that he gave his
only begotten son that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have
everlasting life. What is the immediate end here of God's giving his Son, That
must be the Immediate fruit of Christ's coming, dying, and redeeming the World.
And what is that, but that Whosoever believes in him, may not perish? That is,
The delivery of him from the law of Works, and bringing him under the Covenant
or law of Faith, that, upon the performance only hereof (who could not have it
else without perfect doing) he may obtain everlasting life. And whether this
favor of Christ's procuring new terms upon which man may be saved does belong
to the Elect only, or to all the world, there will need no more but to ask, To
whom the Gospel is to be preached, to decide that question.

It is true, that the freedom of the Jews from the Mosaical law; the breaking
down the partition wall thereby for the Gentiles to be incorporated into one
Church visible; and a power in Christ himself to dispense all assistances
necessary to both for their obedience to the Gospel; as also a discharge of
mankind from damnation for Adams sin only, are fruits of Christ's death, which
may be said too, immediate and universal: but the great benefit which indeed
comprehends these and the like in it, and appears so notorious in the whole
New Testament, is, The reconciliation of the world unto God by his death or
Redemption. And what else such a reconciliation can eminently consistin, but
that I have named, I leave to the understanding to give judgment.

Neither are we to forget that our Redemption in Scripture is said to be from
Sin, and the Devil, as well as from the Law; for the one is the Foundation of
the other. When man fell from God, the Devil obtained a right and dominion over
him. This was not a right as Lord, and Proprietour, but as Jailer and
Executioner; that is, by virtue of that sentence which the Law as the Covenant
of works passed on him. When Christ then by his Satisfaction to the Justice of
God, did put an end to that Covenant; this Right which the Devil held thereby,
must cease with it. In the Cessation of this Right; As the Slave who is
redeemed from his slavery, is redeemed also from the work which he lives in as
a Slave: So must all Mankind be redeemed from sin; only this Redemption must be
distinguished, in regard of Title, and in regard of Possession. It follows not
because the World lies in Wickedness, and the Prince of the Air still rules in
the Children of Disobedience; that Christ has not done His part in their
Redemption: No, while the Law which held them under an impossible Duty (that
is, the Law of Sin and Condemnation) is taken off, and the New Law is such, as
every one is capable to perform the Terms of it, if he will: It is not for want
of Right to come out of this slavery; it is not for want of Power; but it is
because they are not willing to come out of it, because they love their sins;
that the Devil keeps them still in Possession. Even as the Hebrew Servant, when
the Jubilee came; if he said, he loved his Master, and would not go out free, he
was to have his Ears boared to the Door-posts of the House, and remain his
Slave for ever. There is a double work, therefore, Christ has to do as our
Lord-Redeemer. The one is to procure Deliverance if we are willing; that is,
our Redemption in regard of Title: And the other is, To make us Willing, which
is, to put us also in Possession. The one of these is that which is properly
the work of our Redemption, and Universal: The other is peculiar to the Elect,
and has another name in Scripture; that is, our Vocation, Effectual Calling,
or Conversion. Unless when this Possession comes to be perfectly complete, that
is, at Death; and then it is again called the Day of Redemption. Whom he did
predestinate (says the Apostle) them he also called; and whom he called, them
he also justified: And whom he justified, them he also glorified. If Redemption
were not of a larger extent than Election, Vocation, Justification, and Glory,
then would the Apostle have said; Whom he did predestinate, he redeemed: And
whom he redeemed, he called. But when we find no such Link in this Chain, it is
a convincing Argument to my understanding, for the Universality of Redemption.

It is said of Christ, that he is the Savior of the world; especially of his
own body. In that Sentence we have both universal and special Grace together;
and the one is Applicatory, not Destructive to the other. The Redemption of
Christ is universal: The Grace whereby a Man savingly believes, and repents,
and so becomes one of his Body, is special, and belongs to Election. The Death
of Christ may be considered, as it redounds to the purchasing Remission of Sin
and Salvation upon condition; or, as it redounds to the purchasing the
Condition for Remission and Salvation. In the first sense, Christ's Redemption
and Grace of the Gospel is universal; Doctor Twisse, and the like Divines, will
say twenty times over: In the second sense, they will have it for his Elect
only. For my own part, I must go from them here, and account, That the work of
Christ's Redemption and whole Mediation upon Earth, does terminate in the former
consideration. The business of a Mediator between parties, does lie in this,
To bring them to some New terms, wherein they may be agreed when they were at
odds before. The business of Christ's Mediation, Redemption, Reconciliation,
Propitiation, Satisfaction; or whatsoever word out of Scripture, or Orthodox
Writers is used, does lie, I account, in this altogether, That he has taken
that course with the Father, that he shall not deal with the world according to
the Covenant of our Creation; which requires such terms, as no Man now thereby
can be justified or saved; but according to the Covenant of Grace, which is
such, that whosoever he be, that trusting in his Mercy and Goodness through
Christ, does repent, and walk sincerely before him; though imperfectly, shall
be Pardoned, Accepted, and Saved, and yet he be Righteous in so doing. This I
say, is the res ipsa, (as I take it) the thing it self, intended in all these
sorts of words, with the connotations only of the modus also, the mode or
qualification thereof, according to such several Expressions.

Here then appears a Truth (as it seems at least) very agreeable to my Reason;
and will be found as Consonant perhaps to the Judicious, with the Scripture;
that the Merit, or Purchase of Christ's Death, or the Price he laid down for
our Redemption, was not offered to the Father, to procure of Him, that he
should give Faith and Repentance to any; but that he should give Remission to
those that Repent, and Salvation to those that believe on him. I humbly offer
you these Reasons: 1. The holding otherwise than thus, does make Christ's
Redemption a double thing; one thing for one man, and another thing for
another: If shall be procuring Salvation for Judas, if he repent; and it shall
be the procuring Repentance for Peter, that he may be saved. 2. It goes quite
against the hair to reason, that Christ should procure the Benefit upon
Condition, and only on Condition, and not otherwise; and yet that he should
procure also the Performance. To what purpose do we make such a Labor about as
this? Why do you not say, He purchased the Benefit rather free altogether
without condition? 3. If our Believing, and Repenting, be also purchased, then
is there nothing in Man's Salvation but of Purchase; and we shall be beholding
to Christ for all, and to God for nothing. But if we are beholding to Christ
for his Purchase, that Salvation may be had if we repent, and to God for this
Repenting; then do we see, how highly Both are to be magnified for the
Contrivance. 4. The Death and Redemption of Christ is for All, for every man;
for our sins, for the world's. Distinctions to answer this, are but Evasions.
But if Faith and Repentance be the purchase of Christ's Death or Redemption,
then cannot his Death and Redemption be universal, according to so many
Scriptures. Let me double this, and add also, that the Purchase, or Redemption
of Christ being universal certainly, as it is in Scripture, if by his Death he
had procured the Condition, as well as the Covenant, and abatement of Terms,
then must all Men Actually have been saved. I have one Reason yet more to
offer; which is. That the want of knowing this, is I take it, the great
Stumbling Block, or Temptation to our Divines, in the receiving universal
Grace, to cast special Grace quite off; when they should learn the true
Mediocrity of reconciling both these together, according to the Scriptures.


When the Arminian then argues here, Christ has died for All and Every man and
that is not to be put off with the genera singulorum, or, the Gentiles as well
as the Jews: therefore the grace of God is universal for all and every one to
repent and believe that they may be saved. I answer, this is manifestly
inconsequent, because it is true that what Christ has done by way of
Redemption is universal, and belongs to all the World, and every man alike,
which is terminated in procuring these terms to be offered to the World for
salvation. But as for man's belief, repentance, sincere obedience, which are the
terms, they come directly and immediately otherwise, not from the grace of
Redemption, nor from the fountain of man's free will with them, but from the
grace of Election. God gives us his Son, and he gives us his Spirit. His
sending his Son is one thing, and his sending his Spirit another. The work of
drawing persons to Christ, I do observe, is attributed to the Father and the
Spirit, because this is Peculiar: when the work which is attributed to Christ
in distinction to them, is General to all mankind. He sent his Son to purchase
salvation, if we Believe: he sends his Spirit to work that faith and repentance
in us that we may be saved. In the one does lie the mystery of our Redemption,
in the other, I say, the mystery of Election. Let it be true on one hand that
Christ by his Redemption has indeed procured no more for Paul and Peter, than
for Judas and the reprobate, and so the honor of his Redemption be kept up
with the Arminian to the height they contend for it: Yet may it be true, I hope
likewise, on the other hand, that the grace of God toward Peter and Paul was
more in giving them saving faith and repentance, than to Judas or the
reprobate, and so the doctrine of Special Grace and Election need not neither
be discarded.

For caution, There is the Direct, and Collateral issue (if I may so speak) of
Christ's merit, purchase or death. It is certain that the Lord Jesus may be said
by his death and merit to have procured his own exaltation, and as he is become
thereby the Dispensatour of those treasures that are in his Fathers Eection, so
repentance or faith in a collateral way may be accounted to issue from thence.
Whom God has exalted to be a Prince to give repentance, as well as be a
Savior, to procure remission to Israel. But repentance, faith perseverance, or
the condition which God requires of us, and not of Christ, in the business of
our salvation, does not flow to us directly from, or is no direct and immediate
fruit of, his Death or Redemption. I know moreover the Scripture tells us that
we are blessed with all spiritual blessings in him: But that may be true I
hope, though some of those blessings only are the purchase of his death, and
others the effect of his Intercession: or some the fruit of his Purchasing,
others the effect of his Administering of the new Covenant.

This is certain, the Spirit is the Author of our faith, repentance, all
grace: but the Spirit is obtained by virtue of Christ's intercession. I will
pray the Father, and he will send the Comforter. I offer you one argument. The
Spirit proceeds not from the Son alone but from the Father and Son. The mission
or giving of the Spirit therefore cannot be the effect of our Redemption which
is peculiar to the Son, and belongs to all the World: but is the fruit or off
spring of our Election. It is true, we come in the name of Christ to ask his
Spirit, and grace, that is, we ask it through Christ's merits: but there is the
merits of his Person, as well as the merits of his Death; and it is one thing
to be the Propitiation for our sins, and another to be also our Advocate with
the Father. This is that I will pitch upon, that we are not so to attribute all
things to his Oblation, as to make any other part, or parts of his
Mediator-ship, more then needs.

There is a distinction the Scripture makes of Christ in the Flesh and in the
Spirit. He was of the seed of David according to the the flesh, and declared to
be the son of God according to the Spirit, in his Resurrection from the dead,
and in his living ever to make intercession for us. What he did for man in the
flesh I account he did for all mankind, for he took not on him the flesh of
David only and the elect, but of all mankind, or of human nature: but what he
does in the Spirit, that may be peculiar (in some points at least) only to his
elect. Hence it is, that when he tells us he Laid down his life for the World,
yet I pray says he not for the World, but for those thou have given me out of
the World. The prayer of Christ is a part of his intercession, which is
Distinct from his oblation, and it is no argument from his not Praying for the
World, that therefore he Died not for it. If ye being evil know how to give
good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give
his holy Spirit to them that ask him. God has given his Son to those that
never ask him, even to the whole World: but he gives the Spirit of the Son only
to his Children, even to such as can cry Abba Father, when they have received
it. I will pray the Father and he shall give you another Comforter, even the
Spirit of truth, whom the World cannot receive. When he prays not for the
world, that he prays for is the Spirit, and the Spirit which works grace in
the heart whereby we are sanctified, and perseverance to bring us to glory, is
peculiar to those whom God does give to Christ, and of whom Christ can say, For
they are thine, and all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified
in them.

You may say, on the one hand, If it be no more which Christ has purchased for
Peter then for all, then Peter might perish for all Christ's Purhcase. I answer,
you may say so, and without ignominy to his Redemption, provided you know also
that the Election of God and Christ's Prayer will provided for Peter that
further which it provides not for all, and Jesus Christ when he has made his
purchase, is the Executor of Gods Election. On the other hand it may be said,
But to what purpose is this Redemption universal when none but those that
perform the condition are saved? I answer, it is therefore universal, that none
of those who perform the condition may miss of Salvation. As also, that
though it be all one to him that does not perform the same, in regard of the
event, as if he was not all Redeemed: Yet it is not all one as to God, and the
Verity of Scripture, and his Judgment according to it. The Scripture says
often, Christ Dyed for All; and that God will Judge the World according to this
Gospel. He that belives, shall be saved, he that believes not, shall be
damned; the Foundation whereof is Christ's Death, which must reach so far, as to
make this good. And who knows not, that the very business of our whole
Religion, does depend upon the Establishment of the Verity of the Holy
Scriptures?

I must confess, I should most willingly hearken to any, that could make
Christ's Death more Advantageous; and when his purchase has procured Faith and
Repentance to no body, but Remission and Salvation to All, upon their Faith and
Repentance, if they are willing to say, that there is sufficient Grace also
purchased for the World, that all, and every one should Repent and Believe, and
apply that Redemption; I am indifferent to the use of their Thoughts: But if
when I rather grant a universal Power, arising from Christ's purchase, not as a
direct fruit of his Death, but as a consequential Event (N.B.) from the
Abatement only of the terms; that God is not wanting to any in necessariis, and
consequently, that all men have sufficient Light, Spirit, Grace, or Power, to
be saved, if they will: Yet so long as we cannot deny him, but he may abound in
gratuitis, and to give the Will and Deed it self, is more than to give Power,
(as to have given to Adam the Ipsum velle, had been more, and a gratuitum
wherein he might have abounded, if he had pleased, than in giving him only
Posse velle) I cannot see by any means, but when Christ's Death is made
universal, the Fathers Election must be left still, Per modum decreti
efficaciter operantis, By way of a decree effectually operating, free and
absoute, in regard to the condition of it is Application. If all men have alike
the Posse velle, The Power to will, and no more, then must the reason, Why one
man Repents, and is Saved, and not another, be resolved into his own self only,
and so may and must he say, it is I, I my self have made the difference, when
the Scripture does say, Who is it, O man, that has made thee to differ? But if
we allow (as Redemption to be universal so) a Posse velle from general: (I say,
not a Posse velle as to the Covenant of our Creation, but as to the Terms of
the Gospel:) And to the Elect, the Ipsum velle from special Grace, we shall
neither have any thing to charge God, nor give occasion to Man's boasting.
Neither shall the condition be held impossible; nor when we have performed it,
shall we rob God of his Glory.

It is pleaded, That unless Faith and Repentance does lie in every Man's own
Breast, Christ's purchase of Pardon upon that Condition, is but a Mock. I
answer, To deny that to Believe, and to Repent, does lie in our Power, were
indeed, to evacuate Christ's Death to All, besides the Elect: But to say, that
Faith and Repentance therefore does flow from our own Wills, is another matter.
I must offer moreover; If Christ had purchased Faith and Repentance for some
which All have not, the Reprobate might here have something to say, That the
Reason why he Repented not, as the Elect did, was, because Christ purchased
Repentance for the One, and not for the Other: But if Christ has purchased
nothing for One, but what he has purchased for All (which directly is true,)
then cannot the purchase of Christ be a Mock to any, seeing some do reap a real
Benefit by it, and if others do not, it must be their Own fault. Indeed those
Divines, who confound the Blessings we have in Christ, so as to make them All
alike the direct Fruits of his Death with no difference, must be under some
manifest Prejudice here against St. Augushine, and his Doctrine. It stands not
with reason, that any thing which is part of Christ's Purchase, should be
peculiar, for how then has Christ dyed for All? That which is of mere Favor,
is fit for the Elect; that which is of Purchase, should be universal, or for
All Mankind. If that Grace then, whereby we Believe and Repent, is a Fruit
flowing from Christ's Death, no otherwise than the Covenant it self does, these
Divines alone must speak agreeably, who will allow no other, but that which
they call sufficient, putting all men into an aequi librium, or equal Balance,
between Choosing and Refusing, and so leaving it upon their own Wills, to make
the Difference, Who are saved, and who are not saved? But to what little
purpose such Grace as this, is distinguished at all from Nature, and into what
inconveniences, especially in reference to our Prayers, they must be lead that
maintain it, I shall not be able to say presently. Cur admonemur orare pro
inimicis nostris vtique nolentibus pie vivere, nisi ut Deus in illis operetur
and velle? Item cur admonemur petere ut accipiamus, nisi and ab illo fiat quod
volumus, a quo factum est ut velimus. Again, Cur petitur quod ad nostram
pertinet potestatem, si Deus non adjuvat veluntatem? Why are we bid to Pray for
our Enemies, whose Hearts we know are Averse? Why are we bid to ask any thing
which is in our own Power, but that it is God who turns the Will? Augustine.
Enchir: ad Laur. c. 31. Item De Gra. and alibi passim.

It is certain, that St. Austine, speaking of what Grace Adam had, and what We
have ( De correptione and Gratia. c. 11.) does ascribe the Posse permanere si
vellet, The power of standing if he would unto Grace. Prima gratia quae d^a est
Adam, est qua fit ut habeat homo justitiam si velit: Secunda ergo plus potest,
qua etiam fit, ut velit. Again, Posse permanere si vellet, quia dederat
adjutorium per quod posset. He could have stood if he would, because God
vouchsafed help whereby he could. I must confess, I should have judged it not
to be of Grace, that Adam had his Posse perseverare, his strength to persenere,
but of Nature, or his Original Righteousness: And that Grace (which he calls
Adjutorium) is proper to our fallen Estate, for the relieving of Nature. But if
it were of Grace, that Adam had the posse only, when he had not the velle, then
may we assert universal Grace with the more Authority; while we say, that there
is a posse now in Man fallen, as to the performance of the Covenant of Grace, no
less than in Adam at first, as to his keeping the Covenant of Works: when yet
the velle, which is of special Grace, is not vouchsafed.

There may be here indeed, a most difficult Demand, and that must not be
baulked; Whether the Power, which is universal, be of Nature or Grace? And I
must profess, it is an Entanglement to my Thoughts, to distinguish Nature at
all, from that Grace which is universal. Although for the sake I suppose of
some Texts, which attribute our sufficiency, our can, our power, as well as our
will and deed to God, when they say too it is not of our selves, Divines do it.
There is that Concourse, or Operation of God with Us, as reaches to the
Endowing us with Power: or that which reaches to the Endowing us with the Will.
The last of these only, if I might choose, I would have called Grace: Yet
seeing Divines speak otherwise, whether the former also, be called Grace or
Nature, so long as it be held universal, I desire to move no Contention. And
you see me speak as one indifferent in it.

If we consult the Schools, we shall find them giving as little to the strengh
of nature as any others can do. Nullum initium justificationis potest fieri
sine gratia, Sive lllud initium sit causa, sive meritum, condigni aut congrui,
sive impetratio, dispositio, conditio ad quodlibet aliquid, quocunque modo per
se and ratione sui, conducens ad justificationem. There is nothing that we can
do of our own strengh without grace that is any cause, merit, disposition,
condition, or occasion of our justification, or the beginning of it. Ruiz. De
praedestinationis exordio. Trac. 3. Disp. 17. By justification they understand
in effect regeneration, and they distinguish of an occasion which is active or
given of men, and passive or taken of God. They will allow indeed that what we
do may be a Passive occasion or opportunity to God for the infusing his grace,
which is with them to justify us, but no Active. Illae occasiones perse, and
ratione sui, nullam Physican, nec moralem causalitatem exercent, ad obtinendam
miscriocordiam Dei, sed Deus pro sua intriuscca bonitate and Sapientia, ex
illis occasionem accipit. Jb. Did. 16 Sec. 2. The sum is, that whatsoever man
does by the strengh of nature, conduces to his effectual conversion only (as
a removens prohibens) by removing the hindrance which otherwise we might put,
if we with drew from the means that God has appointed to obtain his grace.
Licet cuim aliquis per motum liberi arbitris divinam gratiam nec promercri nec
acquirere possit: potest tamen seipsum impedire ne eam recipiat, says Aquinas.
Though a man by the motion of his freewill cannot merit or procure the divine
grace: yet can he hinder himself from receiving it. They said unto God, Depart
from us we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Quilibet acius qui a nobis
eliciatur per vires naturae sine anxilio gratiae nihil ad gratiam
justificantem, nee ad auxiliatricem gratiam insluit: nihilue conducit aut
confert perse ratione sui, sed soluwnmodo quasi causa per accidens remonendo
prohibens, aut tanquam occasio and opportunitas passiua and a Deo accepta, non
ab hominibus data. Jb. Did. 20.

Having gone thus far in abasing the strengh of nature, we shall find how they
make it up again, with advancing an universal. Sufficient grace, by the help
of which lever the free will of man shall be lifted into the same throne, from
whence before they threw it down. For when that grace which they set up, must
be such only as gives a next power to believe and repent if we will, but leaves
the will undetermined and uninclined, and this being Supposed to be vouchsafed
to all according to the condition they are in, whether Elect or Reprobate
alike, it is apparent that man's free will by the cooperation with this grace,
or refusal, is that which begins, or puts by his own justification, and
causequently makes the differenee (in the upshot) between him that is saved,
and him that is damned. Supponimus omnibus adultis, nullo excepto, dari auxilia
sufficientia ad salutem, and non impedita, sed ita expedita, ut in potestate
cujusque sit, illis cooperando, ulteriora auxilia obtinere, quanrvis per vires
naturae non possint obtinere auxilia gratiae. Again, Barbari ignorantissimi per
interiorem gratiam moventur ad cognoseendum (non explicit sed implicit and
virtualiter, non certo sed subdubio, non in particulari sed in universali)
aliquid supernaturale, atque ad illud desiderandum: Idque sufficit ut
illustrationes and inspirationes siut quidditative supernaturales and
sufficientes ad justificationis initium. Idem ib Disp. 25. Now what my thoughts
are of this, I have offered as I pass; and more particularly, at the end, upon
the first Head, of Election. There is universal Grace consistent with the
Special Grace of Gods Elect: Or inconsisient with it. The former, I shall like
to have well explained. The latter, I take to be against St. Augustine, and the
Scriptures. The Grace of God is without, or within us. There is the Love, or
Good Will of God to Mankind, who would have All to be saved: Our Redemption by
Christ; The remedyicg Covenant; The Gospel. This is Grace without, and that
some Grace there is then sufficient, and universal, that yet has no Effect on
the most, is out of doubt. There is moreover, that Grace which lies in the
Help, or Assistance of the Spirit within, and the Fruit of it (Gratia
Auxiliatrix, and Infusa) and this our Divines do distinguish into Common and
Saving. By Common, they understand not the universal sufficient Assistance of
the Schools before, but some particular Operation of the Spirit, Effecting so
much as it is given for, only because those Effects reach no farther than what
is Common to the Elect and Reprobate, they call such Help or Grace only Common
Grace. Thus far we are safe; As for any Grace besides all this, if there be
any, not opposing Electing Grace, I shall be glad to hear it; but my own mind,
I perceive, hangs thus. There is a Power to will or nill, to act or not to act,
which is the power of Nature: And there is a Disposition on the Will, being
touched by the Holy Spirit, to the doing what is good. Between these two,
Nature, and Grace, to advance a middle Power, arising from an Assistance
sufficient, preceding Effectual, that is to say, To make God by a supernatural
Help, to produce a New Power, which they call, a next Power, in every man, over
and above that Power which we have by Nature (which is the Remote Power, though
the Schools mean it not so, and which alone will render the Sinner inexcusable
without any other) antecedent to the giving the Will and the Deed, wherein
effectual Grace does lie: Even a New Power, I say, Supernatural, of Believing,
Repenting, or Willing, besides the Natural, antecedent to Faith, Repentance, or
the Will it self: I do not see to what purpose else, if it be not a Device
under the Cover of that Name, to advance Free Will, and flap off St. Augustine
(as I take it to be in the Schools) it can be made to serve. What need is
there of Grace, to put the Will only in aequilibrio, which it is in by Nature?
If it encines not the Will, and carries the Heart and Life: What shall I say of
it, but as of the Wood of the Vine? Is it meet for any Work? Yet if it be, I
refuse not to hang my Vessel on it.

Auxilium, aliud est proxime and immediate sufficiens, quod videlicet
formaliter and actualiter continet omnes causas, and conditiones, ex part
principii requisitas ad eliciendum actum quo immediate dispo^umur ad
justificationem: Aliud vero non sufficit ad salutem nisi mediate atque remote,
quatenus immediate sufficiens est ad eliciendum aliquem actum supernaturalem
minus perfectum and remote distantem a justificatione; quem actum si peccator
eliciat, de congruo merebitur, and impetrabit vlteriora auxilia supernaturalia,
quibus possit elicere Perfectiores actus, proximius disponentes ad
justificationem, quousque ipsam obtineat. Ruiz. De praecip. effec. benevol. Dei
erga reprob. Sec. 2. Auxilium vel immediate vel mediate sufficiens, omnibus
adultis, quamdiu sunt viatores, tribuitur ad omnes actiones quae sunt ad
salutem simpliciter necessariae. Ib. Sec. 3. Auxilium remotum simpliciter
necessarium cujus virtute fit absolute possibile proximum Auxilium obtinere,
nunquam subtrahitur, etiam, propter gravissimas culpas. De prin. imped. justif.
Sec. 5. I present this to the Reader only for Light, out of courtesy, that he
who would without more pains, may yet see, how the Schools order their Matters.
And the truth is, if they would order it but a little otherwise, without it is
Antecedency and Equality, This sufficient universal Grace of theirs might do
well. There is an Equality in regard of Quantity, which no body will contend
for: Or in regard of Principle, Ratione principii in actu primo causantis
Operationem. The concourse of God, as the first cause, with Nature in all her
Acts, and so with Man's Free Will, is one principle of Operation: And that
Assistance which we call Grace, is another. Of Grace likewise, the Assistance
which is Common, and which is Effectual, are two Principles according to us. If
we shall therefore make the Assistance of God, which belongs to all, to be
equal, we destroy special Grace: But if we separate this Equality from the
Universality, and tie not an Antecedency to the sufficiency (for what hinders,
but God may work effectually on some Persons altogether graceless at once?) I
see no hurt in the Maintenance of it, if I were first convinced of a necessity
for it.

From hence there is a Point of another sort, that is, of Practical Divinity
comes in upon us: To wit, How far a Natural Man may go, and yet fall short of
True Grace, and Salvation? To answer which, we are to know, that it is one
thing to ask what a Natural man can do? And another, What he may do, and yet be
an Unregenerate Man? The first Question, is the Controversal Point in hand,
between Us and the Arminians: And I say, it is agreeable to that Righteousness
of God, which is Revealed in the Gospel, and to Common Reason, that when Christ
dyed to Redeem the World from the Law of Works, because through the Weakness of
the Flesh, it was impossible for us to perform the same; the New Terms which he
has procured for us in the Remedying Law, should be so Adapted to our Fallen
Estate, as to be made no less possible to us, or within our Power now, than the
Terms of the Covenant of Nature, was to Adam in the state of Innocence. There
is no Interpretation of any Scripture, must be admitted against universal
Reason, and the goodness of God. For the second Question: Take a Drunkard, or
the like Sinner, I say, this man can, and may presently resolve to keep his ill
Company no more; he may command his outward Man, and so his legs to carry him
from the Alehouse, if he will. If he does thus, he leaves that sin, so may he
others. He may Hear, Pray, set up Duty in his Family: He may Receive the Word,
which is more, and bring forth Fruit, with this difference only, that the
Regenerate man, does it with an honest Heart, which he has not. There is the
matter of our Duty, and the manner of Performance. This Question which seems so
difficult, perhaps to many, is easily determined. The Unregenerate man can do
if he will, and may will, and do, that, and all that which the Regenerate man
does, in the matter: but as for the manner, this is certain, that the
Regenerate man, only does act out of that Principle, and to that End, and with
those Circumstances (particularly, in regard to the Predominancy of Gods
Interest, over the Flesh and we World) as brings up what he does, to answer the
Covenant Terms, and so alone is entitled to the promised Reward, which is to
be justified and saved. In conclusion, we see how the Mystery of Election shows
it self; when there is no man but can, if he will, and yet there is no man ever
will, as he ought, without this special Grace of the Elect; What shall we say,
but, Great is the mystery of Godliness! It is he has wrought us for this self
same thing; Blessed be the God of Grace!

And here are there some Socinian, as well as Arminian Disputes might be
Touched, under this Head of Christ's Redemption, especially in relation to his
Satisfaction. For it may be, that such a less intricate Conception only of what
we are to understand by Christ's Satisfaction, might bring the most of several
Parties of Agreement. It is a Question, Whether God could pardon a Sinner
without Satisfaction? And consequently, Whether there be any necessity of
Christ's Dying to that purpose? I answer, There is no Mortal, upon the Terms of
the Covenant of our Creation, can be justified. (Hence is it (N. B.) that by
Nature, we are all said to be the Children of Wrath,) It is necessary
therefore, these Terms be altered. This is that which Jesus Christ has
procured for Us by His Redemption, by the Merits of his Life and Death, by his
Satisfaction; that is, such a well-pleasing of the Father, in the whole course
of his Life and Death, that for his sake, he might (without any Dishonor to
him, or to his Law, as Rector) and does condescend to do it: And there should
be an end, if I might overruled the more Intelligent, of such, and the like
kind of Questions.

Deo Gloria, mihi Condonatio. J. H.

An Advertisement.
THis Paper Of Election and Redemption, should have preceded the former Of
Justification the Term before. The next in order, Of the Law and the Gospel,
and the Covenants of both, will follow (if prudence direct) the Term ensuing.
Sold, and to be Sold by the same Booksellers, T.P.


