A REPLY TO THE DEFENSE OF Dr. Stillingfleet; BEING A Counter Plot for Union
between the Protestants, in opposition to the Project of others for Conjunction
with the Church of Rome.

By the Authors Of the Modest and Peaceable Inquiry. Of the Reflections, (i.e.)
the Country Confor. Of the Peaceable Design.


Then Abner called to Joab and said, shall the sword devour for ever? Know
thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? How long shall it be
then ere thou bid the people return from following their Brethren.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in
Cheapside near Mercers Chapel. 1681.

To the Right Honorable THE EARL of HALLIFAX.
May it please your Lordship.
THE Design of these Papers being for the Glory of the King, and the Peace of
the Church, we cannot think it dishonorable for any person of moderate
Inclinations, and in a capacity to serve so good an end, to favor it. Your
Lordship therefore being at present at the Helm in the Administration of the
greatest Affairs, will not, as we hope, receive with any Disdain this our
humble Dedication.

Not that we concern your Lordship in our little Contests, as the Book is
Controversal, for we know Themistocles cannot fiddle, but he can govern a
State: but because the Thing Designed is so momentous, and concerns Statesmen,
such as your Lordship is.

We do intend, no further avocation of your Honor from your other Employment,
than to look over only the Preface, and the last Half Sheet of the Book:
wherein you will find a Foundation laid, and Materials made ready. There is
wanting only the Perfecting skill of some Master builder, and then Hands to
work.

We are sensible of the Meanness of such an Offering to so great and judicious
a Person; and being conscious that the blame which we deserve upon that account
is too much for One, there are Two of us to bear it.

Your Lordships humble Servants John Humfrey, Stephen Lob.

THE PREFACE.
IT has pleased God, that the hearts of most men at this present juncture (or
at least their faces) are set upon Union of the Protestants; and it is
absolutely necessary that somewhat be done in order to a firm and lasting one
among us. Upon this point on all hands we seem to be agreed, We must Unite or
we must be undone: but as for the means of obtaining this end, the differences
are many.

Some among the Conformists seem to propose an Execution of the Poenal Laws, as
a sure way of Uniting us: Others (as this Author of Dean Stillingfleets
Defense, etc.) insist on a Submission to the Bishops of the Universal Church to
be the only foundation of Unity in the Church. The Dissenters differ from such
as are of these Opinions, and in the general assert, That if ever an Union be
obtained, it must be by an Insisting only on a Few, Certain, Necessary things
as terms of Communion. That the utmost severities of the Magistrate will
rather, fill the minds of the Sufferers with Prejudices, against the Dictates
of those men whose most powerful Argument is the Sword, than Inlighten their
Judgments, or Dispose their Souls to any sincere Compliances; and that the
Notion of our Author, to wit, the Defender of the Dean of Paul's, is
Schismatical.

Upon this account it is not a little time is spent in a Representing the
several Notions there are about the methods of Uniting us to be Ineffectual,
the one Party misliking the Proposals made by the Other. But surely this is not
the way to heal our breaches, or put an end to the Warm and Indecent Contests,
that have been among us. For which Reason, though my principal aim is for
Union, yet will not I presume on any thing proposed by us. I will only
acquaint the Reader with the Nature of the Ancient Constitution of our
Government in Relation to Ecclesiastical Affairs, and thereby show what will
most effectually conduce to Unite us in a way the least novel, and most
consistent with our Civil Establishment.

The which I can no sooner compass, but I shall be capacitated to demonstrate
to the World, That the Principles of the Dissenter are very much adapted for
concord, not only among themselves, but with the moderate Episcoparians, and
very advantageous to the State in which they live.

The Ancient Constitution of our Government about Matters Ecclesiastical, is
very excellently described in the Necessary Doctrine, and Erudition of a
Christian man composed by several Bishops, and other great Doctors, and
approved by Authority in the days of Henry the 8th.

In this Judicious Tractate it is manifest

1. That Church Government is Jure Divino.

2. That to the Constituting such a Church Government those Church Officers
only are necessary who are mentioned in the New Testament.

3. That in the New Testament there is mention made of no other Church
Officers, but Priests, and Deacons. That no other Government is of Divine
Right, but what is under the Conduct of Bishops, or Priests, i. e. Elders, is
evident, in that the New Testament mentions no other Governors, as
Ecclesiastical, but the Bishops, or Elders; whence, that Government, whose
Constitution is such, as that it becomes a Government on no other account, than
that the Governors are of humane make, that Government cannot, formally
considered, be of Divine Right, it is but Humane, though circa Sacra.

4. That Bishops, or Priests, the sole Governors of the Church are of one, and
the same Order, their Power the same, their work the same, which is to preach
the Word, Administer Sacraments, and Exercise Discipline

All this I collect from what is asserted in the aforesaid Necessary Erudition
about the Sacrament of Orders, where it is said, That Bishops, or Priests, and
Deacons are the only Orders mentioned in the New Testament. And of these two
ORDERS only, that is to say, Priests, and Deacons, Scripture makes express
mention. That all others were afterward added by the Church. That the Duty, and
Office of the Bishop, Priest, [or Elder] consists in true Preaching and
Teaching the word of God unto the People, in Dispensing, and Ministering the
Sacraments of Christ; in Losing, and Assoiling from sin, such persons as be
sorry and truly Penitent for the same, and EXCOMMUNICATING such, as BE GUILTY
IN MANIFEST CRIMES, and WILL NOT BE REFORMED OTHERWISE, and finally, in Praying
for the Whole Church of Christ, and specially for the flock, committed unto 'em.

Thus the Order of a Bishop, or Priest is one and the same; whose Office is,
not only to Preach, and Administer Sacraments, but moreover to exercise
Discipline, namely in Losing, and Assoiling from sin, such persons as be sorry,
and truly Penitent, and in Excommunicating the Obstinately Vicious, As much as
if it had been said, that Church Government, and the Office of a Bishop, or
Elder, is of Divine Right.

The Office of the Deacons in the Primitive Church was partly in Ministering
Meat, and Drink, and other Necessaries to the poor people found of the Church,
partly also in Ministering to the Bishops, and Priests, and in doing their duty
in the Church.

Hereby it is apparent that Deacons, as they were not by Office Preachers, nor
Dispensers of the Sacraments, neither were they Governors of the Church. The
Government of the Church being committed unto the Bishops, or Presbyters only.
The which being so, 'twill as I humbly apprehend, follow, That Church
Government, according to Christ's Institution, was seated in those Particular
Societies, which were under the care, and conduct of Bishops, or Elders, every
such society, call it Parochial; or Congregational, being a Complete Gospel
Church, (i.e.) a Church whose Elders, or Bishops have as Entire a power for the
Exercise of Discipline in their Congregations, as for the Dispensing the word
or Administering the Sacraments. This is not only to be found in the Necessary
Erudition, but moreover there are Intimations enough in other Discourses
published in Henry the Eights time, to incline a Judicious mind to conclude,
That the Office of a Priest, and Bishop is One, and the same; and consequently
that Particular Parochial, or Congregational Churches are of Divine Institution.

I have observed in the Sum of Christianity, composed by Francis Lambert of
Avynyon, a Treatise Published An. 1536. That the Notion of the Sameness of the
Order of a Bishop, or Elder appeared in the world with some kind of boldness.
For although this Lambert in his Epistle to Sebastian, Prince of Lausane, does
assert, That there be MANY Bishops of ONE City, for (says he) every City has
so many Bishops, as it has true Evangelists, or Preachers, For every Preacher
of the Truth, etc. is a true Bishop, although he be not called so of many;
Bishops be only Prophets of Truth, and there should be so many Bishops, as the
multitude of People requires, Verily Every Parish ought to have its proper
Bishop. And in the Treatise it self, chap. 5. In every City, Town, and Village
there ought to be many Bishops (i. e.) Evangelists, or Preachers, after the
quantity of places, and multitude of people. If many Parishes be so great, that
one Bishop is not sufficient for them, let them be divided, and to every part a
Bishop assigned. This and much more in Lambert. Notwithstanding which, this
Treatise is published by Tristram Rewell, and dedicated to Queen Anne, wife of
Henry the 8th. A thing that would not have been done but that this Opinion was
very common at that time, and within seven years after declared to be the sense
of the Church of England as I have evinced out of the Necessary Erudition. But

5. That the Superiority of one Bishop over another, or of a Bishop over a
Presbyter is of Humane, not of Divine Right.

Diocesan Bishops, Metropolitan, or Patriarchal are not found in Sacred
writings, and concerning this, the necessary Erudition is most express, in
these words, And whereas we have thus summarily declared what is the Office,
and ministration, which in Holy Scripture has been committed to Bishops, and
Priests, and in what things it consists as is before rehearsed, lest
peradventure it might be thought to some persons, That such Authorities,
Powers, and Jurisdictions as Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, and
Metropolitanes now have, or heretofore at any time have had Justly, and
Lawfully over other Bishops, were given them by God in holy Scripture. We think
it expedient, and necessary, That all men should be advertised, and taught,
That all such lawful Powers, and Authorities of ANY one Bishop over another,
were, and be given to them, by the Consent, Ordinance, and Positive Laws of men
ONLY, AND NOT BY ANY ORDINANCE OF GOD IN HOLY SCRIPTURE. And all other Power,
and Authority, which and Bishop has used, or exercised over another, which
has not been given to him by such consent, and Ordinance of Men,, (as is
aforesaid) is in very deed no LAWFUL POWER, but PLAIN USURPATION AND TYRANNY.
So far the Christian Erudition. From whence it is manifest, That according unto
them, Diocesan Episcopacy is of Humane Right only (i. e.) Any one Bishops
Ruling over another Bishop, or Presbyter, is what the Scriptures do not direct
unto, and consequently it is not of Divine Right, neither is it any further
Lawful, than according unto the Laws of the Land in which it is Exercised.

Though the Power of Diocesane Bishops, as it is Circa Sacra, may be called
Ecclesiastical, yet if we consider its Origin, and Source, we shall find it to
be but Civil, seated primarily in the Civil Magistrate, that it is of an humane
make, and so far, but no farther Lawful, than as Sanction'd by the Laws of the
Land. Diocesane Bishops as such are not immediately owing unto God, but unto
our Civil Governors for their Being, it is on them their sole dependence is,
and on them they rely for the Continuance of their Power. The King, Lords, and
Commons assembled in Parliament can, as they see cause, make what Alterations
they please in the Episcopal, or Diocesan Government, Though they cannot alter
any Divine Law, yet they can change any Law that receives its Being from
themselves. Though they cannot alter the Office of a Presbyter, or Bishop,
which receives its Being from the Institution, or Ordinance of Jesus Christ,
yet they may correct, or amend any thing in the Humane, viz. The Diocesane
Constitution. They can enlarge, or narrow, any Diocese, yea pull down one, and
Erect another. They can add unto, or take from the Episcopal Jurisdiction, as
they judge Expedient.

That this was the sense of the Church of England in Henry the 8ths. time, yea
and in most ages since an Episcopal Government has been established in this
Kingdom, and consequently the Ancient Constitution of our Government, is not
only manifest, from what has been already taken out of the Necessary
Erudition, but from other passages, that are in that excellent treatise, and
some other Considerations that I will insist on. As

First, The Power, that has ever been acknowledged to be seated in the Kings
of this Realm, concerning the exempting any particular Churches from an
Episcopal Jurisdiction evinces it.

If Episcopal Jurisdiction be of Divine Right, it lies not in the power of any
Prince to alter it, If every Parish Presbyter is, according to the Scriptures,
an Officer inferior to some Diocesane Bishop, the exempting such a Presbyter
from Episcopal Jurisdiction is out of the power of any man. 'Twas a known Rule
in our Land even in the days of Popery; That no Law of man can alter, or
disanul any Law of God, If then our Princes ever thought themselves to have
been invested with a Power of exempting any Presbyter from Episcopal
Jurisdiction, it is evident that they look not on that Jurisdiction to be of
Divine Right.

But that our Princes judged themselves to have such a Power, is notorious,
from the many Instances that can be given of their exercising it, Whosoever
consults the Learned Dr. Burnets History of the Refor. part. 1. lib. 3. will
find, That Ethelbert exempted a Monastry at Canterbury with some Churches
belonging unto it from the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop, and his Successors.
King Ina's Charter to the Abbey of Glassenbury exemps them from the Bishops
Jurisdiction. The like did King Offa concerning the Monastry of St. Albans An.
793. Kenulph King of Mercia that at Abington Anno 821. and Knut, that at St.
Edmvndbury An. 1020. Yea and there are several places at this very time exempt
from Episcopal Jurisdiction.

Whatever our Princes in after Ages might lose as to the Exercise of their just
Power, it is certain, that Henry 8th. reassumed it, as appears by his
dismembring some Diocesses, and by his removing some Churches from one
Jurisdiction to another. For this Consult Dr. Burnets History of Reformation,
part 1. lib. 3. page 301. where you will find the Complaint of the Roman party
beyond the Sea concerning the Kings encroaching on the Jurisdiction of the
Church, etc. -- to which 'twas answered, That the Division of the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction whether of Patriarchs, Primates, Metropolitanes, or
Bishops was according to the Roman Law Regulated by the Emperors, Of which the
Ancient Councils always approved. And in England when the Bishopric of
Lincoln, being judged of too great an extent, the Bishopric of Ely was taken
out of it, it was done only by the King, with the consent of his Clergy, and
Nobles.

It Is also evident out of Dr. Burnets Hist. of the Ref. part 1. l. 3 p. 267.
That this great Prince gave cut such a Commission to Bonner, and it may be to
others also, as makes it most manifest, that Diocesan Bishops were not of
God's, but only of the Magistrate's Institution. Hence Bonner in his Commission
from the King most gratefully acknowledges that he received it only from the
King's bounty, and must deliver it up again when it should please his Majesty
to call for it, even as Justices of the Peace, etc. whose Commission is ad
Pacitum. Moreover Laymen had Ecclesiastical Dignities. The E. of Hartford six
Prebends promissed him, as the Lord Cromwal in H. 8. was made Dean of Wells. A
thing very ordinary at that time; Dr. Burnets Hist. of the Refor. part 2.

Thus a Diocesane Episcopacy at best was judged but an humane Creature, owing
to the Magistrate alone for it is Rise, and Conservation.

Secondly, This seems to be the sense of the Reformers in Edward the 6th. time
who were under the Influence of that great Divine, and Blessed Martyr
Archbishop Cranmer. In Henry 8th. days Cranmer did his Utmost for the promoting
a Reformation, the which, he did withal the Speed and Prudence the Ilness of
the times would permit, further attempt to carry on under King Edward, and what
he did, was so highly approved of by all, who were hearty for a Reformation,
that whoever considers how Unanimous the truly Protestans Bishops were, in
Concurring with this great Prelate Cranmer, cannot but incline to think, That
their Principles in most things about Church Discipline were the same, (i. e.)
they were for the Divine Right of Bishops or Presbyters, even when they judged
the Superiority of a Bishop to a Presbyter to be but Humane.

That this may appear to be the sense of Cranmer, I will only beseech my Reader
to compare what was done under King Edw. 6th. by this great Prelate, with his
Judgment concerning a Diocesan Episcopacy under Henry the 8th.

In Henry 8ths. time Cranmer in answer to that Question, Whether Bishops, or
Priests were first? did assert, That the Bishops, and Priest, were at one time,
and were no two things, but both One Office in the beginning of Christ's
Religion, That in the New Testament, he that is appointed to be a BISHOP or
PRIEST, needs no Cousecration by the Scripture, for ELECTION, or APPOINTING
thereto is sufficient. This was then Cranmers Judgment and I cannot understand
that he did at any time in the least vary from it, for in the Necessary
Erudition, which he subscribed, there is nothing asserted, but what is either
Consistent with, or an approbation of what was the Archbishops: Opinion about
these points.

It Is true Cranmer was so Zealous an Asserter to the Kings Supremacy, that he
seemed to be of that Opinion, which does now appear by the name of
Erastianisme, for he held, That a Bishop, or Priest by the Scripture is neither
commanded, nor forbidden to Excommunicate, but, where the Laws of any Region
give him Authority to Excommunicate, there he ought to use the same, etc. But
from this he must be considered to have received, because he subscribed the
Necessary Erudition, where it is expressed, That a part of the Priests or Bishops
Office is according to the Scriptures to Excommunicate, etc. as well as Teach,
and Administer the Sacraments.

To all this add the Progress Cranmer made under Edw. 6. in the Reformation,
how far he went, and how much farther he would have gone, had not the Iniquity
of those times been so exceeding great, and the Reign of this worthy Prince so
very short. It Is well known that he went so far as to tempt Dr. Heylin to
conclude King Edwards death no Infelicity to the Church of England, and to
provoke Queen Elizabeth to say, That they had stripped the Church too much of its
external Splendor and Magnificence, That it was requisite to make some
alteration in the Articles to the end a Compliance of the Roman Catholics
might be more easy. What I have insisted on in this place about Cranmer is
taken out of Dr. Burnets History, and a Record in him ex M.SS. D. Stillingfleet.

3. Such is the present Prerogative of his Majesty in Ecclesiastical as well as
Civil Affairs, that the asserting the Divine Right of a Diocesane Episcopacy is
inconsistent with it.

The King is the Supreme Head of the Church, as well as of the State; for which
Reason, he has Power to appoint Officers to look after the management of
Affairs in the One, as in the Other: But if the Diocesan Bishops depend not so
much on the Prince for their Superiority and Power in making an Authoritative
Inspection into Ecclesiasticalal Affairs, as the Civil Magistrate; who is it
that is his Majesty's Commissionated Officer about Ecclesiastical affairs? It Is
either the Diocesane or None. But if the Diocesane as such receives his
Commission from Jesus Christ, even as the Apostles did, then they are Gods
Officers, and not the Kings. And if so, seeing the King does nothing but by his
Officers, that is, by such as act by a Commission received from him, the King
has in this respect lost at least the Ezercise of his Prerogative. But if they
are the Kings Officers, and depend as much on the King as the Civil, then their
Diocesan Episcopacy is not of Divine, it is but of Humane Right.

We acknowledge that it is the sense of the Church of England, that Princes are
Ordained of God to Govern Ecclesiastical, as well as other Persons: and that
therefore, if we consider such as are appointed by the King to govern under him
Circa Sacra, as the Officers of God Fundamentally, and not Formally, it may be
granted. But when we speak of the Officers of Christ in Contradistinction to
the Officers of the King, we mean such, whose Authority is from God, and
remains good, though the Prince should oppose it, as in the case of the
Primitive Officers of Divine Institution, who being forbidden to Preach in
Christ's name, could reply, Whether we shall obey God or Man Judge ye. The
Office of a Presbyter, or Congregational Bishop is so much of God, that what
right soever the Magistrate may have concerning Nomination, Election, or
Presentation, or Appointing of any such Ecclesiastical Ministers, his
Prohibition cannot make void that Commission he has received from Jesus
Christ. But such as are Officers of the King, whether about the matters of the
Lord, or about the King (i. e.) whether Circa sacra, or about Civil Affairs,
it is in the Power of the Supreme Magistrate to give or take his Commission, as
it pleases him, yea to direct to the Number of such Officers, appointing them
their peculiar work, and to alter and change as the necessity of Affairs, and
State of the National Constitution shall require.

There must be a regard had unto the present temper, and state of the Kingdom,
in which the Church is, and a suiting the Ecclesiastical Affairs so far as they
may have an influence on the State after such a manner, as is most conducive to
the more firm establishment of the Fundamental Constitution, and consequently
Peace of the State, to which end the Civil Magistrate must still firmly adhere
to that known Rule by which King Henry professed to walk, which is expressed in
the necessary Erudition, viz. The Scripture does teach, That all Christian
People, as well as Priests and Bishops, as all other should be obedient unto
Princes, and Potestates of the World; For the Truth is, that God Constituted
and Ordained the Authority of Christian Kings and Princes to be the most High,
and Supreme above all other Powers, and Officers in this World, in the Regiment
and Government of their People, and committed to them as unto the chief leads
of their Commonwealths, the Cure and Oversight of all the People which be in
their Realms, and Dominions, without any exception: and to them of Right, and
by Gods Commandment, belongs not only to prohibit Unlawful Violence, to
correct Offenders by Corporal Death, or other punishment, to Censure Moral
Honesty among their Subjects, according to the Laws of their Realms, to defend
Justice, and to procure the Public Weal, and Common Peace and Tranquillity in
Outward and Earthly things: But Especially and Principally, to Defend the Faith
of Christ, and his Religion, to conserve and maintain the true Doctrine of
Christ, and all such as be true Preachers and Setters forth thereof, and to
abolish all Abuses, Heresies and Idolatries, and to punish with Corporal Pain,
such as of malice be the occasion of the same. And Finally, to Oversee, and
cause that the said Bishops and Priests, do execute their Pastoral Office truly
and faithfully, and especially in those points, which by Christ and his
Apostles were given and committed unto them; and in case they shall be
negligent in any part thereof, or would not diligently execute the same, to
cause them to redouble and supply their lack. And if they obstinately withstand
their Princes kind monition, and will not mend their Faults: then and in such
case to put others in their rooms and places. And God has also commanded the
said Bishops and Priests to obey with all humbleness and Reverence both Kings,
and Princes, and Governors, and all their Laws, not being contrary to the Laws
of God, whatsoever they be, and that not only propter iram, but also propter
Conscientiam, that is to say, not only for fear of punishment, but also for
discharge of Conscience.

Thus the Power of the Magistrate over all Persons, to wit, Ecclesiastical and
Civil, is according to the Ordinance of God; and that it is a Part of the
Magistrates Office to Defend the Faith of Christ, to maintain the true Doctrine
and the Preachers thereof, and to Abolish all Abuses, etc. the which must be
done, not only by keeping to the Rule of the Gospel, but in conjunction
therewith, by taking a special care, that no unnecessary thing be suffered,
that in its Tendency is destructive of the Peace of the State. If the present
constitution of the Government of the Church, as it is National, and of humane
Right only be in any Respects Inconsistent with the Public Weal of the
Kingdom, it is necessary, that it be altered; especially when an Alteration in
some little things, may abundantly contribute: unto the Lasting Peace, both of
Church and State.

But if the Church Government as Diocesane or National be of Divine Right,
there can be no Alteration of it, and consequently, seeing the setting up any
of the Kings Officers to Inspect Ecclesiastical Affairs, is an Altering the
Diocesan Constitution, the Prince durst not, though encouraged by an Act of
Parliament, enter on it. What is of Divine Right is Sacred, and must not be
touched, it is dangerous to come too near that Mount. For which Reason, how
mischeivous soever the Ecclesiastical-National-Government, may in Process of
time be unto the Civil; the Civil, not the Ecclesiastical must be Altered. That
there may be an Adjusting matters in debate between the Diocesane, and the
State, the State must submit unto the Diocesane. For the King according to this
Hypothesis has nothing to do with Church Affairs, which are wholly by the word
of God confined to Churchmen, among whose number the King cannot be justly
mentioned, neither may the King take any Cognizance of what is done among them,
nor may they hold their Courts in his, but only in their own Name, or rather in
Jesus Christ's. A Notion so inconsistent with his Majesty's just Prerogative,
and the Powers of Parliaments, that as it does destroy the Former, in like
manner it does so very much limit the Latter, as to Alter the Fundamental
Constitution of our Government.

By this time I presume it may appear with some Conviction to the Reader.

1. That a Parochial, or Congregational Church Government is, according to the
Church of England, Jure Divino. 2. That the Diocesane, or National Government
as such is Jure Humano, and for its particular Form, must be such in all ages,
as our Civil Governors Judge most meet, as a Means for the Preservation of
Parochial Discipline, and the great Ends of the Civil Constitution.
These things being so, A Declaring this true Church of England Principle to be
still according to the Sentiments of our Governors, will Relieve tender
Consciences among Dissenters, and sufficiently gratify any moderate Conformist
to the Ending all our Divisions, without an Embasing his Majesty's Prerogative.

1. The Establishing a Parochial, or Congregational-Church-Discipline by Law,
is the great thing the Dissenters desire, and what may be done consistently
with the Ancient Constitution of the Government of this Realm, to the fixing
the desired Firm and lasting Union among all sorts of sound Protestants.

These Assemblies once established, as so many Complete Particular Churches,
whose Pastors have full Power for the Administering all Ordinances, and the
exercising Discipline over those who do freely and of choice submit thereunto,
may notwithstanding lesser Differences, be considered as United unto one
another, in that they Profess the same Faith, Preach the same Word, and
Administer the same Sacraments. For the Proof hereof consult the Necessary
Erudition, where it is said, That the Unity of the Holy Church of Christ is not
divided by Distance of Place, nor by Diversity of Traditions and Ceremonies,
diversesly observed in diverse Churches, for good Order of the same: And though
in Traditions, Opinions, and Policies, there was some Diversity among them [
(i.e.) the Churches of Corinth of Ephese, etc.] likewise as the Church of
England, Spain, Italy, Pole, be not separate from the Unity, but be one Church
in God, notwithstanding that among them, there is great distance of Place,
Diversity of Traditions, not in all things Unity of Opinions, Alteration in
Rites, Ceremonies and Ordinances, or Estimation of the same -- such Diversity
in Opinions, and other outward Manners and Customs of Policy, does not
dissolve and break the Unity which is in One God, One Faith, One Doctrine of
Christ and his Sacraments preserved and kept in these several Churches without
any Superiority or Pre-eminence, that one Church by Gods Law may, or ought to
Challenge over another.

Thus Particular Parochial, or Congregational Churches may be United in One
God, One Faith, One Doctrine of Christ and his Sacraments, even where there is
some difference between them in lesser matters. What though in one Parish there
is a Liturgy, in another a Directory, shall this hinder Union? Don't even the
Papists themselves acknowledge, that the Church of England was very closely
United, even among themselves, notwithstanding the several different Offices
there were in use among us in the times of Popery? One Office after the use of
Sarum, another after the use of York, of Bangor, etc. and yet all United.
Moreover what more common than to observe many little differences in Civil
Corporations, even where they are all United in one head. A consideration
sufficient to evince the Union of Parochial Churches to be Possible,
notwithstanding some Remaining Differences in Customs, etc.

In these Kingdoms there are a multitude of Particular Corporations, and little
Policies, whose Customs and modes of Government within themselves, are very
Different. The particular Laws by which they are governed as a Particular Body
Corporate are of as many different kinds as there are Cities, Towns, or
Parishes; but yet All United, in that they swear Alleigance to his Majesty, and
submit themselves to the General Laws of the Land. The different Customs of
different places do not in the least break the Union of the Nation. And why may
it not be so in the Church? What Reason can there be given, why the Union of
many a Civil Society or Association may be, notwithstanding the different
Customs are among them, but the Union of many Particular-Parochial-Churches
cannot be, unless they all agree in every little thing.

Methinks it is as Reasonable to plead for a destroying the Particular
Customs, and Charters of Buroughs, Corporations, and Cities as the only way
to Union in the Civil Government, as it is to assert, That nothing but an
Uniformity among every Parochial or Congregational Church can Unite us in the
Ecclesiastical. What though there are some differences among Parochial Churches
as to their Customs and modes of Worship, so long as they agree in One Faith,
One Lord, One Baptism: So long as they all Profess the same Faith, Preach the
same Word, Administer the same Sacraments, and submit unto the same Civil
Government: So long as they all Swear Allegiance to to their Prince, and
Subscribe any Test to assure the World they are sound Protestants, the which
being so, what hinders a firm and lasting Union?

Certainly, This is enough to show, that their Union, if no more, is as much as
that between One City and another, One Corporation and another, and that their
differences are no greater, (if so great) than those between one City and
another. The which being so, An Altering the Present Laws about Conformity, and
an Establishing such New ones, as shall be Judged necessary by our Governors
for the defense and safety of a Parochial or Congregational Church Discipline,
as well as for the Regulating his Majesty's Officers Circa Sacra, will Unite
us, and put an end to that Horrid sin of Schism, that has these many years
abounded in the midst of us. Let the Dissenters be permitted to Embrace the
Laws and Customs of their Forefathers in the Apostles days about
Church Discipline, and the Mode of Worship, and they are Relieved, the which
may be done without any Injury to the Conscience of any sound Protestant of the
Episcopal Persuasion. I say,

2. This cannot but satisfy any moderate Episcoparian, who may, if he please,
firmly abide by those Ceremonies he now does. He may still Read the same
Prayers among such as are of his own Opinion. He may wear the same Vestments,
and address himself to his Majesty's Officer the Lord Bishop, as unto his
Ordinary for Council and Advice. And if his Ordinary or Diocesan be an Elder
(for that is left to the Supreme Magistrate to appoint) he may look on him
[though in truth as such, he being only the Kings Officer Circa Sacra] as a
Bishop who is of an Order Superior to that of a Presbyter, and so exercise
Disciplene as he Receives Encouragement from him.

If there be any entering on the Ministry, who think a Diocesane Episcopacy to
be Jure Divino, and is called unto a Parish or Congregation of the same
Judgment. This Candidate may (if the Kings Officer be an Elder, and of the same
mind with him) apply himself unto him, as unto his Diocesane, and receive
Orders from him, and do all things as now, unless our Governors Judge meet to
make any Alteration as to the use of some Ceremonies, Only let none be by Law
compelled to do so.

Let those that are so weak, as to think a Diocesane Episcopacy to be of Divine
Right enjoy the Liberty of their Consciences, the which being attended but with
the vouchsafing the like Liberty unto others, I know not why they may not be
satisfied. We are not for the Pulling down Lord Bishops, nor for an Alienating
Church Lands. If it seem good to our Governors to continue them, we only
desire, that the Nature of their Office be declared to be no other than what it
was Anciently in this Kingdom, which is, That they are merely the Kings
Creatures, That all they do must be in the Kings Name, and by virtue of a
Commission received from him: That as such they are only the Kings Magistrates,
that act Circa Sacra, That their work is only to see that the Bishops or
Presbyters within their allotted Precincts discharge their Duty not only in
leading Godly Lives, but in Preaching the word, administering the Sacraments,
and exercising Discipline according to the Rule of the Gospel.

We are far from pulling down such Bishops, for we rather wish that whereas
there is now one, there might be five, nor are we for the alienating Church
Land any more than we are for the taking from his Majesty's other Civil
Officers, those Pensions are allowed them for their great services. A thing we
esteem as necessary, and highly expedient as what does not only conduce very
much to the Encouragement of all sorts of Learning: the equal Administration of
Justice, but as what advances the Honor and Grandeur of the State. But,

3. This does no way Embase his Majesty's Prerogative in matters
Ecclesiastical, It does rather make it the more Grand and August. His Majesty
is hereby acknowledged to be the Supreme Head of the Church. All Officers Circa
Sacra depend as much on his Majesty's Pleasure for their Places as any other
Civil Officers. It Is in the Kings Name they must act, by virtue of a Commission
received from him, whereby the King is Recognized as the sole Governor of the
Kingdom, and has no Competitors with him, nor is he in danger of Foreign
Usurpations.

To sum up all, Let all such Particular Congregational, or Parochial
Churches, that are of Divine Institution according to the sense of the Old, and
most true Church of England, be by Act of Patliament declared to be so, and
taken under the Protection of the Laws, and the Dissenters are satisfied: The
which (as has been proved) may be done without any wrong to the consciences of
the Conformist.

This is the utmost I shall propose leaving it to the Wisdom of the Nation to
Regulate, and Order the Constitution so far as it is National and of Humane
Make, as they Judge most Expedient. The Statesmen know best, how to alter,
correct, or amend any thing in the present Frame, for which reason, Modesty
does best become Divines, whonever succeed in any undertakements beyond their
Sphere. If no encroachments be made on what is of Divine Institution no wrong
can be done us.

I desire the Dean, and his Substitute to consider this Proposal, which is but
a Revival of what was on our first leaving Rome, strenuously asserted, as the
Only way to break all the Designs of the Papists about Church Discipline; From
the corruptions of which did proceed all the Popes Tyranous Usurpations.
Certainly the Establishing this Notion cannot but be of extraordinary use, as
it Erects a Partition Wall between the Reformation, and the Corruptions of the
Roman Church, as it is adjusted for the silencing all Differences among our
selves, the healing our Breaches, and the fixing a firm and lasting Union among
all sound Protestants, whether Episcopal, Presbyterian, Congregational, or mere
Anabaptist.

I humbly apprehend this to be enough to evince, That the Dissenters are not
such Enemies to Union as some have Asserted, nor are they for the destroying a
National Church Government. They are only against Unaccountable Innovations,
even such as tend to the Ruin of the Old Protestant National Church, which as
such is but of Humane Institution, and in all ages must be of such a Peculiar
Form, as is best suited to those great Ends, viz. Gods Glory in the Flourishing
of particular Parochial, or Congregational Churches and the Peace of the State.

The Dissenters do know, that as One Particular Church is not to depend on
another, as to be Accountable thereunto, when at any time she may abuse her
Power, yet All are accountable unto the Magistrate of that Land in which they
Live, and that such is the state of things with us, that what person soever is
grieved, either by a Presbyter or Bishop, or by any Inferior Officer Circa
Sacra, he may make his Appeal to the Supreme Magistrate, with whom all Appeals
on Earth are finally Lodged. Whatever the Deans Substitute may assert, it is
most undoubtedly true, that no Appeal can be justly made from our King unto the
Pope, or any College of Catholic Bishops whatsoever. That herein as our
Author dissents from the Church of England, we do heartily agree with her.

That the sound Protestant Party among the Sons of the Church of England do
accord with the Dissenters about this great Point, is not only evident from
what a Conformist has written in the following Treatise, but from what is
asserted by the Judicious Dr. Burnet in the History of the Reformation. The
which I do the more cheerfully insist on, that the world may see, How the
Dissenters have been misrepresented, and How clear they are from any Seditious
or Factious Principles concerning Church Discipline.

In Dr. Burnets Preface to the History of the Reformation, p. 1. for which the
whole Kingdom have given the Dr. thanks: it is asserted, That in Henry the 8ths
time, 'twas an Established Principle, That every National Church is a complete
Body within it self, so that the Church of England with the Authority and
Concurrence of their Head and King, might examine or Reform all Errors or
Corruptions, whether in Doctrine or Worship. Moreover in the Preamble of that
Act by which this Principle was fixed, it is declared, That the Crown of England
was Imperial, and that the Nation was a Complete Body within it self, with a
full Power to give Justice in all Cases, Spiritual, as well as Temporal. And
that in the Spiritualty, as there had been at all times, so there were then men
of that Sufficiency and Integrity, that they might Declare and Determine all
Doubts within the Kingdom, And that several Kings as Ed. 1. Edw. 3. Ric. 2. and
Hen. 4. had by several Laws Preserved the Liberties of the Realm both Spiritual
and Temporal from the Annoyance of the Sea of Rome, and other Foreign
Potentates, Hist. Ref. p. 1. p. 127.

Furthermore, the same Judicious Author, by an Extract out of the Necessary
Erudition, and out of the Kings Book de Differentia Regiae and Ecclesiasticae
Potestatis, out of Gardiners de vera Obedientia, and Bonners Prefixed Epistle,
and out of a Letter written by Stokesly Bishop of London, and Tonstall Bishop
of Duresm, has made it evident that the Church in Henry 8. did not only assert
the Kings Supremacy, but as a Truth in Conjunction therewith, held, That in the
Primitive Church, the Bishops in their Councels made Rules for Ordering their
Diocesses which they only called CANONS or RULES, nor had they any Compulsive
Authority, but what was derived from the Civil Sanction.

A sufficient evincement that they did not believe General Councils to be by
Jesus Christ made the Regent part of the Catholic Church, neither did they
believe their Determinations, or Decrees, to lay any Obligation on the
Conscience, unless Sanction'd by the Magistrates command.

To this Dr. Burnet speaks excellently well in his Preface to the Second Part
of the Hist. Refor. The Jurisdiction of Synods or Councils is founded either on
the Rules of Expediency or Brotherly Correspondence, or on the force of Civil
Laws; For when the Christian Belief had not the support of Law, Every Bishop
taught his own Flock the best he could, and gave his Neighbors such an account
of his Faith at, or soon after his Consecration, as satisfied them, and so
maintained the Unity of the Church. The Formality of Synods grew up in the
Church from the Division of the Roman Empire, and the Dignity of the several
Cities, which is a thing so well known, and so plainly acknowledged by the
Writers of all sides, that it were a needless Imposing on the Readers Patience
to spend time to prove it. Such as would understand it more perfectly, will
find it in de Marca, the late Archbishop of Paris's Books de Concordia Imperii
and Sacerdotii, and in Blondels works de La Primaute de l'Englise, None can
Imagine there is a Divine Authority in that, which sprang from such a
Beginning. The Major part of Synods cannot be supposed to be in matters of
Faith, so assisted from Heaven, that the lesser part must necessarily Acquiesce
in their Decrees, or that the Civil powers must always measure their Laws by
their Votes, especially where intrest does visibly turn the Scales, so far Dr.
Burnet. The contrary unto which being asserted by the Deans Substitute, it is
Apparent, that he does abundantly recede from the true Church of England, not
only to the Reproach of his Profession, but of the first Reformation, and grief
of the sober and moderate Conformist.

This I thought necessary to suggest, that I might engage the Reader to
consider with what Injustice this Author treats, not only those who dissent
from the Church in some things, but the Sober Conformist also, who is a through
Church man, by Reprsenting us all as Enemies both to Church and State, as if
the adhereing unto Old Protestant Principles about Church Discipline had been
the Overt Act of a Spirit Seditious and Phanatical.

Having thus so fully shown, How easy it is to put an end to the mischevous
Divisions, which have, for some years past, proved very dangerous to this
Kingdom. I will not enlarge on every little thing that our Author may think
deserves our Animadversions.

The Rude, and slovenly methods he has taken to asperse his Adversaries are
such as do rather evince the Feebleness of his cause, than deserve the the
Regard of any sober Person.

His talk about the Impossibility of Union between the Church of England, and
the Dissenter, because of the many Important Differences there are among our
selves, is confuted by the Present Union of the Authors of the Ensuing
Treatices, who, though they differ in little things as much as any, the One
being a Confor. the other a Nonconformist; the third of a Uniting Spirit in the
middle between us both, yet are we all heartily agreed in the things that would
Unite us. Moreover it were easy to make it appear that the differences among
the Dissenters in General about Worship and Discipline are rather Nominal than
Real, and that their Union is in a manner already accomplished.

The Notions we insist on in opposing the Deans Substitute are truly
Protestant, such as are owned and embraced by the Famous Hooker, Dr. Field. Mr.
Chilliggworth and Dr. Burnet, and after a Signal manner by the Country
Conformist, who has expressed himself in these Sheets with Gravity and Candor.
He is aware of the design of this Author as well as we, as its Tendencie is
toward Rome, and is sensible, that the methods taken in the opposition some of
the Clergy make against the Peaceable Dissenter, do Justify the French in
their Rigorous and most cruel Persecutions.

There is to the letter of Mr. Humfrey to me at the end, his late Paper added
Entitled Materials for Union, which together with this Preface if we offered no
more will prove the things I have said to be Feasible, and alone serve to that
Firm and Lasting Union, which is chiefly aimed at in these our joint endeavors.

To conclude, The peace of the Church of England, and the Greatness of the King
who is head of it, being things most desirable to every good Protestant and
true Subject, we have in these Papers shown our good will to do something
toward the advance thereof: Which being submitted to the Superior thoughts of
some one who is in a higher Sphere of Ability for the cultivation of it, and of
place for the representing it without prejudice to our Sovereign, we do hope it
may both be well accepted by him, and take with every body else, who do truly
honor the King, seek Concord, and love good men.

Sep. 16. 1681. Stephen Lobb.

The Author not being able to attend the Press desires the Candid Reader before
be peruses the ensuing Discourse to Correct these momentous Errata.

Page 11. l. 9. r. is to have a Right. p, 17. l. 14. dele them. p. 29. l. 38.
for chain r. chair. p. 36. l. 37. for Catholic College, r. Supreme Governing
Heads p. 74. before l. 18. r. I Will now consider the Deans third Argument, which
is p. 76. before l. 4. r. The Deans fourth Argument, which at this time only
deserves Animadversions is, our Divisions give great Advantage to the Papists,
and the Dissenters by their Separation have caused the Devision. Rep. p. ib. l.
5. for the 2. r. 2d. the l. 7. r. not. p. 78. l. 28. for Form r. Term.

A Reply to the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness, etc.
CHAP. I. A Reply to the Reflections on the Title of the Enquiry.
SECT. I.
The Introduction. The Acts of the Enquirers pretended Immodesty Examined. The
Dissenter vindicated from the Reproach of ruining King and Kingdom. The Civil
War the product of Jesuitical Councels, as is confessed by Dr. Heylin. The War
begun by the Episcopal on both sides. The tendency of the Deans Defense toward
Popery, as it is a revival of the Grotian Design.

THE Defense of the Reverend Dean of Paul's Unreasonableness of Separation,
containing little in it of Argument, more than what we find in the Dean's own
Treatise, might pass unanswered, had not the Author, by a fuller Discovery of
the Design of his Party (which are but a few) made it necessary to show to the
world, whither it leads. For in this Defense there are hints enough given to
tempt an Unprejudiced and Impartial Reader to fear, he has engaged himself too
deeply in that Design that was seemingly but begun by the Dean. For which
Reason I will in this, with as much modesty as the subject matter will admit,
and this Author will let me enjoy, show, That as I did not abuse the Dean of
Paul's, when in the Modest and peaceable Enquiry, I detected some of his
Mistakes; even so, if we must pass a Judgment on the Doctor, answerable to the
Character that is to be found of his Substitute in the Defense, it is apparent
that they are conspiring in a Design, which the Learned and Conformable Clergy
will give him little thanks for. The Doctor's Substitute (as hereafter I will
from his own words prove) does sufficiently declare what his party would be at,
which is a point, I Am sure, that will meet with opposition from such as are
true Sons of the Church, whereby the Controversy, if closely followed, must
cease to be between Conformist and Noncormist; it must be between Conformist
and Conformist. It looks as if there were among our Churchmen some resolved to
revive Laud's Design, as it is well known there are many others among them who
highly value the Principles and Temper of that great Protestant Prelate Abbot,
Laud's Predecessor in the Sea of Canterbury, between whom the Scussle must at
last end.

That this may with the greater Conviction be evinced, I will in this Reply to
the Defense of the Dean, etc. confine my self to the Author's own words, as
compared with what is more than suggested in the Writings of Bishop Bramhall,
and some other Sons of the Church of England; the which with due clearness I
shall not be able to compass, if I follow our Author in his disorderly way of
Writing. For which reason I must keep to the Method I took in the Modest and
Peaceable Enquiry, and bring what calls for my observation, into its proper
place. The whole then he has offered in Answer to the Enquiry, may be reduced
to these Heads.

1. His Reflections on the Title of the Enquiry. 2. His Censure of the Author's
Design. 3. The Defense of the Dean.
I Will begin with the First.

The Author reflects on the Title, as if the Discourse, notwithstanding the
specious pretenses of the Title, had not been as Modest, nor as Peaceable as
suggested; in doing which, he spends one whole Chapter, it may be not f^nding
matter enough in the Discourse it self, to enlarge so far, as to write any
thing that might deserve the name of an Answer, or countenance the Title given
his Great Book.

I could very easily therefore, as one unconcerned, pass by this first Chapter,
if there had not been more in it than the representing me as a person who
deserve not the Character of being either Modest or Peaceable. But the Overt
acts of Immodesty, which are insisted on by this Author, being such as cannot
but be of an ill Tendency, I must consider 'em.

The first instance of Immodesty is thus expressed, He begins his Epistle to
the Dean, with observing how industrious the Papists have been, ever since the
Reformation, to ruin England and the Churches of Christ in it, which he
sufficiently proves from their Rebellions and Insurrections in King Edward's
days, the Spanish Armado in Queen Elizabeth's, the Gunpowder Treason in King
James's, etc. and the late Hellish Conspiracy, which was designed for the utter
Extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and the universal Destruction of all
the Professors thereof, whether Episcopal or Dissenter. But this modest man
(says our Author) takes no notice, That King and Kingdom, Church and State
have been once ruined already by such Modest Dissenters, and may be in a fair
way for it again, if we suffer our selves to be Charmed and Lulled asleep by
such modest Inquirers: We are aware, Sir, what a Popish Zeal would do, and what
a Factious Zeal has done; and think our selves concerned, as much as we can, to
countermine the Designs of both. But however, I confess it was very modestly
done to pass over this, that while men are zealous against Popery, they may
fear no danger from any other quarter.

Rep. Whether the mentioning the Rebellions and Insurrections of the Papists in
King Edw. the 6th days, the Spanish Armado in Queen Elizabeth's, the
Gunpowder-Treason in King James's, the Hellish Plot of late discovered, be an
extraordinary act of Immodesty, or Unpeaceableness, let any temperate man among
the Church of England judge that please. Is it an Act of Immodesty to relate
such notorious Truths? or of Unpeaceableness, to mention the Dangers we are in,
on the account of Popish bloody Plots? This it may be is not the Crime, but
what follows, which is,

This modest man (says our Author) takes no notice, That King and Kingdom,
Church and State, have been once ruined already by such modest Dissenters, and
may be in a fair way for it again, if we suffer our selves to be Charmed and
Lulled asleep by such Modest Inquirers.

Rep. Hereby we know what the Author would be at; it is as if he had said, This
Modest Enquirer is very immodest and quarrelsome, for not imitating the
Jesuitical Clubs, who are, contrary to the Act of Oblivion, raking in old
sores, calling us to the remembrance of 41. to make us look back on the actings
of Archb. Laud and his Faction, the steps they made toward Rome, the bones of
contention they cast in between a Protestant Prince, and a Church of England
Parliament; the Civil War begun by the Episc^pal, who were Chief in each Army.
'Twas this the Enquirer indeed past over in silence, wishing with his very
Soul, that the Episcopal Clergy had been either so wise or honest as to have
done their utmost to have prevented those Ruins, which their own Divisions
brought on these Nations. For it is well known to many hundreds now alive, who
they were that had an Influence on those Unnatural Broils and Intestine
Quarrels; and whoever will consult Mr. Baxter against Hinekley, or rather Mr.
Rushworth, and Dr. Heylin, will see, That the Sons of the Church of England
more on both sides the active persons concerned in the very beginning of those
Troubles. But those things the Inquirer was loath to mention, it being as
Unnecessary, as Unsuitable to his Peaceable Design.

However, seeing our Author will not be satisfied, unless some notice be taken
of those that once already Ruined King and Kingdom, etc. I will out of Dr.
Heylin's Life of Laud, a good Record, at least in the sense of the Dean's
Defender, show, who they were that did it. In a perusal of which 'twill appear,
That 'twas the Papists, who had a sole hand in the Plot; no Protestant, I
verily believe, ever designed what was the unhappy product of the Hellish
Conspiracies of the bloody Papist. This has been long ago discovered by Dr. Du
Moulm, and since by Dr. Oats, and here most exactly related by Dr. Heylin a
Son of the Church, in these words, viz. A Confederacy was formed amongst them,
[ i. e. the Papists] consisting of some of the most subtle heads in the whole
fesuitical Party; by whom it was concluded to foment the Broils began in
Scotland, and to heighten the Combustions there, that the King being drawn into
a War, might give them the opportunity to effect their Enterprise, for sending
Him and the Archbishop to the other World. Which being by one of the party on
Compunction of Conscience made known to Andreas ab Habernsfield, who had been
Chaplain, as some said, to the Queen of Bohemia, they both together gave
intimation of it to Sir William Boswell, his Majesty's Resident at the Hague;
having first bound him by his Oath, not to reveal the same to any man living,
but to the Archbishop himself, and by the Arch^ishop to the King. This
signified by Boswell's Letters of the 19th of September. together with a general
draught of the Design transmitted to Canterbur; under the hand of Hab^^^^field
himself, the first Discoverer of the Plot: On the receipt of which Dispatches,
the Archbishop giving directions to Boswell to proceed to a further discovery
of it, sends the Intelligence with all speed imaginable, by his Letters of the
11th of the same Month, to the King at York, beseeching nothing more than his
Secrecy in it, that he would not trust his Pockets with those dangerous Papers,
and the business. And so far both the King and he had very good reason to be
sensible of the Dangers which were threatened to them. But when the large
Discovery was brought unto him, transmitted in Boswell's Letter of the 15th of
October, he found some Names in it, which discredited the whole Relation, as
well in his Majesty's judgment, as his own. For, besides this naming of some
professed Papists, as the Duchess of Buckingham, the Countesses of Arundel and
Newport, Montague, Digby and Winter, of whose Fidelity the King was not willing
to have any Suspicion, he named the Earl of Arundel, Windebank Principal
Secretary of State, and Porter one of the Grooms of the Bedchamber, whom he
charged to be the King's utter Enemies, and such as betrayed his Secrets to the
Popes Nuncio upon all occasions; all which his Majesty beheld as men of most
approved Loyalty and Affections to him, by reason whereof no further credit
being given to the Advertisement which they had from Boswell, the danger, so
much feared at first, became more slighted and neglected, than consisted with
his Majesty's Safety, and the condition of the times, which were apt to
mischief. For, though the Party, who first brake the Ice to this Intelligence,
might be mistaken in the Names of some of the Accomplices, which were
interessed in the Design, whose relations unto those of the Church of Rome
might give some ground for the mistake; yet the Calamities, which soon after
fell upon them both, the deplorable Death of the Archbishop first, and his
Majesty afterward, declare sufficiently, That there was some greater reality
in the Plot, than some were willing to believe. But it it had been a Maxim
with King James, his Father, That Suspicion was the Sickness and Disease of a
Tyrant, which laid him open to all the subtle practices of malicious cunning.
And it had been taken up by this King for an Axiom also, That it was better to
be Deceived than to Distrust; which paved a plain and easy way to all those
Misfortunes, which in the whole course of his Reign, especially for ten years
last past, had been brought upon him. So far Heylin.

By this it is evident, That the Papists were the first Contrivers of all that
ruin which befell the King and Kingdom, Church and State; and that the first
who received any impressions from their wretched Attempts, were the Sons of the
Church, is as evident to such as consult Baxter, Rushworth, etc. who it may be
were ignorant of their Hellish Designs; though it is evident enough that Laud
was acquainted with them: For which reason it seems somewhat surprising, that
notwithstanding his being so fully enlightened concerning it, he still inclined
to favor the Papist more than the Puritan; concerning which party, they had
nothing but their ungrounded Surmises to occasion any ill thoughts of 'em. For
in the whole account Heylin gives of their Essays, I find nothing but
intimations of their Secret actings, which it is like were so secret, that not
one Overt Act can be given before there was an open breach between King and
Parliament; at which time the Papists come in as Auxiliaries to the King, and
the Puritan Party came in as such to the Parliament: the King remaining to the
very Death a Resolved Protestant, which animated the Papist to do their utmost
for his Ruin; in which after they had in part accomplished their Devilish
Design, they strangely triumphed. I question not but that many of the Roman
Faction were in both Armies, in the one Openly, in the other under a Covert;
and that they attempted to heighten the Division; and at length turned all
things into Confusion. This I take to be a true account of the Transaction; but
why our Churchmen should thus glory, as if they had no hand in it, is not easy
to conjecture: Neither is it over-easie to imagine, what the reason is, that
our Author should represent the Papist so favorably, even when his Discourse
against the Dissenters is so Invective. For says he,

We are aware, Sir, what a Popish Zeal would do, and what a Factious Zeal has
done, etc. q. d. We are aware of what the Papists would do, not what they have
done. What the Papists have done must not be mentioned, not one word of that:
Not one word of their old Rebellions and Insurrections; not one word of the
Gunpowder Plot; not one word of the Plot discovered by Andreas ab Habernsfield;
not one word of the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, of the Assassination of
Justice Arnold; not one word of what they have done, only what they would do. A
pleasant Insinuation, as if the Papist never yet discovered by any Overt-acts
their Horrid Design, etc. It Is the Factious Zeal only which has done somewhat.
But yet this is not to prepare the people to expect a Presb^terian Plot, when
there is none among Protestants, but what is carried on by the Sons of the
Church: This is not to act suitable to the P^pish D^signs, which were to
destroy the King, after they had prepared the People to believe the
Presbyterians were Resolved for it. Whether this was the Dean's Design in
misrepresenting Diss^nters, I could not tell; but as to your self. I must say,
That whatever your Design is, if you had been hired by a Popish Plotter, you
could not more effectually do his work for him; and that the Protestant Gentry,
who mind the Substantial part of their Religion, more than an indifferent Rite,
cannot but deeply resent these your Proceedings.

Is it not most obvious, that notwithstanding the loud Cries we have had of the
Factious and Seditious Principles of Dissenters, the Dissenters have approved
themselves, when under the severest Censures and Pressures of our Clergy, to be
men of another Character? That notwithstanding the many Prophetical and
Historical Discourses among our Churchmen of a Presbyterian Plot, no such
thing could be fastened on a Protestant Dissenter; the Design of the Papists
being the real Destruction of hearty Protestants, though Sons of the Church,
under the name of Presbyterians? Read Mr. Dangerfield's Discovery of that
Sham-Presbyterian Plot, and you will find My Lord Duke of Monmouth, the Lord
President, the Lord of Essex, brought in by the Papists as Presbyterian
Plotters: Although it is well known, that they are Sons of the Church of
England, whose Loyalty to their Prince, and Firmness to the Protestant
Religion, does equalize the greatness of their Honor.

Methinks, Sir, it is now high time to consider, That as all Protestants,
whether Episcopal, Presbyterian, or Congregational, etc. are all in one bottom,
even so the One cannot be ruined with the preservation of the Other. Ought we
not then to entertain better thoughts of each other? What, shall we now quarrel
with one another, even when, unless we join in putting our hand to the Pump,
the Ship sinks, and we all must perish together? But I must not enlarge on this
subject, lest I be thought too Immodest and Unpeaceable.

A Second Instance of Immodesty now succeeds; 'Twas modestly done (says the
Author) to charge the Dean with a Design of gratifying the Roman Faction, etc.
And at the same time to laugh at the Jesuits and Coleman as great Fools, for
designing to bring in Popery, by the Tolerating Fanatics.

Rep. How is this that our Author treats the Dean so unmannerly, as to join him
thus with the Jesuits and Coleman! Methinks a desending the Dean should be a
distinct work from a vindicating the reputation of Jesuits, and the Traitor
Coleman. And why, Sir, may I not laugh at the Counsels of some Jesuits, without
being immodest to the Doctor? Have you such venerable thoughts of these men,
that a laughing at their Devices is a Crime that must not pass without Rebuke?

But the Dean is represented as a Reviler of Dissenters, and that is immodest.

Rep. What I suggested as to this, was not without great reason, as may appear
from what I insisted on in the Enquiry; but he goes on very pleasantly, as if
by Reviling Dissenters I meant Confuting Dissenters. Really Sir, if by Reviling
Dissenters I meant a Confuting of them, I fear I should have wronged the Doctor
and the Truth also, if I had but said there was any one Reviling passage in the
whole Treatise; but the fixing this sense on the words, to the end you may give
us an account of your admirable Faculty of Talking very little to the purpose,
is an excellency wherein you seem to delight; for I Am sure you are so modest as
to fasten your own, which is a foreign sense on my words, and then run on
triumphantly, etc. but after so easy a manner, that it deserves not an Answer;
and therefore I Will consider the great thing.

The Doctor is brought in (you say) as one designing to Gratify the Roman
Faction.

Rep. That I might prevent any just offense here, I was express in
distinguishing between the Deans own intent, and tendency of his Treatise. Take
my words in the Enquiry, I will propose the Design of the Dr's History, [ (i.
e.) of that account he had given of Dissenters, etc.] being charitably disposed
to distinguish between the Finis Operis, and Operantis; For though the End of
the work it self cannot but in its tendency prove pernicious to the Protestant
Religion, yet I hope the Dr. designed it not as such.

But though I thought my self obliged to be thus civil in my thoughts of the
Reverend Dean, I do not find any Reason to pass the same favorable Censure on
you. The Dr. I knew wrote against the Papists; but whether you have not in some
Treatises formerly done as much in some respects for 'em, is best known to your
self. Whatever you have done either for or against the Papist formerly, by what
I find in your Defense of the Dean, I do very much suspect you. It Is very
evident, you have in your Notions about the Nature of an Universal Church, the
Notion of Schism, etc. fallen in with those that were not ashamed to own, that
they were for a going toward Rome, in order to an accommodating the
Differences between the Church of England, and the Papist.

That this may appear to be so, I will faithfully set down your notion of these
things, and then compare it with the Design of Archb. Laud and Archb. Bramhall,
and leave it to the judgment of the Candid and Impartial Reader, whether you
are not of those who ran the Cassandrian way. You say,

1. That the Catholic Church consists of such Particular Churches, as have
all the Essentials of a Church, as to Faith, Government, and Discipline. It
consists of all these, as Similar parts, which have the same Nature, and make
up one Body by a common Union. This p. 139, 140.

2. That the Catholic Church, though it consists of all Particular Churches
contained in it, yet it is not a mere arbitrary combination and confederacy of
particular Churches; but is the Root and Fountain of Unity, and in order of
nature antecedent to particular Churches, as the Sun is before its Beams, and
the Root before its Branches. So that all Particular Churches received their
denomination of Catholic Church from the Catholic Church, p. 144, and c.

Here you assert, That the Universal Church is in order of nature antecedent to
Particular Churches, as the Sun is before its Beams, and the Root before its
Branches, etc. But your Allusion is not ad rem; for you should have given us
some instance of some one Universal, that was in order of nature antecedent to
its Particulars, which is impossible; it being, in the sense of most, evident,
That Universale is unum in multis, that is, in many particulars, which
Universal has no real Existence, but in Particulars; for abstracted from all
Particulars, it is only an Ens raticnis, having its being in the Eutopian
Commonwealth; whence we distinguish between the consideration of an Universal
as Formal, and as Fundamental. Fundamentally, and it is quid singular; but
Formally, and so it is abstracted from all Singulars; the Particulars being the
foundation of the Universal, the Root from which the Universal does proceed.
Now if it be the Particulars that are the foundation of the Universal, How can
the Universal be the Root of the Particulars? This is the more remarkable in
our Author, because he falls in with an old exploded part of Independency, viz.
That what person soever is not a Member of a Particular Church, is not so of
the Universal Church. Which being so, I would fain know Where this Universal
Church should be, when Antecedent to any Particular Church? If he had said,
That by a Particular Church, he meant only such as were Organized and fallen into
some complete order; and that there were many, who not having arrived to that
degree of being complete Church Members of any Particular Church, who yet were
Members of the Church Universal; he would have had ground for his Assertion;
for there must be Particular Christians before Particular Churches: but to
adhere to his Hypothesis, which seems to be but a step to the asserting
Diocesan Churches to be in order of nature antecedent to particular
Congregations, is ridiculous; especially seeing he asserts, That the Universal
Church is an Organized, or Political Body, the (...)of all Instituted Worship
and Discipline; as if there could be Church Members under Government,
antecedent to the being of Particular Churches, even when no one that is not a
Member of a Particular Church, is a Member of the Universal: As if a City that
consists of many particular Houses were in order of nature antecedent to every
particular House.

3. That the Unity of the Christian Church consists in one Communion.
Catholic Unity signifies Catholic Communion. To have a Right to be a Member
of the Christian Church, to communicate in all the several Duties and Offices
of Religion with all Christians all the World over, and to partake in all the
Privileges of Christians, and to be admitted to the freedom of their
conversation, to eat, and drink, and discourse, and trade together. So that
such as are not Church Members have no right to trade among Christians; A
pleasant Insinuation!

4. The Unity of the Christian Sacraments, viz. Baptism and the Lord's Supper,
prove the Unity of Christian Communion. This is from p. 193. to p. 208.

5. Unity of Church Power and Government, does also prove the Unity of
Christian Communion. Under this head he maintains; 1. That every Bishop,
Presbyter, or Deacon, by his Ordination is made a Minister of the Catholic
Church; though for the better edification of the Church, the exercise of his
Office is more peculiarly confined to some particular place. 2. Every Bishop
and Presbyter receives into the Catholic Church by Baptism, and shuts out of
the Catholic Church by Excommunication. 3. That the Catholic Church is
united and coupled by the cement of Bishops, who stick close together; for
which you produce Cyprian. 4. That the Unity and Peace of the Episcopacy is
maintained by their governing their Churches by mutual Consent. Whence you
mention the Collegium Episcopale, the Episcopal College, which I take to be a
Council of Bishops, which Bishops have an Original Right and Power in relation
to the whole Church, (i.e.) the foreign Bishops, as those of Alexandria and
Rome, etc. have an Original Power and Right in relation to the whole Church,
even a Right and Power in relation to England. 5. That every part of the
Universal Church is under the Government of the Universal Bishops assembled in
their College, or in Council; and what Bishop soever abuse his Power, he shall
be accountable to those assembled in Council. 6. That there is no such thing as
the Independency of Bishops, their Independency being almost as inconsistent
with Ecclesiastical Unity, as the Indpendency of single Congregations. Whence
the Church of England, called either Archi-Episcopal, National, or Patriarchal,
is not Independent, but accountable unto Foreign Bishops, if at any time they
abuse their Power. 7. That this Council of Foreign Bishops, unto which they
are accountable, must look on the Bishop of Rome as their Primate; the Primacy
of the Bishop of Rome being acknowledged, it seems, by our Author himself, as
well as by Bramhall. The Primacy (he says) out of Cyprian, being given to
Peter, that it might appear, that the Church of Christ was One; and the Chair,
that is, the Apostolical Office and Power, is One. Thus Cyprian, on whom lay
all the care of the Churches, dispatches Letters to Rome, from whence they were
sent through all the Catholic Churches. All this is to be found from p. 208
to the end of the Chapter. Thus you agree with Bramhall, though you express not
the Notion so well as he does, and should learn it better.


Before I proceed therefore, I cannot but desire you to consider what is become
of your Protestant Episcopacy; I beseech you, Sir, consider, Is the French
Episcopacy, a Protestant Episcopacy? If not, seeing the English Episcopacy, as
described by you, is the same with the French, Why call you the one a Popish,
and the other a Protestant Episcopacy? Whether you agree not in these respects
with the Papists, let the world judge.

But you go on to assert,

6. That to be in Commuion with any Church, is to be a Member of it, every
Member having equal Right, and equal Obligation to all parts of Christian
Communion, even that Communion which is External and Visible, p. 132, and c.

7. All Christians being bound to communicate with that part of the Catholic
Church wherein they live, are guilty of Schism, if they separate; whoever
separate from such particular Churches as are members of the Catholic Church,
do separate from the Universal Catholic Church, which is Schism. For to divide
from any part of the Catholic Church, is to break Catholic communion, i. e.
to be a Schismatic. Whence it is concluded, 1. That Schism is a separating from
the Catholic Church, which notion taken singly, will stand the Dissenters and
all true Christians who must be acknowledged to be members of the Catholic
Church, in great stead, freeing them from the odious sin of Schism. The
Dissenters divide not themselves from the communion of the Universal Church,
Ergo, not Schismatics. But the mischief is, that as this notion of Schism
which our Author adheres unto, is the same with that of the Papists, as is to
be seen in Filiucius, Azorius, etc. but in an especial manner in Charity
maintained by Catholics; even so he closes with the same Popish Faction, in
asserting, 2. That separating from the Church of England is a separating from
the Catholic Church, as if the Catholic Church had been as much confined
within the bounds of the Church of England, as the Papists says within the
limits of Rome. Whence whoever separates from the Church of England, cuts
himself from the Catholic Church, puts himself out of a state of salvation; He
is extra Ecclesiam, extra quam nulla salus; they are all, while Schismatics,
in a state of damnation. But surely if these men believed so much, methinks
they should not be at rest until all their unscriptural impositions were
removed, unless they have greater kindness for such trifles, than they have for
such immortal souls for whom Christ dyed.


By this Doctrine we may understand why it is that some of our Clergy show
greater tenderness toward Drunkards, Swearers, Papists, than toward poor
Dissenters: The former may hold communion with the Church of England, and
consequently with the Catholic Church; when the others are undoubtedly in a
state of damnation; as if we were all in the same state with Heretics.

I Will not (as easily I might) now enlarge, in showing the weakness which the
Dean's Substitute has discovered in the management of this Grotian or
Cassandrian Design; but only tell him, That if he had consulted that excellent
Treatise The Grotian Religion discovered, by Mr. Baxter, he might have seen an
unanswerable confutation of a great part of his Book; or if he had rather
applied himself unto that great Prelate Bishop Bramhall, a man of extraordinary
worth for his Learning, he might have better digested his Notion: For there he
would have been furnished with such distinctions about Communion, that would
have been for his purpose and rectification. In his Defense of the Church of
England, Tom. 2. Disp. 2. c. 2. he says, The Communion of the Christian
Catholic Church, is partly internal, partly external. Among many other things,
in discoursing of internal communion, it is added, That it is to judge charitably
one of another. To exclude none from the Catholic Communion and hope of
salvation, either Eastern, or Western, or Southern, or Northern Christians,
which profess the ancient Faith of the Apostles and primitive Fathers,
established in the first General Councils, and comprehended in the Apostolic,
Nicene, and Athanasian Creeds. This granted by our Author, as described by
Bramhall, seeing the Faith contained in these Creeds is professed by the
Dissenters, it is queried, Whether or no this Gentleman does not fall short in
this respect of Catholic internal communion, by excluding the Dissenters from
the Catholic communion and hope of salvation? Moreover as to external
communion, says Bramhall, There are degrees of exclusion; every one that is
excluded, is not cut off from the Catholic Church; for external communion may
sometimes be suspended more or less, by the just censures of the Church clave
non errante, as in the primitive times some were excluded a caetu
participantium, only from the use of the Sacraments; others a caetu
procumbentium, from Sacraments and Prayers also; and others a caetu Audientium,
from Sacraments, Prayers, and Sermons; and others a caetu Fil^lium, from the
society of Christians, yea and as it may be suspended, it may be waved, or
withdrawn by particular Churches or persons, from their Neighbor Churches, or
Christians, in their Innovations or Errors. Nor is there so strict and
perpetual an adherence required to a particular Church, as to the universal
Church. This surely is enough to intimate how sudden our Authors thoughts were:
for had he but deliberated on those things as this great Bishop did, he would
not assert so confidently, That the separating from a particular Church that is
in the Universal, is a separating from the Universal.

Leaving therefore our Author to receive further light from this Bishop
concerning his own notion, I Will make my address to the Reader, beseeching him
to apply himself to our Protestant Divines for an answer to what is said
against the dependency of the Church of England on Foreign Churches, such as
Rome, etc. And as to what he says concerning Schism from the Universal Church,
which p. 256. says he, is when any shall separate from that part of the
Catholic Church where they dwell, and set up any distinct Churches merely for
some greater degree of purity. This is so like what the Author of Charity
maintained by Catholics, insisted on, that the Memorandums given by the famous
Mr. Chillingworth, will be sufficient to enab'e an ordinary capacity to answer
the whole he has asserted about Schism.

1. That not every separation, but a causless separation from the external
communion of any Church, is the sin of Schism.

2. That imposing upon men under pain of Excommunication, a necessity of
professing known errors, and practicing known corruptions, is a sufficient and
necessary cause of separation; and that this is the cause which Protestants
alledg to justify their separation from the Church of Rome. To which I must
add, That this is the cause which Dissenters alledg to justify their
separation from the Church of England, it being uncontroulably true, That the
professing known errors, and the practicing known corruptions, is imposed on
Dissenters on pain of Excommunication, as has been proved in Mr. Baxter's
first Plea for Peace, never answered, but only nibled at by some inconsiderate
Scriblers. The Dissenters are convinced in conscience, that if they continued
in your communion, they should sin against God. What can be offered against
this, I know not, unless you will say unto us thus, viz. If this your pretense of
conscience may serve, what Schismatic in the Church, what popular seditious
brain in a Kingdom, may not alledg the dictamen of conscience to free
themselves from Schism or Sedition? No man wishes them to do any thing against
their conscience; but we say that they may and ought to rectify and depose
such a conscience, which is easy for them to do. This is what has been
frequently urged by the Clergy, yea by the Dean of Paul's. But seeing these
words are taken out of the mouth of a Papist, the answer shall be no other than
what I find in the mouth of a son of the Church, the famous Chillingworth, who
asserts, That whoever is convinced in conscience, that the Church of Rome errs,
cannot with a good conscience but forsake her in the profession and practice of
her errors; and the reason hereof is manifest, because otherwise he must
profess what he believes not, and practice what he approves not; which is no
more than your self in thesi have diverse times affirmed. For in one place you
say, it is unlawful to speak any the least untruth. Now he that professes your
Religion, and believes it not, what else does he but live in a perpetual lie?
Again, in another, you have called them that profess one thing, and believe
another, a damned crew of dissembling Sycophants. And therefore in inveighing
against Protestants for forsaking the profession of those Errors, the belief
whereof they had already forsaken, what do you but rail at them for not being a
damned crew of Sycophants? [The same may be said as to the Dissenters who are
in conscience convinced, that they must profess to believe what really they do
not, should they conform]. But as to what the wicked may pretend as to
conscience, take the Author's answer: It Is said that a pretense of conscience
will not serve to justify separation from being Schismatical; which is true,
but little to the purpose, (says Mr. Chil.) seeing it was but an erroneous
persuasion, much less an hypocritical pretense, but a true and well grounded
conviction of conscience. And therefore though seditious men in the Church and
State, may pretend conscience for a cloak of their Rebellion; yet this I hope
hinders not but that an honest man ought to obey his rightly informed
conscience, rather than the unjust command of his Tyrannous Superiors.
Otherwise with what color can you defend either your own refusing the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy? I may add, Otherwise with what color can the Dean
and his Substitute defend their so firmly adhering to the present Constitution?

But to return to the third Memorandum.

3. That to leave the Church, and to leave the external communion of the Church
at least, as Dr. Potter understands the words (and I think I may safely add, as
every Protestant but a Grotian understands) is not the same thing. That being
done by ceasing to be a member of it, by ceasing to have those requisites which
constitute a man a member of it, as Faith and Obedience; This by refusing to
communicate with any Church in her Liturgies and public Worship of God. This
little Armor, if it he rightly placed, I am persuaded will repel all those
batteries which you threaten shall be so furious. To use the words of Mr. Chil.
And for this reason I will now show the Reader,

That the Model the Deans Substitu ^^a^h given us, is what is not only in it
self admirably adjusted to accommodate the difference between one Faction of
the Church of England, and the Church [not the Court] of Rome, for that is
their Distinction; but moreover it is very like that of Archb. Laud, for which
he was censured as a Favourer of Popery.

This I will attempt to perform, by giving you an account of the Charge that
was brought in against Laud in the House of Commons by the Lord Faulkland, a
true Son of the Church; and the Reply is made thereunto by Dr. Heylin, whereby
'twill appear, that as there is an agreement between Laud's Design and our
Authors, even so this as well as that was to bring the Church of Rome and
England together.

1. Take My Lord Fauklkland's Speech made in the House of Commons, as
represented by Dr. Heylin in the Life of Archbishop Laud, p. 383. A little
search (says he) will find them to have been the Destruction of Unity, under
pretense of Uniformity; To have brought in Superstition and Scandal, under
titles of Reverence and Decency; to have defiled our Church, by adorning our
Churches; to have slackned the strictness of that Union which was formerly
between us and those of our Religion beyond the Seas, an Action as unpolitick
as ungodly: Or we shall find them to have resembled the Dog in the Manger, to
have neither Preached themselves, nor suffered those that would; to have
brought in Catechizing, only to thrust out Preaching; and cried down Lecturers
by the names of Factions, either because their Industry in that Duty appeared a
reproof to their neglect of it; or with intention to have brought in Darkness,
that they might the easier sow their Tares while it was Night: And by that
introduction of Ignorance, introduce the better that Religion, which accounts
it the Mother of Devotion. In which (says he) they have abused his Majesty, as
well as his people; For when he had with great wisdom silenced on both parts
those Opinions, which have often tormented the Church, and have and always will
trouble the Schools, they made use of this Declaration to tie up one side, and
to let the other loose: Whereas they ought either in discretion to have been
equally restrained, or in Justice to have been equally tolerated. And it is
observable, that the party to which they gave this License, was that, whose
Doctrine, though it was not contrary to Law, was contrary to Custom; and for a
long time in this Kingdom was no oftener Preached, than recanted, etc. We find
them introducing such Doctrines, as admitting them to be true, the truth could
not recompense the Scandal; or such as were so far false, as Sir Thomas Moore
says of the Casuists, their business was not to keep men from sinning, but to
inform them, Qua prope ad peccatum sine peccato liceat accedere. So it seemed
their work was to try, how much of a Papist might be brought in without Popery;
and to destroy as much of the Gospel, without bringing themselves into danger
of being destroyed by Law. To go yet further, some of them have so
industriously labored to deduce themseves from Rome, that they have given
great suspicion that in Gratitude they desire to return thither, or at least to
meet it half way; Some have evidently labored to bring in an English, though
not a Roman Popery. I mean, not only the out side and dress of it, but equally
absolute, a blind dependence of the People upon the Clergy, and of the Clergy
upon themselves: And have opposed the Papacy beyond the Seas, that they might
settle one beyond the Water.

2. I Will now proceed to the Reply Dr. Heylin makes to this Speech of the Lord
Faulkland.

1. He produces the several Protestations of the Archbishop made in the
Starchamber, [p. 389, 390, etc.] and at his Trial before the Lords; and on the
Scaffold just before his going out of this world, of his Innocence as to this.
Besides, Dr. Heylin does insist on his. Conference with Fisher the Jesuit, the
enlarging that Conference as an Argument that the Archbishop was no Papist.

2. Touching the Design of working a Reconciliation betwixt us and Rome, it is
acknowledged by Heylin, and the Design applauded. Take his own words, I thought
when our Savior said Beati Pacifici, it had been sufficient warrant to any man
to endeavor Peace, to build up the Breaches in the Church, and to make
Jerusalem like a City, which is at Unity in it self, especially where it may be
done not only Salva Charitate, without breach of Charity; but Salva Fide too,
without wrong to Faith. The greatest part of the Controversies between us and
the Church of Rome not being in the Fundamentals, or in any Essential point in
the Christian Religion, I cannot but look upon it as a most pious work, to
endeavor an Atonement in the Superstructures. So far Heylin goes to show both
the Lawfulness of the endeavors of a Reconciliation, and then the Possibility
of obtaining of it. The which Dr. Heylin no sooner evinces, but he admits that
such a Reconciliation was endeavored betwixt the Agents for both Churches, and
gives an hint upon what terms the Agreement was to have been made, and how far
they proceeded on it.

3. As to Reconciliation (says he out of a Book entitled the Pope's Nuncio,
affirmed to have been written by a Venetian Ambassador, at his being in
England) between the Churches of England and Rome, there were made some General
Propositions and Overtures by the Archbishops Agents; they assuring, that his
Grace was very much disposed thereunto: And that if it was not accomplished in
his Lifetime, it would prove a work of more difficulty after his Death. That
in very truth, for the last three years the Archbishop had introduced some
Innovations, approaching near the Rites and Forms of Rome: That the Bishop of
Chichester, a great Confident of his Grace, the Lord Treasurer, and eight other
Bishops of his Grace's party, did most passionately desire a Reconciliation
with the Church of Rome; that they did day by day recede from their ancient
Tenants, to accommodate with the Church of Rome; that therefore the Pope ought
on his part to make some steps to meet them, and the Court of Rome remit
something of its Rigor in Doctrine, or otherwise no accord will be. The
Composition on both sides was in so good a forwardness before Panzany left the
Kingdom, that the Archbishop and Bishop of Chichester had often said, That
there were but two sorts of people likely to impede and hinder the
Reconciliation; to wit, the Puritans amongst the Protestants, and the Jesuits
amongst the Catholics.

Let us next see the judgment and relation of another Author, in a Gloss or
Comment on the former, entitled The English Pope, Printed at London in the
same Year, 1643, and he will tell us, That after Con had undertook the managing
of the Affairs, matters began to grow to some Agreement. The King Required,
says he, such a Dispensation from the then Pope, as that his Catholic
Subjects might resort to the Protestant Churches, and to take the Oaths of
Supremacy and Fidelity; and that the Pope's Jurisdiction here should be
declared to be but of Humane Right. And so far had the Pope consented, that
whatever did concern the King therein, should have been really performed, so
far as other Catholic Princes usually enjoy and expect as their due: And so
far as the Bishops were to be Independent both from King and Pope, there was no
fear of breach on the Pope's part. So that upon the point, the Pope was to
content himself amongst us in England with a Priority, instead of a Superiority
over other Bishops; and with a Primacy instead of a Supremacy in these Parts of
Christendom, which I conceive no man of Learning and Sobriety would have
grudged to grant him. It was also condescended to in the name of the Pope, that
Marriage might be permitted to Priests; that the Communion might be administered
sub utraque specie; and that the Liturgy might be officiated in the English
Tongue. And though the Author adds not long after, that it was to be suspected,
That so far as the Inferior Clergy and the People were concerned, the after
performance was to be left to the Popes discretion; yet this was but his own
Suspicion, without ground at all. And to obtain a Reconciliation upon these
advantages, the Archbishop had all the reason in the world to do as he did, in
ordering the Lords-Table to be placed where the Altar stood, and making the
accustomed Reverence in all approaches toward it, and accesses to it: In
beautifying and adorning Churches, and celebrating the Divine Service with all
due Selemnities; in taking care that all offensive and exasperating passages
should be expunged out of such Books as were brought to the Press; and for
reducing the extravagancy of some Opinions to an evener temper. His Majesty had
the like Reason also for Tolerating lawful Recreations on Sundays and Holydays.

But the Doctor goes on, If you would know how far they had proceeded toward
this happy Reconciliation, the Popes Nuncio will assure us thus, That the
Universities, Bishops, and Divines of this Realm, did daily embrace Catholic
Opinions, though they professed not so much with Pen, or Mouth, for fear of the
Puritans. For example, They hold that the Church of Rome is a true Church; That
the Pope is Superior to all Bishops; That to him it appertains to call General
Councils; That it is lawful to pray for the Souls of the departed; That Altars
ought to be erected of Stone: In sum, That they believe all that is taught by
the Church, but not by the Court of Rome. Another of their Authors tells us,
(as was elsewhere noted) That those amongst us of greatest Worth, Learning, and
Authority, began to love Temper and Moderation: That their Doctrines began to
be altered in many things, for which their Progenitors forsook the Visible
Church of Christ; As for example, The Pope not Antichrist, Prayers for the
Dead, Limbus Patrum, Pictures; That the Church has Authority in determining
Controversies of Faith, and to interpret Scriptures about Free Will,
Predestination, Universal Grace; That all our Works are not Sins, Merit of good
Works, Inherent Justice, Faith alone does justify, Charity to be preferred
before Knowledge, the Authority of Traditions, Commandments possible to be kept:
That in Exposition of the Scripture, they are by Canon bound to follow the
Fathers; And that the once fearful names of Priests and Altars are used
willingly in their Talk and Writings. In which compliances, so far forth as
they speak the Truth, says Heylin (for in some points, through the Ignorance
of the One and the Malice of the Other, they are much mistaken) there is scarce
any thing which may not very well consist with the established (though for a
time discontinued) Doctrine of the Church of England. The Articles whereof, as
the same Jesuit has observed, seem patient, or ambitious rather of some sense
wherein they may seem Catholic. And such a sense is put upon them by him that
calls himself Franciscus a Sancta Clara, as before was said. So far Heylir.

Thus to carry on this Recenciling Design, all the care imaginable must be
taken to humor the Papist, not only by prosecuting the Puritan with the
greatest severity; but the Pope must not any longer be stigmatized with the
name of Antichrist; all exasperating passages in any Book brought to the Press,
must be expunged, not one word of the Gunpowder-Treason; for said Baker the
Bishop of London's chaplain, We are not now so angry with the Papists, as we
were twenty years ago; and that there was no need to exasperate them; and
therefore the Book concerning the Gunpowder-Treason, must by no means be
reprinted; the Divine Service must be in some respects altered; that whereas
the Reformers in Queen Elizabeth's time had a greater kindness for the Pope
than those in H. 8. and Ed. 6. manifested by expunging a clause against the
Pope, viz. From the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable
enormities, Good Lord deliver us. Even so in imitation, Archbishop Land changes
some phrases in the Book of Prayers for the fifth of November. So far a Church
of England Dr. To which I might add several other instances, but I wish there
had not been the woeful occasion of insisting on so much.

By this time the Reader may see cause to suspect at least the Deans
Substitute, who in the Defense of the Dr. gives us the scheme of the old
Grotian model, so much esteemed by the Archbishop Laud, who in his walking
toward Rome, kept most exactly thereunto.

But notwithstanding this, caution must be had, that we reproach not all the
Church of England as if they had been such as this Author; for I do verily
believe there are very few this day in England among the Conforming Clergy, who
will approve of this man's notion, but probably may judge themselves as much
concerned to oppose it, as any among the Dissenters. I Am sure Abbot Archbishop
of Canterbury, and Usher Primate of Ireland, were persons of quite another
principle and temper.

And not only Abbot and Usher, but if we may judge of a Queen Elizabeth
Protestant by the Writings of the famous Hooker and Dr. Field, we may be sure
that this man (to say nothing of the Dean) has (notwithstanding the great talk
of the glory of the first Reformation) forsaken the notion the old church of
England had of the church, and of such as are judged Schismatical, falling in
with the French Papacy about Church Government, as I will evince in the next
Section.

SECT. II.
The Deans Substitutes agreement with the Papists about Schism, even when he
differs from the Church of England, detected. His notion about the Government
of the Catholic Church the same with that of the French Papist.

THAT our Author entertains notions about the nature of the Visible Church, and
of the Schismatical, very different from what the old Queen Elizabeth
Protestants did, will appear with the greatest conviction to such as will but
consult the famous Mr. Hooker and Dr. Field, who do most expressly contradict
what is asserted in the Dean's Defense.

The Dean's Defender does extremely insist on the Unity of the Universal
Church, as what does consist in more than in the Unity of the Faith, though in
combination of those other graces of Love, and Charity, and Peace, to wit, in
an external communion, Take his own words in answer to a supposed objection.

P. 183. But though Faith alone is not sufficient to Christian Unity, yet Faith
in combination with those other graces of Love, and Charity, and Peace, make a
firm and lasting union. This I readily grant (says he); but yet must add this
one thing, That Christian love, and charity, and peace, in the language of the
New Testament, and of the ancient Fathers, when they signify Christian Unity,
signify also one communion, that is, the unity of a Body and Society which is
external and visible; and does not only signify the union of souls and
affections, but the union of an external and visible communion.

P. 184. By the union of an external and visible communion, he means the living
in Christian communion and fellowship with each other; that is, a worshipping
God together after one and the same external and visible manner.

P. 248. Moreover he adds, That such as separate themselves from the external
communion of any particular Church that is part of the Universal, do separate
themselves from the Universal visible Church. All Schismatics, in his opinion,
cut themselves off from the visible Catholic Church, even as all such as are
excommunicated, are cut off.

This is the notion of the Deans Substitute, which is as agreeable to the sense
of the Papist, as it is in it self grossly absurd, and different from the
doctrine of sound Church of England Protestants.

That it is agreeable to the sense of the Papists, you will find in a Conference
between Dr. Peter Gunning, and Dr. Pierson, with two Disputants of the Romish
Profession. All Schismatics (say the Romish Disputants) are out of the Church,
and quite separate from it, as a part cut off is separate from the body.
Schismatic is a term contradistinct to Catholic. No Schismatics can be true
members of the Catholic church; for Schism, as they define it, is a voluntary
separation of one part from the whole true visible church of Christ. The
correspondency that there is between the Author of the Deans Defense, and those
Papists, about the formal reason of Schism, is as much as if the Defender had
fetched his Definitition of Schism out of their Writings; which notion, as
embraced by one that professes himself a Protestant, is as grossly absurd, as
it is contrary unto Protestant principles.

I say, such a notion entertained by a professed Protestant, is grossly absurd;
for it exposes him to the triumph of the Roman Catholics, it being impossible
that the Papists, notwithstanding their Schismatical Impositions, should be
esteemed Schismatical by our Author. For all such as are Schismatical, are
(says he) cut off from the visible Catholic Church, of which the Church of
Rome is acknowledged to be a true part, although from it these men, as they are
Protestants, separate, and so cut themselves off from the Catholic visible
Church; for such as separate from any true part of the Catholic church,
according unto him, do cut themselves off from the Catholic church, and are
Schismatics.

Take a view then of the admirable abilities of our Auther, who must be
considered to assert, either that the Church of Rome is Schismatical, or not.
If not Schismatical, the church of England must be so, or otherwise there may
be a separation from the external communion of a particular Church that is a
part of the Universal, without being guilty of Schism or of separating from the
Catholic church. But if the Church of Rome be Schismatical, it is either cut
off from the visible Catholic church, or not; if not, then Schism consists not
in a separating from the visible Catholic church; that is, a man may be a
Schismatic, and yet a member of the catholic church, a thing that our Author
denies. But if the church of Rome be cut off from the visible Catholic church,
then the distressed Papist is in as sad a condition as the Dissenter; he is cut
off from the church of Christ, and must be either damned, or saved by another
Name than that of Jesus Christ. If the latter, then farewell Christian
Religion. If the former, Where shall we find any part of the Universal Church
beside the Church of England? All the Protestants beyond the Sea are in the
same state with the Dissenter at home; The Church of Rome, and all such as are
in Subjection to that See, are cut off from the Visible Catholic Church, and
it may be all the Eastern Churches in the World too; that is, the Catholic
Visible Church is confined within the Pale of the Church of England. Pure
Prelatical Donatism with a witness! Where will not Considence, when the
attendant of Ignorance, lead men. Moreover,

This Notion as it is grossly absurd, in like manner it is most contrary to the
old Protestant Principles. Consult Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, lib. 3. and
you will find nothing more fully asserted than, That the Visible Church of Jesus
Christ is therefore One in outward Profession of those things, which
supernaturally appertain to the very essence of Christianity, and are
necessarily required in every particular Christian man. -- But we speak now of
the Visible Church, whose Children are signed with this mark, One Lord, one
Faith, one Baptifm. In whomsoever these things are, the Church does acknowledge
them for her Children. So far Hooker. But you will, it may be, object, That
such as are Schismatical, or Excommunicate, may acknowledge One Lord, hold One
Faith, and receive One Baptism, And shall such be considered as Members of the
Visible Church? Take Mr. Hooker's own words for an Answer, If by external
Profession they be Christians, then are they of the Visible Church of Christ;
and Christians by external Profession are they all, whose mark of Recognizance
has in it those things which we have mentioned; yea; although they be impious
Idolaters, wicked Heretics, Persons Excommunicable, yea and cast out for
notorious Improbity.

Thus it is evident, that Mr. Hooker entertained apprehensions quite contrary to
those of our Author; yea and Mr. Hooker does consider the very Notion asserted
by our Author to be Popish, which he does as such most excellently expose. As
for the Act of Excommunication, (says he) it neither shuts out from the
Mystical, nor clean from the Visible, but only from the Fellowship with the
Visible in holy Duties. In contradiction to which the Dean's Substitute's
Assertion is, p. 226. That Excommunication casts a man out of the visible
Society of Christ's Church, not of this or that particular Church only, but of
the Whole Christian Church. -- He that is cast out of one Church, is thereby
cast out of all, and separated from the Body of Christ, which is but One. --
And therefore such are out of a state of Salvation. As if it had been said in
opposition to Mr. Hooker, Such as are Excommunicate are shut out clean from the
Visible Church, yea and from the Mystical Church. A Notion that Mr. Hooker
considers as held by none but Papists, for he immediately addresseth himself to
the Church of Rome, thus; With what congruity then (says he) does the Church
of Rome deny, that her enemies whom she holds always for Heretics, do at all
appertain to the Church of Christ? -- How exclude they us from being any part
of the Church of Christ, under the color and pretense of Heresy, when they
cannot but grant it possible, even for him [i. e. the Pope] to be as touching
his own personal persuasion Heretical, who in their opinion not only is of the
Church, but holds the chief place of Authority over the same? The like may be
said by way of Answer unto our Author. Moreover the Learned and Judicious Dr.
Field, Son of the Church, is as full in contradicting what is asserted by our
Author. For this Dr. of the Church, discoursing about the Schismatic, says,
lib. 1. c. 13. That their departure is not such, but that notwithstanding their
Schism, they are and remain parts of the Church of God. -- Schismatics,
notwithstanding their Separation, remain still conjoined with the rest of God's
people, in respect of the profession of the whole saving Truth of God, all
outward acts of Religion, and Divine Worship, Power of Order, and Holy
Sacraments, which they by virtue thereof administer, and so still are and
remain parts of the Church of God. -- The like is asserted of such as are cast
out by Excommunication, c. 15.

But I Will not enlarge any further, having sufficiently evinced, that the
Opinions of this man, who treats the Dissenters with so much scorn and
contempt, are such as were anciently by Queen Elizabeth's Protestants exploded
as Popish; and at this very time, I verily believe, rejected by the greatest
part of the Episcopal Clergy; and that the Contest now is not so much between
Dissenters and the Church of England, as between a few under the name of the
Church of England on the one part, and the greater number of the Church of
England, with the Dissenter, on the other. The former under the notion of
running down Dissenters, are preparing materials to meet the Papist: The other,
to the end they may the more effectually prevent the Designs of Rome, have sent
forth their Plea for the Nonconformist, finding themselves concerned to check
the Insolence of those, who in this day of common Calamity, would ruin the
conscientious Protestant Dissenter.

This being so, I must beseech the Reader not to misapprehend me in what
follows, as if I had been speaking reproachfully of the Church of England;
because I cannot but discover, how agreeable the Sentunents of the Deans
Substitute about Church Government are, unto those embraced by the French
Papist.

That I may the more clearly show what are the mischievous Tendencies of our
Author's Notion about Church Government, I will give in short, the most
distinct, and truest state of the Controversy I can, showing what is granted
by sound Protestants, and what not; What are the Doctrines of the Papists: How
far the French and Italian Papist agree, and wherein they differ, and in what
respects the Dean's Substitute concurs with the French.

1. All are so far agreed as to conclude, That God has had a Church at all
times in every Age of the World. We might be very particular in considering the
diverse Denominations under which the Church falls, answerable to the diverse
capacities of the Members thereof, and the diverse states in which it is and
has been, which I shall at this time pass by.

2. That the Church is but One, one Body united to one Head.

3. That this One Church must be considered, as the Members thereof are
scattered up and down the World, etc. and as they are joined together in
particular Societies. The former is called the Church Universal, the other a
Particular Church.

The Papists themselves do acknowledge, That the Church must be considered as
Universal and as Particular; though they looked on the Universal to be such,
whose whole existence was in Particulars; as Universale est unum in multis
singularibus: Whence it follows, That such as are not members of a Particular
Church, they belong not unto the Catholic Visible Church. This very Notion
has been embraced by some, to wit, the Old Independents; but of late it has
been generally exploded by Divines of that name, they leaving it to entertain
such as the Dean's Substitute.

4. That the Church of Christ is under Government. There is such a thing as
Church Government Jure divino.

The Papists, both French and Italian; The Protestants, whether Episcopal,
Presbyterian, Congregational, or Anabaptist, heartily agree in Thesi about this.

5. The great difference is concerning what that Church Government is, which is
of Divine Institution: Where it is seated, whether in a Particular, or in the
Universal Church; and whether it be Monarchical, Aristocratical, or
Democratical, or mixed.

6. The Papists, with whom the Doctor's Substitute does agree, assert, That the
Universal Church is the (...)of Church Government; That all Church Officers
belong to the Universal Church, and have an Original Right to govern the whole
Universal Church.

Take the notion as found in the Defense. We must (says he) consider, that all
the Apostles had relation to the whole Church; and therefore, though being
finite creatures they could not be every where at a time, but betook themselves
to different places, and planted Churches in several Countries, and did more
peculiarly apply themselves to the government of those Churches which they
themselves had planted, and ordained Bishops to succeed them in their care and
charge; yet their Original Right and Power in relation to the whole Church, did
still remain, which they might reassume when they saw occasion for it; and
which did oblige them to take care as far as possibly they could, that the
Church of Christ suffered no injury by the heresy or evil practices of any of
their Colleagues. P. 212.

7. The Protestants (excepting some obscure Writers) assert particular Churches
to be the (...)of Church Government; among whom there are these differences.

1. The Episcopal and Presbyterian differ from the Congregational and
Anabaptistical about the extent of particular Churches, e. g. the latter
concluding that their number must be no more than are capable of personal
communion; the former contrarily judge, That a company of a greater extent may
be included within the confines of a particular Church, who in the management
of their discourses concerning it, give too great an advantage unto the Papacy.
2. The Episcopal and Presbyterian differ from some of the Congregational
concerning the nature of Discipline, the Congregational being esteemed as
espousers of a Democracy, or Populacy, the other against it. 3. The Episcopal
differs from the Presbyterian, in that the Episcopal are for a Monarchy, the
Presbyterian for an Aristocracy.
8. All Protestants generally agree in asserting the Independency of particular
Churches.

It Is notorious that the Church of England established by Law; is a particular
National Church, independent on any Foreign Power whatsoever. Such is the
constitution of our Church, that what Bishop soever is found an abuser of his
Power, he is not accountable to any College of Bishops, but such as are
convened by his Majesty's Authority; and that what apprehensions soever he may
have of his being grieved through any undue procedure, he cannot make any
Appeal to any Foreign Power from the King.

It Is the King who is the Supreme Head of the Church of England; there is no
Power on earth equal unto, or above his in Ecclesiastical Affairs. To appeal
unto any Foreign Power, whether unto one Bishop singly, or unto many by consent
assembled, it is to do what tends to the subverting the present Constitution;
yea, it is to subvert the very foundation of our Government, as it is opposite
unto a French or an Italian Papacy.

Whoever consults the many Laws made in Henry the 8th's time, Edward the 6th's,
and Queen Elizabeth's, cannot but be fully satisfied that the Appeal of any
Bishop, or any other person, from the King unto any other Foreign Power, is
contrary unto the ancient Laws of this Realm; and that such as shall venture
the doing so, run themselves into a Praemunire. For it is most apparent, that
our National Church of England is a particular Independent Church. That neither
the Pope of Rome, nor the Bishop of Paris, nor any other Foreign Bishops, have
any Original Right or Power in relation to England; and that therefore their
assuming any such power, is a sinful Usurpation. All this is undoubtedly true.
Yet,

9. The Deans Substitute exposes the Independency of Episcopal particular
Churches, as what is inconsistent with Catholic Union; and asserts, That if
any Bishops abuse their Power, they are accountable unto a General Council,
that is, unto a Foreign Power, whereby he does his utmost to tare up the Church
of England by the Roots, to subvert his Majesty's Supremacy, as if all the Laws
of the Land concerning it had not been of any force. All this by Dr. Stilling
fleet's Defender.

That this is so, I Will evince from our Authors own words, which are as follow,
And now I cannot but wonder (says he) to find some Learned men very zealous
assertors of the Independency of Bishops, and to alledg St. Cyprians Authority
for it: for what ever difficulty there may be in giving an account of every
particular saying in St. Cyprian, certainly he would never be of this opinion,
who asserts but One Chair, One Apostolical Office and Power, which now resides
in the Bishops of the Universal Church; for when the same Power is in ten
thousand hands, it can be but One only by Unity of consent in the exercise of
it; and it is very wild to imagine that any one of these persons who abuse this
Power, shall not be accountable to the rest for it, i. e. to the College of
Bishops; for (says he soon after) if we consider the practice of the ancient
Church, we shall find that they never thought every Bishop to be Independent,
but as liable to the censure of their Colleagues, as Presbyters and Deacons
were to the censure of their Bishops. P. 212. So far our Author, who does as it
were expressly assert, That the Archbishop of Canterbury, though Metropolitan
and Primate of England, if he abuses his Power, is accountable unto the General
Council, when by consent assembled; that is, the Archbishop, who is not in
power above any other Bishops, (as is by the Deans Substitute asserted) abusing
his Power, is accountable to some Court above any in this Realm, to a General
Council, a College of Bishops.

10. Although the Papists generally assert, That the Universal Church is the
(...)of all Church Government as has been already intimated; yet there is a
difference between the French and Italian Papist about the kind of the
Government; the one insisting on an Aristocracy, the other on a Monarchy, i. e.
the French holds, That the pars Regens of the Universal Church is a General
Council; the Italian, That it is one single person, viz. the Bishop of Rome.

There has been in the Church of Rome for some hundred years, a great contest
concerning the Supreme Regent part of the Universal Church, Whether it be a
General Council, or the Pope. Whether a General Council be above the Pope, or
the Pope above a General Council. About which the Church of Rome is fallen into
three parts, as Bellarmine asserts.

1. That the P^pe is the Supreme Head of the Church, and so much above a
General Council, that he cannot subject himself thereunto. The Government of
the Universal Church, though mixed, being composed of a Democracy, Aristocracy,
and Monarchy, yet principally it is Monarchical. The Supreme Power being
immediately lodged in the Monarch, who is the Bishop of R^me, Christ's Vicar,
and Peter's Successor, he is above a General Council, and not accountable to
any on earth for any abuse he may be guilty of. Of this opinion, says
Bellarmine, are all the Schoolmen generally, especially Sanctus Antonius,
Jeannes de Turrecremata, Alvarus Pelagius, Dominicus Jacobatius, Cajetan,
Pighius, Ferrariensis, Augustinus de Aneena, Petrus de Monte, etc. Yea, this is
the sense of the Jesuits generally, and of all such as are engaged to support
the Court of Rome, as are the Italian Bishops, for which reason I call it
Italian Popery.

2. There are some among the Canonists who assert, That the Pope is above a
General Council, but yet may subject himself hereunto.

3. There are others who assert, That a General Council is above the Pope, that
the Supreme Governing-power over the whole Catholic Church is given them
immediately; that the Pope, as every other Bishop, is accountable to the
General Council.

This is what has been asserted by the Council at Constance, Anno 1315. and by
that of Basil, Anno 1431. and by many Learned Divines in the Church of Rome,
viz. Cardinal Cameracensis, Jeannes Gerson, Jacobus Almain, Nicolas Cusanus,
Panormitanus, and his Master Cardinal Florentinus, as also by Abulensis.

Gerson being a Chancellor at Paris, had many followers among the French, who
at this very day assert, That the Supreme Regent part of the Universal Church,
is a General Council; for which reason I conclude, that such as assert, That a
General Council is the Political Head or Regent part of the Universal Church,
are in the number of French Papists.

Thus Cassander, yea and Grotius, as to Church Government, were for a French
Papacy. Whether the Dean's Substitute be or be not, I Will leave to the impartial
censure of the judicious R^^der, who is desired to consider his notion as
compared with that of the Parisians.

1. The Dean's Substitute does suggest, That the Universal Church is the first
Seat of Government; it is a political organized Body, in which there is a Pars
Imperans and Subdita, the Bishops in their College being the Governors, or
Pars Imperans, and all others of the Universal Church the subdite part.

It may be our Author to gratify the Dean, will deny the Universal Church to
be a political organized body, as indeed he does; but it is even when he is
resolved to assert, That the Universal church is the Seat of Government and
Discipline; as if there could be any Government in any Society, without a
governing and governed parts. But so it is, as a National, even so the
Universal church with him is not a political body, that is, it is not such a
body unto whose constitution a pars Imperans and subdita is necessary, even
when its constitution is such that it cannot be but there must be in it some
Governors, and other Governed. Ther^ is not a Regent part in the Catholic
Church, but there is a Governing part; that is, there are Governors, viz. the
Catholic Bishops in their College, who are the Governors of the Catholic
church.

Thus our Learned Gentleman in one place endeavoring to fetch the Dean off
from that difficulty Mr. Humphreys had driven him unto, concerning the
constitutive Regent part of the church of England as National, does say, The
Dean answers in my poor opinion, with great judgment and consideration, We deny
any necessity of such a constitutive Regent part -- For though a National
church be one body, yet it is not such a political body as Mr. B. describes, i.
e. there is no such Government as cannot be without a Pars Regens and Subdita,
p. 562. And yet he grants, That Church Governors united and governing by
consent, are the pars Imperans, and christian peoplo in obedience to the Laws
of our Savior, submitting to such government, are the pars subdita. p. 565.
All which is true (says he) without a Constitutive Regent Head, (i. e.) There
is a Governing part or a pars Regens; or to speak English, a Constitutive
Regent part or Head, without a Constitutive Regent Head. The like is asserted
of the Universal Church, namely, That it is a Church governed by the College
of Bishops, which College of Bishops are the Pars Imperans, though not the
constitutive Regent part. For we must allow him to wallow in his
contradictions. But a Governing part there is in the Universal Church, which
Governing part is composed of Bishops.

II. The Governors of the Universal Church are Catholic Bishops in Council,
who though they are equals, and as such have no Superiority over one another,
p. 213. yet the College, or these Bishops assembled, have Authority and
command over any of its colleagues; that is, every single Bishop is under the
Authority and command of this Foreign Council.

III. The Catholic Church is One, when it is not rent and divided, but united
and coupled by the cement of Bishops, who stick c^ose together, p. 596.

The result of all is, That the Catholic Church of Christ being one Visible
Political Body, it is a completely Organized body on Earth, has its Governing
and Governed parts; The Visible Governing part being a Terrestrial Numerical
Head, though collective, viz. A College of Bishops, a General Council.

A Notion that does not only subvert the present constitution of the Church of
England, that thinks not it self accountable to any such Foreign Power; but
moreover in it self as grossly absurd, as it is suited to the French, the
Cassandrian, or the Grotian Model, leading us all to Unite with all the other
parts of the Catholic Church, by rendering an unwarrantable Obedience unto such
a Governing Power as is seldom in being, and when so, as dangerous and of as
destructive a tendency to the Government of Jesus Christ, as that of the
Italian Papacy.

But whether our Author had a clear prospect of this Intreague, when at first
he was put on it, I Will not venture to determine; it being sufficient that I
have fully proved, That the New-Modell'd Episcopacy of this Gentleman is the
same with that of the French; which is as inconsistent with the old-establish'd
Episcopacy of our Church, as is the Italian Papacy. For if our Author may
safely exceed the bounds of those Laws, that do with the greatest Severity
forbid our Appeal to any Foreign Power, by addressing himself unto a Foreign
College, Why may not another presume to make his Appeal to the Court of Rome?
What Reason can be given for the One, which will not prove cogent for the
Other; especially to such, who, living where they have constant experiences of
the excellency of a Monarchical Government in the State, may be easily induced
to conclude Monarchy as admirable in the Church, and then farewell
Impossibilities, viz. General Councils, a Roman Monarch in the Church being
much more desirable.

Having thus given a true state of the Controversy, whereby we find our Author
to agree exactly with the French Papist about G^vernment, asserting the
Universal Church as such, to be a Governed Body, in which there is a Governor,
and the Governed; 'twill be requisite, that as I have shown what are some of
the Absurdities which flow from it, that I do moreover evince it to be in it
self unsound and false.

That this may the more clearly and with the greater conviction be performed, I
will be so just, as to do our Author all the right imaginable, by taking notice
what he seems to assert, and what he is resolved to deny, and accordingly
proceed to the strictest disquisition after the Truth.

Our Author asserts, That the Universal Church, as such, is the Seat of
Government, it is a Body under Government; as much as if it had been said, There
must be in it a Governing, and a Governed part. It being impossible that
Government should be without Order, which Order is secundum sub, and Supra.
Wherever there is Government, there must be a Superior part Governing, and an
Inferior Governed. There must be Dominus and Subditus. This our Author seems
to grant, when he does to this Assertion of the Government of the Universal
Church, add his thoughts about the Governors thereof; which, he says, are the
Universal Bishops assembled in Council.

But alrhough this is what our Author does assert, he does notwithstanding
resolutely deny the Universal Church to be a Political Body; what he says of a
National, that he asserts of the Universal Church, both which are Governed
Societies, but neither a Political Body; p. 564, 565. All which is to fetch off
the Dean from Mr. Humphrey's and Mr. B's unanswerable Queries concerning the
constitutive Regent part of a National church, whose existence must be
acknowledged, if a National church as such be a Governed church, or a Body
Politic; but yet this cannot be found out. For which reason they distinguish
between a Governed Society and a Body Politic; between a Governing and a
Regent part, and assert, That the National church is a Governed Society, but
not a Body Politic; that it has a Governing, but not a Regent part; the like
of an Universal church.

This is the true state of our Author's Judgment, wherein we have an admirable
account of the Gentleman's acute distinguishing, the excellency of which I Will
leave to the entertainment of his Admirers; and if he please, consider the
Notion according to his own stating it: that is, to gratify him, I will not
insist on the word Policy, nor Regent, nor constitutive Regent part; but only
on government, Governors, and Governed; and so our Enquiry being about the
Government of the Universal Church, we must consider what is necessary
thereunto, and see whether what our Author asserts be agreeable unto such a
constitution; for if not so, it is far from Truth.

To consider what it is that is necessary to the constitution of any Governed
Body; that is, what is so necessary, that the absence thereof is destructive to
the Constitution? To this I Answer,

That a Governing, and a Governed part is so necessary unto Goverement, that
where either one of these be absent, there can be no Government. A Governed
Body cannot be without a Governing part, neither can this be without a part
Governed. Government does necessarily infer both these; remove either one, and
the Government is destroyed. Government is a Relation resulting from that
mutual respect the Governing and Governed parts have to each other, whence as
Sublato uno Relatorum tollitur and alterum; and where there is nor Subject nor
Term, (i. e.) nor Relate nor Correlate, there can be no Relation. Remove the
Governing part from the Universal or National Church, and the Government
ceases. Paternity may be where there is no Father, as soon as Government without
a Governing part. Whence I infer, That where there is a Fixed Government, there
must be a fixed Governing part.

This premised, Let us next enquire, whether or no what our Author asserts, be
suitable to this undoubted Rule? Does he show us such a Governing part? The
Government is a constant fixed Government, but where is the constant fixed
Governing part? It Is a General Council, says he, i. e. the universal Bishops
in their College assembled. But is this a fixed Governing part? Is it not
evident to an ordinary capacity, that the assembling such a Council of all the
Bishops in the World, is a difficulty insuperable; and that without such an
Assembly, it is impossible they should by joint consent govern the Universal
Church. The astembling of the Catholic Bishops is as easy as the gathering
together their consent per literas format as, and much more conducive to the
desired End; because when assembled they can debate the matters before 'em, and
with the greater judgment give their determinations.

But it is well known, that had such an Assembly been possible, yet the Church
of God for the first 300 years, had no such Assembly, excepting that in the
Apostles days, i. e. it had no such Governing part; which is as if it had been
said, There was no Government in the Universal Church the first 300 years.

To gratify our Author, Let us suppose that the Universal Church is as such a
Governed Society, and that it has its Governors, But though this be so, yet
it must be still acknowedged, that a Governor cannot be without Power to
Govern; I would therefore beseech my Author to show me, What is that Power with
which this College of Bishops are invested? Is it Legislative only, or also
Executive? Whether the one or the other, is it in the College Subjectively and
Formally, or only in 'em as in fine seu regulante, or supplente, or How?
'Twould be necessary that our Author consult the Parisian Doctors, if he will
speak to the purpose, when he espouses their Notion.

Let our Author assert as it pleases him at an adventure, it matters not, for
his Notion is such as necessarily directs us to conclude what he must, if he
will be consistent with himself, assert, and that is this, All
Church Government is Universal, and as such it must be exercised; no one being
a Governor in the Church, but he that is a Catholic Officer: That the due
course of exercising this Power is, when it flows originally from the Head unto
all its Members. That it flows from the Invisible, or rather unseen Head in
Heaven immediately unto the visible Head on Earth, is granted by all those who
assert an Universal Church Government; though there is a Dispute among the
Papists, whether this Head be the Council, or the Pope. As it flows immediately
from Christ to the visible Head, so it proceeds from this visible Head unto the
Patriarchs, from thence to the Metropolitans, from thence to the Diocesans. For
which Reason if any are injured by their Diocesan, they may Appeal to their
Metropolitan, from thence to their Patriarch, from thence to the Pope or
Council. This our Author must hold. That there may be no wrong done the Little
Ones of Christ, if any be grieved by One, he may Appeal unto an Higher, till he
comes unto the Highest Power on Earth; from whence if he find not relief, he
must acquiesce, leaving the whole to him who is in Heaven. But if there be no
constant visible Head actually existing, where shall the grieved lodge his last
Appeal? The Dean's Substitute supposes an equality of Power in Patriarchs,
Metropolitans, and Diocesans; whence if his Diocesan does abuse his Power, he
is not accountable to any Metropolitan, nor Patriarch, but only unto the
Catholic College. The which being so, 'twill follow, That Executive Power
must be lodged in some Supreme Head Subjectively, who can receive Appeals: I
say Subjectively, or Formally, and not only Virtually; for it is an Executive
Power only that can relieve in this case; which cannot Actually be, where it is
only Virtually. For which Reason it is evident, that according to our Author,
there must be a fixed Governing part invested with an Executive Power, from
whom relief is to be expected, if at any time the Diocesan does abuse his
Power; which Governing part must be either a College of Bishops, or one single
Person. And if the obtaining the former be, as indeed it is impossible, the
acknowledging the latter is necessary.

Thus we see how fairly this Gentleman at length leads us to Rome, or some
other Pope, as the only necessary way of governing the Church. In doing which,
he does but carry on the Project, of which Sir Francis Winnington takes notice
at the Trial of the Lord Stafford, when he assured the Lords, That as an
encouragement to the POPISH PLOTTERS, there did appear in some men too easy
and favorable a Disposition toward the PAPISTS. They were grown strangely
MODERATE toward these OLD ENEMIES of our Church and State. New PROJECTS of
RECONCILING of us were set on foot, and Books were written to distinguish the
Church of Rome from the Court of Rome. One of those Books, which was Printed
the year before the Discovery of the Plot, pretends, That there ought to be a
Difference made between Papists of LOYAL and DISLOYAL Principles. This Book, as
it was written more ARTIFICIALLY than the rest, and Published in so Critical
and Dangerous a Juncture, deserves, and I doubt not in time will have a
particular Consideration. It Is easy to believe how great Encouragement this
must give to the ROMANISTS, to see how very willing men were to meet them, and
how freely the Pen was drawn in their Favor.

By this time the Reader may easily see who it is that is subservient to the
Popish Design, and without any further help clearly perceive what is the
Tendency of our Author's Discourse. There remains only one objection which
calls for our observation, the which can be no sooner removed, but the Reader
may be fully satisfied in this, viz. That it is not impossible for one who
Assents and Consents to the Thirty nine Articles, the Book of Common Prayer,
and of Homilies, to drive on a French (not to say a Popish) Design.

The Objection that occurs to a common capacity, is, How can such that give in
Assent and Consent to all that is said of the excellency of the present
Establishment, do any thing that tends to its subversion?

The Answer is easy; You must distinguish between the sayings and the things
assented and consented unto. For you do not Assent unto the Sayings, though
about the excellency of the present Establishment, but the Things; for says
he, p. 105. We do not give our Assent to every saying in the
Common Prayer Book, but to every thing which is contained in, and prescribed by
it; that is, what we are bound to use. Whence observe, That seeing a Papist can
comply with all the Ceremonies in use, even when he cannot Assent to all the
Sayings in the Common Prayer Book, he may give in his Assent, and Consent, and
be as true a Son of the Church of England as our Author is.

SECT. III.
A Third Overt Act of the Enquirers pretended Immodesty, examined. The
aversness of the Dean and his Substitute to a Protestant Union, proved. Their
falling in with the Dissenters about conscience, considered. Some Remarks on
the Author's modest treatment of others.

THE Enquirer charges the Dean and some of the Episcopal, to be against any
compliances with the Dissenter, as if they set a greater value on the Honor
and Reputation of men, than on Union, or the relieving tender consciences,
which is said to be a malicious and impudent charge. Words very modest, as they
drop from our Author's pen!

To this I Will reply, if possibly, modestly, without passing any further censure
on the heat with which the Deans Defender expresses himself.

It Is true I did charge the Dean and some others of the Episcopal, as persons
who would not condescend to part with the least Iota for Union, for these
Reasons: 1. The Dissenters have used all just means, but without success, for
the obtaining of it. 2. Some of the Episcopal Clergy have for these last Twenty
years made it their business to stir up Authority to a severe execution of such
Laws as were made against Dissenters. 3. They were not ashamed to expose His
Majesty to the great contempt of His people, when he began to show pity and
compassion to the oppressed Dissenters. What Invectives came out after it! What
Satirical Declamations against it! 4. The Dr. himself judged a severe execution
of Laws against Dissenters, to be the most effectual means for the obtaining a
firm and a lasting Union. And therefore,
1. Preached that Sermon which has been the shameful occasion of our late
contests. Thus they press for a Comformity as the only way to Union, as if
there can be no Union among Christians without such Uniformity. 2. He so states
the case between Relief and no Relief to Dissenters, as to incline more for no
Relief. He has but Three Arguments for Relief, and Six against it. Dr. Still.
Preface, p. 53, 54. 3. He inveighs against a boundless Toleration, as the
Mother of all confusion; and then tells us, That the suspension of Penal Laws
against Protestant Dissenters, is to open the Floodgates to such a boundless
Toleration; and yet they are for great Abatements.


In fine, it is remarkable, That notwithstanding the many Protestations made of
a propension toward a real union between Conformist and Nonconformist, nothing
is more notoriously evident, than that those among the Dissenters who are
mostly disposed to some compliances with the Episcopal, are above all others
hated and contemned by such as our Author.

There are some among Dissenters, (namely the Reverend Mr. Baxter, and Mr.
Humphrey,) whose Moderation in these things has been ever since their ejection
for their Nonconformity practically discovered to the whole Kingdom. They
frequently attend on the Conformists Ministry, not scrupling to be present at
their prayers, nor at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Yea, they show with
the greatest evidence desirable, That their disposition toward the
accommodating the matters in difference between Conformist and Nonconformist is
such, that nothing but apparent sin should hinder their conformity. But yet
none more exposed to contempt by the Dean and his Substitute, than these men!
It Is Mr. Baxter who writes in a continued fit of anger. It Is he is the man to
be pitied; and no wonder, for his Substitute gives great reason for it, viz.
Mr. B. is the Judas, the most dangerous Enemy that lodges in the bosom of the
Church; a Cataline, a Protean Religionist, who transforms himself into all
shapes; and differs from the Hobbist only in this, That the Hobbist is for
being always of his Prince's Religion, but he is always for being against it.
P. 234.

This is the character which the Dean's Defender gives of that Reverend and
Peaceable Divine, Mr. Baxter, and that principally, because he is so much
inclined to unite with the Conformist; as if the Gentleman, and such as are of
his Gang, were afraid of a Protestant Union.

But, Sir, is this the way to Union? Is this the way to peace? What, to let out
all your wrath, and rage, and fury, against such as are most peaceable, and
ready to unite with you? What thinking and unbiassed mind can be persuaded to
conclude, That those very men, who after such an unclean and indecent manner
revile the peacemaker, are in love with peace? Is it possible that he who
considers so complying a person as Mr. Baxter is, to be for that reason a
Judas, a Cataline, a Protean Religionist, should be pleased with his
compliances?

This certainly does but discover, That if the Nonconformists could
conscientiously conform to more than really they can, it would not conduce to
their relief, if such as our Author could prevent; They must do all you exact,
or else no peace to be expected; they must comply with every iota, or no Union.
Moreover, when they have conformed to every imposed iota, they must also
separate themselves from all the good Christians in the Land that are not of
their persuasion in every thing, or be still Schismatical: yea, though a man
conforms, if he be more of a C^ristia^ temper than our hot and fiery Author,
that is, if he be but compassi nate toward Dissenters, showing a tenderness to
their Consciences, it is enough to make him the object of their rage. Witness he
Country Conformist, who notwithstanding the greatness of his Learning, and the
excellency of his temper, discovered in his Remarks, is treated by the Dean's
Substitute, Pref. p. 6. as one who is for raising a Civil War for the pulling
down Church and State, to set up a Presbyterian Parity. Thus they deal with
such as are for Peace, and yet would be thought to be for great Abatements for
peace sake, as men sincerely disposed to unite with us; that is, they are so,
if it may be without parting with one iota for Union.

The High-flown Conformists, with whom only our present Controversy is, are
very much for Union, even when it is most obvious, that the utmost they are for,
is the exposing the Dissenter: Let the Dissenters do what they can, these men
will not be pleased. There are several sizes among the Dissenters, some can
Conscientiously do more for Union than others can; but they that do the most,
are not freer from the lash of their Tongues and Pens, nor from the execution
of their Laws than the other. If they come not to Church, then they are
Disobedient, Seditious, Factions, and what not? If they do go to the Church,
they are Judasses, Catalines, Protean Religionists, Hobbists, etc.

These things considered, Let any moderate man judge, what it is they will part
with for Union, what are those Iota's. Not that I accuse all Conformists, but a
few, even those only who are of the same stamp with our Author, who seem to
raze the foundations of the present Constitution; For I am confident, that
there are many of the very Clergy, who desire nothing so much as the Peace of
the Church, and the relieving tender Consciences. And as for the Magistracy,
it is evident, that as few, or none delight to execute the Laws against
Dissenters, even so it is in the heart of our Sovereign, the House of Lords, and
of the Commons of England, that an Expedient be found out for the uniting
Protestants, and the easing those burdens that have so long lain on Dissenters;
so that through God's Grace we may see a happy Union among Protestants, even
when the Dean and his Substitute will not part with an Iota for it.

But you will say, the Dr. makes Proposals for Union in the very Preface against
which I write. Answ. 1. If the Doctor contradicts himself, whose fault is that?
But 2. It Is true the Dean made a Proposal of some Abatements in order unto
Union, but unto whom? Let our skilful Interpreter, the Dean's Substitute
declare. The Dean says, We do heartily and sincerely desire Union, etc. The
meaning of which is, (says our Dean's Interpreter) that we are sincerely
willing to make any Condescensions for Peace-sake, which will not overthrow the
Church of England, nor insinuate a false and scandalous Accusation of the
Unlawfulness of our Constitution and Rites of Worship, which we cannot do with
a safe Conscience, because we believe the contrary, etc. And we are not so
charitable to give ease to other men's Consciences to injure our own, and
thereby condemn the Reformation, etc.

In answer unto this, I must say, what I did unto the Dean, [ Enquiry, p. 33.]
It must be observed, That Dissenters not Conforming to Episcopacy and
Ceremonies, is a judging them Unlawful; which is in the Opinion of our
Churchmen, a casting a Reproach and Dishonor on the Reformation of the Church
of England, etc. To which I add, That the Churches parting with any of those
Rites of Worship, which the Dissenters cannot conscienciously comply with, may
insinuate into the minds of some men the Notion of their Unlawfulness. Whence,
if there must be no Abatements made, but such as do not insinuate an
Unlawfulness in the Episcopal Constitution, nor in the Rites of Worship, what
manner of Abatements can there be made? It Is evident then, that the Doctor's
Proposal made with such Restrictions and Limitations for Union, is but a more
plausible way of denying it. But what is the great Reason, why there must be no
such compliance, as may be attended with such Insinuations, but this, It Is
inconsistent with the Honor of the Reformation, or rather of the Reformers:
For I remember, that when the talk was about blasting the Honor of the first
Reformation, the meaning was, the casting a reproach upon Cramner, Ridley, etc.
the first Reformers; And why may we not understand it now in the same sense in
this place? And if so, How is the Charge untrue? or how comes it to be either
Impudent or Malicious? But here is the Talk of Conscience, They cannot do it
with safe Conscience, this surprizeth me. What! Is the Dean and his Defender
fal^ into such an hot fit of Fanaticisme, as to talk of their not being able to
make any Abatements in the fore-described sense with a safe Conscience! How
comes this about? I am hereby inclined to think, That they make the Scripture
the Rule not only of their Doctrines, but Worship, and Discipline, a
Pres^yterian Principle. And, that it is the Opinion of their Consciences, that
Episcopacy is of Divine Right, and consequently Unalterable. For they must not
admit of any thing contrary to the Opinion of their Consciences; still
Fanaticisme, a justifying the Dissenter, who cannot Consciencously Conform!
Only there is an untoward Insinuation in it on the Doctor's part, namely, That
the Episcopal Constitution is of Divine Right, and that our Churchmen are not
overmuch owing to our Governors for its Establishment; That if our Governors
should go about to make any Alteration in the present Constitution, they offend
God: For which our Governors will not give them any great thanks. But sure a man's
Conscience may permit another, whom he cannot change, to do that which it will
not permit himself to do.

Thus having considered the Overt acts of the Enquirers pretended Immodesty,
let our Author make the most on it, and let the Reader judge, Whether there was
not somewhat more than the Reflection on the Enquirer, that brought forth his
first Chapter? Whether his propensions to favor our Common Enemy the Papist,
were not stronger than his Aversions to the Enquirers Immodesty?

Here I would have put an end unto this Chapter, had it not been requisite to
take some notice of the like Treatment which he affords Mr. Baxter, Mr.
Humfrey, the Country-Conformist, and Doctor Owen. Not that I design to enlarge
on this Subject, but only to give the Reader a Taste of the Modesty of our
Author, who accuses others so much of Immodesty.

1. As for his usage of Mr. Baxter, it is such, that how immodest soever I may
be esteemed, I must solemnly profess, that I cannot without defiling my Pen
express it aright: I will not therefore take any other notice of it than to
say, It becomes not a Man, much less a Christian, much less a Presbyter of the
Church of England, to treat the unworthiest of men after such a rate as he has
treated Mr. B. I am sure, it is recorded in the Sacred Scriptures, that Michael
the Archangel durst not bring a railing Accusation against the Devil. And Oh,
How unmeet then is it for this man of inferior Dignity, to rail at one so
eminent in Piety and Learning!

Methinks it is a pitiful shift, when men have nothing but hard words to answer
hard Arguments with: A way the most ineffectual to the desired End, viz. the
confuting a Learned Adversary; but the best perhaps that can be to come off.
For really when there is so little of solid Answer to what Mr. Baxter has
urged against the Dean, this Gentleman's Treatise is beneath Mr. B's notice; and
his hard words deserving no other Reply than, The Lord rebuke thee.

2. Mr. Humfrey and the Country-Conformist must come next under the Gentleman's
Pen, They must be Immodest too, as I am, and who can help it?

But what is the matter? what is it that occasions all this stir? Really I
cannot imagine, unless Mr. Humphrey's Faithfulness to the Dean, expressed in a
way suitable to his wonted Freedom, be the cause. It Is true, the Country
Conformist takes notice of Mr. H's late Book, giving him thanks for that
judicious Trac^ate, saying, That he had modestly and plainly rebuked the pride
of the Dr. and given Mr. Baxter his due praise. From whence our Author takes
occasion to run into a Discourse on the Modesty of Mr. Humphrey, and produces
several of his expressions, which in the apprehension of some others, who, it
may be, do more impartially, yea and more agreeably to the Christian Rule,
weigh the nature of the Dean's Discourse, etc. are not so liable to exception
as our Author suggests.

It Is well known that the Reverend Mr. H. is a grave Minister, it may be twenty
years elder than Dr. Stillingfleet, for which reason a reproof (though plain
and open) may be proper in him, which would not become me or this Author;
especially, considering that this Mr. H. is one whose inclinations to
conformity are such, that there can be nothing of humor to keep him from a
closure with the Dean, or to provoke him to an unnecessary quarrel; which is
enough to engage a judicious person to conclude, That if such a man as Mr. H.
treats the Dean severely, there is somewhat extraordinary in the Dr. that
called for it.

In this opinion I am abundantly confirmed, when I remember what Mr. Baxter in
the Preface of his Second Defense says of him, which is, That he handles the
Dr. somewhat freely, that is, as the Country Conformist interprets it, very
honestly, as the Dr. deserved; and for this reason, though our Author, who it
may be has not that sense of Conscientious duties upon him, as these others
have, does blame it, yet it may be worthy commendation. For what should tempt
so Learned and Judicious a person, as the Country Conformist is, to be so full
in approving it, unless the very subject matter of the Drs. Discourse, or the
mode of managing it, did suggest, that the greatest kindness could be shown the
Dr. was to deal plainly and uprightly in discovering unto him his sin?

But this is enough to expose the Country conformist presently to the same
lash. He is also immodest; and why? surely for no other reason, that I can
imagine, but because he is not afraid to speak the Truth, and to give to the
world an assurance, That the Dean's Discourse was not grateful unto every
Conformist; and that therefore, whoever would insinuate as if the Dr. had given
us the sense of all his Conforming Brethren in that great Book, would abuse and
injure some of the most judicious and godly among the Conforming Clergy.

He has really done the true Church of England great right, in making not only
his Reflections on the Deans Preface, but also his Remarks on the Book it self,
a Treatise worthy the observation of the Dean, seeing the answering that, as
appears by our Authors silence, is beyond his strength; that is, it is so
heartily wrote, as he should be ashamed to except against it.

I need not say any thing concerning the Reverend Dr. Owen, because as our
Author had spoken little of his person (though more than became him) but less
by way of answer to his Book. However it must be remembered, That seeing our
Author found himself necessitated to run unto the Tents of the French Papist
for Armor to batter down the Notion Dr. O. has established in proving a
particular Church to be the (...) of Church Government; the Drs. notion abides
in its strength, and his Book unanswered in the sense of any sound Protestant;
and therefore this Feeble Defense of the Dean of Paul's, is unworthy of so great
a persons Animadversions. And that the Dean himself is no way relieved by this
Defender, but as much obliged to attempt it himself, as if this Defense had
never been published.

CHAP. II. A Reply to what the Deans Substitute suggests in his censuring the
Enquirers Design.
THIS Gentleman not being able to satisfy himself with his tedious Essay to
evince the Enquirer to be a person neither very Modest, nor very Peaceable,
gives himself the liberty of censuring the Design, as if it had been rather to
reproach the Dr. than to vindicate and clear up the innocence of the Dissenter.
Thus he suggests that Mr. Lobb wrote what he wrote to expose the Dean to
popular odium and fury; to persuade the people never to look into the Deans
book, or to stone him as an implacable enemy to all Loyal Dissenters. Pref. p.
30. Book p. 6.

What reply is necessary to be made unto this charge, is not easy to imagine;
for what though I should solemnly declare, That the casting reproach on Dr.
Stillingfleet, or any other person, is what I perfectly hate; will he believe
me? I can, and hereby do declare so much; but is it possible our Author should
give credit to any such protestation, so long as it is almost natural for a man
of his complexi^n to judge of others according to those over-strong propensions
he finds in himself to such exposing practices?

However, let me ask the Author what it is that provokes him to talk so
confidently of the most secret motions of my soul? Why must exposing the Dean
to popular edium and fury, be my end? What overt-acts were there of such a
design? Did I misrepresent the Dean in any one instance? Or did I make it my
business to carp at every little thing in his Preface? Did I insist on
far-fetcht consequences, or force any undue sense on his words? Did I speak all
I could to show the Tendency of his Preface, or whole Book? Or did I take
notice of any thing more than what was necessary for the clearing up the
innocence of the Dissenter? As to these particulars, you cannot fasten your
Accusation; But yet my aim must be exposing the Dean; and why exposing him?
What, was the Dean exposed, because the charge with which he would load
Dissenters, was such, that the very repeating and confuting it, tends to his
Reproach? If so, whose fault is that?

I do freely confess, That I believe the Deans charge against Dissenters to be
so indecent, that thereby he has lost very much of that Esteem he formerly had
among Judicious Gentlemen of the Church of England; but this is not my fault,
nor an Argument, that what I wrote in the Defense of the Dissenter, was with a
design of exposing the Dean. A thing I could have easily done, without either
wresting his words, or imposing a foreign sense on 'em.

How easily could I have imitated the famous Bishop Jewel, and have picked such
passages out of the Dean's Discourses, as that Great Prelate did out of
Harding, and have showed how unlike himself the Dean acted, in contemning and
pitying the Reverend Mr. Baxter, in comparing the judicious Mr. Alsop's
Discourse to the Bird of Athens, made up of Face and Feathers; and representing
Mr. Alsop himself so, as if all things had not been right, that is, as if he
had been mad. Of this I the rather take notice, because a very serious person
on the reading the Dean's Book, came to me on purpose, to enquire whether Mr.
Alsop was never mad? If not, said he, Why did Dr. Stillingfleet write as if he
had? Many other things of a more uncomely aspect I could have taken out of the
Dean's Writings, but I waved it, it not being my work in that Enquiry, or this
Reply, to acquaint the World with the naevi of the Reverend Doctor; and
therefore notwithstanding the many provocations you have given me in your
Defense of the Dean, I Am resolved to treat the Dean more civilly than he did
Mr. B. or Mr. A. or than you have Mr. B. or Mr. H. and the Country Conformist.

The exposing men to Popular Odium and Fury, becomes only such who hate Persons
more than their Opinions, and who have little to offer against their
Adversaries besides hard words. It becomes not men, who pretend to act suitably
to the Christian Rule, to use railing Expressions instead of pungent Arguments;
nor to expose the Person, instead of confuting his Opinion.

For this Reason I did in the M^dest and Peaceable Enquiry, on a second
perusal, expunge all such words as might seem hard or unmeet, treating the Dean
with the greatest Candor and Respect, not suffering one passage to go to the
Press, that might tend to his reproach, unless rehearsing the charge lain in
against the Dissenter as clothed with his own words, and the confuting him,
must be esteemed as such.

It Is true, I showed the Tendency of his Discourse, which I thought to be for
the advancing the Papal Interest. The very thing the Dean's Substitute drives
at in the Dean's Defense, wherein our Author goes much further than the Dean,
or at least has expressed his sentiments more freely, and with less caution.
But shall this be considered as an exposing you to popular odium and fury? You
assert, That the Universal Church is a governed Society; That the Bishops in
their College are the governing part; That the Bishops convened in their
Assembly, do not meet only for mutual Help and Concord, but for Regiment. The
Assembly of Bishops in Council, is not such as that of Princes of several
distinct Territories, who meet together in order to the maintaining and
conserving a general Union and Peace in the World; for instance, that at
Nimmegen, at which Convention the Princes come freely; and when there, the One
is not under the Regiment of the Assembly, but each one free to Consent or
Dissent to any thing proposed for Peace, their Territories being as so many
distinct Independent Governments, whose Governors are not accountable to any
General Council of Princes in the World. Such an Assembly of Bishops you are
not for: For this, say you, p. 601. makes Christian Communion as Arbitrary a
thing, as the Confederacies of Princes; whereas the Episcopal Office is but
One, and therefore ought to be administered by the mutual Advice and Consent of
Bishops, who all equally share in it; that is, the whole World must be
considered as of One and the same Government; that the many particular Princes
of di^tinct Territories, such as England, France, Spain, Denmark, etc. are not
Independent in their Government, but are accountable either unto One Universal
Emperor, or Di^^, etc. This is what you assert as to Church Government, it is
One all the World ever. Though lesser Societies are variously dispersed, yet
are all under one and the same Government, the Bishops of the one and of the
other are obliged to meet together in their College, or Di^^, where they are
all bound to submit unto the Ca^^^, D^^^^, or Determinations of the College;
that whoever dissents from the Body of the College is Schismatical. -- This is
your Notion, and for ought I know the Deans; a Notion that is the same with
that of the French Papacy, that does but fairly lead us to Rome.

But must the mentioning so much, expose you to the rage and fury of the
people? If so, whom can you blame, but your self? The like may be said to the
Dean, to whom I add this one request, which is, to consider the Tendency of his
great Book, as well as of this your Defense of him; and if his Aims and the
Tendency of either of these Discourses be different, 'twill be apparent that I
was not mistaken in my Charity of the Author, when I passed my censure on his
Treatise. However it is sufficient, that the utmost I did was to expose the evil
Tendency of the Book, endeavoring as much as possibly I could, to save the
Dean from lying under Reproaeh, distinguishing between the Author and his Work.

This much may serve as more than enough to our Author's Censure of invisible
and unknown Designs.

CHAP. III. A Reply to the Defense of the Dean of Paul's, so far as it concerns
the Modest and Peaceable Enquiry.
SECT. I.
The Answer to what the Enquirer insisted on in showing the Deans Mistakes
about the Jesuits Doctrine, concerning Spiritual Prayer, Examined. 1. The
present Aids of the Spirit in enabling Ministers in the Exercise of their
Function, agreeable to the Doctrine of the Church of England. Dr. Burnet's most
Christian Reproof to such Ministers, as neglect the inward Motions of the
Spirit. 2. The Ground of the first Separation in Queen Elizabeth's days, the
very same with that of the first Reformation from Popery, beginning in Henry
the 8th's time, and Sealed after with the Blood of our Martyrs.

THE Deans Substitute does at last apply himself to the Defense of the Doctor,
in doing which he considers the Reasons I collected out of the Dean's Preface,
which the Dean urges to engage the Reader to believe, that the Dissenters are a
people carrying on the Popish Designs.

1. The Dissenters have embraced the Jesuits Principles about Spiritual Prayer,
and a more pure way of Worship. This is what I observed out of Dr. Still. But
our Author, who has read over the Doctors Preface very carefully, can find no
such thing urged against the Dissenters, and adds, All that Mr. Lobb founds
this Accusation on, is, That the Dean says, It is not improbable that the
Jesuits were the first setters up of Spiritual Prayer in England: And then goes
on to a very decent Censure, saying, That this is mighty falsely and
imperfectly represented.

Sir, If I had insisted on no more than what you here mention as the foundation
of my Charge, I must acknowledge, that 'twould not only be imperfectly, but
impertinently related: For what connection is there between the Jesuits
Practices, and their Principles?

Is it not well known, that the Principles they profess, the Doctrines they
embrace concerning many a point in Divinity, are one thing, even when their
Practice is another? May they not then, in order to the carrying on a further
Design, set on Practices contrary to their Doctrines? Yea, surely they may; and
this is the whole Defense you make in behalf of the Dean, with which after an
unnecessary Harangue, you dismiss the Subject.

But is this fair, to misrepresent an Adversary, and then confute what needs no
Confutation? Does this redound to the Honor of a Presbyter of the Church of
England? Was this all on which Mr. Lobb founded his Accusation? Did he not add
somewhat more than what you relate? You say, all that Mr. Lobb founds this
accusation on is, that the Dean says, It is not improbable that the Jesuits
were the first setters up of Spiritual Prayer in England; which is mighty
falsely and imperfectly repesented. p. 6. Yet whoever will consult the Enguiry
will find, that I do out of the Dean add, That there is no improbality of the
thing, if we consider the Dissenters pretenses about Spiritual Prayer, to the
Doctrine and Practice of the Jesuits. The Dean suggests, that Spiritual and
Free Prayer, even that Spiritual and Free Prayer about which there is such a
Pother, is suited to the Doctrines of the Jesuits; to the Doctrine, that is, to
their Principles. What difference is there between the Doctrine and the
Principles of the Church of England? In like manner I Query, What difference is
there between the Doctrines and Principles of the Jesuits? Does the Dean then
assert such an Agreement to be between the Pretenses of the Dissenter about
Spiritual Prayer, and the Doctrines or Principles of the Jesuits, not only the
Practices but Doctrines of the Jesuits? Who then is the impersect or mistaken
Reporter?

The Dean's Charge against Dissenters is, That the Dissenters pretenses about
Spiritual Prayer, are suited with the Doctrines of the Jesuits. And it is our
concern to enquire after the truth of this Charge; I say of this charge; to
wit, about the Agreeableness that is between our Pretenses and their Doctrines.
For it is no way momentous to enquire after the practice of a company of
Villains, who can transform themselves into a thousand shapes, whenever their
Interest obliges them to do so. Was it never known that a Papist crept into
some great Preferment in the Church of England, at which time they did both
Assent and Consent to the doctrines of the Church of England? What think you of
a quondam Bishop of Gloucester, to mention no more? did he not speak well of the
Church of England, yea even of the Protestant Religion? Is it therefore Popery?

For this Reafon it concerns me not to enquire after those Stories insisted on
by the Doctor, or to be found in that Pamphlet called Foxes and Firebrands. The
great Enquiry must be after the Doctrines of the Jesuit, whether there is any
suitableness between the Dissenters pretenses and the Jesuits Doctrines. For
which Reason the Jesuits Writings were consulted, and the Doctor's Charge found
untrue; the Dr. being mistaken as to matter of fact. He represented the Jesuits
Doctrines to be other than indeed they are, which, to speak softly, was a
Mistake.

If the Deans Defender would have spoke to the purpose, He should have searched
those places I insisted on in Azorius, Filiucius, and Bellarmine, and have
showed wherein I had either made a false report of their sayings, or
misinterpreted 'em. But this was impossible.

There being nothing else of moment in the Reply to what I offered against the
Dean about Spiritual Prayer, I might fairly, without saying any thing more,
proceed to the next particular. But seeing some have spoken contemptibly of the
Spirit of prayer, which is said to assist such as use free or extempore prayer,
as if those who spoke of received help from the Spirit in prayer, were
Enthusiastical, etc. and because our Author talks as if the Jesuits had the
first hand in the Separation of the old Nonconformists from the Church of
England, crying down the Common Prayers as a dull, formal, superstitious
Worship, and the setting up free prayer in the room of it; I will show,

1. The sense of the first Reformers about the aid of the Spirit. And 2. What
was the great and chief ground of the First Separation.


1. Concerning the Aid of the Holy Spirit, by which many are enabled to pray
freely or spiritually, it has been by some of the conforming Ministers
asserted, That such as pretend to receive the aid of the Spirit, may as well
pretend to inspiration, etc. That then they will believe that persons can pray by
the Spirit, when they hear the unlearned can pray in Latin, Greek, or in some
other unknown language; as if the aids the Spirit affords unto such as pray
freely, had been extraordinary, etc.

This I cannot but consider, as what does very much reflect on the Dispensation
of the Spirit, to the great dishonor of true Christian Religion. For such is
the present state of true Religion, that whoever speaks contemptibly of the
Spirits Aid, must be esteemed not only a Despiser of the first Reformers, but
of that part of the present Constitution to which our Clergy on their entrance
into their Function are principally concerned.

1. It Is well known that what the first Reformers did in the Reforming the
Liturgy, was by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons assembled in
Parliament, recorded to have been done by the Aid of the Holy Ghost.

The Parliament in K. Edward's days passing an Act for the confirmation of the
Public Liturgy in the preamble thereof, declare, That those who drew up that
Order of Divine Worship, did it by the Aid of the Holy Ghost. It Is true this
expression could not escape the censure of such as were Popishly affected; they
thinking it too much that it was said, the Book was drawn by the aid of the
Holy Ghost, as if the import of those expressions had been nothing less than
that those persons concerned in the drawing it up, had been extraordinarily
inspired. But 'twas well answered by such as said, That it must not be so
understood; that 'twas only to be taken in that sense as all good motions and
consultations are directed or assisted by the secret influences of Gods H.
Spirit, which does often help good men, even in their imperfect actions, where
the good that is done is justly ascribed to the grace of God. For this consult
that truly Judicious and Deserving Dr. Burnet in his History of the
Reformation, Part 2. lib. 1. p. 94. The same that is said of this expression
when applied to the first Composers of the Divine Service, may be said of such
as are assisted in free prayer by the secret Influences of the Holy Spirit.
Moreover,

2. The Clergy at their Ordinination were to receive the Holy Ghost. In King
Edward's days, whenever a Bishop, or Priest was Ordained, 'twas said, Receive
thou the Holy Ghost in the Name of the Father, etc. But to what purpose, if not
to aid and assist them in the discharge of their Ministerial Function, viz. in
Prayer, in Preaching, in giving private Admenitions, and Exhortations? etc.
Hence I argue, The Spirit accordingly is given them, or not. If not, no wonder
they reproach its work, and gracious Influences, to say no more? But if they do
at their Ordination receive a plentiful portion of the Spirit, how can they
talk so much against the Assistances thereof, vouchsafed to others? What, is it
confined unto the Clergy only, or unto the Episcopal Clergy, that none without
canting must mention One word of the Spirit? But

3. It Is surprising, that any of our Clergy should speak any thing against the
secret motions of Gods Spirit; for surely such of them as are just, and true,
and faithful to God, and their own souls, have actually felt so much of the
Internal workings of the Holy Ghost on their souls, that they were thereby
quickened, and moved to enter on the work of the Ministry. Thus it is with them,
or at least, they are conscientiously persuaded of as much; and can such as
have felt the power of the Holy Ghost on their own hearts, speak evil of the
Assistance it affords unto others? That the honest among the Episcopal Clergy
are such as know what it is to be moved by the Holy Spirit, as they themselves
trust, is evident from the answer they give to the question proposed to them,
when they are presented to Orders, which is, Do you trust that you are inwardly
moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon you this Office and Ministration to serve
God for the promoting his glory, and for the edifying his people? To which the
answer is, He trusts he is.

It may be some may inquire, How comes it to pass then that so many of the
Clergy thus ordained, do not only neglect their own work, but by their uncomely
discourses reflect on this very spirit? To this no other answer but that of the
Learned and Pious Dr. Burnet shall be given, who in his Hist. of the
Reformation, Par. 2. l. p. 145. thus expresses himself: It has been often
lamented, that many come to receive Orders before they have seriously read over
these Questions, and examined themselves whether they could with a good
conscience make the Answers there prescribed; since it is scarce credible that
men of common honesty would lie in the presence of God on so great an occasion;
and yet it is too visible, that many have not any such inward vocation, nor have
ever considered seriously what it is. If it were well apprehended, that heat
that many have to get into Orders would soon abate, who perhaps have nothing in
their eye but some place of Profit, or Benefice, to which way must be made by
that preceding Ceremony; and so enter into Orders as others are associated into
Fraternities and Corporations, with little previous sense of that Holy
Character they are to receive, when they thus dedicate their Lives and Labors
to the Service of God in the Gospel. In the Primitive Church the apprehersion
of this made even good and holy men afraid to enter under such bonds, and
therefore they were often to be dragged almost by force, or caught at unawares,
and be so initiated; as appears in the Lives of these two Greek Fathers,
Nazianzen and Chrys^stome. If men make their first step to the Holy Altar by
such a lie, as is their pretending to a motion of the Holy Ghost, concerning
which they know little, but that they have nothing at all of it, they have no
reason to expect that Blessing which otherwise attends on such Dedications. And
it had been happy for the Church if all those that are authorized to confer
Orders, had stood on this more critically, and not been contented with a bare
putting these Questions to those who come to be Ordained, but had used a due
strictness beforehand, suitable to that grave admonition of St. Paul to
Timothy, Lay hands suddenly on no man, and be not partakers of other men's sins.

How would the Church have flourished if this worthy Drs. counsel had been both
given and taken at the beginning of the Reformation! If all that entered on the
Ministry had felt the mighty power of the Spirit in turning them from darkness
to light, from the power of Satan unto God! How would they have labored for
the conversion and edification of their hearers! The which work could not
prosper in their hands, but such as were born of God, receiving the Spirit,
would have been enabled by it to cry Abba Father. Spiritual and free prayer
would have been from the beginning so well known, that the suggesting it to
have been Jesuitical, would with the greatest contempt and scorn be rejected;
and those many rash and indecent epithetes given it, would have been considered
but as the overtacts of ill will to the Reformation of the Church of England.

. II. The Account our Author gives of the first Separation, is very unrrue.
For, 1. It was not the laying aside All forms of prayer, that the old
Nonconformists pressed hard for. They were for the amending the Liturgy, but not
for the removing all Liturgies. It Is true in K. Edward's days there was a
contest between Hooper and Ridley, etc. about the old Popish Vestments, but not
about Forms of Prayer. In Queen Mary's days at Franckfort there were great
contentions among some of them, who before had used the English Liturgy, but
not that those who were against the use of the English Liturgy at that time,
were against it as it was a Form of Prayer, but they apprehended that they
being in foreign parts, they should rather accommodate their worship to those
among whom they lived; whence instead of the English Liturgy, they used one
near the Geneva and French Forms. Moreover in Queen Elizabeth's time, even long
after the Separation, the old Nonconformists declared, that they looked on
Forms of Prayer to be lawful. It may be they were grieved to see Q. Elizabeth's
Bishops to entertain more favorable thoughts of the Pope than those blessed
Martyrs, Cranmer, and Rid^ey did, as is to be seen by their expunging out of Q.
Elizabeth's Liturgy what was offensive to the Pope in K. Edward's; but against
Forms they were not; or it may be they could not approve of any that would
quench the motions of the Spirit they professed to have felt before their
Ordination, whether in trusting unto it for help in the exercise of Prayer, or
any other parts of their work. But to cry down all Forms in order to the
setting up spiritual and free prayer instead of the Liturgy, and for this
reason to separate from the Church of England, is more than can be proved.

2. The great and principal reason of the Separation of the old Nonconformists,
was occasioned by their pressing toward that Reformation expressly aimed at by
our English Reformers in H. 8. 's time, for the which they were burnt in
Smithfield and elsewhere. Whoever would understand the true Reason of the first
Separation in Queen Elizabeth's time, must enquire after the first Reformation
desired in H. 8. 's.

In Henry 8th's days, that wickedness that spread it self throughout the
Western part of the World, sadly prevailed in these Northern parts. This part
of the earth was in an especial manner troubled with a vicious and sensual
Clergy, whose example had a sad influence on the Common people. The offspring
of a lewd vicious Clergy, was a profane and extremely wicked Laity; so that if
ever, it might now be truly said, The whole world lay in wickedness.

This being the state of the Clergy and Laity, the fear of God and all true
Religion almost lost, it pleased the Father of mercies to open the eyes of
some, to show 'em the evil of the times, etc. Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, and
others beyond the seas, and Tindal, Frith, Barns, etc. here in England. These
Worthies being deeply sensible of the Abominations of the times in which they
lived, made diligent search after the causes thereof, in order to the carrying
on a Reformation, etc. In which enquiry, they found the viciousness of the
people to be occasioned by the sensuality and lewdness of the Clergy; the
lewdness of the Clergy to be the product of an uninstituted Hierarchy, which
was rather adjusted for Worldly grandeur than the glory of God.

The great cause of all those Mischiefs was the want of strict and Scriptural
Discipline, which (as it had not been in due exercise since the first
degeneracy from the Apostolical Institution and Primitive Practice, even so)
could not be faithfully exercised but by being reduced to its ancient state.
For which Reason Tyndall applies himself to the work, and so did the famous
Lambert and Doctor Barnes. All which I will from good Authority evince.

1. Mr. Tyndall, a blessed Martyr burnt at Brabant for his firm adhering to the
Truths of the Gospel, does in those Discourses of his published by Mr. Fox
show, that the many Abominations of his Times proceeded from the viciousness of
a Proud, Covetous, and Sensual Clergy, who having forsaken the Apostolical
Rule, in process of time through the Bounty of some wealthy persons, who had
embraced the Christian Religion, and diverse other ways, got an abundance of
Riches, which occasioned their Pride and Luxury, to the ruin of the true
Religion: Thus in that Treatise of The Obedience of a Christian man, There is
no Mischiefs or Disorders (says he) whether it be in the Temporal Regiment, or
in the Spiritual, whereof they [i. e. The Spirituality, the Clergy] are not the
chief Causes, and even the very Fountain and Spring, and as we say, the
Wellhead: So that it is impossible to Preach against Mischief, except thou
begin at them; or to set any Reformation in the world, except thou Reform them
first. This same Mr. Tyndall in another place shows us, how they occasioned so
much mischief, in these words, But after that the Devil was broke loose, and
the Bishops began to purchase, and the Deacons to scratch all to them, and the
Spirituality to climb on high, then because the Labor, [ viz. of examining and
confirming the Adult, who had been Baptized in their Infancy] 'seemed too
tedious and painful, they neglected it. Tyndal of Sacraments and Ceremonies.

The Clergy growing rich, labored that their Honor might equalize their
Wealth, which was followed with Idleness, a Neglect of God and their Duty.
Hence Preaching is let down, the Ceremonies being esteemed as the most
effectual means of Instruction. This occasions the multiplication of
significant Ceremonies, which was the great Reason of the dreadful Ignorance,
into which the whole European world was plundg'd, when Popery prevailed. So Mr.
Tyndall, I impute this our grievous fall into so extreme and horrible Blindness
(wherein we are so deep and so deadly brought asleep) unto nothing so much, as
unto the multitude of Ceremonies; for as soon as the Prelates had set up such a
rabble of Ceremonies, they thought it superfluous to teach the plain Text any
longer, and the Law of God, Faith of Christ, etc. forasmuch as all such things
were played before the peoples faces daily in the Ceremonies, etc. Tyndall of
the Ceremonies of the Mass.

Thus it is evident, that in Henry the 8ths time the great wickedness of that
Age was grievous to such as aimed at Reformation; that these wickednesses were
occasioned by the Pride, Covetousness, and Sensuality of the rich Clergy. But

2. It Is as manifest, That the Pride of the Clergy was discovered by their
Prelacy, their aspiring after a Dominoon over their Brethren. Whence the One
gets the name of Bishop appropriated unto him, and with that name an
Unaccountable, yea an Unscriptural Power. So Mr. Tyndall in his Practice of
Prelates; The Office of a Bishop was a room at the beginning that no man
coveted, and that no man durst take upon him, save he that loved Jesus Christ
better than his own Life. For as Christ says, That no man might be his
Disciple, except that he were ready to forsake Life, and all: Even so might
that Officer be sure, that it might cost him his Life at one time or another,
for bearing record unto the Truth. But after that the multitude of the
Christians were increased, and many great men had received the Faith, then both
Lands and Rents, as well as other Goods, were given unto the maintenance as
well of the Clergy, as of the Poor; because they gave then no Tithes to the
Priests, nor yet now do, save in certain Countries. For it is too much to give
Alms, Offerings, Lands, and Tithes also. And then the Bishops made them
Substitutes under them to help them, which they called Priests, and kept the
name of Bishops to themselves.

But out of the Deacons sprang all the Mischief. For through their hands went
all things, they ministered unto the Clergy, they ministered unto the Poor, they
were in favor with great and small. And when the Bishops Office began to have
rest and be Honorable, then the Deacons through Favor and Gifts climbed up
thereunto, as lightly as he that has the old Abbots Treasure succeeds with
us. And by the means of their practice and acquaintance in the world, they were
more subtle and worldly wise than the old Bishops, and less learned in Gods
word, as our Prelates are, when they come from Stewardships in Gentlemen's
Houses, and from surveying of great men's Lands, etc. -- Then, while they that
had the Plow by the tail, looked back, the Plow went awry, Faith waxed feeble
and faint, Love waxed cold, the Scripture waxed dark, Christ was no more seen;
He was in the Mount with Moses, and therefore the Bishops would have a God upon
the earth, whom they might see; and thereupon they began to dispute who should
be greatest. So far Mr. Tyndal in his Practice of Popish Prelates.

3. The Malady, and Disease of those times, with their Causes, were no sooner
understood, but several Worthy Persons applied themselves to a diligent search
after the most proper Remedy, and found, that a Reformation must begin among
the Clergy, that all things must be reduced to the Apostolical Institution.
Discipline must be strictly exercised, the which could not with effect be
accomplished, but by bringing all things to the first Institution; For which
reason, Mr. Tyndall makes his enquiry after those Officers the Apostles
ordained in Christ's Church, and what their Offices were, concerning which take
Mr. Tyndal's own sense, in his discourse of the Practice of Popish Prelates. --
Wherefore the Apostles (says he) following, and obeying the Rule, Doctrine,
and Commandment of our Savior Jesus Christ, ordained in his Kingdom, and
Congregation, Two Officers: One called after the Greek word, Bishop, in
English, an Overseer, which same was called Priest after the Greek, Elder in
English, because of his Age, Discretion, and sadness; for he was as nigh as
could be, always an Elderly man. And this Overseer has put his hands unto the
Plow of Gods Word, and sed Christ's Flock, and tended them only, without looking
unto any other business in the world. Another Officer they chose, and called
him Deacon, after the Greek; a Minister in English, to minister the alms of the
people unto the poor and needy. For in the Congregation of Christ, love makes
every man's gifts and goods common unto the necessity of his neighbor.
Wherefore the love of God being yet hot in the hearts of men, the rich that had
the substance of this worlds goods, brought of their abundance great plenty
unto the sustentation of the poor, and delivered it unto the hands of the
Deacons.

Mr. Tyndall judged, that according to the Apostolical Institution, there were
no other Officers in the Church but Elders and Deacons. The Elders being of the
same Office and Order with the Bishops, they being two names belonging to one
and the same person. There is (says he) Presbuteros called an Elder by Birth,
which same called immediately a Bishop or Overseer to declare what Persons are
meant -- they were called Elders, because of their Age, Gravity, etc. and
Bishops and Overseers by reason of their Offices. And all that were called
Elders or Priests (if they so will) were called Bishops also, though they have
divided the names now, which thing thou may evidently see by the first Chap.
of Titus, and the 20th. of the Acts -- Those Overseers, which we now call
Bishops after the Greek word, were always biding in one place to Govern the
Congregation there. (Tyndal of the word Elder.) But Deacons were Overseers of
the Poor and crept not into Orders till the Church grew Rich.

Tyndal was not alone in this opinion, it being also the sense of Famous
Lambert and Dr. Barns, who strenuously defended, and at the last sealed this
Truth with their blood. One of the Articles for which they were burnt, being
about the Order of Priesthood.

I Will give you in the first place Lambert's own answer to the ninth Article, as
I find it in Acts and Mon. Vol. 2. As touching Priesthood (says Lambert) in
the Primitive Church, when virtue bare (as ancient Doctors do deem, and
Scripture in mine opinion records the same) the most room, there were no more
Officers in the Church of God than Bishops and Deacons; that is to say,
Ministers; as witnesses, beside Scripture, full apertly Hierome in his
Commentaries upon the Epistles of Paul; whereas he says, That those that we
call Priests, were all one, and no other but Bishops; and the Bishops none
other but Priests, men ancient both in Age and Learning, so near as they could
be chosen. Neither were they institute and chosen as they be now-adays, with
small regard of a Bishop or his Officer, only apposing them if they can co^^^e
a Collect; but they were chosen not only of the Bishop, but also with the
consent of the people among whom they should have their living, as shows
Saint Cyprian; and the people (as he says) ought to have power to choose their
priests, that be men of good Learning, of good and honest report: but alack for
pity, such Elections are now banished, and new fashions brought in, which if we
should confer with the form of the Election showed of Christ by his Apostle
Paul, we should find no small diversity; but all turned upside down. To
conclude, I say, the Order or state of Priests and Deacons, was ordained by
God; but Subdeacons and Conjurers, otherwise called Exorcistae, or Acolitae,
which we call Benet and Collect, were instituted by the invention of men; and
this you may find in the Law, Did. 21. and other places, where it is written,
Subdiaconatus tempore Apost^lorum non fuit sacer. Subdeaconship in the time of
the Apostles was no holy Order.

Dr. Barns in like manner had the same objected against him in the Articles for
which he was burned. I Will give you the Article, and his own sentiments
concerning it, as Mr. Fox relates in a Discourse set forth with Mr. Tyndal and
John Frith's Works.

Article 6. I will never believe, nor yet I can never believe, that one man may
be by the Law of Ood a Bishop of two or three Cities, yea of an whole Country;
for it is contrary to Saint Paul, which says, I have left thee behind, to set
in every City a Bishop. And if you find in one place of Scripture that they be
called Episcopi, you shall find in many that they be called Presbyteri. -- I
was brought before my Lord Cardinal into his Gallery, and there he read all my
Articles till he came to this, and there he stopped, and said, That this
touched him, and therefore he asked me, if I thought it wrong that one Bishop
should have so many Cities underneath him? Unto whom I answered, That I could
no farther go than to St. Paul's text, which set in every City a Bishop. Then
asked he me, If I thought it now unright (seeing the Ordinance of the Church)
that one Bishop should have so many Cities? I answered, That I knew none
Ordinance of the Church (as concerning this thing) but St. Paul's saying only.
Nevertheless I did see a contrary custom and practice in the world, but I know
not the Original thereof. Then said he, That in the Apostles time there were
diverse Cities, some seven miles, some six miles long, and over them was there
set but one Bishop, and of their Suburbs also; so likewise now a Bishop has
also but One City to his Cathedral Church, and the Country about it as Suburbs
unto it. Methought this was far-fetcht, but I durst not deny it, because it was
so great Authority, and of so holy a Father, and of so great a Divine. But this
I dare say, that his Holiness could never prove it by Scripture, nor yet by any
Authority of Doctors, nor yet by any practice of the Apostles; and yet it must
be true, because a Pillar of the Church has spoken it. But let us see what the
Doctors say to mine Article. Athanasius does declare this Text of the Apostle,
I have left thee behind, etc. He would not commit unto one Bishop a whole Ylde,
but he did enjoin that every City should have his proper Pastor, supposing that
by this means they should more diligently oversee the people, and also that the
labor should be more easy to bear, etc. Also Chrysostom on that same Text:
He would not that a whole Country should be permitted unto one man, but he
enjoined to every man his Cure, by that means he knew that his labor should be
more easy, and the subjects should be with more diligence governed, if the
Teachers were not distract with the governing of many Churches, but had cure
and charge of one Church only, etc. Methinks these be plain words, and able to
move a man to speak as much as I did. But grant that you may have all these
Cities, yet can you make it none Heresy. For my Lord Cardinal granted that it
was but against him, and against you, which be no Gods. But I poor man must be
an Heretic, there is no remedy, You will have it so, and who is able to say
nay? Not all Scripture, nor yet God himself.

By this time the Reader cannot but be well satisfied, that the great thing
aimed at by the first great Lights England had in Henry the 8ths days, as a
most effectual way to carry on a Reformation, was the reducing the Popish
Hierarchy to an Apostolical Presbytery. The Presbyterian Discipline, that is,
The Government of Gospel-Churches by Presbyters and Deacons, being of Divine
Institution, is most admirably suited to the designed End of promoting the
Glory of God, the Power of Religion, etc. A Discipline, the truth of which has
been sealed by the blood of blessed Protestant Martyrs, a thing in which our
Episcoparians cannot make the^r boast.

Moreover it is manifest, that this was not only the apprehension of Tindall,
Barnes, and Lambert, but that all the Clergy in Henry the 8ths time, denied a
Diocesan Episcopacy to be of Divine Institution, asserting, that in the New
Testament there is no mention made but of Deacons or Ministers, and Priests or
Bishops. This is in a Paper signed by Cromwell, and many others; Yea, and in
the necessary Erudition of a Christian man, as is acknowledged by the Judicious
Dr. Burnet, who in his Addenda to the first part of the Reformation, does say,
That both in this Writing, and in the necessary Erudition of a Christian man,
Bishops and Priests are spoken of as one and the same Office. Though I must
confess, that the Dr. does differ from those Divines; and although he gives us
not satisfaction in his Reply, yet he speaks more ingenuously, and more to the
purpose, than either this Gentleman, or Dr. Stillingfleet himself.

4. The old Nonconformists in Queen Elizabeth's days agreeing with those worthy
Martyrs, Tyndall, Lambert, and Barnes, concerning the most effectual way of
carrying on the Reformation, applied themselves seriously to the Work. The
Viciousness of some of the Clergy in Queen Elizabeth's days was as grievous unto
the Nonconformist, as unto those glorious Martyrs; a Reformation in Manners,
and in order thereunto in Church Discipline, was what they aimed at.

It Is very evident, That a further Reformation than was carried on by Queen
Elezabeth, was very desirable; for in some respects she carried it not so far
as King Edward himself had done. 'For Queen Elizabeth (as Dr. Burnet most
admirably expresses it) though she had been bred up from her Infancy with a
Hatred to the Papacy, and a Love to the Reformation; yet as her first
Impressions in her Fathers Reign were in favor of such old Rites, as he had
still retained, so in her nature she loved State and some Magnificence in
Religion, as well as in every thing else: She thought that in her Brothers
Reign they had stripped it too much of external Ornaments, and had made their
Doctrine too narrow in some Points: Therefore she intended to have some things
explained in more general Terms, that so all Parties might be comprehended by
them: She inclined to keep up Images in Churches, and to have the manner of
Christ's Presence in the Sacrament left in some general words, that those who
believe a Corporal Presence, might not be driven away from the Church by too
nice an explanation of it. History of Reform. part. 2. l. 3.

As to this last Particular, the Rubric that explained the Reason for the
kneeling at the Sacrament, That thereby no Adoration is intended to any
corporal presence of Christ's flesh and blood, because that is only in Heaven;
which had been in King Edwards Liturgy, is left out, and kneeling at the
Sacrament, to many a Protestant much more offensive than formerly.

The great Propension in Queen Elizabeth's days to gain over the Popish party
to her Communion by those Alterations made in the Liturgy in favor of the
Papist, the ordering the Sacramental Bread to be made round in the fashion of
the Wafers used in the time of Queen Mary, the requiring the Table to be placed
where the Altar stood, etc. was attended with the Conformity of many, who were
cordially affected to the Interest of the Church of Rome, at which time there
was not a sufficient number of learned men to supply the Cures; which filled
the Church (as Heylin says) with an Ignorant and Illiterate Clergy, whose
learning went no further than the Liturgy, or Book of Homilies, though
otherwise conformable unto the Rules of the Church.

The Old Nonconformists still desiring a further Reformation than was carried
on in King Edwards days, but ^^^^ing rather a turning toward Rome, could not
but be greatly grieved. They in their places wait a while, but at length humbly
desire a Parochial Discipline, instead of which they fall under the lash of new
Impositions, unto which they could not Conscienciously conform; hence many
Learned, Jud^^^us, Godly and Faithful Ministers are cast out, even at such a
time when the Church had but a company of Illiterate Fellows to officiate in
Public. From whence proceeds the First S^parati^n, as appears from what the
old Smith said in his Answer to the Bishop of London's charge, where you will
find, that although they separated from the Church, because their faithful
Ministers were turned out, yet they even then made it manifest, That they left
not the Liturgy, because it contained Forms of Prayer, for they made use of a
Form at their Separate Meeting. Take Smith's words in a part of the Register.
Indeed as you said even now, for Preaching and ministering the Sacraments, so
long as we might have the Word freely Preached, and the Sacraments administered
without the preferring of Idolatrous gear about it, we never assembled together
in Houses. But when it came to this point, that all our Preachers were
displaced by your Law, that would not subscribe to your Apparel and your Law;
so that we could not hear none of them in any Church by the space of seven or
eight weeks, except Father Coverdale, of whom we have a good opinion; and yet
God knows the man was so fearful, that he durst not be known unto us where he
Preached, though we sought it at his house. And then were we troubled and
commanded to your Courts from day to day, for not coming to your
Parish-Churches. Then we bethought us what were best to do; and we remembered
that there was a Congregation of us in this City in Queen Marys days; and a
Congreagation at Geneva, which used a Book, and Order of Preaching, Ministering
of the Sacraments and Discipline, most agreeable to the Word of God: which Book
is allowed by that Godly and Well-learned man, Mr. Calvin, and the Preachers
there, which Book and Order we now hold. And if you can reprove this Book, or
any thing that we hold by the Word of God, we will yield to you, and do open
Penance at Paul's Cross; if not, we will stand to it by the Grace of God.

Thus no Parochial Discipline being admitted, but those who desired it being
Ejected, even at such a time, when those who remained in Public for the most
part were Illiterate and Vicious, the Separation begun. The Ejection of the
Godly Now Conformists, the Sensuality of the remaining Clergy, was a great
Cause of the first Separation, and not without great Reason. For it being as
essential to every true Gospel-Minister, that he Govern the Church of which he
is a Pastor, as that he teaches and instructs it; the taking from 'em so
essential a part of their Office, which by woeful experience has been of a very
ill tendency, could not but occasion the Old Nonconformists to manifest their
dislike to such proceedings, and refuse the giving in an Assent and Consent
thereunto; for which Refusal they being Ejected, the multitude of such as
remained being Illiterate, yea and Vicious in their Conversations, the more
sober People withdrew from the Public, and run after the Ejected. The Scandals
of the Clergy having had no inconsiderable influence on the Separation.

For which consult the Learned Dr. Burnet, who says, In the Sponsions made by
the Priests, they bind themselves to teach the People committed to their
charge, to banish away all erroneous Doctrines, and to use both public and
private Monitions and Exhortations, as well to the sick as to the whole, within
their Cures, as need shall require, and as occasion shall be given. Such as
remember that they have plighted their Faith for this to God, will feel the
Pastoral Charge to be a load indeed, and so be far enough from relinquishing
it, or hiring it out to a loose or ignorant Mercenary. These are the blemishes
and Scandals that lie on our Church, brought on it partly by the corruption of
some Simoniacal Patrons, but chiefly by the Negligence of some, and the
Faultiness of other Clergymen: Which could never have lost so much ground in
the Nation, upon such trifling accounts, as are the contests since raised about
Ceremonies, if it were not that the People, by such palpable faults in the
Persons and behavior of some Churchmen, have been possessed with prejudices,
first against them, and then upon their account against the whole Church: So
that these corrupt Churchmen are not only to answer to God for all those Souls
within their charge, that have perished through their neglect; but in a great
degree for all the mischief of the Schism among us; to the nourishing whereof
they have given so great and palpable occasion. The importance of those things,
made me judge they deserved this Digression.

Having been thus large in removing the Mistakes the Dr's Substitute seemed to
lie under, let the Sober Reader judge, Whether it is any way probable that the
Jesuits had an hand in the first Separation; or whether the pretense about
Spiritual Prayer was any ground of their Separation? that is, Whether they were
against a Form of Prayer, crying down the English Liturgy with a Design of
setting up Free and Spritual Prayer in its stead.

SECT. II.
The Designs of the Jesuit against a Prelatical Episcopacy, found to be none.
Some Differences between the first Reformers and our Author. A Letter of Sir
Francis Knolles to the Lord Treasurer Cecil, out of which it is proved, That
there is a Difference between some old Queen Elizabeth's Bishops, and the Dean,
etc. The Author's Pretenses about Antiquity confuted out of Bishop Jewel.

HIS Reply to what I offered to the Dean's second Argument, falls now under
Consideration.

The Dean in representing the Dissenter, to the great Disadvantage of the
Party, insinuates as if their opposing Prelatical Episcopacy, had been the most
effectual way to cast reproach on the first Reformers, and to introduce Popery.

In Answer unto this I did First prove, 1. That it was not the Principle nor
the Interest of the Jesuit to destroy Episcopacy. A Truth the Dean's Substitute
does not deny. 2. That the Reputation of the first Reformation is not in the
least blasted by the Dissenter, which I evinced with so much Demonstration,
that the whole that is returned by way of Answer, is, His not believing some of
those persons, on whose Testimony I insisted, (though he gives no Reason for
his Unbelief.) His proving what I granted, and his Extravagant Interpreting an
Argument brought to evince, That 'twas not the Jesuits Interest to destroy a
Prelatical Episcopal Constitution, to be an admirable Address to the Lords and
Commons, to pull down Bishops, and divide their Lands. All which is done partly
in his Preface, and partly in the first Chapter of his great Book, to show
himself an excellent Methodist. But the whole is so little to the purpose, that
if he had not given an occasion to enlighten the Reader concerning some
momentous Instances, I would have passed it by as deserving no farther
Consideration.

1. Every thing is said to be Misrepresented. But how the Doctor's own words
should misrepresent his own sense, is not overeasie to apprehend. However,
Whether there be any Misreport, I Will leave it to the Impartial Reader, and
consider what Reply is made to what I offered in Answer to the Doctor's
Uncomely Accusation.

2. He grants, [ p. 38.] That the Papists do not so much Envy and Malign the
Episcopal Government. Neither is it their Principle nor Interest to destroy it.
Why then should they be brought to act so contrary to their Principle and
Interest, as to destroy what they so much endeavor to preserve, strengthen and
establish? But

3. He adds, Though they are for Episcopacy, yet they may design the
destruction of a Protestant Episcopacy, etc. Reply. I said, That 'twas not the
Destruction of Episcopacy, but the possessing themselves of our Bishoprics,
that they would be at, which may be without any alteration of the Episcopal
Constitution, so far as it is Episcopal.

His running then unto France is nothing to the purpose, unless it may be
looked on as an intimation of his good will to the Arbitrary proceedings of
that Country.

However, I Will desire our Author to consider, That a change of Persons without
any alteration of the Episcopal Constitution, may most effectually answer the
end of the Jesuit. For hereby they would be capacitated (if ever a Popish
Prince should come to the Crown) to argue with the common people concerning the
Unreasonableness of a separating from Rome, from the same Topics with the
^ean, thus.

The Episcopacy is not pulled down, nor destroyed, it is rather strengthened,
and more firmly established. There is not so vast a deference between the
Church of England, and the Church (I do not say the Court) of R^me, as there is
between the Romanist and the Factious Presbyterean; behold, you have your
Bishops still in all their Glorious Vestments; a Surpliced Cl^rgy; an Excellent
English Liturgy [for the Papists in Dublin have their Mass in English, which is
exactly correspondent to the terms the Papists made the English in the days of
Archbishop Laud] If you submit to the one, when Authority command you, why will
you not to the other? What is the difference?

For this reason I cannot but be pretty confident that the Jesuits acting
according to their own Principles and Interest, receive greatest satisfaction
from such as are most deeply engaged to represent the Episcopal Constitution as
one most Excellent and Admirable.

Do not the whole Land know what it is that gives life unto Jesuitical hopes?
What are their designs and expectations from a Popish Successor? and
consequently how mischievous the Destruction of Episcopacy would prove unto
that sort of People, especially at this Juncture? But I must not insist on
this, lest I be censured as an Addresser to the Lords and Commons to pull down
Episcopacy, a thing the Jesuit would not be at, he being more unwilling, than
by argument unable to oppose it, for which reason (as our learned Author says)
Episcopacy is most easily defended against a Roman Catholic, (i. e.) against
one that has no heart to oppose it. But,

4. Our Author would by all means persuade the world, that the Dissenters cast
the greatest Reproaches on the first Reformation, because they manifest some
dissatisfaction with such as impede a further Reformation; as if a good work
was as soon consummated as begun; or as if it had been either impossible in it
self, or contrary to the design of the first Reformers, to carry on the
Reformation; or as if the present Constitution of Episcopacy had been in every
momentous respect as excellent as that begun in King Edwards days; whereas it is
well known unto wise men, and fully proved in my Epistle to the Reverend Dean,
that 'twas impossible the Reformation should be finished as soon as 'twas
entered on; and that the first Reformers in King Edwards days did more in six
years than all their successors have since done in almost six-score. All which
is prudently past over by our Author.

5. They stick much on that great Agreement there is between the Present, and
King Edwards Reformation; as if we could not complain on the latter, without
reproaching the former. But this is so weakly urged, that any Reader of an
ordinary capacity may see the vanity of this way of arguing; for there is a
great difference between that and this time; what was almost impossible then,
might since be easily done. But, 2. it is easy to demonstrate that the begun
Reformation in King Edward the 6ths days was more excellent than the Present;
and that instead of carrying on the Reformation, it has been carried back, to
the great grief of sound Protestants.

This has been in part proved, when I did show the Propension of Queen
Elizabeth to favor Popery, out of Dr. Burnet, and Dr. Heylin, two Sons of the
Church; though I fear the mentioning of the latter in Conjunction with the
former, may not be so meet; the former being a through Protestant, a man of
great Worth; but the heart of the latter toward Rome; for which reason, as
their Principles are vastly different, so should they be kept at a distance by
me, if Heylin had not acknowledged that to be a truth, which I rather believe,
because found in the incomparable Dr. Burnet.

He now take notice of another considerable difference, between the very
Constitution of Episcopacy in King Edward the 6th's time, and that in Queen
Elizabeth's: The former was such as was inconsistent with the Popes Supremacy;
for they were to hold all their Courts in the Kings Name; but the latter, such
as is most easily reduced to the exalting the Court of Rome. The Government of
the Church being taken from the Prince, it is not so difficult to fix it on the
Pope.

Thus there is a difference between King Edwards, and Queen Elizabeth's
Episcopacies. I may also add,

That there is a great difference between the present Constitution, and that in
Queen Elizabeth's, if we may believe the Lord Treasurer Cecil, who suggests,
that the Bishops did not look on their Superiority above their Brethren, to be
of Divine Right, as the Dean of Paul's, and his Substitute now do: For this I
will give you an account we have of the Speeches used in the Parliament by Sir
Francis Knolles, and after Written to my Lord Treasurer, Sir William Cecil, as
I find it in the end of the Assertion.

To the end I may inform your Lordship of my dealing in this Parliament-time,
against the undue claimed Superiority of the Bishops over their Inferior
Brethren: Thus it was,

Because I was in the Parliament-time, in the 25th year of King Henry the 8th,
in which time, first all the Clergy, as well Bishops as others, made an humble
Submission to King Henry the 8th, acknowledging his Supremacy, and detesting
the Usurpation of the Bishop of Rome's Authority: Upon which Submission of the
Clergy, the King gave unto the said Bishops the same ample Rule, that before
they had under the Pope, over their Inferior Brethren; saving that the same
Rule was abridg'd by Statute, by this Parenthesis following, that is to say
(without offending the Prerogative Royal of the Crown of England, and the Laws
and Customs of the Realm): in the latter end of the Statute it was added, That
whosoever offends in any one part of that Statute, and their Aiders,
Counselors, and Abetters, they did all fall into the penalty of the
Praemunire. And after I had recited this Statute in the Parliament House, I
declared, that in King Henry the 8th's days, after this, there was no Bishop
that did practice Superiority over the Inferior Brethren. And in King Edward's
days the said Bishops obtained a Statute, whereby they were Authorized to keep
their Courts in the Kings Name: the which Statute was repealed in Queen Mary's
days, and was not revived in her Majesty's time that now is; whereupon it was
doubtful to me, by what Authority the Bishops do keep their Courts now in their
own Names, because it is against the Prerogative Royal of the Crown of England,
that any should keep a Court without sufficient Warrant from the Crown:
Whereupon I was answered, that the Bishops do keep their Courts now by
Prescriptions; and it is true, that the Bishops may Prescribe, that King Henry
the 8th gave them Authority by the Statute of the 25th of his Reign, to have
Authority and Rule over their Inferior Brethren, as ample as they had in the
Popes time: For this was no special Warrant for them to keep their Courts by,
and that in their own Names. And yet they have none other Warrant to keep their
Courts (as they do now in their own Names) to my knowledge. And this was the
Cause that made them obtain a Statute in King Edward's days, to keep their
Courts by, in the Kings Name. Now it is a strange Allegation, that the Bishops
should claim Authority at this present, to keep their Courts in their own Names
(as they do) by Prescription, because the Statute of 25. does restrain them
generally from offending of the Prerogative Royal of the Crown of England, and
the Laws and Customs of the Realm. And no man may justly keep a Court without
out a special Warrant from the Crown of England, as is aforesaid. And the
general Liberty given by King Henry the 8th to the Bishops, to Rule and Govern
as they did in the Popes time, is no sufficient Warrant to the Bishops, to keep
their own Courts in their own Names by Prescription, as I take it: And
therefore the Bishops had done wisely, if they had sought a Warrant by Statute,
to keep their Courts in the Queens Name, as the Bishops did in King Edward's
days: in which time Archbishop Cranmer did cause Peter Martyr and Bucer to come
over into this Realm, to be placed in the Two Universities, for the better
Instruction of the Universities in the Word of God. And Bishop Cranmer did
humbly prefer these Learned men without any challenge to himself of any
Superior Rule in this behalf, over his Inferior Brethren. And the time has
been, that no man could carry away any Grant from the Crown of England by
general words, but that he must have special words to carry the same by:
Therefore now the Bishops are Warranted to carry away the keeping of their
Courts in their own Names, by Prescription, it passes my understanding.

Moreover, whereas your Lordship said unto me, that the Bishops have forsaken
their claim of Superiority over their inferior Brethren (lately), to be by Gods
Ordinance, and that now they do only claim Superiority from her Majesty's
Supreme Government. If this be true, then it is requisite, and necessary, that
my Lord of Canterbury that now is, do recant, and retract his saying in his
Book of the great Volume against Cartwright, where he says in plain words (by
the name of Dr. Whitgift), that the Superiority of Bishops is Gods own
Institution: which saying does impugn her Majesty's Supreme Government
directly; and therefore it is to be retracted plainly and truly. For Christ
truly and plainly confesses, John 18.36. That his Kingdom was not of this
world; and therefore he gave no worldy Rule or Pre-eminence to his Apostles,
but the Heavenly Rule, which was to Preach the Gospel, saying, Ite, praedicate
in omnem mundum; Quicunque crediderit and baptizatus fuerit, salvus erit: qui
non crediderit, condemnabitur: Go and Preach in all the world, whosoever shall
believe and be baptized, shall be saved; but he that will not believe, shall be
condemned, Mar. 16.16. But the Bishops do cry out, saying, That Cartwright and
his Fellows would have no Government, etc. So belike the Bishops care for no
Government, but for worldly and forcible Government over their Brethren, the
which Christ never gave to his Disciples nor Apostles, but made them subject to
the Rule of Princes, who ought not to be resisted, saving that they might
answer unto Princes, that they must rather obey God than men, Act. 5.29. And
yet in no wise to resist the Prince, but to take up the Cross and follow
Christ. So far Sir Francis Knolles Discourse in Parliament concerning the
Episcopacy, etc.

But to return: I would fain know, why we may not think honorably of good
beginnings, even when we cannot approve of such as put a stop thereunto? Is the
Episcopacy of King Edward so much the same in all respects with the present,
that whoever dissents from this, must thereby cast a reproach on that? Surely
the Dean will not say so, after so many Months consideration.

6. There is an admirable distinction insisted on, which will bring off the
Dean without all doubt, viz. There is a Popish and a Protestant Episcopacy: But
where lies the Difference? What Difference is there between our present
Episcopacy, and that in Henry the 8ths time?

Is not the Episcopacy, so far as it is an Episcopacy, the same? What is there
Intrinsecal to this Episcopal Constitution, that differs from that? Whence if
that be Popish, why may not this, seeing it is the same with that, be in like
manner so? That Henry the 8ths Episcopacy was Popish, Bishop Bramhall has
evinced, in proving, that the Papists begun the Separation from Rome. In fine,
Let our Author tell me the Difference between Queen Mary's Episcopacy and Queen
Elizabeth's Episcopacy on her first entering the Throne. Is not the Episcopacy
now the same with that at the Reforming the Liturgy by Act of Parliament? and
was not that Episcopacy the same with Queen Mary's? The only specifying
Difference that can be suggested is, that though the Episcopacy as such, is the
same, and the Persons in both may be the same, yea and their Principles, for so
it has been in King Henry the 8th, King Edward the 6th, Queen Mary, and Queen
Elizabeth; yet the outward profession of the Bishops is not the same. But is
this Extrinsecal Consideration sufficient to occasion a Difference that is
Intrinsecal? Moreover, to return to his French Monarch; Has not the Experience
of many a year assured us, That when Monarchs design not the enlarging their
own Monarchies, they have done all they could to preserve other Monarchies? An
Aristocracy, or a Democracy, being things detestable in their eye.

7. His answering the Letter of the Council by transcribing part of Sir Francis
Walsingham's Letter, as recorded in Dr. Burnet, bing little to the purpose,
might have escaped my Consideration, had it not been very necessary to suggest,
How prudently he overlooked the great Principles on which the Queen grounded
her proceedings; the one being, That Consciences cannot be forced, but to be
won and reduced by force of Truth, with the aid of time, and use of all good
means of Instruction, and Persuasion. A Principle unto which if our Clergy
would adhere, it might have conduced very much to the Peace of the Church. This
I suppose is a sufficient Reply to the Dean's Substitute.

The Dissenters oppose Episcopacy and Ceremonies, notwithstanding their
Antiquity, etc. The Doctor's Argument was here set forth to the greatest
advantage of his Cause in his own words. To which I replied, That our not
embracing Episcopacy, etc. does not advantage the Papist, neither does our
rejecting it, even when it pretends to so much Antiquity. I having shown that
there was no such strength in their Argument of Antiquity, if it fell short of
an Absolutely Primitive or an Apostolical Antiquity, as theirs really does;
they not being able to show in what part of the Scriptures their Dio^san
Episcopacy is found, it being considered as a Creature of Human make, by many a
Son of the Church, yea and once by our great Doctor himself; and it has been
proved by other hands unanswerably, That there is no evidence for such an
Episcopacy in the Church the first two hundred years; for which reason Mr.
Chillingworth's Argument, showing the vanity of such men's pretenses about
Antiquity, that can ascend no higher than the fifth, or fourth, or third, or
second Age, is, it may be, as pertinently urged, as the little intimation of
Mr. Ch's sense of the Antiquity of Episcopacy. It Is pleasant then to see with
what pertness our Author hopes, that our Enquirer will now grow so modest, as
not to cite Mr. Chil. any more against an Argument from Antiquity.

The other part of his Reply is as little to the purpose, unless a declaiming
against Protestant Arguments, such as are too strong to receive an Answer, be
the most effectual way to ruin Popery. It Is true, we reject the Popish
pretenses about Antiquity as futilous; many Protestants (in the number of which
some Nonconformists may be listed) having unanswerably proved Popery to be a
Novelty.

However, If Popery or Episcopacy be not agreeable to the Scriptures, whatever
their pretenses are to Antiquity, they will be found unworthy the consideration
of a solid Divine; and therefore because he sends me to Bishop J^wel, [Part 1.
p. mihi, 539, etc.] I Will give the Reader an account of his sense against
Harding. The Truth of God (says the Bishop) is neither furthered by the Face
of Antiquity, nor hindered by the Opinion of Novelty. For oftentimes the thing
that is New is condemned as Old; and the thing that is indeed Old is condemned
as New. If Newness in Religion, in all respects, and every way, were ill,
Christ would not have resembled his Doctrine to New Wine, etc. Arnobius says,
The Authority of Religion must be weighed by God, and not by Time. It behooves
us to consider not upon what day, but what things we begin to Worship. -- The
thing that is true, is never too late. Saint Augustine says, The Heathen say,
The Religion that was First, cannot be False; as if Antiquity and old Custom
could prevail against the Truth. The old Learned Father Tertullian says,
Whatsoever thing savoureth against the Truth, the same is an Heresy, yea
although it be a Custom never so Old, etc.

This surely is the Protestant Doctrine; whence to talk of Antiquity, in order
to the countenancing that in Religion, which finds no favor from the
Scriptures, is but to advance the Papal Interest; who have but little beside
the pretense of Antiquity to support their Abominations.

SECT. III.
A search for the Schismatic. A true state of the Difference between the
Church of England and the Protestant Dissenter. The Dissenter, according to our
Author's Notion, cleared from Schism. The Church of England found Guilty. Some
Remarks on several other passages in the Dean's Defense. An Account of some of
the Dean's Mistakes. The Dissenter no friend to Popery. The Conclusion.

1. THAT our Divisions advance the Popish Designs, is acknowledged. But the 2.
Enquiry is, Who is the Faulty Divider? It being the Faulty Divider alone who
gives the Papist the advantage. The great Enquiry then must be after the Faulty
Divider, Whether the Conformist, or the Nonconformist be the Divider?

The state of the Case was given in the Enquiry, [p. 23.] where the Principle
on which the Dissenters proceed was laid down, and improved; this should have
been considered by our Author, but he was so prudent as to pass it by: For
which Reason, without any Reflections on my Learned Adversary, I must mind him
of the state of the Controversy, and show wherein he has exercised his Wisdom
in leaping over what he could not handsomely remove out of the way.

In the Enquiry after the Faulty Divider, I showed wherein the Parties at
variance agreed, and wherein they differed. 1. They agreed in those Points
commonly called Docirinal or Substantial, in contradistinction to lesser
things, about Worship and Church Discipline, etc. They differed about what was
in the Judgment of the Dissenter Sinful; but in the Opinion of the Episcopal,
only Indifferent.

It Is true, the Episcopal represent us as a weak People, whose Consciences as
to those particulars are Erreneous; that therefore we must cast off these
erring Consciences, and submit.

Our Reply is, We seek Heaven for Counsel, we study hard for the Truth, read
with the greatest Impartiality and Freedom the Discourses the Episcopal have
written; For we can solemnly and with much sincerity declare, as in the
presence of an Heart-searching God, We would with the greatest cheerfulness
Conform to all the Impositions, if we thought we could do it without sin. That
we are so peevish as to lose the Comforts of a good Benefice, merely to
gratify an obstinate Humor; if we are in danger of being biased one way more
than another by carnal considerations, it is toward Conformity. For if we
conform, we are freed from the reproaches and contempt of many, from the
continued fear of Imprisonment, and other uncomfortable severities, and in a
fair way of abounding with the good things of this life for the supporting our
selves and Families. But if we conform not, we are represented as Factious and
Seditious, exposed to the Rage of every vile Informer, in constant danger of
Fines, etc. and of more miseries than I can with delight rehearse.

However, though there are considerations enough from the world to byas our
minds, in a seeking for the Truth, to lean toward Conformity; yet desiring to
approve our selves sincere toward God, we find, That we cannot without sin
conform; we cannot without sinning deliberately, and knowingly comply with the
Episcopal Impositions; and if we should notwithstanding conform to live and die
Conformists, we should knowingly, and deliberately sin, yea, and die under the
guilt thereof, which is a thing so hazardous to the soul, that we durst not
touch with Conformity, lest we die, lest we die eternally.

We censure not such as do conform, because they not lying under the same
convictions of Conscience as we do, may not by their Conformity run that
hazard, which we unavoidably must, should we against the light of our
Consciences comply. There is a great difference between those that act
according to the directions of their Consciences, and such as act contrary
thereunto: For which reason I wonder, that our great Churchmen should say,
that Mr. Baxter represented all Conformists as a company of Perjured Villains,
merely because he showed, that if the Nonconformists should contrary to the
Dictates of their Conscience conform, they should be guilty of Perjury, and
several other great sins.

But though this be the truth, yet there are some who will not believe it, who
say we, do we what we can for their satisfaction, will count us a pack of
Hypocrites. For which reason, that I might anticipate the censure, I laid down
the Principle unto which Dissenters do most firmly adhere, the discussing which
is what they do most sincerely desire.

The Principle is this, That the word of God contained in Scripture, is the
only Rule of the Whole, and of every part of true Religion. As for external
circumstances, as time and place, etc. being no part of, though necessary
appendages unto our Religion.

From this Principle I proceed to this Conclusion, That whatever part of the
Service of the Church of England is imposed on us, as so necessary a part of
our Religion, as to be a term of Communion, if not agreeable to the word of God
in Scripture, that Imposition is sinful.

Our Adversary considers, that such as live in England, and yet are not of the
Church of England, do not belong unto the Catholic Church; that is, they are
all in a state of damnation. Hence it is we must, according unto him, be a
member of the Church of England, or be damned. We are willing with all our
hearts to be members of the same Church with them, i. e. to be members of the
Catholic Church is what we desire. But this, say they, we cannot be, but by
complying with their imposed terms. To which we reply, Let their terms be as
Catholic as they pretend their Church is, and we will comply: i. e. Let them keep
to a few, certain, and necessary things; let them not impose as terms of Union,
any thing but what is according to the Word of God in Scripture, we are
satisfied, the Controversy is at an end. But if they will take on 'em to make
that a part of true Religion, yea so necessary a part, as to make it a term of
our communion with the Catholic Church, it is a sinful encroachment on the
Prerogative of the Lord Jesus Christ, with which we dare not compl^.

If they expe^t our compliance, why do they not show the Scriptures that
declare the things they impose, to be so necessary a part of true Religion, as
to be a form of our communion with the Catholic Church? They must not only
show that those things are a^reeable to true Religion, but moreover that they
are so necessary a part thereof, that whoever conforms not to them when
imposed, is ^pso ^^sact. cut off from the Catholic Church. This they can never
do, and therefore can never clear themselves from being the Faulty dividers.

When we provoke 'em to show us what Scriptures direct them to their
Impositions, we are turned off with Where is it forbidden? as if they had acted
exactly to the Rule Si objiciant in sacris literis non haberi Invocandos esse
Sanctos, venerandas Imagines, abstinendum a Carnibus, int aliquid ej^s^nodi;
non ergo ista esse facienda: nos contra objiciamus and quidem Efficacius: H^c
Sacris Literis non Prohiberi, atque sine piccato fieri posse, quia ^^hi non est
Lex ibi nec pr^evaricatio. Cos^. Irstit. Christ. l. 2. c. 1.
Costerus the Jesuit gave his young Scholars. If any object, Where are those
points, viz. The Invocation of Saints, The worshipping of Images, The
abstaining from flesh, and the like, found in Scripture; and because not found
in Scripture, therefore to be rejected. To which, says the Jesuit, answer
thus: Ask where it is forbidden in Scripture? if not forbidden in Scripture,
it is no sin to observe 'em; for where there is no Law, there is no
transgression. So far Costerus.

To whom we rejoyn, That the holy Scriptures being the only Rule of the Whole,
and of Every part of true Religion, if these things be not according to the
Scripture, it is because there is no truth in 'em. There must be an exact
correspondency and agreeableness between the Rule and its Regulate. The
Regulate must be brought to the Rule, and if it does not agree with it, it is
because the Regulate is not Right. The word of God in Scripture is the Rule,
what Religion soever varies from the Rule, it is a false Religion. Rectum est
Index sui and obliqui.

There are some Religions are larger than the Rule. There are other Religions
that fall short of the Rule. They who embrace any Notion as a part of their
Religion, which is not to be found in Scripture, is too large for the
Scripture; and such as reject what the Scripture injoins, have a Religion too
short. The one puts the Scripture on the Rack, to stretch it to their Religion;
but the other pares off a considerable part of Scripture, that the Rule may not
exceed their Religion. But such as keep exactly to the word of God in
Scripture, who neither go beyond, nor fall short of it, are in the right.

To make that a part of our Religion which is not to be found in Scripture, is
to take that for a part of our Religion which God has not made a part thereof,
which is sinful. How much more so is the making it a term of communion?

That the things in controversy between the Church and the Dissenter, are not
to be found in Scripture, and consequently are no part of true Religion, is
evident, not only because we cannot understand where it is to be found, nor
because the Churchmen cannot direct us where to find it; but because they
themselves look on 'em as indifferent, i. e. as what is not enjoined us in the
word of God, q. d. as what is not according to the word of God.

All this being most plain and obvious to an ordinary Capacity that is not
biassed by Prejudice, etc. Let the world judge who is in the FAULT, They who
keep close to Scripture, or they who recede therefrom. They who will do any
thing, but Sin, for Peace; Or they who will exercise their Authority, and
impose unnecessary things with the greatest Violence imaginable: I say, with
the greatest Violence imaginable; for they are imposed with such a severe
Threatening anrex'd, that whoever refuses a compliance, is cut off from the
Catholic Church, and given over to the Devil. Hence it is, that they imposing
Indifferent things as necessary to Salvation, do according to Dr.
Stillingfleet's own Rule, declare themselves to be the Schismatical Dividers.

I say, according to Dr. Stillingfleet's own Rule, compared with his
Substitutes Notion. In the Doctor's Unreasonableness of Separation, p. 213. he
says, That there are three Cases wheren the Scripture allow of Separation. The
last of which is, When men make things Indifferent Necessary to Salvation, and
divide the Church upon that account; and this was the Case of the false
Apostles, who urged the Ceremonies of the Law, as necessary to Salvation. --
Now although St. Paul himself complied sometimes with the practice of them. --
Yet when these false Apostles came to enforce the Observation of them as
necessary to Salvation, then he bids the Christians at Philippi to beware of
them; i. e. To fly their Communion, and have nothing to do with chem.

From this Rule of Dr. Stillingfleet it must follow, That if the Church of
England make things Indifferent Necessary to Salvation, our Separation from the
Church is allowed by the Scriptures; yea commanded and enjoined. We must beware
of 'em, (i. e.) to fly their Communnion, and have nothing to do with them. But
that things Indifferent are made necessary by the Church of England, according
to his Doctrine, does appear irrefragably.

That which is Necessary to our Communion with the Catholic Church, is,
according to his Doctrine, necessary to Salvation. But Indifferent things are
Necessary to our Communion with the Church of England, which is One with the
Communion with the Catholic Church, in that, according to him, they are made
necessary to our Communion with the Church of England, which is One with the
Communion with the Catholic Church, according to his constant Judgment. Ergo.

Or in other Terms, Whatever is made necessary to our being Members of the
Catholic Church, is made necessary to Savation; for to be Members of the
Catholic Church, and to be in a state of Salvation, is the same; and to be
Members of the particular Church of England, and Members of the Catholic
Church is one and the same with our Author, [ p. 248.] As if it had been said,
To be Members of the Church of England, is to be in a state of Salvation; but
not to be Members of the Church of England, is to be out of a state of
Salvation. Whence what is made necessary to our being Members of the Church of
England, is made necessary to our Salvation; that is, The many indifferent
Ceremonies imposed, as terms of our Communion with the Church of England, are
made necessary for Salvation, according to our Author.

For which reason the Scripture allows our Separation, yea the Scripture bids
us beware of her, that is, to fly her Communion, and have nothing to do with
her. Thus the Doctor in conjunction with his Substitute furnishes us with an
unanswerable Argument to clear the Dissenter from the odious Sin of Schism,
which in short is this;

From such as make Indifferent things Necessary to Salvation, we must Separate.
This is Dr. Stillingfleet's.

But the Church of England makes Indifferent things necessary to Salvation.
This is the Dr's Substitutes Notion.

Ergo, We may, yea we must Separate; that is, It Is the Will of God we should
Separate, or it is our Duty, and therefore not our Sin to separate; (i. e.) We
are not the Schismatics.

This is Argumentum ad Hominem; and either this Author must quit his Doctrine,
or acquit us of Schism.

But to treat our Author with the greater Civility, we'll suppose him to be so
tenacious of his own Doctrine, that he will rather discharge us of Schism than
abandon his beloved Notions; for which reason, seeing it is on all sides
acknowledged that there is a Faulty Division among us, and consequently a
Faulty Divider, who is the Schismatic; He must be either the Dissenter, or the
Conformist; but not the Dissenter, as we have already proved from our Author's
own Topics; Ergo, the Conformist. Here we might have put an end to this
Discourse, and would do so, had not our Author's fertile Brain furnished us with
another Argument, that does as fully evince the Conformist to be the
Schismatic, as the former cleared the Dissenter.

In the management of this Argument, we'll consider the Netion of Dr. Peter
Gunning and Peirson, as compared with our Author.

The I earned G. and P. in a Conference with the Papists, assert, That a
Superiors unjust casting any out of the Church, is Schismatical. If the
Governors of the Church do by sinful Impositions, or unjust Excommunications
cast any out of the Church, they are Schismatical. This our Author will not deny.

But according to his Notion, The Church of England are guilty of such
Impositions, and do unjustly Excommunicate Dissenters.

1. That the Impositions are sinful is evident, in that Indifferent things (as
has been proved) are made necessary to Salvation. The making any indifferent
thing Necessary to Salvation, is sinful. But the imposing indifferent things as
terms of Catholic Communion, is the making such things Necessary to
Salvation. Ergo, Sinful. Ergo, The Imposer is Schismatical. But

2. Whoever does unjustly Excommunicate any, are Schismatical. This is Dr.
Gunning's sense. But the Church of England (if they agree with our Author)
Excommunicates the Dissenter unjustly. Ergo, etc.

That the Church of England Excommunicates unjustly, according to the Doctrine
of our Author, is demonstrable; even in that the Church does, as he would have
it, by Excommunication cast thousands out of a state of Salvation, for not
complying with little uncommanded things. Whence I argue thus, To
Excommunicate, or cast us out of a state of Salvation, merely because we cannot
comply with what God never commanded us, is to Excommunicate unjustly: But so
does the Church of England, if we may pass a censure on her as our Author
provokes us to do; for the Church according unto him does Excommunicate, that
is, shut Heaven-gates against such to whom our Lord Jesus Christ has promised
the opening them.

To illustrate this with the greater clearness, I beseech the Reader to
consider, That Salvation is promised by Jesus Christ unto all such as do
sincerely Believe, truly Repent, and lead an Holy Life in all Godliness and
Honesty. Though a man may be daily guilty of lesser Evils, yet if he believe in
Christ, and renders sincere Obedience to the known Will of God, he shall be
saved. All which may be, even with those, who being verily persuaded that their
compliances with the present Impositions are sinful, durst not Conform; that
is, The Promise of Salvation is made by Christ to many, who do not conform to
the Imp^sitions of the Church of England. But Salvation by our Author is denied
unto such, their Noncompliance is enough to make 'em Schismatical, to cut them
off from Christ, and the hopes of Salvation, which being no ways justifiable in
the Conscience of any sober man, the Dissenters are unjustly Excommunicated;
and he that so Excommunicates, is Schismatical.

It Is most certain, That many good Christians cannot conform to the imposed
terms of Communion with the Church, and that for this single Reason they are
Excommunicable, if not actually Excommunicated from the Church; that is, put
out of a state of Salvation. The which being so, 'twill unavoidably follow,
That either the Excommunication is unjust; or, That the Church has greater
Power, than he that is the Lord of it, to open and shut the gates of Heaven. If
the latter, then the Church sets itself up above all that is called God in this
world, and Christ in the other. For whereas Repentance toward God, and Faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ, is sufficient for our Salvation; these add somewhat
more, to wit, an Obedience to new Impositions, threatening the neglect with
Damnation. But if the former, if the Excommunication is unjust, then according
to Dr. Gunning, with the addition of our Author, Our Ecclesiastical Governors
are the Schismatics. The Argument here in short is this;

He that does unjustly Excommunicate any out of the Catholic Church, is a
Schismatic. This is Dr. Gunning's.

But the Church of England, shutting those out of Salvation to whom Christ has
promised it, Excommunicates unjustly. This is our Authors.

Therefore the Church of England, according to the Position of our Author, is
the Schismatic.

Hereby we may easily perceive, what an admirable Defender the Church of
England has, in the Defender of the Dean; and how little the true Protestant
Clergy of the Church are beholding to this man, who insists on such Notions as
do necessarily lead judicious men to conclude the Church of England
Schismatical.

But to return to our Author, who leaping over all the difficulties, though but
hinted in the Enquiry, runs unto another Question, viz. From Ceremonies to
Circumstances; form the Parts of their Religion, to the external Appendages
thereunto, confounding the one with the other, and then runs triumphantly,
assuring his Reader, That it is impossible to worship God, or exercise any act
of Religion, but it must be in some time, or in some place; it must be done in
some circumstances, therefore we may make some things a part of our Religion,
which God has not. At this rate he fills up a great part of his Second Chapter.
Insisting on nothing but what had its answer in that Enquiry he attempted to
confute. Therefore if I should say no more than what I have in giving the true
state of the Controversy, it would be sufficient: For it lies on him either to
prove to our Conviction, that We may without sin comply with their Impositions,
(i. e.) He must so far effectually enlighten our Conscience, as to help us to
see, that the Impositions are not sinful, and that we may lawfully Conform; or
show, That we must Conform contrary to the Convictions of our Consciences, and
render a blind Obedience unto their Commands, Believing as the Church believes;
or they ought to remove the Impositions, or acknowledge that our Compliances
are not sinful. One of these must be done. Let him do either, and the
Controversy will be ended, and the Dissenters freed from Schism. But if he
cannot enlighten us to see the Lawfulness of their Impositions, nor persuade us
to render a blind Obedience, nor remove the Impositions, but plead for their
continuance, 'twill appear, That they by imposing what in their Judgments is
but Indifferent, as things necessary to our Salvation, are the Schismatics.
This might suffice as a full Answer.

But that nothing may escape consideration, that our Author may think deserves
it, Ple reflect a little on his main strength. If there be any force in this
Argument (says he) it consists in these two things: First, That all things
which are in their own nature indifferent, may without sin be parted with. And
secondly, That the Opinion of Dissenters, That indifferent things are unlawful
in the worship of God, is a just reason for parting with them: For if it be not
lawful to part with every thing that is indifferent, those who retain the use
of some indifferent things, cannot merely upon that account be called Dividers
or Schismatics; and if the opinion of Dissenters that all indifferent things
are unlawful, be not a sufficient reason for parting with them, then there may
be no fault in the Episcopals will not, nor a sufficient justification or
excuse in the Dissenters cannot. p. 9.

First, says he, If there be any force in this Argument, it consists in two
things: First, That all things which are in their own nature indifferent, may
without sin be parted with. This is his mistake; he should have said, That if
there be any strength in the Enquiry, it lies in this, viz. No one indifferent
Ceremony must be made so necessary a part of Religion, as to be a term of
Communion. It Is this he should have considered. For you sin by insisting on any
one, or more indifferent things so zealously as to make 'em terms of Communion
with your Church, and consequently with the Church Catholic; so as to deny us
a right to Christ and Salvation, for a mere noncompliance. You can part with
your indifferent Ceremonies without sin, and open the door of Salvation to the
wretched Dissenter if you will, even when they cannot without sin comply with
your intolerable Impositions. The indifferent things you impose, you impose as
terms of our Communion with you, which you make to be the same with Catholic
Communion, that is of Salvation.

2. You add the second thing, viz. That the Opinion of Dissenters, That
Indifferent things are unlawful, is a just reason for parting with them. For if
it be not, say you, lawful to part with every thing that is indifferent; those
who retain the use of Indifferent things, cannot merely upon that account be
called Dividers, or Schismatics, etc.

You should remember, that I distinguished between Ceremonies and
Circumstances, between what is a part of Religion, and Intrinsecal thereunto,
and what is Extrinsecal only: But you run to external Circumstances that are
necessary in Thesi, which is off from the point in hand.

You run from what is Indifferent to what is Necessary, as if we called you to
part with any necessary thing; whereas there is never any indifferent Ceremony
that is grievous to our Consciences, but you may part with, or cease to impose
'em, and yet worship God. But to divide necessary circumstances of Action from
the Action, is impossible. A thing we no way desire.

It Is true as you assert, A man who is to remove from London to York, is not
bound either to go thither on foot, or on horseback, or in a Coach, or in a
Wagon, each of these ways are in themselves indifferent; but yet if he will
travel to York, he must use one or either of those ways of Motion; not one in
particular is necessary, yet one or other is. But what is this to our purpose?
What though the Partition Wall between Ceremonies and Circumstances be broken
down, and they all mingled together, and all must be considered alike but as
Circumstances, What will this help you? To keep to your pretty Allusion with
one necessary Addition, viz. One has not strength to walk on foot from London
to York, another cannot bear the riding in Coach, yet to York they must go. If
you will keep to the point before us, you must say to the person that cannot walk
to York, Some way of Motion is necessary to your going to York, if you will go
thither; therefore you shall walk, or not go thither: And to the other that
cannot ride in a Coach, if you will not go thither in a Coach, you shall not go at
all; and yet give him the Strapad^ for not going thither.

This is the Case; and how easily may they reply unto you on your calling them
to hasten to York on these impossible terms, or to the Bisli^ps Colehouse? We
would go to York with all our heart on Horseback, or in a Wagon; but to walk
or to ride in a Coach we cannot. You can give us leave to go thither on
horsback, if you will, but you will not; we would go, but go in Coach, or walk,
we cannot. Here is a division, your will not, and our cannot; who now is in
fault? That they cannot, is evident because of weakness and Infirmity of body;
That you can permit 'em to go on Horseback, is as unquestionable; but yet you
will not.

Thus we have the strength of our Author's Reply; You must get into the visible
Catholich Church, or to prison; and you cannot get in, but you must either use
some external circumstances in some time, or in some place, etc. therefore this
time, or no time; this place or no place. Sir, by your good favor, as you
acknowledge this or the other particular circumstance to be indifferent, and
that other circumstances may be chosen, if not this; to make either of these
indifferent circumstances a necessary t^rm of communion, is sinful and
schismatical. To make of a little thing so great a bar to shut thousands out of
heaven, is what you will never be able to answer when you shall appear before
the Tribunal of a righteous God.

But as to the true state of the Controversy, it is another thing; you make
that a part of Religion which God has not made; you impose uninstituted
ceremonies, and in many things recede from the Apostolical Institution, and
call on us on pain of damnation to comply with you. We must comply, or be cut
off from the Catholic Church, even from the body of Christ, from all hopes of
salvation.

These things being thus plain, I Will gratisie our Authors desire in considering
his Logic. If the Dissenters can without sin (says he) obey their Governors
in indifferent, that is, in lawful things, but will not; and the Episcopal
would be content to part with indifferent things for union, but cannot, who is
the Divider? What must be done for Union? Must the Dissenters comply in things
wherein they can without sin; or must the Episcopal sin and lose their peace
with God fot Union? p. 29.

This is called by our Author an Argument, but why, I cannot imagine; however
let it be so, wherein lies its strength, or how comes it to pass, that this
cannot be answered, without a showing Sophistry to be where it is not?

If there be any force in this Argument, it must be either in this, viz. That
the Impositions are in the judgment of the Dissenters Lawful, or Indifferent,
which may be submitted unto without sin. Had this suggestion been true, we
would grant him the whole he desires, viz. That the Dissenters refusing to do
what is Lawful in their own judgment to be done for Union, they are Faulty. But
it is notirious, That the imposed terms are of such a nature, that they cannot
be submitted unto by the Dissenter, but he must grievously offend the most high
God, to the wounding his own conscience.

If its strength lies not there, it must in this, That the Epis^^pal would be
content to part with indifferent things, but cannot. And why can they not? What
is the matter that they cannot part with toys and trifles to take many a
thousand within the pale of the Church, and thereby help 'em to Heaven? The
things are still supposed indifferent by our Author, and therefore a parting
with 'em is not contrary to any Law, nor sinful. Why then can they not without
sin part with, what they can part with without sin? This is surely mysterious!
They cannot part with that without sin, which they can part with without sin,
and Yet will not part with it, though according to their own judgment their not
parting with their indifferent things tends to the unavoidable destruction of
souls. They know the Dissenters, unless these indifferent things be past by,
must be kept out of the Church of England, that is, out of the Catholic Church
say they, and remain to the last hour of their life in a state of damnation.
Whence then did I say, What must must be done for Union? I may now say, What
must be done to save the thousands of Souls for whom Christ died? Must the
Episcopal part with what they can without sin, and take the Dissenters into the
Catholic Church, and thereby save their Souls; or must the Dissenters sin
that they may be saved? What, Is there no way to Heaven for English Dissenters,
but their complying with sinful Impositions? "It Was said in the Apostles days,
that We must not do evil, that good may come thereof. Then surely, if we will
be of the Apostles judgment, We must not sin, to save our Souls. Our
Unrighteousness does not, cannot commend the Righteousness of God. But

Before I dismiss this Point, that the Reader may be fully satisfied that I
abuse not our Author, I must beseech him to consider;

1. That our Author has, in a way different from the greatest, or rather the
better part of the Clergy, asserted, That our not holding external communion
with the Church of England, is a cutting our selves off from the Catholic
Church, a putting our selves out of the Way of Salvation. This is the main
scope of his discourse. A notion concerning which Dr. Stillingfleet's thoughts
are desired. 2. That notwithstanding the absolute necessity there is of the
Dissenters returning to the Church of England, that they may become members of
the Universal Church, and be saved, they will not part with any of those things
that are in their own judgment little, though it be to save the Dissenters
souls. If they would remove what is in their own judgment but little, and what
may be done without their sin, but what cannot be complied with by the
Dissenter without his great sin, the Controversy is ended, the Schis^^ lost,
and the Dissenter restored to the Catholic Church, and may be saved. Let the
World judge then who is in the fault.
There remains nothing more that is worthy our consideration, unless the many
slips of our Author may be esteemed as such, by the Authors insisting on my
parallelling Dr. Stillingfleet and Bellarmine, not only in their Dividing
Principles, but also in that, even when by their Impositions; they make the
greatest rents in the Church imaginable, they speak well of Union, but this is
only an overt act of his inadvertency. For the reason why I mentioned this, was
to obviate a common Objection, viz. How can you parallel the Doctor and
Bellarmine in this, seeing the Doctor cries up Union so much, as the design of
his great Book, as well as of his Sermon? To which I reply, That though the
Principles of Bellarmine were Dividing, yet he cries up Union; for which reason
though the Doctor applauds Union, yet in doing so, does no more than
Bellarmine, and therefore may be as much a Divider as Bellarmine,
notwithstanding those many plausible Discourses concerning the excellency of
Union; for Union is a lovely name in the judgment of such as will do nothing to
obtain the thing.

His passing over the most momentous parts of the Enquiry, without saying any
thing considerable unto 'em, makes a further Defense, at present, unnecessary;
I say for the present, because he seems to threaten, as if I should hear more
of it in DUE TIME.

To close then this discourse, it only remains, that in Charity to our Author,
whose Affections to Dr. Stillingfleet have so abundantly blinded his Judgment,
that he cannot, though in searching till he has wearied himself, find out any
Mistake in the Dr's Preface, I Will give him an Account of a few among many, and
then show what little Reason such of the Church of England, who are for the
Grotian, or Bishop Laud's Model, have to reproach Dissenters, as a People
carrying on Popish Designs, in blasting the honor of the first Reformation.

1. An Account of some of those Mistakes, which are found in Dr. Stilling fleet
's Preface to his Unreasonableness of Separation, not to mention any thing of
the Parallel between the Dean and the Jesuit, so much insisted on in the
Enquiry.

1. THE Dean asserted, p. 14. a suitableness between the Dissenters Pretenses,
and the Jesuits Doctrines, about Spiritual Prayer: whereas I have evinced the
contrary. 2. That the Grounds and Reasons of the first Separation of the old
Nonconformist from the Church of England, are said to be the Jesuits crying
down all Forms of Prayer, and setting up Spiritual Prayer in the room thereof.
But I have proved, that the first who separated, did keep to a Form of Prayer.
3. That the Dissenters do blast the honor of the first Reformation; but they
so far countenance it, as to endeavor the carrying it on. 4. That the
Dissenters are the best Proctors the Papists could meet with, their fittest and
aptest Instruments; that they were made the Engines of the Roman Conclave, p.
16. All which the Doctor takes out of Archbishop Whitgift. But an unjust
Censure, if not a great Mistake. 5. That the Episcopacy now and in King
Edward's days was the same; whereas in King Edward's days they held all their
Courts in the King's name, but now in their own. 6. That there is no
considerable difference between the Reformation begun in Edward the 6ths, and
that carried on in Queen Elizabeth's time: Whereas it is most apparent, that in
King Edward's time they judged the Pope to be Antichrist; but in Queen
Elizabeth's not a word of it; and many other differences.
All which relate unto matter of fact, and therefore may be rightly called
Historical Mistakes. Many more might be insisted on, but these are sufficient
to help our Author to see, that if his eyes had been good, he needed not to
weary himself in making a search after them without effect. If this will not
satisfy our Author, if he will call for a larger list of the Dean's Mistakes,
I do assure him it is easy enough to add a multitude more, although I delight
not in a detecting the Weaknesses of any.

2. Thus having given an hint of some of Dr. Stillingfleet's Mistakes found in
his Preface; I shall conclude, by showing what little Reason, such as our
Author, have to make such a prodigious noise about the Dissenters subserviency
to Popish Designs, in blasting the honor of the Reformation.

Sir, If the case be narrowly searched into, you will find, that in all times
since the first Reformation, those called Puritans were a block in the way to
the Church of Englands passing over toward Rome. Had it not been for the
Industry of the Nonconformist, as all the foreign Protestant Churches beyond
the Seas are Unchurched by our high-flown Episcopal men, even so they should
have been abandoned as Heretical, but that the Dissenter makes such a clamor
on all occasions about Popery.

You have very ingeniously distinguished between the Church, and the Court of
Rome, and have taken the most effectual care to endeavor that favor might be
shown the Church of Rome, even when you cry down Popery; as if the common
People had understood by Popery no more than your self, namely the Court of
Rome; whereas they think, that when you cry down Popery, you are enemies to the
Church of Rome. A pretty juggle! Popery is an odious thing, even when to be a
Roman Catholic is worthy of all applause. Laud was no Papist, he was an enemy
to Popery, when a cordial Friend to the Church of Rome. Popery is detestable,
when all the care imaginable must be taken, that nothing be done to the disgust
of the Roman Church. Consult Bramhall and Heylin, to mention no more, to see
whether these be not their Sentiments.

You boast strangely of King Edwards Reformaton, not considering how short of
it, in some things, you are fallen. You represent us as blasters of the
Reformation begun in his days, not duly minding what one of your own Faction,
Dr. Heylin, has said on it in his Preface to the History of the Reformation:
Take the Character he gives of Edward the 6th, and make the most of it; it is
this, Scarce had they (says he) brought it, [ viz. the Reformation] to pass,
when Edward died, whose death I cannot reckon for an Infelicity to the Church
of England. For being ill-principled in himself, and easily inclined to embrace
such Counsels as were offered to him, it is not to be thought but that the rest
of the Bishoprics (before sufficiently impoverished) must have followed
Durham, and the poor Church be left as destitute of Lands and Ornaments, as
when she came into the world in her natural Nakedness.

From these words of Heylin it is evident, That such as are of this Grotian
Faction, do reflect sufficiently on the Reformation then begun, and also
plainly enough suggest, That if K. Edward had lived longer, the Reformation had
gone on further than you or your party desire; it may be they would have gone
on so far as those you now call Schismatics. If so, how comes it to pass that
the Dissenters by acting so agreeably to what King Edwards Protestants would
have done, cast any reproach on that so happily begun Reformation?

In fine, It cannot but amuse wise men, to observe how prudently Dr. Stilling
fleet and his Substitute insist on the Dissenters subserviency to the Popish
Interest: Whereas it is most manifest, that the Papists themselves do with the
greatest confidence conclude none more opposite, nor more injurious to their
Designs than the Dissenter. However, seeing one Dissenter spoke but a word for
the forbearance of a mere conscientious Papist, this is enough to animate those
Gentlemen to load the whole Party with the reproach of being great friends to
Popery. The which is the more remarkable, because all this cry is even when a
Son of the Church, yea a Reverend Divine of that name has written a Volume in
favor of the Church though not of the Court) of Rome, without any notice taken
of it. And the Dean himself in that very Preface in which he so much declaims
against the Dissenter, does speak much more in favor of the Papists, than any
Dissenter ever did; for he himself asserts, That it will be thought great
hardship when men's heats are ever, for them only (viz. the Papists) to be
deprived of the liberty of their Consciences, when the wildest Fanatics are
allowed it. p. 79.

Moreover, what is matter of greater surprise is, That all this stir is raised
from one word out of a Dissenters mouth, even when great things have been done
by some who pretend to be sons of the Church, in favor of the Papist, to the
turning the edg of those Laws that were made against Papists on Protestant
Dissenters, without any remark; as if it had been highly meritorious in a
Churchman to act for all Papists in the general, though an unpardonable crime in
a Dissenter to speak but one word for the supposed conscientious only.

That some of the Church of England have acted in favor of all sorts of
Papists, to the advancing Popery, is notorious, as has been observed by Sir
Francis Winnington at the Trial of the Lord Stafford. Another encouragement, my
Lord (faith Sir Fr. W.) which the Papists had, was, That by the means of those
Ministers who were secretly of their Faction, whenever his Majesty was pleased
to command the Laws made against them in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth and K.
James, to be put in due execution, his good intentions were frustrated, and the
severity of those Laws was turned upon the Protestant Dissenters. This was a
Master piece of Rome, not only to divert from themselves the edg of those Laws
which were designed against them; but to turn them upon the Protestants, and to
make them useful to advance the Romish Interest.

The same is also the sense of the Commons assembled in Parliament, as is to be
seen in their Address unto his Majesty, November 29.1680. Where they declare
unto his Majesty in these words, At home, if your Majesty did at any time by
the advice of your Privy Council, or of your Two Houses of Parliament, command
the Laws to be put in execution against Papists, even from thence they gained
advantage to their Party, while the edg of those Laws was turned against
Protestant Dissenters, and the Papists escaped in a manner untouched.

Thus many a Son of the Church have heretofore taken an especial care to turn
the edg of Laws against Popery, on the Dissenter. But this is not speaking for
a forbearance; it is but an actual affording forbearance to 'em all in general.
Of which one word must not be spoke. As if such men as our Author would that
all the Respects which are had for Papists, must be confined to them, who alone
without offense may show it 'em.

But it is pretty evident, that there are other Conformists of another mind, as
may appear by the Countrey-Conformists further Reply to this Defense, or
Vindication, which we have received from him in these Sheets following, and to
which I refer my Reader.

FINIS.
Mr. PARK HURST,
HAVING information that you are Printing some Papers of others in Answer to the
Defense of Dr. Stilling fleet, I have thought fit upon advice to send you these
three or four sheets to put in, as one concerned among the rest.

The young Hero that has written this Defense, has treated his Antagonists
with no less a supercilious contempt than the Dr.; but he has not written his
Book with the like judgment and sense. I cannot say that he has in any thing
confuted them; but he does grossly pervert their words, and give them a meaning
which is contrary to their intention, and then drolls upon it, and mightily
pleases himself in his Victory and Success. And this he has done almost
throughout his Book.

He that reads the Book, and does nor compare it with the Authors whom he
pretends to Answer, may perhaps think there is something in it: But if he shall
diligently do this, he will alter his opinion. I will instance in one
particular: Mr. Baxter, among other things, objects the renunciation of the
Covenant for our selves and others, when we know not their sense. These last
words he interprets of the Takers of that Covenant, when Mr. B. meant it of the
Imposers; and no wonder then if he makes fine work of it.

The Author of the Reflections has reason to take notice of these his dealings
in this kind; and I do foresee how he is like to fare again; yet being one for
whom I have so near a concern, I cannot refuse a sheet or two (having this
intimation) in his behalf, especially seeing he is a Son of the Church; and
it is convenient his Brethren should rightly understand him.

It is in the Preface I am engaged; and (p. 3.) thus he begins. The Country
Conformist in his Reflections on Dr. Stilling fleet, endeavors to excuse Mr.
B. from intending the D. of St. Paul's, in that lewd character that he gave, of
a m^st unskilful, proud, partial, obstinate, impertinent Adversary, by making
it the description of such Substitutes as had neither the Candor nor. Learning
of the Doctor.

He did so; and how does this Gentleman prove that he endeavored it to no
purpose? Why even thus: However any impartial Reader will see cause to believe,
that Mr. B. had the Dean in his eye, though he had not courage enough to apply
every thing to him, but left his Readers to apply as much as they pleased.

To which I reply, There Is no Impartial Reader can believe that Mr. B. intended
the Dr. in that lewd Character, as he is pleased to call it; and it is a rare
faculty this Author has of misrepresenting the words of other men, and to put
his sense upon them as he lists, and then brazen it out. I will add withal,
that it seems a little strange that Mr. B. that has courage enough to libel
Church and State, as this Author often says, and to cast dirt upon the Church
and Churchmen, as it is in his next page, should be afraid to apply to the Dr.
any part of that Character which he thought did belong to him.

The Gentleman proceeds in the same page, But suppose he meant this of such
Substitutes as had neither the Candor nor Learning of the Dr. I reckon a man
may fall many degrees short of the Dr. and yet not deserve such a character, or
be unworthy of Mr. B 's notice.

Sir, the question is not, Whether a person may not fall many degrees short of
the Dr. and yet not deserve that Character; but whether a person may not fall
so far beneath him, as to deserve it, and yet officiously substitute himself in
the place of the Learned Doctor; and whether such an one may not be unworthy of
Mr. B's notice?

Our Author adds, p. 4. As for the former (i. e. Candor) I confess a very
great proportion of that is necessary for any man, that will treat Mr. B. with
any tolerable Civility, when in all his late Writings he casts so much dirt
upon the Church and Churchmen: And this Author will not allow the Dean himself
any great share of that, though he has very sparingly, considering the frequent
provocations, and very decently and modestly, considering the occasions he
takes for it, rebuked that hussing Disputant.

To this I answer, That Mr. B. has reproved the faults of Churchmen in words
pretty plain and sharp, I do easily acknowledge, (and so have some regular Sons
of the Church done also; See Englands faithful Reprover and Monitor; and a Book
called Ichabod.) But that he has thrown dirt upon them, (unless speaking truth
be casting dirt) I shall not easily grant; and I am of opinion, if this Author
and some others had lived in the days of the old Prophets, yea and of the Son
of God himself, and had heard their Sermons and Discourses, they would have
said, That they Defamed the Governors of the Church, and Libelled the State.

That a great deal of candor is necessary for those that will treat such as
reprove them with Civility, I do easily concede, yea and a great deal of
Humility, Self-denial, Tenderness of Conscience, and the fear of God too; But
all this is no more than their Duty, and if they had any considerable measure
or degree of these Virtues, they would find no great difficulty in treating
such as reprove them with Respect and Kindness.

As to what concerns the Learned Doctor, I have always esteemed him, and do to
this day, a person of Candor; but good men are sometimes transported, and do
such things as are inconsistent with the habitual Temper and Constitution of
their own Minds: And I hope the excellent Dr. suffered some such kind of
Transport, when he replied to Mr. B. in his late Book.

That the Dr. did very sparingly, decently and modestly rebuke Mr. B. which
this Author calls a hussing Disputant, I shall grant also, if the Doctor's
rebukes be compared with this Authors. For he has observed no Laws of Modesty,
Decency or Decorum therein, but after a most profuse and scornful manner has
reproached and despised him, to his own greater Infamy and Reproach. For Mr.
B's Reputation for Learning and Judgment is too firmly established in the minds
of Impartial and Unbiassed men, that all that he can say to abate it, will be
but throwing water on a rock, that will return and dash himself.

In the same page he adds, As for the latter, ( i. e. Learning) I acknowledge
my self such a Substitute, as may not compare with the Doctor.

This I think (bating the Texts of Scripture which he quotes) is one of the
truest passages in all his Book; and I have a Veneration for truth, and will
not speak any thing to the disadvantage of it; but let the Author have the
honor of having spoke it once at least in a Book of six or seven hundred Pages.

Page the 5th he says, I shall begin with the Reflecter, who writes himself a
Conformist Minister in the Country; and this is the only thing considerable in
it, that it is the testimony of one of our own Church against the Dean of St.
Paul's, and for his adversaries: And for that reason Mr. B. at the end of his
Answers refers his Readers to him, that those may receive that from a
Conformist, which he will not receive from such an one as he.

And then he adds; But what is this to the purpose? If there be some such
Conformists among us now, as there were in 1643, who raised a Church-War, and
then pulled down Church and State, to set up a Presbyterian Party? and such a
Conformist our Reflecter is, who vindicates Mr. B's Parochial Episcopacy, which
is but a new name for Presbytery, as I have proved in the following Treatise.

To which I answer, I had thought our Author had begun with the Reflecter some
time since; but peradventure what he has hitherunto said, has been only like
the slight velitations of the Avant-guards of an Army; he intends now to fall
to downright blows: Be it so, it is to be hoped the Reflecter may survive his
most powerful Impressions, and the rudest of his Assaults: For though he talks
like one of the Sons of Anak, for ought that I can see, be performs as little,
and something less than other men, that do only but talk.

But to proceed to the matter; I will assure him, that the Countrey-Conformist
gives no testimony against the Dean of St. Paul's, or for his Adversaries, but
out of the Love and Zeal that he has for Peace. The Church of God in this
Nation is broken into pieces, Ephraim is against Manass^h, and Manasseh against
Ephraim; and this I dare say is indeed matter of sad Meditation (for I know him
very well) to the Countrey-Conformist, who has no other Controversy with the
Reverend and Learned Doctor, than on the behalf of Peace.

As to what our Author says concerning those Conformists that raised a War in
1643. and pulled down Church and State to set up a Presbyterian parity, the
Country Conformist has nothing to say, unless it be to assure him, That as he
had nothing to do in that, so he never intends to have any thing to do in
another. He is no admirer of that which this Gentleman calls a Presbyterian
Parity; he very well likes of Diccesan Episcopacy, provided their Diocesses be
no bigger than they were in the first two hundred years, yea, than they were in
the third and fourth Centuries, in most parts of the Christian world. Let us
have but such Churches and such Bishops, with Presbyters and Deacons, as were
in the Churches of Corinth, J^r^^lem, and Antioch, in the days of Clemens,
James, and Ignatius, and the Country Conformist is satisfied, and so would Mr.
B. and most Nonconformists in England besides. Whether this kind of Episcopacy
be a new name for Presbytery, and whether this Author have proved it, I leave
to such Readers to judge, as can consider as well as read his Book.

But how comes this Gentleman to know that the Country Conformist is such a
one as those that raised a Civil War some years ago, and pulled down Church and
State to set up a Presbytery? Can a man oppose nothing that is defended by some
Churchmen, but he must immediately be reported a secret Traitor or Rebel? Is
this becoming Christianity, or the Preachers of it? Do these men believe the
Gospel, that dare slander and traduce their brethren in such a villainous
manner? It Is a word I received from him, I hope he will take it again. Though it
should be granted the Miter supports the Crown; yet surely the Errors and Vices
of Churchmen give no support unto it; and I am of opinion, that a man may
speak for peace, and against the opinions and corruption of Churches and
Churchmen, and yet be a very good subject to his Prince, notwithstanding that
perpetual buz of Rebellion that is suggested by some Huffs in the prejudice of
such men and their discourses.

But why did I enquire how this Monsieur came to know that the Country
Conformist was such another as those that raised the Rebellion in forty three?
The nature of the assertion betrays the Author of the Information, and there
needs no great skill in Magic to find him; yet lest he should be ignorant of
him, I will be so kind as to tell his name, he is called Beclzebub the Father
of lies; and I hope when he writes again, he will beware of him, and hold better
correspondencies for his information.

Page 7. he adds: Our Conformist does plainly deride the Dean for thinking he
can justify our present Episcopacy; and then quotes his words as follows:
But the Dr. makes no question but he shall confute this fanciful man, and make
it appear, that our present Episcopacy (which Mr. B. opposes) is agreeable to
the institution of Christ, and the best and most flourishing Churches. And
easily he may, if Mr. B. be such a pitiful Antagonist.

But what is there in these words that savor of derision? I have read and
considered them again and again, and I cannot find it by all the search that I
can make. The Learned Dr. had pitied Mr. B. and given sufficient evidence of
the mean opinion he had of his performances in his late Books, and particularly
in his Treatise of Episcopacy; and is it to deride the Dean to say, he may
easily confute so contemptible an Adversary? This I confess I cannot understand.

And yet after all I am not satisfied, that the Learned Dr. or his Defender
has confuted what Mr. B. has said in prejudice to our present Diocesan
Episcopacy; he says that the enlargement of Diocesses has varied the species
of Episcopacy; and gives many arguments for the proof of it, which neither the
Dr. nor this Gentleman has attempted to answer.

I know the latter of them says, that the enlargement of Diocesses does not
vary the species of Bishops; and that a great and a little King are
specifically the same Governors: But I can by no means believe this to be true
of Bishops, whatever it be of Kings: For the Diocese of the Pope is only bigger
than that of the Bishop of London, or Worcester, or Lincoln; and yet I think
they are Governors specifically distinct, and I hope this Gentleman thinks so
too. Yea, give me leave to suppose that there were but two Bishops in England,
there would be only a gradual difference in their Diocese, and yet I suspect
some men would think that the Government were specifically altered; but let not
our Author infer that this supposition is my desire (for he is apt to pervert
men's words), for I will assure him, that I do not desire it, but would have
many more Bishops, not less.

In fine, it is my opinion, that the needs of the Church, and the abilities of
Bishops to perform the work of the Episcopal Office, ought to determine the
extent of their Diocese. Let their Diocesses be as big as they can manage and
no bugger, and if so, I am sure they must be reduced to smaller limits than now
they are. No Bishop can discharge the proper work of his Office in a thousand,
or five hundred Parishes; nay, I will say, That there are many single Parishes
in England that will employ the most industrious Bishops on earth.

If it be said, that they do perform the proper work of their Office in many
Parishes, I utterly deny it, that the work is not done, and thence proceeds the
profaneness and wickedness of particular Churches; and thence follows the
Schisms, and Separations that have and do vex this Church at this day.

Page ib. Our Author proceeds: He pleads (i. e. the Country Conformist) for
taking off the Impositions (in general without any limitation) to receive the
Presbyterians again into our Church, which before he told us, were
Subscriptions, Declarations, etc. and some few Alterations besides: That is,
faith our Commentator, either a form of Prayer, or at least our present
Liturgy, Ceremonies, and Administration of religious Offices: Now he is an
admirable Conformist indeed, who at once grants away the Episcopal Office, and
instead of it, sets up a Bishop in every Parish; or either an Antichristian
Bishop of Bishops, or an Ecclesiastical Minister of State to head and govern
them, and alters the whole frame of our Worship; and into the bargain leaves
every man to do as he says, and all this without injuring our present
Constitution: Nay he concludes, That all those that hinder the Union of
Presbyterians with this Church, by continuing the Impositions, are Factors for
the Pope.

In this paragraph are a great many falsehoods. He charges the Country
Conformist with pleading for the Admission of the Presbyterians into the
Church, without any Impositions, Subscriptions, or Declarations. This was very
ill done of him, if it be true, which I do a little suspect, because this
Gentleman is so apt to misunderstand, and misrepresent the words and meaning of
his Adversaries. The Country Conformist has declared in several places of his
Books, That he pleads the Cause of none but tolerable Dissenters; and for the
Admission of none into the Church, but such as can Officiate in our Parochial
Assemblies; but how this difference can be made without Impositions, or
Subscriptions, is not imaginable: And therefore to say no more, I think this
Author has injured and wronged him, in this report of his judgment.

And whereas by those few Alterations besides, that the Country-Conformist
speaks of, he understands either a Form of Prayer, or the present Liturgy,
Ceremonies, and Administration of Religious Offices, it is his own Comment, and
he is not obliged to confute it. Yet thus much I will say on his behalf, that
upon my knowledge, he is in his judgment for a Form of Prayer in
Publique-Offices, and Administrations, and has a very hearty esteem for that
of our Church; but I cannot say so of the Ceremonies; I think he might be
easily persuaded to part with them; and if some exceptionable passages in the
Liturgy and Rubricks were altered, I believe he would make no opposition to it.

But he charges this admirable Conformist (as he is pleased to call him) with
giving away at once the Episcopal Office, and instead of it sets up a Bishop in
every Parish, and either an Antichristian Bishop of Bishops, or an
Ecclesiastical Minister of State to govern them. How little there is of truth
in this charge, may be collected from what I have said already. The Conformist
sets up no more Bishops than the necessities of the Church and the duty and
work of the Episcopal-Office requires; and I understand not that this is giving
away the Episcopal Office: And if this Author can free Metropolitan Bishops
from Antichristianism, which he says some do derive from the very days of the
Apostles, and that not without some good appearance of Reason, I hope the
Conformist will defend the Episcopi Episcoporum from that appellation.

As to what he says of an Ecclesiastical Minister of State, the Conformist has
no more to reply than this; He hopes this Gentleman will not plead an Exemption
for the Clergy from under the Civil Magistrates Power and Government; and if
this be granted, I know not what can be matter of Controversy between him and
this Author: For he supposes him to exercise no Power over the Bishops, but
what is inherent in the King, and in this Minister of State by Delegation; that
is in few words, to see that they do their own Duty carefully, reprove their
Negligence and Male-administrations, and preserve peace among them. And what is
there in this Doctrine that our Author should take such offense at, I am yet to
seek.

He adds, And alters the whole frame of our Worship, leaves every man to do as
he lists, and all this without injury to our present Constitution. In these
Lines, to speak plainly, there is not one word of truth, as any man may easily
collect from what I have said already: And this Gentleman himself confesses in
the next page, That the Conformist will not indeed allow of universal
Toleration. How this can be reconciled with Leaving all men to do as they list,
I am not able to tell.

That the Conformist said, That those that hinder the Union of Presbyterians
with the Church of England, by continuing the Impositions, are Factors for the
Pope, I do easily acknowledge, and I believe he is still of the same mind; and
as I remember he gave some Reasons for it too, which this Gentleman takes, no
notice of. When he confutes them, perhaps he may hear of a Vindication, if
there be just reason for it.

Page the 8th he proceeds thus; He (i.e. the Conform.) pleads for the
Indulgence of others, particularly the Independents, who, he says, will be
content with their own Congregations, and is mightily taken with Mr. Humfreys
Project, That the tolerated Churches (such as Independents) be declared parts
of the National Church, whereof the King to be the Head.

The Countrey-Conformist is so great a Lover of Peace, that I do easily suppose
he might be pleased with Mr. H's Project, as he calls it; and I do assure him,
that I my self am much more pleased with it, since I read his Book, than I was
before, though I had always a value for it: For I think the Design of uniting
the Dissenting Protestants in this Nation, is into one National Church, whereof
the King to be the Head, more laudable than the design of uniting Protestants
in a General Council, or in a Pope, Primate, or Metropolitan, which seems to be
the design of our Author, though he has not Courage, or Instruction enough as
yet to speak it out.

For he affirms, 1. That the Episcopal Office and Power is but one, and not
resident in the Bishops of the Universal Church, p. 212. 2. That the
Independency of Bishops is inconsistent with Ecclesiastical Unity, p. 115. And
3. that although equals have no Authority over one the other, yet a Colleague
has Authority over any one of his Colleagues, p. 213. 4. That the Bonds and
Combinations of Churches are of Divine Right, though the ordering and
determination of them be of Humane Prudence, p. 258. 5. That the Unity of the
Church is as much of Divine Right, as any Form of Government in it; and that
the whole Church may be divided into greater or lesser parts, as may best serve
the ends of Peace and Unity. And that it seems strange to him, that a National
or Patriarchal Church should not be thought as much a Divine Institution, as
any particular Church, p. 259. And further he adds, When Christ and his
Apostles have instituted one Form of Government for all particular Churches,
and commanded them all to live in Unity, Peace, Communion, and amicable
Correspondency with each other, the Union and Combination of Churches into one,
according to this Institution, to serve the ends of Catholic Communion, must
be thought as much a Divine Institution, as the bounds of particular Churches.
For if we will not allow those Churches to be of Divine Institution, which have
Officers of Divine Appointment, and are formed according to the general
Directions of Christ and his Apostles, so as may serve the ends of
Church Government, I know not where to find a Church of Divine Institution in
the world, page 259, 260.

These are the words of our Author; from whence we may collect many things for
our Information.

1. That the Bishops of the Catholic Church are the regent part thereof, in
the same sense that the Bishops of any National Church are the regent part of
that Church: For although there be no Superiority among Bishops, their Power
and Office being the same; yet Independency among them being inconsistent with
Ecclesiastical Unity, both in the National and in the Universal Church, they
are bound to unite for the Government of both, and this by Divine Command,
Authority and Obligation. 2. That whatsoever is determined by the Bishops of
the Catholic Church, does oblige all particular Bishops and all Christians all
the world over; provided they determine nothing contrary to the Word of God. 3.
That whatever Bishop shall refuse their Canons and Determinations, and govern
his particular Church by other Laws than they shall appoint, is a Schismatic,
and they may Depose and Excommunicate him; yea, if a whole combination of
Bishops do refuse to govern their National Church by their Laws, Appointments
and Constitutions, they are all Schismatics; and if the Nation refuse to
forsake such Bishops, they are all Schismatics also, both they and their
Bishops are liable to the same Censure. 4. That the external Union of the
Catholic Church consists in their Union to and with the Bishops thereof; that
is, with a General Council. See page 595. where he makes Catholic Communion to
consist in two things; 1. In the Agreement and Concord of the Bishops of the
Catholic Church among themselves. 2. In the Communion of particular Churches
and Christians with each other. And he adds, That Catholic Communion is no
arbitrary thing, but essential to the Church; and whoever violates it by an
unreasonable Dissent, he is a Schismatic whoever he be, and no Member of the
Catholic Church, page 601.
5. That Metrapolitan and Patriarchal Churches are of Divine Appointment, as
much as any other Churches, and must govern their Churches by such Laws as are
advised by a General Council, or by the Bishops of the Church Universal; For
although they be not founded on any express Divine Law, yet they are warranted
by our obligations to Catholic Unity, p. 293. And for my part, I am not able
to see any reason, why the same obligations to Unity may not warrant one Papal
Church, as well as three or four Patriarchal Churches in all the Christian
world. For the Papists think it the most effectual way to preserve Unity, and
for ought that I know they may think as wisely as this Gentleman. I envy
neither him nor them the pleasure of their Dreams; but I hope there are but few
Church-of- England-men that do think the same thoughts with him: these were the
thoughts of Hugo Grotius, whom Bishop Bramhal commends and defends: Unitas
antistuis optimum est adversus Schisma remedium, quod and Christus monstravit,
and Experientia comprobavit. Vid. Annot. In consultat. de Religione, ad Art.
Sept.
I have quoted the words of this Author, and I am not conscious to my self that
I have perverted them, or made any ill deductions from them; and if it be his
design to unite all Pretestants in the Decrees of General Councils, and in the
Intervals of Councils in the Pope, or three or four Patriarchs, who are to
govern according to their Canons; I do assure him, that I prefer Mr. Humfry's
design far before it: For I am of opinion, it is a more Christian Design to
untie Protestants together and among themselves, than to unite them with the
Papists. Mr. Humfry's Design I will transcribe from his Book, that those that
shall read these few Sheets, may compare it with that of our Author.

Archbishop Usher has left us his Model for an Accommodation: And it has been
upon the hearts generally of all moderate persons, that a reduction of such a
Government into our Church, as was in the Primitive Times, (when there was a
Consessus Presbyterorum joined with the Bishop in all his Acts of Ordination
and Jurisdiction) were the way, and only effectual way to our true Happiness
and Reformation. Unto which, if one thing more might be added, that is, If the
Common Prayer might be new cast (it being fit that such a vessel for the
Sanctuary should be all of pure Gold) so as the whole of it were composed of
Scripture Phrase altogether, leaving nothing at all liable any more to
exception, unless the Imposition of a Form only, (which I doubt not but is also
justifiable by Scripture-Instances, as well as sound Reason) it might go near
to put an end to all Dissension among the Sober and Peaceable of the Nation.

It is this I know is apt to recur into the Imaginations of good men; and
forasmuch as there was lately two Bills prepared for Comprehension (or Uniting
the Pootestants), and for Indulgence (or repealing the Penal Statutes); I shall
not, I hope, incur any blame, if I apprehend, that such men who are most
considerate and intent upon the Interest of God, in what they seek, do, or did
look upon either of such Bills, as no other than an English Interim,
preparative to this higher Concord and Union of the Bishop with his Presbyters,
according to the Primitive Pattern mentioned, as soon as more mellow
Opportunity, and well-advised Piety, should administer unto such farther
Per^ection.

Nevertheless, in regard there is no Uniting of a Nation can be supposed by any
Model, but such as is of Human Contrivance; and there are multitudes of Holy
and Learned Men in this Kingdom, that do believe the way of their Gathered
Congregations is after a higher Pattern than this of Primitive Episcopacy it
self, if there were any hope of the return of it; it is manifest that there is
no Society, which is National in England, could be formed on these terms;
because these Congregational-men can never recede from that which is of Divine
Appointment, for the sake of any Antiquity whatsoever. They do hold Particular
Churches to be of Christ's Institution, and Diocesan of Ecclesiastical Consent
only; and under the Notion of Divine Right, it is Sin to them to submit to any
Bishop.

There is another Notion then that must be advanced to take in these good Men
of This Way, as well as those of the Parochial and Diocesan Way, into one
Political Body, for the making up the National Church of England, whereof the
King is Head, as I have been speaking; and that is, by an Act of Parliament
Legitimating these Meetings of the Nonconformists, so as to become thereby
immediately Parts of the Church, as National, no less than Parochial
Assemblies. It was a good thing in the House of Commons, that they were about
to free many Innocent Men from the danger of the Penal Statutes; but the making
such Meetings to be Legal, is a Design of another Nature, of a far greater,
nobler, and vast Importance. See page 28, 29, 30, 31. To which add what he
says, page 36. 'If these Separate Assemblies were made Legal, the Schism
presently, in reference to the National Church, were at an end. Schism in a
Separation from that Church, whereof we ought, or are bound to be Members: If
the Supreme Authority then loose our Obligation to the Parish-Meeting, so that
we are bound no longer, the Iniquity upon that account is not to be found, and
the Schism gone. It is one Act of Parliament would give a full Answer to all
men's Arguments.

Mr. H.'s design may be easily gathered from these words, which I have thus
largely transcribed; and should our Superiors favor and promote it, it would
restore peace and quiet to a Church and State almost broken to pieces by
divisions, animosities, fears and jealousies: By this means the sons of the
Church might enjoy their Dignities, Preferments and Livings, and believe their
Government and Discipline to be of Divine right, and exercise it on all that
are of the same apprehension and judgment: The Separate Congregations may enjoy
their own opinions concerning their own Government and Churches; and all might
live together in love, and every one sit under his vine and fig tree, and none
make him afraid. A closer union I do easily grant were desirable; but I am
afraid this is all that is attainaable in this Nation, yea and in the Christian
world (whatever our Author may say to the contrary); and that those that will
have more, shall have less. It Is with Christian Churches as it is with some
weakly constituted bodies, if no violent remedies be used, they may drill out
for many years; but if you will be tampering, and nothing will satisfy you but
a perfect health, you will soon destroy them.

If Churches that have some defects may be endured, God may have some worship,
and we may see some peace among Christians; but if like Ecclesiastical
Mountebanks we will be perpetually trying experiments upon sickly and diseased
Churches, we may disturb the peace of Christians, destroy the Churches, and
leave few to call upon the name of God in the world.

What I have discoursed, I think may with some probability be expected from Mr.
H.'s design. But can we expect so much from the design of this Gentleman? Or is
there the least shadow for it? For my part I can see no such thing; he must
have better eyes, or worse, than I have, that can see any advantage like to
betide Protestants by uniting in a General Council, or in a Patriarch or Pope,
ruling by the Canons thereof. And yet I think this is that our Author would be
at. For he affirms, That it is not enough or sufficient to Christian Unity,
that the Christians of one Nation, or one Congregation be united among
themselves, unless they be united to the Catholic Church: For if there be but
one Church, a whole Nation may be Schismatical, as well as single persons, etc.
Well then, I am past all doubt that Protestants will never agree to the Canons
of a General Council, nor to the Government of a Patriarch or Pope according to
those Canons, and then they are all Schismatics; and if the Princes in whose
Dominions they live, can be prevailed withal to do it, they are to be
Proscribed, Banished, sent to the Galleys and Mines, or be chastised at home by
Axes and Halters: And I think this is a very pious and charitable Design, and
becoming a Protestant Doctor, and Son of the Church of England!

But by the way, give me leave to add, that whereas this Gentleman has
undertaken to vindicate the Learned Dean of St. Paul's, from what Mr. Humfrey
has said against him, concerning the Constitutive. Head of this National
Church, I am shrewdly afraid that he has given up the Doctor's Cause, and left
it to shift for it self as well as it can, or rather asserted that of his
Adversary. The Doctor had said, That we deny any need of a Constitutive Regent
part, or one Formal Ecclesiastical Head as essential to a National Church. This
Mr. H. confutes, and this Author affirms and defends, but grants a pars
imperans and subdita, or a ruling and ruled part, p. 567. Church Governors
united, and governing by consent, says he, are the governing part, Christian
people in obedience to the Laws of our Savior, submitting to such Government,
are the ruled part; and all this is true without a Constitutive Regent Head,
page ibid.

This methinks looks strange! That the Bishops by consent (which consent they
are obliged to by the Laws of Christ) should be the pars imperans, and yet not
the Constitutive Regent Head, is in my opinion a Paradox: For I would fain
learn, what it is that makes a Constitutive Regent Head to any Body; Is it not
Right and Obligation to Rule? Does not this make Kings and Princes Constitutive
Heads of their Principalities and Kingdoms? And does not this make
Aristocracies and Democracies the essential Regent part of those Commonwealths
over which they do preside? Have the Bishops of this Nation Right and
Obligation to rule all the Christian People in it? This I think our Author will
grant: And how he will deny them to be the Constitutive Head of the National
Church, with any consistency of Reason, I do not yet understand.

This Gentleman indeed says, That though a National Church be one body, yet'
it is not such a body as he (Mr. B.) describes, nor can be according to its
Original Constitution, which differs from Secular Forms of Government, by that
ancient Church-Canon of our Savior, It shall not be so among you. And then
adds, A National Church, as governed by consent, may be one body in an
Ecclesiastical, though not in a Civil Political sense.

That it cannot be a Body, consisting of Head and Members in a Political sense,
according to Mr. B's. description, I do not find proved by that Church-Canon of
our Savior.

That the Ecclesiastical and Civil Forms of Government do differ, I readily
grant; but are there no other Differences but such as are essential?

A Regent formal Head and Members, is of the essence of political bodies, and
that is no body that is without them, whatever ever this Gentleman says to the
contrary. Many other defects are consistent with the being of Political bodies;
but if they want a Head, they are no Body. The Church differs in many things
from Civil Political bodies, and particularly in this, that it is not armed
with civil power and jurisdiction, p. 566. by which I suppose this Author means
Coercive power. But what then? Has the Church no Constitutive Head, because it
has no Coercive power? or because it cannot imprison, fine, and destroy its
members? Masters, and Parents, and Tutors, cannot do these things, and yet most
men think they are the Regent formal Heads of their Families, children and
pupils. Well then, against that mavelous Oracle of our Author, That a
National Church governed by consent, may be a body in an Ecclesiastical, though
not in a civil political sense, (i. e. though it may be a Church, yet it cannot
be a Commonwealth or Kingdom) I will advance this proposition, That a National
Church is a body in a political sense, as well as in an Ecclesiastical, or else
it is no body at all; and that according to his own doctrine. And if he will
defend the Deans cause, he must write a book in his own confutation, which I
think he ought to do in revenge on himself, that he has hitherunto betrayed
it, as the Dr. has the Church of England's.

Our Author, I remember, somewhere calls Mr. Humfrey Mr. Baxter's Echo, when
yet Mr. Humfrey's Answer to the Drs. Book, came out before Mr. Baxter's. When
the Echo now can be proved to go before the Voice, or the Voice to follow the
Echo, then shall the Deans determination of the question between him and them
concerning the Constitutive Head of the National Church, be held as
unanswerable as this Gentleman affirms it in one place, and as admirable as he
cries it up in another.

Having said thus much on the behalf of Mr. H. I shall add a few lines more
before I return to the vindication of the Country Conformist. The learned D.
of St. Paul's had charged the Nonconformists with joining with the Papists for a
general Toleration; and as a proof of what he affirmed, produces some few
passages from a Book written, (though not printed) by Mr. H. in the year 1675.
and reprinted with some alterations 1680. Mr. Humfrey gives the reasons of
those alterations, but withal affirms that he altered not his opinion. At which
our Author makes some exceptions (page 26. of his Preface), and seems to
suspect the truth of what Mr. H. had said concerning the alteration of some
lines in his Book, without altering his judgment in that case. These are his
words: He will not own that he has altered his judgment in the second
Impression of his book, from what it was in the first: but people know not men's
judgments but by their words; and the words of his first and second Edition
contain a very different and contrary sense, which should suppose some
alteration.

What a spiteful malignant insinuation were this, if Mr. H. were not known to
be one that does not lie! He persists upon the words like toleration, which
after Mr. H. has explained, is nothing but cavil, and I need no more than to
repeat Mr. H's own words for the reproof of this Gentleman, who would not have
omitted these when he cites others, if he had dealt honestly by him.

The Dr. thinks or speaks as if the Author (in reprinting the Book) had changed
his opinion; wherein I account he is most of all out, and most to blame. He who
drew up the Book, is not one of that humor, as to turn with the times, but
rather against them. The opinion he offered in the year -- 75. is the same that
he holds now in the year -- 80. Here is an alteration indeed, as to more words,
or some other words, but the same opinion, or solution, with the difference
only of a further explication of it, and nothing therein (besides avoiding
offense) intended. The Author had been wary in declaring the Toleration he
proposed, to be a limited one, and provided against the Jesuit upon reason of
State, and showed his dread of Popery in dominion, but had omitted the
distinction of a toleration, in regard to public Assemblies, and the private
exercise of a man's Religion. He explains himself therefore by way of supply,
signifying that what he said at first, should be taken in regard to the
tolerating the Papist only privately, as his meaning really was then, and is
now but fuller expressed. This is the opinion he recedes not from (whether
peculiar to himself, or not) that no man should be persecuted merely for his
conscience, if there be no other reason. Whether he be a Dissenter of one kind,
or other, the common rule of Christianity must be remembered (he says) still,
that we do by all men as we would be done by, and that with what measure we
mete to others, it shall be measured to us again. These words are in all the
Impressions.

And to this purpose I cannot but note what I find in Mr. B's. 2 l Def. p. 16,
who after he has spoken of Mr. H. upon this account, as a man of known
Latitude, and Universal Charity, and discountenancing Cruelty, adds concerning
himself; And I so little fear the noise of the Censorious, that even now, while
tht Plot does render them most odious, I freely say; 1. That I would have
Papists used like men, and no worse than our own Defense requires. 2. That I
would have no man put to death for being a Priest. 3. I would not have them by
any Law compelled to our Communion and Sacraments. Nor can a man think but the
Reverend Dean of St. Paul's himself had also some Compassion, Pity and Kindness
for them, when he condemns such Heats, as transport men beyond the just bounds
of Prudence, Decency and Humanity toward their greatest Enemies, Pref. page
34. And whereas this Gentleman objects, That the alteration was not made in Mr.
H's Book till five years after, I hope there is a good reason for it, because
it was so many years before the second Impression: and I know not by what means
it could be altered till the Book was Printed a second time.

I return now to the Country Conformist. The Doctor had said in his Pref. page
78. upon the Principles of some of our Dissenting Brethren, Let the
Constitution be made never so easy to themselves, yet others may make use of
their grounds, and carry on their differences as high as ever. To which the
Conformist had said, There was no doubt but insufferable Heretics might
pretend Conscience and many other things for Indulgence, as well as modest and
tolerable Dissenters; but that he thought there was no reason that they should
have the same Concessions; and that he hoped our Governors would be able to
distinguish between those that err in small things, and those that subvert the
Christian Religion. This Answer does not satisfy our Author, who enquires,
(page 8.) But in the mean time, how does he answer the Deans Argument, that it
is not the way to Peace, and Union, and to silence Differences?

If I should reply to this Gentleman in other words, and give him another
Answer, peradventure he may be unsatisfied, and ask the same Question again:
However I Will venture this once. Many of the Dissenters from the Church of
England are sound in their Judgments, and agree with us in all the great
Essentials of the Christian Religion, and in most of the Integrals also; these
would gladly incorporate with us, but that there are some Impositions that they
cannot submit unto; now certainly if these things which are the reason and
cause of the Difference between them and their Brethren were removed, the
difference were at an end. Others there are that are men of sound Judgments in
the main Articles of the Christian Religion, but cannot incorporate with us in
the National Church; if these were Legally indulged, they would be free from
fear, their minds would be at rest; amidst variety of Judgments and Practices,
we might live together in Love and Peace. And thus I think I have told this
Gentleman, how many of our differences may be ended, and how those that cannot
be ended, may yet be laid to sleep, and persons made amicable and friendly. As
for intolerable Heretics, I shall not be their Patron, only I would have them
used like men, and that nothing be done to them that is unworthy of the
Christian Religion, which is made up in great part of Love, Kindness and
Compassion: And if thus much Union and Peace will not satisfy this Author, I
suppose he may look for it in Heaven, but I doubt that he will hardly find it
in this world. I am of opinion, that a cessation of Differences among
Christians and Churches, and a total cessation of sin, will appear at the same
instant. I do sometimes admire, that those that never expect to see the one upon
Earth, but are very calm and patient without it, should so passionately desire
the other, that they can be content to move Heaven and Earth for the obtaining
of it. What Seneca said of particular persons, I say of Churches, Optimus est
qui minimis urgetur vitiis; He is the best man that has least faults, and
there are none without them. Those are the best Churches which have the least
of defects and imperfections; such as are without fault are not to be found out
of Heaven. And as among men, the strong must bear the Infirmities of the weak;
so among Churches, the strongest and most perfect must bear the Weakness and
Infirmities of those that are more defective and imperfect. If our Author
should say, that those that I plead for and call Churches, are no Churches, but
acompany of Schismatical Conventicles; I answer, I am of opinion, that they are
as truly Churches, and parts of this National Church (or may be easily so made)
as the Churches of France, Holland, Geneva, Switzerland, etc. are of the
Universal: But if our Author shall please to cut them off from the Catholic
(as I think according to his own Doctrine he must do) I shall permit him the
liberty (for I know not how to hinder it) to cut off these from the National
Church, having no mind at this time to debate the Justice of his Sentence. Only
I will beg leave to tell him, that I can by no means believe, that what he does
on Earth will be ratified in Heaven; or that God will damn all that he gives up
to the Devil.

If what has been said does not satisfy our Gentleman; give me leave to
suppose him a Minister of the Reformed Church in France, be it at Charenton,
Caen, Saumur, or where you please, and let me suppose that some Gentlemen of
the Roman Catholic Religion address themselves to him after this manner: Sir,
We pity your state and condition, and have a kindness for you, (for though you
be an Heretic, you are one of human race) the King our Master will have but
one Religion in his Kingdom, and you must comply with him, or else you are
undone; your Estate, your Liberty, and peradventure your Life must all be
sacrificed to him, for he is resolved, and peremptory in that resolution; all
must serve God the same way, or they must bear the punishment of refusing it:
Here are the Subscriptions that are made by the Catholic Clergy, do but set
your hand to them, and you're safe, and may share with them in the Preferments
of the Church.

To this our Author answers; Gentlemen, I bear an honor to our Puissant and
Invincible Monarch, and am very ready to obey all his just commands; but in
this particular I pray you have me excused, God is a King superior to our
Prince, and must be obeyed before him. I fear His Majesty's Displeasure and
Vengeance, but I am much more afraid of that, of God; the one may hang or break
me upon the wheel, but the other will damn me for evermore. I beseech you
therefore interpose with his Majesty on the behalf of me and my Brethren, that
we may have the same liberty of worshipping God, as for many years past we have
enjoyed under him and his Royal Predecessors; We vow all Duty and Allegiance to
his Person and Government; we will defend them with our Lives and Fortunes; and
we have nothing so dear to us (unless it be our Consciences) which we are not
willing to sacrifice for his just Honor and Advantage. The Subscription you
propose I cannot make, without the offense of God and my Conscience: And I must
beg his Majesty's Pardon, if I choose to obey the God of Heaven, before his
Vicegerent here on earth.

The Catholic Gentlemen replies, His Majesty is willing and resolved to put an
end to all Differences and Controversies in Religion, he is weary of those
eternal Squabbles that are managed by Divines of different persuasions. The
Temple of Janus shall be shut, he will have no more Religious Wars among his
Subjects. To grant you the Liberty of serving God after your own Way, is not a
method of ending Differences, but of perpetuating them: For when you are
pleased, others may succeed to you, and under pretense of Conscience carry on
Differences as high as ever.

Let our Author answer the Argument of these Catholic Messieurs, and I do
humbly conceive I may be able from his own words to answer that of the Doctor,
if it be not sufficiently done already: but let him not misunderstand or
pervert my words. I do not affirm that the Impositions in the Church of
England, and those of the Church of Rome are equally wicked, burdensome and
offensive; all that I say is, they are both unlawful in the judgment of those
that do refuse them: and the Arguments against relaxing those Impositions, or
granting Liberty to those that do refuse them, are the same, and must receive
the same Answers.

Page 9. The Conformist had said, That he hoped our Governors would
distinguish between those that subvert the Christian Faith, and those that err
in small things. Our Gentleman answers: Thus our Governors have distinguished
already, and yet it has not put an end to our Controversies; nor is he (the
Conformist) sure that once more distinguishing will do it.

To which I reply, That when and where our Governors have made this
distinction, I confess the Country Conformist is as ignorant as our Author
will needs have him in the Constitution of our Church, p. 10. What particular
persons may have done, I do not enquire; but what the Governors of our Church
have done. They have determined the conditions of Communion, and upon what
terms the Clergy may minister at the Altar; but where by any public act they
have distinguished between the great essentials of the Christian Religion which
must be believed, and lesser errors that may be tolerated, I do not know, and
cannot find. If this Gentleman thinks that all things imposed as conditions of
Communion either upon Laity or Clergy in England, are of the essence of
Christianity, and that all who have other apprehensions concerning them, are
damnable Heretics, let him enjoy his Faith to himself, I am not like to become
his proselyte, nor I think many others.

P. 10. Our Author proceeds; Will not the excluded parties cry as loud for
Liberty of Conscience, and complain of persecution, as they do now? Either
these are good arguments, or they are not? If they be, they will hold good in
all cases, that men must not suffer for their consciences, but be allowed the
free exercise of their Religion according to their own persuasions. If they be
not, let them leave off the pretenses of scruples and tender consciences, with
that liberty and freedom in exercising their Religion which they challenge as
their natural birthright, and demand no more of that, than what the merit of
their Cause requires.

In this discourse there are more strange things than one. 1. He declares, that
if those arguments that are brought for free exercise of Religion, from
scruple, and tenderness of Conscience, be good, they must be good in all cases.
The meaning is this, One man doubts, whether it be lawful to use a Form of
Prayer, another whether it be lawful to take the Sacrament kneeling, and the
like. Now from these things therefore they plead for some condescentions. But
no, says our Author, if we humor and indulge you in this scruple, we must do
the like by such as doubt, whether Jesus Christ be the Savior of the world:
for if the argument from scruple of Conscience, be good in one case, it is good
in all cases. 2. He supposes their arguments may not be good; and what must
they do then? Why, they must leave off their pretenses of scruple, and demand
no more than the merit of their Cause requires. But what is this? Does their
Cause deserve some liberty and indulgence, though the reasons they plead for it,
be nothing worth? This I confess looks to me unaccountable. I have been always
apt to think, that the merits of a Cause were neither more nor less than the
reasons that might be produced in favor of it. But cheer up Nonconformists, if
you will but lay aside all claim to indulgence, and say, you have no reason to
claim any, you may have it.


Page lb. Our Gentleman proceeds. As for what he (the Country Conformist) adds
about the difference between subverting Religion, and some smaller errors, as a
just foundation for liberty, or restraint: Suppose our Governors should think
Schism as destructive to Religion, and the souls of men, as many heresies are,
it would be an unreasonable thing to desire them to establish Schism by a Law;
and yet if they did so, they would not be much mistaken in it.

I answer: The Country Conformist did say, that the difference between
subverting Religion, and some smaller errors, is a just foundation for liberty
and restraint; and I know nothing this Author has said in prejudice thereunto.
Either all men of differing judgments and apprehensions must have liberty, or
only some. If all, then is this Gentleman a greater Patron for liberty than I.
If only some, then must they be distinguished by the opinions in which they
differ, which is that Assertion the Country Conformist lays down.

If it be said, That no difference in opinions must be tolerated, then no man
must be endured: for I much doubt whether there be any two men in the world
that are in all things of the same mind; and so every man's hand will be
against every man, and the Christian world will be a field of blood.

As to what our Author says in the next paragraph, (p. 11, 12.) of the Country
Conformist's Ignorance and Enmity to the Church, Partiality to Dissenters, his
charging the Dr. with haughtiness, and apologizing for the rude and barbarous
treating of an excellent person without provocation, I reply. The Country
Conformist upon my knowledge is not ignorant of the Constitution of our Church;
nor is he any Enemy to any thing in it, but its imperfections, and the
pertinacity of those Churchmen that do in every thing defend it, and avow
nothing in it needing Reformation. He has no prejudice against the Dean, nor
partiality for his Adversaries, any further than he conceives the D.'s
Adversaries to have truth and right on their side, and him to be mistaken. That
the D. has treated the Dissenters severely in his Sermon, and his Adversaries
with haughtiness and contempt in his Book, is not only the opinion of the
Country Conformist, but the sorrow of many others who are no enemies to him.
He has made no Apology for any thing that is rude and barbarous in the D's
Adversaries (for where that is, he does not find): He has only endeavored to
put a true and candid interpretation upon what was otherwise liable to be
misunderstood.

To the next paragraph (p. 13.) I shall need to say nothing, seeing the
Gentleman does confess that the passage quoted by the Country Conformist out
of the Dean's Sermon was sharp. And forasmuch as he is brought to this, I am
not for that diverting entertainment he would give me, in the enquiry what
usage the Dr. has met with (from Mr. B. Mr. A. Mr. H.) upon so little
provocation, as he accounts. There is one passage only in reference to the
Country Conformist's Apology for Mr. Baxter as to his way of writing, that I
must not pass over. If men (says he) revile and reproach without spite and
anger, as much as other men can do with it; if a quick and earnest temper of
mind, and keen and pungent style, make a man guilty of as unjust censures and
opprobrious reflections as the most envenomed spirit, what satisfaction is this
to the injured person?

To which I reply: How a man can revile and reproach without spite or anger, I
confess I cannot tell. Our Savior says, Out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks; but how a man may speak plain English without either one or the
other of these, and with no invenomed spirit at all, I can tell; and that is to
speak out of love and zeal to peace, and for the vindication of the innocent
and depressed. And thus I hope have I, and Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Humfrey spoken,
notwithstanding the six next pages which are spent in exposing some bare
expressions of Mr. Humfrey (whom he has also named, when he put not his name
to his Book) without serving any end but the exposing them, upon my saying that
Mr. H. had done Mr. Baxter and the Dr. both right, in praising the one, and
rebuking the other. Mr. H.'s rebukes (says he) I confess are plain, how modest
let others judge by a perusal of some of them.

Here he runs out six pages in citations. In answer to all which, I shall only
make him this payment. He has cited, I will recite Mr. H.'s expressions. He
has done nothing but cite them, to slur him: I shall need nothing but recite
them for my own, and his full vindication.

The Doctor is one who may look on himself to have Abilities in some regard,
which Mr. B. has not: But if he should really value himself with Mr. B. upon
the account of a profound Divine, he is a man who must want that Modesty in
good earnest, whereof he makes a show in the beginning of his Book, upon a
comparison of his with Bishop Jewel. The Doctor has his excellencies other
ways, but he has not Mr. B's. The Doctor's Soul is made of Freestone, you
shall have from him polished Learning. Mr. B's is made of Flint, you shall have
from him acute Truth. Mr. B. (I will say) is one, like the man in the
Neighborhood who is first up, and all the Neighbors come for fire to his
house; that is, a man indeed extraordinary. From whom the present Age do fetch
Light, and unto whom the Ages to come will bring Honor. Above all, Mr. B. is a
holy man, who will be for ever greater in his once refusing a Bishopric, than
the Doctor can be in getting one, if the present illmanaging this Cause does
not preclude his having any.

These are some of Mr H's expressions, and of Mr. B's Character, and which in
my opinion, are weighed as well as written. I shall only add on mine own part
those few words of the Apostle, This witness is true. And seeing I have quoted
so much of that Learned man's words, in point of equal judging; I will not
forbear the end of his Book, in point of upright dealing.

The Dr. had no need to lay out his parts upon such a Design as that he has
under his hands; nor has he reason to despise or scorn, no nor to slight or
neglect the meanest person. For I must confess, it is matter of real offense to
me, that a person who is so learned a man, so honored a man throughout the
Nation, should prove a proud man, a disdainful person; which temper if it be
indulged, is so unendurable by God and man, that it will hurl any man into the
dust. And I cannot do any better service in the earth to this otherwise very
much worthy, and excellent Doctor, than to contribute the best I can to my
utmost, for the bringing him to some ingenuous sense and Amendment of it. Thou
shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart; but thou shall in any wise rebuke him,
and not suffer sin upon him. Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet, so far as concerns
the Peaceable Design.

I should now follow our Author to p. 20. where he returns to the Country
Conformist (and there were some sheets done), but because it is indeed but
endless, and it will turn to no account, but to ease my self, I desist.

Existimat ejus Majestas (Rex Jacobus) nullum ad in enndam Concordiam,
breviorem fore viam, quam si diligenter separentur necessaria a non
necessariis, and ut de necessariis conveniat, omnis open insumatur: in non
necessariis libertati Christianae locus detur.

Ep. Causaboni ad Card Perroniam, p. 31. Author of the Reflections. C. Conf.

THE END.
Mr. Lob,
I cannot tell whether it be best to meddle with this Book, or let it alone.
The wise may says Answer a man, and Answer not a man. There may be reasons to
do it, and reasons to forbear. Nevertheless if you determine upon it as to
your part, I have fetched the Book, and taken my pen and looked it over as to
mine. There is but one Chapter wherein I am concerned, and I have no mind to
meddle with any more, though when I am writing I may point at some few things
besides.

Of all the Books that came out against Dr. Stillingfleet's, there are those
few sheets called Additional Remarks which are some of the least taken notice
of, and of the most value. Not I count for the merits of the Controversy,
which is not to be expected from a Conformist, but for the ingenuity of Spirit
which he has shown in so singular exemplary a charity toward the Dissenter,
and (what I count more peculiar) in such a true candid respect to the Doctor,
even while he takes so natural a freedom as he does with him, that the fawning
(for so is applause to the rising) of this Author, is but alchimy to his
reprehension. I am beholding I must confess to the Gentleman for my own part
for his Reflections, but I must commend his Additional Remarks. I will commend
them particularly to the Deans Defender, not for an Answer, but for his
imitation. I do apprehend that in the writing his first sheets, he was not so
well aware of their being Printed as he was of the other, and that, that was
the reason of the difference of the style in regard to the Doctor. It is a
kindness this worthy good man has done me by laying in a censure of my sheets
before hand, and so prevented the sugillations of this Author. As I need not
therefore, so I shall forbear any retortions of that kind, and address my self
to my little task before me.

It begins, page 557. To State this matter, and to lay a foundation for an
Answer to the Question what the Church of England is, and who is the
Constitutive Regent part of it, he distinguishes between a National Church
considered as a Church, and as incorporated in the State (p. 558.) and then
speaks to both.

For this distinction, if he had said the Church of Christ may be considered in
its self, and as incorporated in the State, it had been a good distinction, but
to say the National Church may have this double consideration, it is not good,
because the Church is National only under the last consideration. The Church
of Christ considered in its self is either Universal or Particular, but it must
be considered as incorporated in the State to make it National. This quick
Antagonist has the sagacity to perceive this, and therefore cites these words
of mine, page 559. To be Particular or Universal is Essential to Christ's
Church, but to be National is of Accidental consideration. If this be true (now
says he) then is my distinction (that is this distinction) quite out of doors,
for it is a Church (that is a National Church) as it is the State (as it is in
the State, he should say,) and Headed by the Civil Magistrate. This is well,
and what has he then to object against me, and to say for himself?

Against me, he says, There are two things (p. 560.) supposed in my Argument
(which he has heartily delivered) as necessary to the being of a National
Church that are not necessary, That all the people (that is the generality) of
the Nation should be Christian, and that the King should be so also. These two
things, I had said, were Accidental to the Church of Christ, and yet go to the
making our Church National, and consequently the Church of Christ is National
only under an Accidental consideration. But these two things he Objects are
not to be supposed necessary to a National Church. I answer, when we speak of a
National Church, our own is always to be understood, about which the dispute
is, and our Church is a National Political Church, no otherwise but upon this
account, and the supposition hereof is necessary to it.

For himself, he says, There were great Combinations before Constantine's days
Patriarchal, Metropolitan, which are of the same nature with what we call
National Churches. I Answer, A Patriarchal Church, and a Metropolitan Church is
not a Church National. A Patriarchate may contain in it the Christians of many
Nations, A Metropolitan but half the Christians of one, and so the one is too
big, and the other too little to be a National Church, and a Diocesan much
less. By a National Church we commonly understand (I apprehend) a Political
Church wherein all the particular Christians and Churches in a Nation, and
these only, are combined under one Government, through the Supreme Magistrate,
to Church purposes. A Metropolitan Church is no combination of them all, and a
Patriarchal a combination of more then all. The one and the other may be called
Churches, but neither one or other a National Church, which he himself takes to
be such a Union.

But he cannot tell (he says p. 561.) why it is Accidental to the Church of
Christ to be National any more then to be Universal or Patriarchal and
Metropolitical any more then Universal: but when I tell him that the Body of
Christ (which is his Church) may subsist though there were never a Patriarch or
Metropolitan in the Earth, I hope he can see (if he will) how the consideration
of the Church as Patriarchal or Metropolitical, and so National, must be
Accidental to it. And as for Christ's command of planting Churches (p. 16.) in
the whole world, and so in Nations, and Cities, and Towns, requiring Unity and
Communion every where among Christians, it may warrant the Combinations of
Patriarchal, Metropolitical, National, Diocesan, and Parochial Churches to this
end, if he please, provided only, that these forms be held Accidental forms
according to humane prudence, and not the Essential form of the Church of
Christ according to divine institution.

To the question whether a National Church be Political, he offers something
(p. 562.) and says the Dean in his Opinion has answered with great Judgment in
his denying any necessity of a Constitutive Regent part to be Essential to a
National Church. But I will make it appear, that either the Dean or his
Defender, do speak here with little Judgment. It is the Notion this Author has
proposed to public consideration, that the Bishops in every Nation are to
Govern the Church by consent, that is as Colleagues, per litteras formatas when
they convene not, and when they do by their Canons in a Convocation. This he
makes throughout his Book to be of Christ's appointment, holding Episcopacy to
be Jure Divino with others of his party. If this then be true, this Author has
found out a Constitutive Regent part, yea an Ecclesiastical Constitutive Regent
part of the Church in every Nation, where there are Christians, and Bishops.
And when he has found out a Head for the Doctor, how can he thus applaud the
Doctors answer, that denies the Church to have one, or says, there is no
necessity of any. When he does prove it to be a Church Political, and the
Doctors answer includes a denial of it to be so, how comes this man to be so
full of reverence here with these words in his mouth? To this the Dean answers,
in my poor Opinion, with great Judgment and Consideration. It is with great
Judgment indeed, is it not, that the Dean has given up the Cause of the
Bishops? And with great Judgment, is it not, that this man has assumed the
Prerogative of the King to their College? Let him take heed least he bring
himself into question.

Many Churches Associated for mutual help and concord, are a Church only in a
loose sense; but those that are constituted of one Regent and subdite part, are
Churches in a Political proper sense. It is no body Political without one
common Governor Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Democratical. Thus says Mr.
Baxter (p. 563.) Unto which says this Author, Herein does his strength (p.
564.) consist.

Answ. I acknowledge it does, and what has he to weaken it? I will Transcribe
what he says: If we deny this, that though a National Church be one body, yet
it is not such a Political body as he describes, (which differs from secular
forms of Government, by that ancient Canon of our Savior, It shall not be so
among you) the controversy may be at an end, and a National Church may be one
body in an Ecclesiastical, though not in a Civil Political sense.

This is the help the Dean must expect from his Defender, and if the Doctor be
not ashamed of his own answer for this desense sake, I know not what should put
any man to shame. This man tells me in his Preface, he will interpose between
the Dean and shame in this Controversy. Upon this account therefore I will
take leave to tell him, that he does here manifestly betray a raw ignorance
which ought to shame him. He understands the term Political to be Commensurate
with Civil; as if a Government Ecclesiastical could not be Political, as well
as a Government Civil; that is, as if a Church could not be Political as well
as other Societies. He does yet discover the same more then by words; for he
has found out a Head for the Church which is Aristocratical, and yet thinks
the Church cannot be Political, unless it have some Head that is Personal: or
as if a Head Collective were not One Head, as well as one that is Monarchical.
This man who has interposed betvveen shame and the Doctor, must take shame
upon him, seeing he calls upon me to do my part honestly, in the same place. I
say this man has found an Ecclesiastical Constitutive Head of the Church, and
that of Christ's own Institution, if he understands what he drives at; and yet
he and the Doctor will not allow the Church of England to be Political. I will
advise him to consult with Bishop Gunning, and the excellently learned, and yet
humble Mr. Dodwell who are living, seeing he has not taken his Notions from
Bramhal, or any other who are dead, (as I conjecture) that he may be instructed
better, before we hear any more from him.

Mr. Baxter indeed understands himself thoroughly, and tells us Association of
Churches for Concord (gratia Unitatis,) are no proper Churches: But an United
College of Bishops for government (gratia Regiminis) is a formal Ecclesiastical
Head, about which was the Original Question. And this, this bold, and herein
but half informed Author (who will interpose between shame and the Doctor) does
not understand neither, and as soon as he has read this, will he own the shame
he has taken upon him? Above all, is there any man (unless so forward a one)
would ever have produced that saying of our Savior, If shall not be so among
you, for the proving a National Church to have no Head, or that the Churches of
Christ must not therefore be Political? I shall not be blamed I hope therefore
if I say now again what I said to the Doctor; That if this man be not ashamed
for himself and the Doctor, I must be ashamed for them both. If we deny this
(says he) the Controversy were at an end: Well, but when it cannot be denied,
we must look farther.

P. 565. We grant (says he) a National Church is a Political Society; for
Government by consent without Superiority is Government. I grant too Church
Governors united and governing by consent are the Pars Imperans, and the
people submitting to such Government in obedience to the Commands of our
Savior, are the Pars Subdita, and all this is true without a constitutive
Kegent Head. I Answer, if he grants (or rather asserts) thus much, a Government
by consent, understanding by it the Episcopal College, or Cyprians One
Episcopacy as the Governing part, and the People by the Law of Christ subdite
to it, then has he found out a Constitutive Head, and an Ecclesiastical
Constitutive Head by Christ's Institution: and to say that all this is true
without one, is to me a perfect contradiction.

When he goes on then (p. 566.) to prove that this is all, that is, or can be
required to make a National Church One, by two Arguments, I answer, If there be
so much as this indeed required, his two Arguments must prove it not only to
be One, but one Political proper Church with an Ecclesiastical Constitutive
Regent part to it. The Bishops (he says) have equal power by Christ's
appointment, and rule not by Superiority, but by Consent, that is not by
Superiority over one another, but they do rule by a Superiority (I hope) over
the people, and that is an Aristocratical Government: and when the People do
consent to Unite in Communion with them, this makes them Members (he says) of
that Political body: And these are his two reasons (p. 566, and 567.) which
need no other Animadversion, but this notice of them. The great questions only
are whether this indeed be the will of Christ, that the Catholic, and so every
National Church (as he states the matter) should be ruled by these Bishops as
Colleagues, that is by a Government (as he calls it) by consent, and if it be,
how it should come to pass that we have not in England such a Government, where
there is for certain no such Rule by consent of the College without a
Superiority, but by a Superiority (or a Supremacy) of the King, who is the Head
of these Bishops themselves, as well as the Nation. This I make not my Province.

P. 568. He has four things for the strengthening the Government of his
Mintage, and then concludes that if Mr. Baxter can give him one reason why this
may not be called one Church, or Ecclesiastical Body Politic without a
Constitutive. Regent part, he will think farther of it. To which I answer; and
tell him presently why this cannot be called one Church or Ecclesiastical Body
Politic without a Constitutive Regent part, the reason is, because it is a
Body Politic Ecclesiastical with a Constitutive Regent part; and so he need
think no farther of it.

And this Answer being of another nature then that which he fancies like to be
made him in the next page (p. 569.) I need say nothing to that, nor the next
(p. 570.) but come on to p. 571. for now he has prepared the way, as he says,
to justify the Doctor. Well, where there is a Political Church says Mr. Baxter,
there must be a Constitutive Head. The Doctor answers, there may be the true
notion of a Church without one. I Reply, This is a coming off, but the question
indeed at the bottom, is, whether it be the true notion of the Church of
England?

The Doctor argues, If it be necessary that every Church must have a
Constitutive Regent part as essential to it, then it unavoidably follows, that
there must be a Catholic Visible Head to the Church Catholic Visible. This
Argument the Deans Defender thinks unanswerable. But we reply, the Argument is
such, as needs no Answer, and it may easily be Answered.

In the first place it needs no Answer, because the thing it would prove, is
but what we can grant him; that is, a Visible Head to the Catholic Church.
Christ is that Head we say, and he is Visible. When he was on earth he gave
Laws for his Church, and Commissionated Officers, which are Rights of a Head;
He after appeared to Paul, and Commissionated him, and is now Visible in
Heaven. This is plain proof in Reason, Sense and Scripture, and not to be
jeered off, and therefore in the first place the Doctors Argument needs no
Answer.

In the next place we say farther, it is easily Answered; for we deny the
Argument. If it be necessary for a Church to have a Constitutive Head, it
follows that the Catholic Church must have a Constitutive one: but it follows
not that it must have a Catholic Visible Head or that, that Constitutive Head
must be Visible.

This in truth is introducing four Terms into the Argument which we know is
false Arguing. When there is put more into the thing Asserted in the
Consequence, then there is to prove it in the Antecedent in an Hypothetical
Syllogism, it is all one as to argue with four terms in a Syllogism that is
Categorical. But the Doctor (says he) puts more strength in it. The question is
about the Catholic Church, whereof particular Churches are parts, and they
being Visible do require the Constitutive Regent part to be Visible. I Answer,
though here be more words, here is no more strength put into the Argument, I
still deny the Consequence. For though the Catholic Church consists of
Particular Churches which are Visible, it consists also of that society in
heaven which is not Visible, Christ's Body is but one Body, whereof part is in
Heaven, and part on Earth, and while the Head is in Heaven, it follows not,
that because part of the Body is Visible, therefore the Head must be Visible.
It is all one as if he should argue thus. Particular Churches are on Earth, and
if Christ be Head of the Catholic Church whereof they are parts, he must not
be in Heaven. And when indeed this is one and the same Argument, and we know it
to be false, we do justly deny the Doctors Argument. Suppose a man so high as
that his head reached above the clouds, will you argue, that this person has
no head, because his head is not visible? I deny the Argument.

There is really nothing hard in the Doctors Argument, but to understand why
his Defender (whom I value for his Parts) should come to think it unanswerable.
It may be the Doctors confident word at first, [it undenyably follows] drew on
this apprehension, and he has fetched the Argument over so long, till he has
put enough in it, to make himself believe it. We are far (says he) from
asserting that the Universal Head must be Visible if the Subordinate be so (he
should be as far from asserting the Head to be Visible, because Particular
Churches or the Members are so:) but this we assert, that if no Church can be a
true Visible Church without a Subordinate Visible Head, then the Universal
Church cannot be a Visible Church without a Subordinate Catholic Visible Head,
p. 574, 575, 576. This he takes to be the Doctors Argument, and he will make
the consequence hold before he has done with it. But against whom does the
Doctor and this man argue? Is it not against Mr. Bexter? and did Mr. Baxter
ever say this, that there can be no true Church without a Subordinate Head
under Christ? Is not Mr. Baxter a Protestant as well as the Doctor, and do they
not both maintain the Catholic Church to have one only Supreme Head and no
Subordinate one in Earth? If his Defender has found out one who is not the
Pope, but the College of Bishops, I desire Doctor Stillingfleet to appear
above board, and to let us know whether he will set up also for that notion,
and defend his Defender.

Mr. Baxter is a man who understood Politics, and stated what he understood,
but the Doctor was (at the present) raw, and put into his arguing he did not
know well what (that is the truth on it,) and forasmuch as this man has
undertaken to interpose between shame and the Doctor. I will tell them both
plainly, the Doctor may be ashamed to put in a fourth Term into his Argument,
and this man truly takes the shame on him, by bringing in a fifth also. That
which Mr. Baxter said, was this, That every proper Political Church must have a
Constitutive Head, and the Doctor both leaves out the words Proper, Political,
and brings in the term Visible: Therefore the Catholic Church (says he) must
have a Constitutive Visible Head. The Interposer now to take off this shame
from the Doctor, has taken the right course (I say) for he comes and does
worse, and that is, puts in a fifth term also into the Argument. If every
Church (when he should say every Proper Political Church only, if he speaks to
Mr. Baxter) must have a Visible Subordinate Constitutive Head, then must the
Catholic Church have such a one: But that having no such a one, a National
Church as well as the Catholic may be without a Constitutive Head. This is the
Reasoning in the sum (I say in the sum, for it is no matter for more of his
words) that puts me and Mr. Baxter (as he says) at such a loss, as is
irrecoverable. And does he not indeed take off the shame from the Doctor by
taking it thus upon himself? Suppose another should put a sixth term into the
Argument, and argue, If no Church can be a true Visible Church without a
Visible Subordinate Monarchical Constitutive Head, then cannot the Catholic
Church visible be a true Church without a Visible Subordinate Monarchical
Constitutive Head, Who could doubt now any longer but Mr. Baxter must yield to
a plain Confutation, or bring in the Pope presently without remedy? But did Mr.
Baxter I pray lay down the Proposition, from which, this Consequence, by this
means, is indeed made unavoidable? No, you will say this were to wrong Mr.
Baxter to put in the term Monarchical (and would spoil this man's Government by
Consent quite:) I say likewise, that this Author wrongs him to put in this term
Subordinate, and the Doctor by putting in the term Visible. Mr. Baxter has
neither of these terms in his Assertion, and if you cannot argue from what he
has said that the Pope is Head of the Catholic Church Visible, you cnanot,
argue from him that it has any Subordinate Head, or Visible, but a
Constitutive Head only, whether Visible or Invisible. It is nothing else but
the Fallacy whereby the Opponent puts in more into the Argument then is granted
by the Respondent (which I think we called at the University Fallacia plurium
interrogationum vel dictionum, for whether the diverse things are interrogated
or argued the Paralogism is the same,) that has made all this pother as this
man phrases it, which seeing it is on their side, I will give over any farther
persuit of this Chapter.

There is one thing only, and that is the main thing not to be omitted. The
Dean in his Determination of this point does hold that Consent is sufficient to
the making a National Church, understanding by that Consent, a Consent to be of
it. The Deans Defender holds the Church to be a Government by Consent, meaning
by it the Consent of the Bishops. These are two contrary things, the one making
the Church not Political, and the other makes it an Aristocracy, and yet
intends to justify the former. But neither of them are in the right. The
Church of England, is not a Church by Consent only without a Head, nor a
Government by Consent, by the College of Bishops: but it is a Political Church
with a Constitutive Regent part, which is the King, according to my Papers.

That the King is the Head of it appears by the Statute that declares him Head
of the Church, as it is called the Church of England. It appears by other Acts
that give him the same Supremacy the Pope usurped. It appears by the First
Fruits and Tenths of all Benefices given him as the Supreme Head of the Church.
It appears by Cromwell who was made Henry the Eigths Vicar General and
Vicegerent, and sat in the Convocation as Personating the Head of it. It
appears by this Reason of my Book. Where the Rights of Majesty are, there must
the Headship be placed. Legislation and the Last appeal belong to him. It is
the King gives Authority to the Canons, in so much as when a Law cannot pass
without a Parliament, the Canons becomes valid by the Kings own Ratification.
And there can be no Appeal in any Ecclesiastical cause from the King. Again, it
appears most unanimously by the Ministers Prayers every Sunday, giving him the
Title of Supreme Head, and by the Oaths of Supremacy and Alleigance. If the
King be not the Head accordingly, then must the Clergy generally be both Liars
and Perjured Persons.

From this truth then (which is beyond opposition) it follows, that a National
Church is of Humane appointment and not of Divine right that is indispensible:
It follows that it belongs not to the Essence of the Church of Christ to be
National, but that this is a consideration accidental to it. It follows that
such a Church may receive its Constitution at first, and a new form or mould at
any time, as is most convenient to the State, and most conducive to the glory
of God in the good of the People. It follows that a Reformation of the
Government of our Church by the introducing some such new form into it as shall
be more conducive to the ends of Holiness and Peace than the present Form does,
were a most desirable thing, and fit to be tendered to the Wisdom of
Parliament. It follows finally that seeing the model that is hammering by this
Author is proposed as strictly of Divine Right, which is therefore the most
direful Schismatical Scheme that can be proposed in regard to Dissenters,
excluding them thereby out of the body of Christ, and consequently from
salvation, besides dangerous to the Supremacy of the Magistrate, and
unanswerably faulty in many respects, so that it cannot be received or endured,
it is fit that a model more agreeable to the power which is proper to Kings,
and less exceptionable in regard to the Conscience of the Subject, were
exhibited in the room of it; and if it be such as would make the Prelates only
the Kings Officers ( to execute under him such Government of the Church as
belongs to Kings, as this Author so well expresses it, (p. 275.) so as the
Nonconformist and Conformist may share: I shall not for the dislike of any one
or two men, or party (who are designing an Antipodes to it) be at all out of
love with it. And seeing there is a draught to this purpose which he alludes
to, and (whatsoever the humor be) does style an ingenious proposal, I advise
that it be preserved and inserted therefore at the end of the Book if you Print
it. The Paper (you know) was prepared against the Sitting of the last
Parliament at Oxford, and Entitled Materials for Union.

And now I have done about my self, you may expect from me some more general
censure of the Author and his Book, which I was willing to decline.

For the Author (whatsoever he else be) I take him to be a man of Ability that
requires our regard. By his Style and Undertaking, I guess him to be a man of
younger age, (so I hear and believe) though by his reading and compass he
fetches for the making good his Notion, he may be some graver Person. In the
small game he plays with me I perceive he has hit me, and I ought not to like
him the worse for that. It is where I lay open to him, and left him a blot. But
for the defense he makes of the Doctor against me, I think he has failed in
his cast, and thrown out. He is a ^^^n I count has a Proud Pen, and I am not
moved at that: but the Doctor whose Pen is more Prudential, seemed to me to
have his contempt within, and that moved me, do what I could, and made me write
as I did. There are many (I believe) will think that this man has despised me
so much that it should move me: but I do not think it so much. The man is a
bold insolent man, and it is (I think) the taking a ferocious liberty, rather
then showing disdain. He has used Mr. Baxter like a very dog, and when I
methinks am but something rightly served, why should I care how he uses me? I
will do nothing more to deserve it, and if he despises me, I know then how to
be even with him, I wont care if he does.

For the Book, I think the Bookseller has done his part. The Paper and Print
is to be like't: but for the matter I think it to dear at the price. Five
Shillings (I must tell him with some displeasure) is too unreasonable much for
such Controversy. There are three or four things more particularly I have
observed in the Reading it.

In the first place I observe the Design which appears to be in hand. A design
which seems specious, being for Union: but that Union is of the Church of
England with the Church of Rome, in the French and Cassandrian way, not a Union
of Protestant Dissenters and the Conformists with one another. On the contrary,
this Gentleman thus discourses. The Christian Church throughout the whole world
is One. The Unity of this Church Catholic lies in One Communion. This
Communion is exercised in Particular Churches. There are no true Particular
Churches of Christ's Institution, and parts of that Catholic, but they must
have Bishops. Every man consequently that is not in Communion with his Bishop,
is out of the true Catholic Church which consists of such parts, and so not
only a Schismatic, but cut off from Salvation. Either this Author now is aware
of this Doctrine or not: If not, as soon as he comes to be, he will be ashamed
of it: if he already be, he may be ashamed to own such Doctrine as this is.

In the next place I observe a little, how consistent he is in this Doctrine.
For when he has bestowed a whole Chapter (p. 164.) to tell us that the Unity
of the Universal Christian Church consists in one Communion, and descends to
explain that Communion by a Communication of the same Divine Service (for when
Dr. Owen is speaking of a Communion between the Churches in Faith and Love, He
ought to have added (says he) in Religious Worship, for without this there is
no Christian Communion, (p, 446.) which he also urges so far as to make a
forsaking Communion with the Church of England to be a cutting a man quite off
from the Church of Christ; and yet if you turn to p. 305. you shall find these
words. The Nature and Essence of the Church does not consist in Religious
Assemblies -- but it is a Covenant Relation to Christ which Constitutes the
Church. Here then we have sounder Doctrine, for these two are different things.
If an entering into Covenant with Christ is that really which Constitues a man a
member, and unites him to the Body, then is it not this One Communion wherein
the Unity of that Body does consist. A man may give himself up to Christ I
hope, who yet does not, and cannot communicate with the Church of England, and
though he own not the Bishops, may be a Christian for all that.

In the third place I observe this, that when he has said some things well
about the Text which the Doctor chose for his Sermon (p. 447, 448.) yet is he
very unsatisfactory in bringing off the Doctor, or vindicating his judgment in
his choice of it for his purpose. There were some in the Apostles time that
thought the Jewish Law still obligatory, and that they should sin against God
if they did not keep it: and there were others understood the liberty they had
from it by the Gospel. The first of these are called the weak brother, the last
the perfect. The advice the Apostles gives to the perfect is to use and enjoy
that liberty which the Gospel brought them: The advice he gives the weak, is to
wait till God should reveal to them the knowledge of this liberty. And in the
mean while that they should forbear, seeing, To them who esteem any thing to be
sin, it is sin: and this he presses still so far, and with such exceeding
caution that the strong Christian himself must refrain his liberty for their
sakes, in case that by his example he shall give them occasion to do the same
thing, which in regard to their not yet sufficiently informed formed
consciences would be sin, and destroy their souls. This is the certain sense
and diffusive doctrine of St. Paul in his Epistles. I will come then to the
Doctors Text, Whereto we have attained let us walk by the same rule, let us
mind the same thing, and I must ask his Defender whether the weak and perfect
Christian (as before explained) be here both included, I mean whether both of
these are alike required in the Text to walk by the same rule? This Author does
hold it, and he frames such an interpretation of the words as he must hold it:
but I deny it, and that interpretation therefore must be counterfeit. By
walking by the same rule he understands the maintaining Church Communion, and
this Communion with the Church he counts must be held, howsoever it be we
differ. This is therefore a fictitious and certain false application or
explication of the Text, for it is directly contrary to the scope of that
Doctrine which I have but now delivered as the sum or substance of the
Apostle in his Epistles altogether. I say also that this is manifestly here
destitute of reason. The Apostle requires that all Christians should walk by
the same rule in things whereto they have attained, Therefore they must walk by
the same rule in things whereto they have not attained. Such is his force. This
walking by the same rule I am persuaded is a phrase or expression only,
signifying the doing as others do. Now because they that had the knowledge of
their liberty might do as others did, and were to use it, must those that had
not that knowledge do so likewise? The contrary is apparent, for they shall sin
against their consciences if they do. The like case is here. The Conformist
among us looks upon all and every of those things that are enjoined about
Uniformity in the Church to be lawful, and he values himself for perfect in
this discerning indifferent things, but the Nonconformist thinks these things
unlawful, and that he shall sin if he yields to them, and what if herein he be
weak, must the weak and perfect, must both these here now walk by the same
rule, or do as one another do? Nay must there be a Rule made on purpose by
Authority about these very things wherein the difference lies to force them to
act both alike, when one of them (if they do) cannot possibly act in faith, and
so must needs sin? Nothing more contrary to what I have laid down, Nothing more
contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostle. I will add, if by this Rule there be
more meant then a Phrase, and some Rule he will account there must be, I would
fain know why this Rule should be any other then that of the same Apostle
otherwhere, As many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them and the
Israel of God. And what is that Rule, but Christianity it self, the great Rule
of the Christian Religion, or Doctrine of the Gospel? And what then will follow
from thence! The Doctor I remember reflects upon my Peaceable Design for being
called an Answer to his Sermon: I will undertake now upon this Supposition,
that, that Title was as fit for my Book, as this Text was for his Sermon.
Because we must walk according to the general rule of the Christian Religion,
in all things that are required of us, as we attain to the knowledge thereof,
Therefore we must Conform to the Canons and Liturgy of the Church of England.
This is the Doctors Sermon upon that Text; and I will tell you the Inference
now of his Defender upon that Sermon, Therefore must all that Conform not, in
the excluding themselves from Communion with the Church of England, be excluded
also out of the Catholic Church, and consequently out of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

By the way, since I wrote this, I was reading Doctor Owen, and I find that he
falls in with the last Interpretation of the Rule, and he has these words upon
it. Let the Apostles rule be produced (says he) with any probability of proof
to be his, and we are ready to subscribe and conform to it. To which Doctor
Stillingfleet Replies, This is the Apostles rule, to go as far as they can, and
if they can go no farther to sit down, and not to break the peace of the
Church. Unto this Dr. Owen Answers, The Apostles rule is not that we should go
as far as we can, but that so far as we have attained we must walk by the same
rule. I interpose here and say to the Doctor, This is, this must be the rule of
the Apostle, supposing that rule be meant as he understands it, that is, of the
great rule of faith and love, or law of the Gospel. For this is part of that
Rule. It is part of that love we owe the Magistrate and our Conforming Brethren
to go as far as we can, or to come as near as we can to them. But I answer then
to the Dean, It is part also of the same Rule to go no farther then we can. Our
duty of love requires the one: Our duty of faith requires the other. We may not
do any thing which we cannot do in faith but we break the rule as it is the
rule of faith, as well as if we do not do what we can, we shall break the
rule, as it is the rule of love. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Now when
the Dean hereupon goes on, and teaches us, that we must sit down and not break
the peace of the Church when we can go no farther, I Reply, there is a breaking
the peace of the Church in his sense, or in ours. If we understand breaking the
peace of the Church in his sense, which is going from the Church to our
Meetings, I say he is out, and that we must break the peace of the Church if
this be the breaking it, for this is that which is required of us in that
branch of the Rule, that we must go no farther then we can: But when we go to
private Meetings and leave the Church in this case (where we suppose a man
cannot act in faith, or with persuasion in his conscience that it is lawful for
him to go thither,) it is no breaking the peace of the Church in our sense, but
a part of our duty (we say) of going no farther then we can. We go as far as
we can with them in holding the same Doctrine and Sacraments, in acknowledging
them as true Churches, maintaining a Communion in love with them, and doing all
the good offices we can to them, and when we can go no farther, in this lies
our duty of going no farther then we can, that we meet for worship otherwhere.
To assemble (I say) for worship is one part of the rule: Not to assemble, (but
to forbear any thing,) when we cannot act in faith, is another part of the
rule: Put them both together and it comes to this, that, To go to other
meetings when we cannot go to Church must be walking by the rule (if this rule
be the great rule of faith and of love) out of question. This I speak in the
person of Doctor Owen, who can and do go to Church my self: but there is one
eminent thing said by that eminent great man, and very much accomplished
Doctor. We do and shall abide by this Principle (p. 250.) that Communion in
faith and love with the administration of the same Sacraments is sufficient to
preserve all Christians from the guilt of Schism, though they cannot
communicate together in some rites and rules of Worship and Order. If the
Doctor makes good this, he does our work: and till the Dean debates this, he
says nothing.

To return, I observe in the fourth place (for the Digression it self does but
lead me hither) that this Author does industriously endeavor to bring the
Controversy between Conformist and Nonconformist to this issue. If the Church
requires of us any things as necessary to her Communion which are sinful, the
schism is on her part. If not, the schism is on ours. To what end he does this,
unless there be some body else entertaining the task which the Doctor ought, I
cannot tell: but if this be supposed the true case between us, then should the
business here that Doctor Stillingfleet had to do, have been this, To see what
things are alleged by the Nonconformists as Unlawful in the point of
Conformity (whereof there was a taste first in the Peaceable Design, and a
fuller measure after in Mr. Baxters Plea) and then to have answered those
Allegations. If the Doctor was able sincerely and substantially to have done
this, then has he declined his work: if indeed he cannot (at least on the
Ministers part he cannot), then has he yielded the Nonconformist his Cause.
The Doctors Defender seeing this, does endeavor to supply his defect, and
speaks to many of these things: but I must tell him he has done it in such an
overly way, with such misrepresentation of Mr. Baxter, such incidental
mistakes, such slight and perfunctory answers, that I do not apprehend he
believes in his heart that what he has said can give satisfaction. I will
content my self with one instance to show him this. It is in the matter of
Assent and Consent, to.all and every thing contained in, and prescribed by the
two Books of the Liturgy and Orders. It Is plain by these words, that whatsoever
is Asserted in these Books we must give our assent to the truth of it, as
whatsoever is prescribed we must consent to the use of it. How vast a Field
then have we here for our Objections against this Declaration, and yet does
this Author come off thus. We do not give our assent to every saying in the
Common Prayer Book, but to every thing contained in and prescribed by it, that
is what we are bound to use, p. 105. And does this man now think indeed this
enough to satisfy a Conscientious man in any thing which he scruples upon this
account? Is this distinction enough to salve the matter? We do not assent to
the Sayings of the Book but to the Things? as if whatsoever is said in the Book
were not something that is contained in it: Or as if there was nothing to be
assented to as true, but what is prescribed to be used. Good Lord! what Healers
are we like to have of such men as these be? They should set themselves to
satisfy us, in such Solutions of our Objections, as our Consciences being
convinced of the Solidity might acquiess in them: but their care is only to
satisfy themselves, and no matter so long as they come off with any Evasion.

In the last place, there remains some passages this Author has here and there
in his Book, and more industriously in his Preface, on set purpose to expose
me, in an ill representing some of my expressions, without regard to the matter
between us, whether it be any thing or nothing; which though it can hardly be
well (as to me) to asperse a man for the aspersion sake, (when as to Mr. Baxter
it is (I Judge) even irreligiously ill) yet do I readily forgive it him, upon
this double account. The one is, because when I wrote these sheets I think I
was to blame, that having written them foul, I could not abide to be at the
pains to write them over fair, (which yet I thought, to have done) and then I
should have castigated such expressions, that now in his exposing them again to
me do not like me (some of them), as indeed not cautious enough for my self, or
respectful enough for the Doctor. I am ready to crave the Doctors pardon, which
is my best satisfaction for that. The other is because the Author does it out
of respect to so worthy a person as him he vindicates (not out of malice to
me), and one may think it but a friendly Office for him to do so: But I do
think also that Dr. Stillingfleet himself ought not to pass it so lightly, who
has the more cause to be aware of him, and to say the rather, Get thee behind
me Sherlock, thou art one that would foment my pride, when others (I am to
believe) have more honestly endeavored to let me see it, that I may be humbled
to God for it.

If it was merely for peace sake, and out of tenderness to the Nonconformists,
seeking their good at his heart as in the sight of God, that Dr. Stillingfleet
Preached his Sermon, and writ his Book, the good Lord pardon every man that
has had but one hard thought, or spoke one hard word of so good and learned a
man: but if it was really otherwise, if it was to appear some body, to seek
himself, and in lifting himself up against his Brethren without regard to the
consequence, the righteous God is ready to take the least hurt he does them to
be all one as done to himself, then the good Lord pardon him (for he has
sinned much), and bring him to see (though at last) unto whom he is indeed more
beholding (or from whom he is indeed like to receive most good), either him
that licketh up his spittle, or him that has rebuked his fault.

The Author of the Peaceable Design.

Materials for Union.
WHereas there are three Parties of Protestants in the Nation, the
Episcopalian, the Presbyterian, and the Independent (or Congregational-Men,
which are of diverse sorts) who do, and will ever differ in their Opinions
about the Church, and Discipline of it, in the Question, which is of Christ's
Institution; or, Whether the One, or the Other, is most consonant to Scripture:
it is not our Disputes about the Church as Particular (which are rather to be
mutually forborne, and every Party (left herein to their own Persuasion) but a
Common Agreement in what we Can Agree, and that is in the Church as National,
must Heal our Divisions.

It is here we must lay the Foundation-Stone of Union.

When the Parliament then shall set about this business to purpose, A Bill
should be brought in for Declaring the Constitution of Our Church of England.

A Parliament is the Representative of the whole People of England, and I doubt
not, but by Consent and Agreement, they might Make a New Constitution of the
CHURCH, as it is National; and much more may they Declare the Constitution of
it.

The Papists are for one Universal Organical Church throughout the world,
whereof the Pope is Head by Christ's Appintment; and whosoever consequently is
not of this Roman Catholick-Church, and Governed by him, must be damned. There
are some of our late Prelatists are for the same Church, but under the Diocesan
Bishops of the whole Earth, who being Convened in a General Council, are the
Head that must give laws to it; and whosoever refuse to be Governed by the Laws
of these General Counsels, are Schismatics. I am much rather therefore, in my
mind, for the Notion (which is that in the Embryo the Reverend Dean of St.
Paul's seems to me to aim at, if it could be once well formed) of an Independent
National Church Political, but not to be held, as the Congregationalist
supposes his Particular Independent One, and They their Catholic, to be of
Divine, but of Humane Institution; for it is manifestly a thing Accidental to
the Church of Christ, that the Supreme Magistrate, and the whole Body of a
Nation, are Christian.

It should be declared then in such a Bill of Act of Parliament, that the
Church of England consists of the King as the Head, and all the several
Assemblies of the Protestants as the Body.

A Discrimination between the Tolerable and Intolerable is never to be
gainsaid by any Wise Man.

It is not for me, or any One persons, but a Convocation, or Parliament, to
prescribe the Terms of National Communion; but I would have all our Assemblies
that are Tolerable, to be made Legal by such an Act, and thereby parts of the
National Church, as well as the Parochial Congregations.

That the Bishops should be declared Ecclesiastical Officers under the KING,
acting Circa Sacra only by Virtue of His Authority and Commission.

As Jehoshophat appointed Officers for Government in the Matters of God, and
the Kings Matters: So should the Bishops be in Our Ecclesiastical, as the
Judges are in Civil Matters, the Substitutes of his Majesty, and Execute His
Jurisdiction.

Upon this Account, if any of the Eminent among the Non-conformists were Chosen
to be Bishops, they could not refuse it.

Let two or three the most fit of those Parties be the next that are called to
this Function upon such an Act, an commanded to Hold it, and then would UNION
indeed Commence.

Their Work in general, should be to Supervise the Churches of both sorts in
their Diocesses, that they all Walk according to their own Order, agreeable to
the Gospel, and the Peace of one another.

I am sensible unto what Distress a Congregational Minister may be brought in
the exercise of Discipline over some potent, turbulent, and refractory Members;
and what Relief he might find in such a (...)al Ecclesiastical Officer as this.
I am sensible how the many inconveniences (supposed) of Congregational
Episcopacy, by this one only means may be salved.

This shall Advance, and not Lessen, the outward Power and Honor of the
Bishops.

I humbly Motion a Third Clerk for the Convocation, to be added to the Two in
every Diocese, and chose out of the Non-conformists for the Unanimous
prosecution of Holiness and Concord throughout all the Churches: And the two
Provinces of Canterbury and York should Unite in this Convocation, for the
making them one National Church, and not two Provincial ones in a diverse
Assembly.

By this means should one Organ more be added to this great Political Society
for deriving an influence from this Head to these parts of the Body as well as
Others, which now seem neglected, and to have no care taken of them.

It were the part of such a Convocation to Decree that neither Church should
Unchurch one another; That no members of Either should depart from One Church
to the Other without a sufficient peaceable reason; That when a man has his
choice to be of One Church, which he will, in regard to Fixed Communion, he
should Occasionally come also to the Other for maintaining this National Union.

There are these and other things of such a nature as these, I should expect
then would be molded into Canons, that kindly preventing all our scruples,
would render the Nation happy, in the satisfaction of both Parties.

An Act of Parliament to this purpose, would make the Church of England to be
in Earnest, such a Church, as the Churchmen would have us still think it, the
Best Constituted, the most Exemplary, and the most Glorious of any that is, or
indeed that well can be in this World.

But is not all this at last too Erastian? I answer, No. We suppose that every
Parish where there is a Pastor and a Flock does contain in it such a Particular
Church as is of Christ's Institution. That Christ committed to every such Church
a complete power of Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline. That what Christ has
committed to his Church cannot be taken away by any. That the Authority of the
Magistrate is for care and oversight, and so to protect and maintain this
power, but not to destroy it. That the Church as National, and Diocesan as part
of the National, and Parochial ( qua Parochial) as part of the Diocesan, are of
Humane institution, and owe their power, and preservation of it, to the Supreme
Magistrate. That as the Magistrate does not take away or invade, but preserve
the power of the Keys (invested in the Miinster, but given with the Pastor
himself to the Church), No more can the Diocesans that Derive from him, assume
it to themselves, and deprive the Particular Churches of it. That so long as
this Power is preserved, there is no Erastianism maintained as to a Particular
Church, and as to the National there is no danger of it.

And thus I have offered my Mite to the Sanctuary; that is, so much as I have,
and what I think fit for Cultivation by Others, whom GOD shall make
Wise-hearted, and Concerned, for the Welfare of Sion.

There is Room also here left for the farther Invention of Such, in regard to
many the like things as (or greater then) these: For they that will, may see
something more in a few Sheets, in part Entitled, Animadversions upon the
Debate between Dr. Stillingfleet and Mr. Baxter, Concerning the National Church
and Head of it.

J. H.

THE END.

