Mr. EMMERTONS MARRIAGE WITH Mrs. BRIDGET HYDE CONSIDERED.

Wherein is discoursed the Rights and Nature of Marriage.

What Authority the Curia Christianitatis has in Matrimonial Causes at this
day.

The Levitical Degrees, the Bounds of a Legal Marriage, and the Reasons thereof.

And that now Matrimonial Causes are determinable by Virtue of the Statute of
H. 8. by the Judges of Common Law.

In a Letter from a Gentleman in the Country to one of the Commissioners
Delegates in that Cause, desiring his Opinion therein.

(...)
(...).
Marc. Antonin. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and Published by Richard
Baldwin. 1682.

Mr. EMMERTON's MARRIAGE WITH Mrs. BRIDGET HYDE CONSIDERED.
SIR,
I Received your Letter, wherein you were pleased to consult me, and to desire
my thoughts how a Judge in the Cause of Mr. Emmerton's Marriage to Mrs. Bridget
Hyde now depending, before the Commissioners of Delegates, ought to guide
himself. And what Opinion I have of the Authority of such Commissioners: And to
resolve you how Matrimonial Causes came to be thus split and the same cause in
several respects of several Conusance. The Question of Right Cognoscible in the
Curia Christianitatis; But the Question of Fact in our Common Law Courts: How
this inconvenience and irregularity came about, and whether it be not remedyed
by the Stat. of H. 8. which prohibits Marriages to be Impeached that are
contracted by Persons not within the Levitical degrees of Kindred. By that
Statute the Laws of Moses to the Jews, is become a Statute Law of England; and
the interposing of the Church her Authority, in defining within what degrees
Marriages can be lawfully made, are discharged. The Canons of the Church have
always given the Rule to all Christendom in these Matters, Matrimonial Causes
are conducted every where by the Canon Law where it is not controld by the
Sovereign Law of the State. As the Civil Law does govern in most Countries, in
all Cases where no municipal Laws or local Customs do intervene: what the Roman
Civil Law has Established, is not the measure of Matrimonial Causes, but the
Canon Law or Councels of the Church, which is not so in any other Causes
referred by our Constitutions to the Civil Law Courts.

You likewise desire my Opinion about the Levitical degrees, and for what
reason Marriages within these degrees are forbidden, and whether we ought to
stand within the Letter of that Law of Moses, and the prohibited instances, and
not take Cases under aparity of Reason to be likewise prohibited: Whether our
Common Law Courts are not competent to understand and Interpret a Chapter of
Leveticus and a Law of Moses as well as any other Writing, or as our own
Statute Laws. And consequently the Authority of the Church precluded in judging
any longer about the lawfulness or unlawfulness of Marriages in respect of the
degrees of Kindred: which you think was the only reason that the Church
interposed in Matrimonial Causes: which were certainly before the Statute of H.
8. within their Province. And that duly, for that they had been from the first
publishing of our Religion, accounted of a Religious consideration, and were
declared by the Laws, and the Spirit, and Purity of our Religion; and those
matters were rightly and fitly conducted by the guides of our Religion.

Sir, as soon as I read your Commands, I applied my self, all other matters,
but necessary avocations neglected, to give you such a return as I could, not
conside^ing my own great insufficiency to resolutions in matter of such high
moment, but considering, that you desired what I could, not, what I could not
say in the matter. But in what I fall short of your expectation, you must
impute it to the very short time you allotted me, a peremptary day for this
cause being very near, and what I shall after that time offer, may be like
advice administered to a departing man.

But that which did most discourage me in this undertaking, was want of
particular notice of the Cause, you having supplied to me but some Generals,
and given me only the complexion of the Cause, and not given it me,
represented in all its lineaments and parts, nor furnished me any of those
niceties that have perplexed the Cause, nor those Arts which have given it all
this delay; by which the iniquity of a pretense may be discerned, and the zeal
of a Righteous man may be provoked and excited. But tho you have not troubled
your self with a prolix account of those matters for the sparing my trouble, I
am pleased that you are not without a just resentment of them, and they will be
duly considered by you when you come to form your Judgment, for I understand by
you that you were not at the last Session in this Cause, being detained by very
weighty affairs of your own, and presuming (as you say) that you could not
imagine, that a Cause of that clearness, a Matrimonial Cause, a Cause of any
other to be highly favored, a Cause that would not suffer any longer delay.
The mischeifs and the sin of those delays becoming every day more crying and
clamorous, could not but find a ready Sentence from worthy men that are touched
with a sense of Justice, and have any zeal for the Rights of Marriage, the
happiest and best Institution in the World, and the most Sacred and inviolate
Faith of the Matrimonial Contract,

For, Sir, most true it is, that many and great are the advantages to mankind,
that proceed from the state of Marriages (that is to say) a propagation of our
kind, honest and well-becoming the Dignity of our Nature, a more effective and
busy care of two Parents in Educating our Children, by which the better
improving our kind is provided for.

This State secures to every Child a Father, as it does appropriate the Child
to the Husband, so that we are entertained also with the love of our Children,
as well as the Woman who would otherwise enjoy a pleasure, of which we could
hardly ever partake.

The labors and cares of our life are encouraged, sustained, and rewarded by
the love of our Issue and Posterities, and they enjoy the Riches, and Honors,
and Rewards of their Fathers Wisdom and Virtue, which would otherwise determine
into the first acquirer, return to the fiscus, or without satisfaction, be
bestowed upon a less beloved Stranger. The worthy and generous ambition
consequently of performing worthy Actions, and rendering our selves useful to
the public, would cease and languish, the public good be utterly neglected,
and Kingdoms and Commonwealths dissolve, and we become again as Savage as the
Beasts themselves, unguarded and without the comforts or Ornaments of humane
life.

Cecrops from his Institution of Marriage at Athens is honored with the Title
of (...) by this Institution we all become (...), and know our Fathers, Without
Marriage, our great men, who undervalue and disgrace it, had found themselves
among the heard, and for ever there had continued and never enjoyed the honors
of their Ancestors, from whom they vilely degenerate.

But besides the advantages that we derive from this State of Marriage to our
whole kind in the better providing for the Improvement of humane Nature, and
the accommodations of life: it does immediately confer an honor and dignity
upon our nature, when we do those Acts that are common to us with the Beasts,
we do not in this State perform them brutally. They are the effects rather of
Friendship than Lust, and a kind of Chastity belongs truly to these Amors.

By the Enclosure of this State we have acquired Modesty to our Nature; Thereby
the very Appetites of Nature are duly retrenched and brought into Rule: and
this by Example becomes a Bridle and Restraint to the Younger Sort, before they
come under the guidance of Reason and Understanding, and directs the Natural
Pudor to take care of their Chastity.

Whilst we stand to the Obligations that this State puts us under, we are free
from the Incontinency of a Vagabond Lust, which is infinite, unbounded and
unsatiable, it befools as many as it possesses, and makes them become Vain,
and light to Contempt, utterly useless to any Manly purposes, betrays them to
Gluttony and Sloth, and an incurable Voluptuousness, leaves them without Soul,
and without Virtue, sinks them into a low and Brutal Life, and leaves them
without fear of God, or regard to Men, and makes them the vilest Knaves, gives
them a Languishing and Spiritless Health, and often precipitates them into a
nasty and squalid Old Age, and a hasty Death, they are always persecuted with
contempt and dishonor whilst they live, and their Children Inherit their
Shame, fore that they are Sinners against the Laws of Modesty and Decency,
which this State has Introduced, and Dishonor Humane Nature, and Violate that
Natural Pudor, by this State directed and fortified; which so directed, the
Moralists call Pudicitia, which once lost is irreparable.

Laesa pudicitia est nulla reparabilis art. I had not made this Digression,
but that I fear, The Contempt that this Licentious Age has brought upon
Marriage, gives occasion to less considering Men to trifle with Matrimonial
Causes, but the mischiefs that are consequent upon the contempt of Marriage,
have sufficiently Revenged the Indignities done to that State, and Vindicated
its Honor, viz. Spurious and Degenerate Broods, as vile in their Manners, as
they are vilely Got, and worse Bred. And hence it is that the greatest Families
often last not longer then the single Life of a Virtuous Man.

Conjugium rem Esse vere saeram non humanitus sed divinitus repertam magno
consensu gentes crediderunt, says Grotius. And they who truly consider the
matter must thus conclude.

Marriages agreeably have been every where hollowed with holy Rites, the
Offices of Religion, and the Benedictions of the Priests: it being a State
directed to, and capable (if blessed by God) of producing, and ministering to
many inestimable Benefits to Mankind; Marriages have been in all Ages every
where celebrated with festival Joy and Mirth, and every Man has a
Congratulation for the new married Couple; as if it did import some common and
universal Good: Many privileges have been granted to this Estate to invite and
encourage it, it has sometimes been made necessary and enjoined by Laws. The
Jews take themselves obliged to marry and that early too, and did allow only a
temporary Dispensation for public good to men that might in that interim of
time make themselves very useful to the public. The Entry into that State made
easy and expedite discharging Conditions, that lay any Restraint upon our
Liberty of Choice where we are capable of choosing.

The Government has provided Formula's for this important contract, that the
contractors may not be deceived in their intention for want of words
significant to that purpose, and operative of that contract, but in these their
Provisions they have not inserted any verba irrtiantia and made the Marriage
void, if the words used by the contractors do conclude to that contract, though
they do depart from the Form and Ceremony prescribed, and kindly directed by
the Government, in favor of that state Governments enjoin public Marriages,
that they may be better attested, and that that sacred contract be not
frustrated and defrauded, but they do not annul clandestine Marriages. And
certainly a greater violence was never at any time done to Nature, nor any
absurdity greater enacted by the infamous Council of Trent, than that Councels
declaring clandestine Marriages to be null and void. The forms of espousing
amongst the Jews were easy, in few words obvious, no certain Form enjoined.
Some of them I will recite out of Maimonides, Ecce tu mihi es per hoc
disponsata, Ecce tu mihi tum hoc es in Vxorem, mea es, es mea accepta, es in
potestate mea, but the more common Form was, En disponsata mihi es hac re
secundum ritum Masis and Israelis. He also relates the Law to be thus (Viz) Vir
potest Mulierem desponsare quivis Lingua, quam ipsa intelligat modo verbis
vtatur significationem talem, ut modo dictum, habentibus.

But when Marriages were to be dissolved by Divorces, in favor of marriages,
and in disfavor of Divorces rather permitted as used amongst them, than allowed
or approved. It was required, that there should be a Bill of Divorce, and in
this they require abundance of Ceremony, and Form as well about the writing of
it, as the delivering to make it difficult, and unfeasible or very easily
defeated, that so upon the abatement of the husbands displeasure, the marriage
may be redintegrated by some matter of Exception to the Bill of Divorce; about
which there were a Number of Questions even to the Ink and Pen, wherewith it
was written the number of the lines, and the Figure of the Letters.

A precontract or inchoat Marriage is indissoluble, tho in other Affairs the
Rule of Law, which almost universally obtains, is Nihil actum videtur quam diu
aliquid superest agendum. But such effect this Precontract has, that it
disables and rescinds any subsequent Marriage, tho Children are born in the
after Marriage, and tho the Person married to the Precontractor was nescient of
the Precontract and no Dolus malus imputable to the Person so married.

The matrimonial contract being founded in Nature, and made sacred by Divine
institution, being necessary to mankind, and producing the greatest Benefits,
becomes thereby the more sacred and inviolable, and can therefore be more early
made and agreed, and for this reason the Persons are reckoned competent to make
a valid marriage at such an age, at which they cannot oblige themselves with
effect in any other affair or concernment, nay then when they can scarce by any
Act render themselves criminal, and are scarce Pilii praecepti as the Jews call
them. The man's consent at 14. and the Woman's consent at 12 is unalterable, and
irrevocable, for that besides at these Ages they can make Friendship, and choose
their Companions, and can separate out of many some one with whom they are more
particularly delighted, and pleased with a propenseness of affection, and
entertain one an other with a pure and undesigning love, and complacency, not
at all sullied with the Passion of concupiscence; and Marriages, that are made
upon such inducements under the guidance and allowance of their Parents, and
Tutors, if all things else are agreeable, are most apt to prove the most chaste,
happy and undefiled Marriages. The Law is wise and good, that allows them the
inducement upon which it is grounded is reasonable, and the Law it self
commendable. But however Law it is, and to that as to the measure of right, we
must determine our selves, and conform our Consciences. A present sufficiency
to Acts of Venery is no necessary requisite to the making of that Contract rate
and^firm ^^Neither is the performing of them necessary, in any degree, to the
making the matrimonial contract complete: by that contract, indeed the Man and
Woman respectively have a right to each other; but no right can be created by
the Exercise of that right. I have often observed with great pleasure the Marks
of Divinity in the Law of Moses, and in the institutions of that Commonwealth,
but in nothing more then in the cleanness of that Law, of which I shall remark
one Instance to the present purpose; there was amongst them appointed Espousals
before they proceeded to marriage, which could not be rescinded any other way,
but as marriages were undone; and that which was adultery in the woman after
marriage, was accounted, and punished as adultery after the Espousals, and
before the marriage, but infamous it was to contract those Espousals (...) or
concubitu, as it is amongst us to marry upon the first interview.

This interim between Espousals and Marriage, was designed for conciliating a
Friendship between the Espoused Persons such a love, that might support the
happiness of that conjugal Estate, and last when the fervors of lust were
abated: very necessary to that salacious People, who without such provision
would have had greater pleasure in matrimonio quam marito nuptiis quam in
nupta, and the marriage State must then needs have been very transitory, when
they had the liberty amongst them of divorcing. And this Law, and practice
Lycurgus transcribed for the Commonwealth of Sparta; So little is the business
of Concubitus to be had in Consideration by the Virtuous and wise considerers
of what is necessary and convenient to the making the State of Marriage happy,
and virtuous and blessed with a lasting Friendship; as also what is precisely
requisite to the making a Marriage.

So great assurance this contract gives us, and such Reputation all Lawgivers
give to the faith of marriage for the quieting of Jealousy and Caprices, and
curious Enquirys of suspicious Men, and for the peace of Familys, and for the
encouraging that State, and to distinguish it from a loose Concubinat. That the
Husband is presumed to be Father of the Children, when he cohabits with his
Wife, and will not suffer the legitimacy of a Child born in marriage to be
litigated, and disputed: And indeed it cannot be disputed, for filiation cannot
be proved or disproved, and no Judicature ever allowed any allegation, to such
purpose an allegation of this nature, is not more injurious to the Person to
whom it is objected, then it is against the sacred rights and privilege, that
in all ages have been constantly acknowledged, zealously asserted necessarily
to result from the matrimonial State. It is no less iniquity to form his
Judgment by any respect to such suggestion, whencesoever it comes, or to his
own surmise.

The matrimonial contract between competent Persons cannot be really prejudiced,
by any mistake in Judgment, or by any Laws whatsoever of human legislation in
derogation thereof. The rights that result from marriage differs in this, from
all other rights whatsoever, this may seem strange; But for this, I have the
Authority of an universal consent of the Drs. of Canon, and civil Law, who all
tell us That a sentence against a marriage, does not transire in rem judicatam;
whatsoever can be submitted to judicatures, and is under the Government of
Laws, the right of the matters submitted, is such as the Judgment of the Court
of the last resort makes it, and whether the Judgment be right or wrong
according to the natural reason of right Justice, it matters not. And if the
defendant before had a right, the right to the things in pretense, by the
Judment for the Plantiff, ceases to be the Defendants, right any longer, and
can be no longer possessed without a public injustice; all those things, that
are in our power to give or alien, may be thus forfeited to the constitution of
the Government, under which we are and of such causes it is true.

Praetor jus dicit quum iniquum decernit. But in all matters wherein any Law of
God has interposed really, or in general opinion, in matters, that are bound
upon us by an Oath, or a religious Vow in a matter lawful, whereby we have a
Conscience toward God, no human Authority can make us safe, if we depart from
the rule of our own Conscience. Decrees of Councels, and Laws of Princes cannot
change a Man's understanding, neither can sentences in matters of this nature
take the conscience in Execution, and Execute themselves by changing the mind,
and enforcing a belief upon the understanding, and for this reason our
Canonists and Civilians conclude, that matrimonial causes do not transire in
rem judicatam. They can punish and afflict the Person, disgrace the marriages
upon strong Presumptions in fact against the pretended marriage, or for that
marriages are made otherwise than as Laws or Canons, for preventing
inconveniences have directed. But they who know the truth of the fact, and are
under the obligation of a contract made in pursuant of Gods institution, and
not contrary to any injunction of his appointment, must as much as in them
lies, and as is possible for them, perform, fulfill and observe it, and their
Consciences are onerated with it everlastingly, and cannot be discharged by any
nullity Sentence whatsoever.

Such Laws as are made arbitrarily for the restraining of the liberty of
marriages permitted, or not prohibited in first nature; If they do use only
prohibiting words, and not add express words, that a marriage so made shall be
null and void, a marriage prohibited is not therefore null and void; for though
it may be very convenient to make further a restraint in the matter of
marriages, than Nature peremptorily enjoins (and in such Laws the rule holds,
Quod fieri non debet factum valet obtains.) Tho not further then reason of
Decence, and General convenience does persuade, which is always the rule to
refined understandings, and where there is a perfect virtue.

Yet human Laws which command, and not persuade are never interpreted to
onerate the Conscience, nor are intended beyond the express letter thereof, to
tie men to the necessity of performing acts of virtue, which cease to be so if
done by command, and not by a prompt generosity and easy inclination. The
formal reason of virtue consists in being voluntary, and free, that it be not
done of constraint, but of a ready mind, no man can be charitable or grateful
in any instance, if he be so by the compulsion, and constraint of a Law;
neither can he be counted chaste, valiant or patient, if he be not so in
conformity to the inward love, and Complacency, and satisfaction he takes in
comporting with the Rules of the like Virtues. It is no Exception against the
legal validity of any act, that it is not altogether without fault, and the
most commendable.

The Laws of nature themselves have different considerations, Acts of vitue in
the first degree are enjoined by the Law of Nature. (viz.) where the not
performing them tenders the man vicious and mischievous, and our conscience for
these omissions by sharp convictions, and sentences against our selves, binds
us over to the expectation of dreadful punishments to be inflicted upon us at
the great Tribunal. But we are invited to great and noble acts of virtue, by
the gloriations and applauses of our consciences, which are the anticipations
of that Honor and Glory, that comes from God. To such Acts, we do not find our
selves compelled or urged by fear, but invited to them by the worthiness of the
Acts themselves, and the Honor that attends them, and the comfortable
expectation of a glorious Immortality; But besides the necessary first Acts of
Virtue, which is a little else then not being wicked to which we are bound by
fear of punishment, and the free and voluntary Acts of a noble virtue, to which
we are invited by increased rewards; which are threatened and promised, and in
some sort performed and executed in, and by our own Consciences.

There are a sort of Laws of precise decency, which our Consciences oblidge us
to observe; for our conscience in whatever it dictates, declares the Law of
Nature to us, and the not observing these matters of decence affects us with
some shame, and the observing of them renders us honest, to our selves the
neglect of them is rarather (...) than (...) the greatest punishment thereof,
in Nature is blushing, and the greatest reward of observing them is, that we do
not fall into a Disesteem of our selves, and a dejection of mind. And in
conformity to the rule of our conscience by civil Government, matters of
indecency (when prohibited by Law) are only noted with ignominy wickedness is
punished, and virtue is rewarded. The procedure of our consciences has
governed human Laws, as well as it instructs us how God will proceed with us;
by which we become inexcusable.

Pub. Mim. Grave est judicium vbi nullum est praejudicium. But all Acts, that
are prohibited in nature as undecent, and inconvenient are not therefore null
and void, for that the indecency may lie in the very Act, and not in the
effects, that that Act produces, and the inconveniences, that follow the
rescinding of the act may be greater than the indecence, and inconvenience of
the act it self.

That which I mean to say is, that the doing a thing undecently, to which I
have a Competent authority does not therefore want effect; Laws prohibitory of
such Acts. If they do not irritate as well as prohibit, leave such Acts when
prohibited in force, much rather have they effect when there is no such
prohibitory Law, and therefore the consideration, that a thing is not
unquestionably well ought to have no direction in a Judicial sentence, for
making any Act done by a competent Power null and void. A Sin in nature is
much, rather to be avoided than a transgression, which seems to be forbidden at
most by the rules of decence, and the precise measure of convenience.

In matrimonial causes, nothing is to be favored but the marriage it self, no
quality is considerable in the Persons contracting marriage, but that which
give them capacity to make the contract: Whether the Persons be of the same, or
of different Religions of a true or false Religion makes no matter: In case of
a Marriage, between a Christian woman, with a Pagan or Jew if any thing can
impeach the Marriage, its because they do not contract for a marriage according
to the Christian Law, but under the Liberty of an arbitrary Divorce, and
Polygamy which is not agreeable to the institutions of our Savior. But if a
Jew, Pagan or Mohammedan received the Christian Baptism, but yesterday he is a
better Christian than if he had been baptized in his Cradle for that he was so
lately baptized if he be sincere in his profession, which none but God can
know, but Man ought to presume. The proof of the Marriage is to be favored by
the Judges in matrimonial causes: Where the probabilitys on either side, for or
against the marriage are equal. The danger of Sin of an unpardonable Sin which
may be occasioned by a sentence against the marriage, ought to determine for
the marriage: The consideration of this, ought to be put into the Balance of
Judgment in such cases, and make the Sentence.

In such cases the evil Feared is greater than the Good, that can accrue to the
Person, that pretends to dissolve the marriage, which is only the Liberty of
another choice. In Charity therefore the Judgment, ought to prevent the greater
evil by recluding the occasion of it, and determine in favor of the pretended
marriage, which is innocent and safe; but so probably proved. Besides that the
incurring the probability of occasioning this Evil cannot be justified by the
Freedom they design her. It is not agreeable to the favor, that is due and
allowed to the marriage contract, that it should be exposed to all the
Artifices of Wit, and Cavillations of Law, that the Wit of Men can invent to
lesson the credibility of the Testimony produced in its Confirmation. By a
single Artifice of putting the marriage under an ill Name, by calling it a
Clandestine marriage with an accent of censure they make all the Witnesses,
that are proper to testify such a Contract, and are to be present, if any
other, for that bad Name sake suspectae fidei, and incompetent Witnesses.
Clandestinity is the word of reproach; which carrys with it no fault but a
neglect of that solemnity, which would have put the matter out of all dispute;
this is the disparaging Name they affix with art to this Marriage. But an
innocent and prudent reason the case it self gives, and assigns for that
Circumstance of the Marriage; and that which tells us why a thing is so, and so
done, and in such manner, contributes to the proof that the thing was really
done, when performed in that form and manner. If the marriage had been
celebrated in the Church it had been less credible, the Mothers consent would
have been less credited, and she it may be dare not have owned it to her
defeated Husband. The Clerk that married (which is to be complained of) was
notoriously corrupted by threats, and promises to deny the marriage: Under
these temptations he is a notorious falsary in what he thus says to avoid the
marriage, and yet what he says under these circumstances in affirmation of the
Marriage, is rejected as not credible, upon this general rule, falsus in vno
falsus in omnibus; when there can be no greater Evidence in the World of the
reality and truth of any matter, then violent and lend endeavors to have it
disbelieve: Except it be the testimony of the Man himself, thus practiced with,
on the behalf of that matter thus endeavored to be suppressed. A clearer
Testimony was never given to our Savior of his Divinity then when he was
acknowledged by the Devil, the Father of Lies to be the Son of God.

But after all this the terms of marriages are made yet harder by the nature,
and constitution, as generally apprehended, of our Judicatures, that are to
judge in matrimonial Causes, which if legally such as it is generally taken to
be; we shall continue unhappy in this matter until we have a Law for our
redress therein. But the grievance is so great, and the contrivance therein so
little commendable for the Honor of our Nation, that I shall offer some Reasons
to your better consideration, to prove that the Ecclesiastical Courts have at
this time no Judgment in matrimonial Causes; but that the right as well as the
fact of marriages; are cognoscible only in our common Law-Courts. At present
the fact of a marriage is tried, and judged in our common Law-Courts. The right
of a marriage is litigated in the Ecclesiastical Court: Thus the question of
right, and the question of fact, which are inseparable in true Judgment are
divided. After the common Law has enquired into the truth of the Marriage, the
Ecclesiastical Courts upon a pretense of having the Judgment in the Question of
Right, whether the marriage be lawfully made, they proceed to falsify the
Verdicts and Judgments in our commen Law-Courts, and to hold Plea whether the
Marriage was de facto made or no, which is all the matter in Judgment in that
Court, after it was settled in its proper Judicature: And so we have two
thwarting Judicatures that are not subordinat, and yet this is not all whilst
the matter has been cleared on Mr. Emmertons behalf in the Court of common Law,
and consequently he ought to have all the rights of a Husband, possession of
his wifes Lands, and of her person: The Chancery interposeth, that has no
manner of Cognizance in the Cause neither of the right or fact; and at pleasure
sequesters, and disposes of the Estate, and Mr. Emmerton must content himself
with Alimony at the allotment of that Court, as if he were the Adulteress. But
it is notorious to the World how dilatory that Curia Christianitatis is, which
allows so many appeals and so expensive: That if Mr. Emmerton had not married
young, he might have been superannuated for Marriage before the controversy is
ended, and if his Fortune had not been considerable, he might have wanted bread
more than a wife; besides that they have given Judgment against him by the
delay, and he has lost his Wife except she be reclaimed by a very improbable
repentance. For want of a timely remedy he has lost his wife irrecoverably,
and it is not in the power of any Court to restore her to him, for she has now
alien'd her affections inveteratly. He has lost her by the delays of the suit,
and the countenance therein given to her pretense has engaged her in great
difficultys. A suit which supports it self by such means as use to feel the
power of a Star Chamber: It was accounted a vile Crime amongst the Jews (and
forbidden by the 10th. Commandment, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors wife)
to breed and foment a dislike in the Husband toward the Wife, to provoke him
to divorce her to the purpose to marry her: But this is a far worse Crime than
they were capable of acting; for they have wrought the Wife between dislike,
and enjoyment to divorce and abandon her Husband; a thing monstrously wicked,
and very unnatural: And of this Crime the delay, that has been given to this
Cause is chargable.

I am glad it is imputable to things only which have no conscience, and not to
Persons that have. But this is not all Mr. Emmerton knows, he was married to
Mrs. Hide, and cannot be free from his Marriage, nor marry another without
committing Adultery; since no Authority can dissolve the Marriage, and the
declaratory Sentence of a Court, that they were not married cannot alter the
truth of the case, but he is still her Husband, and this all the Canonists will
acknowledge, for that matrimonial Causes do not Transire in rem judicatam,
neither can the Marriage be dissolved by any misbehavior of the wife, a
Sentence of Divorce does not dissolve the Vinculum Matrimonii, and therefore he
can much less (in the opinion of these Courts) discharg himself from the
marriage Bond; So that there had need be a very clear Evidence, such as carrys
no doubt with it; that can warrant a Nullity sentence, that is charged with
such mischiefs and inconveniencys. But this cannot be the true State of the
Evidence in this Cause; since notwithstanding all the Art used to lessen the
certainty of the Marriage, and bring it into some doubt, the greatest Authority
has been for confirming the Marriage in all the instances of the Causes; Nay
the best managers of the Cause on the behalf of Mrs. Hyde have applied
themselves not so much to invalidate the Evidence as to disgrace the Person of
Mr. Emmerton, and to provoke thereby an Envy against his Right to the Lady
which ought not to be endured by any Court; much less ought it abuse, and by as
the understanding of a Judge, and corrupt his Judgment.

But such hardships, and inconveniencys as these will not be considered, and
are hard to be prevented in such Commissions as are issued out in this Cause;
In which Men are named not for known Wisdom, and sufficiency to judge and
determine Causes in this Nature; but for the greatness of their Quality. No Man
can act beyond his sufficiency, and in a doubtful Cause, as all Causes are
doubtful; or with little skill may be made so, to Men that have none. The
consideration of Friendship will determine him that cannot govern himself by
the Merits of the Cause, or will not guide himself by the Judgment of Men of
the best Authority and Reputation. It is very hard to be judged by any Man,
whose Honor does not depend upon right judging; and where the Error in judging
may be with more probability imputed to the want of skill, and incompetency,
than to wilful Mistake.

So that a probable opinion that this cause and others of the like nature ought
to have their final Judgment at Common Law, will meet with a ready and free
consideration I doubt not with our Common Law Judges, since they are so
untowardly and contingently carried in these Commissions, that their
proceedings meet with a general dissatisfaction, as they are a mighty Gravamen
to the Litigants.

That which I have to say in this matter had need be very clear, since the
notion may seem new, and a great prejudice lys against it. But it will appear
not new before I have done with it, the premises from which I conclude it, be
all agreed to me; and the Conclusion I make from them will be clearly inferd:
It will appear to be as useful as true, and therefore I hope have a favorable
Reception.

I do not intend to controvert or bring into Question the Right of the
Ecclesiastical Courts, to judge in all Causes of Offense against the Laws of
Chastity, and the Enforcement of the performance of the conjugal Rights: And to
compel the Precontractators to proceed to Marriage, and perform the Conjugal
dutys. They may retain a Cause de jactitatione maritagij, for that the common
Law allows no action of the case without special Damnification, tho in it self
it carrys with it a prejudice, and is a very great encumbrance fit to be
removed by the Authority of a judicial Sentence. As also in a promise of a
Marriage, where there has been any Execution of the Agreement to enforce a
Marriage: These two last Order of Causes belongs to them upon the same reason;
as Performance of Covenants in kind, and Examination of Witnesses in case of
pretense of title in perpetuam rei memoriam belongs to the Court of Chancery,
that is as a derelict of the common Law, and for a further Reason for that
matter may be concerned, and moved in these Causes which are not so becoming
our more public Trials at common Law. To the Ecclesiastical Court belongs all
Causes of Divorce, and the Punishment of incestuous Mixtures, where Marriages
are void: which our Law ought to judge, and all other sins of incontinence
which are most aptly punished with shame; a restraint of the same Nature which
God has planted in our Nature for the bridling those natural Appetits which
betray Men into such inordinacys: And in this our Government most commendably
follows the Indication of God himself in our Nature. I have a great Honor for
the Gentlemen of that faculty, and do not, envy any matter of judicature that
truly belongs to them; I do believe a true civilian, that has the Learning
that belongs to that faculty to be the best accomplished Man, and of the most
universal Usefulness to the World; and if all Causes of Matrimony were assigned
to be judged only by Men of that Faculty, and not by miscellaneous and
fortuitous Heap of Men which make the Delegates in most Causes: This Cause of
Mr. Emmertons Marriage had not been so afflicted and vexed, and prejudiced by
Reasons which publicly to mention, would I fear be accounted a Libel against
the Government; for the Eminent Drs. of that faculty have acquitted themselves
honorably in the Cause, and have given Reputation to the Cause of Mr. Emmerton
under all the discountenance, that has been cast upon it for little other
Reason than from the disparity in his Condition with that of the rival
Litigant. It is not I declare any Exception against the Justice of the civil
Law-Courts, or against their Law, that moves this Question: But the mere Right,
and Cumbersomness, and vast unweildyness of these Commissions of Appeal: And
for that whatever shall be the chance issue of this fortuitous Commission, It
may be undone by virtue of a prohibition out of the Kings Bench, which as well
reverseth sentences after they are pronounced for that the matter belonged not
to that forum, as it does inhibit their procedure where it comes in time. To
prove that matrimonial Causes are not of Ecclesiastical Cognizance I shall now
proceed. Matrimony is as old as the World, and it will be hard in the search of
History to find a time when any People was without that institution longer then
without Government; Marriages and Familys were before Government, but
Governments every where in all Ages enjoined them dishoner'd and disgraced
Fornication, and concubinat honored Chastity, and made Whores infamous.
Marriage was no invention of Priest craft, as a profane immoral man in Lewd
Rhyme dare pronounce Poet, he ought not to be called that title which might
belong to his inventing faculty he has forfeited by his impiety, and
immorality Poets were the ancient Theologues and Teachers of manners, he that
is a Poet ought to know, Quid deceat quid non quo virtus quo ferat Error Hor.
Art.
Scribendi recte, sapere est and principium and fons. Poet.


This Man's owes all his esteem to the Debaucherys of the Age; If the People
should recover their Wits which they have lost with their manners they would
use him, as the People of Athens did Dionisius at the Olympic Games for his
wicked Poem, tho they at first were taken with the composition. It is no matter
who such a man disgraceth, that publicly blasphemes, reviles Marriages, and
the Laws of Chastity; such public impudence qualifies him to say or write
whatever is false, whatever is evil; he is bad enough to disgrace the worst of
Men, and the worst of Causes.

Marriages were every where enjoined by Governments* and promoted, assisted and
conducted by Laws and Acts of state, and the liberty of marriage had more or
less restraint, as the Laws of several Nations did appoint. The Greeks, Romans
and Germans forbid polygamy, But the Easterlings allowed it. The Romans made
those marriages unlawful, which the Law of Moses made so, and also forbid other
marriages that were not by the Mosaical Law prohibited, as for Example. The
marriage of the Uncle and Neice which the Law of Moses does not forbid, tho it
forbid's the Nephew to marry his Aunt or Uncles Wife: But the Asiatick's used a
license of polygamy, and permitted all marriages but those that the Roman Law
call's Nuptiae nefariae i. e Between Parents and Children and even such
marriages were sometimes committed amongst them. But causes of marriages were
always, and every where judged by the ordinary Courts of Judicature, and as
other contract's were judged: The Law's of marriage were not dictated by the
Priests but enacted by the Legislators neither did ever any forum belong to the
Priest hood in that capacity before Christianity.

It was not the office of the Priest's of the pagan Religion, to instruct the
People in moral's, or to guide their Consciences by the rules of virtue; for
this they were beholden to their Philosophers and Poets: paganism was a
Religion divided and abstracted from morality; That did neither teach it, nor
enforce it, their Priest's were Sacraficers, Conjurers and Sooth Sayers, and no
office did belong to them that referd to the state, except in difficult
affairs of state, to serve a turn sometimes by their Interpretation of
Augury's, and by their Arts of Divination.

The Laws of Marriage given to the Jews were the Laws of God, as all their
other Laws were, and administered as all their otheir Laws were administered, and
not appropriated to a Judicature of Priests: Their Laws tho given by God did
oblidge only the People of the Jews; and lost all effect as Laws with the
dissolution of their Common wealth.

The Christian Religion contains no institutions, that can properly be called
Laws, except the Institution of the Sacrament of the Supper of our Lord, and
Baptism. But it gives rules and precepts of an Excellent morality, and
requires greater degrees of Virtues to be exercised: A greater Chastity, Mercy,
Goodness and Temperance than the Mosaical Law required in the instances therein
defined and required under penalties and a civil Sention.

By and in analogy to the general Institutions and Precepts of our Savior, the
Christians were to govern themselves not determined by any definitive Law, and
as in the State of nature the conduct of these Virtues, was by the measures of
a Wise Man, prout vir prudens definiverit to Christians, the General rule of
all their actions is, prout vir Christianus definiverit. (...).

The Christians, though they did not take themselves to be bound to the Law of
Moses, they took themselves obliged not to do less than that Law required, but
to proceed to perfection.

The Gentile Christians by the Council held at Jerusalem, Act. Apost. 15.28.
Were enjoined amongst other things (...), which Mr. Seldom in his Book de jure
Gentium Secundum Hebraeos, interprets to forbid all those Marriages, that were
Interdicted to the Jews. He that will take the pains to consult him will be
very well pleased and satisfied with his noble interpretation of that text.

The Christian Church did after proceed further in several prohibitions of
marriages, for the better security of the Virtue of Chastity, which was in the
first Ages the Honor and Glory of the Christian Church, they highly commended
Caelebate disgraced Second marriages (though they could not forbid them) and
prohibited sometime, that they should not be honored with the presence of a
Priest when celebrated.

Vides Sacratas Virgins,
miraris intactas anus,
primique post damnum Tori
Ignis secundi nescias. prudentius ad L^ur.
hoc est monile Ecclesiae
his illa gemmis colitur.
Even for Adultery, they would not allow it commendable immediately to dissolve
the marriage, but to live in expectation of the Woman's Repentance.

When the Governments became Christian they became conformable to her rule and
honored her more pure institutions, and were governed by them, for that
marriages was made a Symbol of the Union between Christ and his Church, and the
exercise and conduct of a glorious Christian Virtue was principally concerned
in the limitation of marriages: The declaring in what degrees and in what
circumstances persons might marry, or not marry, was submitted to the
directions of the Guides of the Church.

And so in all Christian Governments, a marriage, that was made well in fact
according to the order of the secular Law, was lawfully to be undone if the
Church judged the persons not fit to come together in marriage for any reasons
of great undecence or offense against the Christian Virtue of Chastity.

But this Power and Authority so duly lodged in the guides of our Religion, for
that it was to the purpose to instruct and guide Christians, how to behave
themselves in one of the principal Virtues of their Religion, was insufferably
abused after the Papal Usurpation.

The Pontificial and Canon Law multiplied restraints upon marriages to
inconvenience, and relaxed them for money, and the most incestuous marriages
they made lawful at a great price. The Roman Priests despise marriage, and
make it more profane than Fornication, nay then Adultery it self. And yet they
have turned marriage in a Sacrament, and have tied the Vinculum Matrimonii
harder upon the laity than our Savior left it. The Vinculum Matrimonii, they
declare and determine to continue, when the Woman is divorced for Adultery.
Though our Savior allowed Adultery a good cause of Divorce, for amongst the
Jews there was no other Divorce, but what did utterly rescind the Marriage.

Sir John Vaughan was mistaken when he calls this divorce an impeachment of the
marriage, but this mistake he run into, to support his Opinion, that the
Statutes of H. 8. hereafter considered left some marriages to be impeached by
the Ecclesiastical Courts, and his other opinion he grounds upon this
Hipothesis vizt. that Questions of marriages belong still to the Curia
Christianitatis, notwithstanding these Statutes of H. 8. which opinion of his
will appear a mistake by what we have hereafter to say. For the Romish Church
has not done so well with us in the case of an Adulteress wife: But in this if
in any thing they are iniquiores in Matrimonium which has been laid to their
charg; for they will not allow the marriage for this cause to be impeached. But
have bound heavy burdens upon the state of marriage, to tempt the Laity to
decline it, whilst they disdain it.

In this we complain of that Church, that they departed from the primitive
Church, in making that necessary to all Men; which the first Christians only
commended under a Liberty of Choice to the good and virtuous, and bind them to
sustain the Calamity of a continuing Marriage in all Cases; whether the Man can
or cannot sustain the want of a Wife, and when the woman's amendment is
desperate as well as when hopeful. By this means, the condition of the Man was
made very afflictive and remediless. And without relief or recompense in the
satisfaction of mind, which accrues from the generous and worthy Resolutions
proceeding from an Extraordinary virtue: A remedy against this Evil, the
Reformation has attempted but could never yet effect.

But against the mischiefs of their arbitrary Restraints of commendable
Marriages: It is provided by our statute Laws which we shall now consider, and
from thence it will appear that the Question of the lawfulness of marriage, for
the Reasons aforementioned, divided from the secular Courts is now consolidated
with the Question of Fact which was never removed from the civil Judicature. As
also for remedy against the lavish use of the dispensatory Powers, assumed by
the Roman Church with forbidden, and unlawful marriages for this purpose. It
was enacted and declared 25. U. 8. Cap. 22. That these marriages following of
which some are nefarious, and others accounted more abominable incestuous, that
is to say Of the Son to the Mother
Of the Son to the Stepmother
Of the Brother to the Sister
Of the Father to his Sons Daughter
Of the Father to his Daughters Daughter
Of the Son to his Fathers Daughter born by the Stepmother
Of the Son to his Aunt his Fathers or Mothers Sister
Of the Son to his Unkles Wife
Of the Father to his Sons Wife
Of the Brother to his Brothers Wife
Of a man to his Wives Sons Daughter
Of a Man to his Wives Daughters Daughter
Of a Man to his Wives Sister.


Are plainly prohibited by Gods Law, and that no man can dispense with Gods
Law, and that a separation be in such marriages be definitive Sentence in the
Spiritual Courts of the Kingdom, without prohibition from, or appeal to Rome,
of such marriages.

By this Act marriages did become of lay Cognizance, faith Sir John Vaughan R.
214. for the Kings Court were required by this Law by the Kings writ of
Mandamus, to enjoin the Ecclesiastical Courts to treat such unlawful Persons,
pretending marriage, as incestuous Persons. But whether this statute made
marriages of lay Cognizance, I will not determine, for the statute that direct
to whom administration shall be committed, does not take the matter of
administration to the Common Law Courts, neither do the writs of our Courts of
Westminster which issue to the Bishops, commanding them to assail an
Excommunicant give the power of the Keys to the Secular Courts.

There was nothing by this Act of 25. H. 8. done to restrain the power of the
Church in declaring what other marriages were unlawful. This Act only
restrained the Popes power of dispensing with such unlawful marriages, and gave
Authority to the Kings Court, to enjoin and command the Ecclesiastical Courts,
to dissolve such marriages by their definitive Sentence, without regard had to
the prohibition from, or Appeal to Rome.

But the statute 28. H. 8. C. 7. the former Act of 25. is repealed, but the
power of the Papal dispensation in such marriages is condemned; the said
marriages are recited again, and declared to be prohibited by Gods Law only,
with these differences, that in the prohibition of the Sons marrying the
Stepmother, of marrying the Unckles Wife of the Father, marrying his Sons Wife
of the Brother, marrying the Brothers Wife is added, carnally known by the
Father, Uncle, Son, Brother respectively, and in the prohibition to marry the
Wives Daughter or her Sons Daughter, or her Daughters is added, having Carnal
Knowledge of his Wife.

And with this further addition, That if any man carnally know any woman, all
persons in any degree of consanguinity or affinity of the persons so offending,
shall be adjudged to be within the said prohibitions, in like manner, as if the
parties so marrying one another had been married: for instance, if a man
carnally know a Woman not marrying her, he is prohibited to marry her daughter
or daughters daughter. In all other clauses this Act, and the former Act of 25
are Verbatim the same, and this Act is in force. Sir John Vaughan says, Rep.
215. that these degrees were the second time made of Lay Cognizance. In this
Act dispensations for such marriages are prohibited: And for that this Act did
declare these marriages to be prohibited by Gods Law, they were declared and
made indispensably unlawful, null and void, and that they could not be
ligitimated by the Papal Authority. And thereby the Common Law Courts had a
power given them to issue out the Kings writ of mandamus, to require them to
dissolve such Marriages by their definitive sentence.

But the Arbitrary power of that Church in defining the lawfulness of
marriages, yet remained in full force and unimpeached, which was an Authority
very much abused by unreasonable restraints of the freedom of marriage, for
Remedy of this, there was a provision made by 28. H. 8. C. 16. That all
marriages made before the 3d day of Nov. 26. H. 8. whereof there is no divorce
had by the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Realm, and which be not prohibited by
Gods Law limited, and declared in the Act made this present Parliament, for
Establishing the King's Succession or otherwise by holy Scriptures, shall be
lawful and effectual by Authority of this present Parliament.

This Law went in Confirmation but to some few marriages, before that time made
and not rescinded by divorce thus forbidden by the Canons of the Church, but
yet left the power of the Church unabated still, in declaring marriages
unlawful, other than are by the Law in Leviticus prohibited, in all marriages,
but those within that time made and not divorced.

But by the statute of 32. H. 8. Cap. 34. a full and complete remedy is
provided against the unreasonable assumings of the Canon Law, to restrain the
Liberty of marriage for slight and fantastical motives and inducements, by
which the Virtue of Chastity was not materially promoted.

By this act it was declared, That all persons lawful to contract marriages,
that be not prohibited by Gods Law to marry; And it is thereby enacted, That no
prohibition or reservation Gods Law Except, shall trouble or impeach any
marriage without the Levitical degrees, And that no Person of what Estate,
degree or Condition whatsoever he or she be; shall after the said first day of
the month of July aforesaid, be admitted in any spiritual Courts within the
Kings Realm, or any by Graces other Lands and Dominions to any process, plea or
allegation contrary to this Act, some part of this as to precontracts was
repealed by Ed. 6. and the residue was repealed by 1. 2. P. m. but it is
revived 1. Eliz. Cap. 2. and now in full force.

Note, That the words by Gods Law, and the words or otherwise by Holy Scripture
in these two last mentioned Acts, refer both to the Laws about marriages in
Leviticus. But for that besides the cases expressly limited and declared in that
Law, other marriages within a parity of reason by the true sense of that Law,
(which is the Law and the Scripture) might be intended prohibited, and
therefore prohibited by that Law, it is added or otherwise in holy Scripture.

Besides that of Leviticus, there is no part of the old Testament if that
prohibits or makes unlawful any marriage. Christ made no Law about the
Lawfulness of marriages, but confirmed those which the Law of Moses had
allowed, against the abuse of the liberty of divorcing, permitted to the Jews
by the Law of Moses.

By the aforementioned statute, that Law in Leviticus is made the statute Law
of England, it is become of Lay Cognizance, and however the Divines may gloss
upon the text, our Judges have the Authority of a Legal and binding
interpretation of that part of the Scripture.

Our Judges at Common Law, are as competent to interpret this Law in Leviticus
as any Divines, and need not want any Learning that is necessary for expounding
thereof, besides, that they have senses exercised to make right and fitting
interpretations of Laws.

In omnibus legibus etiam maxim odiosis quales sunt quae paenam irrogant
receptum est, vbi eadem est ratio jus idem valeat. In benignioribus autem
legibus etiam a paribus ad paria procedit interpretatio.

Our Courts may follow the Karaej, who interpret it to cases of parity of
reason, or the Talmudists which stand within the enumerated Cases of the Law,
or follow their own opinion different from them both.

The words (Gods Law excepted) cannot prejudice the Authority of our Judges in
this matter, tho they are insisted on by some; as if the whole Canon of the
Scripture was to be consulted in this matter, and the whole Science of Theology
must be understood before we can come to a Determination, what marriages are
forbidden by Gods Law in the holy Scriptures

To leave the Ecclesiastical Courts an Authority to undo any marriage upon a
pretense, that they are the best Interpreters of Gods Law; To give them leave
to pretend the Law of God for the unlawfulness of any marriage, other then what
is expressly or literally forbidden, or interpretatively, or upon construction
in the Law of Leviticus, would make the Law illusory and frustraneous:
Especially if they are left Judges of the matters, for then they can and will
to be sure allow their own pretenses and reasons, and no prohibition ought to
issue to the Ecclesiastical Courts, or else they not bound to obey, and they
have a ready answer in case of a prohibition, to the Kings Bench (vizt.) that
Doctors differ upon the Law, this stated I proceed and conclude.

The Law of Leviticus is the only Law, that restrains the liberty of marriage
in the holy Scriptures.

The Law of Leviticus is become part of our statute Law, as much as it would
have been, if the matter thereof had been transcribed into the Act of 32. H. 8.
without reference to the text; or as if a Law of Rome or Athens had been
enacted by Authority of our Parliament to be the Rule, and measure in the
Government of any Affair.

But the Law of 32. H. 8. the definitive Authority of the Church of what
marriages are lawful is taken away.

By reason of this Law the Ecclesiastical Courts can never bring into question
any marriage, for any pretense for their Canon, that the Persons are not lawful

That the Question consequently of the legitimateness of marriages, is restored
to the Judgment of the civil and temporal Courts.

In that this Law of Leviticus by our Law, is called the Law of God (tho it is
not truly so to us) it must have such Authority as a Law of God ought to have,
and we are to conclude, that our Lawmakers intended it should have the like
Effect, as a Law of God by styling it so.

As any matter that is called, and rated a Commune Nocumentum or nuisance in any
statute Law, is for that it is so called in any Law, indispensable by a Non
Obstante.

All the Laws of God, which prohibit any thing to be done from that absolute
Right and Dominion, that God has over us; makes all Acts contrary to the
prohibition sinful and impious, without all Effect null and void; It is not so
in human Laws, except they add to the words of prohibition, words that irritate.

A Marriage may be forbidden by human Laws, that do not annul the marriage when
made of such Laws; there are many, Ulpian calls them Leges imperfectae.

For that the Law, abovementioned has made the Law of God to the Jews of
prohibition of marriages the Law of England, But has not made the particular
Laws of God, for dispensation or allowance of marriages (as between the Heireis
and the next of Kin: And the younger Brothers marrying the relict of the Elder
Brother dying without issue, which were also the Laws of Athens and Sparta.)
the Law of our Land: Such marriages are not allowable by our Law, but stand
interdicted by the general prohibition of that Law, which is only made the Law
of England under the notion of the Law of God.

We further therefore conclude, that a marriage within these prohibited degrees
is no marriage.

Persons contracting marriage within these degrees are no more married then two
women or two men can be married: A moral faculty to a moral Act is as
necessary, as a natural ability to the producing a natural Act.

It was comprehended in the Question, whether a marriage was had in fact at
common Law? whether it was a man married to a woman, whether both persons were
of sufficiency to make the contract? whether either of them precontracted or
before that, married? for the Person precontracted or before married had no
power left over him or herself: Whether if by force or Dolus malus the marriage
wanted consent? for then it was likewise no marriage: All these matters come
into Issue upon the Question married or not married, and the truth of these
matters are understood by proof or inspection as all other things of like
nature are proved, and no religious Notices are requisite to instruct the
Enquiry upon a Trial thereof had; and therefore was never of right proper for
an Ecclesiastical Court. And now in like manner, if the Persons be not lawful,
the marriage for that reason is null, and the Question is a Question of Fact
now (vizt.) whether of kin or how a kin? not of Law (vizt.) whether Persons so
a kin may marry an utter Disability in the Persons disabled, hinders the
marriage to proceed, and there is now no Judgment of Discretion left to the
Ecclesiastical Courts.

The common Law Courts had Knowledge of the Question whether marriage or not
marriage, this cannot be denied or brought in question with any color or
shadow of pretense. A man need not go into the Ecclesiastical Court to prove
his marriage before he can sue for that Estate, or Person of his wife as he
must to prove a will before he can sue as Executor, and any man may directly
declare upon a right acquired to him by marriage of his Wife.

The Fact and Law in the case of marriages is now the same, and the distinction
of marriage, and Legal marriage is taken away.

The question is now single, whether marriage or not marriage, and therefore
cannot be divided into two cognizances: And this belongs solely to the temporal
Courts, for that the Ecclesiastical Court cannot allow of what the temporal Law
has declared to be contrary to the Law of God. Nor can they have conusance of
a statute Law, they cannot impeach any marriage that our Statute says shall
not be impeached; and whether it ought to be impeached or no, whether within
the Statute or no, they are by no means to judge. Our Judges issue out writs of
mandamus to the Ecclesiastical Courts, to require them to separate and punish
Persons, making marriages by our Law incestuous and void; as well as we
prohibit them, if they disquiet any marriage by our Law made lawful in which
our Judges interpret, declare and resolve uncontrolably: The Ecclesiastical
Courts can neither bind nor loose judicially, and therefore can have no
judicial Authority.

And therefore I conceive the Ecclesiastical Courts exceed their Jurisdictions,
as it is now restrained in consequence of these Statutes, if they bring any
Marriage into question in that Court; and ought to be Prohibited, since, that
the question of Right and Law (which was proper for them, when they gave the
Rule of the Lawfulness and unlawfulness of the Degrees) is now become a
question of Fact, and is Cognoscible in our Conmon-Law-Courts.

A Marriage Tried at Law, is not controllable by the Authority of the Curia
Christianitatis: And where there has been a Trial at Law in affirmation of a
Marriage, the Ecclesiastical Courts interposings for that reason the rather
ought to be Prohibited.

By the aforementioned Laws, all Marriages made within the Levitical degrees
are ipso jure null, and void and indispensable by any Ecclesiastical Authority:
And Marriages without the Levitical Degrees by the Ecclesiastical Courts, are
not Impeachable. No process Plea, or Allegation is to be allowed in any
Ecclesiastical Court, to trouble or impeach such Marriages.

Therefore it is no Objection, or Argument, that the Ecclesiastical Courts,
notwithstanding have still Cognizance of Matrimonial Causes. For that
Consultations are granted upon Prohibitions, when the Marriage is made between
Persons not Lawful, and within the Levitical Degrees. For in such cases, those
Courts have no Power of Judgment or Discretion. They do not Annul such
Marriages by their definitive Sentence: For they are (by our Law) no Marriages,
and void, and made null to their Hands; and whether they will or no. A
Consultation in such Causes, is but a softer word for an Injunction or Mandat
to Separate the Persons, and Punish them by the Censures of the Church, as
incestuous; which if they do not do upon a Consultation, they will be
peremptorily Enjoined to do by the Authority of the King's Court.

Sir John Vaughan, would have Matrimonial Causes to be still of Ecclesiastical
Cognizance, read page 320.

First, For that some Marriages are allowed to be unlawful by God's Law, which
are not within the Levitical Degrees: And from thence would infer, That there
remains a Judgment and Authority in the Ecclesiastical Courts in Matrimonial
Causes; and that the definitive Authority of the Church of Marriages Lawful or
unlawful, is not extinguished by the aforementioned Statutes.

His instances to prove this, are these, (viz.) A Marriage made with a Person
Precontracted, or with a Person naturally Impotent: These Marriages he says,
are against God's Law; yet they are not Marriages within the Levitical Degrees.

But all the World has taken such Marriages to be no Marriages; and therefore
not unlawful Marriages: And the matter of impotency or percontract, makes a
Marriage none in fact, and enquirable in an Issue at Common Law, whether
Married or not Married.

His Second Reason is, For that Canons may be made by the Authority of the
Church, to make other Marriages, which are not within the Levitical Degrees,
unlawful. A Lawful Canon is the Law of the Kingdom, as well as an Act of
Parliament. This is a great Paradox indeed, that Canons are Laws, that they can
control Laws. That a Parliament can give away the Legislative Authority, and
empower any Synod or Convocation, to Abrogate their Laws.

Thirdly, He makes an Arbitrary distinction between a Marriage within the
Levitical Degrees, and a Marriage within the Levitical Prohibition: And would
have more Marriages within the Degrees, than are the Marriages Prohibited; and
consequently some Matrimonial Causes still remaining to the Judgment of the
Ecclesiastical Courts.

And this he proves from an Instance of the Wives Sister, which is within the
Degrees, he says, but not Prohibited in all cases, he thinks, because it is
Prohibited to Marry her, during his Wives Life, but doubted if Lawful after her
Death.

But this doubt is put to an end, by 25. H. 8. as is before recited, which
declares it to be Prohibited by God's Law, and indispensable, and the Persons
to be Separated.

These Reasonings of a great Man, as Sir John Vaughan truly was, are a
remarkable instance, how temptible great Men are to assume, speak things
Gratis, and affect to be super-fine, Heterodox, and Skeptical.

True it is, after this restraint of Marriage limited by our Laws, The Church
by her Canons may use her Authority to bring into dislike, discommend, and
dissuade other Marriages that are by our Law allowed, and are not to be
Impeached by the Ecclesiastical Courts; and by this means Marriages so
dissuaded, may at length be brought into disreputation, and general dislike;
and come in time to be made unlawful. But the observance of such Canons cannot
be enjoined under the incurring of Church Censures, and by a judical coercion
of the Ecclesiastical Authority: to affect which ignominy, belongs to the Law
and Civil Authority. Infamiae quoque irrogatio pars est Gladii, says Grotius,
in his Book de jure Summarum potestatum circa sacra.

But most commendable it is to lay Restraints upon our selves for the sake of
Virtue, where the Laws have left us at liberty. In the time when the Christians
observed Moses Law; that of Justin Martyr was verified in their Practices;
(...). They obey the Laws, and in their Lives are better than the Laws require:
And if any Man will, for the regard to the virtue of Chastity, abstain from a
Marriage of a Cousin German, or any other near of Kin to him; and therefore
forgo any advantage; it ought to be imputed to him, as a worthy instance of
Virtue, and very Commendable: But God has made no positive Law to inhibit
them. Our Laws have not forbidden them; and Nature has yet made no Law to
prohibit and restrain them: For Nature, as well as Polities, makes Laws upon
Emergent Mischiefs, and great Inconveniences, that do arise from the use of
Natural Liberty, were the first permission was innocent; but whatever is not
the best, and whatever is not very convenient, is not enjoined as a Law under
the sanction of an evil Conscience.

The Laws of Nature are the directions of Reason for avoiding Mischief, or
obtaining some important Good to the generality of Mankind; and direct us where
Laws do not command. Latius patet officiorum quam Juris regula. Quod non vetat
lex hoc vetat fieri pudor.

But he that is not a Law to himself from his slow Apprehension, and dull
Capacity, is Governed only by Penalty, and the sharp Restraints of Law. The Law
of Nature is no more to be measured by the understandings and Consciences of
some Men, than it is to be defined by the propensions and actings of beasts.

Neither are the Laws of Nature to be numbered, for they are as many as the
various Applications of Reason to the emergent Cases; and there is no end of
her legislative Authority.

Men of refined Senses do soonest apprehend these inconveniences, which render
things by the the direction of humane Nature or Reason unlawful; and by their
Authority first, and after that, by the concurrent Sense of inferior Men, that
at length reflect, they are noted of great inconvenience and mischief: Become
at length detestable, and in process of time an aversation and loathing is
begot in the lowest order of Men to transgress them. Whatsoever, by a general
Opinion, is made infamous, from the regard that every Man has to his own
Esteem by Nature, he is obliged to shun and avoid. And if any thing to which we
are not under an obligation to observe from a declared Will of God, be thus, by
general Opinion, rendered infamous; we are bound by the Law of Modesty to
refrain from it, who is a severe Avenger of any Transgression committed against
Her: There is not a more oppressive and afflictive Passion, than that of shame
and dejection of Mind; the most bitter ingredient in remorse of Conscience.

Nature did not make all her Laws at first.

This the Jews express inartificially, when they say, That God gave Adam a Law
in the Beginning, against Brothers Marrying their Sisters; but God dispensed
with it for the Peopling of the World, and deriving all Mankind from one Stock.

Nothing becomes a Law of God in our Nature and Consciences, before it is
behoof-ful to have it observed, and hurtful to have it neglected. It was no
more a Law to Adam's Sons, not to Marry their Sisters, for the preventing early
Lust and disorder in Families, than it was a Law to Adam, not to Steal; or to
Eve, not to commit Adultery: When there was no Lord, or Proprietor in the World
but himself; and no Man besides Adam in the World.

For that a matter at some time may be Lawful; and for avoiding mischief and
inconveniency, may, in after time, become unlawful and prohibited: Will assoil
that doubt how it comes about, That several of the Marriages prohibited in
Leviticus, were used by the best of Men, whose Story is Recorded by Moses
before the Law: As Abraham's Marrying Sarah his Sister by the Father: Amram,
Moses his Father Marrying Jochebed, his Fathers Sister, etc.

The Mosaical Law was added, because of Transgression.

By reason of such Marriages at that time, by no Law forbidden, Mankind had
corrupted themselves: It was fit therefore, that by a Law, a Restraint should
be made of those Licenses, that in the whole complication of them, had depraved
humane Nature with incessant Lust, and engaged them more frequently in those
desires, which became (by the permission of Persons of the nearest Kindred of
every days Conversation, to be a Lawful Object of Love, and an allowed person
for Marriage) most hurtful by their importunity.

So great a Mischief this permission had wrought, and such a Corruption, if
manners in the Canaanites that they had proceeded from the incestuous and
inconvenient Marriages upon the Reason aforesaid, to nefarious Mixtures; nay,
to mingle with Beasts, and to invert the Order of Nature: And for these
Abominations they came to be destroyed, the Land was defiled, and was now to
Vomit forth the Inhabitants, Levit. 18. v. 27. There needs not that Niceness
that great Critics have used to restrain the word Abominations, to nefarious
and unnatural Mixtures: Who think it not Allowable, that the term Abominations,
Levit. 18. v. 27. be applied to the incestuous Marriages at that time forbidden
to the Jews. But even these Marriages, by reason of the Corruption and
Debauchery of manners they had occasion; and those more horrid Abominations
that followed in Consequence of these Marriages. I think, for these Reasons,
even these Marriages were now become Abominable.

Most necessary it is to preserve Men in any degree good and virtuous, and
useful to any good purposes: That they should, in ordinary Conversation, be
respited from Lust and Amors, and be enjoined great vacancies from those
impure desires: That they should not every where, wherever they go, find an
Object to solicit them. That the innocent Friendship of Families, and
Kindreds, should be preserved pure and entire, which Ministers the truest
pleasure and satisfactions of Life; and by no means become an invitation to
Lust, that is apt to wast and utterly Destroy them. That Families should not be
incessantly haunted, possessed, and cursed by Lust, and Rage two Devils that
are never divided, and are inseparable associates. By permission of Marriages,
in such degrees, Families are apt to be turned into Styes of unclean Beasts.
And Men to be engaged and plunged in such desires, and wholly Governed by them,
so as to be made Mentulae lacinia as petronius Arbiter sharply pronounced of
the Sparks of that Age. And a great part of mankind easily turned into a
salacious sort of Virmin, good for nothing (if for that) but to propagate their
own unworthyness fit to be destroyed by divine Vengeance, for recovering the
humane Nature from Perdition.

I have but one thing more to observe about this Law, which will make out the
Rationale of it, which some great Men have thought inexplicable: and that is
the admirable Wisdom, and Divinity in the Structure of it.

That which this Law designs to promote, is made the inducement of the Law. But
this which becomes the inducement, the Law it self inculcates and teaches: The
Law it self introduces such an understanding in the Minds of the people, as
makes the things that it forbids by the very propounding of them, fit for
aversation. It at once improves natural Modesty, and sets a Fence about it, by
strict prohibitions and penalties. For it calls those Enjoyments the Nakedness
of the Man and Woman, i. e. their Shame; and so makes them the object of the
Natural pudor. It teaches us to reverence our Relations: And out of respect
and good manners, we are not to cast our Thoughts no more than our Eyes upon
those Enjoyments which they are taught by this Law to Blush at, if seen and
detected. These are privacies that we must not enter with our Thoughts. Acts
that are to be done alone, and will admit no participants; no not in
Succession, if we value our selves (for we ought to maintain a respect to our
selves, for the supporting the order of the World, and a reverence is therefore
due to our inferiors, Maxima etiam pueris debetur reverentia) or respect those
Relatives which we ought to reverence: For this Law in the sense of it
instructs us, that they are lessened when remembered by them. By this Law, and
the frame of it, all obscene talk and filthy communication is more than
interdicted; for those that are instructed by this Law, and are under the
reason of it, must even abhor such Communications, as they do exposing their
own Nakedness.

Sir, Thus I have performed your desires, as I could in that shortness of time
you allowed me: What is done in obedience to your Command, cannot fail of your
Acceptance.

Farewell.

