A Defense OF THE CHARTER, AND MUNICIPAL RIGHTS OF THE City of London.

AND THE RIGHTS of other Municipal Cities and Towns of ENGLAND.

Directed to the Citizens of LONDON.

By THOMAS HVNT.

Si populus vult decipi decipiatur.

London: Printed and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in
the Old-bailey.

THE greatest EMPIRES and Monarchs in the World, as well as Republics have
erected, and by their Authorities supported municipal Cities, That is to say,
they have either allowed, or given Authority by their Charters and Imperial
Rescripts to great Towns, to choose their own Officers and Magistrates, and to
govern themselves by their own Laws, so that their Laws were not contrary to
the public Laws of the Sovereign Authority.

They well knew by this means, that great Collective Bodies of their People
would be governed more equally and virtuously, which would redound to the
honor of the Monarch; for in that all powers have been continued by him with
firm approbation and good liking or derived from him: The wise and just
administration of such powers and authorities, by this means better secured and
provided for, would commend his Government and give him the hearts of his
People, and likewise make him a Prince of better and more virtuous Subjects.

For it is hardly possible, that Mankind should miscarry in their own hands. It
is impossible, that there should be such a defection in the communities of men,
from Wisdom and Virtue, that they should not acknowledge, honor and prefer
them in whomsoever they are found and observed, and choose such men into Office
that are most conspicuous amongst them by such endowments, or at least such as
have not disgraced themselves by their vices and folly.

If by a less heedful choice now and then by inadvertency or surprise a less
worthy man is chosen into Office. They soon espy their mistake, and the
mischiefs they suffer under such a Magistrate makes them more curious in their
after-choice, and gives the succeeding Officer an advantage of making himself
more honorable by correcting the evils the negligence of a bad Magistrate had
occasioned.

They found by experience, that Governors appointed by the Court were
ordinarily Oppressers, sought not the Peoples good but their own gain and
advantage: for that they had no dependence upon the people, but on the favor
of the Court where no complaint could be heard against them. They received no
trust from the People, nor were promoted by their esteem, they consequently
were apt to behave themselves as if they owed them no duty, and little valued
their opinion.

What can be expected in such Governors, but insolency and oppression, and an
addictedness to serve their Court-Patron beyond what they owe to their Princes
pleasure.

Law is neglected which is the public will and pleasure of the Prince, and
they govern themselves by the Secret whispers of the Courtier that prefers them.

Princes that were most absolute did take themselves bound to govern by such
measures, that were most expedient to procure the public weal.

They therefore governed by Laws, and for the Honor of their high Authority
they would not transgress them, they governed by Laws that were well advised
Councels, from which they would not depart, and not by Extemporary resolves.
They knew that nothing did more conduce to the happiness of the people, than to
have the aptest men appointed to all Offices; they did not trust themselves,
nor their Courtiers nominations or recommendations to make Magistrates in great
Cities, but committed the choice of them to the people, and also gave Towns and
Cities power and authority to make orders, and rules for the better governing
of themselves agreeable to the public Laws.

These powers constitute municipal Cities which have been always favored by
the best of Princes. The suppressing of Corporations and Communities has
disgraced the Memory of bad Princes; so bad, that to name them would be a
reproach to the best of Kings; it has been practiced by Usurpers and
Conquerors, the better to subdue Countries to their pleasure. The Colleges and
Societies of Rome were a second time put down by Julius Caesar, when he got to
be perpetual Dictator, and was about to ravish the Roman liberty, but were by
Augustus when he had assured the Government to himself by express Edict
restored.

The Roman suppressed the free Cities in Macedonia when they first Conquered
it, and Mummius their Consul in Greece, when Conquered concilia omnia Achaiae
Nationum and Phocensium and Boetorum aut in alia part Greciae delevit, as Livy
tells us: But after they had submitted to the Romans, Antiqua cuique Genti
concilia restituta sunt; their Cities were restored to their Governments,
Strabo.

But after this we are very unfortunate, that whilst we enjoy a Prince that
has assured us he will govern by Law, that no right or liberties shall be
invaded: a Prince that wants no Power, that is not by unquestionable right and
Law established upon him, any pretense should be found, from our unhappy
divisions to make it seem convenient for maintaining the public peace, that
all Officers and Magistrates in Corporations must be made at the Courtiers
nomination, and that too precariously, and the Succession such only as shall be
by them approved. But whatever specious show of convenience they may have in
our present Divisions (which have arisen, and have been blown up since the
Discovery of the Popish Plot by the Conspirators themselves) yet when we
consider, that by this new Form of Corporations, it will be in the Power of a
Popish Successor, to put the Government of all corporated Towns in England into
the hands of Papists. This project appears to have such a direct tendency, and
is so certain, and infallible a course to extirpate the reformed Religion
established by Law: That upon a due consideration had of this unavoidable
consequence of these Councels, His Majesty will retract them we doubt not, who
has solemnly declared he will support the Protestant Religion established by
Law; And punish those officious persons, who have to the Scandal of His
Majesty's Government, by force or fraud surrendered their old Charters to the
purpose, to submit to such like unheard of modes of incorporation, that are not
only inconsistent with the Ends of a Corporation at present, but threaten us
with an immediate overthrow of the Protestant Religion in case of a Popish
Successor.

It would be a sad Issue of the Discovery of the Popish Plot, if after the
several endeavors and overt Agreements to consent to Laws for disabling him to
change our Religion: There should in so short a time after that such a Power be
given from our selves, as will more effectually enable him to extirpate the
reformed Religion, than any Law that could be made for preventing thereof,
could possible thereto disable him.

To what a madness and phrensy has our heats, and animosities brought us. That
one party of Protestants should practice to get the Government over another
part in such sort and manner as will infallibly bring up the Papists into all
Governments in Cities and Corporation Towns, and in consequence thereof give us
at the next Turn, a Parliament of Papists, and Red-coats.

But this is not all, for I know there are many that have no concern for Gods
Religion, that have no other Religion but Loyalty, and believe the only Diety
is Earthly power and Sovereign Authority: Yet such have some conscience, that
the ancient Government ought to continue, and that attempts to change it are
criminal in the Advisers.

I shall therefore add, that this new Mode of incorporating Cities and Towns,
does ipso facto, change the Government: For that one of the three States, an
essential part of the Government, which is made up of the Representatives of
the People, and ought to be chosen by the People, will by this means have five
Sixths parts of such Representatives, upon the matter of the Courts nomination,
and not of the Peoples choice. What will be the consequence of such a
Parliament, I leave all considering men sadly to weigh and ponder, and whether
this is not a change of the Government, let the Advisers thereof in time
resolve themselves.

Amongst Plutarchs Apothegmas I find this saying of Dionysius the Tyrant (...).

That is, the Laws of a City may be wronged, but the Laws of nature cannot be
violated; the nature of things will not change at pleasure, the continuing of
the old name does not continue the old constitution after an essential change
Res nolunt decipi. Nor will the Nation contentedly see the Government changed;
we retain Loyalty enough to prevent it, and our loyalty is strengthened with our
concern for our Religion, and a National interest against Popery.

Our Enemies know, that they can never prevail and bring their design, of
changing our Religion, to effect; Without first changing the Government, and
the present constitution of Parliaments. To make the Nation therefore obedient
to their design, we are to have a Parliament of their nomination by this new
mode of incorporating Towns, Dr. Bradys President, fol. 249. of writs directed
to the Sheriff, to Summon one Knight for a County, and one Citizen for a City,
named in the writ in 27 E. 3. (which appears by the record it self not to be a
Summons to Parliament) is not of weight enough to make it downright lawful for
the King to name, who shall be of the House of Commons, Obliquandi sunt sinus
by this side-wind they may gain the point. But to prepare the People for
admitting this illusion to pass upon them, our latest Parliaments are to be
disgraced.

A Cabal takes upon themselves to Censure and arraign their proceedings, and
expose them to the Nation under what misrepresentations they please, because
they would not be confined to their Will and pleasure, whereas every man's
loyalty (certainly) is to be measured by his agreeableness to their projects.

They endeavor to make the Nation believe that a convention of the best bred
Gentlemen in England of the greatest fortunes, do not understand the interest
of the King and Kingdom, nor are so faithful to it as a few men got together by
chance, that are accumulating honors, and making their fortunes by notable
projects upon the Government. Tho unhappy they are, that they have not yet made
themselves conspicuous, either for their Wisdom or Virtue.

But whatever, that great Assembly resolves in any matters; That by the Laws
and Customs of Parliament, fall under their deliberation (tho Kings have the
liberty of dissenting, as they have likewise a liberty of dissenting from the
Kings desires, for no Law can be made without them; and they who have the Power
to give moneys, can deny it when asked) it is a Crime to Censure and blame them.
And a Crime of a high nature, it must needs be in any Subject of this
Government, for that it tends to the destruction of the Government it self.

But endeavors to lay them aside, is Treason against the King, his Crown and
Dignity, for that it will make him a very mean King, or turn him into a Wicked
and Miserable Tyrant. And therefore our best Kings have always had a high
Regard to their Parliaments, and if it be a Crime to dishonor the King, it is
so likewise to disgrace Parliaments. And he is a dolt or a Papist, and a
Traitor to the Government; that does not thus conclude and determine.

If it be a Scandalum Magnatum to reproach a mean Judge, for erring and
mistaking in his Office. It is insufferable, that a vile Pamphleteer should
revile the States of the Realm for the exercise of their high and
uncontrollable Authority; such insolences against the Government, ought not to
be respited until doomsday, or the Sitting of a Parliament. But ought
immediately to be prosecuted by every man that loves his Country, and the
public peace, to condign punishment.

But if these arts should prevail to bring about a change in our Government (as
they cannot sure in the Reign of our present gracious King, who has given us
assurance in his public declarations against such fears) yet our Enemies know,
that their numbers are not visibly great: And they can have no hopes of
subduing the Nation to their Religion by their own numbers, and by their own
proper strength.

They have therefore engaged a party of Protestants to their assistance, by
raising in them apprehensions of a party of Protestants, which they call
dissenters, as dangerous to the Government and the Church of England, against
whom therefore they ought in every thing to be contrary.

Many Protestants they have thus abused, and divided from the true intrest of
the Church of England, and have engaged them in courses, that tend to her
destruction under the pretext of their being contrary to her Enemies the
dissenters.

They are taught to hate a Presbyterian as a Jesuit, or to have as much
kindness for a Jesuit as a Presbyterian, which will better serve the purpose of
an Observator.

This Frace-maker and Scaramuchi to the vain youth of the nation, is ever
enterchanging the Characters of men, disguising truth with colors of falsehood,
pleasantly deceiving you with the shiftings and turns of his inept Wit, and
making himself merry with the abuse, confounding things of the most separate
nature to embroyle us, to do us into confusion, and to make the Nations Tragedy.

If the Church of England had not been divided by these Arts, and mingled with
her Enemies; the Church of England united would have been able to have defended
her self against all the Power of the Popish Faction, if it were much stronger
than it is, and by an easy Temperament have in time cured the frowardness of
the Dissenters, and accommodated the Schism, that the Papists, the
irreconcilable Enemies of our Religion at first occasioned, and at present by
these Methods manage and improve to its Destruction.

The Division that our Enemies have made amongst you, for this purpose, is that
which opposes your Charter, and the continuance of your municipal rights, and
in this, you of that Division, do minister to their Design.

As many as are for destroying the Charter, are for no Parliament, or for the
new designed Constitution of Parliaments, have more hatred against the
Dissenters than Zeal against Popery. Their Loyalty is Slavery, their Religion
the Princes pleasure.

They are not for a legal Defense of their Religion, but abandon it, to
neglect, mock us with Prayers and Tears, and expose us to Martyrdom, plead for
a Popish Successor, and are forward advocates against their Religion, Lives and
Liberty, invite Tyranny, call for Persecution, seem fond of Fire and Faggot.
Some of little understanding among you that thus behave your selves, are
excusable as misguided by some of your Ministers, who are in good earnest
begging Preferments, Dignitys and Benefices for themselves, by offering and
betraying up our Church to a voluntary Martyrdom. But these good men and
merciful do not intend to singe a Finger of their own; It is enough for them to
commend Martyrdom. The Honor they do thereby to the Christian Religion, does
deserve they should be exempted; It is too much in all reason both to do and
suffer, and to exhibit both active and passive obedience.

It is wonderful that that cause, that could not yet draw one professed Popish
Priest to write for it; though so much it is for their interest to have it
defended, because it is not by any color of reason to be defended, they can be
any thing it seems, but Fools, for their Religion, and they will not so
disgrace it: It is a wonder that that cause has found Writers and Preachers
for it of our Protestant Divines. But the Roman Priests have our Church in
Derision, certainly for the sake of the dishonesty, weakness or folly of these
men. The most fitting return to these men, is a scornful silence, or rather to
note them with ignominy, for undertaking what the Roman Priests are ashamed of.
That, which is too hard for the Learning and Wit of the Roman Clergy, to manage
with any Advantage to their Design, some of our Churchmen have undertaken
without any moderate Talent of either to their own shame, and dishonor to our
Church; nay she is like to perish dishonorably by this means, and her
destruction is to come from her self. Besides the dishonesty of such an
undertaking is notorious in our Ministers. The Priests of the Popish Religion
in France, did not write against the Exclusion of the King of Navarre from the
Crown of France.

Id quamcunque decet maxim quod maxim est suum. Most certainly therefore it
does not become a Protestant Minister to tie his People to the Stake to kindle
the Papists Fires, and to be their Hang-men and Executioners: To be Sollicitors
for the Abolition of that Religion they profess, and are bound to teach and
propagate.

But such men as these have helped to make the Division of those Men, that are
against Charters, and Governments of municipal Cities and Towns, (which are the
greatest defenses against Popery) more numerous.

But to make the Number less, and to sift you to the Bran, I pray reflect a
little.

For you cannot be ignorant of their devices, for the subverting of our ancient
Government, that Popery may steal in upon us and surprise us, which has been
in this last Age by various Methods of wickedness compassed. But all their
devices have been hitherto defeated and frustrated. The City has recovered out
of the ashes, to which the Popish Fires reduced it: Armies have been disdanded,
and their Plot against the Kings life detected, and brought into noon
daylight, declared, prosecuted and punished by that very Parliament, that the
Popish Conspirators attempted to corrupt to betray our Government: But that
they could never obtain from that Parliament, though obliquely it gave them
many Assistances. That Parliament was a Parliament of famous Loyalty. Yet they
disbanded Armies, and never legitimated the Guards; detected the Papists firing
the City, opposed an alliance with France, addressed for a War, impeached
obnoxious Ministers, D L. E D. etc. kept the purse of the Nation, opposed
general indulgence, and the destruction thereby intended by the Conspirators,
of the Church of England, the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion, and declared
the Popish Plot. Against this Parliament they could never have objected the
mischiefs of that in forty one. If there was no other reason therefore for
dissolving that Parliament, our Conspirators had, from this end only,
sufficient reason to get it dissolved. Dissolve them they might, disgrace them
with such imputations they could not. But the subsequent Parliaments, though
consisting principally of the same members, prosecuting the same design, acting
by the same measures, and in the same methods for the preservation of our
Government and Religion. Though with some accession of zeal, which the
inveterate evil growing more bold, audacious and enterprizing did occasion and
require; are therefore charged with designs upon the Government, and of all the
Evils that followed forty one, again to be Acted over upon this Nation. And by
this trick, and the deceivableness of mankind they have brought it about, that
the Conspirators themselves have gotten the reputation with some abused men of
the truly Loyal, even for their having Parliaments in contempt: And those that
are truly so are charged for men factious and seditious, and of the forty one
leaven, for that they esteem Parliaments to be part of the Government.
Parliaments themselves made odious or at least not desirable, and the true
Government at least suspended, and ready to be abolished or made quite another
thing, under the old name for the better subverting with some color our
ancient Government and the English Liberty.

But whatever is pretended, the last Parliaments had no greater fault than this
(viz.) That they did make some overtur's for reducing the Schisms, and making
the terms of the Communion of our Church receptive of the dissenters, (least
they should join with the Papists against her for such an indulgence, as would
quite destroy our Church, and is utterly inconsistent with any national Church
whatsoever,) this would have rendered the Popish conspiracy desperate. Since
that a greater hatred has been raised against the dissenters. And it is
brought about that some Churchmen are grown angry therefore with Parliaments,
and are become willing they should be laid aside, as not friendly to their
order, and it is no wonder if they have seduced some of you of less
consideration to join with them in such sentiments.

Heavy things are laid to the charge of the Dissenters at present, though it is
not long since they embraced them, and since that time they are not a jot the
worse, save that they have showed themselves steadily averse to Popery, and
that they are not to be bribed off by any assurance of a common Indulgence. The
Dissenters are represented and exposed as Enemies to the Church of England, for
which the Conspirators have undoubtedly an unfeigned kindness (if you will
believe them) they get them persecuted for her sake merely, and as her Enemies.

But the truth is, these men have truly an utter abhorrence against Popery and
the Plot, and join forwardly and zealously against it.

This their commendable zeal against Popery the Conspirators give out, and make
it believed is their zeal for their own peculiarities, for their dividing way,
and for those things wherein they differ from us. They have affrighted the
Church of England, with designs of those men against her, even in these their
actings and appearings against Popery and the Plot. What these men endeavor
against Popery, some that are of the Church of England do oppose for no other
reason, but for that they desire it.

And they are contrary to those of the Church of England, with whom these
Dissenters do concur, in any thing though never so conducible to the
preservation of the Nation and our Religion; and the Conspirators have now made
and reckoned, even such also of the adverse party Whigs and Fanatics, and
every thing they say or do is opposed, thwarted, contradicted and censured as
disloyal and fanatical.

It is now come to pass, that no man's reason is regarded; the true state of
things, and our present condition, the arts of our Enemies and their designs
are not considered: But whatever we say or do is fanaticisme, savors of forty
one. By this Artifice they tie together a sort of men amongst you that consider
little, and make of them an obstinate party which they Act and manage, and
engage in courses, which tend to their own and the public ruin, with an utter
neglect of Rights, Laws, and ancient constitutions; nay, they endeavor to
subvert them all, that they may more certainly and speedily arrive at the
mischiefs designed by our Enemies. The greatest fear of the loss of your
Charter and City is from your selves.

Your Charter Government and Privileges have no Enemies that can hurt them,
but your selves, against you it is only that your Charter comes to be defended.
So transported are some of you grown with the humor of opposition and
contradiction, since the discovery of the Popish Plot, against some that are
called Dissenters: Which is brought about by the ammusing arts, and impostures
of the Conspirators: That you are become eager for the destroying of your
Charter, because these Dissenters have concurred with the majority in defending
it. Your Charter had never been attached if some of you had not been persuaded
to be willing to forego it, and at the same time seem to be weary of the
ancient Government, and careless of your Religion, and willing to part with
them too, by the Embraceries of such Persons that fear a Parliament more than
Doomsday. By the influences of these Men who are for making a New Government,
because they cannot Live under the Old, you are made content to forego your
Charter, and the Ancient Government, the safeguard of our Religion and the
English Liberty, for such new Establishments as these confiding Men will form
and contrive for you: who will use you most certainly as your easiness does
deserve.

No Quo Warranto had ever been brought against your City to destroy your
Corporation and Government, for petitioning His Majesty for a parliament in a
time of a Popish Plot at home detected, but not duly punished nor prevented,
when we are under the Fears of a Popish Successor, against which Parliaments
have heretofore consulted how to secure our Religion, and of the growing power
of France which every Man living apprehends; had not some for no other reason,
but that they will be against Dissenters disliked petitioning. Your dislike of
petitioning is the only reason in the World for the unlawfulness of it. Without
that it had been impossible to have had a Lawyers opinion, that a Petition to
the King was unlawful; made in form as the Law directs or allows, for a thing
lawful and necessary (viz.) that we might have our Government in use, when we
had the greatest need of it, and that a Parliament might sit when we were under
Evils scarce sufferable, that no Power or Authority but that of a Parliament
could redress. Lawyers have opinions to sell at any time, if they have the
opinion of a forward and probable Dr, (though never so corrupt or corrupted to
mistake) or of the many to countenance them, though they have not the least
color of reason to support them. And according to their Fee and Expectation
they seem confident, must look assured, and tell you they have a very good
Cause; this they can with some Face do, in case any Error or Mistake has
prevailed to deceive many.

You your selves being first deceived, they take money, and are not bound to
disabuse you; especially when you are resolved not to change your opinion, and
act agreeably.

But if that Petition had been assisted and promoted by your selves too, it
might have prevailed; for the best of Kings do not refuse the universal Desires
of the People, and the Nation had long since been discharged of all the Evils,
that now disquiet us.

But by your dissent from it, it has got the appearance of a Crime: And the
Plotters have got this advantage upon us thereby, that His Majesty is not like
to have any Petitions against them, since they are declared ungrateful to His
Majesty, and he is become more inaccessible. They have brought it about, that
it is now accounted a fault to desire a Parliament, that only can and will
redress our Grievances. I will shortly show you how contrary you are herein to
the provision of our Law, and that you have herein deprived as much as in you
lies, your fellow Subjects of their rights in the Government. By the Stat. of 4
Ed. 3. C. 14. 36 E. 3. C. 10. It is provided that Parliaments be holden once
every Year, which are confirmed by an Act of this King called the Triennial
Act. In 25 E. 3. Statute of Provisors are contained these Words. That the right
of the Crown of England, and that the Law of the said Realm is such, that upon
the mischiefs and damages which happen to the Realm, the King ought and is
bound by Oath with the accord of his People in his Parliament to make remedy,
and Law, in removing the mischiefs and damages which thereof ensued.

King Ed. 1. did appoint certain select Persons of the Clergy and Laity, to
examine the wrongs done to his People by his Ministers, in order to the redress
thereof in the approaching Parliament. 17 Ed. 3. Dors Memb. 2. In the 15th. of
Ed. 3. a Declaration was openly made in the Parliament, que chescum (says the
Rolls) que se sent grevez per le Rey ou ses Ministers ou autres que ils
metroient lour petitions avants and ils averont bone and conenable remedy i. e.
That all People which found themselves aggrieved in any matter, even by the
King himself, his Officers or others should bring forth their Petitions, and
thereupon should have good and convenient remedy to them ordein'd Rot. Parl. 15
E. 3. Numb. 5. the like was done by the very Writ of Summons of Parliament 21
E. 3. part 2. Dors Memb. 9. and in open Parliament 37 Ed. 3. Rot. Parl. N. 2.
The Divines, that have no care how to prevent the impendent Evils, will allow
us at least Prayers and Tears. Sure then, then they ought to give us leave to
petition the Throne, and shed the Tears of Suppliants at the Footstool of His
Majesty. When they encourage men in their importunities to God Almighty, by
remembering the Parable (that our Savior used to that purpose) of the unjust
Judge, that neither feared God nor reverenced man, and yet did right to the
Widow at her importunity; sure they do allow petitioning his Vicegerent. We
cannot believe they pray in secret to God Almighty, unless they will petition
His Majesty openly for putting a stop to the incursions of Popery upon us.

Our Enemies the Papists cannot inwardly condemn our Petitions as unlawful,
though they are afraid of them; for that they may possibly obtain to prevent
their Design.

A bloody Assassinate and Cutthroat is not made more cruel, by the wailings
and passionate beseechings of the innocent Man for his Life. Though they give
the Villain some trouble, and make it more uneasy to him to do the feat, by the
regrets which he suffers from his Humanity, awakened by Pity, moving entreaties
and expostulations.

But it is suspected you are like to have little success in your intentions, to
destroy the Charter in Course of Law, to which you are perversely acted by your
displeasure against the Dissenters, and others whom you causlesly hate and
unreasonably oppose for their sake.

And therefore you have proceeded by the way of fact, and have procured that
the great Offices of the City are executed by Men not duly thereto chosen; for
the bringing this about you have used such bad arts, as would quite destroy
your credit and shut you out of all Commerce, if they were practiced in your
private dealings in your Trades and Occupations. If you seriously reflect and
consider the methods that have been used for that purpose, and will allow the
same Rule, which is observed by you in your private transactions and trade, for
public affairs and administration of public rights (which are in their nature
Sacred of a public concern, the violation of them more hurtful, scandalous,
and criminal) and in this, your Consideration also will lay aside your factious
animosities against the other party, to which you have furiously made your
selves opposite; you will be herein self condemned. I will not remember the
particulars of fact they are fresh in your memory, and your own thoughts, (if
any thing) must make you wise and recover your understandings.

But by this Course you have Evacuated your Charter in fact, and have already
Officers of a Foreign nomination.

You have given trouble and disgrace to the Old Sheriffs, that were duly chosen
to their Office, and acquitted themselves faithful to the Rights of the
Charter, not only deprived them of the reward that is due to a faithful and
strenuous discharge of so difficult an Office, but blame them and reproach
them, and for their good deed sake, go about to deprive the City of a free
choice of such Officers for the time to come. Who will be most gratifyed by
these proceedings with little recollection you may easily conclude.

They have already condemned the Charter and City, and have executed the
Magistrates in Effigy upon the Stage, in a Play called the Duke of Guise,
frequently acted and applauded; intended most certainly to provoke the rabble
into tumults and disorder. The Roman Priest had no success (God be thanked)
when he animated the People not to suffer these same Sheriffs to be carried
through the City to the Tower Prisoners. Now the Poet has undertaken for them
being kicked three or four times a Week about the Stage to the Gallows,
infamously rogued and rascalled, to try what he can do toward making the
Charter forfeitable by some extravagancy and disorder of the People, which the
Authority of the best governed Cities have not been able to prevent sometimes
under far less provocations.

But this ought not to move the Citizens, when he has so maliciously and
mischievously represented the King, and the Kings Son, nay and his favorite the
Duke too, to whom he gives the worst strokes of his unlucky fancy.

He puts the King under the person of H. 3d. of France, who appeared in the
head of the Parisian Massacre. The Kings Son under the person of the Duke of
Guise, who concerted it with the Queen Mother of France, and was slain in that
very place by the righteous judgment of God, where he and the Queen Mother had
first contrived it.

The Duke of Guise ought to have represented a great Prince, that had inserved
to some most detestable Villainy, to please the rage or lust of a Tyrant.

Such great Courtiers have been often sacrificed to appease the furies of the
Tyrants guilty conscience, to expiate for his Sin, and to atone the People.

Besides that a Tyrant naturally stands in fear of Ministers of mighty
wickedness: he is always obnoxious to them, he is a slave to them, as long as
they live they remember him of his guilt, and awe him: These wicked Slaves
become most imperious masters. They drag him to greater evils for their own
impunity, than they first perpetrated for his pleasure and their own ambition.

But such are best given up to public Justice. But by no means to be
assassinated. Until this age, never before, was an assassination invited,
commended and encouraged upon a public Theater.

It is no wonder, that Trimmers (so they call men of some moderation of that
party) displease them: For they seem to have Designs for which it behooves them
to know their men, they must be perfectly wicked or perfectly deceived of the
Catiline make, bold and without understanding, that can adhere to men that
publicly profess Murders, and applaud the Design.

Caius Caesar (to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's) was in the
Catiline Conspiracy, and then the word was he that is not with us is against
us, for the instruments of wickedness must be men, that are resolute and
forward, and without consideration; or they will deceive the design, and relent
when they enterprise.

But when he was made Dictator and had some pretenses, and a probability by
means less wicked and mischievous to arrive at the Government, his words was he
that is not against us is with us. But to Pompey only it belonged, and to his
cause or the like cause; to the Defenders of ancient established Governments,
of the English Monarchy and Liberties, to say they that are not with us are
against us, in internecino bello in attacks upon Government, medii pro hostibus
habentur neutral men are Tray-tors, and assist by their indifferency to the
Destruction of the Government. As many as applaud this play ought to be put
under sureties of the peace, and yet not one Warrant that we hear of yet
granted by the Lord Chief Justice.

But it is not a Duke of Guise to be assassinated, a Turbulent, wicked and
haughty Courtier. But an innocent and gentle Prince, as well as brave and
renowned for noble Achievements; A Prince that has no fault, but that he is
the Kings Son, and the best too of all his Sons; such a Son as would have made
the best of Emperors happy.

Except it be that the People honor him and love him, and every where
publicly and lowdly show it. But this they do, for that the best People of
England have no other way left to show their Loyalty to the King, and love to
their Religion and Government, in long intervals of Parliament than by
prosecuting his Son, for the sake of the King and his own merit, with all the
demonstrations of the highest esteem.

But he has not used his Patron Duke much better, for he has put him under a
most dismal and unfortunate Character of a Successor, excluded from the Crown
by Act of State for his Religion, who fought his way to the Crown, changed his
Religion, and dyed by the Hand of a Roman Assassinate.

It is enough to make his great Dukes courage quail, to find himself under such
an unlucky and disastrous representation, and thus personated. Besides he has
offered a justification of an Act of Exclusion against a Popish Successor in a
Protestant Kingdom, by remembering what was done against the King of Navar.

The Popish Religion in France did de facto by Act of State exclude a
Protestant Prince, who is under no obligation from his Religion, to destroy his
Popish Subjects.

Though a Popish Prince is to destroy his Protestant Subjects.

A Popish Prince to a Protestant Kingdom, without more must be the most
insufferable Tyrant, and exceed the Character that any story can furnish for
that sort of monster. And yet all the while to himself a religious and an
applauded Prince; discharged from the tortures that ordinarily tear and rend
the hearts of the most cruel Princes, and make them as uneasy to themselves as
they are to their Subjects, and sometimes prevail so far as to lay some
restraints upon their wicked minds.

But this his Patron will impute to his want of Judgment, for this Poets Hero's
are commonly such Monsters as Theseus and Hercules are, renowned throughout all
Ages for destroying,

But to excuse him, this man has forsaken his post, and entered upon an other
province. To the Observator it belongs to confound truth and falsehood, and by
his false colors and impostures to put out the Eyes of the People, and leave
them without understanding.

But our Poet has not so much art left him as to frame any thing agreeable, or
very-similar to amuse the People, or wherewith to deceive them.

His Province is to corrupt the manners of the Nation and lay wast their
morals, his understanding is clapped, and his brains are vitiated, and he is to
rot the Age.

His endeavors are more happily applied to extinguish the little remains of the
virtue of the Age by bold impieties, and befooling Religion by impious and
inept Rhimes; to confound virtue and vice, good and evil; and leave us without
consciences.

And thus we are prepared for destruction.

But to give the World a taste of his Atheism and Impiety, I shall recite two of
his Verses, as recited upon the Stage viz.

For Conscience, and Heavens fear, Religious rules They are all State bells to
toll in pious fools.

which I have done the rather, that some honest Judge or Justice may direct a
process against this bold impious man: or some honest Surrogate or Official may
find leisure to proceed ex officio against him, notwithstanding at present,
they are so incumbered with the Dissenters.

Such public Blasphemies against Religion, never went unpunished in any
Country or Age but this.

But I have made too long a digression, but that it carries with it some
instructions toward the preserving of the honor of your August City. viz.

That you do not hereafter authorize the Stage to expose and revile your great
Officers and Offices, by the indignities your selves do them; whilst the
Papists clap their hands and triumph at your public disgraces; and in the
hopes they conceive thereby of the ruin of your Government, as if that were as
sure and certain to them, as it is to us without doubt that they once fired it.

And further, for that it was fit to set forth to the World of what Spirit our
Enemies are, how they intend to attach us: As also how bold they are with His
Majesty, what false and dishonorable representations they make of him, and
present to the World upon a public Theater; which I must confess has moved me
with some passion.

I have now some mistakes to remove that I observe abuse you, and make you
think that it is in your power to destroy your Franchises. I come to defend
your Charter against your reason and understanding; though against your will
there is nothing can be said if it be peremptory and obstinate: But that it can
have no effect in Law it will be criminal and punishable.

The mistakes are these.

That the Excommunication of Dissenters render them incapable of suffrage and
voice in the election of your Officers.

That by thrusting them from a right of Suffrage a Common Council may be had,
that will dispose of the Charter. And that the Common Council have authority to
destroy it.

Which are both mistakes. And I shall likewise make out to you, that the
Sherifalties of London and Middlesex, are in the City by course of Common Law,
or by Statute Law, and are not of the nature of a voluntary grant from the
Crown of a mere right, nor can they be considered as a property that is
alienable, for if they were so, they might lawfully be regranted by those in
whom the right is.

So that they cannot be displaced but by Act of Parliament, tho the consent of
every Citizen were thereunto had.

And first, that excommunicate Dissenters have a right to choose City Officers
notwithstanding their excommunication is evident.

For that excommunication forfeits no private right. If a Plaintiff
excommunicate sues, his excommunication is pleaded in delay only and not in
abatement of the writ. But outlawry pleaded abates the writ, and bars the
Action.

If a Mayor sues in his incorporate capacity, a plea of excommunication is not
allowable to stay proceedings, for that its a public right that he pretends
to, but excommunication of an Executor will stay the Suit, tho he sues in
another right; no excommunication is to be pleaded in delay of the process in
judicial writs, as in Quare non admist, or in a scire facias upon a judgment,
because the right is ascertained by the judgment, and it is not militant as in
an original action.

And tho it be allowed, that a person Excommunicate may be challenged if he be
returned upon a Jury, which is said in some of our old Books, as Sir Edw. Cook
observes. Littleton fol. 158. a. yet that was in the time of the tyranny of the
Papal Church, which was wont to doom to damnation, such as were guilty of the
least contradiction against her order, as if perfectly wicked; or where the
person challenged was Excommunicate by the greater Excommunication, which
declared the person so Excommunicate perfectly wicked an Apostate from the
Faith and Rule of the Christian Religion, Such is not the present
Excommunication of Dissenters.

Yet there is a difference between refusing to accept of a man to an Office,
such is the nature of the challenge of a Jury man, and between the excluding a
man from his right and franchise in a matter, in which the Community also has
a right.

By what we have said, it is clear that by Excommunication no right is
forfeited, no public right is delayed no stated right is prejudiced. That the
right of suffrage is the right of the person, and also the right of the
Community. That at this day Sir Edw. Cook seems to think that Excommunication
is no matter of challenge to a Jury man; and if it were it cannot preclude a
right, tho it makes a man incompetent, or not so fit to be voluntary called
forth and preferred to execute a charge. It is very clear therefore, that for
Excommunication no man ought to be thrust from his right of suffrage and the
Franchise of a Citizen.

And well is it, that the Law is so or else there had remained a lurking
mischief behind in our Law as mischievous almost, as the writ for burning of
Heretics lately abrogated, for

As soon as we can get a set of Popish Clergy, it is but interpreting the
doctrine of the Church of England, as Sancta Clara has done to the sense of
the Council of Trent, and thereby make the doctrine of the Trent Council the
doctrine of the Church of England, and then every Protestant must immediately
incurr Excommunication. Now if thereby we should loose our franchises and the
rights of Freemen, the Papists would have the Government, and we used as Slaves
and Villains for ever; and by this slight without a Law or Parliament, on their
side the Religion of the nation may be changed.

It is very extraordinary, that when this mischief cannot happen to us by Law.
We are making Presidents against our selves, for the Papists their proceeding
against us, in such sort as is now proceeded against the Dissenters; for whom I
am not making an apology, the Evils that we sustain at present by their
occasion, will not give me leave to be so kind unto them. But let us not make
hard resolutions against our selves, when we know not how soon we our selves
may fall into their case. Only this I have to say for them, you have no reason
to be angry with them, for that they have not complied with the Popish interest
for obtaining indulgence, and exemption to themselves from the penal Laws; much
less have you reason to neglect the Defense of your Government and Religion,
because they adhere steadily to it. But if they had not so behaved themselves,
we should not have wanted an honest man of sense amongst you, to have divided
from the interest of the City, and its ancient Rights.

Neither is it in the Power of a Common Council, whoever they be that are sworn
of that body, and however elected, inclined or disposed, to derogate by any Act
of theirs from any of the Cities Rights and Franchises. They are not the Body
in whom the Rights and Franchises of the City are vested. The style of purchase
is the Mayor and Commonalty of the City of London, and the most modern style in
use is the Mayor Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London.

Their beginning is of a much later date than the Citys Charters of
Corporation, they were first erected and have received several alterations by
constitutions made in the Common Hall. Their business and trust is to manage
and defend, govern and protect, as Committees, the Rights of the City, and make
by Laws which are controulable notwithstanding, and sometimes have stood in
need of confirmation by the Common Hall. And this considered they are put under
an Oath to give good and true Counsel, touching the Commonweal of the City,
and that for favor of any man they shall maintain no singular profit against
the Common profit of the City.

They can do nothing validly in prejudice of the Citys Rights and Franchises:
And if they have any conscience of a limited trust under an Oath to be observed
and kept, they will not attempt it.

Perhaps the dissolving of this great Corporation will be too adventurous an
undertaking, for that it may be charged with the extinguishment of many
excellent Laws for the advantage of Trade, for the better Government of the
City, and the customary Provision for Wives and Children; upon which security
and provision by their customs, marriages have been made which will be thereby
defeated. Besides the number of Orphans that will be desperately undone, there
being no fund of stock left to pay them, as they are almost undone already by
banckrupting the fund of City credit (which would everlastingly have made good
payment to their Orphans) By the impending Quo Warranto. A very spreading and
fore calamity, and to be remembered with the Bankers case which put many
thousand Persons well stated to starving and great Necessities without
relenting.

They made a War without the advice of Parliament, they were unsuccesful as
Sea, and made depredations at Land, by this great Numbers of the Kings
subjects, suffered the worst calamitys of War in time of our Land peace. It is
better to be killed outright than to live and starve: They were used as in the
State of War tho Subjects of the most equal Government in the World in its
constitution. The Parliament is blamed for discountenancing loans of money upon
the Credit of the Crown, but these men prohibited and disabled them. But our
modern men to make all sure, have again banckrupted the Credit of the great
Seal; have taken away the planck, which was allowed to keep these poor wretches
from sinking after the wreck made by their Predecessors. They have vacated the
great Seal, that made provision for their interest money without any fear or
dread of that fate, that happend among their Predecessors, for in this too they
govern us according to Law.

The consideration of these Evils (since they have ways at present to bring
whom they please into the offices of authority and trust in the City) will
persuade them perhaps to attempt no farther alteration in the Cities rights,
then their dismissing themselves for ever of the right of choosing Sherifs for
the Counties of London and Middlesex. But this is so far from being done by any
Authority in the Common Council, that it cannot be done by the unanimous assent
of the Common Hall, nor by the consent of every of the Citizens and Freemen.

No more than a County can displace from its self the Choice of a Coroner,
which being placed there by the Common Law, nothing but an Act of Parliament
can remove.

Which will plainly appear by the short History of Sheriffs, which I shall here
subjoyn. The Sheriffs in the time of the Saxons, were choosen by the
Freeholders in the County Courts. The Saxon Laws were confirmed by the first
William, as appears by the Chronicon Leitchfeldense, cited by Mr. Lambert in
his Archajonomia page 158. But this Right of the Counties to choose their
Sheriffs, was arbitrarily disturbed by a plenitude of power in the confused and
troubled times of William Rufus H. 1. King Stephen. But it appears by the
Records of H. 3. time, some Counties still retained their Ancient rights, and
choose their Sheriffs. By the 28 Ed. 1. The Counties were restored to or
confirmed in Their Ancient rights of choosing Sheriffs, where the Shriefalties
had not been before granted in Fee, which were granted by Encroachment of power
minus just, but by this Law such grants were confirmed.

By the Statute of 9. Ed. 2. It was ordained, that the Sheriffs should be
assigned by the Chancellor, Treasurer, Barons of the Exchequer, and the
Justices. This Statute is interpreted not to extend to these Shrieffalties that
were granted in Fee. But such are intended excepted: As it has been always
understood, that particular rights are not extinguished by general Laws. This
is the Account of the History of the Law of Shrieffalties in General.

To descend to the Sheriffs of London, William the Conqueror soon after this
Confirmation of the Laws of England, (in Parliament by his Baronage, which then
made the English Parliaments) whereby the Counties were confirmed in their
Rights to choose their Sheriffs grants by his Charter confirmed in Parliament
Civibus Londini totam dictam Civitatem and Vicecomitatum L. K. Arch. Land. fol.
120. That is, he grants that they shall continue a City and County, and the
right of chosing Sheriffs shall continue to them. That which was their right
before become by his Charter better established. An ancient prudence and
caution of Subjects in transacting with their Kings, used more especially by
our Ancestors (viz) to have their Right and Laws by way of Grant and Charter
from the Crown; for those Mighty Kings that will not be confined by Laws, yet
have held themselves bound by their Charters and Grants. Which made our
Ancestors put the Confirmation of their most precious Laws and Rights under
that form, for their better Establishment. And this Charter of King William was
to the like purpose, that he should not by his power break in upon the Rights
of the County of the City of London, of making their Sheriffs or other the
Rights of the City.

By this it appears, that the making Sheriffs belongs to the City by a Common
Law right, by an Appointment of the Common Law, as to their particular never
yet changed by any Statute Law, nor can this right therefore be altered or
displac't, but by Act of Parliament.

The Sheriffalty of Middlesex was granted by H: 1. to the City upon this
reason, the better to enable the City to keep the Peace, for many Murders,
Rapins and Villainies being committed on the City, the Offenders would thereupon
fly into Middlesex, and the Citizens having no power of Jurisdiction in that
County, the Offenders often escaped.

This Charter has been confirmed amongst other their Charters, by several Acts
of Parliament. The consequence whereof is, that the Sheriffalty of Middlesex is
not to be displac't from the City, but by Act of Parliament, which is thus
remonstrated.

A grant made by the Crown (confirmed in Parliament) of any Estate, profit or
emolument whatsoever, which can amount to no more than a creating or
transferring a right, that right may certainly be surrendered or regranted to
the Crown, or as the proprietor pleases.

But the grant of an authority or power confirmed by Act of Parliament, that
refers to administration of justice, a grant of such a Nature as this is under
such an inducement, as is contained in the mentioned grant of the Sheriffs of
Middlesex to the City of London, does not only create a right but gives an
authority, directs how a public Office shall be administered, and is a Law for
governing that matter, and consequently makes a perpetuity of that office in
the City, and it is not in the Power of the City to transfer or extinguish it,
or innovate the Direction and Order of the Law therein so made and provided.

The Sheriffalty of Middlesex is become upon the matter appendant to the
Sheriffalty of London, or to speak more properly united.

The Sheriffs of London are always Sheriffs of Middlesex, and are not choosen
thereto by a distinct question in the Common Hall.

But for that it is not generally understood how a Corporation or Society of
men may discorporate and dissolve themselves, and least an inconsiderable
minority which shall pretend themselves the Majority, and though but two
hundred say they more than three thousand, and take upon themselves to dissolve
the Corporation of the City.

Tho their skill in Arithmetic is better than their Honesty, I shall shortly
discourse how a Society of Men may be dissolved

A greater number cannot dissolve a body politic, every man has a Negative
against a dissolution of that Body whereof he is a member, tho he is to be
concluded by the majority in any matter determinable, and governable by that
Society. A Majority does not determine a less number in the state of nature,
every man's particular consent was necessary to make him a member of any
society, and so it is to unmember him. That a majority concludes the less
number is by the agreement of all that enter into that society, without which
no society can subsist. But whether they shall continue to be a society or no
is a question, in which the members of that society do admit themselves at
liberty, and act at that time as in the state of nature, and therefore the
Majority cannot bind the few in this Question* and dissolve the Society.

No man can be a member of any Society without his own consent. But every
Member of a Society gives his Faith ipso facto by becoming so, to every one of
that Society, to support and maintain it.

No man can propound any question without Leave, first had of the Society for
dissolving that Society, for to do it otherwise is to transgress against the
Faith, that he owes to the Comunalty.

When such a Question is with Leave of the Society propounded, a Majority
cannot dissolve that Society as to the Dissenters, and these that are willing
to continue it. But such Majority at the most (if that) have but a Leave to go
out of that Society and dismember themselves, which seems to be yielded them
implicitly, in giving leave to put the Question.

But if such Question be put without leave, first had of the Comunalty, the
propounder deserves a punishment to be inflicted upon him.

If the minority be big enough to maintain and support the ends of the
Corporation, the minority is still the Corporation.

If any single Person is unwilling the Society should be dissolved, and this
Corporation is under the Government of any greater Society of Men, as a
Corporation within a Polity, this single person may require, and prosecute the
revolters from the Society to abide in that Community.

These societies of men, that are formed by the sovereign Authority cannot
dissolve or make the terms of their Society and the Order and Rule of governing
them, other than is appointed by the Charter of Incorporation.

Nay it is a Question whether a King can change it, who has not the Power of
making Laws.

For the terms of their Society, their Order and Rule of Government is the
Condition of Incorporating, and upon these terms they consent to be
incorporated, no man by our Law is compellable to be incorporated against his
own liking.

Roll. 1. Rep. Baggs Case.

And agreeable hereto changes in the Government of the City of London, from the
first Charters have been made by Acts of Parliament. Acts of Parliament was
made for the Division of a Ward, and for altering the Election and Continuance
of the Office of an Alderman for Life, whereas in the first Charters they were
choosen annually, and not to be choosen the next Year; I shall here transcribe
the Acts themselves, which are not printed but supplied to me by my worthy
Friend Mr. Petyt, whose enquiry nothing, that is notable in our Records has
escaped.

The Commons in the Parliament 7. R. 2. prayed the King for the maintenance of
peace and tranquillity in the City of London for the time to come, by reason
that all the Aldermen were choosen from year to year at the Feast of St.
Gregory the Pope, and none of them could be re-elected for the year ensuing,
and others put in their places to the great endamagement of the City. The
Commons therefore pray the King to grant to the Mayor, and Commons of the City
and their Successors in that present Parliament, that the Aldermen to be
elected from year to year at the said Feast franchement Ezluz be freely
choosen, and that of the most sufficient persons, and good fame, of those who
had been Aldermen, as others, per le Gardes de la City by the Wards of the
City. Saving to the Wards their free Election in manner aforesaid: To which the
King answered Le Roy le voet and Grante, to endure so long as good Government
should be in the City, by reason of that clause. Rot. Parl. 7o. R. 2ds Numb. 24.

In the Parliament 17o. R. 2di Numb. 25. It was ordained, that the Aldermen
should not be removed Sanz honest and reasonable causes, without reasonable
Cause.

In the same Parliament Numb. 27. upon the Petition of the Mayor Aldermen and
Commons in the said City, by reason of the greatness of the Ward of Farringdon,
which was too great to be governed by one Alderman. The King grants that les
Gents de la dite Guard of Farringdon within, might choose one Alderman, and
those of Farringdon without another, and that both those Aldermen so choosen
should not be removed Si non per cause reasonable, as it was ordained by the
King in Parliament to the Aldermen of the said City.

But though the Government of such Societies and Corporations may be changed by
Law. Yet no Law can change the Government of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, and
alter the terms of Government and Obedience established: nothing can do this
but chance, and time, violence, and an irresistible Power.

But every English man ought from the Nature of his Allegiance, to defend the
English Monarchy with his Life under the Authority of the Government, and the
protection of Laws.

To conclude, the best way to show our Loyalty to the King is to think
honorably of His Majesty, to account his Person Sacred as it is, and himself
impeccable, for so our Government has made him by imputation, which is the
highest Prerogative of the Crown, and a notable instance of the wisdom of our
Government.

Imperii Majestas Tutelae Salus. We heartily bewail the unhappy death of the
late King. But detest that it should be made a pretense to change our
Government. They are very bad men that raise on the one side in the People a
(...) or King-dread, and on the otherside in the King a (...) or People dread
from his deplorable death.

Such passions indeed respectively possess the People, and Successors of
Tyrants, and work the woo of the People or the abolition of the Kingly
Government: But most unnatural these confounding apprehensions are, from the
death of a good King bitterly bewailed by almost all of his subjection.

It is too unreasonable, that we should offer up our ancient Government, our
precious liberties, our Religion it self (in the defense of which he dyed) to
atone for the guilt of an inconsiderable part of the Nation, that was engaged
in that detestable fact, and are since gone to their proper place. This is hard
that we must loose our Government and have no more English Kings, to expiate
for their guilt.

We do not show our Loyalty, but discover an ignominious baseness; if we yield
up our rights at the persuasion of a Courtier, who tells us it is for the Kings
Service: when he is thereby promoting his own advantages and projects, and
shifting for indeminity upon the ruin of the Government. Plutarch in his
treatise (...). base sneaking says that the As^^ticks became slaves, because
they could not pronounce the word NO, and gave denial to Sycohants and
flatterers.

If these Courtiers, really and honestly thought it were for His Majesty's
Service, that all Authorities and Dignities in the Government should be held
precaciously of the Crown, they ought to hold their honors and session in
Parliament by the same tenure, for that those that shall inherit to them may be
wiser than themselves, for this there way is their folly, and their posterities
(I hope) will not approve their doings.

When our Preachers exhort to obedience, they ought not to be heard if they
press us beyond the terms of obedience, that the Government has established.
And we may dutifully insist (notwithstanding) to have the benefit of such Laws,
that the power of the Government can make to preserve us in the peaceable
enjoyment of our Religion, when we have a Protestant King.

When they exhort us to Christian patience, they should not forget to tell the
People, that they are not bound to suffer, but where the Christian virtue of
Fortitude is perfected, and not else but as Christian charity does direct. But
they ought not by any means to abuse the People, with a vain amuzement, that a
Popish Successor will protect the Church of England.

I shall end with the words of King Solomon, Proverbs 24. My Son fear thou the
Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change, for
their Calamity shall arise suddenly, and who knows the Ruin of them both? It
is not good to have respect of Persons in Judgment. He that says unto the
wicked thou art righteous, him shall the People curse, Nations shall abhor him.
But to them that rebuke him shall be delight, and a good Blessing shall come
upon them. If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small. If
thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those that are
ready to be slain: If thou say behold we knew it not; does not he that
pondereth the Heart consider it? and he that keeps thy Soul, does not he know
it, and shall not he render to every Man according to his Works?

ERRATA.
Page 2. L. 23. r the negligence of page number the twelfth is misplaced after
page the thirteenth, and must be read before it. page 7. r obliquandi for
obliquendi page 12. lin. vlt. for which r what. page 13. L. 19. for help r
helped. page 19. L. 26, dele all. page 36. r. Bylaws. p. 38. l. 21. r. their.

FINIS.

