AN ARGUMENT FOR THE Bishops Right In Judging in CAPITAL CAUSES IN PARLIAMENT:
For their RIGHT unalterable to that Place in the GOVERNMENT that they now enjoy.

With several Observations upon the Change of our English Government since the
Conquest.

To which is added a Postscript, being a Letter to a Friend, for Vindicating
the Clergy, and rectifying some mistakes that are mischievous and dangerous to
our Government and Religion.

By THO. HUNT, Esquire.

In Turbas and Discordias pessimo cuique plurima vis Pax and quies bonis
artibus indigent.

Tacit. Hist. l. 4. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Fox, at the Angel and Star in
Westminster Hall. 1682.

THE PREFACE.
THis Argument for the Bishops Right of judging in Capital Causes in
Parliament, for their being one of the three States of the Realm, and that
their Right is unalterable by Law, was written above two years since, and
prepared for the Press, time enough to be made public against an expected
Session of Parliament, in October 1679. But the Parliament being prorogued from
that time until January, the Author was willing to respite the Publication to
advise with his second thoughts, and again to review what he had written in a
case of this weight and moment; and the rather, for that he had but a short
time allowed him for its composure. Since that there has been published by an
excellent person, a Book in vindication of their Right of judging, called The
Grand Question, sufficient to give satisfaction, if the world were just and
impartial, and disposed to make right Judgment in the Cause.

It may well be reasonably expected that Christian People should not be only
just, but favorable to any pretense of a Christian Bishop to any secular trust
that does not lessen the dignity of the Office, and seems unworthy of his
Character; which as it exempts him from mean and sordid offices and affairs, of
an inferior and more private concernment, so it commends him to the Government
of matters of a more public and universal influence, such as require the most
improved wisdom and learning, and a noble virtue.

It seems to me most unreasonable that those that are the great and principal
Expounders of the Christian Law, which gives Law to all Laws, and instructs men
to discharge their several Offices both public and private; that those who are
the great Guides of our Consciences, and by whose Directions and Institutions
we form our Judgments in the greatest intricacies and doubts that perplex
humane affairs; that the Guides of a Religion which is formed all to life and
practice; for the making Governments equal, and private men good and obedient,
which is little else but an Obligation to Justice and Charity, and principally
pursues that which is the end, design, and whole business of Government: I say,
it seems to me most absurd and incongruous, that this Order of men at any time
ought to be shut out of that Council and Court, where Laws are made, and Rules
given, for the Government of a Christian Commonwealth, where the most
difficult and intricate causes are to be heard and determined, and where an
unlimited power remains of censuring the Actions of the greatest men, and the
administration of public affairs, and the safety of the Nation are consulted,
which cannot be long preserved but by pursuing the dictates of a wise Religion:
Such is the Christian Religion, if any other; we should dishonor it by
comparing it to the best.

Paganism became despicable and abandoned soon after its publication: Yet Tully
in his Oration ad Pontifices, magnifies the wisdom of the Romans as Divine, in
advancing the Pagan Priests to the highest places in their Commonwealth, by
which the Commonwealth he says was preserved. Cum multa Divinitus,
Pontifices, a Majoribus nostris inventa atque instituta sunt, tum nihil
praeclarius, quam quod vos eosdem and Religionibus Deorum immortalium and
summae Reipublicae praeesse voluerunt: Vt amplissimi and clarissimi Cives
Rempublicam been gerendo, Religiones sapienter interpretando Rempublicam
conservarent. Such an Opinion more duly and with better reason our Ancestors
conceived of the advantage that might accrue to the Nation by advancing the
Prelates of the Church into the Civil Government. Thereupon they have made them
necessary to it, and framed the Government in a sort to depend upon them, and
left it scarce able to maintain it self without them in its present
constitution. The Temporal Barons will soon find themselves unable to maintain
their own dignity, and to sustain that province that is allotted to them in the
Government, unassisted with the Interest and authority of the Prelates, the
Spiritual Barons, a mighty Power if they be, as they ought to be, of venerable
esteem with the people.

If the present Bishops are not all so happy as to possess such an esteem, we
know what cause to assign for the same, viz. the unhappy Schism that has too
long continued in our Church, has for its own Justification, after they are
almost shamed out of the scruples which first caused the separation, sought
occasions against the Persons of the Bishops, and rather than they will want
faults to complain of, the Order it self must be loaded with all the faults of
all the Bishops in all Countries and Ages, and they adventure now to disparage
their persons for the sake of their office. But sure it is a folly that can
fall upon no people, but such who by the evils they feel or fear, are vexed out
of their understanding, to suppress any Office that is necessary to any
Commonwealth in any form of Government, for the faults of the Officers for the
time being: But too true it is, that a form of Government while established,
may be so utterly misunderstood by the most, when it is not, or not duly
administered, that a true and exact description of it, and a discourse of the
Offices and Functions of the several parts of the Government would be taken by
them for some Vtopian Common wealth, or no better please them than a
description of the strength of an impregnable Fort, once the Security of the
Nation when invested by the Enemy. A Lecture of a learned Physician of the Vsus
Partium will not give sight to a blind Eye, nor motion to a withered hand; and
no body is warmed or comforted by a painted fire: But God be thanked we are not
yet destitute of the benefits of a good Government.

Another cause I apprehend may much lessen the Bishops in the esteem of the
People, and make them want that Reputation that is necessary to every Governor
in proportion to his Charge, is their manner of promotion. The Ministers of
State, whose business it ought to be to understand the true Characters of men
that are preferred to that Office, are often mistaken; however in this Course
they seem not to be promoted for their own Merit, but at the pleasure of the
great Courtiers, and at best the Ministers of State can do no more than
recommend to the King for that office the best of those they know, which are
many times most unfit.

But this may be remedied when his Majesty shall please to give leave to the
Clergy of the Diocese to choose their own Diocesan, their Choice
notwithstanding submitted to the Kings approbation and Confirmation (which was
permitted by Justinian the Emperor, and was in use in several of the best Ages
of the Church) or by some other method which may be advised by his great
Council, whereby the greatest assurance may be given that the best and fittest
persons be preferred to Bishoprics: for the Common people are envious and
suspicious, and what ever may be done by bad means they always think is so. But
if Bishops were promoted to their Sees with the gratulations and applauses of
the whole body of the Clergy of the respective Diocesses, all that passes
under their advice and consent would likely meet with the general satisfactions
of the people, as it would well deserve, as long as the Clergy can have any
Authority with them; That is, as long as the Nation continues Christian.

But the general Corruption of Manners and decay of Piety is the great and
truest cause why the Bishops unenvied enjoy no part of that honor that our
Ancestors Wisdom and Piety conferred upon their order conformably to all other
the Ancient Christian Governments. But when Virtue and Piety shall recover
their esteem, the reverence of the Clergy will return. We are not like long to
expect this happy Change, for Vice is now arrived to a Plethora, and like to
burst by its own excesses: And we well hope that the mischiefs which we suffer
will cure that evil from whence they spring, and prevent the greater Calamities
that it further threatens. However it becomes all good men to assist, to
support the present Government, which is the cheapest, the surest and the next
way to arrive at a happy constitution of things. This was the design of the
Author of the Grand Question. After the publication of that Book I laid by all
thoughts of publishing this Treatise: But perceiving that notwithstanding what
he has said, the Right yet remains controverted, and a Book is since printed,
wherein several things are objected in prejudice of this Right, and more is
expected: I did review these Papers, wherein I found I had prevented those
objections, and with a little application they would appear insignificant. I
did resolve to make this public. And besides that I apprehended some things
material to the Question were omitted by the Grand Question; that a several way
of speaking things to the same purpose has its advantage. Our great Courts
affect to have several arguments on the same side in great Causes, and our
Reporters publish them. Besides herein several things are occasionally
discourst of, which makes it of further usefulness to the public. Our
adversaries also were treated too kindly by him and had deserved sharper
reflections than he makes upon them for their false and perverse Reasonings,
and ought to lose that reputation which they abuse to the hurt of the
Government. And further, I thought it not for the honor of our faculty that
never fails to supply the worst cause with Advocates, That a question of this
Nature, wherein both Church and State, Religion and our Civil Policy is
concerned, and the Right thereof not only clear and evident in it self but also
useful to the State, should have not one of the Robe to plead for it. The
friends of the Cause will not grudge to read two Books for the Right as well as
several against it, and the Adversaries of our Cause ought to suffer the like
trouble themselves which they occasion to others.

These Considerations did induce me to publish this Treatise. I am well pleased
that I am engaged in a good Cause that was suited to one of my slender
Abilities. Right is so strong an Argument for it self, that it wants only light
to discover it: Whereas an unrighteous cause stands in need of disguisings and
shadowings, and all the Artifices and fetches of the Wit of abler men, to give
that a Color at least which is destitute of Law and Right.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Nature of the Right, the obligation to use it, the obvious
indications of it, and the benefit which may be reasonably expected in the
exercise of it. How it came to be drawn into question, and how it can be fairly
determined, how it has been opposed, and upon what Reasons and Evidence the
Right does rely. Chap. II. The general prejudice against this Right, from an
Opinion conceived that the Clergy ought not to intermeddle in Secular Affairs,
removed. That Bishops have been employed in the greatest trusts by Emperors,
not hindered by the Church, but this has been envied to them by the Pope. Chap.
III. The Precedents that are produced from the Parliament Rolls against this
Right, are considered. They prove not pertinent at most, but bare Neglects, not
Argumentative or concluding against the Right. Chap. IV. This Right cannot be
prejudiced by non user. The Nature of Prescription, that the Right in question
is not prescriptible. The Original of this Right, that it is incident to
Baronage. The Bishops when made Barons, and for what reason. That all Offices
whether by Tenure or Creation are Indivisable. Chap. V. Bishops never pretended
the Assise of Clarendon, when said to be absent. Bishops sat in Judgment upon
Becket, and his Crime and Charge Treason, by which it is demonstrated that the
Assise of Clarendon only put them at liberty, but not under restraint from
using their Right of Judging in Capital Causes. Chap. VI. Bishops sat in
Judgment upon John Earl of Moreton, after King John, the Bishop of Coventry,
etc. for Treason. Chap. VII. An Opinion prevailed and continued long, that no
Judgment in Parliament where the Bishops were absent, was good, and their
absence assigned for Error, to reverse Judgment in Treason in Parliament,
proved by the Petition of the Commons 21 R. 2. upon their protestation made 11
R. 2. And by that protestation it is evident they had a Right, and that they
saved it by that protestation. They pretended they could not attend the matters
then treated of by reason of the Canon. But alleged no Law for their absence.
Chap. VIII. Of Canons, Canon law. What effect Canons can have upon a Civil
Right. The Canons prohibiting the use proves the Right. Chap. IX. Bishops made
their Proxies in Capital Causes, which proves their Right and their thereby
being virtually present, and the lawfulness of making Proxies and such as they
made. Chap. X. A Repeal of the Parliament 21 R. 2. No prejudice to what the
Bishops did in making their Proxies. The Opinion of Bishops presence being
necessary in Parliament continued in time of H. 5. Chap. XI. Bishops actually
exercised this Authority in 28 H. 6. in the Case of William de la Pool Duke of
Suffolk. Opinion of the Judges, that Bishops ought to make Proxies in the Trial
of a Peer in Parliament. Of what consideration decency can be. Chap. XII. Their
Sitting in Judgment not so much against the reason of the Canon, as their
assent to Bills of Attainder which was never condemned. And the Nature of an
Act of Attainder. Chap. XIII. Overruling a Plea of pardon does not condemn the
Criminal, and therefore they may judge of such Plea; Though they are not to be
present at the making of a Judgment of Condemnation. Quousque perveniatur in
Judicio further explained. And that which follows upon another thing is not
always caused by it. XIV. Bishops one of the three Estates of all the Realms of
Christian Europe. And how they came to be advanced to that dignity and trust.
The convenience of their not being divided in a distinct house from Lay Peers.
They cannot be detruded from that dignity no more than the Government can be
changed, which no Law can do. Six Bishops of the twelve Peers of France, and
their Aristocratical power. That all Governments are lawful that are lawfully
established. Chap. XV. William the Conqueror agreeable to all the Princes of
that time, put Bishops under Tenure by Baronies, and all Baronies at that time
feudal, with the reason of his Policy and the inconvenience it produced. Of the
Curia Regis which consisted of the Baronage, in which the Capitalis
Justitiarius Angliae did preside. Of the administration of Justice in that
time. And that the Baronage of England upon special Writs of Summons became a
Parliament. An account how all our present Courts derived out of it. Of the
Court of the High Steward, and of the Court of Chancery, and the reasons of its
rise and growth, and how inconvenient it is. And how we recovered out of the
inconveniences of that Constitution of Parliament, by representatives in the
time of H. 3. And that this, it being allowed, can give no countenance to those
that are desirous to change our present and better Constitution. That in all
this Change the Bishops suffered no diminuion. But when the ancient reason of
Baronage failed, they are after to be considered under the new reason of
Baronage. Chap. XVI. The remembrance of the old reason of Baronage became a
prejudice in the Judges, upon which T. Furnival Plea allowed, that he held not
per Baroniam. An Entail of Baronies with lands after allowed. The reason of
Nobility changed, and no man now Noble by his Acres. Many men Summoned to
Parliament, and yet not Noble. No prejudice to the immovable Right of Bishops
to have Summons to Parliament, and that objection answered. Kings may erect new
successive Nobility in Clergymen. That Bishops are of a distinct sort of
Nobility, and under that and other reasons they are considered as a distinct
State. Chap. XVII. Of the three States which make the Government under the
King, that he is none of them. The Objections against this answered. And the
reasons of their being distinct, and the several Offices and Expectances in the
Government that make them so. That the several Orders of Peers make but one
Baronage, and in that there is a great trust, and honor greater belongs to
Bishops than Lay Barons in our present constitution. Their Character and
qualifications commend them to the highest trust, and render them fittest
Judges. Chap. XVIII. The Reason of Trials per Pares, and that the Bishops are
competent upon that reason in Parliament, though not so fit to be of the High
Stewards Court. The Law of M. Charta not Lex scripta. Bishops ought to be tried
by their Peers. How that Right came to be discontinued, and that in Parliament
they ought still to be Tried by their Peers. Chap. XIX. The unreasonableness of
maintaining an Opinion upon a single Objection against a matter evidently
proved, that Questions of this nature should be considered with candor, and not
opposed with mere possibilities. Chap. XX. Several alterations in the
Government since the Conquest, that the Alteration in what concerns the
Baronage, the Bishops Right is to be considered in analogy to the Change. That
changes of Government for the better cannot again be altered, but our zeal is
required to defend the Government made better, and they deserve ill that go
about to reduce us to our old mischiefs by their Antiquity. Chap. XXI. The
advantage of the Change in the constitution of our Parliament, in the change of
granting Subsidies. And how the Lords are bound by a Bill of Aids. Chap. XXII.
The beneficial Change that has been made by the clause praemunientes in the
Bishops Writs of Summons to Parliament, which gives Authority for the
Convocation. By this we are discharged of Provincial Councils, and Canons of
the Church kept distinct from Laws of the State. The Church kept in peace from
rending Questions, and Religion is conducted not by Laws but by Canons, not
force but persuasion, which commends our Episcopal Government. Chap. XXIII. The
danger we avoided of having our Baronage of England ambulatory, and fixing of
it in Families and an indefectible Succession, in which the Right of the
Peer-age of Bishops is established. Chap. XXIV. The advantages the Adversaries
seek to their cause by aspersing the Bishops. Remembrance of all the faults in
all times committed by any of the Order, that many of those faults are
principally due to the Papal Usurpation, and the neglect of Kings to defend the
Rights of their own Bishops, and are all the Vitia Temporum the times of
Popery. Chap. XXV. How inculpably our Bishops have been in administration of
their Ecclesiastical Authority, how faithful in their Temporal Trust, and
Asserters of the Rights of the people. They have not been irreverent to Kings,
nor have they encroached any power in Civil matters in ordine ad spiritualia.
That the power that they challenge is merely spiritual, and they challenge
nothing of Divine Right but the exercise of their Ministry, which they cannot
lay aside. Mr. Selden's Arguments for Erastianism answered. The Church of
England does not tie her self always to think and enjoin as she does at
present. The moderation of the Church in opinions, her apprehensions of Schism
just and great. They are not answerable for the ejectment of the
Nonconformists, nor for the scandalous Lives of their Clerks, nor their
Chancellors, nor abuse of Excommunications. Why matters of Incontinency are
committed to their censures. They have exercised the power of the Keys against
the Infractors of M. Charta, and how it has been guarded with the
denunciations of the Church, we have reason to expect as much from our Bishops
to support the Government of Laws. Chap. XXVI. We have as much reason that the
Protestant Bishops should be as constant to the Reformed Religion, as Popish
Bishops obstinate for Popery. An Apology for their Unanimity in Voting. Their
dependence not so great upon the Crown, as to oblige them to disserve their
Prince. The King bestows nothing upon them but what is the Churches, the great
expectation the Government has of their fidelity and performances. That which
advanced them must continue them great. The contempt of the Bishops and Clergy
the great cause of our evil State at present; out of which we cannot recover
but by an excellent Clergy, and a high esteem of them with the people.
The Postscript.
ERRATA.
PAge 13. Line 18. read they. p. 15. l. 15. r. Taxeotam and Buleutam. p. 19. l.
9. r. Blaesensis. p. 23. l. 4. r. can. p. 44. l. ult. dele as. p. 51. l. 22. to
but add not. l. ult. to usage add other. p. 57. l. 29. r. hucusque. p. 130.
dele in. p. 165. l. 8. r. here. p. 167. r. interpolatis. p. 180. l. 3. dele
them to. r. send. l. 29. to fit add to mention. p. 206. l. 29. r. injurious. p
240. l. ult. dele near.

POSTSCRIPT.

P. 32. l. 1. r. he made his natural Sons first noble. l. 7. r. Eufame. p. 34.
l. 1. r. is not subject. p. 42. l. 25. r. decedents. p. 45. l. 30. r. he. p.
46. l. 8. r. more cruel. p. 58. l. 18. r. futility. p. 59. l 26. r. being.

What else is escaped, the Reader is desired to correct; by reason of the
Authors absence from the Press.

The Argument.
CHAP. I.
IN this question the Constitution of the Government is concerned, and the
Right of a most principal constituent part, and that in a matter of the highest
Trust, which if truly a Right, can be no more relinquished (as the Nature of
this Right is) than a trust can be betrayed, a duty and a Right denied to be
paid and performed, or the Constitution of the Government changed.

For of such a Nature does appear to be the Right in pretense and Controversy,
of the Lords the Bishops to have judgment in the House of Lords in Capital
Causes.

For by their being made Barons, they owed their judgments in such Causes as a
service to the King, at first by their Tenures in Baronage (for though since
they are become Barons Rescriptitii, or Barons by Writ, their duty is not
abated.) And besides, the Cognizance of such Causes become their own Right,
being a part of and belonging to the dignity and office of a Baron. And it
likewise became an appointment in the Government, in which the whole Community
have their Interest (for that is principally provided for and procured in all
Governments) whose greatest concern it is to have Justice done against all
Criminals; and to have great and wise, just and good men in the Administrations
of Justice, and other great offices of the Government.

The people of England did anciently understand the benefit of this
Constitution, when nothing but the Baronage of England, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, could resist the Torrent of Arbitrary Government. And it may be
easily understood too, that nothing but the Baronage of England is able to
support the Throne: For that Monarchy unless so supported, is the weakest and
most precarious and dependent Government in the World except it be supported
with an Army, and turned into a Tyranny. That the Throne should be established
by Natural and gentle provisions, and the Government fixed is every man's
greatest interest.

If the Lords Temporal have more under command, and a larger Potestas jubendi;
yet the Lords Spiritual out-did them Authoritate suadendi, and had more
voluntary obedience. The Lords Spiritual have several Advantages as they are
Novi homines, men chosen out of Thousands for an excellent Character and
Spirit, and need not want any accomplishments, if duly chosen and preferred,
for the discharge of the greatest Provinces that are to be managed by wisdom
and integrity; and therefore they cannot be well wanted in any Ministries in
the Government, to which they are bespoken, and have a legal designation.

Since this Authority by the very opening of the Cause does appear probably
belonging to the Bishops, and if so that it cannot, without breach of their
duty that they owe to all the parts of the Government and the whole Community,
depart from it; it may surely be insisted upon, disputed and maintained by them
without blame or imputation. But so unhappily it falls out, that the very
disputing and contending of this Matter by reason of the unseasonableness of
the dispute, and the delays that were thereby given to the most important
business of the Nation, to the great hazard as some think of the sum of
Affairs, was very mischievous to the public. And now both parties are charging
one another with all the mischiefs and the delays, that this Controversy has
given to public proceeding, or can with any probability be thought to have
occasioned. And there are not men wanting, on either side within doors and
without, that are forward enough to charge all those mischiefs as deserved by
their oppoposite party, which may eventually happen hereupon.

Who sees not how fatal this Controversy is like to prove to one or other of
the Litigants, and to the Government in consequence, if this Cause cannot be
duly heard and considered, and be determined upon its own Merits, without
undue Censures and Reflections on either side: Since at last the contenders
themselves must be the Judges, and give judgment in the Cause, or it can never
be quieted and have an end. I am sure, passion is no equal Judge and Arbiter,
and men angered and provoked have not the same sentiments of the same things, as
when calm and serene. And because there is no common Judicature, it ought to be
considered by both parties with all equality of judgment and an exact pondering
and weighing of the reasons offered on either side; for that otherwise it can
never be fairly decided, but must for ever remain a Controversy to the
immediate overthrow and destruction of the Government, or overruled by the
force and Power of a most dangerous consequence in the course of time, to the
Government, and will be a laying of the Axe to the very root of the Tree, and
will put the Government it self into a State of War, between the several
constituent parts of it, and given an occasion for one part to usurp upon
another, until the tone and frame of Government become changed, and at last fall
into ruin.

I am very well aware of the gravity of the Question and its importance, the
high honor and regard that is due to the House of Commons in Parliament, what
commendations are due to them in their persons, for their zeal and endeavor by
all means if it be possible, to save the Nation, Religion and Government: And
what a great Capacity, that House in its very constitution, in the first
designation of the Government, and by their mighty growth in power and interest
in the Course of time, have in procuring the public good, and that they cannot
have any interest divided from the common Weal. I must do them right, and with
the greatest clearness and satisfaction, I determine with my self, that their
zeal for public Justice against unpardonable offenses in their judgment, and a
prejudicate opinion they had conceived of the Spiritual Lords unindifferency
(how duly will appear by and by) gave the first occasion to this Question,
which was the true causa suasoria of their denial to the Bishops a Right of
Succession and judgment in that noble question, Whether a Treason of State can
be pardoned? And that put them upon the search of Precedents, an Oracle that
will always give a Response agreeable to the Enquirrer and Consulter. For I am
sure there is nothing so absurd and irregular, that rude Antiquity, and the
miscarriages in humane Affairs, in length of time will not furnish a Precedent
for. And these Precedents such as they were reported (which we are hereafter to
consider) by their diligent Members, became a causa justifica, and the matter
in pretense to warrant their proceedings, that a great reason of State did seem
to them to require.

And now whether the Lords Spiritual can be Judges in Capital Causes in
Parliament is become a Question.

Though the Bishops Right to judge in capital Causes in Parliament, seem to be
clear and materially demonstrated from what is visible and obvious, to the most
vulgar observation of the constitution of the Government; every body knows how
the Lords Spiritual and Lords Temporal are placed in the style of Acts of
Parliament, and in the Heralds order in the House of Lords.

The Archbishops give first their Votes, even before Dukes; The Suffragan
Diocesans after the Viscounts, and before the Barons: And in the same order did
the Bishops stand in the public Census in the times of the Saxons, as may be
seen in Sir Henry Spelman his Glossary in the word Alderman.

The great Authority, Power and Rule, that was intended the Prelates should
have in all the great concernments of the Kingdom, that were to make the
business of the House of Lords, may be best understood from the high place that
has been always allotted to their Order in that House; for Public and civil
honors are always appointed and adjusted to the dignity of the Ministers,
offices, and Services, that are to be performed to the Government. Such a
solecism was never enacted by an Order of State, That those persons that were
less in power, and under abatement and restraint of Authority, should be
preferred to those in place, that had plenary power in the same Courts. It is
well known too, That the Archbishop of Canterbury was originally honored with
the first Writ of Summons to Parliament. Since the Conquest there never was an
English Bishop, that had not his several Writ of Summons to Parliament; Though
the number of Temporal Barons have been reduced, and many of the Regular Barons
dismissed of that honor: for that their office was nothing in the Church, and
nothing but the possessions of the Abbots, preferred them to that State.
Nothing seems too big or too high for so great and public a character of the
Bishops, or out of the intendment of their trust that can ever be the business
of a Parliament. The greater the matters are that are agitated there, the more
necessary is the assistance of the Bishops; for he that in any affair is most
trusted, is to be most concerned, and by how much the affairs are of greatest
moment, in the same proportion they are more strictly obliged and required to
assist in the management thereof.

We all know what sort of criminal prosecutions those are, that are made in
Parliament, and what great consideration they are of, that they are always the
symptoms of a very sickly State, and the results of very great disorders in the
Commonwealth. In these Cases, if in any, the Lords Spiritual cannot be wanted:
The neglecting to interpose in any one single prosecution that is
Parliamentary, has proved the occasion, That their Right of Session is now
brought into Question. For to speak the truth, it is not very consistent with
the Reverence that is naturally due to the Prelates, to think that a Trust and
Authority of so high a nature, should be committed to them, and they should at
any time find reasons to neglect it. But for what omissions they have been
guilty of (though upon a general consideration without examining the particular
Causes and Reasons, men not friendly to their Order, may thus censure them) we
shall make a fair Apology as we shall meet with them, and as they fall in to be
considered in this Discourse.

We are now to give you some account, how this comes now to be a question, for
the very questioning thereof makes some prejudice against the Right; and there
is scarce any thing so certain and true in Nature, but if once put under
dispute, that can recover again into a general certainty and assurance.

It has scarce escaped any man's observation, that has been acquainted with
the business of the Courts of Law, That the greatness of the pretender, and the
value of the Interest and Right in pretense, does cause a point of Law to be
contended, which would never else have been stirred, especially if the Right be
invidiously possessed by another. Besides these three considerations, which are
foreign to the true Right, I protest there is nothing to my apprehension of any
moment offered in Print to continue it a Question.

I find Two Books Printed upon this Question, both of them tending to disgrace
the Bishops Right of judging in capital Causes in Parliament. One in Octavo,
called A Letter of a Gentleman to his Friend, showing the Bishops are not to be
Judges in Parliament, in Cases Capital. He begins with a Preface containing
some matters and reasons against Bishops intermedling at all in secular
affairs; and after that he tells us, That the Law of Parliament is best
declared by usage, gives us several precedents, wherein he supposes the Bishops
absent; and concludes they were so for want of Right and Authority to be there.
And to give some Authority to his Precedents of omission (as he would have
them) He tells us of the Assize of Clarendon, an Act of Parliament made 10 Hen.
2 that excluded the Bishops in such Causes; and of a Protestation made by all
the Bishops in the 11 R. 2. whereby they renounce all Judgment of Right in
such Causes, upon the obligation they were under to the Canon Law: and to
render it impossible, they should have any such Right, and to make them
incompetent Judges, he adventures to say and prove after his manner, That the
Bishops are not Peers; and to prepare the way for their remove out of that
House, he adventures to broach an opinion, That the Bishops are not one of the
three States, nor an essential part of the Government.

There is another Book in Folio, called A discourse of the Peerage and
Jurisdiction of the Lords Spiritual in Parliament. This Author pursues the same
design, upon the same grounds, with some peculiar reasonings of his own. If
therein I give him satisfaction in what he has peculiar, without mentioning
distinctly of them, I am sure he will thank me for it.

But we will consider the Octavo's Preface, examine his Precedents, and show
that they are either not against us, or for us. And all along observe the
candor and integrity of the Author. We shall further show how absurd his
Reasonings are to make those Precedents to conclude any thing for his purpose.
We will also with the clearest demonstration prove, That the Assize of
Clarendon establishes the Bishops Authority and right to judge in capital
Causes in Parliament: And likewise, that the protestation made by the Bishops
11. R. 2. is a most solemn Recognition of their Right; that the Bishops have
sat in Judgment in the greatest capital Causes in Parliament that ever
happened; that this their Authority has been exercised in their own Persons,
and by their Proxies, and recognized by Parliaments, and other great Courts of
Judicature; but never before this time brought into Question: That no Canon
could lessen the Right, at most it is but a Council for their guidance in the
exercise of their Authority, which they might observe as they please: That the
Popes Canon Law was never received into England, that prohibits Bishops to
judge in capital Causes: That the Bishops have declined to assist in
pronounceing the Sentence of death, sometimes as undecent for their Order; but
notwithstanding, and without being contrary to the example and practice of
their Predecessors, the Bishops may judge upon the Plea of the Earl of Danby's
Pardon. For that if they do judge the Pardon not good, the Earl is not
therefore to be condemned. And for the better clearing the Bishops Right, and
for the establishing the Government, we shall prove that the Spiritual Lords
are Peers of the Realm, and one of the three States, and an essential part of
the Government, which no legal power can charge or alter. Lastly, we shall
repel the calumnies of the Adversaries in this cause, by which they endeavor
to render the Prelates unworthy of their Right, and to put them amongst the
prodigi and furiosi, that are scarce allowed to be Proprietors of their own.
And conclude our Discourse with a just Apology for the Lords the Bishops.

CHAP. II.
ANd First I begin with the Octavo, which in the Introduction to his Precedents
says, That he will not meddle with the General Question, How far forth
Clergymen in Orders are forbidden having any thing to do with secular matters,
nor what in that particular the Imperial Law requires, as that Rescript of the
Emperor Honorous and Theodosius, which Enacts that Clergymen shall have no
communion with public Functions, or things appertaining to the Court; or the
Decree of Justinian, That Bishops should not take upon them so much as the
Oversight of an Orphan, nor the proving of Wills: saying, It was a filthy thing
crept in amongst them, which appertained to the Master of his Revenue. Nor what
our common Law of England seems to allow or disallow, having provided a special
Writ in the Register upon occasion of a Master of an Hospital, being it seems a
Clergyman, and chosen an Officer in a Manor, to which that Hospital did
belong, saying it was, Contra Legem and consuetudinem Regni, and non consonum;
It was contrary to the Law and Custom of the Kingdom, and not agreeable to
reason, That he who had cure of Souls, and should spend his time in Prayer, and
Church duties, should be made to attend upon Secular employments. I meddle not
neither says he, with what seems to be the Divine Law, as having been the
practice of the Apostles, and by them declared to be grounded upon reason, and
to be what in reason ought to be; which was this, That they should not leave
the word of God and serve Tables, though that was a Church Office; and yet they
say it is not reason we should do that, for their work was the Ministry of the
Word and Prayer, much less then were they to be employed in secular affairs.
This with great skill he prefixes to his precedents (which make the Law of
Parliament, which is the Law of the Land he says) and after he had said all
that he could to make the very pretense it self unlawful, and to persuade the
shutting of the Bishops out of the House, for altogether, he subjoyns his
Precedents: he thought certainly that when he had placed the Precedents in such
a light, they must look all of that color, and have that appearance, which he
endeavors too by other arts to give them.

But we shall spoil his design in a very few words, which the observant Reader
will apprehend, how pertinent it is, and satisfactory to what is objected in
the recited Preface, though we do not for brevity sake apply our answer to
every particular of his Discourse.

We say therefore we cannot think the Clergy fit for Proctors, Public Notaries
and Scriveners, or Ushers of Court, or other subservient offices; nor fit to
make Constables, Tythingmen, and Scavengers; nor to keep watch and ward, and to
be a Hayward or Bailiff of his Worships Manors and Townships: Or that they
should be Merchants or Farmers, or interpose in aany Secular affairs for gain:
That it was declined by the Pastors and Teachers of the Church, as an indignity
for them to administer to Tables, i. e. to the Provisions of Charity in their
Church-feast, and they ought to keep far off from a suspicion of filthy Lucre;
nay, not to preach principally for gain, or make a gain of Godliness: By the
Imperial Law accordingly, they were discharged from the trouble of being Tutors
and Curators of Orphans; nay, where the Law had designed them that care by
their relation to the Orphans, out of respect to their dignity they were
discharged by the Law, that they might not incur unkindness to the neglect of
their relations, nor yet be encumbered with such private attendances to divert
them from their great Cure. Though the Presbytery might be admitted ad Tutelam
Legitimam by their own consent, and this was made Law by Justinian, Cod. L. 1.
By which Law it appears not a Judgment of Incompetency in Clergymen, to
intermedle in Secular affairs; but an honorable exemption of the Bishops from
such private concernments, was the reason of that Law.

It was further provided by a Law of Justinian, Cod. L. 1. That Priests should
not be made of Court-Officers, but those that were so made might continue, the
reason of the Law is contained in it; because that such a man was Enutritus in
Executionibus vehementibus seu asperis and his quae ex ea re accidunt peccatis.
Non utique aequum fuerit modo quidem and illico esse Taxeatam and Buleatam and
facere omnium acerbissima; mox autem Sacerdotem ordinari, and humanitate and
innocentia exponentem dogmata.

In all this the honor of the Church was consulted; But business of weight and
trust was committed to them: Valent. Valens appointed Bishops to set the price
of goods sold with this reason, Negotiatores ne modum mercandi videantur
excedere, Episcopi Christiani quibus verus cultus est adjuvare pauperes,
provideant. Justin. 79. Novel, submits Monks to the Jurisdiction of Bishops
Novel 83. he decrees the like for Clerks, as well for matters Civil, as for
Ecclesiastical Crimes, reserving others to his officers; and furthermore, in
case the Bishops cannot or will not take cognizance of them, he refers them to
his Magistrates.

Nay, the Emperors proceeded further, and did give Jurisdiction to Bishops,
not only over Clerks, but also over Laymen. Constantine the Great (whose Law
the Canonists ascribe to Theodosius) made a very favorable constitution in
behalf of Bishops; whereupon he gives them the Cognizance of all civil Causes
betwixt Laymen, upon the bare demand of one of the Parties, albeit the other
did not consent unto it, in such sort as the Magistrates are bound to desist
from the Cognizance of it, as soon as one of the parties shall require to be
dismissed and sent thither, whether it be at the beginning or middle or end of
the suit.

Arcadius and Honorius derogating from this Law, will have it to be by the
joint consent of both parties, and that by way of Arbitrament.

The same Emperors together with Theodosius do ordain, That there shall be no
appeal from the Episcopal Judgment, and that their sentence shall be put in
execution by the Sergeants and Officers of the Judges.

The two last, Justinian would have to be observed; for as for that of
Constantine he did not insert it in his Books, which Gratian has confessed in
his decrees: and whereas in the Code of Theodosius, the inscription of the
Title runs thus, De Episcopali Judicio; Justinian instead of it has put De
Episcopali audientia, to show that it is not properly any Jurisdiction that is
bestowed upon them but a friendly and arbitrary composition to abridge process.

After this the Emperor Charles the Great in his Capitulary renewed the Law of
Constantine, and gave the same jurisdiction therein contained unto all the
Bishops, repeating the same Law, word for word; which the Popes have not forgot
in their Decrees, where they have inserted the Constitution of Constantine
under the name of Theodosius, just as Justinian did in his Books, the Responses
and Commentaries of Lawyers to give them the strength of a Law.

But I know there is a Question made by very Learned men, Whether that Law of
Constantine is not supposititious? But whether it be or be not, we have
alleged enough without it to prove that Christian Emperors, and the ancient
Christian Church was not of the opinion of this Author, and that his Citations
so much as they are true, are nothing to his purpose; The cause or reason of
those two Laws expressed in the Laws are, For that the authority of Sacred
Religion invents and finds out many means of allaying Suits, which the Ties and
Forms of captious Pleadings will not admit of; That the judgments of Bishops
are true and uncorrupted; That this is the choking of those malicious seeds of
Suits; To the intent that poor men entangled in the long and lasting snares of
tedious Actions, may see how to put a speedy end to those unjust demands which
were proposed to them.

But the Pope his Decretals, the Court of Rome, and other Ecclesiastical Courts
are of old complained of, as the source of Iniquity and injustice, and of all
the shufflings and tricks that ever could be invented in matter of pleading,
and that all Papal Christendom has groaned miserably under them; and I wish
that we may never hear duly of any such complaints of our Ecclesiastical Courts.

It is worth observing how the Church and Commonwealth did Actions contrary to
each other in pursuance of their several interests. The Commonwealth
endeavored to engage Bishops in the highest secular affairs and in their
supreme Judicatures, and so the people would have it, not doubting of such
administrations as they might fairly expect from the Bishops ability, Authority
and Religion. But on the other side the Church did as much decline them as she
could, and so far as she might, she used her Restraint only in prohibiting them
from meddling for their own private gain in Temporal affairs. Can. 14. Arles,
clericus turpis lucri gratia aliquid genus negotii non admittat: but they did
not take from them all opportunities both of doing good to their people and
securing the Secular power (of which they became part) to their own assistance,
and without refusing their services to the Prince when required: from which
practice of the Church, the Pope took advantage to put his peremptory
restraints upon the Bishops and Clergy from intermedling in Secular affairs to
make them the more submitted and dependent upon himself, the better to arrive
to his Ecclesiastical Monarchy. The Dignities and favors that Bishops received
at the Courts of Princes, was the envy of the Pope, and matter of quarrel
against them; and Petrus Blissensis, upon such an occasion makes an Apology to
Pope Alexander the Third, in an Epistle writ in the Name of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, in defense of the Bishops of Ely, Worcester and Norwich, who
attended then at Court upon the service of the King: which because he has been
an Author produced by the other side in this Cause, and because what he says
for their being admitted into the Councels of Princes, contains so many
advantages to the Church and State, I shall here transcribe; Non est novum quod
Regum Conciliis intersint Episcopi, sicut enim honestate and sapientia caeteros
antecedunt, sic expeditiores and efficaciores in Reipub. administratione
censentur; quia sicut scriptum est (minus salubriter disponitur regnum, quod
non regitur consilio Sapientum) in quo notatur eos consiliis regum debere
assistere qui sciant and velint and possint patientibus compati, terrae ac
populi saluti prospicere erudire adjustitiam Reges, imminentibus occursare,
periculis, vitaeque maturioris exemplis informare subditos, and quadam
Authoritate potestativa praesumptionem malignantium cohibere: He proceeds in
his discourse, and brings the examples of Samuel, Isaiah, Elisha, Jehojada,
Zachary, who were Priests and Prophets respectively, and yet employed in
Princes Courts and Councels of Kings, and adds, Vnum noveritis quia nisi
familiares and Consiliarii Regis essent Episcopi supra dorsum Ecclesiae hodie
fabricarent peccatores, and immaniter and intolerabiliter opprimeret Clerum
praesumptio laicalis: then he adds advantages to Religion and policy hereby,
Istis mediantibus mansuescit circa simplices judicarius rigor -- admittitur --
clamor pauperum, Ecclesiarum Dignitas erigitu, relevatur pauperum indigentia,
firmatur in Clero libertas, pax in populis, justitia libere exercetur, superbia
opprimitur, augetur laicorum devotio, religio fovetur, diriguntur judicia.

It is well known (and I will not be so impertinent as to go about to prove)
that the chief Ministers of Religion have been the greatest men in Civil
Government in all Nations, and in all Religions as well as in ours; and as
certain it is, this Author will never find reason or precedent of Authority or
weight enough to persuade the contrary; or an alteration therein
notwithstanding that complaint which he tells us was made in the 45 of E. 3.
fol. by the two Houses, Counts, Barons, and Commons to the King, how the
Government of the Kingdom had been a long time in the hands of the Clergy; Per
cet grant mischiefs and damages sont avenuz en temps pass, and pluis purroit
eschire en temps avenir, al disherison de la Coronne and grant prejudice du
Royalme: Whereby great mischiefs and damages have happened in times past, and
more may fall out in time to come to the disherison of the Crown, and great
prejudice to the Realm. And therefore they humbly pray the King that he would
employ Laymen; This they had too much reason to desire then, when the Pope had
advanced his Authority over them, and put them under Oaths of Canonical
obedience, which rendered them less fit to be entrusted in the Government of
this Kingdom, who were become Subjects of another Empire, usurping continually
upon us; which will never be our Case again if the Bishops can help it.

CHAP. III.
ANd now we proceed to the Precedents, of which the Octavo Book principally
consists, which seem, as that Author and the other in Folio would have it, to
be not only a discontinuance of the Right of the Bishops to judge in Capital
Causes, but an argumentative proof that they never had any; because it can as
they say be never proved to be otherwise. Immemorial time I confess is a great
evidence, of the right whether In non user or user, and a fair reason to allow
or deny the pretense; and therefore we will now consider the Precedents: As for
the argumentative and discoursive parts of those books they will fall in to be
answered by way of Objection, when we are discoursing and proving the
affirmative part of the Question, and will best be reproved by being placed
near the light of our reasons for establishing the Right of the Prelates.

If we do not give some satisfaction to these Precedents, whatever we shall
say, I know can signify no more than an Argument to prove a thing not true,
which is possible, and de facto, testified by unexceptionable witnesses; for
such the Precedents will be taken until exceptions are made to their Testimony.

The Precedents produced by the two Authors are mostly the same, only the
Octavo has more than what the Folio Book has recited.

The first case that the Octavo produces against the Lords Spiritual, their
Right of being Judges in Parliament in Capital Causes, is that of Roger
Mortimer Earl of March, Simon Beresford and others (who were no Peers, and yet
tried in Parliament) and no Bishops present; and we agree it probable for his
reason, because there is mention made of Counts, Barons, and Peers, and Peers
being named after Barons could not comprehend the Bishops. And because we think
it reasonable, when the orders of that House are particularly enumerated, that
the order omitted should be intended absent; but we will not allow but that
Peers is, and so is Grants comprehensive of Bishops: Nor will we when the entry
is General intend the Bishops absent, except he cannot otherwise prove them
absent, which we mention in the entry once for all, as just and common measures
between us in this dispute. It will appear true what we affirm of the words,
Peers and Grants, by what follows: And if we should not insist upon their being
present, when nothing appears to the contrary, we should do wrong to the Cause.

But to come to the consideration of this Precedent: Is this a just Precedent?
Is not Magna Charta hereby violated? Are not the proceedings altogether
illegal? Here are Commoners tried by Peers in Parliament. It is well known,
that the high displeasure of the King was concerned, and that he did interpose
with a plenitude of Power in this particular case against the fundamental
constitutions of the Government; the greatest crime of this Earl was too much
familiarity with the Kings Mother, Indignation and Revenge and not Justice
formed the Process, It was proceeded to condemn him Judicio Zeli, upon pretense
of the Notoriety of the fact.

Sir Robert Cotton in his abridgment tells us Anno 4. Ed. 3. That the King
charged the Peers (who as Judges of the Land, by the Kings assent adjudged)
that the said Roger as a Traitor should be drawn and hanged. The Bishops were
not present, certainly they were none of the Judges that gave Judgment as the
King pronounced without Cognizance of the Cause; The King had more Honor for
their Order, than to call then to such Drudgery and service of the Crown: The
iniquity of the sentence appears by the reversal thereof in Parliament, 25 Ed.
3. in which the Original Record is recited: Sir Robert Cotton in his Abridgment
tells us, That this Earl being condemned of certain points whereof he deserved
commendation, and for other altogether untrue surmises, there was a Bill
brought into the Lords House for the reversal of the Judgment, and it was
reverst by Act of Parliament; indeed it could not be otherways reverst: for no
Court can judicially reverse their own Judgment; for Error in Law and Judgment
in the Lords House, (being the dernier Resort) cannot be repealed, but undone
it may be by themselves in their legislative Capacity. Here says the Octavo,
the Bishops were not present at the passing of that Bill, but yet the Octavo
Gentleman will not pretend that the Bishops are to be excluded in any Acts of
Legislation. Why therefore was he so willing to impose upon the people so
falsely, and unrighteously, and to produce this as a Precedent against the
Bishops Right of Session in matters of that Nature, by himself recognized?
There is nothing can excuse him herein, for he is certainly self-condemned of
undue Art in thi^ matter.

In 20 R. 2. the Case of Sir Thomas Haxey happened, which the Octavo book (page
20) produces against us. He was forsooth condemned in Parliament, for that he
had preferred a Bill in the House of Commons, for regulating the outrageous
Expenses of the Kings House, particularly of Bishops and Ladies. Haxey was for
this tried, and condemned to death for it in Parliament. And here appears to be
no Bishops, and there ought not to have been any for these reasons. First, that
the Bishops were the parties wronged, and therefore could not in any fitness
give sentence; But Secondly, (if that was not in the Case) that that caused the
process was Royal anger upon a great faction of State, (in which I believe the
Bishops were not engaged) made for deposing of Rich. the 2d. that was
understood by the King to be in acting, and promoted by Sir Thomas Haxey by his
Bill. It was this made the sentence altogether abhorrent from legal justice in
matter and form. Here was a Trial of a Commoner by Peers, a matter made
Treason, that did participate nothing of the nature of Treason. But the
discreet Gentleman will take notice of nothing that is faulty in this Case, but
that this proceeding tends to abridge freedom of speech in Parliament, which he
loved from his youth, which we do not blame in him: As he did also to talk
against Bishops, which he cannot depart from, when he is old. But in the first
of Hen. 4. this Judgment of Attainder was repealed and annulled, as he himself
tells us Fol. 25. And here the Lords Spiritual were Judges, which must be
remark't for the honor of their Order, that though they were the pars laesa,
by that fault, such as it was; yet notwithstanding they concurred readily to
the repealing the Judgment.

But by this it appears that the Bishops did agreeable to their rightful
Authority, sit in Judgment in Parliament in capital Causes; and therefore in
consequence, because it is a Case of his own production, he ought to allow that
the Bishops might have had Session in the Repeal of the Attainder of Roger Earl
of March, if it had been, or could have been repealed by Judgment, or a
judicial Act of the Lords House.

For will this renownedly wiseman, for avoiding of this his own testimony
which he has justly produced (though it proves to testify against himself)
say, that the Bishops can be present at repealing of a Judgment of
Condemnation, but not present at confirming any?

Does not it, in this proceeding come before them in Judgment, and
consideration, Whether the sentence shall be repealed or affirmed, and is not
this with a witness, a question of blood? The Judgment being upon an appeal or
review must be final, peremptory and decretory, and is more a question of
blood, than the Cause can be reckoned and deemed to be upon the first Instance.
Or does he think fit that there should be two sorts of Judges appointed, a
hanging Judge, and a saving Judge; if he does, I am sure he will not be able to
find an employment for a just Judge.

So that, I think, to all men that can consider, we have sufficiently vacated
that testimony, that the Cases of the Earl March and Haxey's seemed to give
against us, and they are fairly come over to our side. And we have provided
herein sufficiently for the recovering of all men into an indifferency against
the Prejudices, this Octavo by its great Esteem has done to their Judgments.

The Third Precedent is, 15 E. 3. That Parliament was declared to be called for
the Redress of the breach of the Laws, and of the Peace of the Kingdom, and as
the Octavo has it Fol. 8. because the Prelates were of opinion, that it
belonged not properly to them to give Council about keeping the peace, nor
punishing such evils; they went away by themselves, and returned no more (says
he) but that is out of the Record, (so ready this Author in Octavo is to shut
them out of the House;) but I pray would not the Temporal Lords, if the King
had consulted the Parliament in matters Ecclesiastical, have in like manner
departed, but would such departure of the Temporal Lords exclude them from
having any thing to do in the Affairs of the Church; Why then are the Bishops
treated in their Right so unequally?

And this must serve for an Answer to the Folio, p. 17. where he is very large
in reciting Records of process, and Proclamation against the Earl of
Northumberland, agreed only by Lords. If a Liturgy, or book of Canons were to
be established by Law, the Bishops certainly would have the forming of them.
The Octavo says, that Commissions were then framed by the Counts, Barons, and
other Grants, and brought into Parliament, but no Bishop was present, so much
as to hear the Commissions read; because they were to enquire into all Crimes,
as well Capital, as others. And for affirming this (for all that can appear to
us) he only consulted his Will and pleasure like an honest man, to the cause he
defends, for he has not told us from any Record, what the Nature of these
Commissions were. But we observe, that though this Parliament was called for
matters of the peace, yet the Bishops had their Summons, and it was not a
Parliament excluso Clero. The Bishops it seems upon the opening of the
Parliament, and the causes of convening, modestly, it seemed, declared that
they were not competent, as not perhaps studied in Pleas of the Crown, or
perhaps had not been so observant in fact, of the matters of grievance. What
harm in all this? they that cannot propound may judge of Expedients propounded,
and so did they; for it does appear by the Record 6 E. 3. N. 3. that the
Results of the Temporal Lords were approved in full Parliament, by the King,
Bishops, Lords and Commons, which the Folio agrees. But it seems modesty is a
dangerous thing; and not to be forward to judge and determine, though the
matter be not understood, may be a good Cause to turn a Judge out of his
Office, and forfeit his Judicature. Besides, the principal business of this
Parliament was Legislation, in which the Prelates have an undisputed Right of
Session, and may they not advise upon what they make into a Law? May not they
consider of the matter that is to pass into a Law in all the steps it makes?

But it is admirable what the Folio Book says, viz. that by this Record it is
evident that the Prelates have no judicial power over any personal Crimes,
which are not Parliamentary (I suppose he means Crimes not debated in
Parliament) This does very much fortify the foundations and grounds of his
discourse. What are the grounds of his discourse, I shall never be able to find
out, except it be an overweening Opinion of himself to meddle with these
matters which seem too high for him; and to which the reading of my Lords Cooks
Institutes, and the broken Commentaries of the Law, will never render any man
competent.

Its true the Bishops have never any power and Cognizance of any Causes, except
they are commissionated thereto, out of Parliament. But as true it is of the
Temporal Lords; and therefore whatsoever advantage this will do his Cause, with
all my heart let him take it.

The next Case produced as a Precedent for them, is the Case of Sir William de
La Zouch, and Sir John Gray, for a quarrel in the Kings presence; they were
both committed to the Tower, and after brought into Parliament, no Bishops
there.

It is a Case that could not be judged there, neither was it; but one of them
was discharged, because no probable matter of offense against him, and the
other remanded to the Tower, (I suppose) to be proceeded against as the Law
required. Is this cause (I pray) to his purpose? have not the Prelates judgment
in causes of Trespass, that properly come before that House by his own
Confession? And yet the Octavo remarks here, that no Bishops were present to
judge so much as of a Battery; though the Record warrants him to say only an
Assault. But out of his great sincerity, and to make a Precedent where he could
not find one for his turn, he foists a Battery into the Case, hoping that then
the forward Reader would supply the Rest, and smell blood in the Case, which
must be interdicted to a Bishops Cognizance.

But observe what an aking-tooth he has against the Bishops Right; for he
could not but have in his mind, what almost immediately after, he writes down
in his Octavo (viz.) the Case of Sir John Lee, 24 E. 3. and of several persons
50 E. 3. and 51 E. 3. censured in Parliament, by Bishops for misdemeanors. And
he says well they might; which certainly together with the Case of Michael de
la Pooll, 10 R. 2. he troubled himself to transcribe, to make a show of Number
and false musters, a slight that must not pass upon the people, and a
Stratagem that will never get him any advantage toward a Victory.

We omitted to consider the Case of Sir William de Thorpe 50 E. 3. as it lies
in order in his Book, because we thought it more expedite to examine those that
spoke to the same thing together, but now we will examine it. The Record of a
Judgment of death against him for Buggery, was brought into Parliament, says
the Octavo; in full Parliament says Sir Robert Cotton, and the King caused it
to be read before the Grants in Parliament: The Bishops (says the Octavo)
could not be there, because this was no employment for them; and thus he proves
his cause, it was so, because it was so. And for want of proof concludes he
has a very good Cause: But he knows if he would tell us the truth, that a full
Parliament does include Bishops; that the Bishops are truly Grants and so
called, that the Bishops could not vanish away, at the putting of the question.
But we should have had a most famous Record of that story and wonderful
Accident.

The Cause of William de Weston and John de Gomenits 1 R. 2. was for
traitorously surrendering Towns and Castles in Flanders to the Kings Enemies.
And the question was, whether they behaved themselves well in their defense,
and did therein like valiant and faithful Commanders; Whether the Towns could
be preserved against the strength of the Enemies that did attach them. Indeed
not a very proper question for a Bishop to determine: The Examination of the
Charge and defense was committed to several Lords Temporal, named in the
Record; But it must be observed, though these Lords managed the Cause, found
the Towns upon Examination, not of necessity, but wilfully delivered, and
agreed what Judgment should be pronounced against them: Yet observe their
Answers were put in full Parliament. When the Judgment was pronouncing, there
was likewise sitting a full Parliament, which the Octavo does wilfully omit.
And the Record further says, that they were brought before the Seigniors in
Parliament, Friday the 27. of November, and again, before the said Lords,
Saturday the 28. of Nov. That all this while in the Record, there is no mention
of the Names of any particular Lords, so that we hear nothing yet in the
Record, but of a full Parliament, Seigniors in Parliament, which are the most
comprehensive terms, and can, and do include Bishops, and strongly intend them
included. He that says all, excepts none, the Record says, that when the
Judgment was to be pronounced, Les Seigniors dudit Parliament cestascavoir, and
then names the Duke of Lancaster, Earls of Cambridge, March, Arundel, Warwick,
Stafford, Suffolk, Salisbury, Northumberland, Lord Nevil and Clifford; and
other Lords, Barons and Bannerets being then in Parliament, had met and advised
upon the matters before. These Lords agreed it seems the Judgment for the whole
House, and it was pronounced in full Parliament; and that in the Names and
Authority of the whole Parliament. Pray let it be observed, that when the
Record speaks of Seigniors, in the first part of it, no Lords are named, and so
all intended; when afterward he mentions the Lords, the Record says
avantdits, or foresaid Lords, and no Lords named yet, so that all the Lords of
Parliament are then likewise included: But when he names the Lords that had
advised, there is no avantdits, or aforesaid. Though the Octavo puts the
avantdits, or the aforesaid to the named Lords, to the purpose, that it may
seem, that no Lords were present in this Cause before in Parliament, but those
named and mentioned, amongst the which there were no Bishops, against the Faith
of the Record. To the Record I appeal. Rot. Parl. 1 R. 2. Mem. 5.

The next is Sir Ralph Ferrers his Case, 4 R. 2. He was brought into
Parliament, and there tried for Treason, in holding intelligence with the
French. The Entry is, It seemed to the Lords of the Parliament, that the said
Sir Ralph was innocent. This testimony too is argumentative, and concludes
Bishops not there, because not expressly mentioned, as they were in Alice
Perries Case, 1 R. 2. I never could have a good opinion of a cause, that has
nothing but argumentative proofs, for this reason; because there are more
things possible than ever happened; but a reasoning Witness is always accounted
a willing Witness, and therefore a Witness suspectae fidei; but most certain, a
Witness with a reason His testimony is no better than his reason. But I pray
must the Entries of the Clerks be so nicely weighed? Are they so oracularly
penned, that every iota of the Journal must comprehend a Mystery of State, and
carry in it the very constitution of the Government? must that be such and no
other, than short or large Entries make it? Must a Criticism upon the Clerks
form of Entry alter and refix the Government? must it change and be ambulatory
at the haste or leisure, the short or more large Entry of the Clerk? Did ever
any wise man, before this Criticiser, ever determine questions of the greatest
moment upon such trifling considerations? or suspend the most momentous
concerns of a Nation, the very Government it self, upon such a very slender
thread? But to leave no scope for such Cavillations, we will turn him to the
Parl. Rolls of 14 E. 3. Were not the Grants the Bishops, as well as the
Temporal Lords? Are not both Bishops and Peers called Seigniors? Are not
Seigniors and Grants of the same import? And as certainly this argumentative
testimony makes no credit to the Cause, nor to the Author of the Octavo who
produced it.

The next Case is of the Bishop of Norwich, 7 R. 2. who is brought to Judgment
in Parliament, amongst other offenses, for betraying Graveling to the French,
which was Treason. And this cause the Record says, was heard before the Lords
Temporal: And here I will agree that the Bishops were not present, but I will
not allow that they were excluded. And if that addition of Temporal had been to
the Seigniors in Sir Ralph Ferrers Case, or to the Grants in Sir Will. Thorps, I
would have allowed the Bishops in those Cases not present likewise. But why I
pray may it not be with as much fairness concluded that the Bishops were
present (because the addition of Temporal is not made to Seigniors and Grants)
in the said Cases of Sir Ralph Ferrers, and Sir Will. Thorp, as it can be that
they were absent in the hearing of the said Cases, because the word Prelate or
Bishop, is not in those Entries expressed? If he will be just and change the
Tables, He must yield us the Argument, for he knows that there is no
establishment in the Modus tenendi Parliamentum, directing the Forms of
Entries, or any solemnes formulae, whose import and value is ascertained and
made indisputable, but are to be expounded by an easy interpretation; such as
we use, when we make fair constructions in common speech. But to give this
another Answer, The Arguer is herein guilty of that fallacy which they call
(...), or non causa pro causa; And his Witness does not speak ad idem. The
Bishop was an Ecclesiastical person, and though the Bishops might try a
Temporal Lord for the same offense, yet they would not consent to try a Bishop,
and forgo that great privilege of the Clergy, with so much earnestness
defended in that Age, to be exempt from secular Judicatures. They would not be
present to try, because of the person of the Defendant, which cannot be drawn
into Argument to prove that they had no cognizance of the Cause with any
fairness.

But further the Octavo does afterward produce a Testimony that does
contradict this last Testimony in the point for which he produced it. It is the
Case of Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, 21 R. 2. The Bishops
pronounced Judgment against him in Treason by their Proxy. They can it seems
upon great Reasons wave that privilege, and submit a great Malefactor of
their* own Order to Justice, as they did in the Case of Becket heretofore. So
that you see here, they used a Jurisdiction in a Cause of Treason in the Case
of Thomas Arundel, which the Bishops could not have used without a Right; And
the Case of the Bishop of Norwich is only an omission consistent with a Right.

The Case of Sir William Rikehill is next in order, who was sent by R. 2. to
Calais, to take the Confession of the Duke of Gloucester, who soon after was
Murdered. The Judge was arrested and brought into Parliament before the King,
Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons; the whole matter was examined, and
the Judge was examined. Here is likewise a clear Case for the Bishops, an
Instance wherein they did take cognizance of a Capital Cause in Parliament. But
the Octavo has a Shift for us, and says that there was no impeachment or
charge against the Judge, and so the Bishops might be present at his
Examination. Let the Reader here observe the sleights, wriglings and
prevarications of this Octavo Author; Whatever the World thinks of this Author,
I am much dissatisfyed about him, and cannot believe him a man indifferent and
impartial in this Enquiry.

In his observations of the Parliament of the 15 E. 3. the Bishops he says
vanished like lightning, they went away immediately at the opening. That
matters of the Peace in general were to be treated of (wherein Blood and Member
might not at all be concerned, for all that appears.) They went away and (as he
would have it) they returned no more: and they must not hear so much as a
Commission of the Peace read. But here in this Case of Rikehill they may
examine a Murder. He will say (I am sure) that though the Bishops did examine
it, they could make no judgment of the matter. But who will believe him? In the
Case of de la Zouch and Gray, he observes that Bishops could not be present so
much as at a Battery, though there was no Battery in the Case, and yet he
allows them to judge of all misdemeanors in the same little Book.

I observe but these things, of many more of like nature, which the Reader may
observe of himself, in that little Octavo; that the World may judge, how
unjustly he deals in this Cause: with what iniquity and prevarication he
manages a noble question of Right concerning the Government of the Kingdom.
With what petulancy, spite, and inveterate displeasure, he uses the Bishops.
That he is grinning at them, whetting his teeth, and squinting upon them
perpetually with an evil Eye. He oppugns their Right with Cavillations upon the
Clerks Entries, with what is in the Record, and what is not, and what he is
pleased to add of his own upon them, and with Precedents that reprove one
another. Had it not been more fair for him to have stated the Right upon a
probable result of all the Records considered together, than to make their
Right sometimes more, sometimes less, sometimes to affirm, sometimes to deny
their Right, in the same little Octavo?

He cannot sure think that every Judgment that has been given upon
deliberation in the greatest Judicature, can uncontroulably make the Law; much
less a Fact, much less an Omission, a Negative that can operate nothing. If
nothing be Law but what has always and constantly been done in the same manner
and form, and all circumstances the same, as this Author it seems would have
it; and nothing true Theology (according to Vincentius Lirinensis his Rule) but
what has been received ab omnibus, ubique and semper, We can have no Law, nor
no Theology. Vain and idle opinions must be discharged, such as can have no
consideration with wise men; and the Law must be declared by the Nature of
Government, reason, and the general order of things. But we have made too long
an Excursion, We must return to a further consideration of Rikehil his Case.

And now I submit it to any impartial man, whether the Judge could be arrested
and brought under an Arrest into the Parliament, and be examined and not
accused.

The very next Case he recites is that of John Hall, in which we find nothing
but an Examination and confessal; upon which he was condemned as a Traitor. And
so would it have fared with Sir William Rikehil without doubt, if he had been
guilty and had confessed. Neither the Octavo, nor Sir Robert Cotton mentions
any formality more against the one than the other.

The House of Lords are not tied to Formalities in their proceedings like other
inferior Judicatures: and the more inferior any Court is, the more regular
forms are exacted, and that with great reason, which we will not hear treat of.
Besides, in the Case of the Earl of Northumberland, recited in the Octavo Book
Fol. 34. in 5 H. 4. a Judgment was given against him for an offense upon a
petition, which he exhibited for a pardon of the same offense.

But in the Case of the Earl of Northumberland, I pray observe what the Octavo
says in reference to our question. After he has recited part of the Record in
these words; [The petition being read and understood, the Lords as Peers of
Parliament, to whom such Judgment does of Right appertain, did give their
Judgment] He concludes that the Bishops could not he said to be his Peers,
which shows they were not there. But he must give us leave with much better
Logic, to conclude, that they were present; and We with reason presume,
because they are Peers of Parliament (for so the Record is, not his Peers, for
he fallaciously changes the Terms) they were there, except he can prove them
absent, if common Right is not Reason of presumption, no presumption can be
reasonable. But we can prove to him they were there. And thereby in
consequence, we have another proof that they are Peers.

Sir Robert Cottons Abridgment tells us 5 H. 4. Fol. 426. that at the same time
the Archbishops and Bishops, at their own request, (and therefore certainly
then present) were purged from suspicion of Treason by the said Earl. And at
the same time, I pray observe, Sir Henry Piercy his levying of War was adjudged
Treason by the King and Lords in full Parliament. Note, that here is said to be
a full Parliament, and yet nothing in the Entry, but the style of Lords. So
various and contingent in respect of form are the Entries; which ought to be
observed.

But to review and consider again the Case of John Hall condemned in Parliament
for Treason, for murdering the Duke of Gloucester. And to this place I have
reserved the Case of the two Merchants that killed John Imperial an Ambassador
of Genoua; for both Cases are of the same nature, and must receive the same
answer; and that is this. The Statute of the 25 E. 3. was made to declare
certain matters Treason, and to be so judged in ordinary Judicatures: but
withal that Statute did provide, that if any other Case, supposed Treason, do
happen, it shall be showed to the King and Parliament, whether it ought to be
judged Treason. Concerning which the King and Parliament do and are to declare
by their Legislative power, as it is agreed by all, and as they did in the Case
of John Imperial, as appears by that Record expressly. So that though the
Bishops were not present at the Judgment of John Hall, they might have been (it
must be confessed by our Adversary) if the Judgment against John Hall was by
the Legislative Power, as it must be. By this it appears how false an Argument
this of his is, To conclude no Right from absence; for it is plain, here it
proves too much, it proves a thing notoriously false, a thing false by the
confession of our Adversary: and from what any falsehood may be inferred, is not
it self true, but stands reproved by the falsehood and absurdity of what follows
in consequence thereof. But this is too Solemn Reproof of so frivolous an
Argument, for it is no more in effect than this: That no man can have an
Authority, but what he is always in the exercise of.

The Octavo goes on, and remembers that in the 2 H. 4. the first Writ de
Haeretico comburendo was framed by the Lords Temporal only; and without
question it was so. For the order of proceedings in Case of Heretics Convict,
so required it. The Bishops are upon the Matter, the pars laesa in Heresy. The
authority of the Church is therein offended, and it was not therefore proper
for an Ecclesiastic to be an Actor therein.

The Author does improve this, as he does all things that he can with any
manner of color, to render the Order of Bishops hated, and disesteemed, which
is the public establishment, the legal provision for the Government and
guidance of Religion. What mischief then is he a doing? How great is his fault
to deprave that provision, to destroy their Reputation and Esteem with the
people, to destroy all their authority as much as in him lies? His utmost
endeavors are not thereto wanting, to make their Ministries useless, and to
frustrate the provisions of the Law, and the care of the Government, in the
highest concernment of the Nation. Does this become a great man? I will not say
a good man? God rebuke him. To lessen the Authority, and disrepute and
dishonor any Order of men, or any Constitution, that can be any ways useful to
the public, is a great fault: but this of his, is a most enormous offense.

But what can be inferred from hence against the Order of the Bishops, may be
with like unworthiness inferred against the Christian Religion it self. For it
may be as well concluded, that the Christian Religion is a bad Religion; for
that men of that denomination in the general Apostasy, by pretense of Warranty
from that Religion, though it gave none, murdered innocents: As that the
practices of the Bishops of that Religion so depraved, do reflect any dishonor
against the Bishops of reformed Christianity. And this Answer will suffice too
for the Case of Sir John Old-Castle.

As for the Earls of Kent, Huntingdon and Salisbury, the Lord le Despencer and
Sir Ralph Lumley, before that, executed and declared Traitors in Parliament by
the Lords Temporal only, in the Parliament of the 2 H. 4. and the Earl of
Northumberland and Lord Bardolph, against whom it was proceeded in a Court of
Chivalry after their death, who were declared Traitors after they were dead, in
the Parliament in the 7 H. 4.

I hope the Octavo Gentleman, and all that are at present of his Opinion, will
take this for a sufficient Answer (if we had no more to say) that it was
irregular, very irregular indeed, to condemn men after they were dead; when he
himself would set aside the Authority of the Case of William de la Poole in 28
H. 6. in Parliament where the Bishops were present: which though he says is
the sole single precedent of Bishops acting in Capital Causes, We shall therein
convict him to be a man of Will, to have lost himself in his passions, and his
(...). And enter that Case with a cloud of other testimonies and reasons that
affirm, I will not stick to say, demonstrate, (so as such matters can be
demonstrated) with a moral demonstration, such as shall leave no doubt with any
man, of the Bishops Right of judging in Capital causes in Parliament.

But We shall further add for Answer that the Temporal Lords did not herein
exercise the Office of a Judge. For it could be no Judgment they delivered. It
was only an officious declaration, an avowing of the justness of the slaughter
of these great men, and to enter themselves of the other side. But is it as
reasonable for this Writer, to fore-judge the Bishops of their Franchise, and
to have it seized, because they would not be guilty of a misuser thereof, and
would not consent to so insolent a thing as to judge men unheard, nay when
dead, and they could not be heard? And to kill over again the murdered Lords,
for so they are in consideration of the Law, who are not by legal process
condemned and executed.

I cannot but observe in many of the great convulsions of State, and the
simultates amongst the Great men, and extravagant excesses of injustice, to the
glory and honor of the Bishops it must ever be remembered, that they did
preserve themselves from being engaged in such violences as were committed
against the last mentioned Lords.

But that the Author of the Octavo should produce the Case of Sir John Mortimer
against us, who was condemned upon a bare Indictment without Arraignment or due
Trial (a good reason why the Bishops were not there) when he immediately after
produces the Case of the Duke of Suffolk wherein the Bishops were present, and
will have it stand for nothing, because in that, it was irregularly proceeded,
is monstrous partiality and iniquity. But in what I pray was the irregularity
in the Case of the Duke of Suffolk? Why, because the Commons desired he might
be committed upon a general Accusation: But he was not. And the second
irregularity was, that some Prelates and some Lords should be sent down to the
House of Commons, which is often done. But it is not the Prelates that he is
thus concerned for, but that the Lords lessened their Estate. This (to excuse
him) might make him very angry with that Case and quarrelsome. And yet after
all there is a fallacy in the Case of Sir John Mortimer which he would put upon
us, for Sir John Mortimer was condemned by Act of Parliament; and therefore the
Bishops might have been there if they had pleased, and that with his leave. For
it was by the Duke of Gloucester (who in the Kings absence was commissionated to
call and hold that Parliament) by the Advice of the Lords Temporal, at the
prayer of the whole Commonalty in this present Parliament, and by the Authority
thereof, ordered and decreed, that he should be led to the Tower and from
thence drawn to Tyburn.

I cannot therefore but observe how by the pretense of the Canon a (...)
sometimes, and by other prudent Arts and Recesses from tumultuations, the
Bishops kept themselves often from being engaged in the Animosities of Great
men against one another: A matter remarkable for the commendation of their
Exemplary Wisdom and Justice, and a Recommendation of the men of that Order to
be continued in the greatest trusts that the Government has committed to them.

But now shortly and summarily to review what we have offered in the matter of
Precedents, and together to consider what true value and weight they are of, in
the Cases of Roger Mortimer and Haxey, and of Sir John Mortimer, 2 H. 6. every
body may see a reason why the Bishops should not act, if they had Authority,
and therefore without wilfulness it cannot be concluded they had none. Who sees
not that these Cases are Precedents for us? for that the Bishops judged in the
Reversal of the sentence against Haxey, which if they had reason for it, they
ought to have affirmed. And the Bishops might have been present rightfully at
the undoing the Attainder of Roger Mortimer, by the Confessions of these
Authors.

The Proceedings in the Parliament of 15 E. 3. is a true argument of the
Bishops modesty. But it proves more than he is willing to prove, if true, viz.
that the Bishops cannot join in making Laws to punish public Crimes, and
therefore logically concludes nothing; besides that the matter is false in
fact, as it is alleged.

The Cases of Sir William Thorpe and Sir Ralph Ferrers (taken at best for him)
are but militant, and have as much to say for, as against the Bishops being
there present. But to be true to the cause of the Bishops, We have this
advantage against him, that the Bishops were always in the possession of their
Right, because never fore-judged, and it was once theirs, as we shall prove by
and by: And this makes a presumption that they always used it, when there is
nothing to the contrary.

The Bishops were not present in the Bishop of Norwich's Case: but the Bishops
may be at any time absent upon a sontica Causa. The defendant was a Bishop,
which was a very allowable one in those times. But this must be considered with
the Case of Thomas Arundel Bishop of Canterbury, in whose judgment they were
present virtually by their Proxy; and therefore had a Right to be there.

The Case of John de Gomets, and William de Weston is unduely, and against the
faith of the Record produced against us; for upon the truth of the Record the
Bishops were present, notwithstanding any thing that can be from thence deduced
to the contrary.

The Case of Sir William Rikehil 1 H. 4. is for us, so is the Case of the Earl
of Northumberland 5 H. 4. The Case of John Hall who murdered the Duke of
Gloucester, and of the two Merchants that killed John Imperial the Genoua
Ambassador, 3 R. 2. are foreign to this question, and so is the Case of Sir
John Mortimer, except Judicial Authority and Legislative Authority in Blood,
are of the same consideration, as I think they are, and shall hereafter make
out to be probable: and then those Cases are for our Right.

They confess that the Bishops might have been present if they pleased, and
their absence at the passing of those Bills does not conclude against their
Right, themselves being Judges.

The Writ de haeretico comburendo, is of another consideration, and does not
fall in with the present question. There was no Judgment given, or to be given,
in the Cases of the Earl of Huntingdon, Kent, Salisbury, Lord Le Despencer, Sir
Ralph Lumley, the Earl of Northumberland and Lord Bardolph.

All these Precedents, such as they are, happened in no long Tract of time, but
very tumultuous: Not one of them pretends to be an exclusion of the Bishops
upon Judgment or positive declaration of State. They pretend to be only
instances of Omission, or non user, which may well consist with a Right. And
yet contrary to the true import of these Precedents, and the true Nature of
them, being only of Omission and absence of the Prelates; which as they are,
can make no induction or establish any proposition, whereupon to frame an
Argument or conclude a prescription: Besides that a prescription is not
possible in a mere negative, and to and of nothing. And where no body can use
or possess that Authority in pretense in the defailance of the party to use it,
whose Right it was. Besides that it is not a prescriptible matter (which we
shall further explain hereafter) it being in a matter of the Government, and a
Right arising from its constitution: Contrary, I say, to the whole nature of
the matter, He makes this Argument; a saepe facto ad jus valet argumentum. His
Argument should have been (if agreeable at all to the matter) this, That where
a Right is sometimes not used, there can be no Right. But if this had been said
in English, every body would have condemned his reasoning, and disallowed, if
not laughed at the Argument.

So that we have left this Author neither reason or Argument. We have stripped
the Cause of all the Precedents that pretend to favor it, and have left it
Rara Avis indeed, but not nigro simillima Cygno, as the learned Author in
Octavo has it, with which he reproaches the Right of the Bishops as assisted
only with a single Precedent: But to a Bird of no color at all, the bird in
the Fable I mean, furtivis nudata coloribus, to be exposed to laughter with its
naked Rump.

CHAP. IV.
BUt if these Precedents had been all such as they pretend to be, and the
Bishops not present in Judgment, in any of those Cases which the Octavo and
Folio have produced, and if they had been all Capital Causes that came in
Judgment in that House, and all determined judicially, and not by the
Legislative power of Parliament, and no reason was to be assigned for the
Prelates absence from the Nature of the Cause: If they had had no inducements
to withdraw, from any dissatisfaction they had in the prosecution, and the
pretended Right of the Churchmen (in those days much insisted upon) to be
exempted from the jurisdiction of secular Courts, had not been the Cause of
their absence, which suppositions are not so in fact: And though the Bishops had
never used the Authority and power in question as they have; yet if we can
prove they had once a Right, those Omissions of theirs, can be no prejudice to
the meer-Right. (Though then (I confess) we should labor a-the against
invincible prejudice in the Opinions of most.) 1. For that no man can lose a
Right by not using of it, but where that right can be usurpt by another, and is
so: And that usurpation having been for immemorable time, when no body can tell
when it was otherwise, shall in a matter prescriptible be intended to be
acquired by good Right; and that with great reason, in favor of possession and
the quieting of them; for that Estates and Rights can last longer than the
Grants and Evidences or Records themselves, that first created them. But where
the nature of the Right is such as this of the Bishops in pretense is, which no
body can use for them. For the Temporal Lords sit in Judgment in their own
Right, which is a plenary and complete right, and cannot be made more or less.
Secondly for that no Franchise, from the Power and Authority upward of a Court
Leet, which can be neither more nor less by usuage, than the Law has
established, can be prescribed to: And a Quo Warranto will fore-close and
extinguish an immemorial usuage of any irregular and illegal Franchise. A Right
that can never be prejudged and fore-closed by non user, and such is every
Right that grows from the constitution of the Government, though it should be
discontinued for a long tract of time, may be at any time rightfully and
legally continued.

The happiness of our Case is, that we can point to the time when the Right of
the Prelates to sit in Judgment in Capital Causes in Parliament, was
established; And which is more, imposed upon them, and they put under a
Compulsory, and obliged by the Tenure of their Lands to serve the Crown in that
capacity. And that was in the beginning of the Reign of William the Conqueror:
Mr. Seldom in his Titles of honor, with great probability has fixed it in the
4 year of his Reign, when he made the Bishoprics and Abbeys subject to Knight
service in chief, by creation of new Tenures upon them, and so first turned
their possessions into Baronies, and thereby made them Barons of the Kingdom by
Tenure. This he says is justified by Mat. Paris, and Roger of Windover, out of
whom Mat. Paris took this Relation. Anno 1070. (so are their words) Rex
Willielmus pessimo usus consilio Episcopatus and Abbatias omnes quae Baronias
(that is by Anticipation; for the Lands made Baronies) tenebant in pura and
perpetua, and eatenus ab omni servitute seculari libertatem habuerunt, sub
servitute statuit militari, etc. This he makes further probable, for that in a
Manuscript Copy, which he used, in a very ancient hand, these words are noted
in the upper Margin over the year 1070. hoc anno servitium baroniae imponitur
Ramesiae. It seems, says he, the volumn belonged to the Abbey of Ramsey; And
some Monk of the House noted that in the Margin, touching his own Abbey, which
equally concerned the rest of the Abbeys that were mentioned in that Relation;
by their Lands being put under the Tenure by Barony, and they made Barons, they
had a Right to sit with the rest of the Barons in Councellor Courts of
Judgment; For says Mr. Seldom, tenere de Rege in capite, habere possessiones
sicut Baroniam; and to be a Baron, and to have Right to sit with the rest of
the Barons in Council or Courts of Judgment, according to the Laws of that time
are Synonymies. So that there were no distinctions of Barons, as to power, and
Authority, or Jurisdiction; but the Right of a Baron was the same, whether he
was a Temporal or Spiritual Baron, for the Tenure of both is one and the same,
and therefore the Services must be the same.

The office (that is, the result of this Tenure) is the same in the House of
Lords, and indeed no office can be less than what the Law appoints it. The King
cannot make a Peer, a Judge or a Bishop, and put any Restraint upon the
exercise of the powers, and the jura ordinaria, that belongs by the appointment
of the Law to a Peer, Bishop or Judge. And that it is an office by Tenure, can
make no difference, for the Law declares the Power and Authority: So that the
Powers of all Barons are and must be equal, and what is allowed to one Baron
cannot be denied to another.

William the Conqueror made the Bishops Barons, by putting them to hold as by
Barony, did not intend only the Bishops more honor, but himself also more
service, and better assured. He cannot be intended (especially) to abate them
their service in punitive or vindictive Justice, which a Conqueror of all
other performances cannot want. I do not doubt, and if it were not unnecessary
to this question, likewise to show that before the Conquest, the Bishops or
Spiritual Lords had a great share with the Thanes or Temporal Lords in the
Government, and were then one of the three States, agreeable to all the Gothish
Saxon (for the Saxons were Goths which we must not here insist upon) and Modern
Governments that have been planted in Europe, which we shall speak to more
hereafter: But we will resort no higher than this of their becoming Barons by
Tenure, in time of the Conqueror, for the clearing of the Prelates Right now
in question. And therefore we are not concerned to say any thing to the Case of
E. Godwin, mentioned in the Octavo, in Edward the Confessor's time: For Brevity
sake, and because we will not pass the Limits of our own Arguments, otherwise
we had much to say against the Authority of that Sorry, as it is by the Octavo
mentioned.

But to this day, neither in Record or History, have we heard of any the least
pretense of any special abatement made of any service due by the Tenures by
Barony to any Bishops or other Spiritual Baron by the Conqueror, at the time
of the creating those Tenures, neither did the Bishops when they would fain
have been excused from judging in Blood ever pretend to it, or make any such
excuse, that their Tenures did not oblige them thereto.

They have ever been esteemed to have power of Judgment in Capital Causes in
Parliament: and in a long tract of time, it has been several ways used and
acknowledged. Their Right is so far from being fore-judged, that it never till
of late was brought in question. They have pretended sometimes that they ought
not to use that Right in observation of the Canon Law, and have made their
protestation according; whether of necessity or choice shall be considered.
They were upon the score of the Canon Law indulged in the Satute of Clarendon
from being present and assisting in giving the Judgment of Death and mutilation
of Limb, yet their Right was not by that Statute destroyed or hurt, it put them
only at liberty to use it, or not: but put no obligation or legal restraint
upon them not to use it. That Law was in favor of their Liberty, not a
Restraint upon their Right.

The words of that Law that concern this question, we shall here set down.
Archiepiscopi, Episcopi and universae personae Regni qui de Rege tenent in
capite, habeant possessiones suas de Rege sicut Baroniam, and inde respondeant
Justiciariis and ministris Regis, and sequantur and faciant omnes consuetudines
regias, and sicut caeteri Barons debent interesse judiciis Curiae quousque
perveniatur ad diminutionem membrorum vel ad mortem. Whether these words are
words of Liberty or Restraint, of prohibition or indulgence and favor, as also
how far this favor, Liberty or Indulgence did extend, will appear clearly by
the occasion of the Law, and the History of those times, for whose sake it was
made, and upon what inducements, and how far they did use their Liberty
afterward.

It is notorious that the design and endeavor of some Bishops of that age, and
before from the days of Gregory the seventh, was to establish an Ecclesiastical
Monarchy in the Pope, to make themselves the Grandees of another Kingdom, they
endeavored to exempt themselves from all Civil subjection, as also from being
any part of the Civil Government, over which their Church Empire was to rule
and domineer. They looked upon their Baronies to be marks of Slavery, and
inconsistent with their designed Church-empire, by which they were kept in
subjection to the Government, and made a part of it, which was designed by the
Conqueror, but most sharply complained of, as may be seen in Mat. Paris. Rex
Willielmus pessimo usus consilio Episcopatus sub servitute statuit militari,
and rotulas hujus Ecclesiasticae servitutis ponens in Thesauris, multos viros
Ecclesiasticos huic constitutioni pessimae reluctantes a Regno fugavit. If the
Bishops then had been ambitious and desirous, that they might be as the rest of
the Barons were, Judges in the Kings Court, then it is true that the word
quousque must be a word of Exclusion, and that their pretense of judging was
fore-closed to all matters under the quousque. For if I ask a thing which is
not my right, that which is not granted is denied, and by such denial (in case
of a Law declared,) the more unlawful. But this cannot possibly be, for they
were already Barons, and Judges as other Barons. This they reckoned a
servitude, and was matter of grievance and complaint: But the Assise of
Clarendon did proceed from the King, for the asserting his Sovereign Power, to
resist the design of the Papal Monarchy and to oblige the Bishops to continue
part of the Government, and to tie them to the duty of their Tenures. Gervasius
tells us Col. 1386. that the Bishops did not know what the Consuetudines
Ecclesiasticae in the Assise of Clarendon were, but they imagined them to be
evil, because the King did so much insist upon them. Nesciebant (says he
speaking of the Bishops) hujusque quae essent illae consuetudines, sed pravas
esse suspicabantur, eo quod tanta instantia peterentur. But the King commanded
as follows, sapientia provectiores, ite, disquirite Avi mei consuetudines, ut
in scriptum redactae deducantur in medium and public recenseantur, quas cum
seorsum veteres actus and pravitates, so he calls the Statutes of Clarendon, in
scripta reduxissent, haec tandem scripta modo Chirographi protulerunt, which
the Archbishop was required to seal as the custom then was in passing of Laws.
It is likewise evident in the very Assise of Clarendon, that the Bishops were
then Barons, and ought to do the office of a Baron, and were by being Barons
Judges, and ought interesse sicut caeteri Barons Judiciis Curiae Domini Regis.
But how far they should by that Statute be bound hereafter, this Law was to
determine: In consequence the Quousque is but a Clause of Liberty (at most) and
the matter under it, left to choice. A privilege indeed the Bishops might
hereby obtain, to judge, or not to judge in Causes of blood, which they used in
all aftertimes, as they pleased, as they did more or less regard the Canons,
as either they did or were thought to intend. No right was hereby fore-closed
of judging, but established, for the words are debent interesse. Quousque is a
Clause of exception, and leaves them in that matter at large, and savours not
at all of a prohibition. But though the Bishops might have such a Liberty, by
the Letter of the Assise of Clarendon, to judge, or not to judge at all in
capital Causes, which does not at all impair their Right, but that
notwithstanding they may use their rightful authority, when they please: Yet
the Bishops did not intend themselves further privileged by this Law, than
that they should not be obliged to be present at the pronouncing of the
sentence, which appears by the Canons that have been made about this matter in
England, which we shall mention hereafter, which would have been most
peremptory in their prohibitions and very severe in their denouncing Curses, in
a matter of this nature, as far as they had the Laws on their side. As also by
the Practice of the Bishops in those times, which appears by Peter Blesensis,
whose words are Principes sacerdotum and seniores populi, (by which he means
the Bishops, who from the dignity and worthiness of their Order are called
Seniores, a note of dignity in all Countries, in all Ages, which I observe
because some are so ignorant as not to know it, and think the Laity is meant by
seniores populi, but if the Lay Barons had been guilty of that which he there
complains of as well as the Bishops, he would instead of this complaint,
declaimed against the folly and madness of the Age, for want of justice) Licet
non dictent judicia sanguinis, eadem tamen tractant disputando, and disceptando
de illis, seque ideo immunes a culpa reputant, quod mortis aut truncationis
membrorum judicium decernentes, a pronuntiatione duntaxat and executione
poenalis sententiae se absentent. And it is most observable, that the Bishops
did never excuse themselves from Session in Criminal Causes, by virtue of the
Assise of Clarendon, but from the inhibition of the Canon; and the use of the
Liberty will best declare the Nature of it.

CHAP. V.
It Is most remarkable for the understanding aright the true meaning of this
Law, that the Bishops were admitted Judges in Parliament without exception of
the Temporal Lords in the Case of Thomas Becket accused of Treason, though the
King and Temporal Barons had reason to believe, that the Bishops would not do
right to the Crown against that unruly and rebellious Prelate: and when the
Bishops themselves would have been glad of that pretense to have withdrawn
themselves. And this was about eight Months after the making the Statutes of
Clarendon; And in a short time after the swearing the observance of them by all
the Grants of the Kingdom. But the Law was then so well understood (however the
Letter of the Statute makes matter of dispute now) that it was by no body in
the least pretended, that it was to be understood to such a sense, as it is now
drawn to: viz. to exclude the Bishops the Spiritual Barons from judging in
capital Causes in Parliament. In those times they had only such an
understanding as we have here before offered.

We shall therefore now proceed to give you an account how in the course of
time the Right of the Prelates has been used and recognized. We will begin
with the Case of Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, at a Parliament held in
October in the 11 H. 2. Anno Domini 1165, at the Castle of Northampton. To this
Parliament Archbishop Becket was cited as a Criminal, and had not his Summons
as Archbishop (so that that Parliament seemed to be convened for doing him
Justice; the offense must therefore be very great, so Stephanides tells us, as
he is cited by Mr. Seldom 707.) Though he was wont of custom to have the first
Summons by the Kings Writ. Nec tunc enim (says he) nec diu ante ei scribere
voluerat, qui eum salutare nolebat. Nec aliam per literas sibi directas
solennem ac primam, ut antiquis moris erat, habuerat Archiepiscopus ad
Concilium citationem. Becket was there accused of Treason, laesae majestatis
coronae, says Fitz-Stephen a Monk of Canterbury that attended Thomas Becket
the Archbishop in his troubles. Bishop Godwin in his Book de Praesulibus tells
us that Archbishop Becket, Omnia sibi cernens infesta, Navicula apud Rumenegam
conscensa, in Galliam profugere conatus, ventis adversantibus in littus
repertus ac deprehensus ad Regem, Conventus Northamptoniae agentem, adductus
est. Ibi, repentundarum, peculiatus, perjurii, proditionis, falsi and nescio
quot aliorum Criminum, cum a caeteris proceribus tum and Episcopis ipsis
suffraganeis, reus factus. This Court is called a Parliament by Mr. Seldom, and
magnum Concilium by Roger of Hoveden, and by others as Mr. Seldom says; But
that it was a Parliament and not the Curia Regis, which we shall speak about
hereafter, does appear by this certain diagnostick, viz. that the Bishops were
Summoned, hereto by personal Writ of Summons to them directed immediately, at
that time, which appears by what is before cited out of Fitz-Stephen, and what
is after taken out of Gervasius. But to the Curia Regis they were Summoned by
the Sheriff by a general Writ, to him for that purpose directed, which is a
distinctive Note and Character of a Parliament, as will hereafter appear.

But Fitz-Stephen says, as Mr. Seldom quotes him, Titles of honor Fol. 705.
that secunda die consulentibus Episcopis and Baronibus Angliae omnibus. Nay he
is so exact in his observation, that he tells us who was not there of the
Bishops, viz. Roffensis Episcopus, and quidam alias nondum venenat. Hoveden
tells us, how Becket had before behaved himself toward the King, that
notwithstanding great endeavors used on the Kings part, to reconcile Becket to
himself, He would not be reconciled to the King. Post multum tempus, says
Hoveden, Ernulphus Lexoviensis Episcopus venit in Angliam, and solicit
laboravit die ac nocte, ut pax fieret inter Regem and Archiepiscopum, sed ad
plenum fieri non potuit. Deinde per consilium Lexoviensis Episcopi Rex
separavit Rogerum Archiepiscopum Eboracensem, and Robertum de Welun Episcopum
Herefordiensem, and Robertum Lincolniensem Episcopum, and alios quosdam
Ecclesiae Praelatos a Consortio and Consilio Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, ut
per illos praefatum Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum in suos Conatus facilius
alliceret. Deinde venit in Angliam quidam vir Religiosus dictus Philippus de
Eleemosyna missus a latere Alexandri Summi Pontificis and Cardinalium omnium ad
pacem faciendam inter Regem and Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem. Per quem summus
Pontifex and omnes Cardinales mandaverunt Cantuariensi Episcopo, ut ipse pacem
cum domino suo Rege Angliae faceret, and Leges suas sine aliqua exceptione
custodiendas promitteret: his igitur and aliis magnorum virorum Consiliis
acquiescens, Thomas Cantuariensis venit ad Regem apud Woodstock, and ibi
promisit Regi, and concessit se bona fide and sine malo ingenio leges suas
servanturum. Et paulo post congregato Clero and populo Regni apud Clarendon,
poenituit Archiepiscopum quod ipse Concessionem illam fecerat Regi, and volens
resilire a pacto, dixit se in illa Concessione graviter peccasse, and quod in
hoc amplius non peccaret. Rex plurimum in ira adversus eum commotus, minatus
est ei and suis Exitum and Mortem. Venerunt ergo ad Archiepiscopum
Salisburiensis and Norwicensis Episcopi, and Robertus Leicestriae and
Reginaldus Cornubiae Comites, and lachrymantes provoluti ad pedes Archiepiscopi
petebant, ut saltem propter honorem Regis veniret ad eum and coram populo
diceret se Leges suas recepisse. Precibus igitur tantorum virorum
Archiepiscopus vectus venit ad Regem, and ^oram Clero and populo dixit se Leges
illas quas Rex avitas vocabat suscepisse, and concessit, ut Episcopi Leges
illas susciperent, and ut illas custodire promitterent. Tunc praecepit Rex
universis Comitibus and Baronibus Regni, ut irent for as and recordarentur Legum
Henrici Regis Avi sui, and eas in scripto redigerent. Quod cum factum fuisset,
praecepit Rex Archiepiscopis and Episcopis ut sigilla sua apponerent scripto
illi; and cum caeteri proni essent ad faciendum, Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis
juravit quod nunquam scripto illi sigillum suum apponeret, nec leges illas
confirmaret.

If this was not an encroaching Royal power, there was never any such fault,
when he was grown so great that the King himself must supplicate; that the
great men of that time, though passionataly interceding on the behalf of the
King, could obtain no peace for the King. That an Ambassador from the Pope and
Cardinals must be sent to command him to be reconciled to the King. That he did
make a show of being the Kings friend, and did promise to be at peace with the
King and keep his Laws, at the Popes Command. But of this too he soon repented,
and said he would sin no more. Was not this man a Traitor at Common Law before
the 25 of Ed. 3. does not the reason of the Government declare and pronounce
him so? And does the Octavo Author think that a Parliament would not use the
declarative power by that Statute reserved, to declare such offenses as these,
Treason? If the like case should happen, would not he himself be the likelyest
man to be foremost in the impeachment? But Gervasius Dorobernensis goes on and
tells us, that afterward Becket did voluntary penance, for the aforesaid
promise made to the King, and of his submission to his Laws, and stood out in
disobedience. That the King did cast about and study, quomodo vel qua art
constantiam Archiepiscopi conterere valeret, vel elidere virtutem, Col. 1388.
But see in what respectful terms their Author in the meantime speaks of this
Becket. We may be sure, we can have nothing from them, that is true, if it
makes the Cause of this contumacious rebellious man bad. But at last the Kings
patience is turned into Anger. For Gervasius goes on Col. 1388. and says,
Timens autem Rex Angliae, ne impune manus ejus Cantuariensis Episcopus
evaderet, jam edoctus multiplici Cogitatione and pravorum Eruditione quibus eum
pravitatis laqueis innodaret, Praecepit Praesules and Proceres Regni, apud
Northamptonian una cum Archiepiscopo ipso convenire, qui cum tertia die
convenissent, Archiepiscopus in multis est accusatus. And no man can believe
his accusation was less than Treason, that will believe what is said by all
Historians of Beckets Rebellious behavior against the King, and the Kings
anger conceived, his threatening him with death, and the convening of this
Parliament, lest he should escape unpunisht: And especially that will observe
the partiality of this Gervasius against the King; and in favor of Becket. For
he said, as is before observed and cited, that now the King was edoctus
multiplici cogitatione, that now the King with much thought, and the Advice of
wicked men was instructed how he might ensnare him with evil Arts, and for that
purpose this Parliament was convened. And yet in particular this Gervasius and
Fitz-Stephen, his faithful friend who accompanied Becket in his troubles,
mentions only two faults, whereof he is accused, viz. of injustice in the Case
of John the Marshall, and of his own Contumacy in not obeying the Kings
Summons. Fitz-Stephen, Hoveden and Gervasius tell us, that to the two
particulars Becket made his defense. Gervasius and Hoveden tells us what
defense he made, which the Octavo has faithfully transcribed, to do him right:
(I wish he had observed the whole story, then he would have saved me this
trouble of bringing it into the view of the World.) The Article wherein he is
charged, for not doing Justice to John Marshall, is answered by laying the
fault upon Marshall himself, for abusing the Court, bringing veterum Cantuum
Codicillum, to swear upon, refusing to swear sub Evangelium, ut moris est. The
other Article he answered, proving by two sufficient Witnesses, that it was
sickness hindered him and not any contempt; Very sufficient Answers to those two
Articles, and certainly the Parliament that was called only for to punish
Becket, might have well acquitted him and returned home, and a weighty cause
this was to convene a Parliament.

But these were but two of those many things (for multis est accusatus says
Gervasius) and of the least offense (besides that they were fully answered) in
any man's judgment that has read the Story of Becket, of which he stood
accused. By what I have here transcribed it appears, that he was certainly
guilty of Treason. That the Parliament was called to punish him: The King was
enraged and that justly, and therefore he was most certainly accused of
Treason. Gervasius goes on and tells us, that his rationibus (meaning that he
offered in excuse of himself in the business of Marshall and his own contempt)
Archiepiscous excusari non potuit, sed Curiali judicio, and Assensa Episcoporum
condemnatus est, ita ut omnia ejus bona in misericordia Regis ponerentur. And
yet the prosecution went on. The Bishops are consulted with by Becket, how he
should behave himself. Thus Gervasius tells us Coll. 1398. You may best
understand the Nature of the prosecution and Beckets danger, by the advice of
some of his Suffragan Bishops. The Bishop of London thus advises, Si pater,
inquit, recolis, unde te Dominus Rex sustulit, quid tibi contulit, considerata
temporum malitia, quam Ruinam Ecclesiae and nobis omnibus paraveris, si in his
Regi resistere volueris, non solum Archiepscopatui Cantuariae, sed in decuplo,
si tanti fuerit, cedere deberes. Could all this danger grow from less than
Treason? Could a bare neglect to answer a Summons, where he excused his default
sufficiently, or refusing to proceed in the Case of Marshall, for that he did
presumptuously trifle with the Court, and profanely offered to be Sworn upon a
Song-book, put the whole Church and himself in danger, big enough to be
redeemed with ten times the value of the Bishopric of Canterbury?

The Bishop of Lincoln speaks in Gervasius these Words: Patet, inquam, vitam
istius hominis and sanguinem quaeri, and necessario alterum horum erit, aut
Archiepiscopatui aut vitae cedendum.

The Bishop of Exeter thus: Palam est quoniam dies mali sunt, and si possumus
sub dissimulationis umbra, hujus tempestatis impetum pertransire illaesos. And
after he says, satis est unum Caput in part periclitari, quam totam
Anglicanam Ecclesiam inevitabili exponere discrimini.

The Bishop of Worcester, says Gervasius, being asked what he thought, ita
temperavit Responsum, ut and negando palam secerit, quid animi haberet. The
Bishop of Ely was sick. The Bishop of Norwich, the same Author says, excused
himself, secreto asserens Eliensem foeliciter adeo defensum, and quod ipse
vellet simili plaga percelli, for he had heard, says our Author, quid Rex
conceperat contra Cantuariensem.

Becket not resolved what to do, desired of the Earls of Leicester and
Cornwall, that he might have time until the morrow. And the morrow being
Sunday, time was given until the Monday, and then the Bishops came to Becket
and advised him, for avoiding danger and scandal, to submit himself to the
Kings Will; which if he should do, jam audierint in Curia Regis perjurii Crimen
sibi imponi, and tanquam proditorem judicandum, eo quod terreno Domino honorem
terrenum non servaret, cum avitas consuetudines Regni observaturum firmasset,
ad quas specialiter observare jurisjurandi nova se and illos astrixerat
Religione. And now sure it will be believed that Becket was accused in this
Parliament of Treason, for Treason was his Crime, not allowing the King, with
the consent of his States, to make any Laws, but such as he should approve,
aggravated with perjury, for he had sworn himself to observe them.

After Becket had given the Bishops an obstinate and resolute Answer to adhere
to his Treasonable Practices, to disallow the Authority of the King and States
in the Laws called the Assise of Clarendon, and to oppose the observance of
them; Observe what Gervasius says, discesserunt Episcopi ad Curiam
properantes. By and by Becket comes too (but the Bishops were there before him)
carrying the Cross himself, which the King, as well as the Bishops, took to be
a coming armed. Upon which, says Gervasius, vocatis Episcopis and proceribus
gravem and grandem Rex deponit querimoniam, quod Archiepiscopus sic armatus in
Curiam veniens ipsum and suos omnes, inaudita saeculis forma, naevo notaverit
proditoris. Whereupon the Bishops by the Mouth of Hilaris Cicestrensis a Bishop
more eloquent than the rest, thus said to Becket, Quandoque, ait, fuisti
Archiepiscopus, and tenebamur tibi obedire, sed quia Domino Regi fidelitatem
jurasti, hoc est vitam, membra and terrenam dignitatem sibi per te salvam fore,
and consuetudines quas ipse repetit conservandas, and tu niteris eas destruere,
cum praecipue spectant ad terrenam sui degnitatem and honorem; idcirco, te reum
perjurii dicimus, and perjuro Archiepiscopo de caetero obedire non habemus.

This I take to be a judging in Treason. But this the Bishops did for their
part, as Bishops and Suffragans they did withdraw their obedience from their
Metropolitan, which was (as much as in them lay) to deprive him: a conviction
it was of the Guilt, not indeed judicium sanguinis. But this is not all; for
observe what our said Author says further, they going away, the King says to
them, discernite quid perjurus and contumax proditor debeat sustinere. Itur and
judicatur, and a quo vel qualiter judicium pronuntiandum esset, informatur. In
which matter Stephanides, as he is cited by Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor,
in the Folio Edition fol. 705. tells us, how it was consulted and debated
between the Bishops the Spiritual Barons, and the Temporal Barons, for says
he, de proferendo judicio distantia fuit inter Episcopos and Barons, utrisque
alteri illud imponentibus, utrisque se excusantibus. Aiunt Barons, vos
Episcopi pronuntiare debetis sententiam, ad nos non pertinet, nos Laici sumus,
vos personae Ecclesiasticae sicut ille, Consacerdotes ejus, Coepiscopi ejus. Ad
haec aliquis Episcoporum, Imo vestri potius est hoc officii, non nostri, non
enim est hoc judicium Ecclesiasticum sed Seculare, non sedemus hic Episcopi sed
Barons, Nos Barons and vos Barons, pares hic sumus. Ordinis autem Nostri
rationi frustra innitimini, quia si in nobis ordinationem attenditis, and in
ipso similiter attendere debetis, eo autem ipso, quod Episcopi sumus, non
possumus Archiepiscopum. and dominum nostrum judicare. By which dispute (by the
way) it does appear that both the Bishops and Temporal Lords did take
themselves to be equally constituted Judges and Peers, by reason of their
common Baronage, in this Case of Becket, a Cause of Treason; the Bishops owned
and avowed a Right of judging him as Barons, They did not excuse themselves
upon the score of the Canon alleged, but from the indecency in respect of the
relation that they stood in to the Criminal, he being their Superior and
Metropolitan, they seemed willing to decline the making of the Sentence.
Whether any Judgment was pronounced, by whom, or what the Judgment was, is not
certain, the Historians differing thereupon; But when he went out of the Court
he was called by the people as he past, Traitor and perjured Traitor, as the
King before had called him.

And if this be not the clearest proof of Beckets being accused of Treason, and
the Bishops judging in a capital Cause in Parliament, there can be nothing
proved to satisfaction: Besides that all that writ of his story are unwilling
Witnesses, they magnify, excuse and justify the man all along, extolling his
virtues. They call him Saint, Pater Patriae (so Gervasius does Coll. 1393.) and
Martyr.

Let the Reader consider what is here faithfully recited, and then let him tell
what Opinion he has of the Candor of the Octavo Gentleman, who could find no
fault in Thomas Becket, for he says Folio 62. That Gervasius Dorobernensis
says, that Becket was charged with two things, Injustice to John Marshall, and
his own contempt in not appearing to the Kings Summons: This Author had nothing
of his own knowledge to charge upon him, and says, that Stephanides is not to
be regarded because he was Beckets friend, and an obscure Author, it may be not
yet come into his Study.

The Author had reason to see no faults in Becket, or to forget them all for
the good service the insolences of that man has done toward the Scandal of
the Order. But we have not misspent our own time, neither will the Reader regret
our length in this matter, for this single Case considered, gives a Resolution
to the Question; and puts the Right of the Bishops to sit in capital Causes out
of all doubt. This Case will let in light for the true understanding of the
Assise of Clarendon.

For it must be noted that the Great Parliament of Clarendon was held by Henry
the 2. about the latter end of January, in the tenth year of his Reign; the
Bishops and Lords were all Sworn to observe the Statutes there made (called the
Assise of Clarendon) called the Avitae consuetudines Regni, of which the Law
aforementioned was one.

This Law therefore must be interpreted in such a sense, for that the words
will bear it, and can be intended in no other than that which may consist with
the proceedings in the Case of Archbishop Becket, and with the Oaths of all
the Bishops and Peers, and the great men, taken but a short time before, to
observe the Statutes of Clarendon: Now if the whole Order of capital Causes had
been intended to be excepted by that Statute above recited (upon which our
Adversaries do so much ground themselves) from the Cognizance of the Lords
Spiritual, and they could not be present when any such Case was agitated or
moved, all the Grandees were Notoriously, Wilfully, and Knowingly, and in the
face of the whole World perjured to the Eternal infamy of our Nation.

Could the whole Nation be ignorant of its own Laws and Constitutions, made and
sworn to but a few months before? and neither the King, Lords Spiritual or
Temporal, or Commons understand them? 120 men at least, (for about that number
were the Bishops and regular Barons in H. the 2ds. time and not less) now come
into the highest Judicature in the greatest Cause that ever was agitated (It
was in the Case of Becket disputed whether we should have a Civil or
Ecclesiastical Sovereignty) and there sit Judges, and no body except against
them in October, if excluded by the Statute made in February before; though the
King and the Nobles had reason to suspect them on Becket's side, and they
unwilling themselves to Judge, and they under an Oath not to sit, and the
Temporal Lords under an Oath not to admit them or allow them to be there? And
yet not a word of this matter in all the Historians of that time, Thomas of
Canterbury his friends to a man, who were forward enough to reproach the Judges
sure, when they condemned the Sentence, and applauded the Criminal, and made a
Pater patriae, a Martyr and Saint of this Notorious Church Rebel. He therefore
that can believe that the Bishops were not rightful and unexceptionable Judges
in capital Causes in Parliament, in the time of H. 2. may believe that a whole
Nation may become of insane Memory at once, go to bed a Monarchy and wake into
a Commonwealth, without any notice or observation of a Change. And now that
the Assise of Clarendon is of our side, I hope will be admitted, and that the
Bishops not only may, but ought to be present in capital Causes in Parliament,
for the words of the Statutes are; That the Archiepiscopi, Episcopi and
universi personae qui de Rege tenent in Capite, habeant possessiones suas de
Rege sicut Baroniam, and sicut caeteri Barons debent interesse Judiciis Curiae
Domini Regis cum Baronibus. So that now they were declared to be Judges as the
other Barons, in that they ought to be present in all Causes: Only they were
favored so much in decent regard to their Order, that they were not required
to be present at the Sentence of Death and multilation of Member, for as much
as they are the Ministers of Gods pardon, and the Publishers of the Doctrine of
Faith and Repentance; they ought to comport with their office, and express
their Commiseration to the greatest Sinner, and to have some reluctance against
the Sentence of Condemnation, and to that purpose is that Indulgence given them
in the quousque perveniatur ad mutilationem membrorum vel mortem. But the
Assise of Clarendon having; I will not say left them, but required them to be
Judges (this exception of Quousque etc. being only an Indulgence as aforesaid
upon the Reasons aforesaid) they remain entire Judges in Capital Causes, and
may depart from that Indulgence, and ought so to do when Justice is necessary,
and the offenses more than ordinarily Public, and will be pardoned and escape
with impunity to the hazard of the Government, except they interpose. For if
the Assise of Clarendon had not left them entire Judges of Right, only at
liberty as to the pronouncing of Sentence; they had not remained Judges; for
the office of a Judge cannot be divided; he that has not an Authority to judge
the Cause, can be reckoned and accounted no other than a ministerial assistant
to the process, in such matters as the Court shall award. Therefore Bishops; in
that they have intermedled as Judges in such Causes, they have continued and
avowed their Right of judging, and in that they have withdrawn at the Sentence
they have used that Liberty. But to leave nothing for an after objection,
Evasion, or Cavillation, it shall be in our Adversary's choice, Whether this
Curia Regis mentioned in the Assise of Clarendon, as also the Court that tried
Thomas Becket, was the Curia Regis wherein the ordinary Justice of the Nation
was at that time administered, or the Parliament.

If it was the Curia Regis, and not the Parliament, was intended in the Assise
of Clarendon, in which the Privilege and Indulgence under the Quousque was
allowed to Bishops; Then the Assise of Clarendon is unduly urged against the
Bishops judging in Cases of blood in Parliament, for that all Laws of
Privilege and exemption are stricti Juris, and not to be extended beyond the
Letter of the Law, the single instance, or the enumerated Cases; and
consequently by the Assise of Clarendon the Bishops have no leave to withdraw
in Cases of blood in Parliament.

If the Court wherein Thomas Becket was tried was the Curia Regis, then the
Bishops judging in that Court in that Cause does most clearly declare (that
being a Case in point) that the quousque in the Assise of Clarendon was an
Indulgence and Privilege, which they might use or wave as they then did.

But this cannot be denied, that the Bishops are and were Barons ever since the
Conqueror, (of which, and of the Curia Regis we shall hereafter give an
account) and whatever was the business and office of Baron, was consequently
the office and business of a Bishop of Common Right, and still is, except any
Legal restraint was put upon them by any Law, which was not done by the Assise
of Clarendon, as we have proved by the reason of the making of that Law, the
Interpretation of that Law at that time. Nor was that Law or any other Law
hitherto pretended (but only the Canons of the Church) against the Right and
Duty of Bishops in Capital Causes in Parliament, or if they will have it, in
the Curia Regis.

CHAP. VI.
AND now we proceed further to show how this Right and Authority of the
Prelates has been used and acknowledged in aftertimes.

Roger de Hovedon has remembered in the Life of Richard the First, who
succeeded Henry the 2. That before the arrival of Richard the First in England
who had been in Captivity in the Empire, that one Adam de St. Edmond, Agent to
John Earl of Morton, returned into England, being sent to fortify the Castle
of Earl John, against the King his Brother, and was apprehended by the Lord
Mayor of London, with several papers of instructions and Commissions of Earl
John's for that purpose: Hoveden tells us, That the Mayor cepit omnia brevia
sua, in quibus mandata Comitis Johannis continebantur, and tradidit ea
Cantuariensi Episcopo, qui in crastino convocatis coram eo Episcopis, Comitibus
and Baronibus Regni, ostendit eis literas Comitis Johannis and earum tenorem,
and statim per commune Concilium Regni definitum est, quod Comes Johannes
disseiseretur de omnibus Tenementis suis in Anglia, and Castella sua
obsiderentur.

This is a Cause of Treason, for that Richard the First immediately upon the
demise of the Crown was King. It can be no objection that this was not a formal
Parliament, for whether it was or no, it seems the Bishops power in that Cause
was allowed. That it was Commune Concilium Regni, and had the Nature of a
Parliament. And that the Bishops therein had a parity of Authority with the
Temporal Lords. But soon after his return King Richard held a Parliament at
Notingham Hoveden mentions the Bishops that were present by Name. In which
Parliament our Historian tells us, That the King Petiit sibi Judicium fieri de
Comite Johanne fratre suo, qui contra fidelitatem quam ei juraverat Castella
sua occupaverat, and terras suas transmarinas destruxerat, and foedus contra
eum cum inimico suo Rege Franciae contra eum inierat.

And the like Justice he required against the Bishop of Coventry, for that he
had adhered Regi Franciae and Comiti Johanni inimicis suis; and it was
thereupon adjudged, Judicatum (says Hoveden) quod Comes Johannes and Episcopus
Coventrensis peremptory citarentur, and si intra quadraginta dies non venerint
nec Juri steterint, Judicaverunt Comitem demeruisse regnum, and Episcopum
Coventrensem subjacere judicio Episcoporum in eo quod Episcopus erat, and
Judicio Laicorum in eo quod ipse Vicecomes Regis extiterat.

You see here the Bishops zeal and Loyalty, that they adjoined the censure of
the Church which they had power of as Bishops, to a Civil punishment, which
they with the Temporal Barons had Authority to pronounce against One of their
own Order, who was guilty of a design to engage a Nation in a War by opposing
the lawful Successor to the Crown; and this being so great a Cause, We hear
nothing here of any scruple the Canon gave them, nor mention of any Privilege
of an Ecclesiastic to be exempt from the Judgment of the secular Court.

In the same Parliament Giraldus de Canavilla was accused of harboring of
Pirates, and, Praeterea, says Hoveden, appellaverunt eum de Laesura Regiae
Majestatis, in eo quod ipse ad vocationem Justitiariorum Regis venire noluit,
nec juri stare de praedicta receptatione raptorum, neque eos ad Justitiam Regis
producere, sed respondet se esse hominem Comitis Johannis, and velle in Curia
sua Juri stare. Hoveden tells us all, that were present at this great Council;
Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, Galfridus Archbishop of York, Hugh Bishop of
Durham, Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, William Bishop of Ely, William Bishop of
Hereford, Henry Bishop of Worcester, Henry Bishop of Exeter, and John Bishop of
Carlisle, Earl David Brother of the King of Scots, Hamelinus Earl de Warrenna,
Ranulfus Earl of Chester, William Earl of Feriers, William Earl of Salisbury,
and Roger Bigot. Let any one judge, if it was likely that the Bishops did
withdraw, in the Case of Earl John, or the said Bishop, when besides them there
were but six Barons present at that Parliament. What manner of great Council
would this Parliament have been, that had consisted but of six Barons? of what
Authority would such a Parliament have been, in the absence of the King, and a
troubled Estate of the Kingdom?

CHAP. VII.
IN the time of Edward the Second, in the two Judgments against the Spencers,
the Right of the Bishops to judge in capital Causes in Parliament was carried
so high in opinion, that their presence was thought necessary to give Authority
and validity to the Judgment of the House of Lords in such Cases; and their
absence was assigned for Error, for Reversal of those Judgments (for an Error
that appears in the irregularity of the Proceedings, is an allowable Cause for
vacating the Judgment by the same Court that gave it.) And so far did that
Opinion prevail, that the presence of the Lords Spiritual was necessary to give
Authority to a Judgment of that House, that for this Cause, because the
Prelates were absent, that Judgment was reversed. Which opinion did arise upon
this mistake, that because the Lords Spiritual was one of the two States that
made the House of Lords, nothing could be done without their concurrence. But
though they are a distinct State from the Temporal Lords, they make but one
House, and they are both there under one Notion and Reason, viz. as they are
both Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Baronage of England.

But let any man tell me that can, whether if the Lords Spiritual had not been
understood Judges in Parliament in Capital Causes, it could have been a
question whether their absence could avoid the Judgment in the Case of the
Spencers, much less that such an opinion should prevail, that the Judgment
should be (as it was for that reason) reversed. And though the Reversal of that
Judgment was set aside, and the Judgment affirmed in 1 E. 3. Yet the public
Recognition of the Bishops Right in the Reversal remains an undeniable
Testimony to their Right of sitting: Though the Reversal of that Judgment was not
warrantable, for the reason of the Bishops absence, as it could not have been
reversed by reason of the absence of as many Temporal Barons if there remained
enough besides to make a House to give the Judgment. And yet we find the
Reversal of the Reversal reversed in 21 R. 2. and the Family of the Spencers
restored in the person of the Earl of Gloucester. So prevalent was the opinion
that the Bishops Concurrence was necessary in all capital Judgments in
Parliament at that time. For this see Sir Robert Cottons Abridgment, fol. 373.

Yet it is observable that the consequence from the Bishops being a third
State, and an Essential constituent part of that House; to a necessity of their
presence in all judicial matters, even of Capital Offenses and Treason, did so
stick with that Age: for they then in that Age did no more know what three
States served for, or that they both made but one House, than some in our time
can tell how to find them.

For that very Reason in 21 R. 2. the first Petition that the Commons made in
that Parliament to the King was, for that diverse Judgments were heretofore
undone, for that the Clergy were not present. The Commons prayed the King that
the Clergy would appoint some to be their Common Proctor with sufficient
Authority thereunto. The Prelates therefore being severally examined, appointed
Sir Thomas de la Piercy to assent. The words of which Petition, and the
procuratory Letters, for greater Authority, and more satisfaction I have
thought fit to transcribe. Nos Thomas Cantuar. and Robertus Eborac.
Archiepiscopi ac Praelati, Clerus utriusque Provinciae Cantuar. and Ebor. jure
Ecclesiarum nostrarum, and Temporalium earundem habentes jus interessendi in
singulis Parliamentis Domini nostri Regis and Regni Angliae pro tempore
celebrandis, necnon tractandi and expediendi in eisdem quantum ad singula in
instanti Parliamento pro statu and honor Domini nostri Regis, nec non Regalie
ac quiet pace, and tranquillitate Regni judicialiter justificandi, venerabili
viro D. Thomae Peircy..... Nostram plenariam committimus potestatem, ita ut
singula per ipsum facta in praemissis perpetuis temporibus rata habeantur.

The Commons of England knew what they said, and could not be mistaken in fact,
we know of no Judgments reversed but those of the Spencers; But we have no
Records or very few of the times before Edward the Third, transmitted to us,
through the injury of the times, but they then had certainly whereupon they
grounded their petition, upon which the said procuratory Letters were made,
which petition here follows in terminis. Mecredy prochein, ensuant les Communes
monstrerent au Roy, coment avaunt ces Jeures plusieurs jugements and Ordinances
faitez en temps des progenitors nostre Senior le Roy en le Parliement eiant
estre repelles and adnulles pur ceo que l'estat de Clergy ne fust pressed en
Parliament a la faisaunce des dits jugements and Ordenances, and pur ceo
prierent au Roy que pur surete de sa person and salvation de son Royalme les
Evesques and le Clergy ferroient un Procurator aver poiar sufficient pur
consentir en leur nosme as toutes chooses and ordinances a justifieis en cest
Parliament, and que sur ceo chescun Signior espiritual dirroit pleinenent son
advys. Sur qui les dits Seigniors Espiritual severalment examines se
consenterent de Comettre lour plein poiar grantant en les parts and nosmerent
on especial Tho. Peircy Chivaler, and sur ceo baillerent au Roy une Schedule
contenant lour dit poiar, le quelle nostre Seignior le Roy receust and commanda
la dite Mecredy estre enter de record en Roll de Parliament; deque cela Schedule
le form sensuit.

But it is remarkable that this Petition was made in 21 R. 2. for that in the
11 R. 2. the Bishops had made their Protestation, that by reason of a Canon
they could not be present: The words of the protestation we shall here
transcribe. Per encheson and certeins mattires feurent mouvez en cest present
Parliament and toucherent overtement Crime; L'archevesque de Canterbiry and les
autres Prelates de sa province fierent une protestation en la form and
paroles qui suent. In Dei nomine Amen. Cum de Jure and consuetudine Regni
Angliae ad Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem qui pro tempore fuerit, nec non
caeteros suos Suffraganeos, Confratres, and Coepiscopos, Abbates and Priores
aliosque Praelatos quoscunque per Baroniam de Domino Rege tenentes pertinet in
Parliamentis Regiis quibuscunque ut Pares Regni praedicti personaliter
interesse, ibidemque de Regni negotiis and aliis ibi tractari consuetis, cum
caeteris Domini Regis Paribus and aliis ibidem jus interessendi habentibus
consulere and tractare, ordinare, statuere and definire, ac caetera facere quae
Parliamenti tempore ibidem invenerint faciend. in quibus omnibus and singulis
nos Willielmus Cantuarien. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas and Apostolicae
sedis Legatus pro nobis nostrisque Suffraganeis, Coepiscopis and Confratribus,
necnon Abbatibus and Prioribus ac Praelatis omnibus supradictis protestamur,
and eorum quilibet protestatur, qui per se vel procuratorem hic fuit modo
praesens, public and express, quod intendimus and intendi volumus, and vult
eorum quilibet in hoc presenti Parliamento and aliis ut Pares Regni praedicti
more solito interesse, consulere, tractare, ordinare, statuere and definire, ac
caetera exercere cum caeteris jus interessendi habentibus in iisdem, statu and
ordine nobis and eorum cuilibet in omnibus semper salvis. Verum quia in
praesenti Parliamento agitur de nonnullis materiis in quibus non licet nobis
aut alicui eorum juxta Sacrorum Canonum instituta quomodolibet personaliter
interesse, ea propter pro nobis and eorum quolibet protestamur, and eorum
quilibet hic praesens etiam protestatur, quod non intendimus nec volumus sicuti
de jure non possumus nec debemus, intendit nec vult aliquis eorundem in
praesenti Parliamento dum de hujusmodi materiis agitur vel agetur, quomodolibet
interesse, sed nos and nostrum quemlibet in ea part penitus absentare; Jure
Paritatis nostrae and cujuslibet eorum interessendi in dicto Parliamento quoad
omnia and singula inibi exercenda nostro and eorum cujuslibet statui and ordini
congruentia in omnibus semper salvo. Adhuc insuper protestamur and eorum
quilibet protestatur, quod propter hujusmodi absentiam non intendimus nec
volumus, nec eorum aliquis intendit vel vult, quod processus habiti and habendi
in praesenti Parliamento super materiis auditis, in quibus non possumus nec
debemus ut praemittitur interesse, quantum ad nos and eorum quemlibet attinet,
futuris temporibus quomodolibet impugnentur, infirmentur seu etiam revocentur.
Quelle protestation leu en plein Parliament al instance and priere du dit
L'archevesque and les autres Prelates susditz and inrollez ycy en roll du
Parliament per Commandment du Roy and assent des Signiors Temporeles and
Communes.

This the adversaries of the Bishops would have an Act of Parliament, for that
at the prayer of the Bishops by the Kings command, with the assent of the Lords
Temporal and Commons, it was enrolled; for that all the formalities that were
used in these times, in passing a Law, was only to have the matter shortly
entered in the Roll, or Journal Book, that such a thing was agreed upon by the
King and two Houses, which was drawn into the form of a Law afterward by the
Justices and Kings Council when the Parliament was risen; but this was never
done in this Protestation, and therefore we might say that it is not to be
taken for a Law.

But we will admit it to be a Law, yet it can be a Law only for that Case, and
can be extended no further: Those Bishops protest; but for whom? For themselves
only, their own persons, not their successors; that by reason of the
institution of the Canon they could not be present at certain matters to be
treated of in the Parliament. What those Canons were they do not tell us. They
had no other reason but the Canon to pretend at that time. We hear not a word
from them of the Assise of Clarendon: And what was it that they protested? Why
only that they could not be present: at what? only at the matters aforesaid
mentioned in the Petition and in that present Parliament. But was this without
any regard of their Right? No, they saved their Right, their Jus Paritatis:
pray mark it: what then did they in effect depart from? nothing. They provided
only that they might do nothing indecent or rather against their good liking,
and at the same time consulted likewise the safety of their Estate and Order,
and preservation of all their Rights.

But had they no care of the Authority of the Parliament in their absence? yes,
for they very well knew that it was a probable opinion that nothing acted in
their absence and during a recess of their whole Order could be rate and valid;
and therefore they provide propter hujusmodi absentiam non intendimus nec
volumus, nec eorum aliquis intendit vel vult, quod processus habiti and habendi
in praesenti Parliamento super materiis auditis, quantum ad nos and eorum
quemlibet attinet, futuris temporibus quomodolibet impugnentur, infirmentur seu
etiam revocentur.

Let the Impartial Reader Judge whether this be not a famous recognition of the
Bishops Right of sitting, what a solemn leave they had to be absent, what
provisions made that the proceedings in that Parliament should not be avoided
and made null by their absence; which implies a great probability, that that
time allowed to the opinion of their being necessary in all proceedings in
Parliament. Was there ever such a protestation entered on the behalf of the
Absentees of Temporal Barons? This leave given them to be absent is an
allowance of Right to sit. The proceedings they liked not and the Canon was
pretended. Admitting this protestation to be an Act of Parliament, It is an Act
of Parliament to give the Bishops leave to be absent pro hac vice, and to make
Laws good that should pass in their absence. I appeal to the world whether
there can be a more Solemn and Authentic Recognition of their Right than this
protestation imports.

CHAP. VIII.
IT does appear by the whole tenor of this their protestation, that the Canons
of the Church which they pretend had not passed into Laws; if they had, what
need of such a warm protestation, only for the sake of decency and the honesty
of their order, to be rid of a troublesome business? what means the saving of
their right, if by Law it had been discharged? what means their further
protestation that the validity of the proceedings in those Causes in which they
withdrew, should not be impeach't by their absence, if their Right did not
remain entire notwithstanding the Canon? besides that they do not allege the
Law but the Canons of the Church for their excuse.

They well knew the nature of Canons, the force and obligation of them, and
also that they were not under any obligation to the Canon Law, that it was only
a Law in the Popes Temporal principality, and had no Control upon the Laws of
this Kingdom.

For the clearing this question it will not be unnecessary here to speak to the
nature of Canons, what they effect and how oblige.

Canons therefore are no more Laws than the authority of the Church is Empire,
no not in matters that are proper for their Canons. But most certainly they can
neither make nor annul a Civil Right, nor do they pretend to alter or change
Governments: they exceed their proper bounds when they intermeddle in any
matters of this nature. But when they do extend themselves beyond their bounds
and order, and appoint in any matter of a Civil Government; they intend only to
counsel and direct the man how he shall behave himself in the use of his Right,
which every man may observe if he please. Their Subjects are Populus
voluntarius, the Ecclesiastical Courts are Courts of audience in matters that
belong to their cognizance, and the Church's word is, He that will hear let him
hear.

The Canons of foreign Councils though General, though we send thither our
Delegates and Proxies authorized by public Instruments, and by consent of
Parliament, as has been sometimes done, have not the consideration of Canons,
except received here and allowed by the same Authority, that makes the Canons
of our Church.

Canons here must have the Royal assent at least to make them Canons, but with
the Kings assent they are void, if they alter or meddle with any Civil Right or
Constitution. If any man is proceeded against in the Ecclesiastical Courts for
being contrary in any thing to such a Canon, our Courts will grant him a
prohibition; if Excommunicate thereupon, award Writs to assoil him to the
Bishop, and seize his Temporalties if he do not conform.

Nothing can alter Civil Rights or Civil Constitutions but Law, and such never
were any Canons or so reputed; except the Decrees of Councils confirmed by the
Imperial Rescripts of the Roman Emperors, who by their Rescripts made Laws by
the Authority of the Lex regia, by which the people devolved their Right of
Legislation to the Emperors: but when such Canons were confirmed by the
Emperor, they remained but Canons still, the Canons were to be exacted by the
measures of the Church and by the Churchmen, the matters of such Canons did
not employ the Forum; no alteration was made in any Civil Right, but the Church
had Authority to require observance of them, under the Censures of the Church.

About the 11th. Century the Pope meditating the increase of his new
Ecclesiastical Empire, (the Roman Empire being now extinct) did design to give
Laws to the World: and to that purpose in imitation of the Imperial Roman Law,
Gratian was appointed to compile a body of Laws accomodated to that design, out
of the General Councils, the sayings of the Fathers, and some decrees of former
Popes, which made that part of the Canon Law which they call the Decreta, to
answer to the Digest which was made up of the Senatus consulta, Responsa
prudentum and the Edicta Praetorum; to which another Book was added of
Decretals and Clementines, made up of the Popes Decretal Epistles, which
answered to the Codes and Novels which was made up of the Edicts, Epistles and
Decrees of the Emperors: For by the Constitution of the Senate of Rome, called
Lex Regia, by which they gave the power of making Laws to Augustus, it was
established, that quicquid per Epistolam statuit, cognoscens decrevit, aut per
edictum propalavit, lex esto. And now there was such a thing as a body of Canon
Law. The Pope had Power indeed to make these Decreta and Decretalia Laws in the
Domains of the Church and the patrimony of St. Peter, in which he was a
Temporal Prince; but it was further endeavored by him to make them the Laws of
the Christian World, and thereby to advance his pretended Oecumencial Empire,
and he did so far prevail and advance in his design, that it was thought that
Rome had again recovered the Empire of the World, and it was said with too much
truth of her upon the growth of the Papal power, -- Quicquid non possidet armis
Religione tenet. --


But though the Pontificial as well as the Justinian Law was publicly professed
in England before the end of the 12th. Century, for Mat. Paris tells us of a
Monk of Evesham, Anno Dom. 1196. that suo tempore eorum quos Decretistas and
Legistas appellant peritissimus habebatur, earum etiam facultatum auditores
quamplurimos instituerat, and from that time the study of the Caesarean and
Pontificial Law did flourish amongst us, until the beginning of E. 3. But in
all that time says Mr. Seldom, in his Fleta, gens ipsa Anglicana ac qui in
judiciis praeerant, morum patriorum (viz.) Juris Communis Angliae per
intervallum illud tenacissimi fuere. A remarkable instance we have of this
Nations steady aversion from admitting here either the Civil or Canon Law in
the Parliament of Merton, which rejected a Bill for Legitimation of Children
born before marriage in Concubinate, in these Terms: Nolumus leges Angliae
mutari, meaning that they would not make Laws conformable to the Civil or Canon
Law.

The great Policy that the Popes used to effect their Ambitious design of
making themselves Monarchs of the Christian World were: The assuming to
themselves the entire rule and Government of Religion, and endeavoring to make
every where the Bishops and the whole Clergy, together with the Regulars,
dependant upon them by pretending them to be exempt from all Civil Authority
and Jurisdiction: and by interdicting to them the exercise of any Civil
Authority, and shutting them out from all intromissions into the Civil
Government, and from any interest or dependence thereupon: So far as he
prevailed in these designs, he acquired an Imperium in Imperio; and if besides
these he could have fixed a Spiritual handle to the Temporal Sword, and have got
the Government of secular affairs in ordine ad spiritualia, his design had been
completed, and he had arrived to a more absolute and extensive Empire than
that of the Roman Caesar's.

To these purposes the Canon Law provided that the Ecclesiastics were neither
to exercise, nor be subject to any Civil Authority: But this policy of the Pope
had no success in England, the endeavors of the Papalins herein met with
constant opposition: and at last they were made desperate by the Assise of
Clarendon, where it was declared and enacted accordingly agreeable to the
Avitae Consuetudines Regni, that the Bishops should be retained and continue to
be a part of the Government, and exercise Jurisdiction in all Causes in the
Kings Court as other Barons, as is before observed, and that the Clergy should
stand submitted to the Jurisdiction of the Kings Courts. For this purpose it
was also in that Parliament enacted as follows: Si controversia emerserit
inter Laicos vel Laicos and Clericos, in Curia Domini Regis tractetur and
determinetur, and also quod clerici rectati and accusati de quacunque re
summoniti a Justitia Regis venient in Curiam Domini Regis responsuri ibidem,
etc.

And so far were the Bishops and Clergy from observing that part of the Canon
Law that was to detrude them from all secular Authority and Jurisdiction, that
they were from time to time Chancellors, Treasurers, Keepers of the Privy Seal
and Judges, and while that Ancient Office continued of Capitalis Justiciarius
Angliae, to whom was committed the Justice of the Kingdom, (who were called
Custodes Regni, Vice-Domini Angliae, and sometimes the abstract Justitia, He
did preside in the Curia Regis, which Office was afterward divided, for there
were Justitiarii Angliae Boreales, and Justitiarii Angliae Australes,) this
Office was often executed by Bishops as you may see in Sir Hen. Spelmans
Glossary, in the word Justitiarius. Bishops and Churchmen administered the
greatest Offices of State and Justice: this was matter of Envy to the Temporal
Lords, and they complained in Parliament 45 E. 3. (as is before observed,) That
the Government of the Kingdom had been a long time in the hand of the Clergy.
Mr. Seldom in his Fleta tells us, that in the times before and after the Assise
of Clarendon, Mos fuit Judices Regios ex genere hieratico, veluti Episcopis,
Abbatibus, Decanis, id genus aliis, constituendi. And it is provided by 28 E.
1. Cap. 3. That if a Clergyman was a Judge of Assise, another should be joined
in Commission with him to deliver the Goals; which was to the end that the
Ecclesiastical Judge might use that liberty which was indulged to him by the
Assise of Clarendon of not pronouncing the Sentence; for it must be observed
that by that Statute a Clergyman might be a Judge in a Jail-delivery; for that
a Laick was by the provision of that Statute to be joined to him in Commission,
and Pleas of the Crown are to be found, purporting them to be held before two
Judges, whereof one a Clerk, after this Law, which could not possibly have been
if the Clerk had not been in Commission.

Besides for after Ages it is well known that all the great Officers and
Ministers of State and Justice have been always entrusted with the conservancy
of the peace, are in Commissions of the peace, and Commissioners of Oyer and
Terminer, for judging capital Causes; so that the constant practice in all
times, as well as the express declaration of the Assise of Clarendon does
assure us that the Canon Law that prohibits Clergymen being Judges in capital
Causes, was never received here or became the common Law of England.

Besides what regard our Clergy had of the Canon Law, what opinion they had of
the Right in question, and how far the Laws did intend to prohibit the exercise
of it; And that such right was used and exercised, will appear by the Canon of
Toledo, Council. Toletan. 11. Cap. 6. fo. 553. and the Canon of Lanfrank,
Spelmans Council. 2 vol. fol. 11. these were made before the Assise of
Clarendon. That of Toledo is this. His a quibus Domini Sacramenta tractanda
sunt, judicium sanguinis agitare non licet, and ideo magnopere talium
excessibus prohibendum est, ne qui praesumptionis motibus agitati aut quod
morte plectendum est, sententia propria judicandi mant, aut truncationes
quaslibet membrorum quibuslibet personis, aut per se inferant aut inferendas
precipiant. This being a Foreign Council, this Canon carries not with it the
Authority of a Canon with us; only we may observe, whatever the Opinion of that
Council was that it was not convenient (for licet can have no ocher sense here)
for Clergymen agitare judicium Sanguinis: Yet this Canon prohibits only the
pronouncing the Sentence by themselves or others. I am sure, that by a positive
Law, as this Canon must be, so far as it participates of the nature of a Law,
nothing becomes unlawful, but what is forbidden, whatever the reason be of that
Prohibition. That of Lanfrank follows thus; Vt nullus Episcopus, vel Abbas, seu
quilibet ex Clero hominem occidendum, vel membris truncandam judicet, vel
judicantibus suae authoritatis favorem accomodet. This may be a Canon for all
that I know; but I suspect, it had never the Royal Assent to make it so, it not
being likely, that the Conqueror would discharge the Bishops from those
Services of the Crown, which he had so lately obliged them to, by his tenure;
but surely it was never intended by this Canon, that the Prelates, and great
Abbots should, or that they did depart from their Royal Franchises, and not
make their Officers for administering Justice according to their Authorities in
their Charters of Liberties and Privileges: For the words of the Canon, Vel
judicantibus tuae authoritatis favorem accomodet; if they signify any thing
more than what weallow must sound to that purpose.

But I suppose the Gentlemen that appeared against the Bishops, had rather than
affirm so against the known practice of all Ages, be content to agree, that
this Canon did only intend to prohibit their pronouncing, or encouraging, or
promoting the Sentence of Death, or Mutilation; and indeed this was all that
truly could be pretended to, from them, in comporting themselves decently with
respect (as the Opinion of those times was) to their Function: which is
expressed to be the Inducement to that Canon of Toledo, as it was the only
avowed Reason of all others, that is, that it did not become (as they thought)
those that administered the Sacraments, which were the Seals of God's Pardon, to
pronounce an exterminating Sentence of Life and Member, though they might have
a farther Secret purpose therein, of carrying on the Design of a
Church-Sovereignty, by imbodying the Clergy, and dividing them from all Secular
Dependencies; but this was nor always to be owned; neither is it an agreeable
Employment to any person who pretends himself a Protestant, to urge these
ill-designing Canons, as a pretense to divest the Bishops of those their Legal
Rights which were so prejudicial to the high Growth of the Papal Power, upon
any pretense whatsoever; or to go about to deprave the Reformation, as if the
true Christian Religion would not allow to the Bishops, Honors and Trusts as
great as they now enjoy by the Constitution of the Government, who are the
Chief Ministers of it: which is a Religion that makes men wise and good, the
Religion of the State, and is the greatest Support of it, and reciprocally this
Religion it self, is honored, assisted, and greatly advantaged, for obtaining
its ends by those Honors, and the place at present appointed to them in the
Government. But it is deplorable to find any man so madly set upon so bad a
Design, that he should be thereby transported from Common Sense, and think to
displace them, and degrade them by Popish Canons, that when they were made, did
not oblige, were never observed, and can no more bind our present Church to
observe them, than the Fathers of Toledo, or Lanfrank, and his Suffragans and
Clerks, can be blamed for not being agreeable to the Canons that have been made
since the Reformation, or hereafter shall be made by our Church, in any after
Age of the World. But there are two Canons yet behind, which have been
mentioned in this Controversy, which we will likewise take notice of; or we
shall have said nothing; though I almost despair, that any thing will be a
Satisfaction to such Opposers as this Right has met withal.

The first whereof was made by Richard, Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno Domini
1175. in 21 H. 2. about Eleven Years after the Assize of Clarendon, in these
Words, as Hoveden, p. 310. ac Gervase Dorob. relates them, His qui in sacris
Ordinibus constituti sunt judicium sanguinis agitare non licet; unde prohibemus
ne aut per se membrorum truncationes faciant, aut inferendas judicent: quod si
quis tale fecerit concessi Ordinis privetur officio and loco; inhibemus etiam
sub interminatione Anathematis, ne quis Sacerdos habeat Vicecomitum, aut
praepositi secularis officium.

The other was made Anno 1222, about 47 years after the first, which is to be
found in Linwood, p. 146. among the Constitutions of Stephen, Archbishop of
Canterbury, as follows, Praesenti Decreto statuimus ne Clerici beneficiati aut
in sacris ordinibus constituti villarum procuratores admittantur, viz. ut sint
Seneschalli aut Ballivi talium administrationum; occasion quarum laicis in
reddendis ratiociniis obligentur: veljurisdictiones exerceant seculares,
presertim illas quibus sanguinis judicium in locis sacris tractetur, in
Ecclesia, viz. aut in Coemiterio. Authoritate quoque Concilii districtius
inhibemus ne quis Clericus beneficiatus vel in Sacris Ordinibus constitutus
literas pro poena sanguinis infligenda scribere vel dictare presumat, vel ubi
judicium sanguinis tractatur vel exercetur intersit. Noverint enim hujusmodi se
Ecclesiastica indignos protectione cum per eos in Ecclesia Dei per talia
presumpta scandalum generetur.

Upon both these Canons, we observe, first, that the Pope's Canon Law had not
obtained in England: For then there had been no need of these Canons; or
however their Denunciations and Censures would have been the same: That the
Inhibition is repeated by a Second Council, but in milder Terms, signifies to
me the Continuance of the thing prohibited; and that it was so much in use
after the first Canon, that the second Council thought fit rather to direct and
admonish by their Canon, than to pronounce either Anathema's, or Privation
against those that break that Canon.

Secondly, That neither of these Canons extend to Bishops; not the first, not
only for that I question whether Bishops can be intended in such general words,
In Sacris Ordinibus constituti: But because the Denunciation of the Canon
cannot have effect as to them, no Ecclesiastical Authority can depose a
Metropolitan; and also because the Second cannot, by any Construction extend to
them; for Clerici beneficiali, does not mean them; and that which comes after,
aut in Sacris Ordinibus constituti, cannot ascend in meaning, and intend the
Bishops, especially in a Canon Law, which we must suppose penned with special
Care and Observance, of Decency and Reverence to that Order.

Now, to consider them apart, I find the first agreeable to, and to prohibit no
more than what the Bishops (if here meant) are licenced and privileged from in
the Assize of Clarendon: And to intend more, is unreasonable, when it was made
in time so near to Thomas of Becket, that his Fate could not be forgotten. And
farther, we must distinguish between the Preamble, which contains the Reason
and Inducement of a Law, and what is for that reason prohibited; For let the
Reason be as large as it will, yet the Law is no other than what is enjoined.
Reason makes no Law, but the Legislators for Reasons which they may tell us if
they please; though the Nature of Canons requires, that they should. The
Preamble of this Canon, was an opinion taken up amongst some of the Clergy,
viz, Non licet his, qui in sacris ordinibus constituti judicium sanguinis
agitare unde: (says the Canon) Prolibemus ne aut per se membrorum truncationes
faciant, (a very fitting Employment for a Bishop) aut inferendas judicent; and
after all this, we have still our old Answer, upon which we will ever insist;
it is but a Canon, and can make no Alteration in the Rights of Government.

For though Gervasius Dorob. tells us, In hoc Concilio, ad emendationem
Anglicanae Ecclesiae assensu Domini Regis, and primorum omnium Regni haec
subscripta promulgata sunt Capitula; yet the Canons of this Council are not
Laws: For that our Historian does not tell us of any Parliament then held, or
that they were confirmed in Parliament, and the good liking of Great Men out of
Parliament, will not confirm; nay, not justify the Canons, if they cannot
justify themselves in Parliament. Besides, that these Canons were not made
into Laws, we will offer two Reasons. 1st. For that amongst these Canons, there
is one that disposes of the Right of Patronage against the Law, as it has
been before and since taken; and that is this, Nulli liceat Ecclesiam nomine
dotalitii ad aliquem transfer, vel pro presentatatione alicui personae
pecuniam vel aliquod emolumentum pacto interveniente recipere: quod si quis
fecerit and in jure convictus vel confessus fuerit ipsum tam Regia, quam nostra
freti autoritate patricinio ejusdem Ecclesiae in perpetuum privari statuimus;
which was never, most certainly Law.

Secondly, If this had been a Law, the other Canon beforementioned, made by
Stephen, Archbishop of Canterbury, was idle; nay, presumptuous, for offering
to derogate from a Canon, made a Law about 47 years before: But however, Canons
confirmed by Law, remain but Canons still; and the Breach of them not punished
as the Breach of Laws, nor no Innovation made thereby, upon a civil Right; of
which before and after more.

As to the Second Canon, we observe how dutiful this Canon in the Style of it
behaves it self toward the Civil Government, in that Clerks should not
exercise Jurisdiction where Judgment of Blood is to be given, under the soft
word Statuimus, that they should not Literas pro poena sanguinis infligenda
scribere, that is, sign an Order for the Execution of a Condemned Man, or be
present at the Sentence, is under the districtius inhibemus; but the doing of
this, is not declared to be a Sin; he that is contravenient to the Canon, is
not thereby to become irregular to be punished by his Superior, or to incurr
Excommunication, or any Censure, the Clergy are not declared by this Canon to
be incompetent Judges: it only declares them unworthy of the Protection of the
Church; the meaning of it is, Judge not least ye be judged: If you judge the
Laics, they will judge you. This is the Scandal for which the Privilegium
Clericale will be lost; So that upon the whole matter this Canon is but Advice
and Counsel, and offers reasons to the Choice and Approbation, rather than a
Command, under the Authority of the Church in a Council. But let it be what it
will, if the Canon had been most peremptory in its Prohibition, and had
lightened and thundered in its Denunciatiations, it would have been of no force
to alter the Government, or discharge a Judge from doing his Duty; but this is
farther to be duly observed, that this Canon could not be broken if the Law
had not been otherwise than these Canons direct; and therefore these Canons
produced by our Adversaries, are the greatest Testimonies to the Right we
defend, and a practice agreeable thereto. Does not the Canon suppose, that a
Beneficed Clerk, or one in Holy Orders, was sometimes in Commission for judging
in Capital Causes? For certainly the Canon did not prohibit them to murder, or
enjoin them not to write Letters to subborn men to kill. What can be the
meaning of the Canon but this, supposing a Beneficed Clerk to be made a Judge
of Life and Death, to assist in a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, or
Jail-delivery, that he should be enjoined not to pronounce the Sentence, or to
sign the Order or Calendar for Execution. But if he were not a Judge, how
possibly could he sign an Order for Execution? By the other words of the Canon,
Nec intersit ubi judicium sanguinis tractatur; he can be forbidden only to be
present and assisting as a Judge or Officer at the pronouncing of Sentence: for
it can be no fault sure, nor ever was intended by any Canon to be made one, for
any Clerk to hear a Court pronounce a Judgment of Death or Mutilation, or to
see a Malefactor executed.

What therefore can be more evident, than that the Bishops did withdraw, not
for want of Right of Session, but they pretended the Canon because they did not
like the Causes? But further, that nothing more than what we have showed was
understood to be done in that Protestation, by those times (they must be
allowed at least to know their own Opinions) does appear; for that
notwithstanding the Protestation of the Bishops aforementioned, the great
Council of the Kingdom did not think the Authority of a Parliament when the
Bishops were absent unquestionable. This Opinion we do not go about to
maintain, but this we conclude, that there could never have been such an
Opinion, if the Bishops had been denied Right of Session in Capital Causes in
that time.

CHAP. IX.
THE Commons of England in the 21 R. 2 pray, that the Bishops might make their
Proxy; which they did thrice in that Parliament, once by Procuratory Letters to
Sir Thomas Percy, as is before recited; and afterward William la Scroop Earl
of Wilts was made their Procurator; and a third time the Earls of Worcester and
Wilts were made their Procurators, in the matter between the two Dukes of
Hereford and Norfolk.

That it may the better appear, that the Bishops were virtually present by
their Proxy, it ought to appear that they were allowed to make Proxies, and
that the Lords Spiritual did so as well as the Temporal Lords. The first
mention of Proxies that occurs in the memory of our Parliaments is in the
Parliament of Carlisle under E. 1. and that is of the Bishops Proxies. The
words are these; Quia omnes Praelati tunc plenarie non venerunt receptis
quibusdam procurationibus Praelator. qui venire non poterant adjornantur. And
in a Parliament held at Westminster, under Ed. 2. dors. clauso Ed. 2. m. 11.
the Bishops of Durham and Carlisle remaining upon the Defense of the Marches of
Scotland, are severally commanded to stay there, and in the Writ this Clause
was added to both of them, Sed Procurat. vestrum sufficienter instructum, ad
dictum diem and locum, mittatis ad consentiendum his quae tunc ibidem
praedictos Praelatos and Proceres contigerit ordinari. Though generally Proxies
were admitted to both Spiritual and Temporal Lords, yet when the business of
the Parliament was extraordinary, the Writs of Summons both to the Prelates and
Barons had a Premonition, that a Proxy should not be allowed, unless they could
not possibly be present, dors. claus. 6 E. 3. m. 36. claus. 1 R. 2. m. 37. 2 R.
2. m. 29. Nor was it unusual with the Prelates to make such their Procurators,
who were no Members of that House. In that Parliament of Carlisle under E. 1.
the Bishop of Exeter sends to the Parliament Henry de Pinkney Parson of
Haughton as his Proxy. The Bishop of Bath and Wells sends William of Charleton
a Canon of his Church. In the Parliament 17 R. 2. the Bishop of Norwich made
Michael Cergeaux Dean of the Arches and others his Procurators. In the same
year the Bishop of Durham his Proxies are John of Burton Canon of Beudly and
others. In the Statute of Praemunire 16 R. 2. cap. 5. it is said, that the
advice of the Lords Spiritual being present, and of the Procurators of them
that were absent was demanded. This making of others then Barons of Parliament
Proxies, is not without President likewise in the case of Temporal Lords. Lit.
Procurator. Parl. 4 H. 5. Thomas de la War gave his Procuratory Letters to John
Frank and Richard Hulme Clerks. So that it appears, that by the Law of
Parliament the Proxies of the Bishops in the 21th. of R. 2. were legal Proxies;
and consequently the Bishops there virtually. Besides that, the lawfulness
thereof does appear, for that it was required of them by the Parliament, that
they should make their Proxies, and be present by their Procurators, for this
reason, lest otherwise the Proceedings in that Parliament should be void.

CHAP. X.
IT is true that the Parliament 21 R. 2. was wholly repealed by 1 H. 4. but
that was for a good reason indeed, because that Parliament of 21 R. 2. had
delegated their whole power to a few of their number, who finally without any
resort back to the House made and past Laws.

But did ever any man before the Octavo argue at this rate, that because there
is one error in a case for which the Judgment is reversed, that therefore there
was nothing in the case legal and well considered. And therefore how
unreasonable and false this way of arguing is, and that it is disputing against
fact, we shall further show and prove.

For a probable Opinion still continued of the necessity of the Bishops
sitting, which implies a clear Recognition of a Right; for in the 2 H. 5 the
Earl of Salisbury petitioned the House to reverse a Judgment given against the
Earl his Father, Anno 2 H. 4. the Error assigned was the Absence of the
Spiritual Lords. The Case was much debated, but the Judgment affirmed as we
allow it ought to be, but we produce it as an irrefragable Testimony of the
Bishops Right to sit: for if that had not been allowed, there could not have
been the least color in the case, nor matter of debate.

CHHP. XI.
BUt though the Actual Exercise of the Bishops Right in their own Persons (though
whatsoever is done by a Deputy, is done in the Right of him that makes the
Deputation, as every body knows) was for some time discontinued (though their
Right in that time was most solemnly owned and recognized) yet in 28 H. 6. we
find them re-continuing the Exercise of that Right and Authority, and in their
own Persons sitting in Judgment, upon William de la Pool, Duke of Suffolk, who
was impeached of Treason by the Commons, for that he had sold the Realm to the
French King, and had fortified Wallingford Castle for a place of Refuge. The
Impeachment of High Treason was brought from the House of Commons, by several
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, sent thither by the King's Command; the Ninth of
March, the Duke was brought from the Tower, into the Presence of the King, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal: The Impeachment was read unto him. The Thirteenth
of March, he was sent for, to come before the King, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, to answer to his Charge, which he did. On Tuesday, the Seventeenth of
March, the King sent for all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, who were in
Town: They are named, two Archbishops, and thirteen Bishops, besides the
Temporal Lords, who being assembled, the King sent for the Duke. There was no
Judgment given by the Parliament, but he submitted to the King, and the King
gave him Penance; which was, that he should be absent for Five Years out of
England.

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, by Viscount Beaumont, declared to the King,
that this that was so decreed, and done against the Person of the Duke,
proceeded not by their Advice and Council, with this Protestation, that it
should not be, nor turn in Prejudice, nor Derogation of them, their Heirs, ne,
of their Successors in time coming; but that they may have and enjoy their
Liberty and Freedom, as largely as ever their Ancestors, or Predecessors had
and enjoyed before this time. Observe here, that the Lords Spiritual were
present at every Motion of this Cause. This Cause was thrice before them, no
Exception taken to the Bishops being Judges. They could not sit by Permission,
without Right; if the Bishops had no Right to sit, the Proceedings had been
certainly erroneous: For though one Judge's Absence (if there be a Quorum) will
not vacate a Judgment; yet if one sit in Judgment, that is not an Authorized
Judge, the Proceeding is certainly erroneous and void. Can any man believe,
that the Government should lose it self? forget its own Establishments in the
highest concerns? We may as soon believe that a man may forget his own name.
One positive Act of Session signifies more than 100 Omissions; for if it had
not been well understood, that the Bishops had a Right to sit in Judgment in
Capital Causes in Parliament, they could never have been admitted; they would
never have presumed to endeavor it. But with false Logic and absurd
Reasonings, and dislike to the Order, it is become an Opinion in this Age,
because sometimes the Bishops absented, that they have no Right.

But we have one thing further to add, that declares an inherent Right in the
Lords Spiritual to the Authority in question; and that is an Opinion of the
Judges 10 E. 4. 35. which says, that the Lords Spiritual in case of a Trial of
a Temporal Peer in Parliament shall make a Procurator; for then it seems an
Opinion was received, (which was error temporis) That it was indecent for
Bishops to sit in their own persons in Judgment in such cases. But they
themselves are best Judges of what is indecent and unbecoming their Order; for
no man is obliged to any man but himself, in the matters of Decency, and the
measures that make things decent or indecent is very mutable, as changable and
mutable as Customs, Fashions, and Opinions. Besides that, there is nothing that
is very valuable, and is of great concernment, but can and ought to set aside
and supersede the consideration of Decency.

CHAP. XII.
BUT to complete our Evidence, I will add the consideration of what remains
unquestionably the Right of the Lords Spiritual, which seems to me to be in
parity of Reason with the Right now in Pretense, and that is their Right to be
authoritatively present and assisting at passing Bills of Attainder, which the
Bishops always exercised as the Folio says, though he will not think it
allowable from thence to infer, that they have rightful Authority when that
House does proceed judicially to Condemnation. But I desire to be informed what
difference there is between condemning a man by Act of Parliament, and by
Judgment in Parliament. If the death of the man be only considered, it is as
much against the Canon to condemn the man one way or the other. It Is causa and
judicium sanguinis, and death follows. Nay, to condemn a man by Bill of
Attainder is more against the reason of the Canon, than the condemning a man
judicially; for the condemning a man judicially is ex officio Judicis, but a
Bill of Attainder is an extraordinary use of the Legislative Power to a
purpose, which was not designed in the Institution. Such an Act is not ex
officio Legislatoris, but the using of the Absolute Power of the Sovereignty
upon Reasons of State. Here one would think if the Canon had any consideration,
any obligation, it should restrain the Bishops from meddling in such
Legislations. Privilegia ne irrogunto was one of the Laws of the twelve Tables.

But (if I do rightly understand) the reason why Bishops did more frequently,
and without pretense of scruple or objecting the Canon, assist in the Bills of
Attainder, was for this reason, That the weightiness of the Affair, the high
nature of the Proceeding, the extraordinary use of the Legislative Power, which
can be warranted only by extraordinary Reasons, required their Presence, and
put that little pretense of the Canon out of countenance, it could not with any
faith to the Government be then so much as mentioned for an Excuse by the
Bishops.

And this I will say, that the Canon has no more right of restraining the
Bishops in Judicial Proceedings, than in the Proceedings upon Bill of
Attainder. That it has not done so is confessed in this, and therefore it did
not de jure do so in the other.

The Folio Author has found out a very extraordinary Reason why Bishops are
necessary to Acts of Attainder, (but this he says must not be drawn into an
Argument for the Bishops Right of Judging) and that is, because Rights, Titles,
and Interests, are made forfeit by Acts of Attainder, which were not
forfeitable at Common Law; and for the doing of this it i^ necessary there
should be a concurrence of the three Estates to bind all Rights. This Argument
supposes, that private Acts of Attainder did not always conform themselves in
the matter of Forfeitures to the severity of the Common Law, or general Statute
Law: which is a mistake; for before the Statutes of 26 H. 8. c. 13. and 33 H.
8. c. 20. private Acts of Attainder made no Forfeitures, but what the Common
Law made; and since the Statutes of 26 H. 8. c. 13. and 33 H. 8. c. 20. the
private Attainders by Parliament have not exceeded those appointed by that
Statute, but have often times gone less. And therefore the Bishops were not
present for the reason of making Forfeitures larger, and of more things than
the Law at the time being made forfeitable, but of common duty, especially in
all these matters of an extraordinary nature or difficulty, to assist as Judges
and Councillors in that House. And to this that I now say, all the Acts of
Parliament of private Attainders that I have seen, and they are not a few, are
agreeable. I believe what he has said in this matter is not grounded upon any
observation, but he was willing to find out a Reason for what he had undertaken
to prove, and to offer it without trying of its truth. Besides, whatever can be
a Law, can be a Law without them, and if they are absent.

CHAP. XIII.
BUT I must take notice that we have proved beyond what is necessary, to
maintain the Lords Spiritual their pretense of Right to judge of the Earl of
Danby's Pardon, which is the present case, and gives the occasion of this
Dispute. And here I desire the Reader to remember and observe, what was
heretofore done by the Bishops in case of Heresy The Bishop in his Consistory
convicted a Heretic, and did never imagine he incurred the Canon pretended,
(though the delivery over to the Secular Arm, and burning of the Convict if he
did not recant, was intended assuredly to follow) because he did not award the
Execution, and give the final killing Sentence.

How then can the Canon (if it was a Law as it is not, nor obliges any man but
he that will be obliged) lay any restraint upon the Bishops in judging of the
Earl of Danby's Pardon. For if they dislallow his Pardon, and reject his Plea,
he is not to be therefore condemned, (though perhaps his Condemnation may
follow, as burning does the Conviction of a Heretic;) but he is not ipso
facto, and merely by rejecting his Plea of Pardon, condemned. For observe, I
pray, no man is condemned, or cast in any Suit, because he does not make a good
Defense, but upon the sufficiency of the matter whereupon he is charged.
Besides, that it is not without Precedent, that a man has been tried after a
Pardon pleaded and disallowed. This every Lawyer knows to be so, that if a Plea
is pleaded to any Declaration, upon which the Plaintiff demurs, if the Plea be
ruled a bad Plea, the Defendent has liberty to take exception to the
insufficiency of the Declaration. So that Judgment is finally and truly given
upon the Declaration and Charge, because there is a good cause of Action, and
not because the Defendent has made a bad Plea.

So that the Bishops may judge in their own persons of the validity of Pardons,
without being contravenient to the Reason of the Canon so much talked of is
evident; for that the Judgment upon the Pardon is not the final and killing
Judgment. The Folio has furnished us with an Authority for the same, out of an
ancient Manuscript Chronicle in libro Mailrosso he calls it, wherein he says,
the Prelates are said to have given their Opinion in 21 R. 2. for the
revocation of certain Pardons of the Duke of Gloucester, Earls of Arundel and
Warwick, which were granted in 11 R. 2. and in the Parliament of 21 R. 2.
repealed. And though the Chronicle said, some blamed the Bishops, and thought
that they had incurred thereby Irregularity. That does not at all prejudice our
Right, nor abate the force of the Testimony, that this matter of fact gives to
it.

We reserved it to this place to add, that as the intention of the Assize of
Clarendon was, to set bounds to the Encroachment of the Papal Power, and in
this matter to declare, how far the Bishops might if they pleased observe the
Canon Law, or rather themselves, and what was thought then decent to their
Order. So according to the Print in Gervasius, and therein he differs from
Matthew. Paris) it is, Quousque judicio perveniatur ad mutilationem membrorum vel
mortem; which further clears the meaning of that Law to be, that the Bishops
were thereby excused not altogether from Capital Causes, but only when it was
proceeded so far in such like Cause, that Judgment was to be pronounced, which
when the Bishops had nothing to gainsay, they might depart, and leave Sentence
to be pronounced by the House.

But we cannot after all this allow the Author of the Folio, to have so little
sense, as with a good conscience to say, that he who cannot perhaps by reason
of his circumstance, and some consideration of Indecency, execute a thing in
his own person, therefore cannot do it by another, no more than he can
authorize one man to murder another. Thus he says fol. 20. when surely this
Gentleman cannot think it as fit for a Judge to be a Hangman, as to sign a
Calendar for the Execution of the Condemned Prisoners.

But the Octavo is somewhat surprising in this matter: For he does affirm, That
it is not lawful for Bishops to vote in any Question preliminary and
preparatory to the Sentence of Condemnation, when such Sentence follows, and
the matter preliminary is necessary to the Process. This he proves by a Logic
Rule, Causa Causae, est Causa Causati; one of Sthalius his Axioms, has turned
round the Head of this Gentleman. I find few men can bear Axioms, Maxims, and
Sentences. There are none speak so much unnatural Nonsense, as they that use
them most. May not several men, I pray, do several parts of an affair; and yet
he that does the first part, is no ways the Cause of what another man does in
the second and third place? Is the acting the first part of the Play, the cause
of acting the last; Or, is the laying the Foundation, the Cause that lays on
the Roof? Is the Jury the Cause of any more than their Verdict? And does not
the Court give Judgment by their own Authority and Causality?

If men would speak by Nature, and according to first Notions, and were not so
full of second Notions, and Universals, we should not have so many Errors,
Mistakes, and Confounding Opinions in the Work.

But this we complain of as too severe in the Octavo; that when he had
confounded us with his Causa Causae, and Causati, he would render us ridiculous
with a Story of a Friar, out of Chaucer, That would of a Capon, the Liver, of a
Pig, the Head;
But would, that nothing for him should be dead.
This indeed was a fine piece of Wit in the Poet; but translated hither by our
Author, is an insipid piece of Malice. His Design sure in this, was, to enter
the Bishops amongst Chaucer's Friars; and then the Learned Readers of Chaucer,
would be very conceited upon them; and apply all his pleasant Satyrs against
the Friars, to the Bishops.

But for the farther Evidence of the Bishops Baronage, and their Jus paritatis,
it would not be impertinent here, to add, That the Names of Barons, Peers,
Seniors, Grants, have been attributed to the Lords Spiritual, in all times, in
Authentic Histories and Records. Forasmuch as a Nominal Argument, is not a
very inartificial Topic in such a Cause as this. Besides, that this will
destroy the very strength of our Adversaries; which lies in this, that they
will not allow Prelates to be comprehended in the Name of Peers, Grants, and
Barons. And that where the Records does not expressly mention Prelates, they
will conclude, they were not meant or intended to be present: But the
Collection which was made for this purpose, shall not trouble the Reader,
because in two Books since Printed, in Defense of the Bishops Right in
question, this is abundantly performed. Besides, that it is a very precarious
Conclusion, that our Adversaries make, and without argument: For they ground
themselves herein, upon a most unreasonable Postulatum, viz. That Titles do not
belong to persons for whom they were made; and to whose Character they agree;
and that Words do not design the things which they were made and imposed to
signify.

CHAP. XIV.
NOw we shall proceed to perform a necessary piece of Justice to the Prelates,
as well as a Right to the Government, to recover its true Constitution, from
the Prejudice of Modern Ignorance, to declare and manifest, that our Gvernment
does consist of three States, the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons of
England.

These do make the Great Council of the Kingdom, and minister to the King,
Council and Auxiliaries; over which the King does preside as the Great
Superintendent, and mover of this mighty Machin.

The consequence of which is, that the Bishops cannot be detruded from that
place they bear in the Constitution of the Government, for that no Government
can be legally or by any lawful power changed, but must remain for ever once
established. And it cannot be no less than Treason of State to attempt a
change, no Authority in the world is competent to make any alteration.

The Princes of Christendom, after they took to themselves the Election of
Bishops, which is a natural right of the Sovereign Power, become Christian,
they soon observed the advantage that they might make by advancing them to the
greatest Secular Dignities, Governments, and Trusts; and did accordingly
advance them to an equality, if not to a superiority, to the highest of the
Secular Nobility; gave them Dutchies, Marquisates, Baronies, and rich
Endowments, and erected that Order into a successive Nobility. Another sort of
Nobility from that of the Lay Princes, concluding that they should be better
served by men of their own choice and approved worthiness, (who had also other
advantages over the People, than those that the Temporal Princes and Lords had,
by that Reverence they paid to their Bishops, and the Authority and Power that
they had over them in the virtue of Religion) than by the Hereditary Princes
and Nobility, who did not always answer to the virtue of the original
Ancestors, and the first stock.

Besides that, Religious Kings and Sovereign Princes did by advancing Bishops
intend to do great advantages and honor to Religion; but withal they did not
divide the Bishops thus advanced, from the Secular Princes and Noblemen in
Councils, for then they had lost their design. The Bishops could not have had
any direct influence upon the Councils of the Nobles and Secular Princes, nor
have tempered their Debates with an excellent Charity and firm Loyalty, and
other Virtues which belong to their Character. It would have made trouble,
distraction, and impediment in the Affairs of Princes, and emulation and strife
and faction between the Ecclesiastical and Secular Orders and several mischiefs
and great inconveniences would have ensued, if they had been divided and
separated in several Colleges, and had had in consequence thereof a Negative
upon each other, as they then of necessity must. But by uniting both Orders
into one Council and Assembly, distractions in Councils and impediments to the
Affairs of Princes are avoided. And we are assured of a more wise, as well as
an unanimous and more authoritative Result in all Councils and Debates; which
if the Octavo had duly considered, he would not have depraved and disparaged
this wise Constitution, by comparing it to a nest of Boxes.

They were therefore for these great Reasons, both Spiritual and Secular Lords,
united in the great Councils of Kingdoms, and these two Orders of Nobles
Spiritual and Secular, became the two States, which together with the
Representatives of the People the third State, made the Parliaments Diets and
Convention of State, under which Names the great Assembly which we call a
Parliament, in the several Sovereignties of Christian Europe has respectively
passed.

This has been observed by the most learned Onuphrius: Postquam vero juris
imperii facta est eorundem Praelat. electio, quemadmodum and ceteri Principes
seculares Imperii, tum Caesares qui de Religione been merere volebant, sine
Imperii tamen praejudicio coeperunt Episc. and Abbates, ob Religionem tanquam
potiora Imperii membra, prae caeteris Laicis Principibus honorare, profana
ditione and ingentibus opibus honestare, Arces, Oppida, Vrbes, Marchias,
Ducatus, Provincias, Pedagia, Telonia, Vectigalia, Portaria, and multa alia
quae Imperii propria erant, Episcopatibus concedere, quae vel ex suis propriis
bonis quae ad Imperium pertinebant, vel ex alienis feudis erant. Nam Laicis
Principibus sine legitimo haerede mortuis, eorum Provincias, quae beneficiario
jure ad Imperium pertinebant, non aliis amplius Laicis Regulis, sed Episcopis
concedebat; atque hac ratione omnes Episcopatus and Abbatias Italiae,
Galliarum, and Germaniae, imo totius Orbis Latini, and denique ipsum Pontificem
Romanum, ex pauperibus ditissimos maximos Principes fecerunt, and ex eis
scilicet quibus, quae antea Imperii juris erant, in nulla re propterea
Imperialia jura minui existimantes; quippe quod certi essent eos omnes
Praelatos a se designandos fore, and non nisi jussu suo, and voluntate
Sacerdotia ipsa obtenturos.

Nicholaus Cusanus, lib. 3. de Concordia Catholica cap. 27. attributes this
Policy to Otho Secundus, who says he, Vnico gaudens filio and multis regnis,
cogitans difficile fore absque maximo labor, tot regna in pace aliquamdiu
servari posse, insequens vestiga Avi sui Henrici Primi, and Ottonis Patris,
suum cogitatum ad res ecclesiasticas appulit, considerans multa jam Religiosis
locis per praesentes Reges donata, summa pace gaudere, quia verecundum erat Deo
dicatis vim infer animo ponderavit Ordinationem factam Synodo Romanae
Ecclesiae, de qua 63. Did. In Synodo. Per quam perpetua dabatur potestas
Imperatoribus, and Romanum Pontificem, and Cunctos sub Imperio Episcopos
investiendi, vel saltem eorum consensum semper concurrere debere celebrata
Canonica Electione, ut 63. Distinct. NOS SANCTORVM. Vnde hoc ponderans
credidit, perpetuis temporibus Imperio subjectis pacem dare posse, si
temporalia Dominia, tam Romanae Ecclesiae, quam aliis adjungerentur, cum certi
Servitii observatione, tunc enim cultus Divinus augmentaretur, and Religionem
in magnam Reverentiam exaltandam credidit quando sanctissimi magnae potentiae
aliis Principibus intermiscerentur: non posse tunc quosque voluntate in
peccatis, uti nulla publica sperabat unquam peccata Captorum and depopulatorum,
agrorum, and communem pacem turbantium, incendiariorum; and consimilium posse
nutriri Ecclesiastica Sacra potestate potenti and valenti resistente: etiam
praedones, and pauperum oppressores, qui particulari regimini praeessent, sic
corrigi posse affirmabat, ut sic absque Tyrannica Oppressione populus in
Liberate vivere posset. Imperio etiam tranquillissimo non dubitabat hanc
Ordinationem esse utilissimam, quando per annua servitia, and praestimonias
quilibet Ecclesiae juxta quantitatem temporalium indictas Status Imperialis
manu teneretur, ac etiam multo major Imperii Potentia, ex hoc appareret quod
illis omninibus Dominiis ita Ecclesiis traditis, nullus nisi per Imperium, and
absque Successione percipi posset. Who is desirous of more to this purpose, may
see Sigonius, de Regno Italiae.

Bishops were made Dukes and Counts in France, and also Peers in France; and
about this time, out of the Princes, Dukes and Counts, the number of 12 were
selected by the Kings of France, and erected into the Title of the 12 Peers of
France: by which Dignity, they became the Chief Counselors, and Directors of
State. These twelve being chosen, besides their being Peers in matters of
Judgment, in the Old Parliaments, were Peers also in the management of the
whole Kingdom; and while their Greatness held, were therein so Powerful, that
they added a Taste of Aristocracy to that great Monarchy (not disagreable to
the Title that our Peers assumed of being Pares Regis, and having a Power,
Fraenum imponere Regi, as Bracton tells us; but he and his Law both are
antiquated. Of these, six were Lay, and six were Ecclesiastical; but the
Dignity of Pair, is supposed in these Bishops, not as they are Bishops; but as
being Dukes and Counts also; that is, in the first three, viz. Rhemes, Laon,
Langres, as Dukes, and of Beavois, Chalous, and Noyons, as Counts.

These twelve Peers of France had such a Power toward the Ancient Kings of
France, as the Ephori of Sparta, and the Justiciaries of Arragon had toward
their Kings. They were obliged to exercise that Power with Care, and they did
exert it toward their Kings. What they did agreeable to the Power assigned them
in the Government, was lawful and just; nay, their bounden Duty. But certainly,
the Exercise of these Powers was against no Command of God: For God makes no
Government; nor obliges us to obey any, but what are made by Men: The
Government it self is its own Measure. It Is no Objection against the Lawfulness
of any Government, that it is inconvenient, if they like it notwithstanding,
whose Government it is. But this Constitution was of advantage to Royal
Families, in that it made a kind of Entail of the Crown upon their Families,
and preserved the Monarchy and its Descent: And besides, had this farther
Convenience, that it was under them impossible for a Nation, or Kingdom to be
undone in a trice for a Caprice of the Prince, or destroyed to make a Fortune
for some Up-start.

For the Sake of Mankind, it is to be earnestly desired and prayed, that such
as they who derive no Honor from their Ancestors, may leave none to their
Children, that themselves may survive their Honors, and leave nothing of their
Fortunes to their Children, but what they themselves could deserve, viz. Hate
and Infamy. All Usurpation and Encroachment of Power is to be opposed where it
can be lawfully, as the greatest Mischief, and the Ministers to the Designs
hated and detested as the most pernicious and loathsome Vermin.

CHHP. XV.
BUt to return, agreeable to this Policy of Sovereign Princes, who had the
Donation of Bishoprics, of advancing Bishops to the highest secular Dignities
and Trust.

William the Conqueror did create Bishops into Barons, and exacted the Services
and Counsels of Barons in the Great Council of the Kingdom, by putting their
Lands under Tenure by Barony: he gave them no new Endowments; but as a
Conqueror, he confirmed their Ancient Possessions, under a new reserved Tenure,
and annexed to their Order, a Secular Honor, a successive Baronage. Since the
Conqueror the title of Baron took the place of that of Thane, which was
likewise a Feudal Honor in the Saxons time. By William the Conqueror Baronies
were feudal, and in congruity to the State of the Lay Nobles he made the
Bishops feudal Barons, for there was no other than feudal Nobility at that time.

It will not be amiss, nor time misspent, here to give a short account of the
Government in the Conquerours time, of the Baronage by him introduced, and the
policy thereof, and of the change made in the Baronage of England in after
time. Because from thence we must derive the Bishops Right now in question,
which is included and virtually contained in their Right of Baronage. Hereby it
will appear, that the Bishops were of the Barons majores, and of the Barons
majores the first in Dignity, that they became feudal Barons in the
Conquerour's time, and when the reason of our Baronage changed, and no man
continued a Baron ratione tenurae, it cannot with reason be said, that the
Bishops are Barons only for the sake of their Lands, which our Adversaries do
insist upon, for that they think it is an abatement to the Honor of Peerage,
and a prejudice to their Right in question: but because it has been said before
by men of Authority in the Law, and grown up to be a vulgar error, we will now
discharge the mistake, by affixing here the History and Reason of the change.

It was the policy of the first William, (for some are so critical they will
not call him Conqueror) to create new Tenures upon all the great Possessions
of the Realm, and impose upon the principal men to hold their Lands of him in
capite, under such Services that were necessary in peace and war for State and
Justice, and by putting all the considerable men of the Realm under Oaths of
Fealty incident to those Tenures, besides the Oaths of Allegiance, he provided
for the establishment of his Conquest, or his possession of the Crown without
title. The principal men of the Realm, both Ecclesiastical and Lay, hereby were
not only obliged to support, but to become part of the Government, and were
obliged to be Ministers of Justice, and also Members of the great Council of
the Kingdom or Parliament, which was now to be made up principally of his
Dependents; by which he changed the constitution of the great Council in the
Saxons times, and in the balance of that equal sort of Government, the
consequent mischiefs whereof this Kingdom labored under, until we recovered
it again by an equal representative of the Commons in Parliament, in the time
of King Henry the Third. The power of the Baronage proved equally oppressive to
the people, and came in that time to be reduced irreverent to the Crown. By
this policy the Conqueror intended to establish his Conquest, to secure to
himself, and his posterity, the Imperial Crown of England, imagining, that
otherwise he should have been but a precarious King.

He had now turned the Kingdom upon the matter, into one great Manor, and kept
his Courts, called, the Curia Regis, in the nature of a Sovereign Court Baron;
now become more frequented and solemn, than that Court was before the Conquest,
thrice in every Year, at stated Times, and Places, viz. at Easter, at
Winchester, at Whitsuntide, at Westminster, and at Christmas, at Gloucester: at
these times and places, all his Tenants, which were all the considerable
Freeholders of England, attended of course; and upon a General Summons at any
other time or place appointed by the King, as his Affairs did require, they
were bound likewise to attend.

In these Courts the Suitors swore Fealty, did renew and confirm their
Obligations to the Crown, and the King became more assured of their Allegiance,
by their Personal Attendance, and by his Royal Entertainments of them at such
times.

In these Courts they recognized their own Services, and the Rights of the
King, their Lord, and assessed Aids and Estuage, Prestations due to the Crown,
by their Tenures upon themselves, to which in general they were obliged by
their Tenures. In these Conventions the Right of the Suitors, the King's
Tenants were adjudged, as Private Lords had Judgment of the Right of Lands, in
pretense held of them in Fee, in their several Manors, as they have to this
day. But if Right was not done by the Lord, the Cause was to be removed to this
Curia Regis, the King being Lord Paramount, of whom all Estates, mediately, or
immediately were held: Which appears by the Form of the Writ of Right now in
use, which we will transcribe, N. B. precipimus tibi quod sine dilatione plenum
Rectum teneas A. de B. de uno Messuagio L. in I, quae clamat tenere de te per
liberum Servitium unius denarii per annum pro omni servitio, quod W. de T. ei
deforciat; and nisi feceris Vicecomes faciatne amplius inde Clamorem audiamus
pro defectu Recti. The Common Pleas was not then a Court, and at this time the
Appeal and resort to the King, was in this Court, if Justice was not done by
the Lord or Sheriff. So that the greatest part of the Justice of the Nation was
administered in those Assemblies.

But it must not be understood, that this vast Convention was a Court of
Judicature for every Cause; neither, that it was formally a Parliament, without
some farther Act of the King, for erecting that Convention into the great
Council of the Nation.

But in this Curia Regis, they were obliged to answer the King's Writs of
Summons, Writs of Commission, and obey his Appointments in the Ordinary
Administration of Justice, in which the Capitalis Justiciarius, or Justitia was
to preside.

That this was not a Judicature, the vast numbers of those that made it, the
inequality of the Persons considered under the Common Reason of being Tenants
in Capite, and Barons, whereby they became indifferently members of the Curia
Regis, besides the neglect that must necessarily be presumed in the greatest
part of such a Body, to the business of Jurisdiction and judging of Rights,
without particular Designation thereto, do sufficiently argue and evince. But
as many of them as were most proper to judge, or assist in the Judgment, as the
Case did require, were appointed by the King, or his Capitalis Justiciarius.
And that it was so in Fact, appears by that Famous Cause, wherein Archbishop
Lanfranck, recovered against Odo, Bishop of Baieux, Earl of Kent. Eadmerus
Hist. Nov. l. 1. f. 9. tells us, That there was Principum Conventus, an
Assembly of Barons at Pinneden in Kent; and that the Kings Precept was, Rex
quatenus adunatis primoribus and probis viris, non solum de Comitatu Cantiae,
sed de aliis Comitatibus Angliae, Querele Lanfranci in medium ducerentur,
examinarentur, and determinarentur; disposito itaque (says he) principum
Conventus apud Pinneden, Gaufridus Episcopus Constantiensis, vir ea tempestate
praedives in Anglia Vice Regis (for Odo, Bishop of Baieux, one of the
Litigants, was at that time the Justiciarius Angliae) justitiam de suis
querelis strenuissime, jussus, fecit; where we see Godfrey, at the King's
Precept, took so many Barons of that Country, or of any other, where any of the
Lands lay as Assistants to him: For our Historian says, that Lanfranck,
(though Godfred pronounced the Judgment) did recover judicio Baronum qui
placita tenuerunt. The probi homines were such, by whom the truth of the matter
might be better understood, and did probably enquire of it, who did accord and
agree the Judgment to be right. Lanfranc did recover ex communi omnium
astipulatione and judicio, as our Historian also informs us. I might cite many
more Records of the Method of the Administration of Justice in this Curia
Regis; but I should be too long in this matter, not being strictly necessary to
the Question in hand, though the understanding of the Nature of this Court, and
the Constitution of the Government at this time, will many ways inserve to the
clearing the Right thereof.

In this Court Peers were tried, all Pleas of the Crown heard; and whatever is
now the Business of the Courts of Common Pleas and Exchequer, was dispatched in
this Curia Regis. Here Fines were levied, as appears by a Record furnished to
us, by Sir Hen. Spelman, in his Gloss. f. 279. the word Fines. There men famous
for their Skill in the Law, did attend, and by this Judicature, some place was
assigned them, where they were to hear such Causes as were referred and sent
down to them and it is very possible, that Fines may be levied, i. e. Concord
made of the thing in pretense, that was referred to them; and it may be true,
that in a Charter of a Grant of Conusance of Causes, Words may be contained for
excluding the Intromissions of the Justices of the one Bench, and the other:
For such Charters never want words. These matters are produced by Sir Edward
Coke, in his Preface to the Eighth Report, to prove that the Common Pleas was a
Court before the Magna Charta of King John; for that these matters are in time
before that Charter; but these Justices were no other than Ministers to the
Curia Regis: They were not such Justices as now make that Court, all Common
Pleas being now appropriated to their Judicature: For the Writs, before that
Charter, were returnable, coram me, vel Justitia mea, Glanvil. l. 1. cap 6. but
after that Charter, they were returnable, coram Justiciariis meis apud
Westmonasterium. Bracton. l. 2. cap. 32. But before this, all Common Pleas were
adjudged in the Curia Regis, and that Court did send down the Cause to such as
did attend that Court, to receive its References. By Magna Charta, cap. 11. it
was provided, Communia placita non sequantur Curiam nostram, sed teneantur in
aliquo certo loco: And now Writs were made returnable there, the Common Pleas
were taken out of the Jurisdiction of the Curia Regis, one Judicature was
appointed for all Causes between the Subjects, and one place of Attendance for
Litigants. By this Provision, Justice was administered without Noise and Tumult;
the Administration of it committed to men of Skill; and to such who might be
answerable for their Judgments, and from whom it might be appealed.

But after Magna Charta, made by King John, and confirmed by H. 3, 9. the
Authority continued of the Justitia, or capitalis Justiciarius: to him was the
resort for Writs, from whence all Judicial Authority was still derived: He did
direct and bound the Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, by such Formula's as
were allowed in the Curia Regis, where the Chancellor, and his College of
Clerks did attend for the forming of Writs, according to the nature of the
Complaint, with the Allowance of that Court; but the Authority of this Court
ceasing, and the Office of this great Justiciary, about the end of H. 3. we
find in the Statutes of Glouc. 6 E. 1. c. 7. Laws for a Writ of Entry to be
granted to the Reversioner, where Tenant in Dower, Aliens in Fee, though her
Alienation was a Forfeiture of that Estate at Common Law: But it seems there
had been no such Writ yet formed; and the Chancellor had no such Power of
forming a new Writ. That Statute provides, that in that Case, there shall be a
Writ of Entry thereof made in Chancery, which is called, A Writ of Entry in
casu proviso.

And for that Power might not be wanting in the Chancellor to issue out new
Writs where no Writs before formed were fitted to the Case; So that Writs in
Cases of like reason had been granted; by W. 2. cap. 24. it was provided,
quotiescunque evenerit in Cancellaria quod in uno casu reperitur Breve, and in
consimili casu cadente simili indigente remedio concordent Clerici de
Cancellaria in Brevi faciendo. Whereas in the full Authority of the Court of
the Curia Regis, no Right could have failed of a Remedy: For Jura sunt matres
Actionum. But Derivative Authorities, are always stricti Juris; no Rights are
now remediable, but where they are in a Parity of Reason, or Analogy with such
Rights as had received relief in the time of that Great and Original Judicature.

So inconvenient are those Reformations, that reform by pulling down: Want of
Authority to do Right, is a greater Fault in Government, than the allowance of
a Power that may be abused to Wrong and Oppression: But this is the true reason
why we have so many Causes irremediable at Common Law, petitioning for relief
at this day in our Court of Chancery; though, if the Statute of Westminster. 2.
beforementioned, were well improved, the Defects of our Law would not be so
shameful and notorious.

By what has been said, it appears, that the Common Pleas was not an Original
Court, or a Court of ordinary Jurisdiction in the First Constitution of the
Government; and such it remains and continues to this time: For that Court
cannot proceed to Judgment in any Cause, without an Original Writ out of
Chancery, though a late Statute makes their Judgments good, without an Original
upon a Verdict. If the Causes that are properly now of the cognizance of that
Court of Common Pleas, had been allotted to that Court Originally, when the
distribution of Administration of Justice was made in the Constitution of the
Government, that Court, by its proper Authority, and its own Process, would
have done Justice to all its Suitors, without first expecting a Writ out of
Chancery, to bring the Cause before them; or leaving any right without remedy
to complain in Chancery of the defects of Justice in that Court.

But that Law of Magna Charta, cap. 11. beforementioned, which erected the
Court of Common Pleas, fixed the Judges, and appropriated civil Causes to their
Judicature, no longer now ambulatory, was the first step that was made to
reduce the Court of Barons, called, Curia Domini Regis, in which the Capitalis
Justiciarius did preside; Yet still this Court continued a Court of Pleas of
the Crown and Appeals, and for those that had the Privilege of that Court, as
Officers, Dependents, Suitors, as appears by Bracton, l. 3. cap. 7. Rex habet
unam propriam Curiam sicut Aulam Regiam, and Justitiarios Capitales, qui
proprias causas Regias terminant and aliorum omnium per querelam, (i. e.
Appeal) vel per privilegium seu libertatem. This Sir Edward Coke imagines is
meant of the Kings Bench, but that must be a mistake, for sicut Aula Regia is
not competent to that Court as now, the Capitales Justitiarii were not the
Chief Justices we now have: For the Office of the Capitalis Justitiarius did
yet continue. But then that which follows in Bracton, the description of the
Justices of the Court he before spoke of puts the matter out of doubt; Item
(says he) Justitiariorum quidam sunt capitales, generales, perpetui, and
majores, a latere Regis residentes; which terms are agreeable to none but the
Barons.

But this sort of Judicature was not fit for continuance, and the Barons were
to be reduced, they were dismissed of this Jurisdiction about the time that
change was made, in reference to them in the Parliament; for as long as they
continued in their numbers and power so great as they were; both Courts and
Parliaments were troubled with tumultuous heaps of people, brought thither by
the Barons to countenance their pretenses, of which who will may see enough in
Eadmerus. And this reducement was (I doubt not) about the end of the Reign of
H. 3. when the first Writs were issued to choose Knights of the Shire. Philip
Basset was the last of these Capitales Justitiarii; Sir Henry Spelmans Glossary
p. 415. And then the Court of Kings Bench came to have such Judges as at this
day, ad obitum H. 3. 1272. Summorum Angliae Justitiariorum authoritas cessarit,
postea Capitales Justitiarii ad placita coram Rege tenenda appellati sunt,
says an ancient Anonymous Author quoted by Sir Hen. Spelman, Glossary 406.

That ancient Style of Capitalis Justitiarius Angliae is now allowed to the
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, though his legal Style is Capitalis
Justitiarius ad placita coram Rege tenenda. 2 E. 1. Radulphus Hengham was made
the first Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, as Sir Henry Spelmans Glossary 416.
But the Chief Justices of the Common Pleas were first made about the time of
King John's Magna Charta, when that Court was fixed, as is before remembered.
Sir Henry Spelman out of Florilegus tells us, Martin Peteshus was Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, 1 H. 3.

Neither did E. 1. trust the Barons with the Government of his Revenue, as it
was before the Capitalis Justic. and the power of the Barons was reduced; but
he made Adam de Stratton a Clerk Chief Baron, but in what time of his Reign
does not appear.

But they continued after they were reduced from the business of the Kings
Bench, and from that of the Court of Common Pleas, to have the Government of
the Revenue, and making a Court of Exchequer. And they still continued the
Exercise of their ancient ordinary Right, and judged Common Pleas in the
Exchequer until the 28 E. 1. And then in the Statute called Articuli super
Cartas cap. 4. it was enacted, That no Common Pleas shall be henceforth held in
the Exchequer, contrary to the form of the Great Charter. Their exercising
their power lastly in that Court, may be the reason why the Judges of that
Court are called Barons. Sir Henry Spelman says, he has an uninterrupted
Succession of the Barons of the Exchequer, from the sixth year of Edward the
Second; by which it appears, that the present Constitution was established
after the Kings Bench and Common Pleas were made such as they now are.

But there was one Power and Authority that was inseparable from the Baronage,
and that is the Trial of Peers, the ancient Curia Regis continues to this day
to that purpose, as it must, no other provision being ever since made therein.
This is the ancient Court of Peers, the Curia Regis when revived. The Power and
Authority of the ancient Capitalis Justitiarius is as often revived, as that
Court is erected for Trial; for Offices at Common Law can be no more nor less
than the Law appointed. That he is called High Steward is no Objection to us,
for so was the Capitalis Justitiarius called, and Justitiarius and Seneschallus
are used one for another in the Language of those times; Sir Henry Spelmans
Glossary 403. And this is the true reason, I humbly conceive, of that
Tradition, that the High Steward by the Kings constituting him such, has such
mighty powers that are fit to be trusted with him, no longer than while he is
busy about that piece of Justice for which he is appointed; and he is not to
receive his Commission, but just at his entry upon the business of the Court,
and not before. The power of this Capitalis Justitiarius was the same with that
of the Mair of the Palace in France, from whence the Conqueror brought this
Office, which was the same or greater with the Authority of the Praefectus
Praetorio amongst the Romans.

It is a thing to be wished, that Gentlemen that apply themselves to the study
of Antiquities, that relate to our Laws and Government, would design to adorn
and cultivate the present Laws, and to make out their reasonableness, rather
than to innovate upon us, by bringing back what is obsolete, rejected, and
antiquated; and that they would contribute what they can to refine it from many
absurd reasons that dishonor our Faculty, which are the best our Books afford
even for some of the Regulae juris.

I shall instance only in one or two of them: Why the Father cannot inherit
the Lands of the Son, it is told us for a reason in our Books, that Terra est
quid ponderosum, and will not ascend in the right line; whereas the true reason
is this, the Lord that first granted the Fee neglected the Father, gave it to
the Son and his Descendents, and to the Family he should derive from himself;
and when this was alienated in Fee, the descent of it was directed agreeably to
the manner and direction of the first Collation. If the Father gave the Son the
Estate, there was a Tenure created, of the Father, as there was in all
Feofments of the Feoffer, before the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum; and it
is a Rule in Law, that a man cannot be haeres and dominus; Stamford's
Exposition of the Prerogative, chap. 5. fol. 23. B.

If before the Statute of Quia emptores, the eldest Son had enfeoffed the
middlemost, to hold of him, and had taken his Homage; the middlemost dies
without Issue, the youngest should have had the Land, and not the eldest.
Howbeit if there were no youngest Son, or any other Heir, than the Feoffor
might claim the Land again by Escheat, and not otherwise.

Another is this for a reason in our Law, why the Children of several venters
shall not inherit each others Lands: it is told us, it is so because they are
but of the half blood to one another, and therefore the Brother of the first
venture shall not succeed to the State of the Brother by a second venture which
dies without Issue, But the Land must descend to the Uncle, But this Uncle can
be but of the half blood to the Nephew, and the very reason that is given for
the Law makes the Law unreasonable. But the true reason why the Brothers of
different venters cannot inherit each other, is a disallowance that our
Ancestors, the Saxons, had of second Marriages, they, as most of the Germane
Nations, esteeming them as concubinat, and at best, but as permitted
Fornication: So Tacitus tells us, in his Book, de moribus Germanorum, that they
did not allow of Second Marriages, Ne non maritum, sed matrimonium ament, non
nuptam sed nuptias; and agreeable to this Opinion, are descents governed in
several Countries in Germany at this day.

This (though it is apt to excite all Gentlemen of the Robe, never to acquiesce
in any reason of the Law that is not sense, which if they do, they will forfeit
their Reason and Judgment) I should not have been so impertinent as to have
mentioned in this Discourse; but that this dealing in Causes without the
exercise of clear reason about them, has brought it to pass, that much of our
Law will not sort to Natural Reason and Justice; and this gave one great
occasion to the Rise and Growth of the Court of Chancery. Since it came in my
way, to show the Original of the other Courts; and the Reader may wonder, that
there is nothing in Antiquity, that gives Authority to so celebrated, and so
busy a Court as this is at this day: I will here offer an account of the Rise
and Growth of it; which will prepare the way for taking of it down, which is no
less a Reproach, than it is a Grievance to the Nation.

There is nothing so great a Reproach to a Nation, than to have Laws that are
confessedly not good and equal, to continue them; and yet to allow of an
Authority to reproach them with Iniquity: that our Courts of Law should be
under Rules and Obligations, to pronounce Judgments, which a single Gentleman
shall authoritatively control and condemn, as unrighteous; that Law and Equity
should be Opposites; That a Judgment must be made up, and formd in a Case, and
what is equal, just and fit therein, must not be considered, though it can be,
and will, in another Court have a judicial Consideration.

Our Judges at Law, take themselves bound, not to hear, or regard the
Allegations of the Defendants against the Plaintiffs pretense, which ought in
good reason to bar them therein; or, at least, qualify the Judgments, when the
same matter shall be heard in Chancery, and prevail either wholly to set aside,
or to qualify the same Judgments.

This is not only to be complained of as derogatory to the Reputation of the
Wisdom of the Nation; but is insufferably oppressive to the Subject, by the
multiplicity of Suits, tedious and vexatious Delays: Nay, by this ill
Contrivance, the Expenses sometimes equal, sometimes exceed the Value of the
Right, which is litigated, and which is worse, the Event of the Suit is very
uncertain and fortuitous.

But this is not all; our Law, it seems, is not a Rule that extends it self to
all Causes; and we have Rights confessedly, such, and which can be judicially
remedied, to which the Common Law extends no Relief: For a thousand Causes in a
year, are for that reason heard in the Court of Chancery.

Two such Reproaches, no Nation but ours has ever yet incurred or suffered:
For Law and Equity is no where else opposed, and every Right has his Remedy by
the Law of the Country, but ours.

The first great occasion to the rise of the Chancery, was, Feoffments, made
upon Trust, to uses in the time of our Warring about the Title of the Crown, to
avoid Forfeitures. The Judges, in tenderness to the Condition and necessity of
those times, did judge, that an Use was no Right, though most certainly it is:
For it is jus ad rem, that nothing might be forfeited when it depended upon
chance whether a man should be a good Subject, or a Traitor. And the same
consideration easily admitted of any Authority that would interpose to relieve
against those who would abuse or deny such Trusts; and no body brought into
question, that authority, by which a piece of justice, so necessary to the
Nation, was administered.

Another great reason of the business of the Court of Chancery, is that which
we beforementioned, that we have not improved the Statute of Westminster. 2 C. 24.
And a third, is the ill conducting of our Laws: our Ancient Judges were
infected with the Monkery of that time, men of no Learning, and of a vain
Subtilty. The Theology of those times was insipid, and most trifling, and the
Administration of Justice, agreably turned into a vain art of disputing the
apices juris; and a subtilty was used, too fine for business, and to govern the
affairs of Men that governed themselves by none of those Superfineries. They
argued without Discourse, or discoursed from positive Rules or Presidents,
which were almost the same with them as Rules of Law, and not from the true
Merits of the Cause, and its own particular reasons of Right.

And the Common Law, which is Lex non scripta, i. e. that which a wise
Judicature should declare, upon the consideration of the present Case, was by
the Proceedings of our Courts, turned into a Lex scripta, positive and
inflexible; and the Rule of Justice could not accomodate it self to every Case,
according to the Exigency of Right and Justice.

But if it were considered, that there can be no Prescription against Justice,
that no Presidents, where a Right has not been relieved, can be pretended why
it should not be assisted hereafter: And if a matter pleaded in Bar, upon which
the Defendant will be certainly relieved in Chancery, may, notwithstanding it
has not heretofore, be hereafter allowed in our Law-Courts, we should be in a
great measure restored to our easy, expedite, cheap, and certain Justice,
which the Methods of our Common Law-Courts has most excellently provided,
until a Parliament, sometime, or other, may consider, whether it be not fit to
take it quite down, by inabling Courts of Law, to do true Right in all Causes
that shall come before them: For nothing renders the Chancery tolerable, but
the mo: exemplary Virtue, and Great Endowments of our present Lord Chancellor,
in which he is not like to have a Successor.

But to return to the Curia Regis, it was not only the great Judicature of the
Nation formally; but it was also materially our Parliament too.

That this Curia Regis was not without any more, the Parliament of these times,
is evident: first, that the Curia Regis, was summoned by a general Writ of
Summons, directed to the Sheriffs in this Form, viz. Rex Vicecomiti
Northamptoniae, etc. praecipimus tibi quod summoneri facias Archiepiscopos,
Episcopos, Comites, Barons, Abbates, Priores, Milites, and Liberos homines,
qui de nobis tenent in Capite, etc. Rot. Claus. 26 H. 3 M. 7. Dorso. This must
necessarily be this Curia Regis, in Distinction to a Parliament.

For that in the Grand Charter of King John, made in the last year of his
Reign, it was granted, that Ad habendum Commune Concilium Regni, de auxilio
assidendo, (aliter quam in tribus praedictis casibus; i. e. Those cases of Aid,
to make the eldest Son a Knight to marry the eldest Daughter, and of Ransom,
and de Scutagiis assidendis) faciemus summoneri Archiepiscopos, Episcopos,
Abbates, and Comites, and majores Barons Regni, sigillatim per Literas
nostras. Et praeterea faciemus summoneri in generali per Vicecomites and
Ballivos nostros omnes alios, qui in capite tenent de nobis.

At present we make no other use of this Grand Charter, than to prove it a
distinctive mark of a Parliament, where the Summons are personal to the
Bishops, Earls, and the greater Barons. This Charter of King John's declares the
ancient usage of summoning the greater Barons, by special Summons to them
severally directed; for that the Kings before him, as Sir Henry Spelman in his
Glossary p. 80. Propter crebra bella and simultates, quas aliquando habuere cum
his ipsis majoribus suis Baronibus, alios etiam eorum interdum omitterent, and
aegre hoc ferentes Proceres Johannem adegere sub magno sigillo Angliae pacisci,
ut Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Comites, and majores Barons Regni, sigillatim
per Literas summoneri faceret. By which it was provided, that all the Barons
should have pro more Summons to the Parliament, that non of those great Barons
should want his several Summons, and they had anciently several Summons, for in
a general Summons no body was excluded. By which it does appear that the
Council at Northampton wherein Thomas of Becket was brought in judgment, was a
Parliament, and not the Curia Regis; for that the Bishops had their several
Writs of Summons, which appears in that Fitz Stephens tells us as matter of
observation, that Thomas of Canterbury had not his Writ of Summons, but was
cited as a Criminal to answer; which we before observed.

And this was but necessary, that when the Tenants in capite, or Barons, which
principally at least made the Parliament, were to be consulted about some
arduous Affairs, that they should have notice and a solemn intimation thereof,
and their presence required and enjoined, by Writs to them particularly and
personally directed.

Besides that, it was agreeable to all the forms of Government then in use, to
have their ordinary and extraordinary Council. For, Omnes Germanicae Originis
Reges atque Imperatores, duplici Concilio antiquitus utebantur, altero
statario, qui Senatus dicitur ad res quotidianas, altero evocato, concilium aut
conventus ordinum ad res momenti majoris; as Grotius assures us.

Neither can it be denied by any man of modesty, who has heard any thing of
the state of our Government before the Conquest, and that knows that many
ancient Buroughs send Burgesses to Parliament by Prescription, and will
consider the Records produced by Mr. Petit, in his very learned and elaborate
Book called, The Ancient Right of the Commons of England, to prove the Right of
ancient Buroughs to send Members to Parliament who represent them; but that
such, though not Suitors to the Curia Regis, were Members de jure of the great
Council of Parliament. But the truth is, they are not mentioned in any Record
or History of any Parliament, from the beginning of the Conquerours Reign to
the end of Henry 3. as a distinct part of the Parliament of England, their
Numbers and Qualities were little and mean, of no consideration in comparison
to that great Body of the Baronage that constituted our Parliaments in that
time; but our Parliaments seem by the style used in Histories and Records, to
be only the Baronage of England. William the First in the fourth year of his
Reign, Consilio Baronum suorum (says Hoveden, page 343.) fecit summoneri per
universos Consulatus Angliae, Anglos nobiles and sapientes, and sua lege
eruditos, ut eorum and jura and consuetudines ab ipsis audiret. Those who were
returned showed what the Customs of the Kingdom were; which with the assent of
the same Barons were for the most part confirmed in that Assembly, which was a
Parliament of that time says Mr. Seldom, Titles of Honor, page 701.

Amongst the Laws of Hen. 1. published by Mr. Abraham Whelock, cap. 2. I find
thus; Forestas communi consensu Baronum in manu mea retinui, sicut pater meus
eas habuit. And after, Lagam Regis Edwardi vobis reddo, cum illis
emendationibus quibus pater meus emendavit consilio Baronum suorum. The
Parliament is styled Commune Concilium gentis Anglorum; and at the same time,
Commune Concilium Baronum; and also Clerus and Populus, Matthew. Paris, fol. 52,
53, 54. And this is sometimes called Communitas, for that it represents the
whole people, and involves their consent. Which appears by 48 H. 3. Pars unica
M. 8. D. Haec est forma pacis a Domino Rege, and Domino Edwardo filio suo,
Praelatis and Proceribus omnibus, and Communitate Regni Angliae, communiter and
concorditer approbata. And that Communitas Regni has no other sense than
commune concilium Regni, and used as a comprehensive term of them that made it,
is evident; for that it is said in the second Record, Si videntur communitati
Praelatorum and Baronum. And again, Per consilium communitatis Praelatorum and
Baronum. Further, Magnates and Vniversitas Regni, sometimes used for the
Parliament, Matthew Paris 659,666. And after King John's Charter, wherein it was
established, that those that were not Barons majores, qui tenent de nobis in
capite, should be generally summoned. It is observable, that the Barons
minores are so mentioned, as if the name of Barons were not to belong to them.
Agreeable thereto is that we have mentioned in the style of our Parliaments, of
Milites libere tenentes, and alii fideles, and are all involved in this
general, Et universi de Baronagio Regni Angliae. Several Instances of this are
in Mr. Petyt, aforementioned, p. 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116. besides that,
many Instances of the like Style of Parliaments in those times are obvious.

That our Parliaments in those times were thus constituted, is so clear, that
it cannot be dissembled: But I do not deny, but upon a change in the Succession
to the Crown, there might have been in this time extraordinary Conventions of
the People, to declare their Universal Assent, for better assuring such
Successor, discountenancing the Rival Prince, and preserving the Peace; as in
the Case of William the Second, Henry the first, King Stephen, and King John,
which has been usual in other Countries, in mighty Distresses of State; such
were in use amongst the Jews. Josephus calls such an Assembly, (...). Grotius,
in his Annot. p. 200. rells us, Solitos fuisse Judaeos interdum in rebus ad
summam Religionis, aut Imperii spectantibus advocare ad Synedrium quotquot
habere poterant tribuum primores, aliisve honoribus praeditos, ut quod
constituerunt legis potius a populo probatae, quam Senatus consulti haberet
auctoritatem. With the assent of such an Assembly as this; at least King John
should only (if so) have made this Kingdom Tributary to the Pope; though I
believe, what he did in it, he did without, and against the Assent of that
Parliament, in which he could only therefore offer to do it. He did no more
effective, than of Right he could, which is nothing. That which was done, was
without the Consent of his Bishops and Barons, as appears by a Letter of his to
the Pope, in those words recited by Mr. Petyt, in his mentioned Book, Cum
Comites and Barons Angliae, nobis devoti essent antequam Nos, and nostram
Terram Domino vestro subjicere curassemus, Extunc in Nos specialiter ob hoc
sicut public dicunt violenter insurgunt. And by another Letter of his, to the
Pope, recited, p. 163. Wherein he complains of the Bishops Disobedience on this
Occasion; which I the rather take notice of, that the Cause of our Government
might not be betrayed, by depending upon such weak Inferences as those, viz.
that there was a House of Commons at that time, which did not consent to the
vassallating of the Kingdom, by King John to the Pope: For that otherwise, it
could have been validly done. And that, if our present House of Commons, in the
same Form as it is now constituted, was not in Being ever after the Conquest,
it is not therefore an Essential part of our Government: For if our Government
must take its Fate upon such Issues as these, I am sure we shall not long hold
it. The greatest Truths are betrayed by weak Proofs, and the clearest Right,
sometimes lost, by putting it upon an uncertain or improbable Issue. This is
certain, that whatever thing of Government is introduced by the Consent of the
Prince, and that Alteration assented to, and embraced, avowed and owned by
every man of the Community, by Actions, and other open Declarations of a full
Consent; and this continued for Centuries of Years; and in all that time,
applauded, and found agreeable to the Interest of the Prince and People, and the
Old Government abolished and impracticable, the very matter of its ceasing; and
it become a thing impossible, as well as not desirable to restore it. I say,
whatever Constitution is thus introduced and established, is as unmovable as
unalterable, (or no Government is) as if it had been ever so: For there can be
no Government in this World that is eternal; how this Change came, we shall
speak to by and by.

But for the sake of Truth, I must confess, that I have no reason to believe,
that the Counties, in all this time, had their Representatives in Parliament,
by the formality of a Choice. But this is a great mistake, that the People
cannot be represented, but by such as are from time to time chosen by them;
when as every Government is the Representative of the People, in what they are
to be governed by it, and by their Consent to it in the first erecting thereof,
they do trust their Governors with the Rule and Order of their Lives and
Estates, for the Commonweal: For Government, as well as Law, is Republicae
communis sponsio, to use Bracton's Words. I cannot easily tell which is more
eligible for the assuring us of good Men in the Common Council of the Kingdom,
whether the Choice, and Designation of a Person thereto by his Character, and a
General Rule, or by the contingent Suffrages of the People: But they are, I am
sure, as much our Representatives, who are appointed thereto by the
Constitutions of the Government, embraced and consented to by the People, as
those are, whom the People nominate for that purpose. I know no reason
therefore why any should think, that nothing is stable in our Government, but
what has been ever so, and in the same Form; or that any man should be so
affrighted with the Objection (as if it made our Government shake, which some
slight Antiquaries, for little Learning in Antiquity will serve for that
purpose) That our Parliament was not at all times such it is at this day. It
suffices to me that it was always materially the same. When the Conqueror did
innovate his Tenures in Capite, and made all men of great Estates, Barons; and
by their Tenures and Estates, Members of Parliament, we had then such Laws,
quas vulgus elegerit; and then we had materially our three Estates, though not
so well sized and sorted as since. I thought fit to say this, for the
preventing the World's being troubled with such Impertinent Labors, and to
divert those that thus employ themselves to undertakings more useful to the
Public, and advantageous to themselves.

We had then (I say) many great Freeholders in every County, that by their
Tenures were Members of Parliament, whereas now we have but two; and though the
People did not choose them, yet the men of that Order seem chosen once for all
interpretatively, by the People in their consent to the Government; and they
might be reasonably presumed to be faithful to the Commonweal, from their own
great Concernments therein. In this Constitution scarce any man that was fit to
be chosen, but was without the Peoples choice a Member of Parliament; as now
they have more who are fit to be chosen than they can choose. So that the
Barons minores were then instead of Knights of the Shire; and the Barons
majores Bishops and Earls did then as now make the Parliament.

Besides the Barons majores and minores, there was at this time a distinction
between the Barons Regis and Barons Regni, which I will here explain, to
prevent any mistake that may grow thereupon, The Barons Regni were Barons by
Tenure, and made part of the Government by the Constitution of the first
William; and so in process of time called Barons Regni, because they had by
continuance of that Constitution acquired a fixed right to that Honor. But
because of the frequent Wars between the Barons and the Kings at that time,
they did omit to summon some who were Barons by Tenure, and now duly called
Barons Regni to Parliament, and called others to Parliament that had no right
to be called ratione tenurae, and these they called Barons Regis. This was ill
taken by the Lords, and was one of the occasions of their War with King John;
upon which they did obtain his Charter for remedy as follows; Barons majores
Regni sigillatim summoniri faceret. The truth of this as to the fact will
appear by the Histories of those times; and that this is the reason of that
distinction of Barons Regis and Barons Regni, does appear by the recited
Charter of King John, where the majores Barons are called Barons Regni; for
the Barons were more concerned for the losing of their Honors, than they were
at the communication of the like Honors to others, and with reason; though all
Honors are lessened by the numbers of those participate of them.

The inconveniences and mischiefs of this Constitution were very great and very
sensible, by making the Government consist of one Order; there was no third to
moderate and hold the balance. The Honor of the great Nobility was lessened,
by an Equality of Suffrage in the great Council of the Kingdom, yielded to the
Tenants in capite, and were not so concerned to support the Dignity of the
Crown for the maintaining their own, which in that Constitution could not be
great. It had the faults of either House, and the virtues of neither: they
pressed hard upon the King, and were uneasy and oppressive to the People: they
were not reverent of the Crown, nor tender of common right. The great Charter
provides against the Oppressions of great men, as it does for bounding the
Prerogative. Our mixed Monarchy was out of tune, by the Aristocratical Power of
the Baronage, now become too excessive by the policy of the Conqueror, by
advancing too great numbers to that Dignity, too great to depend upon the
Crown, or to be governed by it unassisted. That which the first William
intended and designed for the establishment of his Conquest, and of the Peace
of the Kingdom, made it very easy to afflict bad Princes. But by several steps
we recovered, being taught and instructed to it by our Experience, and the
sufferance of great Calamities, such a Representative, that might most
certainly effect what in all Ages was intended and designed, that nothing
should be Law or civilly just, but what the People assent to, by which their
Persons and Rights are secured and defended, which is the sole end of
Government.

But evident it is, that this more equal and clear representative, which we now
enjoy in our House of Commons, grew upon the reducement of the excessive number
of Barons, so great that it made them a Tumult rather than an Assembly, and for
the reducement of the power of the greater Barons: for in the Parliament of 49
H. 3. when but 25 Lay Barons were summoned, though in the 41 year of his Reign he
numbered 250 great Baronies in England, we find Writs for electing to a
Parliament at London, two Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, and Barons for the
Cinque Ports: before that time, none were found, nor any Footsteps of Right
for the Counties sending Knights to Parliament; though there is a clear Right
appears for the Buroughs to send Burgesses; which we shall speak to afterward.

It will not be impertinent, here to add, that the Government of Scotland,
which runs parallel almost to our English Government, found it inconvenient,
that all the Tenants in Capite should resort to their Parliaments; and
therefore, they were reduced in this manner; viz. their Barons Minores, or
Tenants in Capite, in every County, choose two of there own number to
Parliaments; which, at this day, they call the Barons for Counties: whereas,
all our Freeholders choose their Knights of the Shire; and our Elections are
not restrained to Tenants in Capite. And this made it more reasonable for our
Representatives of Shires (together with the Burgesses) to become, in process
of time, a distinct Lower House; whereas, their Barons of Shires set together
with the Lords, and vote in Common with them. The Knights of the Shire, which
made the principal part of the Representative of the Commons, having no
Relation to the House of Peers, or the Baronage of England; because, chosen by
all the Feee-holders indifferently, though not Tenants in Capite.

But to return to our History that deduceth the Change of our Government. That
some great matters for public Good and Establishment of the peace of the King
and Kingdom, was treated of in this Parliament, (they did to be sure establish
this new Form of a Parliament) will appear by a Form of a Writ of Summons, to
the Bishop of Durham, to that Parliament; which I will here transcribe.
Henricus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
venerabili in Christo patri R. Episcopo Dunelmensi salutem. Cum post gravia
turbationum discriminia dudum habita in Regno Nostro, Charissimus filius
Edwardus primogenitus noster, pro pace in regno nostro assecuranda, and
firmanda obses traditus extitisset and jam sedata (benedictus Deus) turbatione
praedicta super deliberatione ejusdem salubriter providenda and plena
securitate, and tranquillitate pacis ad honorem Dei, and utilitate totius Regni
nostri firmanda, and totaliter complenda ac super quibusdam aliis Regni nostri
negotiis, quae sine Consilio vestro, and aliorum Praelatorum, and magnatum
nostrorum nolumus expediri, cum eisdem tractatum habere nos oportet; vobis
mandamus, Rogantes in fide and dilectione quibus nobis tenemini, quod omni
occasion postposita, and negotiis aliis praetermissis sitis ad nos Londiniis
in octabis Sancti Hilarii proximo futuris, nobiscum and cum praedictis
Prelatis, and magnatibus nostris, quos ibidem vocari secimus super praemissis
tractaturis, and consilium impensuris, and hoc sicut nos and honorem nostrum,
and vestrum, necnon and communem Regni nostri tranquillitatem diligitis,
nullatenus omittatis Dors. Claus. 49 H. 3. M. 11. in Scedulae.

I strongly incline to believe, That this King did call in the Commons by their
representatives, (the Barons Minores being discharged) to moderate between him
and his Barons, which became after (to be sure, however it was before) the
standing Representative of the people. Something like this, was before
attempted by King John, by this Writ of King John, the like of which, is not
found. Rex vicecomiti Oxoniae salutem; praecipimus tibi quod omnes milites
Ballivae tuae qui summoniti fuerant esse apud Oxoniam ad nos a die omnium
Sanctorum in 15 dies venire facias cum armis suis, corpora vero Baronum, sive
Armis singulariter and 4 discretos milites de comitatu tuo illuc venire facias
ad nos, ad eundem Terminum ad loquendum nobiscum de Negotiis Regni nostri;
test meipso apud Written, 11 die Novembris. Dors. Claus. 15. Johannis Regis.
Part 2. M. 7. But that Hen. 3. in that Parliament, had some notable Expedient
for the Establishment of the public Peace and Quiet. His Hopes and Desires of
accomplishng it, will appear by the Style of the fore-recited Writ, if compared
with another Writ of Summons, in a Cursory Form, in the 26th, Year of his
Reign, which was thus; Henricus, etc. Venerabili in Christo Patri Waltero
Eboracensi Archiepiscopo salutem; mandamus vobis qualenus sicut and honorem
nostrum pariter and vestrum diligitis, and in fide qua Nobis tenemini, omnibus
aliis negotiis omissis sitis ad nos apud London, a die Sancti Hillani, in 14
dies, ad tractandum nobiscum una cum caeteris magnatibus nostris statum
nostrum, and totius Regni nostri specialiter tangentibus and hoc nullatenus
omittatis.

But shortly, to deduce the History of this Change, (which is but conjectural)
under the Authority of Mr. Seldom, in which, nothing is certain, but that the
Bishops continued in the Change of the Baronage in the same State of Greatness
mentioned, the same Order had their Writs of Summons continued to them as
before; and, though many of the Regular Barons were after omitted to be
summoned to Parliament, yet not one Bishop ever wanted his Summons. This
Discrimination shows, That they were now Barons by Writ, as the Lay, Barons
were, and for the same Reason; that is, because Tenures did not now make them
Barons. But such only were so, who had the King's Writs sent to them of Summons
to Parliament: So that the Bishops are not now to be reckoned Barons feudales,
or Barons by Tenure, but Barons rescriptitii, as all Barons at this day,
except those by Patent, which are so, without any respect to Tenure.

The Feudal Baronage, as we said, was as large, and as numerous as the Tenures
by Knights Service in Chief, which were capable of being multiplied several
ways, for every part of the Fee however divided, the Services reserved upon
that Fee, that were entire and indivisible, were to be performed by the several
Proprietors of the several parts of the divided Fee.

The Feudal Baronies besides, were ambulatory, not fixed to Families; but
assignable, as Estates, and passed with the Lands. Who sees not, that by this
Constitution and Nature of Baronage, a great many mean persons, not agreeable
to that high Order, must be entitled to it, and so in truth it happened? And
hereupon, a Distinction was made first between Barons Majores, and Barons
Minores. The Barons minores, soon lost the Title of Barons altogether. This is
conjectured, by Mr. Seldom, to be before the latter end of King John's Reign,
and their legal Style became Milites, or Libere Tenentes; which some, upon a
mistake, anticipating the Change of the Government, made in H. 3. time, think,
when they meet with Milites, or Libere Tenentes in Parliament, they have found
Knights of the Shire, chosen for Representatives in Parliament.

And, if they retained the Name and Style of Barons, it was now but abusively
applied to them; for, their Baronies were in Truth estimable, but as Knights
Fees only: and, of this sort of Barons, there remains some to this day.

This appears by a Passage in the grand Charter of King John, made in the
latter end of his Reign, as it is in Mat. Paris 343. Ad habendum commune
concilium Regni, de auxilio assidendo aliter quam in tribus casibus praedict.
(these three Cases of Aid to make the Eldest Son a Knight of Aid, to marry the
Eldest Daughter, and Aid of Ransom are understood Heir, as is plain by the
Charter) Et de scutagiis assidendis faciemus summoneri Archiepiscopos,
Episcopos, Abbates, Comites and majores Barons Angliae sigillatim per literas
nostras. Et praeterea faciemus summoneri in generali omnes alios qui in Capite
tenent. This was one Step to remove these Barons Minores, from the Dignity of
Barons; which by H. 3. were quite discharged, and never appeared after in
Parliaments, except chosen Knights of the Shire.

But because I find this great Charter of King John, not well understood by
several considerable Writers, nor by Mr. Seldom explained, I will offer my
Thoughts, and the rather, because it is not impertinent to our present purpose.
The first part to which the part before-recited, does refer is thus: Nullum
scutagium, vel auxilium ponam in regno nostro, nisi per commune concilium Regni
nostri nisi ad corpus redimendum, and ad primogenitum filium nostrum militem
faciendum, and ad primogenitam filiam nostram semel maritandum, and ad hoc non
fiet nisi rationabile auxilium; and then follows, and ad habendum Concilium
Regni aliter quam in tribus casibus praedictis and scutagiis assidendis, etc. I
conceive, that by the first Commune Concilium, he means the Curia Regis; and
that he did grant that out of that Court, he would not impose Escuage, or aid
upon his Tenants, except it were those three Cases of Aid mentioned: For
Escuage was then and after assessed in that Court, and that properly, as being
due by their Tenure, only the Opportionment there was to be made, which was a
proper Office for the King's Tenants amongst themselves, until the Statute of
34 E. 1. de Tallagio non concedendo; in which it was provided, that no Tallage,
or Aid, shall be put or levied without the Will and Assent of the Archbishops,
Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other Free Commons of the
Realm; but for all matters other than those three mentioned Aids and Escuage,
which were due by Tenure, it should be done by that Commune Concilium, that is,
his Parliament; and he there declares, how he would have it summoned as to his
Baronage, who in that part of his Charter, were to receive their Satisfaction;
and for the Liberties of sending Burgesses to Parliament, they are likewise
confirmed in the same Charter; and therein provided for. So that I am
persuaded, that the modus Parliamenti, in King John's Time, was in the said
Charter declared.

It was probable, that before this Charter, there was some Law to declare who
those Majores Barons were, and who those Tenants in Chief were, that should be
accounted now, no longer Barons; and after the Tenants in chief had lost the
Honor of a particular Summons to Parliament, and the Style of Barons, it was
less difficult for those Great Barons, to procure a Law to exclude the rest
wholly from having any Right to sit in the Parliaments under the name of Tenant
in Chief only. And to this purpose, doubtless, says Mr. Seldom, some Law was
afterward made, that none should come to Parliament, as a Baron, (that is, by
virtue of his Tenure) but such as should have several Writs of Summons directed
to them; in which number, not only all those of the Ancient and Greater Barons
were comprehended; but others to whom Writs should be directed; which is in
effect, that no Tenure should any longer make a Baron of the Kingdom; but that
the Writ of Summons only should make a Baron.

It is not improbable for the reasons aforementioned, that such Law was made
the 49 H. 3. and farther, for that we find, that the Abbot of Leicester, in the
26 E. 3. was discharged from being summoned to Parliament amongst other
reasons, that he was not summoned to Parliament before 49th. year of H. 3. and
after that Interpotalis vicibus; as if part of the Constitution had been that
those of the Ecclesiastics, who at that time were accounted the Barons
Majores; so declared by having Writs of Summons to Parliament, should have
Writs of Summons to Parliament, thence after in Succession: And herewith
agrees Mr. Cambden. Brit. fo. Henricus tertius ex tanta multitudine quae
seditiosa and turbulenta fuit, optimos quosque rescripto ad Comitia
Parliamentaria evocaverit, ille enim (ex satis antiquo scriptore loquor) post
magnas perturbationes, and enormes vexationes, inter ipsum Regem and Simonem de
Montfort, and alios Barons, motas and sopitas? statuit and ordinavit quod
omnes illi Comites and Barons Regni Angliae quibus ipse Rex dignatus est
brevia summonitionum dirigere venierent ad Parliamentum.

CHAP. XVI.
SO that it appears clearly, that the Feudal Baronies about this time were
quite discharged so far, that no man by a feudal Barony had any Right to sit in
Parliament; and those that were feudal Barons before this time, by the
Alienation of their Baronies afterward did not cease to be Barons: But for
that the Majores Barons, and such as had then Writs of Summons, and were
appointed to make the House of Lords for after time, were then Barons by
Tenure: It continued an Opinion some time, that no man was bound to answer such
Writs of Summons; but those that were bound thereto by their Tenures; thence it
was, that after this Constitution, many that were feudal Barons before, have
taken a Liberty to entail their Baronies with the Lands that were held per
Baroniam, upon the Heirs Males, whereby the Heirs general, or next Heir Female
were excluded; and an Heir of the half Blood has enjoyed the Honor with the
Lands by virtue of the Entail. We will trouble the Reader with one Instance of
this kind; and that is as late as Q. E. William Lord Paget of Beaudesert,
entailed the Baronies of Longdon and Haywood, by Fine, which descended to Henry
his Son and Heir, who had Elizabeth, his Daughter and Heir died, 11 Eliz. after
whose Death, Thomas, Brother, and Heir Male of Henry, entered into the Baronies
aforesaid, and was summoned to Parliament. This was allowable, because the
Honor of the Name and Family was thereby better supported, and the Office of a
Baron continued in the Family; and the Duty of it better performed by such
direction of the Descent.

And we do also observe, that after the reason of being a Baron from Tenure did
cease, the following times kept the Old Form of Speech, and tenere per
Baroniam, was used commonly to denote a man a Baron.

That the Law is as we have said, appears for that an Issue at Law, whether
Baron, or not, ought to be tried by the Parliament Records of his Summons and
Session there as a Baron, and not by the Records of the Exchequer to prove the
Tenure. I will not therefore trouble the Reader with what is reported to us in
our Year-books, nor my self in reconciling the seeming disagreements there
about this matter, only thus, that the Judges have sometimes spoken cum vulgo,
and not agreeable to the true notion of the Law, and that they did not judge
according to Law in the case of Thomas de Furnival. But, the Barons being
anciently first so by Tenure did so stick with the Judges, that they allowed
Thomas de Furnivals Plea, that he did not hold per Baroniam, to discharge him
from being a Baron, though he had been summoned as a Baron, and sat in several
Parliaments as such. But of this more hereafter.

For that which now made Parliamentary Barons was, the receiving of a Writ of
Summons to Parliament. Before the 49 H. 3. The Bishops were of the number of
those that were majores Barons, and had Writs of Summons to Parliament among
the rest of the great men, before the making of the Law aforesaid; and they by
this new Constitution became Barons for them and their Successors, not by
Tenure any longer no more than the great Lay Barons, but by virtue of the Writ
of Summons, and by the before remembered Constitution and Law made some time
about the 49 H. 3.

And though the Lands of the Bishops in the time of the Conqueror, which were
put under that Tenure, be alienated or exchanged as they might have been, I am
sure if they are not before the Statute of Queen Elizabeth put a restraint upon
them, yet the Succession of the Bishops to their Baronies remains.

It is a question I know, whether a Bishop can demand his Writ to Parliament,
before the restitution of the Temporalities, upon his Consecration: there are
valuable Opinions on both sides; but if the restitution of the Temporalities
must be first made, it is I conceive upon no other reason, than that he is not
completely Bishop before that is done, no more than a Rector is a complete
Rector after Institution before Induction be made; though he ought (I conceive)
to have his Writ upon Consecration, because upon vacancy of the Sea, the
Guardian of the Spiritualities used anciently to have a Writ of Summons to
Parliaments; as Diocesans themselves.

And now the Baronage Secular is affixed to Families, and the Spiritual
Baronage to the Office and Succession. And now Birth designs the Temporal
Baron, and Consecration of the Bishop designs the Spiritual Baron; nay single
Election without Confirmation or Consecration. If elected only, they were
summoned to Parliament by the addition of Electi; if confirmed and not
consecrated, then they are in the Writ of Summons styled Electi and Confirmati.
And Mr. Seldom further tells us, that there never was any that had the Title of
a Bishop in England, and of the Kings Creation since the Normans, but was a
Baron of Parliament; and though the Regular Barons, and such of them who had
Writs were discharged upon their Prayer, and omitted to be summoned; Yet the
Bishops by reason of their Spiritual Dignity had necessarily a right and voice.
The Archiepiscopi, Comites, Barons, and alii Magnates, in ancient
Parliamentary Writs of Summons, do ordinarily express and comprehend the whole
Baronage, without naming the Abbots and Priors, which must be signified by the
alii Magnates. Which I the rather note, because the Folio Author, a Gentleman
very easy and ready in Inferences, does conclude, that because such Writs
mention Magnates, besides Bishops, Comites, and Barons, (which he too suddenly
concluded were comprehensive of the whole Baronage) does thence argue, that a
Writ of Summons of any man to Parliament does not make him a Baron; and from
thence would have it inferred, that the Bishops are not so, (though they are
expressly mentioned, and first in order, and cannot in reason be reduced to that
meanness of rate and quality with those that fall under an Et caetera;) and
from hence would have it concluded, that they may, when the King pleases, be
dismissed that House, because there were anciently some Grandees that had Session
in Parliament now discharged.

Besides we do observe, that another sort of great men may be meant by the alii
Magnates, that is to say, famous men of the Clergy, not Bishops, and other men
of great name for wisdom, of which there were some summoned in most of the
ancient Parliaments, not intended thereby by the King to be made noble, or
advanced to the state of Baronage; for there were distinct clauses in the Writs
of Summons, to signify the Kings purpose therein. The Writs directed to such
as were not intended thereby to be made Barons, as the Judges, Attorney
General, Kings Sergeant, etc. was, Quod intersitis nobiscum and cum caeteris de
Concilio nostro; and sometimes nobiscum only, super praemissis tractaturi,
vestrumque consilium impensuri: whereas that to the Barons was, Quod intersitis
cum Praelatis, Magnanatibus, and Proceribus, etc.

But, as Mr. Seldom observes, that custom of sending Summons to great men (not
Bishops) to Parliament, did cease after the clause of Praemunientes (by which
Convocations were summoned by Bishops to meet with Parliaments) grew in use, in
the Bishops Writs of Summons to Parliament. Of which excellent Provision we
shall have occasion to speak to hereafter.

All the Baronage, both Spiritual and Temporal, de jure ought to have Summons
now to Parliament, without respect to Estate or Tenures.

There is no man now, noble by his Acres, a sort of Nobility, that this refined
Age will not allow of. The King, according to the Constitution of H. 3.
aforementioned, may now, by Letters Pattents, or Writ, erect a new successive
Barony (as well as hereditary) as was done by H. 8. The fifth year of his Reign
(for that the Baronage of England was now affixed to Family and Succession, and
not to Tenures) he by his Letters Patents did then grant unto Richard Bamham,
Abbot of Tavestock, in the County of Devon, the Abbey being of his Foundation
and Patronage, and to the Successors of the said Abbot, Vt eorum quilibet qui
pro tempore ibidem fuerit Abbas sit and erit unus de Spiritualibus and
Religiosis Dominis Parliamenti nostri haeredum and Successorum nostrorum
gaudend. honor privilegio and libertatibus ejusdem.

This the King might well do, because, the Abbot was of his Patronage, and the
Successors were therefore to be elected and collated by the King; for, that was
the Inducement and Reason of Kings and Sovereign Princes advancing Bishops and
great Abbots to the degree of Baronage, making them members of the great
Councils of their Kingdoms and Principalities, as is before observed, because
such Abbots as the Bishops, were made always, and appointed by the Sovereign
Prince.

And here we may take notice by the way, of the Reason, why the Episcopus
Soderensis, or, the Bishop of the Isle of Man, is not summoned to Parliament,
which I shall give you in the Words of Sir H. Spelm. in his Glossary, Baronum
appellatione non omnes hodie apud nos censentur Episcopi ut pote Soderensis in
insula Mannia quod de Rege non tenet immediate at de Comite Darbiae.

Nay, it is most observable, That this Honor of Baronage, or being a Member of
the House of Peers, was so inseparable to the Office of a Bishop, after the
aforementioned new Constitution of the Baronage, That the Guardians of the
Spiritualties of Bishoprics in the times of Vacancy, and the Vicars General of
Bishops being beyond Sea, were summoned to Parliaments by the same kind of
Writs as the Bishops were summoned. Of this, Mr. Seldom does assure us; Titles
of Honor. 2 Edit. fol. 721. But this Honor lasted no longer than this legal
Substitution, and Vicarious Power. If they had Right to sit in that House, in
respect of their Temporalties, the Guardian of the Spirituals, or the Vicars
General, would not have had Writs of Summons to Parliament. But, if the Kingdom
had not had a great Opinion of that Order, it would not have been provided, and
put in use; that in Vacancy of the Sea, or Absence of the Bishop, rather than
that great Council would want one Bishop utterly, or the Interest, Authority,
and Consent of any that had Episcopal Authority, they admitted the Substitute,
by whom that Office was executed and administered for that Interval only.

When Baronies were feudal, the person, though in respect of his Land, was noble;
his great Estate and Interest, and the other general Presumptions that attend
opulent Fortunes, made the Possessor noble in his Person.

Anciently the Estate; of late, the Descent, in the Temporal Baronies; and, the
Succession in the Spiritual Baronies, place the persons respectively in the
Census and Rank of Baronage: but there is no Nobility but what is personal, nor
can be in Nature. All the persons in the same Order of the public Census, are
of the same Quality.

Neither are Bishops to be accounted less Barons, or less noble, because they
enjoy their Baronies for Life only, no more than a Tenant for Life of an
hereditary feudal Barony could be so accounted. Feudal Baronies being
considered as Estates were alienable as Estates, and as Estates would suffer
Limitations, and admit of particular Estates for Life. No man can say we had no
personal Nobility in the time when there was no other Baronage than Feudal. How
then can it be said, that the Bishops Persons are not noble, though they should
be accounted only Barons Ratione Tenurae, as certainly they are not in proper
speaking, at this day, neither can it be objected against their personal
Nobility, that a Bishop may be degraded; for, so may a Peer for more Reasons
than a Decay of his Fortune and Estate.

Which matter, I the rather insist upon, for that the great Mr. Seldom
committed an Error, by not considering, that the ways and means, by which,
persons derive and come to be of the Order of the Nobility and Baronage, can
make no Difference in the Baronage; but, thence he offers a Reason (which must
needs be a Mistake too) why Bishops shall not be tried by Peers, in Capital
Crimes, because these are personal; and, his being a Baron, is Ratione tenurae,
and not of personal Nobility. But this he wrote when he was young, in his first
Edition of Titles of Honor, which was in the time of King James.

But, can there be a harsher and more incongruous thing said, than that there
is any other Nobility than what is personal? Can Land be noble?

This that I have said, is to prove, That the Spiritual Lords are of the
Baronage of England, such as it is now constituted; and, they do not, cannot
remain in any Reason or Understanding, Feudal Barons, after the Ratio Baronagii
is changed, and if they could remain Barons Ratione tenurae at this day; yet,
they ought to have all Preheminencies and Privileges of Barons.

But, true it is, that they are another sort of Nobility, different from that
of the secular Lords (though equal in all the powers of Baronage; and besides,
have precedence in Honor) and therefore make a distinct State from them, and
one of the three Estates, or Ordines Regni. Besides that, by the way, we have
destroyed the Force of the Arguments used by the Folio, against the Jus
Paritatis of Bishops, and their Competency to try a Lay Peer, which we shall
speak to more by and by.

CHAP. XVII.
IN the King, and in these three Estates, is placed the Peoples Security, and
the Care of the whole Community: from every of them they have distinct, just,
and reasonable Expectations, though the third State of the House of Commons,
has carried away, and almost engrossed the name of the Peoples
Representatives, though they are only the Peoples Representatives, to act for
them, in matters wherein the People are left at perfect Liberty; and concerning
which, there is no Order taken in the Constitution of the Government.

This is truly Our Government, a King, and Three Estates, the Lords Spiritual,
the Lords Temporal, and the Commons, by their Delegates and Representatives for
the purpose only to treat about matters, in which, the People have Power to
deliberate, and are, and ought to be redressed.

This is the Form of all the Modern and Gothic Governments, planted in
Christian Europe. Guntherus expresses three Estates thus: Praelati, Proceres,
missisque Potentibus Vrbes.

The great men of Estates, Proceres, were sufficient to take care of their
Interests and Dependents, which made the Body of the County. But then there
were Cities or great Towns, in which were great Bodies of Freemen, men of
Wealth and Trade, that were little concerned in Lands or Tenures, which we call
Liberi Burgi, which our Neighbors call Hans Towns: And our Kings seem to have
by Prerogative a continuing Power to declare Towns, when they arrive to be
great, peopled, and rich, Free Boroughs; and thereupon they acquire a Right to
send Delegates to Parliament: And this appears, for that many Boroughs that
send Burgesses of to Parliament, have no other Foundation Right, but the King's
Charter; in which he grants, Sit A. de Caetero liber Burgus, I have seen some
of these Charters as ancient as King John. These Charters could have had no
such Operation, but by virtue of some Ancient Establishment in the Government:
We have no History of its Commencement. King William I. that he might have the
assistance of all the States in Parliament, put the Boroughs under Tenure by
Baronage. How many of the Burgage Tenures were of that sort, we know not; but
it is probable, all that at that time sent Burgesses to the Parliamentary
Conventions (by what name soever they were then called) the Burgesses of the
Cinque Ports, are still called Barons. And we know, that the Borough of St.
Albans was put under that Tenure, and in that Right challenged them to
Burgesses to Parliament, as Dr. Brady acknowledges. But the reason why we have
no remembrance of the Tenures of Boroughs to send Burgesses to Parliament, is
that which we have here proved, viz. the ancient reason of Baronage, viz. by
Tenure, did cease about the time of H. 3. And conformably the King might
require Boroughs to send Members to Parliament, without mentioning in his Writs
the duty of their Tenure; and by declaring them free Boroughs, give them that
Privilege, though not obliged thereto, by any Tenure created upon them. So
that it is evident, that before H. 3. our great Councils, or Parliaments
consisted of three Estates, though they all passed under the general Style of
Baronagium Angliae; which I thought fit to demonstrate, that our Parliaments,
or great Council of the Realm always consisted of three States,

Corol. From this, that the King's Prerogative being so, viz. to have power to
declare Free Boroughs, which he uses by his Letters Patents: The Rights of
chosing their Burgesses to Parliament, belongs to all of the Community, and
cannot be restrained to fewer Electors by their Charters: For Jura ordinaria
non recipient modum.

The Remainder at least of this Form of Government, continued in all the
Countries wherein the German Colonies made their Conquests, and planted
themselves, as will appear to any body that will consult the Republics, and
those plentiful Quotations that has been made by a Learned Author in his Book,
published since this was written.

I cannot but wonder, since this our Constitution has been oftenmost
authentickly declared; and every one knows, that the Government is materially
so as we have said; and it is agreed by all, that the Government consists of
three States; that yet we know not where to find 'em.

There is much Art used to give Countenance to, or rather to form an Opinion
that the King is one of the three States. It is now almost come to be an
Opinion; and insomuch as it is an Opinion, it is an Error. This Error, such as
it is, is endeavored to be improved to the Destruction of the Government. It is
nursed up carefully, and is to gain Reputation and Credit with the People, by
the Authority of great Names; and when it is grown popular, it is designed to
take the least next Advantage against the Spiritual Lords, to dismiss them from
their Bench, as no necessary, or essential part of the Government.

There was, it is true, an ill-pen'd and inconsiderate Address, made by the
House of Commons only to the the King in 2 Hen. 4. to desire him to make Peace
between the Lords, and therein they say, that the three States of Parliament,
are the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons: But this is
the first time, that an Address of a House of Commons, was so nicely
considered: And that the Form and Letter of it should be the measure of Law and
of the Government. There was also a fantastic Letter, written by Stephen
Gardener, printed it seems in the Book of Martyrs, wherein that Bishop talks of
three States, in which he must needs reckon the King for one: For he could not
leave him out of the Government; and he had no more Christian Graces than
Faith, Hope and Charity, which he attributes to this Ternary of States of his
own making. But if he had four of those Graces, there had been four States, if
six of those Graces, to have matched them in number, he would have found three
States in the House of Commons, viz. Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, and have
made six States.

It seems too, King James made a Speech in Parliament, wherein he was pleased
to use his Logic; and liked, it seems, the Ramistical way of Dichotomies. The
truth is, he had more Logic than a wise King could tell how to bestow. For in
that Speech, he says, The Parliament is composed of a Head and a Body, himself
and the Parliament. This Body is sub-divided into two parts, the upper House,
and the lower House. The upper House into two, Lords Spiritual and Temporal;
the lower House into two, Knights and Burgesses. The Citizens were left out for
the sake of his Dithotomy. His Method was to proceed by the way of two's; and
therefore 'twas impossible we should here in this Speech of any three
whatsoever; yet this Speech too, is produced against three States distinct from
the King.

Besides, they tell us, that in one of the late King's Declarations, drawn by
(then) a young Gentleman, but of great hopes, and afterward a very great Man;
the King is called one of the three States. This Gentleman was very probably
misled into that Mistake, by a Book called Nomotechnia; wherein it is said,
that the King, Lords and Commons are the three States: a Book of Institutions
for young Students, which was never yet allowed for Authority in the Law; nor
ever had the Honor to be cited in our Courts of Westminster.

These Mistakes, or whatever you will call them with the Authority of the
Octavo Author, are united together to form an Opinion, that the King is, but
the Bishops are not one of the three States, which will be a very dishonorable
Error: For that it will lead us into a Mistake of our Government; and which is
much worse, for that it has a tendency to subvert it, that is, to depress the
King, and to suppress the Bishops.

It is an Indign thing, and not to be suffered, that we should lose our
Government by Surreption, and be made a Babel, by dividing and confounding our
Language. To prevent this mischief, we have declared our Government, from the
very Reason and Nature of the Structure thereof, to consist of three States,
that is, three different Orders, which make the Great Council of the Kingdom;
whose End and Business, is, to administer Council and Auxiliaries to the King,
who is entrusted with the executive Power of the Government and Laws. And
besides, now we will produce great Authorities, to put this Mistake out of
Countenance, and to prevent its gaining any farther Authority with the People.

For Errors of this nature, in process of time, turn into Truth, and things
prove to be so at last, as the Error and Mistake first bespake them; and this
our Lawyers know well enough, with whom it is a Maxim (it belongs only to them,
and matters within their Province) Communis Error facit Jus.

And first, for this purpose, we will mention the Style that the Parliament
used, which was convened by the Authority of Richard the Second, he being then
about to relinquish the Crown to H. 4. This Parliament, in transacting so
weighty an Office, had reason to consider and know who they themselves were.
They, without doubt, in all their Proceedings in this High Matter, used their
true, as well as biggest Style, which was that of States. Walsingham tells us,
Sede Regali tunc vacua Procurators Regis Richardi, Archiepiscop. Eborac. and
Hereford. Renunciationem dicti Regis and cessionem omnibus statibus Regni tunc
adunatis ibi public declararunt And again, Quoniam videbatur cunctis Regni
statibus super dictis Articulis singulatim, ac etiam communiter interrogatis.
And again, Ordinati sunt Comissarii ex part statuum and Communitatis ejusdem
Regni. Observe here, that the King is none of these States; that they are
called all the States, which signifies more than two; that there is mention of
States, besides Community; and therefore, it was then understood, that there
were two States in the Lords House.

But afterward he recites us the Form of a most important Instrument, which
follows, In Dei nomine, Amen, Nos, I. Episc. Assavensis, I. Abbas
Glasconiensis, Thomas Comes Glocestriae, Thomas Dominus de Berkley, Tho. de
Epingham, Tho. Gray Miles, Willielmus Thirning Justiciarius, per Pares and
Proceres Regni Angliae Spirituales and Temporales, and ejusdem Regni
Communitates, omnes status ejusdem Regni Representantes Commissarii, ad infra
scripta specialiter deputati, etc. By which it is most clear, that the
Government was then understood to consist of three States, of which the King
was none, as he cannot be with any Congruity.

1 R. 3. Rot. Parl. apud Westminster. die Veneris 23 Jan. it appears, that a Bill was
exhibited coram Dom. Rege in Parl. Wherein is contained, That several Articles
on the behalf, and in the name of the three States of the Realm, viz. Lords
Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons, were delivered to the King. And farther, that
the said three Estates were not assembled in form of Parliaments; therefore be
it ordained by this present Parliament, that the Tenor of the said Articles,
delivered as aforesaid, on the behalf of the said three Estates out of
Parliament, etc. Now by the three Estates assembled in this present Parliament,
be the same ratified and approved, Ac idem Dominus Rex de assensu dictorumtrium
statuum Regni and Authoritate praedicta, omnia and singula praemissa, in billa
praedicta contenta concedit, and ea pro vero and indubio pronunciat, decernit,
ac declarat. This was in like manner, an Act of Parliament, for declaring the
Right of the Crown to be in Rich. 3.

In the Statute made 2 H. 4. the Word State is used plurally, and for more than
two, of which the King was none, to signify the Parliament, as appears cap,
15. And so it is also in 4 Hen. 4. cap. 4. in which these words are, Since it is
the desire of all the States of the Realm, that nothing shall be so demanded of
our Sovereign the King. He will that all those who make any Demand, etc. So
that hereby it is evident, that in the Understanding of that time, there were
three States besides the King. But to spare the Reader the trouble of the
mentioning the Records at large, that testify the Parliament to consist of the
King and the three Estates, viz. Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and Commons,
I will refer them that doubt to the Collection made in Mr. Pryn's Index to Sir
Robert Cotton's Abridgment, under that Title (who himself was of this Opinion,
which nothing but the Evidence of the truth of the thing could have formed: His
great Knowledge in Records; and that he is known, not to be partial for the
Bishops, make him of great Authority, pages 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 329, 384,
325, 281, 392, 567, 607, 710, 712, 713, 714.

And farther, in the Time of Queen Elizabeth, in an Act of Parliament, in the
first Year of her Reign, made for the Recognition of Her Queen of England;
which was an Act of State, and of the whole Community; and therefore most
requisite it was, that that Parliament should give themselves their right
Style. It is said, We your said (the Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons in
Parliament assembled, was said before, to which this does relate) most loving
Subjects, representing the three States of your Realm of England.

The Nature of the Government came directly at their Times, under Consideration
of the Parliament, which is an Assembly that cannot be mistaken in the
Constitution of the Kingdom, in any Question of such a Nature, when they will
deliberate and consider. This mighty Affair required them to consider who they
were, and what was their Constitution. Now (if at any time) they are to use
that Style, that denotes their Power, and declares the Government. The Style of
the three Estates of the Realm, it seems, is so sacred and great, and not for
ordinary use, but that it is used upon such occasions as the Recognition of the
Sovereign Princes, and in declaring Kings. This Style is most certain
declarative of the true Constitution, and the great Style and Title of the
Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and Commons of England. A Misnomer now would
be as great a Solecism, as to see the Nobles and Prelates without their Robes,
and proper Cognizances, at the Solemnities of a Coronation.

By the due comparing the Statutes aforementiond, wherein the Lords Spiritual,
and Temporal, and Commons are called the States, and also the Representatives
of all the Estates of the Kingdom. We may be enlightened into a great Mystery
of State; for that the Lords Spiritual, and the Lords Temporal, and Commons,
are called the three States; and also the Representatives of the States give us
to understand, that every one of them is entrusted for the other; and with the
Conservancy of the whole Community, and are all in their proper Ministries
designed to the Common Good; and each of them have Dependencies and
Expectancies from the other, in the due Discharge of their proper and distinct
Offices. And that the Lords Spiritual, and the Lords Temporal are
Representatives and Trustees, for the Peoples Good, and the Commonweal, as
well as their own. In like manner, as every Parliament man, for a particular
Borough, is a Representative of all the Commons of England.

To which we will adjoyn another great Authority, and that is of Sir Edward
Coke, 4 Inst. fol. 2. who tells us, that the King and three Estates, viz. Lords
Spiritual, and Lords Temporal, and Commons, are the great Corporation and Body
Politic of this Nation. This was the Opinion of his Old Age, when he was most
improved in Knowledge; and when he did not flatter the Prerogative.

Besides, to clear this point, we may observe, that the Style of Acts of
Parliament, that has mostly obtained, is this, viz, Be it enacted, etc. and
by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual, and Lords Temporal,
and Commons. This distinct mention of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, is
Cognizance of their being distinct States: For observe, there is no particular
mention of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in Acts of Parliament; because
they are all of the Commonalty, which is but one State. They are all involved
under the general Name of Commons: And so would certainly the Lords, both
Spiritual, and Temporal have been in the general Name of Lords, if they had not
been distinct States, and so accounted. The Style of Acts of Parliament, would
have been by the Advice and Assent of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament: And the ancient Style of Parliament, before the House of Commons
was divided and constituted apart from the Lords House, was Clerus and Populus,
Clerus and Magnates; as may be seen by Eadmerus, and Matthew. Paris, and the
Writers of those Times: So that the Clerus, or Bishops, were always a distinct
State in Parliament.

For the letting in Light upon all that has been said in this matter; and for
farther clearing it, and to reconcile the Differences in the Styles of the
Parliament; and that they may unite in their Evidence, and not seem to thwart
one another: It must be remembered, that that which is most express and
particular, is most scientifical, and more exactly instructive, most distinct
and true; and intends to inform us exactly in the very Nature of the thing; and
therefore cannot be derogated from, nor prejudiced by what is more general, or
less distinct.

It is hence therefore evident, that the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, are
taken for distinct States, as they are: For they have their distinct Interests,
and for several ends and purposes became parts in the Government. They have
their several Ministries and Advantages to the Government apart, and come into
that House, by several ways of Designation and Appointment. The Prelates care,
besides that which is common between them and the Temporal Lords, is that of
Religion, and the Affairs of the Church, and the whole Order Ecclesiastical, by
which the People are to be ministered to in their highest Concernments; which
are Reasons very sufficient to reckon and account them a distinct State.

And now we have asserted to the Prelates a Jus Paritatis in the House of
Lords, for that they are complete Barons, as we have likewise proved them a
distinct State.

The Baronage of England is the House of Lords. Additions of Title give
Precedence, but no Superiority or addition of Power. The Baronage is one Order
and Rank, and the highest in the Census of the Government, the manner of the
Promotion, the Ends and Interests of the Government in the advancement of the
Bishops, though several from those that advanced the Temporal Lords to their
State and Honor; yet to the same degree they are promoted, they are both
Members of the same great Council, of the same great Judicature, and are
therefore by their long continuance most duly styled Pares Regni. And moreover
the Bishops are considered as to their Order and Office Ecclesiastical, and
another care incumbent upon them besides that of the Baronage; and the Orders
that belong to the consideration of Heralds do signify, that their Office of a
Bishop does not lessen the Dignity of their Peerage.

What is it then that makes this present Question? The Bishops have the reason
and nature of the Government of their side, they have used such a power when
they have pleased, it was never denied to them, and their right has had the
most solemn Recognition that can be made.

The Canon could not abridge and restrain their right, and their true Character
qualifies them not only to the degree of an unexceptionable Judge, but renders
them most fit and desirable. For besides their Wisdom and Justice, common with
that of the Temporal Lords, they are intended of the greatest tenderness and
compassion, and must be so if they comport themselves with agreeableness to
their Character and Function.

They are not ordinarily engaged in the Factions of the Temporal Grandees, and
Religion being their business, they are more under the powers of it; that being
their glory and their first greatness, that which promoted them to their
Secular Honor and Dignity, and that which must support it. Their Interest is
Religion, and therefore they are the more obliged in all their outward acts to
comport with it. They, out of an universal charity, understand, that it is
mercy and compassion to the innocent to punish the nocent person; and yet they
can, in the administration of punitive Justice, attemper the severities of Laws
with the mercies of Religion, and use Compassion to the Criminal, when they do
not depart from the unrelenting Rules of Law out of regard to the public
peace: and by such demeanor they may reconcile the Office of a Judge with that
of a Priest, which some have thought incompatible. (...). Synes. But they are
no more inconsistent than Power and Authority, which united makes a most
venerable Magistrate, and gives him the greatest advantage of serving the
Community.

-- Peragit tranquilla potestas
Quod violenta nequit; mandataque fortius urget
Imperiosa quies. --
CHHP. XVIII.
AND such a Judge would I choose; but we we must take such a Judge as the Law
appoints. Magna Charta is objected against the Bishops right in the question,
which says, that Nullus liber homo capiatur, etc. nec super eum ibimus, nec
super eum mittemus nisi per judicium parium suorum. The Objector omitted to add
or consider what follows, viz. Aut per legem terrae.

But the Statute of Magna Charta is no Literal Law, as every body knows, but
intending to confirm the Common Law, it is upon the matter Lex non scripta; it
alters nothing that was the Common Law before, but that being found out
declares what Magna Charta establishes. And therefore Peers shall be tried by
Commoners in Appeals, notwithstanding the Letter of Magna Charta; for otherwise
Peers could not be tried at all, nor no Justice done in Appeals, which is the
Suit of the Party and not of the King. Privilege must be always set aside,
rather than a faileur of Justice shall be allowed. So that the Law before Magna
Charta and since, whatsoever it was, must determine this matter.

The Provisions that the Law has made, that the Nobles and the Commonalty
shall not intermeddle to judge any persons, not of their Order, is a most
prudent Establishment, without which neither Order, Justice, or Peace could be
preserved. The Envy of the Commons would render them unfit Judges of the Peers;
and the Animosities of the Peers would render them unapt to sit in Judgment
upon a despised Commoner.

Besides that, otherwise the Dignity of the Order of Peers would suffer, for
the Superior can no more be judged with any congruity, than blessed by the
Inferior. This is a reason big and wise enough to be assigned, and worthy of a
wise Government and Polity. And to this reason the words of the Statute of 25
E. 3. cap. 2. de Proditoribus, do point, De ceo soit probablement attaint de
overt fait per gens de lour condition.

And therefore it seems to me, that according to the Reason and Design of the
Law, which declares the Law in particular Cases, that Bishops being Barons, and
of the Peerage of England and of that Rank and Order, they ought to be, tried
by those of their own Condition: And the denial to them of this Privilege,
which is annexed to, and is a resultance from the Dignity of their Order, is a
departure from Magna Charta, and not agreeable to the Provision of the 25 E. 3.
c. 2.

But it was never an allowable Exception to a Judge, that the Judge has not so
good an Estate, or other Advantages of Fortune, equal to the man he Judges, to
forfeit, in case the Judge be a Capital Offender; upon which reason, the Folio
Gentleman grounds his Reasonings against the Bishops being Tryers of Peers. He
argues the Bishops incompetent to try a temporal Baron upon this reason;
because the Bishop has only a Peerage for his Life to forfeit.

But who can be satisfied with such fine and slender Reasoning, or entertain an
Opinion that is not bettern grounded?

I would not be thought to argue or maintain, that Prelates are so fit to be
appointeed by the King's Commission, to try a Temporal Peer, in the Court of a
Lord High Steward, out of Parliament: when a select Number of Peers are to be
appointed for Trial, it is most convenient, that those of the same Species of
the Baronage, should be chosen for that purpose, for many reasons: but for a
Trial of a Temporal Peer in Parliament, which is the Establishment and
Appointment of the Governmnt, and not of the King's special Designation
(notwithstanding the reason of the Folio) for Reasons herein alleged, a
Bishop is a most fit, legal, and competent Judge.

But I have taken too much notice already of the Errors and Mistakes of the
Folio, and his false Reasonings; I am weary of such Animadversions: I shall
proceed now to the end of my Discourse; without making any more Reflections.

It is already cleared, that the Bishops are complete Barons, that they are of
the State of the Baronage; and it can have no Consideration how they came by
it, nor how they held it for the Modus tenendi, does not alter or diversifie
the Honor.

And for my part, I cannot find reason to believe, but that the Bishops had, or
might have had originally their Trials, by Peers; and that it was their Right
in Consequence of their being placed in that Order and State (besides that they
have a Precedence to the Temporal Baronage) to be tried by the Baronage,
because the Law for the reason aforementioned, appoints Trials per Pares. But
the contrary practice is the Strength of our Adversaries, in opposing the
Peerage of Bishops, which we shall therefore now consider of.

It is certain, that in all Trials, wherein Bishops are concerned, whether
Plaintiffs, or Defendants, in Actions real, as well as personal, whether the
Lands of the Church are concerned or not, a Knight is to be returned upon the
Jury, that is, to try the Issue. I will not trouble the Reader with Law Cases,
any Gentleman that pleases may examine the Truth of what I say.

This privilege therefore cannot be in respect of the Lands of the Bishopric
(as the Folio would have it) but of the persons of the Bishops, a respect to
the Order and Peerage of the Bishops.

It is the same Privilege, and as large as the Temporal Peers enjoy in this
matter, which is, that the worthiest and best of the Commoners, which are
Knights, should be impannelled upon a Jury, where either a Spiritual or
Temporal Baron is concerned; besides that, I find a single Remembrance as high,
as 13 E. 3. in Brooks Trial 142. (the Reports of that year are not printed) of
the Bishops Right of Peerage in a Capital Cause; the Book is Evesque est Peer
de Realm, and serva try per Peers in Crime.

But how this Right came to be discontinued, and to lose remembrance, we shall
presently account for; but I cannot think it Sense, which some of our Lawyers
have said for this purpose, that a Bishop, his being a Baron, is Ratione
Tenurae, and not personal; which is all one as to say, that the Bishop is a
Baron, but his Person is not a Baron; but his Peerage and Baronage, is no other
in truth, than an Honor accumulated upon the Person of a Bishop, together with
his Office.

But to excuse them, they thought themselves obliged to give a reason why
Bishops are not (as the Law is taken) to be tried by Peers, but by a Common
Jury, which grew into practice by accident, and was not ever so in probability;
but certainly is very irregular, and extreme incongruous; and therefore to give
a good reason, for it is too hard a task to be undertaken; and he that will
undertake to give a reason of that which is unreasonable, and go about to prove
a thing fit which is incongruous, must likely speak things equally incongruous,
absurd and unreasonable.

But to speak what the truth is in this matter, the Bishops and the whole Order
of Clergy did challenge to be exempt from the Jurisdiction of Secular Courts;
but the Bishops, as is objected, never waved their jus paritatis, upon
Arraignment in inferior Courts. They only never insisted upon it: For they had
a better way to escape, by setting up the pretended Rights and Privileges of
their Order, and that Church, for exempting themselves from the Jurisdiction of
the Temporal Courts; and by this means, they did escape unpunished for the most
part.

Though there were several Abatements made by the provision of the Laws, and
the Wisdom of the Judges, to their unreasonable pretenses therein; yet they
always got off by their pretended privilege, if not with impunity, yet with
some protection at least from Justice; and farther they thought perhaps they
might at least avoid being thought guilty of the Crimes objected, whilst they
used this pretense for a reason why they would not make a Defense.

And sure in all Offenses but Treason, they escaped with their Lives before the
Statutes that took away the benefit of Clergy, in some Cases of the greatest
Guilt, and even in the Case of Treason, the Criminal ever had the Advocation
and Intercession of the Church Power and Interest, because the privilege they
contended for, was so great and valuable a Concernment (as they esteemed it) to
the Order of the Clergy.

But by this means, the memory of the Use of this Right and Privilege was
lost, and the Detestation of a Crime in a Prelate, provided him a speedy and
ready Justice, such as was at hand; and at length, Bishops themselves,
unadvisedly, and being born down by the Common Opinion thus grounded and
occasioned, did submit to Trials by Juries.

It is enough to have given an account, how this Anamolous piece of Law came
about. But Anamolous Cases never make Rules, nor destroy any. Nor is it to be
drawn into consequence, whatever is a departure from the Establishment to
destroy it quite. Positive Constitutions, of which no Reasons can be given why
they are so, can infer or argue nothing. Reason cannot make Law, though it is a
fair inducement: but our Reason is most perversely employed, when it proceeds
from the Irregularities that happen in Human Affairs, and are shuffled upon us
by length of time by violence and iniquity, and a heap of Accidents to argue us
into more, and to refix that which is regular, and remains firm. In quo quis
peccat, in eo punietur. Is it not enough, that the Order now suffers a
diminution of their dignity, by reason of the contumacy of the Popish Prelates
their Predecessors, and that their Refusals to submit to Temporal Justice are
visited upon the Succession? Severe enough this is in it self.

But why should any man expect, that this Age in consequence of this should be
persuaded, and reasoned to exclude the Bishops out of their remaining right?
It Is no more to be expected, than that a man that has one hand withered and
mortified with the Palsy, should be persuaded to cut off the other for
conformity.

We know how the Prelates fell from their primitive Dignity, of being tried by
those of their own Order, and were submitted to be tried by Juries of
Commoners. It would be therefore consonant and agreeable to the Dignity of
Barons, and Lords of Parliament, (for such the Bishops are) that they be
restored to their ancient right in the matters of Trials, as mistaken Law is
rectified by an Act of Parliament. A wise Act of State it would be, to
redintegrate the Honor of the Baronage of England, the whole Baronage
suffering dishonor by a mutilation of so Honorable a Privilege in one of the
membra dividentia of that body, whilst the Bishops are thrown to common
Jurors. Especially since the incongruity thereof has given occasion to some
men, to question one another of the jura paritatis, which belongs to the
Prelates, and to dispute their right of Session in that House, in one of the
most important Concerns of the Government.

But however this Irregularity is discoursed, it does not affect the Right of
the Prelates now in dispute; for though Bishops are tried by Commoners out of
Parliament, as the Law is now generally taken; yet that they are to be tried by
Peers in Parliament our Adversaries do not deny. And that they may and ought to
sit in judgment upon Temporal Lords in Parliament in Capital Causes, we have
clearly proved. So that the Reciprocal of a Bishops being judged and judging in
Capital Causes in Parliament is entire, and in this they continue duly pares.

But that it may not depend upon our Adversaries Concessions, that Bishops may
be tried by Peers in Parliament; for he is not always constant to himself, and
may take back what he has yielded; we shall here subjoyn a short demonstrative
proof, that the Bishops ought to be tried by Peers in Parliament. And that they
have been declared and taken for Peers, and under that Character tried; when if
they had not been reckoned and deemed Peers, they could not have received Trial
in Parliament; and it is thus:

Edward the Third had prevailed with the Lords against their good will to
condemn the Earl of March; Sir Simon Beresford, John Matrevers, Boys de Boyons,
John Devard, Thomas de Gowrney, William Ogle, for the Murder of Edward the
Second his Father and the Earl of Kent; all of them Commoners but the Earl of
March. The Lords were afterward sensible of the Injustice and Irregularity of
their Proceedings, in judging and condemning Commoners; and for the avoiding of
the like for time to come, an Act of Parliament was made which follows, viz.
El est assensu and accord per nostre Seigniour le Roy, and touts les gents en
plein Parliament, per tant que les dits Peers come Judges du Parliament
pristerint en le presence nostre Seigniour le Roy, a fair and a render les
dits judgments passant du Roy, sur ascun de ceux que n'estoient pas leur Peers,
and ce que encheson de murdre de Seignior Lige, and destruction de celuy que fu
sipres de Sank Royal, and fits du Roy, que per les dits Peers, que ore sont ou
les Peers que serront en temps aveniz ne soient, mes tenus ne charge a render
judgments sur auter que sur lour peers ne ace fair mes eiont les peers de la
terre poer eins de ceo pur tout Jours ore venu soient discharges and quietes
and qui les avaunt dits judgments ore rendus ne soient ensample nen sequence en
temps avenir per quoi les dits peers puissent estre charges desore judges
autres que lour peers contre la ley de la terre si autiel case deveigne, que
Dieu defend. Rot. Parl. 4 E. 3. 11. 6.

This the Author of the grand Question concerning the Judicature of the House
of Peers, would have but an Order of the House, and no Act of Parliament,
because it served his purpose to have it so; but for no other reason which he
offers in that Book: but that it was an Act of Parliament, will appear by a
Record, which my worthy Friend Mr. Petyt, a most Industrious and Sagacious
Enquirer into the Records of Elder Times, has furnished to me, which is a Writ
directed to the Barons of the Exchequer, wherein the afore-recited Record is
mentioned, and called an Act of Parliament, viz. Rex These. and Baronibus suis
de scaccariis salutem; mittimus nobis sub pede sigilli nostri quaedam Judicia
in Parliamento nostro apud Westminster. nuper tent' per Comites, Barons, and alios
Pares Regni, super Rogero de Mortuo Mari, and quosdam alios reddita, necnon
quondam Concordiam per nos and Pares praedict', necnon Communitatem Regni
nostri in eodem Parl. to fact' super premissis mandamas quod Judicia and
Concordiam praedict', in Scaccario nostro praedict' coram vobis legi and
publicari, and ibid. seriatim, in Rotulari, and de caetero ibid. observari
Fac'. Test meipso apud Windsor. 15. die Februarii, Anno Regni nostri quinti,
adhuc Brevia directa Baronibus de termino, Sancti Hilar. anno 5 E. 3. R. 33.
penes Rememor. Domini Regis in Scaccario.

To complete our Argument, the Concordia appears now an Act of Parliament to
the purpose, that the Lords should not give Judgment upon others than their
Peers; yet we find the Bishops afterward judged in Parliament, and that in
times near the making of this Act, when we may be allowed to presume they knew
this Law (and besides the practice has been conformable to the Law, since, as
our Adversary confesses) and particularly to mention no more, the Bishop of
Norwich, in the 7 R. 2. And Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, 21 R. 2.
both for Treason, were tried in Parliament, by Peers; which Cases are before
mentioned to another purpose.

There was likewise an Act of Parliament, made 13 E. 3. n. 7. that the Nobles
of the Land should not be put to answer, but in open Parliament, by their
Peers: but two years after that Act was repealed; otherwise we should not have
since heard of Trials of Bishops by common Juries in Capital Causes. And when
the Laypeers can again procure and provide for themselves such a Law, they will
not, I hope, envy the Bishops, if they find them therein included.

CHAP. XIX.
BUt after all that has been said, it will be yet necessary to advertise the
Reader for informing and settling a true Judgment of the Right of the Cause,
that in Questions of this Nature, we can only arrive to a moral Certainty,
which is made by incomparably the greatest probability. That we cannot be
answered, but by producing something, at least, equally probable to all the
several parts of our Discourse that are to the question, if by any Objection
they should render any one part of our Discourse doubtful, they would do
nothing, except they can do so to all the rest; which can be done only by
offering something more probable. For when many probabilities are concurring to
prove the same thing, they do not singly stand upon their own Credit; but they
are all assisted by their Conjunction, and give Aids mutually to support every
one single probability. This is but necessary to be said, for that I see this
Question will be kept up and defended, with Obstinacy, Passion, Interest, and
unreasonable Contention.

And farther, that it is very undecent, that a question of this Greatness,
concerning a matter grave and important, should be endlesly vexed with trifling
Objections of the Nequam ingeniosi. To prevent therefore the Caprice, Captions,
Cavillations, trifling Criticisms, forcing of a Grammatical Sense of Words,
against their true and easy meaning, most agreeable to the subject matter, to
the occasion of speaking of them, and their probable intendment, and to the
understanding of the Times when they were spoken. And that we may be no longer,
or more troubled with their Opposings to that which is fairly probable, an
imagination of something barely possible, and which otherwise does appear
notoriously false. That Objections neither from the loose Style, especially of
partial Historians, nor from Records of Matters dark and obscure, which leave
us in doubt of their true meaning, and therefore can be no ground for Argument;
nor from the various sense of words, which they make to stand for this or that,
as it serves their turn. At which rate nothing will be certain, because few
words have one single determinate Sense, may any longer continue the Subterfuge
of a desperate Cause, and matter of endless Dispute. I appeal to the World,
whether such like Objections deserve an Answer, (for to some of these Topics,
whatever shall be produced by our Adversaries will be reduced:) And whether
they are not rude and imperious to the Dignity of the Right in question, to
draw it to a Trial, by such mean and incompetent ways, and unjust measures, as
they are otherwise in the Management of this Question, to the persons of those
that are concerned in it.

It is with passion to be resented, that so noble a Question should be tried by
such means, and incompetent ways of Probation, and by such unnatural measures,
which can be endured by none but such, who have no measures of Right, but an
agreableness to their own Projects; and who are upon the search of Colors and
Pretenses, to change and alter our Government, or hurt it in a Vital part, and
begin with the Bishops, to take down our Government.

CHAP. XX.
I Have farther this just Caution to add, for the warding of some other undue
prejudices in the Consideration of this question, that our Government did not
continue the same after, and before the Conquest; and that the Government upon
the Conquest, has received since many beneficial Alterations. That the Bishops
Right must be considered in Analogy to those several Alterations, and in
consequence, they ought not to be considered as Barons by Tenure, when Tenure
ceased to be the reason of Baronage. The contrary whereof, I find insisted
upon, and made the reason, why Bishops must not be tried by Peers. And the same
reason will serve to eject them out of the House at the Kings pleasure; because
forsooth several Barons by Tenure have been omitted in Summons to Parliament,
and no Lay Baron now (they say) is summoned upon that score; but for that he is
a Baron by Writ or by Patent, which makes a permanent Nobility in their
Families.

But that which is now our Government, in what it differs from what it was
anciently, as it is not less rightfully our Government because it was not ever
such, so it deserves our greatest zele to defend it because it is much better.

Governments are (I am sure ours is) (...), formed and fashioned and refined by
long experience: they are not perfected as soon as made, they have their Infant
state as well as Men. The elder and first times are the Childhood of
Government, and of the World; Antiquitas seculi juventas mundi. It is egregious
folly in any man, to attempt to reduce us back again to the rudeness of the
first Ages, and to all the inconveniences that have been discharged and filed
off insensibly by Experience and Wisdom the daughters of Time, in a long series
of Ages. We neither eat, drink, nor cloth our selves, nor build after the
manner of our Ancestors, but according to our improved Inventions.

Vnde datae populis fruges and glande relicta?
Cesserat inventis Dodonia quercus Aristis.
Claud. de raptu Proserpinae.
It is time ill spent by some of the Antiquaries, to go about to refix the
present established Government, by endeavoring to find out the Records,
wherein it appears to have been other, of which we have some published, and are
threatened with more. But they will have no other effect (I hope) than to
provoke us to give God thanks for the wisdom of our Forefathers, and that they
have left us a Government much better than what they found, more just and
peaceable, and better established for a lasting continuance: Though they
perversely design it as an Artifice to overturn the State, and to evacuate our
most refined and wisest Constitutions. For that they can find something before
then, they would note them to want Authority and Justice. We ought (say they)
to have recourse to the primitive Laws of the State, which have been abolished
by unjust Customs and Usurpations. This is a Game at which we are sure to lose
all, nothing will be found just in this Balance. And by these means some base
Factors for Slavery are contriving the ruin of our Liberty: but this they will
effect when they shall have persuaded us to suffer again all the incommodities
and coursnesses of Life, which our Ancestors suffered because they were no
better instructed: Frugibus inventis ad glandes velle reverti.

The great change that was made in the Baronage of England which we have
observed, was remedial and healthful. Its Goodness does appear by the thorough
Cure it made of our Disorders: for we have not since relapsed into these Evils,
from which we recovered by that Change. It was Legal, and with full Consent of
the whole Community: For it was introduced without Noise, without Opposition or
Dispute; nay, without Observation: So that we hear not how it was done; but
only perceive the Change. These are sure Signs, that we arrived by this Change,
where our Government did at first design us; and that we were agreeable to this
Alteration, to its first Intentions. That all Parties herein received their
Satisfactions, and found their Interest, that no body was aggrieved at it,
neither did it raise Wonder in any man; it was every man's Desire and easy
Expectation, which I believe are the true Reasons why this Change is not more
remarked in our Histories. But pity it is, that through the Injury of Time, and
(what is reasonably suspected) the Iniquity of Corrupt Ministers; that we want
our Records of that time, which could not have failed, telling us, the whole
Secret, by what means the Inducements thereto, the Methods whereby, and the
exact time when we made our Alterations in our Government, materially, and in
its essential parts always the same.

Of this our Records, if they had been preserved to us entire, would have
informed us; but alas, we have but a few Remains of them.

Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto. And of those that have arrived us, many
are but References and Recitals in other Records, not the Original Records
themselves, by which the Original Records escaped an utter Oblivion against the
Will of our Civil Expurgatories.

But of such that remain, the most laudable Use of them, is, to give Authority
to the present State of our Government; and we ought with good reason to
interpret them in an agreableness to the present Establishment, because the
Change we suffered, was easy and natural, ex Hercule pedem, to invert the
Proverb: For it is easier to know what Foot will fit Hercules, than to fit an
Hercules to a Foot given.

CHAP. XXI.
THough our Government has always consisted of the same constituent parts; yet
they have been ill sized, and proportioned and unduely placed, not well joined
or united, or so blended, that neither could perform their Offices or proper
Functions.

The Baronage of England was an overgrown part, and did by its Excess and
extravagant Bulk, disorder the whole Economy of our Government, and became it
self less useful. The Honor of the Baronage was lessened to nothing by the
Numbers thereof; they did not find themselves so much obliged, to support the
Majesty of the King, for the Preservation of their own Grandeur, as our great
Barons are in our present Constitution. The People were in some sort
represented by them, as they were a great Body of the Chiefest Freeholders;
but they had a power to oppress them, and they were not obliged by so strong a
Tie, and plain Duty to a care of the People, because not chosen by them; and by
that Choice, put under a more clear and strict Trust of taking care of their
Rights. In this Constitution, neither King, Lords nor Commons had their Ends;
and therefore would not have the old Constitution revived, if it were possible.

When the Representatives of the People, which make the House of Commons, were
joined with the Lords, and sat in one House, they could not discharge that
Office of a Representative, so well, as since they are divided from them and
make a distinct House. They could not well use that Freedom of Speech and
Debate, under the Observation of the great Lords, upon whom the Principal
Gentlemen had great Dependencies. Their Consent was often very improperly such;
for he only truly and naturally consents, who has entire Freedom to dissent,
Si vis scire an velim, effice ut possim nolle.

In the granting Aids for the Support of the Government, and Defense of the
Kingdom, a Matter of the greatest Importance, the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons
stood divided, and could not, as the Ancient Constitution was, by one Act of
State, be regularly and proportionably taxed, according to the Exigency of the
Affairs, and their respective Abilities; but those three Orders taxed
themselves in such measures as they pleased, which made the Kingdom
Geryon-like, a Monster of three Bodies.

Their several Concessions, by this means, not likely to be always equal, and
in the whole not competent to the instant necessity.

The Bishops, Abbots, and other Ecclesiastical persons of the Saxons time, held
their Lands free from all Secular Services; besides, Trinoda Necessitas, viz.
Expedition, i. e. Supply for War, pontium and arcium extructio. But King
Ethelbald did grant, that the Ecclesiastics should be freed from all public
Charges, except for the Building and Repairing of Castles and Bridges,
Ingulphus, page 853. The like Immunity was allowed to the Clergy of the Empire,
by Honorius and Theodosius, Lib. 4. Cod. Just. de priv. Dom. Aug. By the Great
Charter their Privileges were confirmed. And for this reason the Clergy have
taken themselves not of Right chargeable to Aids granted to the King by
Parliament. This Exemption has been envied to them, and made matter of
Reproach, though unduely in after Ages. But notwithstanding this Exemption,
they have aided the Crown with Supplies frequently; yet in such manner as
asserted and saved their ancient Privilege of being exempt, that is, they
would not suffer themselves to be involved in a general Law; but of their own
Freedom and Will, gave to the King; which Concessions were notwithstanding not
legal, unless confirmed by Parliament, to whom belonged always the power of
judging of the Freedom and Ends of giving Aids and Benevolences, and the
necessity that required them. But in the last Ages, they have, for their
Commendation and Honor, waved their pretenses of Privilege and Exemption; and
for the sake of Common Justice, and the Public Weal, for avoiding, being
thought less in their Duty to the Public, than their Order required. And for
the better ascertaining, and more equally adjusting the Parliamentary Aids,
they have submitted to be taxed by Acts of Parliament.

The Commons in Parliament we find as late as Henry 7. taxing only the Commons,
and that by Indenture between them and the King (This Form of Grant, is utterly
exclusive of the Lords Power, to charge the quantum, times of Payment, or ways
of Levying of the Aids granted) wherein they subject all Lands to the Levies
thereof; but the Lands of the Lords in Parliament, or Land amortis'd to the
Church. Such an Indenture was made in Parliament held at Westminster, 10 H. 7.
and is pleaded at large in Rastals Entr. fol. 135. But of late our Government
has cleared it self from that grand inconveniency.

The Commons in Parliament, and those whom they represent, being far the
greatest Proprietors, they reasonably challenge it their Right, to propound all
Aids, and appointing the Levies and Methods of raising them, which (because it
must be agreed, that the Commons in no congruity can tax the Lords
authoritatively, or impose upon them) must have civilem intellectum, that is,
the Commons in a Bill of Aids do propound, that they will agree on the behalf
of the Commonalty, that they shall be taxed as the Bill propounds, if the Lords
for their part will agree the same.

CHAP. XXII.
NEither was our ancient Government without great faults and inconveniences in
the conduct of Religion, the principal care of all Governments on the one side,
by confounding Administrations, which should have been kept distinct; which was
the fault of our Government in the Saxons time, and by utterly disjoyning and
severing the Church and State, and not tying the Ecclesiastics to a just
dependency upon the State, which was the Evil of after times; that is to say,
the Ecclesiastics were left to themselves to convene Councils, and to make
Canons, without any dependence upon, or relation to Parliaments. The
Constitution was such in the Saxons time, that the Synods or Councils which
governed in Religious matters were the same, with their great Council or
Parliament: By these means all the Rules and Orders that were made in the
matters of Religion were not Canons, which are of the nature of Councils, but
Laws, and obliged those that contravened them to temporal punishment. The
Church was thereby turned into a Dynasty, and Religion was against its nature
promoted by force, which can only truly obtain by persuasion. And wheresoever
this is in practice and use, the Clergy to the great scandal of their Office,
will be entitled to all the Severities that shall be inflicted upon
Dissenters. Heretofore the Councils of the Church, and the Authority of the
State, were unduly confounded.

After that we had Legatine Councils, and Provincials convened by the
Archbishops as they pleased, not under the observation and control of the
Civil Power; by which many inconveniences were occasioned, many embroilments of
the people happened, the Authority of the Prince lessened, and Civil Rights
encroached upon; the validity of several good Laws made in Parliament disputed,
clamoured against, and sentenced as unlawful; for want of a due subservience
and dependence of the Ecclesiastical Conventions on Parliaments. We had
Imperium in Imperio, or at least a Kingdom divided against it self. This fault
in our Government was helped by Edward the Third, our English Justinian; he in
the several Writs of Summons of the Bishops to Parliament, made it a settled
Rule, that the clause of Praemunientes should be inserted, requiring them
therein to warn respectively, Priorem and Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae C. ac
Archidiaconos, totumque Clerum vestrae Diocesis; quod iidem Prior (which if a
Cathedral is the same as a Dean) and Archidiaconi, totusque Clerus vestrae
Diocesis, quod iidem Prior and Archidiaconi in propriis personis suis, and
dictum Capitulum per unum, idamque Clerus per duos Procuratores idoneos, plenam
ac sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo and Clero habentes, praedictis die
and loco personaliter intersint, ad consentiendum his quae tunc ibidem de
communi concilio ipsius Regni nostri, Divina favente Clementia contigerit,
ordinari. And accordingly the several Bishops, in obedience to such like Writs
of Summons to Parliament to them directed, summoned or warned their Deans or
Priors, Archdeacons, and the Clergy by their Proxies; which have since made the
Convocations, or the Ecclesiastical Council of the Kingdom, and are to meet at
every Session of Parliament, but to debate nothing but what is propounded, and
to publish nothing for Canons without the Royal Assent. So that they are to act
nothing but under the observation of Parliament. This Convocation or
Ecclesiastical Council (other allowable Synods we have none) ought not to
convene but when a Parliament is sitting, and continue no longer than the
Parliament.

We ought to observe herein, and applaud the excellent wisdom of our
Government, that in the very constituion of it has provided for the peace of
our Church, by silencing Controversies, which can never be determined with any
effect; such a wise expedient and course, as the best instructed Christian
Emperors did take by their Edicts, prohibiting public Disputations about
subtle and nice Questions; as Constantine, Martianus, Leo and Anthemius,
Andronicus, Heraclius, to mention no more. None but mad men and extravagantly
presumptuous, or utterly ignorant of Church History, will ever hereafter go
about by Acts of Councils to end Controversies, but rather to shame the
Dogmatizers out of their contentious zeal, by showing how little the ends and
designs of Christianity are concerned one way or other in such Questions, in
which those that are most learned know least; and a little learned ignorance
would discharge most of them from any longer troubling the world.

And farther, we must observe, to the Honor of our Nation, that it is so
religiously wise, as to commit the Care of conducting Devotions, ordering the
Decency of Public Worship, and censuring the Manners of Clerks to the Bishops,
and the Principal Clergy; whereto their Religion, Wisdom, Devotion and
Moderation, bespeak them the fittest Persons.

No less remarkable is the Wisdom of our Government, that it does not make
that, which is properly the matter of Canons, the Subject of their Legislation;
and thereby subject us to Temporal Punishments, where the Admonitions of the
Church and her Censures, are more proportioned Remedies to the disobedient and
froward. Laws oblige us to punishments, govern us by Fear and Awe, oblige with
Reason or without Reason, because they are Laws. They admit of no
Ecclesiastical Relaxation or Dispensation, and bind when the reason cease. In
whatsoever thing relative to Religon a Law is made, the matter is taken out of
the Hands of the Churchmen, and no longer under their Government, whose
Government is a Ministry, not Empire and Dominion. They can institute nothing
but what they may reasonably persuade, Nihil tam voluntarium quam Religio.
Lact. We can have no more Religion or Truth than we can persuade. Religion and
Truth are to be promoted by moving the Will. The Church rules by persuasion,
and her Canons oblige only for their Reason, Religion for the sake of our own
Edification, and the Edification of others, the Peace of the Church, and
Reverence of our Pastors and Teachers. Canons in their own Nature are
Temporary, for the present necessity and convenience, variable and mutable, as
the Edification of the Church shall require, and the prudence of the Guides of
the Church shall determine; and therefore what is properly the Matter of
Canons, ought not to pass under Laws which are rigid and inflexible,
peremptory, punitive and ungovernable. And this magnifies the prudence and
Christian Temper of our English Prelates.

CHAP. XXIII.
LAstly, I observe what a dangerous Opinion our Judges sometimes had in
reference to the Baronage of England, viz. that it was in the Power of the
King, or in any Nobleman, once summoned by Writ to Parliament, as a Baron, at
the pleasure of the King, to relinquish his place, and determine the Nobility
of his Family. Which Opinion not being corrected, would have made that State
ambulatory and moveable, upon which the whole Frame of the Government depends.
The Baronage of England, is the Stabiliment of our Government, and may be soon
made too weak to support the other greater parts of the Building, that rest
upon it, and are supported by it. It is this that moderates between the two
contending Interests of Prerogative and Liberty; and prevents those violent
Concussions, which would otherwise unavoidably happen.

-- geminum gracilis Mare separat Isthmus,
Nec patitur confer fretum si terra recedat,
Ionium Aegaeo frangat Mare. --
Of what Importance therefore is it, that we should be a Kingdom that cannot be
shaken, as much as Humane Wisdom can provide, and frail Materials will admit?
That our Baronage should not hold their places precariously at the King's
Pleasure, and be deposed at his Will. And yet our Judges, after that Honor was
fixed in the Families of those whom the King should appoint by Writ, to hold
that Honor and Place in the Commonwealth, remembering, that Baronage was at
first a Service imposed ratione tenurae, by Will. the Conqueror: Our Judges, I
say, more able to judge of Private Rights, than in Questions of State and
Government, being under a prejudice, from the Consideration of the Original of
our Baronies, did allow the Plea of Thomas de Furnival, who had been called to
several Parliaments by Writ, that he was no Baron, for that he held not his
Land per Baroniam, vel partem Baroniae, and therefore adjudged him no Baron.
Communia de Term. Sancti Hillarii, Anno 19 E. 2. Rot. penes Remem. Dom. These.
in Scaccario pro Thoma de Furnival. Seniore exonerando. But of this Cause they
were not properly Judges, the Lords themselves are the only Judges of the right
Constitution of that House; and they have anciently challenged a Writ of
Summons, de jure, and debito Justitiae for themselves, and Descendents; where
they have been once summoned by Writ, and answered that Writ, and taken their
place accordingly. And the whole House does constantly refuse to act, until the
Lord that complains of an Omission, has a Writ of Summons sent him.

What Apprehensions was had of this Honor, by Thomas de Furnival, and others in
his time, I know not. But it might have been then, and since it is well
understood, that that place which they sustain in the Government, is of the
highest Trust; and the Benefits which redound therefrom to the Commonweal, the
greatest: For they make the Government as well gentle and good, as firm and
stable.

These Noble Lords Marchers* are placed between two great Contending Powers, to
preserve the due Boundaries and respective Limits, and oblige them to Right and
Reason, by their Courage and Wisdom. And for their Encouragement and Reward,
deserve the highest Honors; and that they should be as they are, immortal in
their Families. And accordingly it was resolved lately in the Case of the Honor
of Purbeck, in the Lords House, that no Fine or Surrender of the Honor of a
Baron can extinguish it: But that notwithstanding it shall continue to his
Heirs and Descendents: And that upon the clearest and most important Reason;
for that the Constitution of the Government, ought not (as in its own Nature it
cannot) to depend upon the Will of the Prince, nor of Single Persons, that bore
a part in the Government for their time, nor be prejudiced in Succession by
their Lachesse.

The same Privilege does belong to the Spiritual Baronage, the successive
Nobility of this Realm; and a Writ of Summons to Parliament can be no more
refused any of them, or any of their Successors, than it can to any of the
Temporal Baronage. I cannot but upon a review of our Government, applaud our
happiness that we enjoy, and were born to so excellent a Government, without
our Sweat and Contrivance; which was arrived to by several slow Steps, and
beaten out by the long experience of former Ages.

But it is a portentous thing, and of ill, very ill Omen, that a Government so
Venerable and August, so Wise, Beneficial and desirable, should be assaulted
with peevish Dotages, froward Petulances, and childish Cavillations: And that
some Brainsick, foolish Antiquaries, Rakers in the Rubbish of Time, should
imagine, that they can barter away our Government for moldy Bread and clouted
Shoes: But these we have before obviated. Another sort we have before engaged,
to consider in their ill Treatment of the Bishops in their handling this
Question of their Right we now defend. To which I will now proceed.

CHAP. XXIV.
FOr I am not now insensible of the great Prejudices that lie against the Right
of the question, from those Calumnies that are thrown upon the Order: And that
no reason, not the clearest Demonstration will be admitted to any Degree of
satisfaction, until this be removed. Men's understandings are mingled with
their interests and Passions. It is a hard matter not to see the person in the
Cause; and if the person is dis-esteemed, his Right cannot be equally favored:
Nay which is more, if our Adversaries can persuade the World, that the Bishops
will abuse this their Right, nothing will be able to keep off this Conclusion,
that they have none.

We most duly therefore here complain of the dishonest Artifice used by the
Gentlemen, that we have undertaken in this Cause, viz. That they seek all
occasions of lessening the esteem of the Bishops; and of them, they speak what
they will. He that can believe what he will, is an Infidel, and he that does
what he will, is a man of no Conscience; and he that can speak what he will,
wants Truth and Candor: But of a culpable sort of Wilfulness we find these two
Authors very blameable.

We must complain of these fierce disputants, that they strive unlawfully, they
contend with passion, and a keen Animosity; they strike as well as argue, they
lay about them right or wrong, to assault and wound the Persons, whose Right
they oppose. A wound and Dishonor do they give to their own hurt.

Animosque in Vulnere ponunt. The first and greatest Injustice they do to the
Cause against all Right and Reason, of which sure they must be self-condemned,
is an odious Remembrance of any thing culpable in the whole Succession of
Bishops, in the times of the lowest Degeneracy of the Christian Religion, and
of the height of Papal Usurpation and Tyranny; which was more heavy in those
times, upon the Rights of the Bishops, than upon those of the Crown.

When Princes thorough their own Weakness, or to serve their Interest, or to
support their defective Titles to their Crowns, or for obtaining dispensations
from his Holiness, for an unwarrantable Marriage, or for other Ends and Reasons
could not, or would not defend the Bishops and their Rights.

The very order of Bishops in those times was attempted upon, to be annulled by
that Oecumecall Usurper. It was disputed and boldly maintained in the Council
of Trent that the Bishops were only jure Pontificio, and had no Authority in
the Church, but such as his Holiness would vouchsafe them. It was endeavored
to make them but his Substitutes: He pretended Powers to create and translate
them, diminish or enlarge their Dioceses; gave them more or less Authority, did
suspend them also, and deprive them; and pretended, that they had only a
vicarious and precarious Authority from him; and in such Measures as he should
think fit to limit and appoint. Were not Provisions and Reservations first made
by the Pope, upon Benefices belonging to Churchmen? The Statute of the 25 E. 3.
gave their Presentations to the King, when the Pope usurped upon them, as a
Fortification against his Usurpation and Invasion. Did he not urge his Canon
upon them, that they should not agitare judicium sanguinis, so much talked of
in this Question, that he might strip them out of their Secular Greatness, that
he might the better go over them, and tread upon them and their Ecclesiastical
Rights?

Is there no Consideration to be had by those Gentlemen, in this Case of the
Error temporis, or Vitia Temporum; They will snatch at this unduely when it
seems for their turn; but can they think that any Bishop, under a Protestant
Sovereign, will ever return under the old Yoke?

And yet the business of Provisions, Reservations and Dispensations, and of
Pluralties, must be laid at the Bishops Door (yea, though Dispensation of
Pluralties, is now established by Statute Law,) with all the Usurpations
exercised by the Pope, the Firstborn of the Children of Pride, to which they
willingly-unwillingly were forced to submit.

But how unrighteous a thing is it to load the Order it self with all the
Miscarriages of a long Course of Succession? as if the Faults of the Bishops in
all Ages, did stick to their respective Chairs, and had passed into the Office
it self.

But it is no wonder, that they remember the Faults of those Bishops unduely,
to the Disparagement and Dishonor of the Order and Succession: When the Folio
turns matter of Commendation into Reproach, and calls their contending for due
Administration of Justice and Laws, Clamors for the Breach of Magna Charta.

Invisos seu been, seu male facta premunt. By this he sems to argue them guilty
of affecting Temporal Power, and intermedling unduely in Secular Affairs.

CHAP. XXV.
BUT to discharge this Imputation, we will shortly remember, how modest they
have always been in the exercise of their Ecclesiastical Office; and how
faithful they have always been in former Ages, to that Temporal Trust which the
Laws and Constitutions of this Government, has annexed to the Spiritual Office
of a Bishop.

The Bishops challenge nothing to belong to them of Divine Right, but the
Exercise of their Ministry in the Cure of Souls.

They do not assume the Office of themselves, but are appointed thereto by the
Sovereign Power; and therefore the Bench of Bishops are not answerable for
every one of their Order. They rightfully acknowledge the Right of Investiture,
and Collation of Bishoprics to be in the King, subject to Royal Exemptions and
Privileges from their ordinary Right. From which Exemptions Mr. Seldom is too
forward to conclude his Doctrine of Erastianism, for that the Exercise of their
Function may be restrained, as well in reference to Persons or Territories, by
the Civil Authority.

Their Convocations are convened by the King's Writ; they debate nothing
without his Leave. Their Results become Canons, and receive Sanction by the
Royal Authority, and do not pretend to infringe any Temporal or Civil Right or
Law. And besides, their Convocations are always to be held, sittting
Parliaments, and no longer, not at any other times: And whatever they debate or
resolve, is under the Observation of Parliament. Nequid detrimenti capiat
Respublica.

The Bishops make no Laws about Religion apart by themselves, neither have they
any Negative against any that are propounded, and therefore are not answerable
for any that are made or not made. They have not the definition of Heresy, but
the Law has declared it since the Reformation. And the Writ De Heretico
comburendo is since abrogated by the Christian Temper of a Parliament,
principally consisting of such Members, that were conformable to the
Institutions of the Church of England; that is, the legal Establishments of
this our Christian Commonwealth.

The Church of England is no more her own present Establishments, than the
present thoughts of any man is the man himself; as the thoughts of a man are
more refined and unreprovable as the man grows wiser, so do the Laws and
Constitutions, the Orders and Rules of a Church or Christian Republic, alter,
amend, and improve, as the Wisdom and Virtue, Religion and Devotion of the
Government, and the principal parts thereof in Church or State increases or
advances.

Our Bishops have had, and that with the greatest reason, greater apprehensions
of Schism and Separation, than of Errors in Opinion which occasioned it, as of
worse importance to the Christian Faith than the Errors themselves. Besides,
that a man cannot help being mistaken in many things; but it is in every man's
power to be modest and peaceable, and wise to sobriety, and hold the unity of
the faith in the bond of peace and charity, and not to revile and deprave that
which has the public approbation, though he cannot thereto fully assent. It
is great iniquity and unrighteousness, to pretend to Liberty of Conscience as
their right, and in the mean time not to tolerate the public appointments, and
what is authoritatively allowed and approved.

If Controvertible Opinions are allowed a Warrant for making a Sect and
separate Communion, and Churches are denominated and distinguished by them; and
consequently such Opinions are advanced unduly unto the same necessity of
belief as Articles of Faith: what will become of the Christian Verity? where
will it be recognized and purely professed? how distinguished? how understood?
how ascertained amidst the number of Opinions contended for, by the several
dogmatizing Sectaries, with more zele than the undoubted and uncontrovertible
Articles of Faith?

Nay, I will adventure to say further on their behalf, that Schismatical
Separations would not offend them, (so little do they affect to be Magisterial)
but for that if this Disease should grow Epidemical, there would be no such
thing as a Christian Church, and the Christian Religion would perish from the
earth without a miracle.

It is only designed by our Church, that those whose Subscriptions are
required, should thereby only signify their allowance of the Liturgy and
Articles, as fit to be used and allowable. What Plea then can our Separatists
have for a Toleration for themselves; who by their Separation seem unwilling to
tolerate the public Establishment, either from our Governors Civil or
Ecclesiastical, or from one another in their divided ways.

To reform or change to these men's pleasures is impossible, for that they
cannot (they positively differing from each other) be all pleased in any one
possible Establishment. Besides that, until we cease to be Schismatics, and
to be of separate and divided Communions upon the score of any dislike, or but
probable exception to what is publicly received or allowed, the altering any
thing for our satisfaction, will be but applying the Cure to the Symptoms, a
cutting off one head of the Hydra. By this way to effect an union is as
impossible as it would be to empty the Ocean, without stopping the cur-of the
Rivers.

The Bishops are (as all men, by how much they are better learned, are) of the
greatest Moderation in Opinions, and can tell how duly to rate and value them
(according to the Prejudice or Advantage they do to the Ends of our Religon)
those several Opinions, that have been contended with furious and rending Zeal,
in the several Ages of the Church, to the Scandal of that peaceable Institution.

They can have a better Opinion of that man who has unhappily entertained the
less probable side of the Questions controverted, if he opines with Modesty,
than they have of him, that holds the most probable part thereof, with a
Sectary-Zeal, Separation from, Contempt and Disdain of those of a different
persuasion. Their Moderation is known unto all men, of it their Opposers have
had very sensible Experience, the several Dissenters cannot disown it; but must
confess, that they have had severally kinder Usage from the Episcopal Men, than
their several Parties have from one another.

By their Learning, Wisdom and Moderation, which is most eminently known and
observed in many of them, and has recommended them to the highest Esteem they
must be allowed, their Enemies being Judges, to be the fittest Arbiters of the
Controversies, and the most likely and probable Procurers of the Peace of
Christendom.

All the Dissenting Parties have reason to look upon them, as their Common
Sanctuary, and Defense against the Outrages of each other.

But in this they must be pardoned, if they, being under a Law or Rule of their
Superiors (made, as they think, in a matter lawful) act accordingly, and do not
disobey for their sake who think otherwise, though in the mean time they pity
their Scruples.

Indeed the Terms of the Nonconforming Ministers have been made hard upon them;
But that has been from Reasons of State, which the late unhappy Wars
occasioned, and they were ejected out of their Livings by Statute Law. And on
the other side it is true, that many men, not to fit for that Holy Function
have enjoyed Church Benefices; but neither this can the Bishops help: For they
cannot reject a Clerk presented to a Benefice, or eject him, but as the Law
will, (so sacred is the Right of Patronage, and so fixed by the Law, are
Ministers in their Livings) which is not Nice in the manners of Clerks, and the
Bishops cannot be severer than the Laws.

So that if some men, not of the most unblamable conversations, have kept their
Livings, and some of very unexceptionable Lives have been ejected: The unhappy
Nonconformists are directed where to make their Complaint.

But as there is little Cause of complaint, on this part of the Episcopal
Authority and function, viz. Their Superintendency over the Pastors of their
Dioceses: So we shall observe how they have behaved themselves in the Exercise
of the Power of the Keys: For what is done therein by their Chancellors and
Officials, to whom Custom has given some Powers and Authoririty, which cannot
be checked and controlled by the Bishops themselves, they are not to account,
neither are they answerable for the Lay-Zeal that has made the Condition of
Excommunicants so very afflictive. For whatever some men please to think, the
Laity have outdone the Ecclesiastics in the Excesses of intemperate Zeal, as
they are most apt, and prone by their Ignorance to Superstition. No man can
pass under the Admonitions of the Church, and be suspended from the Holy
Mysteries, until he has made Satisfaction for his disorderly walking, or
Spiritual Pride, in breaking Order; but he is presently given up by the Laity
to Satan. I mean, he suffers beyond the first Intention of the Church in her
Discipline. Severities enacted by the Law of the State, which if reversed by
that Authority that established them, and a civil Process were enacted for the
Ecclesiastical Courts, in Causes of a Temporal Nature, which are appointed by
Law to their cognizance. I persuade my self, we should hear of no more
Complaints against them in the Exercise of the Power of the Keys.

For we observe, that they exercise the Power of the Keys with deference to the
Secular Magistrates. They never presume to excommunicate the Prince, least they
should thereby lessen his Authority, and shock the Government: For that all
Government is established by the Honor and Reverence of the Governor, according
to that Saying of Aristotle, (...), Dissolution of Government does easily
follow the Contempt of the Governor. As Kings are not subject to Penal Laws,
nor to be coerced by Penalties: So true it is also, what Balsamo has noted, ad
12 Canonem Synod. Ancyranae, Imperatoria unctione penitentiam tolli.

Neither do they presume in Reverence to the King, to excommunicate his
Counselors, and Ministers of State and Justice: For so it was declared amongst
other of the Avitae consuetudines of this Realm, by the Assize of Clarendon,
Nullus qui de Rege teneat in Capite, nec aliquis dominicorum ministrorum ejus
excommunicetur, nisi prius Dominus Rex conveniatur. In which our Bishops are
agreeable to the Ancients. Hildebert Cenoman, after Bishop of Tours, who lived
about the eleventh Century, says he, Apud Serenissimum Regem opus est
exhortatione potius quam increpatione, Concilio quam praeceptis, doctrina quam
virga. Ivo, Bishop of Chartres, in his Apology for communicating. -- Gervasius
says thus, Quos culpatorum Regia Potestas, aut in gratiam benignitatis
receperit, aut mensae suae participes fecerit, eos etiam Sacerdotum and
populorum conventus suscipere in Ecclesiastica Communione debebit; ut quod
principalis pietas recipit, nec a Sacerdotibus Dei alienum habeatur.

Thus while the Bishops are not guilty of mean and unfaithful flatteries, they
do not participate of the pride of the Bishops of Rome, or the irreverence and
sawciness of a Presbyterian Consistory against their Princes and Governors.

Neither do they call up any criminal cause originally to their examination,
but pronounce the sentence of Excommunication on such only as first are
civilly convict of a crime; save that matters of Incontinency are by the Common
Law submitted to their Censure, for that by the venerable gravity of the Judge,
and by the more private examination of such offenses, the modesty of the Nation
is best preserved, which is a surer defensative against the rifeness of such
crimes, perhaps than the sharpest punishments.

If they do excommunicate any man without a just cause, or do not absolve the
Excommunicate when he has made his satisfactions, the Bishop is compellable by
the Authority of the Kings Courts to assoil the man, under the pain of having
his Temporalities seized into the Kings hands, though he is not restored
without the Episcopal Absolution. For it is fit they should finally judge in
their own proper Province; and they must not, they cannot relax the Laws of
Christ, nor administer the power of the Keys of binding and losing, by any
other measures, for any power on earth. But against this power of the Kings
Courts they do not dispute or declare, but have recognized it by their
submission, and they can submit to the penalties, without complaining of this
civil constitution. Nay, in the general order they approve it, though in a
particular case perhaps they do not, because they cannot obey.

Our Bishops do not encroach any Temporal Authority in ordine ad spiritualia;
that stale pretense by which the Bishop of Rome has arrived to his exorbitant
power, and by which the Scotch Presbyters would have acquired the like over
Kings and Governors. Their Authority always administers to and assists but
never thwarts or contradicts the Temporal. They have accommodated their power
of the Keys, to the vindication of our established Government against the
attempts of Arbitrary Power, to which their Allegiance to the King, and the
regard of the public Peace, did oblige them. For such Attempts are mostly the
ruin of those that make them, always bring the Government it self into the
greatest danger, and sometimes prove the ruin both of the Government and the
Nation.

This was required of them as an indispensible duty, they being a principal
part of the Government; and the present Bishops Successors to all their
Rights, have no reason to decline their example, if they have the like cause.

The Bishops anciently were sturdy opposers of King John, when he designed to
put this Kingdom into vassallage to the Pope, and thereupon he writes to the
Pope thus as follows: In conspectu paternitatis vestrae humiliamus ad gratias
multiplices, prout melius scimus and possumus, exhibendas, pro cura and
sollicitudine, quam ad desensionem nostram and Regni nostri Angliae, paterna
vestra benevolentia indesinenter apponit, licet duritia Praelatorum Angliae and
inobedientia impediant vestrae provesionis effectum. Pat. 17 Joannis R. M. 15.
as I find it related by Mr. Petit, in his book entitled, The ancient Right of
the Commons of England asserted.

About the 24 H. 3. Edmund then Archbishop of Canterbury, at a Synod held at
Westminster, the King being present, Candelis acceptis, and projectis, ac
extinctis, Chartam Libertatum violantes, vel sinistre interpretantes,
excommunicantur. Mat. Paris, p. 151. About 13 years after, viz. in 37 H. 3.
Boniface then Archbishop of Canterbury, the sentence of Excommunication is
again repeated against those, Qui Ecclesiasticas Libertates vel antiquas Regni
Consuetudines in Chartis communium Libertatum and de Foresta concessas
quascunque, art vel ingenio violaverunt. Fleta l. 2. c. 42. Dors. Claus. 37 H.
3. membr. 9. Additament. ad Mat. Paris, p. 117. Which Sentence of
Excommunication was ratified and confirmed in a Parliament held that year as
follows: Noverint universi quod Dominus Rex Angliae, illustris Comes Norfolk
and Mareschallus Angliae, H. Comes Hereford and Essex, J. Comes de Warewico,
Petrus a Sabaudia, ceterique magnates Angliae, concesserunt in sententiam
Excommunicationis generaliter latam apud Westminster. decimo tertio die Maii, Anno
Regni Regis praedicti 37, in hac forma, viz. Quod vinculo praefatae sententiae
ligentur omnes venientes contra Libertates contentas in Chartis communium
Libertatum Angliae, and de Foresta, and omnes qui Libertates Ecclesiae Angliae,
temporibus Domini Regis and praedecessorum suorum Regni Angliae obtentas and
usitatas, scienter and malitiose violaverint, aut infringere praesumpserint.
And the Record concludes, In hujus rei memoriam, and in posterum veritatis
testimonium, tam Dominus Rex quam praedicti Comites, ad instantiam aliorum and
populi praesentium, (which at that time was the style of a Parliament, and the
manner of passing such Acts) scripto sigilla sua apposuerunt. Rot. Pat. 37 H.
3. M. 12. dorso.

And whereas it was provided by the Confirmat. Chart. c. 4.25 E. 1. and by the
Statute De Tallagio non concedendo, c. 4.34 E. 1. That Excommunication should
twice a year be denounced against the Infringers of Magna Charta. At a Synod
held for the Province of Canterbury in that Kings time, John Peckam Archbishop
of Canterbury enjoined the like Denunciations near four times every year.
Constit. Provinc. tit. De Sententia Excom. And in the Province of York it
obtained three times in a year. Manuale juxta usum Ecclesiae Eboracensis.

By which the exemplary zele of the Bishops in those times against Oppression,
and the violation of the common Rights, and the attempts of absolute and
unlimited power appears; for that they prevented the Temporal Baronage, and
outdid the Parliament it self in defending and guarding the Government of Laws.
By the way we cannot but take notice of Mr. Seldom his mistake in his book De
Synedriis, which he fell into by inserving to his beloved Erastian Hypothesis,
viz. That that Excommunication before mentioned in 37 H. 3. was enacted by
Parliament, whereas it was only confirmed, but pronounced by the Bishops,
though with the seeming good liking of that King: so that the Power of the Keys
was not usurped, but the exercise thereof approved by Parliament; according to
what has been usual, as Grotius observes, Vsum Clavium Divino Juri congruum,
and poenarum injunctionem Canonibus and Legibus consentaneum, summae potestates
solent approbare; atque hoc est Imperiale Anathema, Quod non una Justiniani
lege comprehensum est. Which together with what has been said by us here, will
serve for an Answer to what Mr. Seldom has aggested in his book De Synedriis,
for wresting the Keys out of the hands of the Bishops.

They pretend to a Jus Divinum only, for that which merely concerns their
Spiritual Office; and I cannot for my part suspect them of holding any Opinion
of a Jus divinum in Civil Offices, which are of a Humane Original, because I
can imagine no reason for such an Opinion, though I know it is by some imputed
to them.

By a Thomas of Becket, a Sibthorp, and Manwaring, and a few less-considering
Clergymen in an Age, we are not to conclude the Judgment of the Body of our
Learned Clergy. They assuredly know, as all men in their Wits do believe, that
the Government is de jure, such as it is, and can be no other, nor rightfully
admit any Alteration. That God never made any Commonwealth but one, by his
directive Will, and that only for one Nation (for in these things, he has left
men ordinarily in the Hands of their own Councils, and to their own Prudence)
in which he had no regard to the absolute rightful Sovereignty of Adam's right
Heir, the wildest certainly of all the Paradoxes that this giddy fantastic
Age has produced. The Kentish Knight should have kept his Dream to himself,
until he had found him out, and then have brought him and his Book called
Patriarcha, together to the King: Then I doubt not, but his Majesty would have
provided him his due Reward. But his Book, and the Publishers thereof, deserve
his Majesty's utmost Displeasute: For we are in fear that the Government is
about to be changed, when Books are licensed to prove any thing Lawful in that
kind. And besides, it makes a Charge upon our Divines, that they have a good
liking to the Design; for that they who best understand by their Profession the
jura divina, have not answered it. But to speak the Truth, the Book is not to
be answered: For it is but a fine Essay, how near Nonsense may be made to look
like Sense; and it is truly worth no man's Undertaking.

But whatsoever sinister thoughts some ill affected Men to the Bishops may
conceive of them, we expect, and with reason too, that they will, with equal
Courage to that recorded of their Predecessors, stand up for the Preservation
of the Government, in its true and rightful Constitution. And the rather, for
that the true Religion, their Principal Care, and their Temporal Rights and
Dignities, will inevitably perish in the Change: Nay, perhaps in consequence of
the very Attempt of a Change, except they strenuously for their parts oppose
it. However their Order, will certainly, by their Silence and Indifferency, be
rendered despicable. They will lose all opinion with the People, of their
Sincerity, perform their Functions with no advantage, and lose that share in
the Honors and Affections of the People, that will establish them, and bespeak
them useful and necessary to the Church and state in their several Capacities,
in all after times. That they answer their Trust, and perform that Duty which
they owe to the Public in their several Offices, is that we may justly expect:
And this they will certainly do, though they should be censured, as they were
in K. John's days; or in the Language of the Folio Author, charged to be
clamorous and over-busie Medlers in Matters of State and Government. But to
return;

Is it not a course Artifice, in the Octavo, page 96. that he will so wilfully
mistake the Questioned of the Bishops, being one of the three States, and
representing the Matter; as if the Bishops should have a Negative by
themselves, to stop the passing of any Bill, if they are admitted to be a
distinct State.

CHAP. XXVI.
WHen it is not disputed, or brought into Question, whether they are divided in
their Voting from the Temporal Barons, most certainly they never were; nor was
it ever disputed. Though an obstinate Opinion was maintained from the Time of
E. 2. in the Case of the Spencers, until the Time of E. 5. in the Case of the
Earl of Salisbury, that the Bishops Presence was necessary in Judgments, even
in Capital Causes, which must be allowed a clear Argument for their Right of
Judgment in such Causes. For the Spiritual and Temporal Lords, though two
States, make but one House upon the Reasons aforementioned, according to the
general Understanding and Usage of former Ages. But upon this Supposition, he
tells us of several Bills that gave furtherance to the Reformation, to which
the Bishops did not assent, and would never have passed, if they had had a
Negative upon them. But by his Favor, these Instances of his, are great
Arguments of those Bishops their Sincerity: For they must needs be under great
and violent Prejudices: Besides, every great man (as the Author of the Letter
well knows) is apt to value himself, and cares not to be accounted a light man;
and the higher in place, the more unwilling to be found in a Mistake; and they
are not content, if Old Men,

Quae juvenes dedicere senes perdenda fateri. There is good Hopes therefore,
that our Rightfully Reformed Bishops will be the last that will give up the
Cause of Reformed Christianity, and will not be outdone by the Popish Bishops
in Constancy, when they have a better Cause.

I must likewise take notice to do the Spiritual Lords Justice, of the Behavior
of the Gentleman in Folio toward the Bishops. He takes notice, and that
dutifully, of the Satirical (so he calls it) Language of the Pamphleteers
against the Court, and the greatest Scurrilities with which the House of
Commons are aspersed; but has not heard, sure, of any against the Bishops, and
the whole Ecclesiastical Order: For he makes not the least mention of any such:
But because they shall not escape (besides that, in his Book he declaims (...),
against the Order, and seems so fond of this Office, that he forbids all other
the use of the Cart) he tells the Story of Hephestion and Craterus, the one of
which loved Alexander, and the other the King. By this Apologue, I doubt not,
but he intended a Slander; and to signify thereby supprestly, a lewd Reproach,
viz. that the Bishops are not true Servants of the King and Government, but of
themselves; than which a falser thing, I hope, cannot be said, nor a more
malicious thing imagined, if not true: For he may know, that they are better
men in their true Character, than his Loyal Patriots, that are true to the
King, and House of Commons: For they have, I doubt not, I am sure they ought to
have a care of the whole Government in the Integrity of its Constitution.

The Bishops well know how much the People are concerned in the Greatness of
the House of Lords, which establishes the Throne, and makes, and supports the
King Great; and by their Power and Interest, make his Government equal; to
which they contribute no small Share; for to them is entrusted, by the
Authothority of our Lord Christ, the Conduct of Religion, and that mighty and
momentous Office, has commended them, and advanced them to the State of
Peerage; and will continue them in great Authority with the People, as long as
the Nation continues in any degree Religious. The Temporal Baronage cannot want
them in the Support of that mighty Province that belongs to that House. In them
the People will find their Interest, as long as they can value Wisdom and
Religion, that is, as long as they are Christian Men; and by them the Kingly
Office will find it self served, as long as true Religion and Wisdom can
minister to the Support of Government, and wise and good men under the greatest
Trust, and in the highest Dignity in the Government, can be fit Counselors and
Ministers of State.

The Octavo has also a hint to this purpose: for page 30. where he brings in
the Case of Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, when all the Bishops
made Sir Thomas Piercy their Procurator, he says, That uniting in one man,
argued a great Unanimity in the Voting of the Prelates; which seems, says he,
has ever been. The meaning of this is a sly Disparagement of the Bishops in
their Voting, viz. that have one Common Tie and Dependency upon the Crown, that
determines them to their Interest, and produces the Unanimity of Voting.

But are the Bishops more depending, because they once for all received their
Temporalities from the King, than the Temporal Lords, who are commoly Officers
of State, and otherwise depend upon their Prince's Favor? Is not the Bishops
Advancement rather a Reward to their Eminent Services, performed in the matter
of Religon, of the greatest Importance certainly to the State, and a
Recognition of the excellent Character of those men that are preferred to that
Office, than a Bribe upon their Actings, after they have that Favor irrevocable.

Do not we know that the Services of Churchmen are rewardable upon the
Churches Stock, and that the King need not impair the Royal Treasure, to pay
Thanks to Episcopal Men, whose Worth does bespeak the Royal Favor to that
Preferment and Advancement? Are not the Temporalities of the Church, the King's
only to give, but not to retain? What evil Prejudice or Obligation can this be
to any man, to serve the King unfaithfully, who has chosen him perhaps, though
there were others but as equally fit for that Office: For we ought to suppose
no other disposition of those Dignities, than what is just and fit in our
general Discourses, however things are administered in particular Cases.

Is not this an Office, together with its maintenance, of the Provision of the
Law, and not of the King.

But to remove that Scandal of their Unanimity, in voting, which some have
reproached with a scoffing Term of a dead Weight, it may be considered, that
Men of the best Judgments and Honesty mostly agree: That Variety of Judgments
proceeds oftener from Passion and Interest, than from Difficulty of the matter
debated. It mostly grows, either from want of Integrity, or want of Judgment.
Agreement in Votes, is an Argument therefore of true Judgment, and unbiassed
Integrity: As it is also farther, of a good Correspondence amongst themselves,
of previous Debates, and more mature Deliberation. Besides, that it is no
unusual thing in difficult and lubricous Affairs, for many to compromise the
matters to a few, or to the Majority of their own Numbers, and abide the Result
of the major part.

But because this matter of Exception to the Integrity of my Lords the Bishops,
in the great Affair now in Agitation, is argumentum ad hominem, and gives
Prejudice to the true Right and Merits of the Cause; and is the most prevalent
and hopeful Argument, if not the only one that our Adversaries can rely upon:
For whatever the Causa justifica, or Pretense be, for the espousing of any
Opinion, or part of any Controversy, if the Causa suasoria, the Inducement,
and true moving cause thereto be strong and persuasive, the slightest Reasons
will be a pretense for Confidence, and the smallest Color of Right, shall
prevail finally, and in the last Issue, especially where the Parties concerned
must judge; or by their Power, can make their Will, and determinate Resolves,
to obtain to the biggest purposes. I will therefore farther add, that we well
know what a high Esteem their true Character does deserve.

That they are intended the Light of the World, the Salt of the Earth: If the
Salt has lost its Savor, wherewith shall it be Seasoned? And if our Light be
darkened, how great is our Darkness. The Bishops know, that the World will not
be kept in Order, by mere Designations of Trust, but by Execution of their
Trusts, not by abstract of Characters, unless they are put on, and effectively
worn. The World will not be put off, that there is no Provision made in the
Government for reasonable Expectancies of all that can make a People happy, if
we are disappointed in our just Expectations. They know for what high Ends they
are advanced to their Secular Dignities, what was it that has thus advanced
them. Was it not the reasonable Expectation that Christian Princes and
Governors conceived of their excellent Virtues, that they would out-doe all
mankind in firm Constancy, a vast and extensive Charity, unrelenting Fortitude,
inflexible Justice, unmovable Faith and Loyalty, and unbyassed Sincerity? What
Temptations can their Lordships have, that they should not, or we Reasons to
believe, that they will not put forth all those Christian Virtues in Heroical
Degrees, which the World will not give them leave to exert only in common
measures? They will find it necessary sure to be now Confessors for the Support
and Happiness of a poor distracted Nation, a vast and great People. They will,
no doubt, subdue the Greatest Potentate to Justice (if there be any such) who
has unhinged the Government, and sap'd the very Foundations of our
Constitution, and will never consent to the Pardon of such Sins, that are not
to be pardoned in this World, nor in the World to come.

Can they suffer the true Christian Religion, of which they are the chief
Ministers and Curators, to perish by their timidity and cowardice? Can they
suffer a great People committed to their charge, to be destroyed into an
Anarchy, and desert that Prince whose Beneficiaries they are, and not interpose
for the saving of him and his Government, by faithful and wise Counsel?

To suppose such things as are morally impossible is unreasonable, and to fear
where no fear is. For they, if they were wholly secular, and were guided by
nothing but a secular Interest, can consider that the world is impatient of
disappointments. That they hate nothing more than deceits and abuse of trusts,
and that he that falls short, and goes less than a just expectation, falls into
the lowest and vilest contempt and deepest scorn.

But this is not a time sure to lessen the Prelates, to take from the Bishops
any just advantage or honor, when that the contempt in this later age thrown
upon them, and the whole Order Ecclesiastical, and the mischiefs that have
naturally ensued thereupon, have brought our Nation, Religion, and Government,
to a most miserable state, a most desperate plunge, out of which I pray God we
may be able to emerge.

The Contempt of the Bishops and Clergy made the People despise the public
Establishment, choose Teachers not much wiser than themselves: And they have
thereupon multiplied vain Opinions and Divisions, and true Christianity, is
scarce had in any Consideration. Atheism and Profaneness upon this Stock, is
come to an enormous Growth, which thrives the faster, by the vain Opinions and
Immoralities of the mistaken Religionists, by which the Atheists take the
Measures of true Christianity; and in Consequence of this, Popery is arrived to
a vast Increase in Power and Interest, and threatens us, and the little Remains
of true Reformed Christianity with an utter Overthrow. The true Christian
Religion is not generally understood, and has lost almost all Credit and
Belief in a Christian Nation.

So that it seems to me, upon the Consideration of our present State, almost
necessary, that the Truth of the Christian Faith should be again demonstrated
in Flames to this Infidel, flagitious and degenerate Age, that the Stains of
the Christian Religion must be washed off by the Blood of the Sincere
Professors. That the true Faith should be better understood, as it will be by
dying Thoughts, and vain Opinions, be destroyed, and burn up like Hay and
Stubble, in the Fire of Persecution: For then we shall understand what it is
that is worth dying for, and that which is not worth dying for, is not worth
disputing and dividing for in our Christian Communions, with breach of Charity.
Then our Guides, the Holy Order of Bishops, and other Faithful Pastors of the
Church, may show their Sincerity, and appear of what Value they are of in the
Conduct of Souls, by their wise Apologies and Noble Confessions and Martyrdoms
for the true Christian Faith, and recover a due place in the Peoples Reverence
and Esteem for their Successors. And if God, in all his wise Providence and
Care, which will never be wanting to his true Religion, shall think it
necessary by this means to recover and restore it, let this Fiery Trial come,
let it come.

And then, I doubt not, but we shall have our (...) and (...), used in
Scrripture, for the Prelates of the Church, to signify the high Esteem they
had of them, and are the same with Leaders, Captains and Commanders, many
Cranmers, Ridleys, and Latimers, leading up their Troops of Confessors, and a
Noble Army of Martyrs, who will again seal the Christan Religion with their
Blood; and a more Glorious Church shall recover out of the Ashes of this.

But God grant that we may dispose our selves by more easy Methods, to recover
out of our sickly Estate, when we know our Disease, and may be cured by more
gentle Remedies. But I am sure, that nothing can save our Nation and Religion,
but an excellent Clergy, and a high Esteem of them amongst the Laity. And for
this Reason, I have earnestly concerned my self for the Bishops Right, of
judging in Capital Causes in Parliament, that they may want no Capacity of
making a gasping Nation live; and thereby of recovering themselves and their
Order into a high Veneration, that they may more effectually administer to the
Advancement of God's True Religion and Virtue, and making this Kingdom happy
for Succeeding Generations,

THE POSTSCIPT.

The POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
I Now render you my hearty thanks for your free advise, you gave me concerning
the publishing of the Argument, for the Bishops Right of Judging in Capital
Causes in Parliament, and for asserting their civil Honors and Rights in the
Government. Because it has given me an occasion, both of vindicating the most
of the Inferior Clergy, from those Imputations which you have remembered to me,
and are commonly discoursed to their disadvantage, whereby they have lost their
Esteem with the People, and also of rectifying the mistakes of some; for their
number is not great, who have given too much cause therein of public
complaints.

You diswade me from giving any assistance to the Rights of the present
Bishops; for, that the Clergy out of whom the Bishops must be made, have
entertained Principles that are destructive to the Government. They affirm (you
say) That it is in the power of a Prince, by Divine Right, to govern as he
pleases, that the power of the Laws is solely in him; that he may if he
please, use the consent of Parliaments to assist the reason of his Laws, when
he shall give any, but it is great condescension in Kings to give a reason for
what they do, and a diminution to their most unaccountable Prerogative. You
say, That they are for a Popish Successor and no Parliament, and do as much as
in them lies, give up our ancient Government and the Protestant Religion, the
true Christian Faith to the absolute will of a Popish Successor, giving him a
Divine Right to extirpate God's true Religion established amongst us by Law,
and to evacuate our Government by his absolute pleasure.

Our Government by a King and Estates of Parliament, is as ancient as any thing
can be remembered of the Nation. The attempt of altering it in all ages
accounted treason, and the punishment thereof reserved to the Parliament by 25.
Ed. 3. The conservancy of the Government being not safely to be lodged any
where, but with the government it self. Offenses of this kind not pardonable by
the King, because it is not in his power to change it. This is our Government,
and thus it is established, and for ages and immemorial time has thus
continued; a long Succession of Kings have recognized it to be such; And just
now when we are under the dread of a Popish Successor, some of our Clergy are
illuminated into a mystery, that has been concealed from the beginning of
Governments to this day, from the wisdom of all Princes and Ministers of State.
That any authority in the Government not derived from the King, and that is not
to yield to his absolute Will, was rebellious and against the Divine Right and
Authority of Kings in the Establishment, against which no usage or prescription
to the contrary, or in abatement of it, is to be allowed. That all Rights are
ambulatory, and depend for their continuance upon his pleasure. So that though
the Reformation was made here by the Government established by Law, and has
acquired civil Rights not to be altered, but by the King and the three Estates.
These men yet speak (say you) as if they envied the Rights of their own
Religion, and had a mind to reduce the Church back again into a state and
condition of being persecuted, and designed she should be stripped of her Legal
Immunities and Defensatives, and brought back to the deplorable helpless
condition of Prayers and Tears, do utterly abandon and neglect all the
Provisions that God's providence has made for her protection. Nay, by this
their new Hypothesis, they put it by Divine Right into the power of a Popish
Successor; when he pleases at once by a single indisputable and irresistible
Edict, to destroy our Religion and Government. And these opinions, you say,
they are the more inclined to entertain; For, That they believe no Plot, but a
Presbyterian Plot; for, of them they believe all ill, and call whom they please
by that hated name, and boldly avow that Popery is more eligible than
Presbytery; for by that they shall have greater revenues, and more Authority
and Rule over the Laymen.

This is a heavy charge if true, but it is imputable (I am sure) but to a few,
and not so generally, as some malevolent men of the Popish Faction are
industriously busy to have it. For if it were, I confess, it might choque the
constancy, Resolution and Zeal of the most addicted, to the service of the
Church men, and make them at least very indifferent in their concerns. For
these mistakes are so gross and inexcusable, that they ought to be permitted to
suffer the smart of their own follies, and to be corrected by the evils they
are drawing down upon themselves, with their own hands. They deserve to suffer
as betrayers of their own Country, and to be prosecuted with greater shame and
ignominy, by all of the Reformed Religion, than the Traditores were by the
ancient Christians. These their diserting of the true Christian Faith, being
much less excusable then that of theirs, and of greater mischief, as of deeper
malignity.

How many of the Clergymen are thus misled we know not, but they seem many
more than they are, because they are most in view, and come often under
observation, frequent public houses, and talk loud, because they want the
Complement of their preferments.

But certainly Sir, what you say to be the declared opinions of some
Clergymen, is the business now of the Papists to propagate.

Hoc Ithacus velit and magno mercantur Atridae.

These are agreeable to, and indeed make up the most modern Project and Schem
of the Popish Plot.

Since the discovery of their first design of killing the King, and massacring
of the Protestants. They have taken such courage by observing how little power
we have to prevent their design, that they have us in scorn, and in the vilest
contempt.

They now think that we are not worth destroying, but by our own hands, that we
are not worthy of their trouble, or the charge of Executioners of their
providing. How entertaining is it to his Holiness, to find the Church of
England, the impregnable Bulwark of the Reformed Religion, easily fall into his
hands, by the unpresidented folly of some of her Sons, without the trouble of
attacking her, either by force or Argument, which has hitherto wanted success,
and the attempts always attended with dishonor, and mischief to his See. How
pleasant will it be to him to see us perish, and our destruction to be from our
selves. With this he will answer all the irrefragable Apologies of the Church
of England, for her departure from the Communion of the Romish Church. Then he
will say with triumph, our Church destroyed her self, and perished by a Divine
Fate, for her unwarrantable and Sacrilegious Schism; for so he will call our
follies, and impute them to Divine infatuations. The manner of our destruction
will be a better Argument, and of more force against the Doctrine of the
Reformation, than all the Arguments of all the Doctors of that Church to this
day.

For this purpose, since the Discovery of the Popish Plot, it is that Sir
Robert Filmers Books were Reprinted together, and recommended by the Title
Page and the public Gazet to our reading. Since the Discovery of the Plot, we
have had variety of Books Printed to the same purpose; viz. To prove that all
Kings as Kings are absolute by Divine Right. Since the Discovery of the Popish
Plot, we have had men employed to search all our ancient Records and Histories,
to find out something more ancient than our Parliaments as now constituted,
that it may serve as a pretense to take them away. Since the Discovery of the
Popish Plot, we have the memory of our late calamitous War revived, to raise a
Pannick fear of another, and to make the King believe that the genius of the
Nation is Rebellious, and that the Protestant Religion it self is to be
apprehended by Kings.

It is difficult to tell how that late unhappy War began, or how it came to
issue so Tragically in the Death of the Late King, though we know how it ended,
viz. The Nation recovered within twelve years after the most deplored Death of
that excellent King into a renowned Loyalty, and in spite of a great Armed
Power, never before foiled, ever victorious, then kept on foot for the interest
of a very few men, restored our present King (may his Reign be long and happy)
to the Government of his Kingdoms, without the least assistance of any of the
Cavalier party, and obliged a wary General in the head of a factious and
republican army to Loyalty.

Nay within that time also, the Nation had recovered out of their partial Lapse
into Fanaticisme, bread up great numbers of excellent Scholars, who masterd
the prejudices of those times, were reverenced by the chief of the Presbyterian
party, and are the beauty and strength of the Church of England at this time.

The Presbyterians themselves were grown reconcilable to the Church of
England, and had learnt by woeful experience the mischievousness of Schism,
upon no better pretenses than what then might have been satisfied and
accommodated.

When the King and Church were restored, Fanaticisme had expired, if some old
peevish and stiff Churchmen had not studied obstacles against a universal
accommodation, and some crafty Statesmen had not projected that the continuance
of the Schism would be of great service some time or other, to destroy the
Church of England, and change our ancient Government, which is now apparently
the Popish Plot, and if ever it be effected, it will be with this trick of
affrighting the Church of England with the apprehension of Fanaticisme, and
making them suspicious of Parliaments. As many of them as are drawn into an
opinion of the disloyalty of our late Parliaments, the illusions of the Popish
Plot has passed upon them, and they are under the power of its fascinations.
But both the Loyalty of the late Parliaments, and also how much it imports the
Plotters to have it believed that they design upon the present Government, will
at once be clearly understood; if it be considered what has been done for the
forging of a Protestant Plot, (which was intended at the first opening to
extend to the House of Commons) Things so wicked as would make a virtuous man
ashamed of the age he lives in. But after all endeavors to find witnesses for
their purpose, powerful encouragements and great rewards, they have drawn none
into their assistance, but who are publicly known for Rogues, or who wanted
Bread, or had no Reputation to loose. If the falsehood of this forged Plot had
not been utterly improbable, they might have procured better seeming, and more
credible witnesses. They might sure have found in this age men bad enough, not
already infamous to have testified a probable Lie. But so necessary it is to
the Popish design, that a Protestant Plot be believed that they are not
discouraged at the manifest detection of their conspiracies, perjuries and
subornations; but will still go on as if they had a power to work miracles of
villainy for their Religion, which is no better. Our modern Politicians have
been most observant agreeably to their virtuous make; how frauds, perjuries and
violence have prospered, and succeeded in some particular cases, and have
brought about some designs, imagine such means thoroughly multiplied, to be able
to conquer all things which they design. But these Arts which have had success
by the permission of God, when one Villain has been to destroy another, will
not pass upon the Protestant Religion. Let them seriously in time despair, and
give over such enterprises, For there is no Enchantment against Jacob, nor
Divination against Israel, the Lot of Gods inheritance, and his peculiar Care.
If Mordecai be of the Seed of the Jews, Haman shall fall before him. It is
matter of comfort to us, and despair to the Plotters, that not one of their
Plots yet, but has proved Abortive, or they have been defeated by their very
success.

Besides, pray let it be observed how this Design of lessening our just
confidence in Parliaments, is otherwise carried on and promoted. It is now
become the principal business of the Mercenary Writers for the Plot, to pick up
and cull out all the enormities and irregularities of those times, the Vitia
temporum, and stories of wild pranks of some beastly Fanatical people, that
exceeded the common degeneracy of those ill times, into which the Nation by
undicernable degrees so foully lapsed, to make thereof an ugly Vizard, and this
they clap unduly upon four fifths of the Nation, upon all that love and adhere
to our Government and Religion, to render them suspected of destroying again
the English Monarchy and the Protestant Religion, even for those very
proceedings that they make for preserving both. For the service of Popery
requires, that whosoever opposes it must be branded with Treason and
Fanaticisme; that such delicate persons as are fond of the name of Loyalty,
though they understand not in what it consists; that hate the name of Fanatic,
since it is become as common a name of reproach, as the Son of a Whore; though
they understand not so well what it means, will be sure so to behave
themselves, as to be reckoned for Loyal and not Fanatical, by taking the
measures of the one and the other, according to the new notion of the Plot
Writers, may become theirs with all their idle prattle. But let them make their
best of this foolish sort of men, if that was all they could effect by this
project.

But they design further upon the Nation, viz. to match the fears of Popery,
with a fear as great of the like Evils to those of Forty one, as if these
Plotters had power by their interest to raise a new War, when we have power and
authority in our Government, if it were exerted, to destroy them by Justice.
But these State Mountebanks think it convenient, because the Nation was cast
into a Frenzy in Forty one; therefore now when in perfect health, we are to be
cast into a Lethargy to prevent our relapse, and in the mean time they intend
we should perish insensibly and quietly, that way they design to destroy us.

It is since the Discovery of the Popish Plot, that Popish Mercenaries have
been hired to write virulent Libels against the Church, and bitter invectives
against Fanatics. Out of the same Mint came a villainous Libel, called Omnia
Comesta a Belo against the Church, apt to render the Churchmen suspicious of
another detestable Sacrilege designed. And that loathsome Print entitled the
Committee or Popery in Masquerade. Many parts whereof has no other reason of
belief, but that they have been the Subject of some drunken Rhimes in former
times, but it is in the whole an insufferable Libel against the Nation by its
application to this age.

These Mercenaries are the Authors as well of treasonable Libels against the
King which they form, so as they may seem to come from the Fanatic party, to
render the King jealous of them, as they are of the Libels against the
Parliament and their proceedings, to breed misunderstandings between the King,
Parliament and People.

It is since the Popish Plot was discovered, that Fanaticisme is represented
more intolerable than Popery. That the Popish Plot evident to the satisfaction
of the King and several Parliaments, and of our greatest Judicatures, is yet
told us not to be so certain, as that the Fanatics are Traitors in their
hearts, though they own no principles as the Papists do that warrant
Treasonable practices. And these Mercenaries as frankly, as if they had for the
dividing of the Nation a Warrant so to do, call all Fanatics that oppose
Popery, desire Parliaments, and expect they should use that power that is
lodged in them, to keep out Popery, and preserve our Government, and to bring
to punishment those wicked men, that have notoriously designed to destroy it.
The belief of the Popish Plot in the mean time, is by scoffs and paltry Rhimes,
permitted publicly to be sung in the Streets, put out of Countenance, and
those that believe it exposed as a sort of credulous Fools, or designing Knaves.

Such a vile esteem the Papists now have of us, that they prosecute us with
their scorn, and use us as if we were below their hate. They think our
divisions which they have made have already destroyed us; and they now hire a
sort of Scaramouchy Zanys, Merry Andrews and Jack-Puddings to insult over us,
and make sport at our miseries.

These pleasant Knaves cry with one side of the Face, and laugh with the other,
but in the mean time they cry in jest, but laugh in good earnest. He that had
the art of imitating a grave Spaniard with one side of his body, and a brisk
French man on the other side rendered both Nations ridiculous.

These vain fellows deprave every thing they meddle with, and what ever they
say of Church or State, Religion or Policy, is raillery and abuse and
Pamphleting scurrility.

Lord under what seeming fatality do we labor, that it can be thought to the
Service of the Church or State, to employ such Knaves.

We are used like Samson bound, and our Eyes put out, and made sport for the
Philistims. By these pyd Pipers, our young men are seduced, and danced down a
precipice, though these merry Knaves have not skill enough to commend them for
Rat-catchers; if our City should be infested with that vermin, as they say the
Town of Hammel once was. But the Demon that appeared there a pyd Piper who
destroyed their Children as well as their Rats, was not more mischievous to
that Town, than these motley Knaves are to the Kingdom and Nation.

It is an insufferable indignity, that the tragical State of our Nation should
become almost daily the matter of a Rascally Farse; the very anguish and groans
of the Nation turned into Laughter and Mockery, such a barbarity was never used
to a Nation.

It is an excess of Petulancy, to make abstract misery in the very form of it,
mimically represented matter of Mirth and Laughter.

These men were born out of time, and were fit for no age but that of Nero, of
whose consort they should have been, when he played the Destruction of Troy, to
the Burning of Rome. But I do not doubt but His Majesty's Justice will e're
long overtake these incendiaries, that are so pleasant at the embroilment of
his Kingdom, when it shall be duly represented to him what beautefeau's they
are, and unmerciful deriders of the Calamities of his People, which they
occasion or promote, tho they think they may pass any thing of this kind upon
the Nation made vain, with trifling false wit and Buffoonery.

It is now Twenty years since our Nation was infected with this sort of wit,
and now we are to dye of the disease, and we have a Fiddle provided for us that
have been bit with this venomous Tarantula, to dance and frisk us to our
destruction not to our cure, and yet we pay the Fiddler. This thing wit, the
greatest debauchment of this age has depraved not only the manners, but the
Judgment and understanding of the Nation too. It has been accounted the best
accomplishment of men in place, the best part of the Learning of this last Age:
It is not the reason of the Leviathan, so much as the vanity of wit, that has
propogated atheism and corrupted our manners. This has made our Judgments
insincere and trifling, and our determinate resolutions in matters of the
greatest moment slight and Fantastical introduc't idleness and neglect of
solid Learning, which requires labor and application to obtain, while this
extemporary faculty has been accounted an admired accomplishment.

There is a sort of wit very commendable which Tully calls celeritas in verbis,
and the Greek Epigram, (...), which is a pleasant entertainment in
conversation, and a commendable refreshment, where our minds are tired with
anxious and graver business, and the troubles and cares of human life, but this
ought to observe its times, its proper subjects, it ought to be confined to
Table talk, an evening compotation, and the hours of mirth, and the relaxation
of our mind: It may be used decently in a Comical Farce; but it is not
allowable in Satyr, most undecent is the use of it in Tragedy. But yet it has
insolently interposed in our Politics, governed public Councels, sometimes
determined debates in Parliament, has made our Pulpits contemptible, our
Theology trifling: It is admitted to resolve the greatest Questions and
determine Cases of Conscience, to establish and refix Church Gevernment, has
usurped, an authority to alter and pull down Governments, and to render them
tottering, when they are as firmly established and fixed as a Rock.

That Wit that is abhorred by all men that are wise and honest, is that
versatile shifting, squinting, distorting of the understanding, that it views
nothing truly and represents things not according to their true nature, but
under false Fantastical Schemes, which they affix to them to abuse the
judgments of others, a man can never arrive to any perfection in this faculty,
until he is become false, and lost his truth and modesty, and none but weak
men are entertained with it, and such who do not desire to understand truth,
but to serve a turn and love to be deceived, and deceive themselves for
advantage, it is in perfection in old Knaves, and admired by young Coxcombs: It
is the Hypocrisy of the Tongue, a plausible mode of lying and slandring, and
at best but a pleasant Knavery.

It will render ridiculous or culpable by false representations the most noble
and heroical actions, and put false colors upon most detestable Villainies. It
can discredit a man by honoring him, and make a thing incredible by the very
mode of believing it, making a man ridiculous, it concludes him at the same
time unworthy, and to confute the most avowed Truths, there needs no more than
to raise a fit of laughter upon it, which has the same effect with the men of
Wit, and their vain admirers as reducing a false proposition to an absurdity:
Thus the reason of this age is governed by our risibility. The Popish Writers
have thus tickled us with their Wit, that we are ready to dye and perish
laughing, and we know not, nor care to Judge what does truly concern our
preservation. And by improving the vanity of some youngsters, they have drawn
them to question the Truth of the Popish Plot, and some can believe every hour
of the day when they meet with a merry Popish Pamphlet that there is a
Protestant Plot on foot; though they believe it, I am sure not much longer than
they are reading it.

I will not grudge my pains in furnishing a short Demonstration of the Popish
Plot, since it is of such importance to the saving of these men and the whole
Nation, which possibly may fix their minds (notwithstanding so vain they be)
into a belief of it, which I have made short that it may be the better
remembered, which I do in kindness to them, since it was lately (and may be so
again shortly) a criminal matter to bring the truth of it into question, and
they are by all honest men reckoned as Plotters themselves who doubt it.

The Plot has been declared by the Kings Proclamation, and four Parliaments,
one of them consisting of Pensioners and Dependents on the Court, which for
eighteen years together, were giving Demonstrations of their Loyalty to their
Prince, almost forgetting the public Weal: A solemn National Fast has been
Indicted by the Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority of the Kingdom, for averting
the mischiefs thereby designed, and solemnly Celebrated by the whole Nation, in
which certainly they did not mock God and deride his providence.

Many unparalleld Villainies have been committed for the stifling, concealing
and suppressing the discovery of it, which (however wicked the Papistical sort
of base, false and degenerate Christians are) we cannot without breach of
Charity toward them, think they would commit cheaply, and without cause, and
to no purpose. They have murdered a Minister of Justice, because he had the
knowledge of it, and left nothing undone that they thought necessary to
Assacinate another for strenuously opposing it. They have attempted upon the
Lives of our Witnesses, by perjuries and forgeries, they have endeavored to
charge them with the most infamous crimes, endeavored to destroy them in their
Lives and Reputations too in a form of Justice. They have attempted by fears
and rewards upon the integrity of all our Witnesses, to draw them to retract
their Testimony against the Plot, for which some of their Agents have been
judicially censured; One Gentleman to the Pillory, Fined a 1000 l. and
Condemned to a years imprisonment, so evident and notorious was his offense,
and by the Court thought so heinous: That it provoked the passion of the Court,
and they seemed to exceed the ordinary Rules of Justice, for that they judged
the Case to be of an exorbitant and transcendent nature. The Plot of the Meal
Tub is so sublimated a piece of wickedness, the last accomplishment of villainy,
it has outdone all former, and will never be outdone in after ages. The
Papists by the Discovery of the first Plot became less hopeful in a Massacre,
and of effecting their purpose by force: They dare not now kill the King, for
that the World would not now believe it to be done by Mr. Claypole and his
accomplices, which must have born the blame from the Papists, and he and they
long since Executed as Traitors, if that part of the Plot against the Kings
Life, had not been prevented by being detected.

I say the first design of the Plot being rendered less feasible by the
discovery, they keep the King alive with care as well for their avoiding the
rage of the Nation, as to lessen the credit of the Plot: But contrive to
destroy as many as they thought fit to be Massacred in form of a legal
process, and to charge them with a design of raising Rebellion against the
King: They had made a List of a great number, whom they intended to charge
principal Nobles and worthy Gentlemen about the Town, had prepared witnesses to
swear the charge against them, and would with more ease after the first
Conviction and Execution, have sworn all that they had a mind to destroy into
the same guilt. And thus all the truly Religious, the noble, good and virtuous
of our Nation, that had courage enough to own, assert and defend the true
Christianity, and our Government must to the eternal dishonor of our Nation and
Religion, have suffered the execrable death of Traitors. We have reason to
think them humane, when they only designed a Gunpowder Treason or a Massacre,
and our abhorrence of this usage discharges in us all reluctance to Martyrdom:
Let them bring us to the Stake as Martyrs, then we shall bear our Testimony to
the truth of the best Religion, and our Lives will not be cheaply lost; but by
this means we must be forced to dishonor this Religion by our deaths, by a
Massacre or a Gunpowder Plot, the vileness, cruelty and treachery of that
Apostate Church, had been declared to all the World, and that false Religion,
as well as the professors of it, had been rendered detestable, for which end a
good man would scarce refuse to dye, but by this means they would have forced
us to personate their own proper Crimes and Villainies, and dishonor our own
peaceable and holy Religion: A man of Honor prefers his Honor to his Life, and
would redeem it by his Death: But by this means we were, though innocent to
lose our Lives by dishonor, and to fasten a stain upon our Memories by our
death. The Priests, their impudent Lies at their deaths in denying the matters
of the Plot, of which they were upon clear evidence Convicted and Sentenced,
must have past for truths, and all our worthy men dying with protestations of
their innocence, must to the everlasting infamy of our Religion and Nation,
been accounted false and impious at their last breath, there is no reason to be
assigned of the patience of God or Man toward such miscreants, but that they
may have time to add one impiety to another, until an easy vengeance triumphs
over them; for though this last mentioned Plot is cleared beyond all exception,
their Faces are hardened, and they are not yet ashamed; but have since
contrived and suborned Witnesses to swear the very Discovery of the first Plot
to be a false contrivance of a Plot against the Papists. To this purpose they
suborned a Son by perjury to commit parricide against his Father, the greatest
Sin against Earth, the other the greatest affront against Heaven; What a
Religion is this that must be thus supported!

Nay, as if they did not fear or care to loose the favor of their most
indulgent Prince, which they have possessed since he chose to trust them rather
than his Protestant Subjects, in making his escape at Worcester; they have
contrived these two last Plots with such Art, as to bring them under His
Majesty's observation, and represented them as things fit for his
encouragement: Sure if they were not urged with the fears of a real guilt, and
a restless Conscience of the Plot, they would never have adventured thus to
have interested the honor of the King, and to tempt him to abandon them to the
public Justice of the Nation, which begins to grow impatient by the delays of
it against this Hellish Plot: For we have had four Parliaments dissolved since
the Discovery of it, one a darling to the Crown. The bringing into question the
Dissolution of that Parliament in the House of Peers, upon the reason of an
unnatural Prorogation, was not long before censured, and some great Lords
imprisoned, therefore proceeding so unwarrantable, that it was after thought
fit by that House to obliterate the Memory of them; so necessary was that
Parliament then thought to the service of the Crown. The Dissolution of that
Parliament gave us reason to fear that the King had no more business for
Parliaments. By these Dissolutions, no public ends that are intelligible are
served, no interest is gratified, no persons of any sort receive their
satisfaction but the Plotters, and the Plot are respited thereby from public
Justice, and gain time to bring the Plot to effect.

This is the end the Papists have served, but the King our great Physician of
State, had another reason that has governed him, for he knew the strength of
the Plot, our Disease, and that a Disease that is dangerous, is sometimes to be
palliated until the season comes to make a through Cure, for it many times kills
the patient to precipitate the Crisis; all these Demonstrations of the Plot are
past under every man's observation.

But that we know so little of it after all this time: It is now above three
years since the first discovery, that the Plotters now ordinarily escape
Justice. That a great Judge did abate his first Zeal in punishing the Plot,
least he should exasperate it, and Reason of State might thus require it.

These things prove the greatness and strength of the Plot as well as the
reality of it, these declare the Plotters interest is great, that the Plot is
yet unbroken, stanch and hopeful, and therefore we are not to believe our
selves well, and live sine Regimine as the Physicians say, but to expect
address to and desire our Cure. And that the Papists think it yet hopeful, is
evident from the Priests and the Lawyer, abjuring their guilt with their last
breath. We had the honest Confessions of the Convicted Priests and other
Traitors, of the Popish Treasons of which they stood Convicted in the time of
Queen Elizabeth, and in the time of King James, of the Gunpowder Treason. What
then could induce our Plotters Convict, to utter most solemn perjuries the next
minute before they were to appear to God? nothing sure but that they then hoped
that the Plot might be executed; they did it for the interest and service of
their Church, and for the better bringing it to effect: For which they dyed,
and for which at their deaths, to conceal, they adventured Heroically upon lies
and perjuries, which if confessed would have been frustrated and become
Abortive: For it must not be believed that that Church is so degenerate, as to
permit and allow men to such impieties, for the punctilio's of honor, though of
the Church it self: But while they are not done for the sake of him that
commits them, but for an important interest of their Church, (such as the
carrying on of this Plot) they say they loose their nature by the direction of
the intention, they become a pure piece of mortification and self denial, an
adventure to trust God in what they do for his sake, and for his service; and
their Casuists will no more call them in this Case lies or perjuries, than
Abraham's offering up his Son Isaac (though that was at Gods express command)
was murder. But the God of Truth, that God who has declared, that when he
himself in any intercourse with Mankind interposeth an Oath, that the matter
under that Oath is irrevocable, peremptory and absolute, cannot license or
dispense with perjurious falsehoods for any end whatsoever.

But I must remark one thing more, and that is, touching the credit of Dr.
Titus Oats, and Capt. William Bedloe, viz. That they have been incurious in
their conversation, have followed their own natural course, allowed themselves
in their passions, have been apert and unreserved, have not cared who they
offended, have sought no man's favor, seem to care for no man's opinion, have
valued and supported themselves only by their veracity, and have seemed to set
all the World at defiance to find a flaw in their evidence, and have had little
of friendship or esteem, but for the sake of their discovery. Besides that so
long a time has not afforded a possibility by all the Artifice, Interest and
unhallowed frauds of Rome, to falsify any one part of that evidence. But
numberless events have given credit and authentickness to their Testimony: Did
ever any feigned Testimony bear it self up with so much Confidence, Bravery and
Assurance? was there ever any false witness that did not endeavor to render
himself acceptable, to bespeak favor which draws after it eredit, and to
appear of the most unexceptionable behavior? Their faults and imprudences such
as they have been, we would not have wanted to make their evidence beyond all
exception.

The undoubted truth of their evidence alone, has given them the civil respect
of all honest men, and will give the Doctor the public honors of the Nation in
due time. I will not recite the innumerable Sham-plots contrived against the
Protestants, every one of them a Demonstration by it self of the trurh of the
Popish Plot, because I have no design to exasperate, but awaken these men that
are asleep and secure in this storm.

This trouble of demonstrating of the Plot, may seem unnecessary to the
judicious, nay to the plain sort of honest, upright and well meaning men; and
so it would certainly have been, had not some young Gentlemen by this paltry
thing called Wit, been corrupted in their judgments, and brought into a
Scepticisme, and wild undetermination in a matter of so great concernment.

This despicable faculty has made a famous Gentleman, who has a liberal dose
of it, a Writer of Books caused him to waste so much Paper, and abuse so many
Readers; but in all that I have read of him, there is nothing true and sincere,
or truly and sincerely said, his Judgment is made false by his Fantasy, or he
has served a turn by his Versatile windings and Wily conceits. That dangerous
faculty that he indulgeth has imposed upon him, which the severe and honest
enquirers after truth, are concerned to mortify and suppress. And I do
earnestly recommend to all ingenious Gentlemen that would be rightly instructed
and informed, neither deceive others, nor would be deceived themselves, as they
love truth and virtue, wisdom and sober thoughts, to despise this sort of wit
in others, and repress it in themselves: And never allow it to be used, but in
the hours of mirth, in the Relaxations of their minds from serious
Contemplations and matters grave and weighty, where this profane thing wit
ought always to be shut out with care.

Enough has been said for rectifying the mistakes of any true Protestant,
especially any Clergyman of the Church of England, which you have objected
against them about Government or Parliament, dissenters from the Church of
England and Popery. Especially when it is made apparent that these mistakes are
made serviceable to the Popish Plot, and the means which that party prosecute
to compass and bring about the ruin of our Church. But that nothing may be
wanting, that lies in my poor power, for pulling their Foot out of the Snare, I
shall more distinctly consider them.

First, I shall desire them to consider what our Government is, and where the
true knowledge of it is to be found: And where can it be found, but in our
Statute Books, the Commentaries of our Law, the Histories of our Government,
and of the Kingdom. Search them if you be at leisure, if you are not, consult
those that have read them, and whose business and employment it is to
understand them, and you cannot fail to be informed.

That the King has no power to make Laws, that both Houses of Parliament must
join with the King in making a Law.

It can with no more reason be concluded that the King has the Legislative
power, because his Assent makes the Bills in Parliament Laws, than it can
because the third Unit added to two makes a Triad, that the other two do not go
to the making of that number, when a matter's moved from the King in Parliament
to pass into a Law the Commons consent last. The Letters Patents of Ed. Sir E.
Cook 8: R.
3. for making the Eldest Son of a King in Succession Prince of Wales, and Duke
of Cornwall was confirmed (as there must have been, otherwise they would have
been void) by the House of Commons. And yet we will not say, that the House of
Commons can make a Prince of Wales or Duke of Cornwall. And yet upon no better
reason than this, some men will talk as if they believed themselves, that the
Legislative power is in the King, when no King of England yet ever pretended to
it; but by their process of Law have punished such officious and mischievous
Knaves.

They will tell you that the Laws are the measures of our Allegiance, and the
Kings Prerogative, and declare the terms of Obedience and Government.

That a Legislative authority is necessary to every Government, and therefore
we ought not to want it; and therefore Parliaments in which our Government has
placed the making of Laws, cannot be long discontinued, nor their Conventions
rendered illusory and in vain, which is all one as to want them.

That to Govern by Laws implies that great fundamental Law, that new Laws
shall be made upon new emergencies, and for avoiding unsufferable mischiefs to
the State. By the Statutes of 4 Ed. 3. c. 14.36. Ed. 3. c. 10. it is provided
that Parliaments be holden once every year. The Statute of this King required a
Parliament every three years, which being an affirmatory Law, does not derogate
from those of Ed. the 3. But if the King does not call a Parliament once in a
year, He neglects these Laws, and if he delays calling a Parliament three
years, he neglects the other Law of his own time to. And for that he is by the
Law entrusted with the calling of Parliaments, He is at liberty to call them
within the times appointed. And that Laws ought to be made for Redress of
mischiefs that may ensue, appears by the Statute of provisors 25. E. 3. cap.
23. In which we have these words.

Whereupon the Commons have prayed our said Sovereign Lord the King, that since
the right of the Crown of England, and the Law of the said Realm is such, that
upon the mischiefs and Damage which happens to this Realm, he ought and is
bound of the Accord of his said People in his Parliament thereof, to make
Remedy and Law in avoiding the mischief and damage, which whereof comes,
which that King agreed to by his Royal Assent thereto given.

I dare be bold to say, that never any Bill in Parliament was lost, and wanted
the Royal Assent that was promoted by the general desires of the people.

If Popery therefore (which is the greatest mischief to us that ever threatened
this Kingdom) can be kept out by a Law, we ought to have such a Law, and
nothing can hinder such a Law to be past for that purpose, but want of an
universal desire to have it. I desire these Gentlemen to consider how they will
answer it to their Savior at the last day, if they suffer his true Religion,
and the professors of it to be destroyed and persecuted, when nothing but their
desires of a thing lawful to be had, and of right due, was requisite to prevent
it. Their sufferings will be just and righteous from God, if their sin
occasioneth it, and very uncomfortable to themselves.

The extent of the Legislative authority, is no where to be understood, but by
our Acts of Parliament in which it has been exercised and used, and by such
Acts that declare the extent of its power, by the 13. Eliz. cap. 1. it is made
Treason during that Queens Life, and forfeiture of Goods and Chattels
afterward. To hold, maintain and affirm, that the Queen by the Authority of
the Parliament of England, is not able to make Laws and Statutes of sufficient
force and validity, to limit and bind the Crown of this Realm, and the descent,
limitation, inheritance and Government thereof. And this authority was
exercised by Entailing the Crown in Parliaments, in the times of Richard the
2d. Henry the 4th. Henry the 6th. Edward the 4th. Richard the 3d. Henry the
7th. thrice in the time of Henry the 8th. and upon the Marriage of Queen Mary
to King Philip of Spain, both the Crowns of England and Spain were Entailed,
whereby it was provided that of the several Children to be begotten upon the
Queen, one was to have the Crown of England, another Spain, another the
Low Countries. The Articles of Marriage to this purpose were confirmed by Act
of Parliament.

Those that are truly Loyal to our present Sovereign, have reason to recognize
with high satisfaction, that such a power of altering and limiting the descent
of the Crown, is duly lodged in the King and States of the Realm: For under the
authority of an Act of Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, we derive our
selves to the happiness of his Government, and and He his title to the Crown of
Scotland, which drew to him the Imperial Crown of England. For Robert Steward
first King of Scotland of that Family, lived in concubinate with Elizabeth
Mure, and by her had three Sons, John, Robert and Alexander, afterward he
Married Eufame Daughter to the Earl of Ross, and after was Crowned King of
Scotland; He had by her Walter Earl of Athol, and David Earl of Straherne. When
Eufame his Wife dyed, he Married Elizabeth Mure. After that by one Act of
Parliament, he made them first Noble, that is to say, John Earl of Carrick,
Robert Earl of Menteith, and Alexander Earl of Buchquhane. And shortly after by
another Parliament, he limited the Crown in Tail Successively to John, Robert
and Alexander his Children by Elizabeth Mure in Concubinate, and after to the
Children of Elizabeth Ross his Legitimate Children; who are to this day in
their issue by this limitation, by authority of an Act of Parliament in
Scotland barred from the Crown, and we hope ever will be, by the continuance of
the Line of our most Gracious King. For note, that though a subsequent Marriage
by the civil Law, which is the Law of Scotland, in such cases does Legitimate
the Children born before Marriage, of a Concubine; yet it is with this
exception, that they shall not be Legitimated to the prejudice of Children born
afterward in Marriage, and before the Marriage of the Concubine. Besides the
reason of the Civil Law in Legitimating the Children upon a subsequent
Marriage, is this, viz. a presumption that they were begotten affectu maritali,
which presumption fails where the man proceeds to Marry another woman, and
abandons or neglects his Concubine.

But I desire these Gentlemen that are so unwilling to be safe in their
Religion, which I believe is most dear unto them.

That if any Law should exceed the declared measures of the Legislative
authority, though in such Case they may have leave to doubt of the lawfulness
of such a Law, yet if it be not against any express Law of God, they will upon
a little consideration, determine it lawful, if it be necessary to the
Commonweal, for that nothing can be the concerns of men united in any Polity,
but may be governed and ordered by the Laws of their Legislature, for public
good; for by the reason of all political societies, For further satisfaction of
the lawfulness of the bill of exclusion. See a Book called The great and
weighty Consideration considered.
there is a submission made of all Rights, especially of the Common Rights of
that community, to the Government of its own Laws.

But all this and a hundred times as much will not satisfy some Gentlemen, of
the lawfulness of our Government, and the extent of the Legislative power of
Parliaments; since they have entertained a Notion, that Monarchy is jure
divino, unalterable in its descent by any Law of man, for that it is subject to
none. That all Kings are alike absolute, that their Will is a Law to all their
Subjects. That Parliaments and the states of the Realm, in their Conventions
can be no more than the Monarcks Ministers acting under and by his appointment,
which he may exauctorate and turn out of Office when he pleases. For there can
be (say they) under the Sun no obliging Authority but that of Kings (to whom
God has given a plenitude of power) and what is derived from them: That this
Divine Absoluteness may Govern, and exercise Royal power immensely, and that it
is subject to, nor to be abated or restrained by any humane inventions or
contrivances of men: (however necessary and convenient Kings have thought them
in former Ages) by such methods and such offices and Officers (of which number
the States of the Realm may be, or not be, as Kings shall please) as they shall
by their absolute Will order or appoint. Our Parliaments, say they, are
Rebellious and an Usurpation upon the unbounded Power of Kings, which belongs
to every King as such jure ordinario, and by Divine institution. That a mixed
Monarchy as ours is, is an Anarchy, and that we are at present without a
Government, at least such as we ought to have, and which God has appointed and
ordained for us: That we by adhering to the present Government are Rebels to
God Almighty, and the Kings unlimited Power and Authority under him, which no
humane constitution, no not the Will and Pleasure of Kings themselves can limit
or restrain. For that jura ordinaria and divina non recipient modum, That the
Legislative Power is solely in the King, and that the business of a Parliament
(if they would think of being only what they ought to be) is only to declare on
the behalf of themselves and the people (that send them for that purpose
certainly) the obedience that is due from them to such Laws as the K. shall
make, and that they may be laid aside wholly when he pleases. And after all
this, what matter's it with them what we say, our Government is, has been, or
where the Legislative Authority of the Nation is placed, or how used.

But I desire these Gentlemen to consider how they come to these Notions, upon
what reason they are grounded. How a Government established by God and Nature
for all Mankind, should remain a secret to all the wise, good, just and
peaceable men of all Ages. That Kings should not before this have understood
their Authority, when no pretenses are omitted for increase of power and
enlargement of Empire. I desire them to consider that this secret was not
discovered to the World before the last Age, and was a forerunner of our late
unnatural War, and is now again revived by the republishing of Sir Robert
Filmers Books, since the Discovery of the Popish Plot.

I wish they would consider that the reasons ought to be as clear and evident
as Demonstration, that will warrant them to discost from the sense of all
Mankind, in a matter of such weight and moment.

That to mistake with confidence and overweening in this matter, will be an
unpardonable affront to the Common sense of Mankind, and the greatest Violation
of the Laws of modesty. I desire that they would consider and rate the
mischiefs that will certainly ensue upon this opinion, and whether a probable
reason can therefore support it.

That they would thoroughly weigh, ponder and examine the Reasons of these bold
and new Dogmata. For their enquiries ought to be in proportion diligent and
strict, as the matter is of moment, and if they are not, their error and
mistake will be very culpable, and the sin of the error aggravated to the
measure of the mischief which it produces and occasioneth.

Where is the Charter of Kings from God Almighty to be read or found? for
nothing but the declared Will of God can warrant us to destroy our Government,
or to give up the Rights and Liberties of our people. If they are lawful, I am
sure it is villainy to betray them, since all political Societies are framed
that all may assist the Common Rights of all. I cannot imagine they can pretend
an umbrage from the Holy Scriptures for such unheard of opinions.

The Jews indeed had a Government, and Laws of Gods framing and appointment,
and a King of their own choosing, and such a King as they desired by God's
permission they had. But their form of Government ought with less reason to be
the Rule of all kingly Governors, because it was a Government chosen by
themselves, then the Laws of the Jews ought to be the Laws of all Nations
(which they are not) though made and enacted by God himself.

Christ would not make himself a Judge in a private Right submitted to him. He
determined the right of the Roman Empire, by the possession of Sovereign
Authority, and such as the whole world had made it, his Disciples were obliged
to acknowledge it, by their Obedience and Submissions, which is the sum of the
Apostles Doctrine in this matter.

The Christian Religion instituted no form of Governments, but enjoins us to be
obedient to those we have, not only by express command in the case, but by its
general Rules of a most refined, improved and extensive morality.

But though I said the Scriptures have not prescribed or directed any universal
Form of Government, yet the Scripture has declared the falsehood of this new
Hypothesis of Kingly Government to be Jure Divino, or by Divine Right. For St.
Peter 1 Peter 2.13. and 14. styles Kings as well as the Governors under him the
ordinance of man, which cannot have any other sense, but that men make them and
give them their powers. By St. Paul the power of Government indeed is called
Gods Ordnance Romans 13.2. but that is, for this reason, because in general God
approves of Governments, as necessary to the well being of Mankind, for the
improvement of humane nature, for the punishing of Vice, Encouragement and
security of virtue, without them it being impossible to live honestly and in
peace. And he has made them the under Ministers of his providence and care
over Mankind, and expects of them, that they should promote his true Honor and
Worship in the World, which will be always accompanied with the exercise of all
civil Virtues. These two different places must be so understood, that they may
be both true, and by no other interpretation can they be reconciled and made
consistent.

It is impossible, that any thing can be of man's appointment, which is of Gods
Ordination, there can be no such thing, as a Co-legislative power of Men with
their Maker, Government therefore is from God, as he has made Governments
necessary in the general order of things, but the specification thereof is from
Men, and the best definition that can be made of Government is, in the words of
both the Apostles put together (...), and such Governments, which men make God
approves and requires our obedience to them upon all those reasons, which make
Governments necessary.

The natural and easy consequence and result of these Scriptures is this,
which I desire those Gentlemen to observe. That whatsoever is not lawfully
established by men, no Law of God not the Christian Law does oblige us to obey.
The Christian Religion does equally condemn in the reason of its Institutions,
Usurpation, and Contumacy. Where the Apostle admonishes us, that if we be free
we should not become servants, he has by virtue of that Admonition, made it
commendable not to suffer the Encroachments of power over us. Most certainly
therefore as the Christian Religion does not prejudice the Sovereign Rights of
Princes, such as they are in the several forms and Modells of Monarchical
Governments, non eripit terrestria qui regna dat coelestia as Sedulius, so does
it not enlarge them; when by the Gospel God made us free from his own positive
Laws to the Jews, he did not intend thereby de Jure, to render us slaves to the
Arbitrary pleasure of Men.

No Man intends by any thing in the Scripture, that all mankind is obliged to
any one form of Government, and therefore all Men are left to their own. It
has not therefore altered the terms of Government and Obedience, that every
Nation has Established for themselves, but has confirmed and strictly obliged
the observance of them.

To Obedience, to Government; we are obliged by as many ties as there are
Christian Virtues, and he must disown his Christianity, that departs from his
due Allegiance. And since our Savior is declared King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, all Kings, Christian Kings especially, are to govern in Imitation of his
mercy and goodness, and in subserviency to the Interest of his Religion and
Kingdom.

Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos imperium est Javis,
cuncta supercilio moventis.
Whence then is this absolute Authority of Kings, if it come neither from God
nor Man.

Give me leave now to inform you, that these opinions render you all Traitors,
guilty of Treason of State, perduellionis rei obnoxious to be punished as
Traitors by an Authority lodged in Parliament, In the Constitution of the
Government.

You your selves must needs condemn your selves to have forfeited all your own,
who hold such Principles, that tend to destroy every Man's Right, by resolving
all things into the absolute pleasure of a Monarch, in which you mostly
disserve the King, and are contrary to His Majesty's late Declaration. The Men
of these Principles the less of the Government, they are entrusted with the
better, for the less they have to give up and betray. I confess, if I could
believe, that this Doctrine was become Orthodox among them, and the prevailing
opinion of the Clergy, I should conclude us to be the most unhappy people under
the Sun. This is an Hypothesis indeed, that will bring on new Heavens and a new
Earth, but such wherein no peace or Righteousness can ever dwell. But I deem
all such as are Defenders and Promoters of it, do deserve a civil
Excommunication, more smarting then their Ecclesiastical, and to be condemned
to live upon, and only feed themselves with their thin speculations, and to be
excluded from any share of that Government, that they professedly in their
Principles betray, to be punished as seditious persons, and most mischievous
Schismatics, far more intolerable in this matter than the scrupulous
brotherhood, for their boglings at an indifferent and insignificant Ceremony.
For that to the ruin of our Religion and destruction of the public peace, they
divide from that polity, to which by drawing here their first breath, they made
Faith, and to which the condition of their birth does oblige them, they falsify
that which Arrian in his Epictetus calls the (...) than which nothing is more
sacred and inviolable.

By creating themselves a new Allegiance, and obtruding it upon their fellow
Citizens, and Members of the same Kingdom, they set up a Kingdom within a
Kingdom, more dangerous and mischievous than the Papal Imperium in Imperio,
which certainly will be introduced, if this Modern, and monstrously extravagant
opinion can prevail by a general Credence.

It is criminal, and no less dangerous to the being of any policy to restrain
the legislative Authority, and to entertain Principles, that disables it to
provide remedy against the greatest mischiefs, that can happen to any
Community. No Government can support it self without an unlimited Power, in
providing for the happiness of the people: No Civil establishment but is
controlable and alterable to the public Weal. What ever is not of Divine
Institution, ought to yield and submit to this Power and Authority.

The Succession to the Crown is of a civil nature, not established by any
Divine Right. Several Kingdoms have several Laws of Succession, some are
Elective, others Haereditary under several Limitations. All humane
Constitutions are made tum sensu humanae imbecillitatis, under reasonable
exceptions of unforeseen accidents and Emergencies, that may happen in humane
Affairs, and so they must be intended and so interpreted. The several
limitations of the descent of the Crown, must be made by the people in
conferring the Royal Dignity and power which is more or less in several
Kingdoms.

The descent of the Crown is governed according to the presumed will of the
People, and the presumption of the peoples will, is made by measuring, and
considering what is most expedient to the public good, whereas private Estates
are directed in their descent according to the descendents. And this is the
reason that the descent of the Crown is governed by other rules than private
Estates. Only one daughter, and not all as in private Estates, shall succeed to
the Crown, because the strength of the Kingdom is preserved when continueds
united, and the peace and concord of the people better Established. A son of
the second venture shall inherit, which is not allowed in private Estates,
because a son of the second venture is equally of the blood of the great
Ancestor, upon whom the Crown was first conferred by the people, or after he
had got into the Throne obtained their Submissions, and may equally participate
of his Virtues.

If the Royal Family be extinct, it belongs to the people to make a new King,
under what limitations they please, or to make none; for the Polity is not
destroyed if there be no King created, and consequently in case of this cesser
or discontinuance of the Regnum, there may be Treason committed against the
people. By all which it is evident, that the succession to the Crown is the
peoples right: And though the succession to the Crown is Hereditary, because
the people so appointed it, would have it so, or consented to have it so. Yet
in a particular case for the saving the Nation, the whole line and Monarchy it
self, it may be altered by the unlimited Power of the Legislative Authority. We
have been more just to the Royal Succession, than the wonderful Sir Robert
Filmer, for his Hypotheses will not allow at all of Hereditary rightful
Succession. For the establishing the right of the Universal Empire of the World
in Adams right heir, since this illuminato (has enlightened the world in this
secret,) no Successor can derive any hereditary right from his Predecessor. His
Title can be only his own possession, for no man can claim by descent the
Usurpation of his Father, but he that is not conscious to the wrong, and is
bonae fidei possessor, under the presumed right and title of his Father. I
would be understood to speak as the matter can be considered in a free Reason,
not under the prejudice of any positive municipal law, for to such laws the
right of Crowns, as the Renowned Knight will have it, are not submitted.

So that here in this matter their Knight fails them, and can give them no
help. Their other Friend the great Leviathan Maker, is so far from establishing
an Hereditary Succession, that he leaves Kings to be rightfully assaulted,
deposed and destroyed, by any person that can, who stands in danger of being
destroyed by the King, though justly condemned to death; Leviathan Part. 2.
Cap. 21. Those (says he) that have committed a Capital Crime, for which they
expect death, have the liberty to defend themselves by Arms as well as the
Innocent. But I mention him only to render him detestable, for I take his Books
to be the dehonestamenta humani generis. But I desire them to regard the sense
of all Mankind, in the words of Isiodorus Pelusiota, (...), This Governed the
Judicious and Learned Dr. Falkner, for when he had carried Christian Loyalty as
high as he could, to the honor of our Religion and the benefit of the World for
which we are all extremely beholden to him, he concludes thus in his excellent
Book called Christian Loyalty. That if any Prince undertakes to alienate his
Kingdom, or to give it up into the hands of another Sovereign Power, or that
really acts the Destruction or the Universal calamity of his People, he tells
us Grotius thinks that in his utmost extremity, the use of a defense, as a last
refuge ultimo necessitatis presidio is not to be condemned, provided the care
of the Common good be preserved. And if this be true says he it must be upon
this ground; that such attempts of ruining de ipso facto include a disclaiming
the governing of these persons as Subjects, and consequently of being their
Prince or King; what unreasonableness is there then in shutting the door upon
him, and making it fast against him by an act of State, who has excluded
himself by his principles and designs. For the truth of the fact, I shall only
refer you to Secretary Coleman his Letters, wherein he says that his Masters
interest, and the King of France his interest, is one and the same, and their
design their glorious design the same (viz) the extirpating the Northern
Heresy, how far the King of France has complied, with the design the cruel
Persecution, and exils of his Protestant Subjects, who at the time of that
letter, were under the security and protection of the Laws of that Kingdom, the
Faith of that Crown, do declare to the world. And by what secret influences I
know no, the is made so great, his conquests so easy and expedite, that he is
like to do the work himself here in England, and go away with all the Glory.
But if the work must lie upon our hands, let no man think with himself, that
Popery is not to be introduced here, because the numbers of Papists are few,
for that will not render the design impracticable, but the execution of it were
cruel and barbarous, a whole Nation upon the matter must be corrupted from the
Faith of the true Religion or destroyed. One single arm of an ordinary strength
not resisted, may assassinate a whole Nation.

Let no man betray his Country and Religion by pretending the example of the
patience, and sufferance of the Primitive Christians for our rule.

The Reformed Religion has acquired a civil right, and the protection of Laws,
if we ought not to loose our Lives, Liberties, and Estates, but where forfeited
by Law, we ought much rather not to loose them for the profession of the best
Religion, which by Law is made the public national Religion. And it is strange
that some men of the same Religion in profession can think (that
notwithstanding) it makes no matter what is done to a man, if he be Religious,
but if he be not so, the least public injuries and injustice may be resisted,
vindicated, remedyed, and by right defended by old Laws, or new ones, to be
made for that purpose.

The Christian Religion was published, when the whole world was Pagan, and
therefore it was submitted to such usage as the Governments would give it. But
when the Christian Faith, had by miracles of patience declared it self to be of
Heaven, and of a Divine Original: According to the Prophecies on that behalf,
it took possession of the Empire, and Crowns, and Scepters became submitted to
the Cross, and the Christians acquired a civil right of Protection and
Immunity, which they ought not, they cannot relinquish and abandon, no more
than they can destroy themselves, or suffer violence and cruelty to destroy the
Innocent. Such as thus perish shall never wear a Martyrs Crown, but perish in
the next world for perishing in this. This will be interpretatively Crucifying
Christ afresh, after he is received up into Glory. i. e. After his Religion is
exalted into dignity and honor and civil Authority. If the senate of Rome had
been Christians, they would never have given up the Government to a Pagan
Augustus, with a power to him and his Successors, to make laws for extirpating
the Christian Faith, what is said of the Christian Religion, and Paganism holds
between the Reformed Religion and Popery.

If any man is so vain as to say, that an unalterable course of Succession, is
established amongst us by Divine Right. I say he is a man fitted to believe
transubstantiation, and the infallibility of the Pope; he is deeply lapsed into
fanaticism, he dreams when he is awake, and his dreams are dreams of frenzy.
There are somethings so false, that they cannot be disproved, as somethings are
so evidently true that they cannot be proved. This proposition has no color to
ground it self upon, no medium to prove it, no argument for it which is to be
answered, nor nothing more absurd than it self to reduce it to: But if any
shall add, that this Doctrine is the Doctrine of the Reformation, and adventure
to tell the people so, they are the most impudent falsaries that ever any age
produced, when there is scarce a Child, but has heard what was done, said, and
maintained, by the Clergy of England, in the case of Mary Queen of Scots, a
Popish Successor, in the earliest time of our Reformation here in England.

Our Age is blessed with a Clergy renownedly Learned, and Prudent: by the
Providence of God, and the piety of our Ancestors, they possess good, though
not to be envyed Revenues and Honors.

It is scarce possible, they should have many among them, that can countenance
a proposition so wickedly impious and sacrilegious (that we cannot have new
Laws, but must loose the old, at the pleasure of a Popish Successor) against
not their own interest, and the Rights of the Church, but against the Rights
and Liberty of Religion it self. For she is capable of Franchises and
Immunitys: which ought above all things to be most zealously asserted and
defended by her Ministers, can they themselves with their own hands ever pull
down her Hedge and destroy her Defensatives, and expose her helpless to the rage
of her implacable Enemies, and suspend all the Legal security she has for her
preservation, upon the Life of our present King, whom God long preserve. If
Kings be admitted to have a power to make Laws. One Proclamation may establish
the Popish Religion amongst us, which the Papal Bulls so long as that See
continues, will never be able to effect. Next to Religion her self, the
Revenues of the Church challenge their faithful care, for they are at best but
Usu-fructuary Trustees of her Endowments for the Succession, which they will
wretchedly betray to an Arbitrary Successor, if they do not repress such
Opinions that pretend to change the Government, into an absolute jure Divinity
Monarchy, which will leave nothing jure divino but it self and the Popedom.
Kings for their so doing have the authority of Sir Robert Filmer, who affirms
in his Treatise called the Power of Kings, Fol. 1. That the Laws, Ordinances,
Letters, Patents, Privileges and Grants of Princes have no force but during
their Life, if they be not ratified by the express consent, or at least by the
sufferance of the Prince following, who had a knowledge thereof. This is but
the necessary consequence and result from the Doctrine of the absolute power of
a Prince, for in such Government the Concessions of a Predecessor can no more
oblige the Successor, than he can Govern when he is dead; and the Successor
must be absolute in his time, as the Predecessors were in theirs. But in vain
is the Net spread, in the sight of any Bird; this deceit is of so gross a
thread, that it cannot pass with the common people, much less upon our Clergy;
but I will not dissemble what may be the true reason of the seduction of some
young good natured Gentlemen of the Clergy: They persuade themselves that if
these principles and opinions of the Unlimited Power of Kings had been
received, the late Wars had been prevented: Not rightly considering, that if
such opinions had never been broached, or Universally rejected, that War could
never have ensued; and we should together with peace have enjoyed our ancient
Government, which our Ancestors transmitted to us, without that miserable
inter-regnum.

I would not be perversely understood by any man, as if I went about to justify
our late War: This is all I say, that every Government once established will
continue for ever, if all the parts of it would unalterably consent to preserve
it, to which their narural Allegiance does oblige them: And never any Prince
endeavored to change the Government, but where part of the people were first
willing, or content to have it so.

Those false flatterers that go about to remove the boundaries of power, and
change the Government, are the greatest enemies to the quiet and happy Reigns
of the Kings, and the peace and prosperity of Kingdoms.

And if they do adventure to call the;ir fellow Subjects, by any opprobrious
names of disloyalty, because they will not join with them in such change, they
are as absurdly impious and insolent, as any Prince or State would be, who
should challenge another, as free and absolute as himself, for his Tributary
and Vassal; and traduce him for a troubler of the World, because he would not
Compose the Quarrel, thus injuriously sought, with the surrender of his Crown
and dignity.

I desire these Gentlemen to consider, that the happiness of a Nation, is best
supported with Truth and Justice: This new Doctrine is not true, and whosoever
entertains a belief of it, is not only barely mistaken, but will be lead by the
mistake, into the most mischievous, impious and sacrilegious injustice, and
treachery.

It is very agreeable to a good man, to embrace a proposition, with an easy
belief that offers the least seeming probability of a security against the
miseries of War, by all means to be avoided. But this Doctrine of the Divinity
of Kings, is most dangerous to the Peace of Kingdoms, for it is pregnant with
Wars: Besides that it will give bad Princes, which sometime hereafter may be
Born into the World, (for such there have been now and then) power to make
their Reigns worse then War, and Plague, and Famine to boot.

The Panick fear of a change of the Government, that this Doctrine occasioned,
and the Divisions it made among us, was the principal cause of the late War.

It is not without reason, that together with these new principles, revived
since the Discovery of the Popish Plot, we have a perpetual din and noise of
Forty one.

Then that fatal War begun, which ended in the destruction of the Prince, and
ruin of the Church and State; The remembrance of it is the principal matter,
that stuffs our weekly Pamphlets, and it is brought into common discourse, and
grown so trivial, that it is mentioned and heard without abhorrence and regret:
And what Service this can be to His Majesty, I do not understand; much better
it were, that the memory of it were utterly extinct and abolished for ever,
except only in the Anniversary of that great Prince, that so fell. Then I say,
and then only is it fit to be remembered, when we are on our Knees to God
Almighty, and in his presence affecting our selves, with sorrow and remorse,
deprecating the like Judgments, and bewailing the National sins, that
occasioned those; For notwithstanding the Glories of that Great Prince his
unhappy death, and the admired Devotions of the (...), The story of the
Calamities of his people, (all his three Kingdoms involved in War, during his
Reign) and the remembrance of them, will be with some Men not very Loyal, a
stein and diminution to the Glories of the Royal Family. In Princes their
Calamities are reckoned amongst the abatements of their Honor, and mere
misfortunes are disgraces, and have the same influence upon the minds of the
common people, as real faults and male administrations.

How then can this tend to the peace of the Nation, or the Honor of the King?
what satisfaction is it to have our almost healed wounds, thus perpetually
rubbed and kept green?

-- Quis sua vulnera victus
commemorare velit --
Why should any of our Nation, insult over the miseries of his own, and
neighbor Kingdoms, when he must be the most barbarous villain, and have
divested himself of all humanity, that is not deeply empassioned at the
remembranee of them? If a Thuanus, or a Philip de Comines were to pass a
Judgment, of the condition of our late times; upon the consideration of our
late Tragedies, and the Preludium's to it in the Reigns of King James and the
late King, it would be formed and pronounced in these words of Tully, upon
another occasion: Mihi quidem, si proprium and verum nomen vestri mali
quaeratur, fatalis quaedam calamitas incidisse videtur, and improvidas hominum
mentes occupavisse, ut nemo mirari debeat humana consilia divina necessitate
esse superata.

But this is not all, -- nec adhuc finitur Orestes.

We are affrighted by the weekly Pamphlets, with the expectation of another
Parliamentary War, and this is the true reason of the mention of the late War,
that we may forgo our Parliaments for fear of another. So it is written in our
public prints, which are published under permission, as if Parliaments are
designed to be rendered hateful, and to be feared as Plagues, Famines, or
Inundations of the Sea.

But who is to begin it, who designs this War, the Pamphlateers, or those that
set them on work, best know: We had never heard of any such thing, if the
Mercenary writers of the Popish Faction had not told us of it, as they do
weekly, and hitherto we cannot find any Color for this affrightful Lie; they
are impudent so to talk of it, as if they believed it, and have brought some as
weak men as they are false Knaves to a belief of it: But to do them no wrong,
those may best know what is to come to pass, who have the power of contriving
and designing.

Qui pavet vanos metus veros fatetur. The vilest Traitors cannot contrive a
greater prejudice to the King and his Family, than by advancing such a dismal
thing into credit and belief, for fears though but upon imaginary and false
grounds, produce real effects, as well as they are in themselves really
afflictive, and that almost equally, if of continuance to the evils feared. Do
these men speak like true Loyalists, that are mentioning perpetually the
Calamitous War, in the time of our Kings Father, and fright us with another now
ensuing? after those Universal, Solemn and hearty Joys of the whole Nation for
his Restoration, after so many Millions of Money, most dutifully issued out of
the affections of his people, from time to time at His Majesty's Royal
pleasure, and nothing complained of, but that they have not opportunities of
issuing ten times more, to the service of His Majesty's Glory. Nay they speak
of this ensuing War, as if the Royal Standard was already displayed, and the
Rebels had made their Musters; which must certainly affect the Royal Family
with the greatest danger.

If there were twenty Trajans derived from one stock, that had Reigned in an
uninterrupted Succession, Two immediate Successors, that should have their
Reigns successively attended with civil Wars, were enough to efface their own,
and the glories and merits of such Ancestors: But base Caitiffs, you can no
more truly believe the last Parliaments designed upon His Majesty's Crown and
Dignity to make War, and change the Government, than you can believe that every
Mothers Child of them, before they came up to the last Parliaments, set his
House on fire, and burnt his Wife and Children.

But these impudent Forgeries against the House of Commons, are contrived to
make the people afraid of Parliaments, that this new model of Government in
process of time, when we have an enterprising Successor, may take place, for
the service of the Popish Religion. For upon the strength of Dr. B -- s
performance, who has with great labor found out (which it is hard for any man
acquainted with our English History to be ignorant of) that our Parliaments
were not always such as now constituted: this blessed change of our Government
will never be achieved, the Nation will never be persuaded, by any thing that
he has found out in his diligent research, that the House of Commons is an
overgrown Wen, an unnatural Accrescency to the Government, and fit to be cut
off. Neither can the most insolent Paradox of Sir Robert Filmers Patriarcha,
contribute much to this purpose. But that it may be able to deceive but a very
few, for the time to come; for the sake of such Gentlemen who have not Chosen
their side, are glad of the least Color, or dream of a Shadow, a single opinion
of any body, it matters not whom to relieve their modesty, in their notorious
defections from Truth, Justice and the Government. I shall here consider his
Hypothesis, especially for that it was Reprinted, and is magnified by the
Factors for the Popish Plot.

And first, I will draw it out shortly, in all its strength, and make it more
argumentative than he has left it, (for he has left his willing readers to
find out the Argument, and to make the Conclusion) Adam says he, was the
Father of Mankind, that to him as Father, belonged an Absolute dominion over
all his descendents; that all Men being so born, are born under subjection to
such an Authority: This authority so reserved upon us by God, and the condition
of our birth, and the manner of coming into the World, is to be submitted to,
in the person of the present King, who by becoming King, is for that reason
vested with this absolute Authority. This power and the duty of our subjection
to it, results from our being Born, and coming into the World, after the manner
of men. This power of Kings is grounded (by him) merely upon this natural
resultance, and not from any positive and express Revelation from God, for
such, neither we, nor, he yet ever heard of. We will now then consider, what
there is of weight in this fictitious Reason of Government, in which the World
is so lately illuminated by this Speculator; what force there is in it to
unravel all Models of Government, that are framed in the World, to confound
Kingdoms and Nations, and to give Warranty to the bringing upon us, all the
miseries that are designed by the Papists for us, which we are to be prepared
to suffer, with most conscientious patience, from the comforts and supports of
this insolent and vain pretense.

I appeal to the Reader of him, whither in thus stating his Doctrine, I have
not made it more Argumentative, and concluding to his purpose than he left it:
I will take this method of remonstrating the fertility of his Hypothesis.

By considering what a Father is, and what his Duty toward, and Power over his
Children, in which it will be found, that nothing of Empire belongs to him as
Father, that no more belonged to Adam over his Children, than did to any of his
Children over their own.

That the Authority of Parents over their Children, continues together with
Sovereign power, and is not at all abated by it, and that it cannot be the
same, because it continues entire with it.

That there is no footsteps in the Records of the Old Testament, to verify his
Hypothesis; that we could not have wanted some Declarations about it from God,
(if true) it being a matter so necessary for us to know, That no claims were
made, (that we know of) to any such authority in the earliest times, when the
Right was unprejudiced, and must have been best understood, and could not have
been forgotten, as now it is utterly.

Besides that it was never used. The first Histories Recorded in the Bible,
makes every Child of the common Ancestor, alike independent and absolute, and
so it would for ever have continued: And to this day we should have been in the
state of Nature, and not United in any Government, and so no King yet in the
World, notwithstanding the Paternal authority. That his Instances of exercising
Sovereign power by the Fathers of Families, are not concluding, and to this
purpose.

That admitting Adam had while he lived been Universal Monarch, (yet if there
be no other reason and Foundation of Monarchy in the World, but this of Sir
Robert Filmer) Adams right heir not been known, (and if he were might perhaps
be an Idiot or Lunatic, some Cobbler or Botcher under a Stall, or mean Person
unfit to govern) we can have no rightful King in the World, for certain it is,
that there is nothing in the World so personal as Relations, and the duties and
Rights that do result from them: for they are neither assignable to, nor can be
exercised or exacted by and between any persons, but the Relatives themselves:
So that this power of Sir R. F. has no foundation of reason in the nature of
things, was in Fact never exercised, and is now utterly fallen to the ground,
and all Government with it. A more pusled, vain, senseless and unlearned
Paradox, was never yet offered to the World, nor a thing more mischievous ever
received.

The absolute Power of a Prince over his Subjects, is not at all connatural to
the dutiful Care of a Father over his Children.

It was the good pleasure of God that this part of the immense world, should be
planted with men endowed with a capacity to admire his power, wisdom and
goodness, and therefore to render him praise and worship: he designed that we
should be happy in our own enjoyments, and promote the happiness of each other,
which is not to be performed but by a mind serene, beneficent and loving. He
provided that the disseminations of Love should run parallel, and be under a
like necessity with the propagation of our kind. For the planting love in our
nature, he instituted Marriage for Procreation, that we might owe our Being to
the state of the greatest and most agreeable friendship, and tenderest
affection. That for many years we should be educated by a pure single and
undesigning love of our Parents: and the friendship of that conjugal State,
should be maintained by, and principally exercised in, their common care of
their issue.

Every Act of Love, of either of the Parents to the Child, being the best
instance of love to the other of them; an endearment of a reciprocal love, and
a provocation to the like love and care of the Child. God did likewise ordain
and so it was, that all Mankind should derive from one stock, be made of one
blood, and every Man, every Man's Brother of the same family and cognation. By
this it was provided by the Father of us all, that we should be born into the
World, under the tendrest care for our preservation and improvement of our
Nature, and be powerfully inclined to love, and beneficence, whereby we may be
pleased with our selves, and at Peace and Amity with our whole kind.

That the Generations of Mankind might certainly proceed, God planted in our
Natures powerful and irresistible instincts to procreation which the Jews call
a Precept, tho after this no Precept seemed necessary, for increase and
multiply they make a Command. But we follow our own propensions and have no
conscience of obedience to a Law, when we observe and follow them, which are so
strong pleasurable and entertaining, that if God had not planted a restraint of
Modesty in our Natures, and a sense of decency. W^ should over do the business,
and degrade ou^ selves from the dignity of our Natures.

Thus far the Parents are fulfilling Gods appointments and gratifying their own
Natures. What from all this can give them a right over their Child, all men
coming into the world this way are no less free, then if they had been formed
in Lucretius his Bottles, and dropped out of his imaginary matrixes, and we were
all (...) and Aborigines.

In this they are only executing the appointment of God, are but his
Instruments to bring us into this World, and are all along rewarded and
entertained and caressed by the order of Nature. Adam owed this duty to God his
Father, and so ordered it was, that he owed it to himself, and to his own
natural propensions, pleasures and satisfactions to propagate. The several
succeeding generations of men, as soon as they are men have as much Right to
the enjoyment of themselves to the freedom of their own Will, and to live by
their own measures as Adam himself had. Our Parents do not give us life, but
hand it to us from the Fountain of being the Universal Father of all things.

Vitai Lampadu tradunt. And this is allowed, acknowledged by all Mankind, for
as soon as Children can Govern themselves, we declare them free that they are
sui juris they are extrafamiliated and become themselves Fathers and acquire to
themselves.

But that which has imposed upon this, Gentleman, I believe is, for that while
they are to be educated, their Parents exercise an Authority over their
Children which a souer Father may imagine to be power. This I believe gave the
Gentleman his mastake, because he says a Child and a Slave, does not differ
which is a shrewd indication that he was something too masterly over his
Children. But all equal parents know and understand that the Education of their
Children is duty and care, and may not improperly be called, a Sort of
Generation Work.

For I pray let it be considered, that the foetus is not perfected as soon as it
is extruded the Matrix, no not until it be able to perform, unassisted all the
Actions of its proper life. That the life of a man is a life of Reason, that he
cannot do the Acts of a man, until he has it in the exercise of it. He is not
a perfect foetus so as to be neglected by his parents, as soon as he can feed
himself the man after this may miscarry, and if exposed by his parents, and not
continued under their care be abortivated. Education is a kind of Incubation.
Our faculties are to be formed and drawn out into use, as well as our body, to
be organized, before we can be denominated men, and while this is a^complishing
the parents are but executing the natural instinct of propagating their like,
until they have made them men, they are not begotten in their own likeness.
They therefore with an easy propension, and a natural care do apply themselves
to offer things to their observation, to furnish their Memories, to try their
judgments in little Essays, to render them discoursive to draw out their
faculties into use, until by little and little they arrive at discretion, and a
power to form true judgments of what belongs to them, and to govern themselves
in such Affairs and businesses, that are to employ them.

But while this is a doing, they are under a Government of love and care, by
the Arts of Discipline to be trained up to perfection. Several freakishnesses
and caprices are to be cured, and the strength and luxuriancies of several
natural Appetites, are to be abated and restrained; and they are to be held to
attention and observation, and made patient of instruction, and correction is
to be administered to these purposes, and by these measures, but this duty of
Correction does not participate any thing of the Nature of Civil Government. It
has nothing of the Nature of punishment exemplarity or vindicative Justice

It is not for the gratifying of the Parents displeasure to secure him against
wrong or injury to deter others, but to amend improve and better the Child, and
always terminated to, and directed to that end, and by those measures it is
tenderly and affectionately administered. It will not be impertinent to observe,
that our Common Law, had no opinion of any Sovereign Authority in a Father.

And also that the Statute of 25 E. 3. which declares petty Treasons as well as
high Treasons does not declare, the sons killing the Father to be Treason, tho
Treason it is, for a Servant to Kill his Master: In which we have the Authority
of our Parliament, and of the constant opinion of our Judges. That the nature
and relation of a Father and a Son, does not savor any thing of Government, or
of a servile or Political subjection. For that they have not made parricide
Treason tho it is the most unnatural and most detestable Crime, and a far
greater sin than that of Killing a Master.

But further to clear the true notion of a Fathers Authority, that it is duty
and care, not Empire and absolute will. Let it be considered, that God by his
right of Creation, has an absolute dominion over us; we are more his than we
are our own, or than any thing can be ours. Yet when he was pleased of his
gracious condescension to our capacity to quiet our fears of his power, and to
invite our love and assure our hope, he did declare himself our Father thereby
to assure us, that he would not rule us pro imperio, and according to his
absolute right he had over us, that style he himself delights to use, and give
us leave to call him our Father, by which we all understand, that he will not
proceed with us according to his Right of absolute domination, no not in the
terms of Right and Political Justice. But that he will consider our frame, pity
our infirmity, correct us as his Children, but not punish us with an
exterminating Justice.

Amongst the Romans anciently no man was admitted a Judge in criminal Causes,
but he that was a Father of Children, that the severities of a Judge might be
abated by the tenderness of a Father, that he who had Children of his own,
might have the more pity to those of others, so different is the office of a
Judge from the natural duty and tenderness of a Father. And it is the greatest
violence, that can be done to nature, to compel a Father to sit in Judgment
upon his Son, and next to that of obliging and compelling a man to execute
himself, to make it the Fathers duty to pronounce a capital sentence upon the
Son, is the most unnatural thing in the world, the Father and the Son in this
consideration are conjunctae personae, and when the Sin of the Father is
visited upon the son, the son is afflicted, but the Father is punished, and
when the Son has the Question, the Father is taken to be confessed in
tormentis filii.

But for a further instance to make it appear, how imcompetent the duty of a
Magistrate is with the Nature of a Father, I will observe that notwithstanding
a Law was given to Adam and all his Sons, to establish judicatures according to
the Tradition of the Jews, as may be seen in Mr. Seldom his Book de jure
Gentium secundum Hebraeos, which Law by the way had been supervacaneous, if the
Power of a Prince did belong to Adam in the right of his paternity, and a
Government had been provided for them by their Birth. Yet I say notwithstanding
that: There was such a Relaxation of Justice in the World before the Flood,
because it could be only administered by a Father, or such who participated of
the stock of love lodged in the common Father, from whom his Children did
derive their tenderness, one to another, as they themselves sprang from him.
That the World was grown so wicked with in 2 ages (as men then lived) from the
creation, that a Universal deluge was brought upon the World, by the Just
Judgment of God, for the outrageous and insufferable Wickedness, that had
spread it self universally over mankind; 8 Persons only excepted. The
overflowing deluge of Wickedness, that caused the deluge of waters cannot be
imputed, to a more probable cause than to the indulgence and impunity, that the
observed and understood nearness of Kindred, that all men stood then in to one
another must naturally occasion.

This is a sad consequence of that natural Love in Parents toward their
Children, which was intended for the propagation and advancement of mankind.
But since that now we are estranged one from another in remote, and unknown
degrees, and that prejudice is over. Here is a gentleman to destroy the World
another way, and to undo us by unreasonable and unbounded power, which is a
like apt to make the World fit for another Universal destruction, if it be not
without more destroyed by it; does endeavor to turn the exercise of such power
into a Right, and to give it warranty from the Reason and way of our
propagation, and by this means to destroy us faster, then we can be born and
bred, and impare the Generations of Mankind, or render them extremely
miserable, or wicked which is much worse, extinguish the light of the world,
which is Love and Amity, and destroy the encouragement and reason of almost all
relative Morality.

What a Saturnine Father have we got, to make a golden Age, who ever would have
thought, that the (...) the most moving kindest, most tender pleasing, and
beneficent instinct in Nature, planted by God the Father of us all, for the
propagating educating and improving humane Nature, should ever be made use of
to found a Right of Tyranny, and Arbitrary domination, the greatest destroyer
and depraver of Mankind. What Monster has this last Age produced! a Christian,
a Father, seriously endeavoring to persuade all Mankind, to offer up their
Children to Moloch the Saturn of the Easterlings, who was but the Devil of
Tyranny as the name imports.

This (...) the true origin, and Fountain of Love and Amity, and the sociable
Virtues which render men humane, from whence flows all the happiness of
mankind, will by this Doctrine be corrupted and rendered unsincere and self
designing. For when a Father performs an Act of Generation, it seems now he
designs to add a slave to his Retinue, and when a Child is born there is
another item added to the inventory of his Estate. If this Fountain be
corrupted, there can be nothing sincerely kind after it in humane Nature. The
Leviathan is outdone by this Gentleman, and has not performed half so
renownedly in the great Work of depraving Humane Nature, as our Patriarchal
Knight will do, if his Admirers can bring him into vogue and esteem.

For the Author of the Leviathan allowed something good in Humane Nature,
several equal propensions, which he terms her Counsels, and sometimes
adventures to call the Laws of Nature: But he concludes they are not
practicable, and they are only fools who govern themselves by them.

But this Gentlemen will not allow Nature to be good in her first institution
and designment, tho in this I think they are near agreeable, that Mr. Hobs made
the Pourtraiture of Humane Nature in an agreeableness to his own evil Ingeny.
And this Knight did set himself, when he made this his draught of a Father he
could have no other Original but himself, or the Idea of the moross and sower
Dr. P.H. his admired friend but by his Character he had at least misfigured his
understanding, and made it his own Nature by liking it.

2ly, No more of authority belonged to Adam over his Children, then does to any
of his Children over his, for that this Authority proceeds from Nature, and
Nature is a like in all men, the duty of their education, and the Authority
over them, that is competent to that purpose, is as much incumbent upon them,
as upon the Protoplast, the duty is so personal consisting (...) that it cannot
be transferred, or permitted absolutely to any other person by the Parents, nor
can any man challenge a right to it, or discharge the Father from it, or
require the same affection, submission and reverence, that is due from a Child
to his Father.

To expect relative duties without Relation is most unnatural, it is as
impossible as incongruous, and we may as well love and hate rejoice and grieve
without the proper objects and incitements of those passions. The fundamental
Rule of all morality, is that of Simplicius (...). It is as certain as any
proposition in Euclid, as the Doctrine of proportionable triangles, and received
as such by all the Masters of Moral Philosophy, there is no other foundation of
our duty to God or Man, or toward our selves this rule must declare it, and
what ever is measured and allowed by this Rule, is commonly called, which is
comprehensive of all that is honest, just, and fit, (...) and the application
of this rule is called by St. Paul (...), which when a man observes he is
perfectly moral, a man may as well pay his debts by giving away his Money, be
grateful to his benefactor by being beneficent to Strangers, as perform that
duty he ows his Father to any but he that is so: It is impossible to separate
the shadow from the Substance as to make that subsist by it self which grows by
resultance from the state and condition of the person. Or that without that
state of the person, from which it does arise it should ever accrue.

3ly. Admitting Adam had a Sovereign Authority over all his descendents, which
must grow (if there was any such thing) from some positive institution, and not
from his paternity, yet the natural Authority and duty of Parents toward their
Children, continues entire together with Sovereign Power, and is not at all
abated by it, and therefore cannot be the same. No Sovereign Power can extort
the Children from their Fathers Authority and care: This is a duty in Nature
before Governments. They cannot belong to the Government before they are filii
precepti, and capable of the Conscience of a Law. It is a duty in Parents to
Educate their Children, and a right they have in consequence to govern them,
that cannot be taken from them. It is the Parents duty to form their
consciences. They are appoint-by God, the great Ministers of his Providence to
the Children. That they perform this Office, he has tied them to it by the
sweatest constraints and almost violences of Nature, by an irresistible love
and ties of Endearment, that cannot be broken, this declares their Right of
Authority over their Children, against any interposings of Sovereign Authority
to its prejudice, let or hindrance. Thomas Aquinas positively determines, that
it is not lawful for Christian Kings to baptize the Children of the Jews
against the will of their Parents, for that (says he) it is against the course
of natural justice.

4ly, There is no footsteps in the Records of the old World to verify this
Hypothesis. That such Authority was so much as pretended to be used or
exercised by Adam, but we find instances against it in the short History before
the Flood. Cain received no sentence from Adam his Prince and Sovereign Judge,
but from God himself, or rather from his Shecinah or some visible
Representation of his presence.

Thence he obtained some degree of impunity and his life protected. No mention
here at all of Adam, his taking the Tribunal or Cains arraignment, or of any
pardon or indulgence granted by King Adam. Lamech that had Killed a man by
mischance, did not allege his case at his Father Adams Court, and the matter
of extenuation of the Man-killing, we hear of no pardon of Course to be
allowed, when the circumstances of fact had been first judicially considered.

How could a thing of such importance be omitted in the story of the old World,
tho so short. It was of more concernment, than to know that Tubal Cain was the
first Smith and Jubal, the first man that made a Musical instrument, to know
the original nature and reason of Government.

Besides we find all the grand Children of Noah, becoming Princes of Countries,
and the Sons and grand sons of Esau alike Dukes and Princes, that is at least
absolute Fathers of their own Families, and ruling over such as were their
slaves and dependents.

And the 12 Sons of Jacob are all called Patriarchs:

When Nimrod played the Tyrant we find nothing said for his justification upon
any Patriarchal right.

But if we consult the Traditions of the Jews, they will inform us of another
original of Government, and that is this. They say that God gave several
Precepts to Adam and his Sons, and Noah and his Sons, and one amongst the rest,
that they should erect Governments, which his Sons could not have performed
without Rebellion against their King Father, if Adam had been so as Sir Robert
Filmer first dreamt.

Also besides that of making Governments, there was a Precept given them of
honoring their Parents, Seldom de jure Naturae secundum Hebraeos fol. 2792. And
therefore the Precept of honoring Parents, is a distinct duty from that of
obedience to Governments. By this Precept they had Authority in general, to
establish Governments amongst themselves, in the specification of which they
were left to rheir own liberty and discretion, and therefore were not obliged
to any single form of Government. It must be understood, that the Precept which
required the Sons of Adam and Noah to establish Governments, required also
every man's Submission to their Orders, Laws, and Decrees, when established.

Lastly, We will consider of the instances he gives of the Exercise of
Sovereign Power, by Fathers of Families, which are as impertinent to his
purpose, as his Doctrine is groundless and precarious, but they are these.
Abraham's War and Judahs judgment upon Thamar.

As to the first of Abraham's making War: We say we cannot allow, that making
War does argue any Sovereign Authority. It is sufficient, that he who makes it
is under none to make a vindicative War Lawful. For an injured Person may in
the State of Nature, vindicate wrongs by an authority derived from God and
Nature to a just satisfaction: Because there is no competent judicature to
appeal to for right and redress. But see how unhappy the Gentleman is. This
very instance of his production is clearly against him, for if Sovereign Power
had been Patriarchal, Abraham had been guilty of Treason, in making War without
a Commission from Melchizedech the King of Salem, who as the Learned men
conjecture, was Shem his Patriarch and Chief and known by him for such. But
because Abraham the best man perhaps in any Age did not take a Commission from
Melchizedech his Patriarchal chief. And yet he was blessed by Melchizedech when
he returned from the War. We may conclude that neither Melchizedeeh nor Abraham
knew of any such Patriarchal Sovereignty. And also from this great example it
appears, that it is lawful for him, that is not a Sovereign, if he be not under
any to make War.

I will not enter into a discourse, whence and how is derived the Authority of
making War and capital Sentences, which must have the same reason to warrant
both which has pusled some great Divines. Dr. Hammond that great man was at a
loss in this enquiry, and thinks that nothing but a Divine Authority can
warrant them, which has put them upon strange extravagant Hypotheses of
Government, and sent this Knights brains a Wool-gathering. But this may
satisfy any man of sense, that whatever is necessary for the general happiness
of mankind, and for preserving peace in the world, and protecting the innocent,
and disinabling the mighty oppressors is more commendable to be done, then the
Killing a man in his own defense is simply lawful.

As to his second instance of Judah, his Sentence pronounced upon his Daughter
in Law Thamar, which he would have an exercise of Patriarchal Sovereign
Authority. We say how could Judah do this by a Patriarchal Power, when Jacob
his Father was then alive, and for all that appears Judah his Son was not
extrafamiliated. Besides which is very unlucky, Thamar was then none of his
Family, or of the Subjects of his Domestic Empire, for his Son her Husband
being dead, she was free from the Law of her Husband, and ceased to be a
Subject of his Paternal Kingdom. But Mr. Seldom under the Authority of some
Rabbis, which he cites in his excellent Book before mentioned Fol. 807. says
that, Judah might have the Office of a Prince or Magistrate in a district in
that Country, and by that Authority might judge her according to the Laws of
that Country. But what the Law was, and the Nature and reason of her offense,
by which it became capital, is not understood as he tells us in the place
before cited, I shall not trouble the Reader with unfolding the matter.

But why does he trouble himself to make Kings, Fathers of their Countries,
some cannot be so and some have no mind to be so, and yet they ought to be
Kings. And some that have not been Kings, have been so and so styled, as the
great M. Tully, for defeating the Catiline Conspiracy, He was by decree of the
Senate called Pater Patriae. Those are with reason truly called Patres patriae,
which either relieve their Country from miserable pressures, which is the civil
death of a Nation, and for this reason our King has the honor of being called
Pater Patriae, and we hope, that he will wear that honorable Title upon a
second deliverance of us from a most deplorable condition. Or else such who
bring the Nation to an exalted state of happiness, so much beyond their old
state of things, that they seem to give the Nation a new civil Life, Being and
Birth. For his etymological argument from the notation of the Word, it is too
putid to be insisted upon, tho not more ridiculous than his Hypothesis.

But for that the reduction of our duty to our King, to the fifth Commandment,
may seem to give some advantage to the Hypothesis with Fathers who know no
bounds of their power over their Children. It must be observed, that the
Decalogue is not a complete Rule of Morality. The decalogue comprised the
Principal Laws of that common Wealth, which God their Law giver by a most
Solemn Act of his Legislation, did more awfully oblige them to observe.

God that time was their King, Rebellion was as Idolatry, and the sin of
Witchcraft and the Defection of one of their Cities to Idolatry, was punished
as a revolt and Rebellion, Deuteronomy. 13. v. 15. He had provided for his honor and
worship, and their Allegiance in the first Table, and did design by the 5th
Commandment to lay the Foundation of all positive morality, by providing for a
Reciprocation of kindnesses, by injoyning the gratitude and fitting returns of
Children to their Parents, and by putting Children under obligations to be
taught and instructed by their Parents. But our duty to Governors is more duly
referred to all the other Commandments, because Government secures the
observation of those Laws to us, by which we enjoy our selves, and ours freed
from the Violations of Lust, Appetite, Fraud and Violence.

We do not honor our King by relief in his fortune, which is commanded to be
done by our Parents in the precept of honoring them, our subsidies and Aids are
not to that purpose, but contributions to the charges of the Government, they
are the just price of our immunity and protection, from fraud and violence for
which cause pay we tribute.

But whosoever he be, that has more respect for this Knights works then I
have, may find him more gently treated by a very worthy Gentleman, in a very
candid and judicious book called Patriarcha non Monarcha.

But what is the meaning of these flattering Books, they cannot but be nauseous
to His Majesty, who is a very wise Prince, and knows how senseless such Books
are, and besides they make the People afraid, and the Nation unquiet from the
apprehensions they give, that the Government will be changed. Notwithstanding
the King has given such solemn assurance to the Nation by his late
Declaration, that we shall have frequent Parliaments, and that he will govern
by Law.

They would have had a better market, for the Divinity they bestow upon
Princes, with Alexander after he had lost his Virtue, and with those Vile
Emperors whose Names are Regum opprobria, for such the flatterers of ancient
times Deifyed, those who had ceased to be men they made Gods, and when they had
left nothing about them that was tolerable, they magnified their power, which
was already most intolerable.

If the Kings hereafter would but read the History of Kings, under that
conclusion, that a wise observer of Humane Events made after a long observation
and experience, and would make experiments of the truth of it in their own
reading, Kings would be glorious, and the Nations they govern happy and full of
peace.

They would find therein so many effectual Documents to fear God and regard
men, and govern them righteously.

Si Vitam spectes hominum si denique Mores,
Artem vim fraudem, cuncta putes agere.
Si propius spectes, fortuna est arbitra Rerum.
Nescis quid dicis, sed tamen esse putas.
At penitus si introspicias and ultima primis
Connectas, solus rector in orb Deus.
Alciat.
People can be no happyer than Government and Laws design to make them, though
they do not always answer the good designments of the Government.

To what purpose then are these new Hypotheses framed and published, Kings are
exempted by their Office, and the sacredness of their persons from all fears,
but the fears of Nature, and these can never be discharged. Those who do ill
will fear ill Eternally, tho their power were made little less than omnipotent,
for the frame of Humane Nature has made it necessary to be so. Besides God
has made one thing against another, there is a Divine Nemesis interwoven in
the Nature of things, and God will always govern the World.

Omne sub regno duriore regnum. The great Mogul at his inauguration swears,
that his People shall be at peace at home, and victorious abroad, afflicted
neither with plague nor famine, but enjoy Health and Plenty all his days.

This seems extraordinary Pompous and Arrogant, but it means no more than this,
that he will govern them so virtuously, that Gods Providence shall be always
propitious to his People, and is no more in plain English, than what our Church
offers up in her public prayers for the King. (viz.) That he may govern us in
Wealth Peace and Godliness, that he may live long and so govern us ought to be
every honest man's Prayers. But after all these vain Hypotheses contrived, for
making Kings absolute, it will be more easy for Kings to make their reigns
unquiet, and turn their Kingdoms into Shambles.

But lastly, to revive the Ancient Zeal of the true members of the Church of
England against Popery. To rectify the mistakes of some Gentlemen of the Clergy
about the Dissenters: And of our late Parliaments, and their proceedings in
reference to them.

Let it be considered; how unreasonable their apprehensions are of any danger
to the Church of England, from the desires of the House of Commons, of some
indulgence or toleration in favor of the Dissenters at this time; especially
when the Protestant Religion is so shrewdly beset, she has reason now sure to
take all such for her friends, that are heartily Enemies to Popery, tho not so
skillful as they should be to ward off its assaults. Since the Papists presume
to call them Fanatics, tho exactly conformable to the Church of England, that
will not assist to bring on the Popish Plot by disbelieving it; and put us in
fear of the Fanatics, by taking all the courses imaginable to provoke and
exasperate them, and upon their discontents (which they maliciously heighten
and by falsehood and forgeries misrepresent): To graft thereupon a Pretens of a
Protestant Plot, for a pretext to extirpate Protestanism and introduce Popery,
which they impudently pretend to be of a more firm Allegiance to the Government
than the Reformed Religion.

I pray let it be considered, that that which is tolerated is put under
disgrace, even for that it is tolerated; and that which tolerates, even for
that it tolerats, has the Governing Authority; and in so much as it indulgeth,
it obliges to modesty and reason, and. if that indulgence should be abused it
may and will be retracted. It was never intended by the House of Commons, that
the Church of England should be altered or modelled to an agreeableness to any
form or sect of the separation, or prescribed to by any of the Dissenters, or
that she should be made subject to any of their rules or opinions, or her
Liturgy laid aside for directories, or which is worse undervalued to the
profane way of extemporizing: For as generally used and exercised it deserves
no milder a style. That the Church should always govern by her own Wisdom in
her own Province, and in those things that appertain to her, can never be
denied her.

No man has reason to say, tho he has great cause to dislike the separation,
and to have a bad opinion of the Dissenters, that he had rather submit to
Popery than to any form of the Separation, for he need do neither except he
pleases. No man that thus expresses himself, but will be suspected to seek an
occasion and pretens to become a Papist, and to make a defection from the
Church of England.

But if these Gentlemen have such a displeasure against Schism and Separation
(which certainly is the worst disease any Church can labor under, and at this
time threatens the destruction as well of the Protestant Religion it self, as
it does to the Professors of all denominations) let this sharpen their zeal
against Popery (which by its unhallowed arts has occasioned and exasperated
our Schism,) and put them upon the use of all means to reconcile if possible
the Schism (that the Papists have already made, and by all means endeavor to
continue) and take away if possible the occasion of it for the time to come:
And thus defeat the Arts of the Priests and Jesuits for supplanting our Church.
It is a most deplorable thing that our Church should be kept, rent and divided,
in danger of being lost between Rituality and scrupulosity.

Though the Scruples of the Nonconformists, which I always thought, and do
still think groundless, and unreasonable, have often moved me into some passion
against them, yet upon consideration, I think this their Scrupulosity may be of
God, and that some Men are by him framed to it. That he has provided it, as a
bare and obstacle in the Natures and Complexions of some devout Men, against
any Innovations whatsoever, that dangerous ones may not steal upon the Church,
for the better maintaining the simplicity and purity of the Christian Religion
and Worship. But in saying this, I have said nothing, that is apt to give them
a conceit of themselves, but rather to humble them: For the best Men are not
governed by their Temper and Constitution, but correct them by their reason,
and determine themselves by a clear and firm Judgment. What affrightment all
this while either to Church or State, from this weak and pittyable
Scrupulosity: Where lies the Treason or Sacrilege, nay or so much as contumacy
against our Ecclesiastical Governors which is so much upbraided to them?

The Christian Religion may be prejudiced by addition to, as well as
substraction from her rule: The Church of Rome by her additions has almost
evacuated the Christian faith.

Besides there may be a fineness in the outward mode of religious Worship in
its self very justifiable, which may be not congenial to men of a course make.
The Worship of God will always savor of the manners of the People; Men of dull
capacity can scarce admit of any Ceremonys without danger of falling into
superstition, or being vexed with endless and incurable scruple, until for ease
of their minds they throw them off.

But the wisdom of the best Lawmakers has considered in giving Laws, what the
People would bare, and not what is best to be enjoined, and many things have
been tolerated by them, which they did not approve, ne majoribus mal is detur
occasio aut etiam ne vilescant sine moribus leges.

There is nothing more exposes the Authority of Government to contempt, then a
public and an open neglect of its Injunctions. But where obedience to Laws is
exacted under severe penalties, where it does not greatly import the common
good to have them observed, that Government is unequal and uses its Authority
unjustifiable, Leges cupiunt ut jure regantur.

The consideration of the sad effects the Schism in our Church has occasioned,
the contempt that it has brought upon our Ecclesiastical Governors. That
Religion it self is thereby made the scorn of Atheists. That the Papists are
thereby furnished with matter of objection, reproach and scandal to the
Reformation. That every Age since it begun has heightened the malignity of the
Schism, that it seems now to despise the Cure of the greatest Cassanders. These
considerations make it infinitely desirable to have it utterly extinguished.

There seems to be now left but one way of accommodating our Divisions, and
that is, that we do not hereafter make those things wherein we differ matter
and reason of Division.

That the Children of the Light and Reformation, be at length as wise in this
matter as the Church of Rome, which is at unity with itself under more and
greater differences, then those that have troubled the peace of our Church;
which is sufficiently known to all Learned men.

Had it not been happy, that this Schism had been prevented by the use of the
power of the Church in Ecclesiastical dispensations. (If no Law had been made
touching the matters that gave the first occasion to the Schism, it had been in
the Power of the Church to have prevented it.) No good Bishop but would have
relaxed the Canons that enjoined these Ceremonies, about whose lawfulness there
has been so much Zeal misspent; and unwarrantable heat and contention raised,
for the sake of peace and preservation of the Unity of the Church, to men
peaceable and otherwise obedient to her injunctions. So dangerous it is to make
Laws in matters of Religion which takes the conduct of Religion, in so much
from the guides of the Church.

The beginning of contention is like the breaking out of waters, says the wise
man, and they are as soon as begun more easily ended. Before the Contenders have
exasperated one another with mutual severities and contumelies, which at every
Return increase, until both sides loose either their virtue or the Reputation
of it.

Can any man imagine that any prejudice can accrue to the Church of England, if
she did enlarge her Communion by making the conditions of it more easy,
especially if this may be done without annulling any of her institutions, which
the better instructed Christians will always and the Weak may in time devoutly
observe. But till they can they may be received and retained of her Communion,
and not be rejected by her censures, tho they do not submit to all of them at
present: Will it be any prejudice, that the Number of her Bishops be increased,
and that suffragans be appointed or approved by the present Bishops, in partem
sollicitudinis, as was enacted by the statute 26. H. 8. cap. 14. Which Law was
repealed by 1. 2. P. M. and revived by 8. Eliz. cap. 1. These suffragans were
not intended to participate of their honors or Revenues. Had it not been much
more eligible to have dispensed with invincible scruples, rather than a schism
should have been occasioned, which the longer if continues will be more
incurable, and with greater difficulty accommodated; as it grows likewise more
mischievous. Is it fit that the peace should be hazarded, or the Nation put
with reason or without reason in fear of it: Or a Kingdom turned into a
Shambles for a Ceremony, or a Ritual in our public Worship, which if omitted
would leave the exercise of it solemn and decent. For no man knows the
obstinacy of inveterate prejudices, founded perhaps in the very complexions and
Natures of the dissenters, hardened also in their way by observing, how little
effect Laws have had for reducing their Numbers, and also how unpracticable any
severity is in the present broken and distracted state of the Nation. Why may
not standing at the Sacrament be tolerated (tho kneeling is the devoutest
gesture, and to me most agreeable) when it is a posture of Prayer enjoined in
the Primitive Church, in their solemn meetings for Divine Worship, between the
Feasts of Easter and Whitsuntide. Why may not the signing of the Cross in
Baptism for the sake of peace and unity be dispensed with, where desired when
the Sacrament is entire without it? Why may not our public Liturgy be changed
and altered, tho it may be defended as it is, and as it is entertains the
devotions of the best men, merely for this reason, because it is not liked in
some parts of it by some men, yet truly devout? Besides it is the wish of some
excellent persons of the Church of England, that our public offices were more
and those we have, not so long, and that the Church had a greater Treasury of
Prayers, and by variety of Forms for the same Office were enlarged in her
spirit of Prayer, and her public Devotions heightened. Why may not the Rubric
be altered as general scruples shall arise, by the Authority of the Church,
which would not lessen her Authority, but advance the esteem of her Wisdom in
the exercise of it, when she uses it for edification?

It is much better sure to give place to an innocent opinion, when entertained
by considerable Numbers, tho a mistake then to keep up contention and strife.
Peace in the Church is better than precise and nice orthodoxness, and Union is
to be preferred before unnecessary truth, which is of no more importance to our
salvation, then one of Euclids propositions, tho to be sure not so certain and
of less use.

The business of the Church is not to make men great Clerks, to improve us to
the subtilty of the Schools, but to build men up in the Faith and Love of God,
by which they may be instructed to every good Work. Her aim is not to make men
courtly in their behavior in our Churches, but truly devout, and true devotion
will never fail to make the Public Worship solemn, and advance it beyond a
decent formality.

But I would not be mistaken, it is not the Dissenters I intend to befriend,
but the Church of England, for as for them I declare I have no liking to any
thing they say or do, and am especially dissatisfyed with their very bad
manners. It is difficult to abstain from an invective, but that I think it
would be thrown away upon them, and that they are at present incorrigible. This
is not the season for instructing their Wisdoms, we must wait for the mollia
tempora fondi. I thus conclude since that excellent person the Dean of Paul's
has been treated by them, with such petulancies and rude insults for his
Sermon of the mischiefs of separation. If a discourse managed with almost
irresistible reason, candor, temper and Address be matter of exasperation, and
they turn again and are more hardened in their obstinacies, and become more
confirmed in their separating way, nothing but their own thoughts, and the
consideration in what a desperate condition, they have brought the reformed
Religion by their Separation will reclaim them.

But it is expected that Governments should be wise, that they manage and
control the Follies and Weaknesses of those committed to their care, that they
may do the least mischief to themselves and others, and by prudent and
practicable methods amend and reform them. The most froward weiward and
stubborn Children give their Parents the most care, and opportunities of
exercising the most tender love for them, tho they can take no complacency in
their awkerdness. The Church of England is concerned to retain all her Children
in her Family to shut out none by abdication, that their numbers be not few,
and she be ashamed when she speaks with her Enemy in the Gate. Not to provoke
any of them to wrath, least they forsake her and turn against her when
distresses shall come upon her. She has reason at this time sure to make her
Discipline easy, and to learn of the Church of Rome to be more comprehensive.
Their Doctrine of comprehension is so large, that it destroys the Religion to
increase the Number of Professors, but I mean no more, than that positive and
alterable institutions may give place to the peace, security, and preservation
of Religion it self, to whose service they were first framed and designed.

It has been heretofore, of old it has been said Mores Leges in potestatem
pertraxerunt suam. Plato formed an Idea to himself of a Common Wealth, without
respect to the manners of men, but he writ another, which he calls (...).
Origin in his Book against Celsus applies to Moses, the Answer of a famous
Lawgiver, who asked (...), the Answer was (...). And we all know what God
permitted to the Jews, in the matter of Divorce for the hardness of their
Hearts. When all is said People must be governed as they can.

But in the mean time, it is pity any of our zeal and indignation should be
misspent, when we have use for it all against the Church of Rome, the source
whence all our divisions spring. To which we owe the first separations, that
were made in our Chutch, which appears by undeniable Records, published by Dr.
Stillingfleet in his Book, called the Unreasonableness of Separation. How they
have propagated, multiplied, exasperated, and promoted our divisions, to tell
you would make a Volume, besides no Protestant is now to know it. I have only
this further to observe, that the Church of Rome at first only designed by the
Arts of dividing us, and breaking us into several Communions, to disgrace the
Reformation, to make our Spiritual Governors Pastors and Teachers, lose their
Authority with the People. To deprave our Religion with licentious opiniastre
and absurd dogmatizing, to load our departure from that Church, with the
mischief of innumerable Schisms, and to make us reconcilable to the Tyranny
and impostures of that Church, from the vain opinions and licentiousness of the
Sectaries, who have been seduced, managed, inflamed and made wild by their
imposturous Arts and Deceits.

This I believe was only at first designed by the Priests, but now they
apparently design by the Dissenters to destroy the Church, or by the Church to
destroy the Dissenters, that they more easily come to rights with her. They
imagine the Dissenters are very numerous, and that the Nation is fallen into
two great parts, that the Dissenters numbers are vast. But God be thanked they
neither make our grand Jury men, nor the common Halls of the City of London,
for choosing the Lord Majors or Sheriffs. And I challeng any man to give me a
List of all the Names of Dissenters, that were of the House of Commons in our
two last Parliaments, I am sure they will not make an Number, but they reckon
the Numbers of Dissenters by the care they have taken to increase it. They used
great art to continue the Separation when His Majesty was restored: Since Laws
have been made to raise the Animosities of Dissenters, but scarce ever executed
for repressing them. If for any reason of state the Laws here and there, and
for a spurt have been exacted, secret comforts and supports have been given to
their Preachers of greatest Authority with them. And when they have seemed to
preach with the courage and zeal of confessors to their Auditors, they have
been assured not only of indemnity, but have received rewards. How prosperously
did the work of separation go on by these Councils of our Achtlophels, by these
means they concluded it would be heightened, that it would admit of no terms of
an accommodation. How insolent were their Harangues more taking with their
deluded Auditors, while they apprehended them, acted with an invincible zeal of
Religion. What Animations did their People receive to defy the Church and her
Authority, when their Preachers despised Fines and Imprisonment to their
seeming out of pure zeal against her Order.

It is well known several of them were in Pension, and no men have been better
received by the D. than J. J. J. O. E. B. and W. P. etc. Ringleaders of the
Separation: Besides that Popish Priests have been taken and executed for
preaching in Field meetings in Scotland. They have raised there a sort of
Euthusiasts more wild and mischievous, than any we had amongst us in the times
of licentiousness. They have had notwithstanding great Lords that have
patronis'd them who were always well received in their applications in their
favor, at St. James's, and several of their Preachers who were not Priests,
have received exhibitions and pensions for their Encouragement. It was
necessary that the Fanaticism planted in Scotland, should be very loathsome to
make that Nation abate any of their zeal for the Protestant Religion, or to
neglect their fears and apprehensions of Popery, or to make the least step
toward it.

Awake you drowsy Sleepers, open your Eyes? the Sun is risen, there is light
enough to fill your sight, if you would look up and were wiling to see. Could
any thing be conceived more apt, to bring the Church of England into contempt
and scorn with those of the separation then to have Laws made in her favor,
penal Laws which are thought to be of her procurement, and not executed. Vain
and Ineffective anger is always returned with contumely, scorn and hatred.
Cupide conculcatur nimis ante metitum. And so it has succeeded in this case,
nothing has been more passable than the basest Scurrility upon the Church, the
Bishops and the Clergy. The Atheist, the impious and profane have listed
themselves Fanatics, that they might have the greater Liberty of reviling
Religion it self with impunity, Consider how the Church of England is used,
which is truly the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion. About ten years since
they designed to slight her works, and demolish her by a general indulgence and
toleration. And now they intend to destroy her Garrison, those that can, and
will defend her against Popery. By one of their Pamphleteers, the separation is
called an usurpation upon the Government, and all the Dissenters (as such only)
Rebels and Traitors to the King. The same Gentleman would persuade the World,
that the ready way to extirpate Popery is by rooting out of Fanaticism, whither
(says he) the Fanatics bring on the Jesuits plot, or the Jesuits the
Fanatics is not a farthing matter. But in the mean time, that the Papists have
a plot on foot needs no proof: That any sort of Protestants are engaged in a
plot cannot be proved. But all honest Protestants of the Church of England,
think it more righteous to punish the Deceivers, and pity the Deceived, and
wish them only cut off, that make divisions. It is one way of curing or rather
of extinguishing the disease to Kill the Patient. But no Prince did ever yet
provide Cutthroats for his People, in epidemical diseases instead of
Physicians. But if the Papists could arm other Protestants against Dissenters,
there would be the less work for Papists to do. And they will be sure to
requite them, for this favor with Polyphemus his courtesy. For to give the
Devil his due, they are not themselves so fond of Massacres and destruction of
Heretics, as to envy that employment to any other, that will undertake it.
They had rather any other party of Men should do the Drudgery for them. Besides
what one sort of Protestants shall execute upon another, will give them better
pretense and more hardiness (if they wanted either Pretense or Resolution to
destroy such as they call Heretics) to execute the like destruction upon the
Church Protestants, who certainly differ more from the Papists then the
Separatists do from our Church. Sure there is good Reason they should be more
sharply treated by the Papists, than they treated the Dissenters. And if they
are in such sort used they must lay their hands upon their mouths; and be
silent before their Persecutors, and acknowledge the righteous judgment of God,
in bringing such tribulation upon them, from their Enemies wherewith they
troubled their own Brethren.

But there are better ways of putting an end to the Popish Plot, then by
putting it in Execution for them. (That is to say) by suppressing that
contumacy, that is grown so rife in the Dissenters against the Church of
England, by putting the Revilers of her Establishment and Order under the
severest Penalties.

By the Church her condescentions and indulgences to those that are weak and
scrupulous, and the peaceable Dissenters, such condescentions will not abate
but magnify her Authority. The Church of England will not be by this means
lost, but her Governance preserved, especially if the Relaxation that shall be
made proceeds from her ex mero motu, and is not imposed upon her by any secular
Authority. Nay she will become by this means more ample and venerable. What
Glories will shine upon the Heads of the Bishops: We shall all rise up and call
them blessed. They will attain an (...) here, and receive divine Honors while
they live. Their Order will be recovered into the highest Veneration, and it
will never be after a question in the English Church whither the Order of
Bishops be Apostolical. The Parliament will make all Laws yield and comply to
such happy peaceable and gracious Intendments. All the People will honor them
as their common Saviors, that shall thus snatch us from the very Brink of
Ruin, and render the Designs of the implacable Enemies of the Church ready to
take effect to the destruction of our Religion, and the Nation, utterly
defeated.

But what punishments can we think too severe upon any, that shall be guilty of
such insolent Iniquity, as not to allow, that liberty to the Church which they
seek as a favor from her to themselves, that will not let the Church escape
their Censures, when she graciously exempts them from her Censures, and pittys
their Errors and Follies. What Fines and Imprisonments, Pillories and
Scourgings do they deserve, that persecute the Church with Revilings, when they
themselves are tolerated. Their condemnation must be just, what ever their doom
be, themselves being Juges: They will suffer as Evil doers and disturbers of
the peace, not for their Religion, but for a most extravagant and intolerable
unrighteousness. They who will not tolerate others are themselves for that
reason most intolerable. Against these our Laws are to be sharpened, and their
iniquities to be punished by a Judge. But the Statute of 35 Eliz. which
punishes dissatisfactions, and peaceable withdrawings from the public worship
with exile, and death declares how odly the business of the Separation has
been managed, and with what disadvantages to the Church; as it does also the
impracticableness of Laws, that make perhaps invincible prejudices, and modest
and peaceable dissatisfactions capitally criminal. The execution of this Law is
scarce possible. It is by no means agreeable, either to the Christian temper of
our Church, or His Majesty's great Clemency of which he has assured us in the
general course of his Reign. And especially for that that Law has been very
rarely proceeded upon. A Gentleman that lay in Cambridge Goal; under the
Judgment of that Law was reprieved by His Majesty, with a great dislike
expressed by him against that and such like severities. What ever extravagances
of a few wild Fanatics of that Age occasioned that Law: the State of the
Separation and of the Nation being quite altered from what it was then; the
execution of this Law now, would be something like a Sheriffs serving a Writ
out of Date, in another County which can have no effect but mischief to himself.

While our Dissenters are thus reasonably indulged, and strictly obliged to
their peaceable behavior, they can give no apprehensions to the Government
either in Church or State. This is all that is designed, and all that they
ought to have, and this certainly would be readily yielded them in this present
juncture, especially if the Evils of the late unhappy times did not stand upon
their score.

But I persuade my self, that this course if it had been heretofore taken would
have prevented one great cause of our late Troubles, so it will in such measure
prevent them from returning, as the separation can be accounted the cause of
them. As for the Sacrilege and Spoil, which was then made upon our Church it
could never have happened, but upon the dissolution of the Government, nor can
it ever happen again.

That War would have been impossible, if the Churchmen had not maintained the
doctrine, that Monarchy was Jure Divino, in such a sense that made the King
absolute, and they and the Church in consequence perished by it.

But God be thanked, we see the Church again restored to her endowments, grown
wiser than to desire to hold that precariously, and at pleasure, she does enjoy
by an unmovable legal Right. Of the three Estates of this Kingdom (for to
suspect any such thing of the King would be unpardonable blasphemy) there can
be no reasonable Suspicion. Though of the House of Commons it is be come now
lawful to suspect and say any thing, that is evil. But no man but the Villains,
that design by dishonoring them, to change the Government has reason to
entertain such a thought. The Members of the Commons in our latest Parliaments,
were all upon the matter entirely conformable to the Church of England. They
were persons of the best Estates, Reputation and Honor in their Countries: And
they, or such as they are like to make our succeeding Parliaments.

I have leave to put them under the imprecation of the severest Curse, if ever
they do sacrilegiously impair the Church her Revenues. And I desire it may be
assisted with the hearty and passionate desires of all good Christians, that so
the curse I now pronounce may operate upon them who shall incur it. He that
designs, contrives or consents to spoil the Church, of any of her Endowments;
may a secret curse wast his substance. Let his Children be Vagabonds and beg
their bread in desolate places. Besides I know it is meditated, and designed by
many, and the best Men, that use to be sent to Parliaments, to redeem in part,
that infamous Sacrilege, that was committed in the times of H. 8. When the
Appropriations of Rectories made to religious Houses which had the cure of the
Parish, and ought at the dissolution of the Monasteries to be presented to,
were vested in the Crown whereby not only the Church was robbed, but the People
cheated of their Tithes which were theirs to give, tho not to retain, and their
praemium for the Priests Ministrations; which are now often most slenderly and
sometimes scandalously performed. As also to disencumber her Revenue of the
Charges and impositions of First Fruits and Tithes, which were imposed and
exacted by the Pope, upon his pretense of being the ecumenical Pastor and High
Priest of the Christian Church, and at that time conferred upon the Crown, and
are as unreasonably continued, as any thing can be that has a Law for a
pretext. But for this a compensation may be given to the Crown, and some way
will be found out for Augmentation of Vicaridges and reindowment of Churches,
that lost all in that unparrallel'd Sacrilege, committed by the unsatiable
Avarice of that haughty and luxurious Prince. These designs employ the care of
a great Number of our principal gentlemen, to purge the sin and dishonor
brought upon the Nation by that extraordinary King.

But if there were reason for any fear, that the Nation could again incur the
guilt of sacrilege. What Warranty can this give to any of her Clergy to slack
or abate the Zeal, that is due for the purity of her Doctrine, prudence of her
discipline, and her commendable decent and intelligible devotion. Are they
worthy to be named of her, that are ready to dissert her out of fear of a
remote possibility, that she may not always have such largesses, as she now
bestows upon her Sons? Will they prefer the gift to the Altar, and declare all
their godliness to be gain? To suffer Popery for such a consideration to be
induced upon her, is a far worse and more detestable sacrilege than that they
pretend to fear. This is to make the Anathemata of the Temple to inserve to the
dishonor of the Numen. To desecrate the Altar for the sake of the gift, and
will by the just judgment of God (I fear) bring the abomination of desolation
again into our holy places.

Let none of her Sons for the obtaining a dignity or a capacity for a double
benefice betray her by neglecting her interest, thinking with themselves that
she will otherwise be supported, for this their doings is no less than the sin
of Judas, who took money to betray our Lord, imagining, that he would by a
Miracle rescue himself from the hands of those to whom he sold and betrayed him.

The honest of our Clergy will have little satisfaction, when that day comes,
when they shall be reduced to Prayers and Tears, if they are failing in any
thing, that they may lawfully do to prevent that miserable State. Their Tears
will be as water spilt upon the ground, and their Prayers wiil never find
acceptance with God, nor be returned into their own bosom.

Disce Miser pigris, non flecti numina, votis.
Proesentemque adhibe, dum facis ipse, Deum.
But above all those fine men are not to pass unreproved, who are preparing
Pretenses for their Revolt to the Roman Church. They tell us that the
Reformation is depraved, and Popery it self is much amended since the
Reformation, that it is not so grossly superstitious (tho her superstitions are
still enough to stifle Religion) nor so fabulous in her Legends (she need make
no new ones since she gives Authority still to the old) nor so imposterous in
her cheats (for her Priests have not been hocus pocuses of late used so many
tricks of Legerdemain, and presented their puppey plays of moving and squeaking
images) since the Reformation as before.

But they may know, that the reason why we have not maintained the dignity of
the Reformation entire is this, for that Popery has not been utterly
extirpated from amongst us tho their frequent Treasons, and their notorious
seductious have deserved it. By its continuance amongst us, and the resorts of
their Priests hither, it has created and fomented divisions amongst us, and
corrupted her Children from their obedience to her guidance and instructions,
but she her self is still the same she was, the Reformation of the Church is
still entire. She has made good her departure from the Church of Rome, her
Adversaries have not been able to convict her of any fault therein, and by an
easy victory she has triumphed over all their oppositions.

And tho Popery appear not altogether so deformed by her Priests Artificial
dress, and the Representations they make of her to seduce us, and entice us to
come again under her yoke, yet we know she has more established her Tyranny,
by the Council of Trent, and more corrupted her Morals by her modern Casuists
since the Reformation, and thereby has rendered her self more detestable, and
for ever to be avoided. But though it may be true, that the Popish world is
beholden to the Reformation, and Popery it self is thereby amended in some
overt things, and reformed in those Countries, that have not reformed from her.
For in the Light of the Reformation they have seen Light, and have been ashamed
of some of their works of darkness, and do not bring into present use some of
their gross Impostures, and some worse than Pagan superstitions. Yet when this
Light is extinguished it will be a most dismal and eternal Night upon the
Christian world. If we return to her our Ears will be bored, and we shall be
irredeemably enslaved.

The spirit of Popery if it returns and possesses us again, that has been
walking in the reformed Countries as in dry places seeking Rest and finding
none, and finds us thus swept and garnished, will bring with it seven Devils
more wicked than it self, and our last estate will be worse than the first.

The Pride, Cruelty and Avarice, Domination and Luxury of their Priesthood,
will be aggravated upon us, and the minds of the Laity, more lowly depressed by
superstition and ignorance. The Gospel of Cardinal Palavicini will be the Canon
of the Christian Religion or it may be something worse; for who can tell what
will be the Religion, that that Church will offer in process of time, to the
World under the Christian Name. When the Pope by his pretended infallibility,
may make the Christian Religion what he please, by interpreting, adding,
altering or detracting with an uncontrollable Authority. For us therefore to
become Papists to return to the Church of Rome, acknowledge the Popes
infallibility (there is no other way to become Papists) is virtually to betray
the Christian Faith to renounce our Allegiance to our Lord Christ, to prefer
the Bulls of a Profane Pope, to the Holy Oracles of God, and the Revelation of
Jesus, God Blessed for ever.

With this Religion therefore we can never make an accommodation. We may as
well make a Covenant with Hell. This (as Dr. Jackson one of the glories of the
Church of England, in his Book called the Eternal Truth of Scriptures,
vehemently admonishes us) admits no terms of Parley for any possible
Reconcilement, whose following words to this purpose, I shall here transcribe.

The natural separation of this Island, from those Countries wherein this
Doctrine is profess, shall serve as an Everlasting Emblem of the Inhabitants,
divided Hearts at least in this point of Religion: And let them O Lord be cut
off speedily from amongst us, and their posterity transported hence, never to
enjoy again the least good thing this Land affords: Let no print of their
Memory be extant so much as in a Tree or Stone within our Coast. Or let their
Names be such as remain here after them be never mentioned, or always to their
Endless shame: Who living here amongst us will not imprint these or the like
wishes in their Hearts, and daily mention them in their Prayers.

Littora Littoribus contraria, fluctibus undas,
Imprecor arma armis, pugnent ipsique Nepotes.
which he thus renders.

Let our, and forain Coasts, join Battle in the Main,
Ere this fowl Blasphemy Great Britain ever stain.
Where never let it come, but floating in a Flood,
Of our, our Nephews and their Childrens Blood.
I shall only subjoyn my hearty Desires and Prayers, that we may all fear God,
and be zealous for his true Religion. Honor the King, and firmly adhere to the
Government, and in our several places steadily oppose and resist those
Villains, that are given to change. And that by our Union we may defeat the
crafty Designs of our cruel and implacable Enemies, who if they can continue
those Divisions they have made amongst us by their wicked Arts, will certainly
at length destroy us: Who are bent upon our Destruction, though they themselves
perish with us, and we cease to be a Nation, and our Language be forgotten in a
forain Captivity.

Sir
Now I have given you my Answer to your Reasons, to dissuade me from publishing
the Argument for the Bishops; by representing how few of the Clergy can with
Reason be thought guilty of Opinions, so mischievous to the Church and State,
which you charge to have generally corrupted them, and how easily and with
little consideration they will be laid aside by them.

I will make no other Apology for the publishing this, than that I have
communicated these thoughts to no Man alive, either of the Church of England or
any other Demomination, or consulted any Man's advice about it. That I can serve
the design of no party of men herein, nor any particular design of my own. I
wish, they can be serviceable in the least Degree to public Good. I have had
them by me a great while, and have considered them under the several Varieties
of Temper, that our Bodies are disposed to, which induce different thoughts,
and various Apprehensions in most things, under the several passions, that the
fluctuation of public Affairs have occasioned; under the Ebs and Flows of
Hopes and Fears in reference to the state of the Kingdom, for some length of
time. And finding them to have the same appearance, and to give me the same
satisfaction in all the several Postures and Views, that I could take of them.
I assure my self I was sincere when I thought, and that they result merely from
my Judgment (such as it is) uncorrupted. that I am not perverted or biased by
any secret passion or desire of any sort, which many times lurk and steel upon
us, deceive us unawar's, and undiscernedly abuse us. Sir, the Sum of my
Apology is this, that I know my self sincere of honest Intentions, moved by
nothing, but a hearty love and affection to our King, Religion and Country, and
for what any man shall think of me, I am not Solicitous.

Yours T. H.

FINIS.

