THE Middle-Way

In One paper of THE COVENANTS, LAW and GOSPEL.

With Indifferency between the LEGALIST and ANTINOMIAN.

By J. H.

Doing nothing by Partiality, LONDON, Printed for I, Parkhurst, at the Bible
and Three Crowns in Cheap Side, 1674.

OF The Covenants.
IT is one reason of my sending out these sheets thus in single Papers, that I
may have the opportunity my self of Reflection. If any thing be wanting I may
supply it; where I am in the dark I may explain it, or call for Light; If I
err, I may correct it, and put my self at ease still when I need, as to the
whole. It is verily a foolish thing I count for any man to think that he can
speak or write so, as what he has once spoken or written cannot be mended.
When we change our thoughts every day and week in our private Studies, what a
vain resolution is it, that because we have Preached or Printed thus, the
shutters must be drawn up presently, and no more Light be let, to come in upon
us. For my part I declare, I will never Preach or Print upon such terms, but
upon these: That I may be mistaken; That I may acknowledge it, if I be
convinced. That I may therefore be controuled, and have leave to be indifferent
to my own opinion, as to another.

Two Papers I have sent out already.

The first (or that which in order should be first) is of Election and
Redemption, wherein I observe some things to be misplaced at the Press, but so
long as the things be put in, and my notion proposed, I am sollicitous about
nothing else. That God would have all to be saved, and therefore prepares that
grace for all that is sufficient, which is his antccedent will: and that then
he foresees who they be that will comply with that grace and and who not, and
by his consequent will decrees the one to salvation, and the other to
damnation, is that Doctrine in the maine, that is the Rachel of the Schools. For
the latter part whereof, I have given my thoughts in that paper: the former
part requires a little further consideration. That the goodness of God is
advanced toward all, I like well, and that they lay the blame on man only that
he perishes, and that they are so careful against Pelagius, for therefore do
they bring in a sufficient grace for all, because man shall be allowed him to
do nothing that disposes him to conversion or justification by his own strength
without grace; nevertheless whether this sufficient grace of theirs is to pass
or not, is the question. There is the universal convourse of God with man in
all his acts as the first cause, in whom we live and move and have our being:
and there is that influx or assistance of his, we call Grace. It would be known
in the first place, what is the difference between these. That assistance of
God which goes to the acts of Nature, and the prefervation thereof, is the
common concourse of his Providence, that assistance of his which goes to the
production of acts above Nature, is called Grace. By Nature we mean corrupt
Nature, and by acts above Nature we mean such acts as we should not do
according to our natural inclination, if it were not for supernatural help,
that is, some further operation or influence on us from God then that which
goes only to our natural preservation. Grace then in short is that Divine
assistance which Elevates Nature, and heales it. This Grace is twofold, the
Divine motion, or habitual disposition; habitualis gratia, or divina motio; the
infused habit, or Divine operation. It is said now in the Schools that there is
this difference between infused habits, and acquired, that when the one do
introduce only a facility to the action but presupposes the power, the other do
bring the power it self, as without which we can do nothing. This is spoken I
count very agreeably to the Scripture, which sets forth man in his natural
state as dead in sin, and the work of Grace by regeneration and new life, with
many the like expressions: nevertheless, as there must be some limits fixed for
the right interpretation of such places which in effect must come to that which
I have given in my first paper, (that there is indeed such an indisposition on
all men through original corruption, as that there is no man ever does, did, or
will repent, do his duty, and live, but it is, was, and must be through Gods
especial Grace, and yet are we to account for all that, that they have power,
that they may if they will, that the covenant of grace requires not any thing
which is impossible, for both these are to be held): So must I crave liberty to
enter my different opinion. It was Pelagius his conceit ( I have noted in one
of my other papers) that grace served only to help the power, when St.
Augustine proves that it inclines the will, and works in us the deed: my
thoughts now lie partly between both, that the Posse or Power indeed is of
Nature, and Grace or the operation of God is that which draws that power into
the Will, or Act, that is makes us willing; This act of the Will lays an
impression on the soul inclining it to the like acts; These acts iterated turns
that inclination to an habit, that is Habitual grace, infused if you please,
per modum acquisitorum. The agere, the act must presuppose the posse, the
power, That Is certain. If the habit then brought the power, the Divine motion,
or preventing grace which goes before the habit, did nothing. You will say,
There is a double power, a remote or next power. The remote power is of nature,
but the next power is of grace, and sufficient grace gives to all a next power.
Let me ask you then, whether there be any further grace after we have the next
power, to make us willing, or to give us also the will and deed. If you grant
it, you may make the most of your sufficient grace, I will not quarrel with you
for it: But when the posse (the power) is of nature, and the Will and Deed is
of that grace which is more than sufficient, I would feign know why nature and
effectual grace alone should not serve the turn, and whether sufficient grace
over and above these is not indeed more than needs? Here I stick where I left.

The second paper is of justification, and of this I count there are two parts.
The one is, a reconciliation of St. James and Paul, and so of faith and works
in that point: which I must needs say, having lain in my thoughts (and the main
notion in Paper by me) this 16 or 18 Years or upwards, I cannot but be very
thoroughly satisfied with, and much the rather, when I see the same growing up
in late Books; as particularly in those most judicious temperate Theses of Le
Blanc, and Mr. Trumans Great Propittation. The other is concerning the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness, wherein I will confess, though in my
judgment I am persuaded that what I have writ is the truth, and it is nothing
but truth that made me write it: yet does my heart a little misgive me, that it
were better to let pious men alone to such apprehensions as they have imbibed,
though mingled with much darkness and some error, in such a point as this,
where so much of their peace and life is bound up, then to offer them any
unsettlement by cleerer light, though I were able indeed to bring it to them. I
may be allowed to be sorry if I offend any body, but I ought to have a care I
stumble none, who are good men and live godly; Neither would I streighten my
own soul. If there be any thing more therefore in the imputation of Christ's
righteousness then I have expressed in that paper, which I know not, I do not
part with my portion in it, I protest thus much, but will rather renounce all
upon the conviction to cleave to it.

That Christ's righteousness does justify us from the Law, and so from sin, and
from condemnation, I do hold no less then others: but that Christ's
righteousness does justify us by the Law, is an overgrown conception. It is
certain, that no works of man be we never so holy, are able to stand before God
in his disstrict judgment, that is, if he should deal with us according to the
exact justice of the Law without showing us any mercy, which will be
acknowledged by Protestants and Papists, who are ready to pray both with David,
Enter not into judgment with thy servants O Lord, for in thy sight shall no
flesh living be justified. If any Papist then shall think that man's
righteousness is made so perfect by Christ's merits: or, any Protestant that
Christ's righteousness it self is so made ours, as that we are justified by the
Law, upon that account, they are both mistaken. This is the only true
extremity on both sides: for it is not by the Law, but by Faith; by the
Evangelical covenant, or by Grace that we are justified. We are not under the
Law, says the the Apostle, but under grace. It is enough for a poor sinner to
have a righteousness imputed to him without works, and that he is pardoned: but
to have a righteonsness imputed to him with works, is more then we can sind to
be allowed him. Christ's righteousness is such, and to have that made ours in it
self, or so, as that in Gods reckoning we must be as righteous as he, I must
needs say, it is not harder perhaps to believe that the bread is turned into
Christ's body (where we have a text for it) in the Sacrament: then to believe
such a conceit (for which we have no Scripture at all) in the matter of
Justification. What then? Do I deny Imputation? No, but I explain it. It is by
the righteousness of Christ, not inherent in us, our Divines will say
Ordinarily, but imputed to us, that we are justified. And what if I thus
interpret this for them, that is, not as if we had done in his person what
Christ did, but by his righteousness made ours in the effects only? So the very
Learned Bishop Forbs expressly, Hoc est, Quoad effectum and fructum (See
Considerationes modestae. De justificatione, l. 2. c. 2.) I will use the same
words as they use, but I am not bound to the same construction. Even as I will
speak of man's insufficiency (I mentioned before) as other Divines do, and as
the Scriptures do, that we can do nothing: but I will keep the due
interpretation. I will say we can, and that we cannot, without loss of my
liberty: for I must understand it with its right measures. I will say I can in
confession of my sin, and acknowledging God just: I will say I cannot in the
sense of my corruption, and the imploring his grace.

Indeed a man can hardly consider the Doctrine of St. James never so little with
that of Paul which is one part of my paper, but it will lead him to the other,
which is to see that what our Protestants say ordinarily on this matter, does
need a favorable exposition. It is a jejune thing, I count, to bring the great
dispute that Paul has with the Jews about justification to this result only,
whether we are justified by Faith, or the proper Work or Fruits of it? It is
but a little more satisfactory to bring it only to this, whether it be by the
observation of Moses Law? For though this was the occasion of the dispute, and
the Apostle therefore does show them how it was by the Promise, and so by Faith
that Abraham and the Jews themselves had life, and not by the Law, which was
but a Schoolmaster to lead them thereunto, or unto Christ: yet it is manifest,
that he advances the point higher, while he tells them that by Works neither
Jew nor Gemile could be justified, so that by works he must mean the
observation of that Law of works which was common to both, and not Moses Law
only: and the resolution of the dispute in both Apostles comes to this (as I
have said) that it is by the performance of the covenant of Grace, and not of
the ovenant of works, or Law of Moses, that a man is to look for life
everlasting. I must add, Nor are they to be heard in a third place, who say,
that the dispute between Paul and the Jews is neither of these, but whether we
are justified by our own righteousness, or by the righteousness of Christ, and
so resolve that it is not by any works which we do, even Faith it self as a
work, but by the works Christ has done for us, that is by the obedience of his
life and death only. For though this be taught ordinarily by our Protestants,
and is coincident with the first result, there is one thing I must say these
Divines have not considered which I have offered them in my paper, that must
bring them to another understanding. It is this, that the Apostle does indeed
stand much upon the Righteousness of God in opposition to works, in the
business of justification, but never opposes our works to the Righteousness of
Christ: the Righteousness of Christ in their sense being truly a very contrary
thing to the Righteousness of God in the sense of the Apostle. The
righteousness of God according to the A ostle, if I may then describe it but as
well as I can, and as the thing is, and a little more fully then I have in my
former paper, is on Gods part, his taking our human frailey or fallen nature
into that meet consideration, as not to deal with us in his district judgment
which we cannot bear, but according to his Covenant of Mercy: the
righteousness, sacrifice, atonement or satisfaction of Christ being supposed
as the foundation upon which his Justice does stand good, notwithstanding this
condescension: And consequently on Man's part, this righteousness is our
imperfect duty performed in sincerity according to this new Law, and so for
Christ's sake accepted to Salvation. In this sense am I apt to understand that
everlasting Righteousness which is brought in, by the Messiah, or by his
covenant, in Daniel: and in this sense do I construe that Title, The Lord our
Righteousness. Only when I have said in my former paper, that it is not
appropriated to the second Person, I desire not to be so taken, as if I
supposed that by the Branih in the two Texts of Jeremy where we find it,
Zcrubabble only was meant (though a total silence in the new Testament of so
pertinent a quotation for Christ, if it were spoken of him, might well tempt
Grotius to that interpretation) but that, the Divinity of Christ being thereby
asserted, it is a Title that must belong to him as God, and not as Second
person. For the Son is Lord, and the Father is Lord, and the Holy Ghost Lord:
and yet not three Lords, but one Lord, The Lord our Righteousness.

There is the uncreated, absolute righteousness of God, which is the Divine
essence it self, for as God is Truth in the abstract, so is he Righteousness:
or the created, relative righteousness of God, that is his righteousness set
forth in relation to us, which consists in his dealing with us as his Creatures
according to our conditions. This relative righteousness then is double. The
Righteousness or Justice of God according to the Covenant of works: and the
righteousness or equity of God according to the Covenant of grace. The one I
count to be that our Divines call his Strict: the other his Paternal Justice.
When God made man at first and gave him the Law of his Creation, he was to
deal with him according to this perfect Law, and it was but equal according to
his perfect state, and this being the original righteousness (as I may say) of
God in relation to us, there are none of us but do find some sense of it in our
hearts, that makes us not so much only to fear, as to be afraid of him under
that apprehension. But there is another righteousness then this, which was ever
afoot in the world since the promise of the woman's seed, or else there were no
man could have bin Saved, though it be said to be now manifested (as brought
in, in Daniels phrase) because the reason upon which it is founded, that is
man's reconciliation to God by Christ, is revealed by the Gospel, and this is
the righteousness of God opposed to works (or to his strict Justice which he
was bound to exercise according to the Covenant of works) that is so magnified
by the Apostle. And here now is a distinction to be used which I want Terms to
express. For this righteousness of God must be considered with regard to
himself, which is his dealing with us according to the Covenant of Faith for
Christ's sake, when he might deal with us according to the Covenant of Nature
if he would: and with regard to us, or to the condition upon which he does so
mercifully deal with us. As the Love of God is taken in Scripture both for his
Love toward us, and our Love of him: So is the Righteousness of God taken for
both these, his dealing with us according to this covenant, and the condition
on our part which he accepts. And hence is it, that when it is called the
Righteousness of God in one place, it is called the Righteousness of Faith in
another; and in a third, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. Now when
it is our faith, our repentance, our new obedience which is the Righteousness
of God it self (taken -- help me to two Terms) whereby we are justified in
opposition to the works of the Law, which no man can perform to be justified by
them: and our Divines by works will understand all good works, even this faith
it self as a work (as was said), and our Evangelical obedience, insomuch as
when there is no righteousness but what is without us can be opposed to these,
it makes them by the Righteousness of God to understand the Righteousness of
Christ who is God, and by faith the righteousness of Christ apprehended by
Faith, which are in good earnest conceptions so strained: it appears (if I may
use those words in humility) how being ignorant of the Righteousness of God in
the right notion, and going about to establish in a contrary vein to the Jews a
righteousness which is not their own but another, in the stead of that which
it is not, they have not submitted to the truth, in this Doctrine of
Justification.

And here in now (farther) does appear the ground of reconciliation between
the Papists and us upon the point. For when the one and the other (let their
Books be consulted) do go on the supposition that it is by the Law (the Law of
works) that we are justified, this Hypothesis being removed, the opposition on
both sides falls to the ground. That no man can bring or plead any such
righteousness of his own before God as answers the Law, the Protestant must
needs be in the right, and consequently if it were by the Law that we must
stand or fall at his Tribunal, there was a necessity for their bringing in the
righteousness of Christ made ours by faith (as they do) to justify us: but when
indeed it is not so, when it is not (I say) by the Law, but by the Covenant of
Grace, or by the Gospel that we are to be judged, it is some wonder to me, this
plain truth should be no better understood. That Gods judging a man to have
performed the condition of the covenant of grace is the accounting or declaring
him righteous; and that Gods accounting a man righteous is his justification.
Let no man deceive you (says St. John) he that does righteousness, is
righteous. That righteousness which makes a man righteous and denominates him
righteous, is that righteousness which makes God account him righteous. But
this is the righteousness which he does. Note it, for it is express. And what
righteousness is that? Why, Not the righteousness of works which no man does:
but the righteousness of the Gospel, that is in the style of the other Apostle,
a righteousness without works (to wit, without the works of the Law, or perfect
works, in the sense he says also God justifies the ungodly) so that it is by
Grace, while it it by this Righteousness (which does and must lean on the
merits of Christ no less then we say Faith it self does) that we are justified
and saved.

That the end of Christ's coming into the world, of our redemption, and the
Covenant of Grace, was that we should be holy and righteous is said ordinarily
by Divines according to the Scriptures, but the right and plain understanding
or reason of what they say, is not so ordinary. He has chosen up in Christ
that we should be holy. He has redeemed us from iniquity that we should be a
peculiar People. We are his workmanship created unto good works in (or through)
Christ Jesus. When God made man at first and gave him a Law, it was that he
should live Holy. When righteousness then was the end of his Creation and the
Law thereof, how is this said to be the end of his Redemption? I answer.
Righteousness (or holiness as they are one) we must know, does lie in a
conformity to the Law which God gives us. There is nothing else, and nothing
less then this (the full performance of a Law given) that is Righteousness.
Upon this account, as soon as man once fell and broke the Law of his creation,
it was impossible he should be righteous any more, unless there were a new Law
brought in, in the performance whereof he might attain to that again which he
had lost. Now to this end was it, that Christ came and died, this was the very
main business (I count) of his Redemption, even the procuring this new Law, or
another Law with lower terms, which some men performing, they do thereby
become righteous, and so have righteousness, according to that Law, imputed to
them for remission, and life eternal. Here you see what that righteousness
indeed is which Christ is said to bring in, and in what sense he has brought
it in, or how such Texts (as those before) do attribute our Holiness to him.
The obedience of Christ's life and death, we know, was fulfilled on earth, and
of this he himself has once said, It is finished: But the righteousness he is
said to bring in, is called an Everlasting righteousness. And what then can
that be, but the righteousness of the Gospel, which upon the same account also
is called the Everlasting Gospel? That is, because it is by this righteousness
in opposition to that of the Law (or the righteousness of works) that all men
from the beginning of the world to the end of it, (and so is it to be accounted
ever of force) do obtain everlasting Salvation.

I know the great difficulty of this Doctrine will lie on the point of
remission. Our Divines do generally place justification in the remission of
Sin; so do the Papists (with something else), and so have I my self after
others. Nevertheless, as I remember St. Augustine in one place does find fault
with this in Pelagius: so has the perplexity of it of late lead me into the
like thoughts. The truth is, Pardon of Sin is a benefit unto which the
justified person is adjudged, as eternal life is: but remission of Sin must not
be made the formal reason of justification. Our Divines may define
justification to be an Act of Grace whereby God gives us Eternal Life (or a
right to it,) as well as, an act of grace whereby he pardons our sins. That
act, that very only act wherein the form of justification does lie, is Gods
accounting or pronouncing a man righteous, and this is a forensical act,
according to Law, the Law, or Covenant of grace; Which covenant promising
Forgivencss and Life upon the performance of its Conditions, when a man has
performed them, he has a right to those benefits, and when God does declare or
account that a man has performed them (which is all one as to judge him
righteous), these benefits flow to him from that judgment (or are conferred on
him by that act) as Effects of that cause, and consequently cannot be the very
act it self, which is the cause of them.

To forgive a man's sin, and declare him righteous are two things inconsistent
one with another in the same respect, and therefore when God pronounces a man
just, it is according to the Law of Faith, and when he pardons his Sin, it is
in respect to the Law of works. And how then can two acts incompatable but in
diverse respects ( cum omne ens sit unum) be made to enter one and the same
definition?

It is true as all agree, that there are no works that man does, or can do,
able to make God any amends for our offenses, so that remission of sin must be
attributed altogether to the merits of Christ in regard to the atonement made.
But we must distinguish of Remission, Remission is either Conditional and
Universal as it lies in the Covenant, and is the purchase of Christ: or Actual,
as it lies in the application thereof to particular persons upon performance of
the condition. When Divines do say we can do nothing our selves for procuring
reconciliation and remission, it is to be understood of Conditional universal
remission. No mortal could do any thing toward the obtaining of that. God was
in Christ reconciling the World unto himself not imputing their trespasses. But
as for remission Actual, that man must be blind who sees not that God does
every where require us to repent, believe, confess our faults, forsake them, do
good works, forgive others, that we may have pardon, and be saved. Conditional
pardon now is antecedent to a man's justification, and contained in our
redemption. In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness
of Sins. Actual remission is subsequent to justification, for we must be
supposed first to have performed the condition and be pronounced righteous, and
then pardoned. When there is no remission then but what does either go before,
or follow justification, it cannot be made the very act it self of our
justification.

There is one Text may be opposed. Even as David also described the blessedness
of the man unto whom God imputes Righteousness without works. Saying, Blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgiven. It seems that the Righteousness which
Paul speaks of without works in the one verse, is described by pardon in the
other. This I my self have alleged, but upon farther consideration I answer.
The man to whom God imputes righteousness without works, or the blessedness of
that man, is described: but we may suppose, not the Righteousness without
works. The scope of the Apostle is plainly to show us only, that it is not by
works of the Law, or such works as would make the reward of debt and not of
grace (as appears in the immediate verses before) which are perfect works,
that a man is justified. And he proves it by this argument, because the man is
blessed whose sins are forgiven; that is as much as to say, not he who is
without sin, but he who has sin and it is forgiven. The man who is blessed is
justified. But the man who is blessed has sin to be forgiven. Therefore the
righteousness which a man has, or is imputed to him, is not a righteousness
according to the Law of works, but according to the Covenant of Grace. This I
say is the scope of the place. Gods imputing Righteousness to a person is
indeed a phrase signifying Gods accounting him righteous or justifying him: and
the Apostle Proves a man is justified without works, (that is perfect works)
because he has sin to be covered. I will yet repcate, The man to whom
righteousness is imputed without works, is pardoned: but it follows not, that
this Righteousness without works is pardon. To have righteousness imputed to a
man without works, is all one as to have faith imputed to him for
righteousness, so repentance or evangelical obedience, and that is not pardon,
though these are never divided from the same subject. I will conclude therefore
with that I have said once before, and will say it again at my parting with the
point, that it is strange to me our Protestant Divines should be so offward to
this clear Determination. To wit, God judges (and will judge) all men according
to the Gospel; Those who perform the condition of it, he accounts or pronounces
righteous; They whom he accounts righteous, are justified. I will add, That,
the righteousness of Christ which is the meritorious cause of our justification
without dispute on all hands (that is the impulsive procatartick cause,) which
always comes under the Efficient, cannot for the same reason be the Formal, or
Material cause of it. It is not the infusion of Righteousness with the Papist,
which is our sanctification; nor the imputation of Christ's righteousness with
the Protestant, which is not to be understood but in genere causae Efficientis;
nor remission of Sin, with Protestant and Papist, which I have now bin
disproving: but the imputing to a person his performance of the new covenant
for righteousness, or the accounting or pronouncing him righteous according to
that covenant, is the form, formal Cause, or formal Reason of his justification.

Do not think this strange, Justification (I will grant) virtually or Eminenter
(as unum aggregatione) contains in it many things, and so remission among
others (for we must find line to speak as Divines use): but Justification
Formaliter (as unum simplex) I say, is only Gods pronouncing us Just (or
sincere penitent believers), and remission is a benefit which in order of
Nature does follow the performance of that condition.

And so I proceed to my third Paper, Of the Covenants, Of the Law and Gospel.

For the Doctrine of the Covenants. There is the Covenant of Works (say
Divines): and the Covenant of Grace. The Covenant of works (say they) was made
with Adam in his integrity being that Law which is written in all men's hearts,
and so requires perfection, and for the least transgression threatens Death.
The Covenant of grace is made with man in his Estate fallen (or with Christ in
his behalf), and requires only our Faith, repentance, and sincerity, unto Life,
which being held forth under the Title of the Promise to Adam, Abraham, David,
and all during the Law, was ratified by the death and blood of Christ the
Redeemer under the Gospel, and so promulgated to the world, to continue still
on force (and in that, as in one regard, called new) as long as that lasts.
Behold the days come says the Lord when I will make a new Covenant, not
according to the Covenant I made with their fathers in the day when I took them
by the hand to lead them out of Egypt. Here is the Old Covenant and the New
Covenant. The Old is that which God made with the Jews when Moses lead them in
the wilderness. The New is that which we have under the Gospel. The old
Covenant then is not the Covenant of works; for that was made with all in Adam,
and as written in our hearts, must be eternally obligatory. But the old
Covenant was made with the Jews in opposition to other Nations, and as peculiar
to them is vanished, and binds not. Neither is it the Covenant of grace for the
same reason, as also because the covenant of grace is the new covenant, but the
New is not the Old. The Old and New covenants say Divines indeed ordinarily,
are both the covenant of grace in opposition to that of works, the same in
substance, but differing in the Administration. But this with me is not so easy
to be received without the distinction of an A and The in the case. The Old
covenant may be a covenant of grace, or covenant of works, or both, but not the
covenant of works, or the covenant of grace. There are some plead it is a
subservient covenant as Camero. Some that it is a mixed covenant as Ball. Some
that it is a covenant of works as the Loyden Divines. The most of our own late
Divines, do make it a covenant of grace. Whereof one voluminous Author denying
the other three opinions, does yet say it was so dispensed as to tender life
both upon the condition of Faith, and works. But if it proposed life on
condition of perfect doing, it was a covenant of works: If on believing too, a
Covenant mixed both of Works and Grace: And as perfect doing was urged only in
tendency to believing, a Covenant-Subservient; and so all say true as to the
main; and yet none so distinctly true, as to leave any enquiring man without
confusion in what they say. There is one thing then I apprehend will serve much
for the enodation of many difficulties in these matter, and that is to conceive
aright what the Old Covenant is: And there is another like it to the same
purpose, to know what kind of Covenant it was.

As for the former, we have hitherto been seeing but what it is not only; now
to understand what it is, Let us separate what Moses did deliver to the
Israelites, from that which was before in promise to the Patriarks as single by
it self, and this is the Old Covenant. Or, take that, and all that whatsoever,
and in what manner soever, that was added to the Covenant of Grace, which
Abraham and the Patriarks were under, and that abstracted therefrom, is I
count, the Old Covenant. Let me yet speak more fully; Take Abraham before he
was ninety years old, when he at first Believed, and that Faith was imputed to
him for Righteousness, upon which he became the Father of the faithful, while
as yet he was in his Uncircumcision (for the Law of Circumcision which was
after given in peculiar reference to his natural Seed the Jews, in pursuance of
the temporal Benediction, is to be reckoned as Preambulatory to the Law, and
belonging to it), and when you have pared away Circumcision, and all that which
Moses commanded the Jews afterward, from Walk before me only, and be perfect;
all this rest, this pared away from that, whatsoever it be, is I say, the Old
Covenant, or the Law strictly taken. From this in the first place, we have
light to distinguish between the Law taken strictly and largely: In regard
whereof, we shall find the Apostles sometimes proving the Righteousness of Faith
from the Law, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets; and another time
setting the Law and Gospel at the widest distance and opposition. As the Law is
taken comprehensively for the promise to Abraham, as well as the Covenant made
with the Jews (that is for the whole state they stood in, who were under the
Law, by virtue of the Covenant confirmed to their fore Fathers as by virtue of
that given by Moses,) the Law and Gospel are confounded. As the Law is taken
strictly or precisely for the Old Covenant, or the Law of Moses with
Circumcision its appurtenance, that is for all that apart that was added to the
promise before-going, and abstracted therefrom as I have said, so are they
distinguished, and their differences to be owned and maintained. In the next
place, we may understand from this, how the Jews were under both conditions of
Believing and Doing: Of doing this and live; and of believing also that they
might be saved. To wit, As the Covenant of Grace was delivered to their
Forefathers, and so on foot before, it must needs hold forth life to them on
their Faith, as well as to Abraham their Progenitour, who received Circumcision
as a seal of Righteousness thereby (or to come thereby), and not by the Law,
which as yet was not given. And as the Law was added (as the Apostle speaks) to
this Covenant or Promise, it did tie the Jews to a performance of it as a
condition of living by it, in some sense, as neither the Patriarks before, nor
we since are under; and in regard whereof that which is said by a reverend
person, that the Old Testament-Spirit was a fearing Spirit, with the like
expressions, are not without a truth in them, that desires more consideration
then One of late does give them: Especially when the Apostle is so express that
the Jews were under a Schoolmaster, and we are not under that Schoolmaster.
That the Covenant from Sinai engendered to Bondage; but where the Spirit of the
Lord is, or the New Testament is, there is Liberty. From this yet in the third
place, we may enlarge our light further, to judge of that abrogation of the
Law, or deliverance from it, which Christians have under the Gospel. A glorious
thing (the Apostle counts it), that puts us directly into such an estate and
condition as the Patriarks, and those holy men before Abraham were in, to live
according to the light and liberty of their Consciences, that is according to
the Law of Nature, which as it is in the hands of Christ, and not of Moses, to
wit, as delivered from the Yoke of his Ceremonies, and the superstition of
Idolaters, and administered with Grace and the Spirit, with Grace in God's
acceptance of our sincerity instead of perfect obedience for the Redeemers
sake, and with the Spirit in his assistance of us for the performance, is both
the Universal Religion of Mankind, and the substance of that which is
Christian unto this day. I should quote Eusebius, De praep. Evan. See his Ecc.
Hist. l. 1. c. 5. From whence also, we see in the way, how the Covenant of
Grace which Abraham and all those holy men which went before him, or that ever
were, have had as well as we, is yet called the New Covenant; and that is, it
is called New, as the lump is called a new lump by the Apostle to the Corinths.
That Church was leavened by the ill example of vicious Members, particularly of
the incestuous person, they are therefore commanded to cast him out, and that
they should not mingle themselves, or keep company with the seandalous, and in
so doing, they should become, as it were, a new body, or lump, though they were
still otherwise but the same Community. Purge out therefore the old Leaven,
that you may be a new Lump. So is it with the Covenant, it was made by God with
all mankind in Christ, ever since the beginning of the World, and confirmed to
the Patriarchs (it being impossible else that any should have been saved), and
yet it is called a New Covenant in relation to us under the Gospel; because I
say that, that which was added to it by Moses, to wit, all that which properly
is the Old Covenant, is removed or purged away, as the Leaven in the Jews
Feast, by Christ our Passover, who has been Sacrificed, and made for us that
expurgation. And if that which is done away was glorious, how much more that
which remains? That which is done away, was the Ministration of death engraven
in stone, and of the Letter that kills: That which remains, is the
Ministration of the New Testament, of the Spirit which gives Life, and of
Righteousness. That which remains, I pray note it, That cannot be said to
remain which was not before extant. The Covenant of Grace with the Patriarchs,
and the New Covenant with us, being the very same, as I have said, but ours
only called New, (or renewed) upon the abolishing of that which was
super-added, as upon this remaining too it self, never to wax old and vanish.

For the latter, what kind of Covenant I take this to be, I am now in order to
tell you. The Old Covenant, as to me it seems, was a kind of Political
Covenant made with the Nation of the Jews, as Princes compacts are with their
people, when they first set up Government. God promises them his Protection,
that he would lead them to a fruitful Land; overcome all their Enemies, with
the like blessings; and they promise him they will be ruled by him. To this
purpose did God in sundry ways appear to them to Moses, to their Elders, to
them all in the Clouds and Fire; and then causes a Tabernacle to be made for
him, which was a Keeping house among them, where the Sacrifices and Offerings
was his Provision, and the Priests his Servants that lived on him; and unto
that Tabernacle and Ark, might they repair for Counsel and Judgment. This
People then being peculiarly under a Theocracy, which Samuel in two places does
expressly signify (at least until the time of Saul,) so that the Church and
Commonwealth of the Jews were but one, according to the Apostle; it is no
wonder if Religion be made their Laws, and so required of them, together with
other political Ordinances and Statutes, for their happiness or public peace
as a Nation. From hence is it, that though their Law is not to be judged the
Covenant of Works, or the Covenant of Grace, either of the two themselves, yet
may we expect that it should represent both the one and the other to them;
because in the knowledge of both does the business of Religion, and the whole
of it, virtually consist. In the delivery of the Moral Law, and that with
Thunder and Lightning, and such Terror as we read of it, they had a
representation of the Covenant of Nature, which quafaedus is doubtless in our
fallen Estate a Ministration only of Wrath, or Law of sin and death. In their
Ceremonial Offerings, and Priestly appointments, though there was a remembrance
still of sin, and so matter of bondage and sear, yet had they types of Christ,
of remedying Mercy, and the Glory to come. These Sacrifices were brought
directly as Mulcts to their King, to deliver them from the danger of present
punishment, being Redemptions of their lives, which else they should have
forfeited by his Laws, and served, I have said, to the maintenance of his
house, the Tabernacle and Temple which he was pleased to keep up among them:
Nevertheless that does not hinder, but God Almighty might make use thereof,
farther, for types and representations of other things, that is to say
Spiritual, and so the Law be a Paedagogy under a temporal dispensation, leading
many to Heaven. This is certain, that the Covenants of Nature and Grace being
made with Mankind, are not matters of concernment only to the Jews, but to the
whole world as well as to them for everlasting life and death; and it is not to
be conceived, therefore, that either of them should receive any detriment by
the Covenant made with that particular Nation. This, I say, that the Covenant
confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was four hundred and thirty
years after, cannot disannul, that it should make the Promise of no effect. The
Covenant of God in Christ, is the covenant of grace, and that we see a-foot in
the world before the Law, and before Abraham; for, when it was confirmed to
Abraham, it must be in being before on necessity, and ever was since the Fall,
or else none after could be saved. And if this be not disannul'd, then cannot
that, whatsoever it be, which is given by this covenant, come to the Jews by
the Law. For as the Apostle argues, If there had been a Law given that could
have given life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law; If the Law
of Nature could be kept by man, there would be no need of a covenant of Grace
by Christ: So do I argue, if Righteousness unto justification of life, was to
come by the Law, the Promise, or Covenant of Grace, as soon as that was given,
might be spared. But for-as-much as eternal life and justification does come
only by the covenant of grace, it follows that the covenant made with the Jews,
must needs be a covenant which concerned their outward state, or political
welfare, as I have said; and that neither Salvation nor Condemnation, as to the
life to come, was the primary intention, or the direct and proper effect of it.

If Salvation, or Condemnation was the proper issue of the Law, then could
neither any of those holy men as the Patriarchs, nor any of the wicked world,
who were before the Law, as the men of Sodom and Gomorah be condemned at the
day of Judgment: For where no Law is, there is no Transgression, and so no
Condemnation. And indeed, if this covenant was conceived any other than some
such thing as I make it, how could it be, that the most substantial part, or
body of the Jews Nation should be Sadduces in Christ's time? The Covenant of
Nature is that which lays all the world guilty before God; so that He who
believes not, is Condemned already; he is condemned by the Law of his Creation
writ in his heart; he needs no outward Law to condemn him. Whatsoever things
the Law says, it says to them who are under the Law: If there were no Curse,
nor Death, but that which the Jews Law does speak, then were there none but the
Jew should suffer Condemnation. If a man on the contrary side does believe and
repent, he needs no other Law than that of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus,
to set him free from this Law of Sin and Death. So long as he does not believe,
he abides under that Wrath, and it is not for want of Faith as the cause of his
Condemnation (to justify God in not giving all men that alike), but for want of
it ( N B,) as that which should be the remedy, that he perishes. Salvation
then, and Condemnation which is Eternal, does proceed from the covenants of
grace and works; and it is not to be imagined that God should deal otherwise
with the Jews than with the rest of the world, as to the terms of a future
life. I have set before you Life and Death, says Moses. And Cursed be he that
continues not in all the Law to do it. But what this Life and Death, these
Blessings and Curses are, we see express in Deuteronomy, and in the fifth
Commandment. The Laws which God did give the Jews, were about Religion, and
about Civil matters. Religion concerned their Eternal, civil things their
Temporal good. Yet whether they are commanded the observation of the one or the
other, the sanction of both does lie in the threats and promises of Temporal
blessings and judgments. Even as in the Laws of our Realm, Rellgion and the
Service of God is required under a civil forfeiture, when it is the Gospel it
self must threaten farther Vengeance to the Transgressor. In short, herein will
lie the mystery and sum of all. The Law, as it was in the hand of Moses, and
given to the peculiar Nation of the Jews, must be no other than a temporal
covenant; yet did this temporal covenant contain in it patterns of things (as
the Apostle speaks) in the Heavens. And as the ten Commandments particularly,
written in stone, are a transcript of the Moral Law written by Nature in our
hearts, I do take the Law to represent the covenant of works, and by virtue of
that representation alone, or of that it represents, does it operate to future
judgment, and is the ministration of condemnation. The Law indeed, taken at
large, for all that is contained in the whole books of the Old Testament, may
be supposed to hold forth whatsoever is in the covenant of works and grace: but
the Law taken separately from both, as a third covenant, cannot hold forth any
other than the external government of God with propriety over the Jews, and
that consisting in these two things, to wit, a hard task of burdensome duties
under the danger of temporal judgments, and a redress from them by Sacrifices;
the one typifying our estate according to the Law of works; and the other, the
grace which comes to us by Christ Jesus.

What use may be made of this, I leave to minds which are searching. I am never
out of my way I count, so long as I meet with any such. Only there is one in a
late Book, who seems to fall a little too hard on a grave Preacher for making
the dispensation of the Old Testament, in some Sermons of his, to be more
terrible than ours under the New: For doing which he has thus much the more
reason indeed, if (as I say) that life and death which is Eternal, comes not
from the Law, but from the Covenants of Works and Grace, which were before it,
and cannot be made void by it. There is therefore the Believing Penitent
Sinner, and the Unbelieving and Impenitent. For the man that sins and repents
not, it is true that he has no less reason to fear under the Gospel than under
the Law; but rather the more, in regard that the threatenings of the Law were
directly, I take it only of temporal punishments, but the Gospel does
manifestly threaten Eternal. Of how much sorer punnishment (says the Scripture)
worthy he is? But for the Penitent and Believing, the case is otherwise, and
the Reprover should know it is in regard of such, that this difference is to be
holden. It is true then, the Penitent Jew had the Promise to trust to as well
as we, but yet he was still under the Law, and not we: and the Law it self did
engender to bondage, as in the Scripture before quoted. He had the Promise as
well as we, but he could not look unto it as well as we, he had a vail over him
as we have not, that he could not steadfastly look unto the end of that which
was abolished. This is most apparent that the Jews were in the dark as to their
understanding of the covenant, and Christ that End, after another manner than
we are, and the more they were in the dark, the more must they be in doubts and
fears, and upon this foundation is this difference built ordinarily, I suppose,
by the Understanding. Nevertheless, there is yet this one thing or two farther,
that under the Law, there was recourse to be had still unto their Sacrifices,
which were remembrances of sin, I said before, and consequently of terror and
bondage, seeing if they failed, they had reason of fear in regard of temporal
punishments, as much more then we, as they had to expect temporal blessings
more then we upon their obedience, upon the account they were under a peculiar
temral covenant. Add hereunto, These temporal things under that covenant were
resemblances, patterns, and in some sense portendments of future. To what end
then served the Law, says the Apostle, as you may likewise adjoyn from this
supposition? It was added because of Transgressions. The Law entered that the
offense might abound. Again, By the Law comes the knowledge of sin; and though
sin was in the world before, men were not apt to impute it to themselves
without a Law. The Law then was for the brideling the Jews from sin, and
through the conviction of sin upon the Conscience, and that temporal death they
saw due to them in the Beasts that were slain in their behalfs, they might be
driven in the sense of their spiritual estates, to the remedying Law of Mercy
upon Repentance which is the substance of the Promise which God had given to
their Forefathers, and has established in the Gospel. For Christ was the end
of the Law for Righteousness; and the Law was a Schoolmaster (says the Apostle)
to drive us to Christ.

Of the Law and Gospel.
FOR this Theme, I shall have need to speak the less in regard of what has
been said already. That which I have to offer, I shall serve in by way of
striking light at a passage or two in a Book which has been intended in the
Chapter before, but not named. I am sensible how many there are, who being
taken with the Preaching of free grace, are too apt to disrellish other
Preachers, who press more unto Duty; and I think that Writer does not therefore
spend his pains without good cause about the consistency of good works with the
Gospel and Justification. It is objected against such Divines, that they are
but Legal Preachers, and that they impeach the grace of God by putting men so
much on Doing. To the one his Answer is, They Preach not the Works of Moses
Law, but the Works Christ enjoins: To the other he tells us, The Law and Gospel
both put us upon doing, but not the same thing, nor with the same disposition,
which he explains; The Gospel gives better rules of life, and power to do
according to them, with a more willing and cheerful mind than the Law did. I
will here under favor of this ingenious person, use a few words.

For the first, I look not on this Answer so jejunely, as if the meaning of the
Author was only that they preach not the Ceremonial Law; for who need be
informed of that, or that the ceremonial Law does no longer oblige? But
supposing the Moral Law it self coming under a double consideration, to wit, as
delivered by Moses, and as it is in the hand of Christ; it is this indeed which
is worth his enquiry, how the duties of the ten Commandments, or those good
works which we, as well as the Jews are bound to perform, are obligatory in the
one respect, and not in the other. Now should he have used these words, as some
of our Divines do, and by the distinction intend only, we are not obliged to
good works in the point of Justification, but out of gratitude to our Redeemer,
or to that purpose, he must run straight into that praemunire which he strives
to avoid, to wit, of Justification by Faith only. If he stick upon this, that
the Law, as it was in the hand of Moses, was given for a temporal covenant, and
not so as it is in the hand of Christ, I do not see what that does signify to
the objection. This is that therefore which is to be said, and to be conceived
therefore what he intends. By the works of the Law, understand we, that exact
obedience which is required unto living by the Law, Do this and live. By the
works Christ enjoins, let us understand that sincerity only in our obedience
which God requires unto our living by Faith, or accepts though imperfect
through Christ. Good works are not exacted now of any in the first sense, but
good works are required of all in the second. That Preacher that should Preach
obedience to the decalogue, as necessary to life in the former sense, were a
legal Preacher indeed; but that Preacher that preaches obedience and good works
in the second sense, is but a Preacher of the Gospel, and may not preach
otherwise, as he tenders his Hearers Salvation. And behold, one came to Christ,
and said, what shall I do that I may inherit Eternal Life? And he said to him,
if thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. The Commandments then, I
say, may be considered as the matter of the covenant of works, or our Legal
Righteousness: or as the matter of the covenant of grace, or our Evangelical
Righteousness. In the former sense, if any man could perform them, he should
merit Eternal Life, and be sure to have it; but there is no man can keep them
as they are so required. In the latter sense, there is no man but must keep
them (as to the prevalent interest of his will, which constitutes integrity),
and does, that ever was, and is finally justified and saved.

For the second, we have two or three things to be touched: In the first place,
I do not believe (craving that Gentleman's pardon) that the Gospel gives any
better, or any other rules of life, than what are contained in the Law. It is
true that Christ has instituted other Sacraments, but it is the Moral Law we
call the rule of life, and that Christ came not to bring us the Systeme of any
new Law, but to explain aad establish the Law Moral (which the Jews, I count,
and Gentiles both ever had, the one by the light of Nature, the other by
Revelation also) is a truth something more considerable, as I take it, than that
alone which our Divines contend for against the Sooinian in this matter. In the
next place, when Divines make a difference between the Law and Gospel, as to
the power of doing, that the Law commands to do, but the Gospel gives power to
do; The Law commands the tale of Brick, but gives not Straw, and the like
expressions: I doubt not, but they have some verity at the bottom, which should
have nakedly been laid down, if he could, by this Bright person, For the
delivery of things after others, by roat, without disgestion, is the great
fault which he finds so often in other men's Books. The Law and Gospel we know
are liable to a diverse acception. By the Law most properly, I think, we are to
understand that Law which is written in the heart of man by Nature, in Adams
and ours, the copy whereof, is the ten Commandments, called the Moral Law: and
by the Gospel, the Law of Christ; That which he delivered, and his Apostles.
The matter whereof in both, may be considered qua faedus, or qua regula, to use
the terms of others. Qua regula, the things required in the Law moral, and the
Gospel or Law of Christ, are the same: but qua faedus, the Law of Nature
originally requires these things in perfection, to be accepted unto life; and
the Law of Christ requires them in sincerity only, accepting them, though
imperfect unto life, through his Mediation and Redemption. This is the only
difference that concerns us here between the Law and the Gospel. The Law then
and Gospel both being considered as the Doctrine of life, how does this Author
speak, that the one gives power, and not the other? The rule shows what we are
to do; the power to do, is not given by our being shown. That which therefore
is to be understood by such terms, may come to this; that, that which the Law
thus taken (that is the Law of our Creation, and qua faedus) does require of
man, is not in our power to do, and consequently none can attain Salvation by
it: but that which the Gospel requires, we have power to perform; and if we be
not wanting to God's Grace, upon the performance we shall be saved. In the
third place, when he says the Gospel enables us to do with a more willing and
cheerful mind then the Law; if we understand this kind of speech, as those
Divines do I think ordinarlly that use it, in such a sense, that Christ having
done all our works for us, that Righteousness of his which was a most perfect
conformity to the Law, being imputed, or accepted in our behalf for life, there
are no good works now required of us to do, but only as the testification of
our thankfulness, and belief of this, and therefore we perform all we do with
gladness, joy, and love altogether, without bondage, fear, or doubt, it being
not in order to our Justification, though we miscarry in the doing: I do
apprehend this Learned Man would be one of the first to dislike such Teaching.
Yet is there thus much here of truth also, That when the Law (so taken as
before) does give us no heart at all to do that which through the flesh (as the
Apostle speaks) is indeed impossible to any, the Gospel does give us
encouragement to do, upon the account, that what it requires may be performed,
and by that performance (through the assistance of God's Spirit) as the
condition, Man is both justified and saved.

I know well that St. Augustine does use the like expressions, and I think
often, but he does explain his meaning, which comes to this; that when the Law
of works commands us what is our duty, and threatens us if we do it not, the
Law of Faith (he counts) directs us to God for his assistance, grace, or
spirit, to do what he commands. I do not forget neither, that God has promised
his spirit, and so his grace for the performance of the New Covenant; and
though it does not follow, that if Adam had stood, he should not therefore have
given man his grace and spirit for performing the perfect obedience of the Old,
as well as to us for the performing imperfect under the New, seeing that Father
does speak of grace to Adam, as to us; and if we should ascribe the obedience
he performed, during his Innocence to his own strength, and not to the adjutory
of God's spirit altogether, he would not endure it: Yet if the Author, or
those Divines of ours that speak as he does, will chose rather to make good
what they say upon the contrary assertion, then can I tell how to understand
with them. When God made Man at first, we know, he endued him with original
righteousness. Let us suppose this righteousness alone, sufficient to him for
the performing the Law, unto which he was made; so that before the fall, there
was no need of that we call grace (which is properly such help of the spirit,
as consists in the healing and relief of our fallen estate) to enable man to do
that which he had strength to perform by nature, until he did voluntarily
deflect from it. But when he was fallen, and lost that righteousness, which was
his strength, then are we to conceive a need straight, both of a new Law, to be
lowerd, brought down, or fitted to his weakness, that he may be able; and also
of grace, that he may be made willing to perform it. And thus shall there be
grace, the spirit, and the promise of it belonging to the Covenant of our
Redeemer, when there was none, nor need of it, to belong to the covenant of our
Creation. However, there is this I count most certain, and I would have it to
be noted, that the spirit which is promised or given to man for his obedience
to God, is promised and given only in respect to this Covenant, not for the
performance of the Covenant of Nature, for then should Adam never have fallen,
nor we have had any need of a Redeemer.

It is true, that there are some Divines are so much (with Austin) to have
Adams standing (supposing he had stood) to be of grace, that they will have
man's original righteousness to be a work (or habit) supernatural, from which,
when Adam fell, he returned, (as they would teach us) to his pure naturals, and
so his Posterity are born. But this is a kind of Pelagianisme, no ways to be
received: For what indeed should be a Creatures Nature, if that be not, which
it receives from its Creation? Besides, if man's original righteousness be not
looked on as natural, how shall original sin, which consists in the loss of it,
be defined by the depravation of our nature, according to the doctrine of the
Church of England, as well as the Catechism of the Assembly? Neither is Dr.
Tailor here to be heard, who cannot abide that, that (whatsoever he will call
it) which we contract from Adam without any will of our own, should be held to
be sin, or so much as damnable, though it should be granted him through
Christ's redemption actually to damn no body. It may be the want of a plainer
consideration, what the immediate benefit of Christ's redemption to the world,
is, made that excellent person think this so grievous. It is not grievous, I
hope, that God should give a Law to his Creature according to his nature; and
that therefore having made man righteous, he should require of him to continue
in that righteousness, and walk up according to it. It necessarily follows
without any thing else, that this Law being made in Innocence, must condemn
all mankind, in whom this righteousness and perfection is no longer to be
found; so that by nature, or according to this Covenant of man's nature, we are,
and must be all the Children of wrath, as the Apostle speaks. It would now be
indeed a grievous thing if God should deal with any in that justice, as he
might according to this Covenant; and therefore it has pleased him according
to a Righteousness of his declared in the Gospel, in opposition to the
righteousness of this Covenant of works, to give us his Son; who by the work of
his Mediation for mankind, should prepare a remedying Law, or universal
conditional remission against that condemnation. As for Children then, if they
are Baptized, we are to account they do perform this Covenant, or new Law, by
the Faith of their Parents bringing them to Baptism. This is my Covenant you
shall keep, every man-child shall be Circumcised. If they be not Baptized, we
are yet to look on them as such who have not broken this new Law, or never
refused and rejected their remedy; and so long as by the Redemption of Christ,
they are delivered over with all the world from the Covenant of works, to the
new Law to be judged, I will not be the man that shall condemn one Infant to
Hell, or unto torments; although, if there be any that will make a difference
of place, or state in the future life for Children, proportionable only to the
difference there is between performing the condition, and not being guilty of
any breach at all of it, I will not gainsay them, nor determine any thing in a
matter so lubricous, and above what is written.

To return, By the Law and the Gospel, it may be thought perhaps by some, that
we are to understand the state of the Old and New Testament; and so must this
Author mentioned be made to conceive that David, and the like holy men, had
not the same spirit or power, or not so much, to enable them to observe God's
precepts, as we have now, when he uses these expressions. That the spirit was
given under the Gospel as to his miraculous gists in another measure, then
under the Law. I believe; and that such Texts as the spirit was not yet given,
because Christ was not yet lorified, and that, they had not yet heard that
there was a Holy Ghost, with the like, may be happily so understood, I believe:
But to think that the Spirit, as to sanctification of the heart, and inclining
it to a ready service of God, was not given under the Old Testament as well as
under the the New, is a conceit I will not fasten on any. To say it is given
more to us now, than to David, Samuel, Jeremy, and such persons in respect to
this end, will yet require explanation and proof, if that be intended wholly by
these speeches.

Before I pass, there is one passage of this apt Writer, I cannot but note with
much approbation. It is Grace that accepts of our Repentance, and Obedience
after we have sinned. This passage contains more in it, then the most are like
to be aware of. The Scripture tells us in several Texts, that by Grace we are
saved, and freely justified, and not by Works. By Works we are to understand
the works of the Law, and that qua faedas, as before; and no body is justified
or saved by these works, they being above the ability of any to perform. By
Grace, I will understand with him this accepting our sincere, though imperfect
obedience for life through Christ, as if it were perfect righteousness. Not
unto him that works, that is, unto him that has not performed the works of
the Law, which if they were perfect, he should live by them: but unto him that
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, that is, but is ungodly in
reference to these works, or is one that his Conscience tells him, has sinned,
and does sin, or is imperfect, and falls short of these works, yet believes
that God is gracious and merciful for all that, and will pardon these sins and
failings, if he repent and walk sincerely, though imperfectly, his Fath is
imputed for Righteousness; his Faith, that is such a believing this, as
produces that repentance and sincere walking, is imputed to him for
Righteousness; that is, is made to stand him in that stead as a perfect
righteousness would do; so that through grace, or this gracious acceptance, he
shall live by it. There are works (if I may still say over, what has been
somwhere also said before) that would make life to be of debt according to
God's Covenant of Nature, if any could perform them, and so there are none
justified or saved by works, for all have sinned and fall short (under this
sense) of the glory of God: Or there are works that cannot be accepted or
imputed unto life, but through grace; and so is it, that by grace only, or
gratis, that the Scripture teaches us we are justified and saved. Nay, the
acceptance of our imperfect, sincere obedience for righteousness, or that we
should live by it, is that very grace it self that saves us. So well am I
pleased with this Note from that Author.

If this seem to savor too much of inculcation, you must pardon me. I do
apprehend that the Doctrine of grace and justification, whereof I have been, and
therefore am still the longer, has been the occasion of several apprehensions
in good men, that instead of being conducive to, have proved but hindrances
of, true sober practical Godliness. There are two of these mentioned by the
same understanding person.

The one is a conceit, that a Christian may not avoid sin, and do good, for
fear of Hell, and to obtain Heaven, that is for the sake of Reward. This the
Mentioner has confuted with plain text, that it needs not a second hand:
Only, that it may not needlessly disquiet any, I will advance this contrary
truth; that whatsoever person, out of any principle, fear, or hope, or love,
does, or shall in the prevalent intentions of his Soul, and endeavor as to the
constant tenor of his life, prefer his Eternal Salvation before his
Flesh-pleasing in this world, is surely in a good Estate, the Converted man, or
the Godly man, that shall be saved. He that does Righteousness is born of God.
I will suppose him a Christian, and one that acts according to the Sripture;
but if he be a Heathen, and acts herein but fully up to his light, I dare not
deny the same of him. And indeed, what is that pure love of God, out of which
you will say alone, a man must act? If you love me, says Christ, who knows
best, keep my Commandments. The love of God, and keeping his Commandments are
the same. The commands of God are to be kept that we may inherit Eternal Life,
Christ tells the Ruler in the Gospel express (I have noted before), and
consequently we may love God to that end. If man could do any good to God, by
his duties, or any hurt by his sins, then should I believe there was some other
end of our duty, than man's Salvation. You may say, this appears selfish, or
self-love only. I answer that, that man then, who does but love himself so as
to seek the Salvation of his Soul above his flesh, this world, and any thing
therein, is the man he should be in the sight of God. If you stick at it,
consider, what is Salvation? A loving God, a delighting in him, a conformity to
him. I love God in keeping his Commandments in this life, that I may be
conformed to him, and have complacency in him to all Eternity. I will add, our
Orthodox Divines say not (and are not to be so understood) that good works may
not be done with respect to the reward; but with respect to the reward, as due
to them ex condigno. For to expect that God should accept of what we do, in
bearing with our failings, and rewarding us out of Grace; when we walk
sincerely before him, is but to act our Faith on, or putting our trust in, his
declared goodness, Christ's Merits, and the promises of the Gospel.

The other Apprehension is, that a Christian must not live on his own Purse or
Earnings. A pretty sound of something, which (as I suppose) does signify that
which other Divines intend by Resting in Dutys. There is therefore a resting in
Duty, I may say, and a resting on God in Duty. I doubt not but a Christian is
to trust to God for whatsoever he seeks of him upon the performance of his
duty, when it were but presumption to do so without that performance. It is
true, that no man, by any thing he can do (seeing when he has done all, he is
but an unprofitable Servant) can deserve or merit any thing from God's hand
(and much less his saving Grace, which is most free) so as it may be properly
said to be earned, as wages is due unto work, or to make his blessings of debt;
yet is a Christian by his prayers, and the like duty, said to get, or obtain
from God whasoever he has from him; and as a man does live on his Estate which
he gets, so may a Christian be said to live his spiritual life, upon the riches
of God's grace which he gets by his duty. The want of trusting to duty
therefore, in a right sense, is indeed, I doubt me, more reprovable in our
Protestants ordinarily than their resting in duty. And I am seriously troubled
very often, at what I have observed in some of our special practical Divines
about this point of resting in duties (I will particularly name Mr. Shepherds
sincere Convert,) which is enough to bring any man Religiously melancholy (for
the more pious his Soul is in the case, the more liable it must be to such
strokes) into desperation. I will, therefore, say thus much in zeal against
that danger. Let a man be but careful of two things about resting in duty, and
trouble himself henceforth no more, but about the doing of it. The first is,
Let him take heed of making any duty a pillow to lay his head on to rest in
sin. Thus it is dangerous indeed to rest in duty; and this may be either when a
man thinks he may sin, and go on in it, because he Prays, gives Alms, or the
like; as if that would bear him out: Or chiefly, when a man shall sit down
short of sincere Conversion, by doing of some duty, that is by taking up in
leaving some sins, and doing many things he did not before, he shall content
himself, and not come up to that universal unreserved, giving up himself to
Christ, as is required of him to that sincerity of life, which is the condition
of Salvation. This is the most deadly, dangerous resting in duty that I will
admonish every Soul of. And then for the second, I will say only, Let him be a
Protestant, which I count he is, and I doubt not but his opinion alone against
merit, and that he is justified through Christ, will secure him for the rest of
this business. Provided though, he remembers still that humility, and the like
qualification of Soul, when he has done all he can do, is also his duty.

And now after I have spoken of these Heads, if any be otherwise minded in
whatsoever I have hitherto said, and are resolved to keep to that only which
they count the soundest Calvinisme in them all, I will be so candid, as to lay
down their doctrine for them, to the best advantage. God has Elected some to
Salvation. Christ dyed only for them. That which he has Purchased by his
Death, is not only the benefit conditionally, but Faith it self the condition.
Faith is the persuasion of a man, that Christ has died particularly for him,
and so his sins are forgiven. This persuasion, or apprehension of Christ, makes
Christ ones own, and so justifies instrumentally, without works, either Legal
or Evangelical, and how, also to serve this turn, I have set down in my paper
of Justification, page 15. No man can be ever, in good earnest, thus persuaded,
but the Elect, for whom alone this Faith is purchased. When a Minister then
declares the Gospel, and requires of all in God's name to Believe, to wit, to
believe particularly that Christ has dyed for their sins, as knowing not, for
his part, who the Elect by name be, there is no fear of hurt unto any, seeing
no person on earth shall be able to be persuaded hereof indeed (that
persuasion, with Calvin and Luther, being true Faith), but the Elect only.
Besides, as soon as this persuasion once is but wrought, it does so possess the
Soul with love and gratitude to the Redeemer, that it constrains it to
Christian duty; so that unfeigned Conversion, Self-denial, a Crucifixion with
Christ to the world and the flesh, and the life of God, and that with
perseverance to the end, do follow as naturally (to wit, according to the new
Nature) as the Fig Tree brings forth Figgs, or the Olive, Olives, without all
possibility of separation from it. This Doctrine, if any will so concatenate the
parts, does seem to me to carry a kind of mysterious authority in it, that I
find some awe for it at my heart, although really, I am convinced both of the
danger of it, and also (excepting only in the first proposition) that it is
untrue. So far am I from despising of those, against whom the spirit of that
Author, in the book intimated, seems so much over-sharpened: when yet I do
incline in my own sentiments to hang things together, much rather after his
fashion, than theirs, who would look upon me as more Evangelical, in such a
Determination.

Deo Gloria mihi Condonatio. J. H.

ERRATA.
PAge 16. l. 21. for desires read deserves. p. 18. l. 7. for Clouds read Cloud.


