THE TWO STEPS OF A Nonconformist Minister; Made by him, in Order to the
obtaining his liberty of Preaching in Public. Together with an APPENDIX about
coming to Church in respect to the People.

Published for a Testimony in his Generation, by a Lover of Sincerity and Peace.

1 Timothy 5.21. Doing nothing by Partiality.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Three Crowns and Bible, at the
lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1684.

The First Step, BEING My Paper to the Bishop.
My Lord,
THE Design of this Paper is Union between the Moderate Bishop, and Sober
Nonconformist; and there is but one Rule must be laid down in order thereunto,
supposing both sensible that an endeavor after Concord as Brethren in the same
Reformed Religion, is an undeniable Duty, and that a wilful neglect of it
cannot be answered to God by either Party, whosoever of them shall be found in
default. The Rule is this, that the Nonconformist be ready to do in the
sincerity of his Conscience what he can, and that out of the like Conscience to
God the Bishop then does bear with him in what he cannot, at least so far I
hope as the Law and the Government, or his Duty thereunto, according to his own
private Judgment of discretion, will give way.

The Nonconformist is to consider well the importance of such Texts as require
Subjection to the Higher Powers, and he is out of Conscience to the Fifth
Commandment to comply with their Injunctions to the uttermost that may give
satisfaction, so far as he can without sin. The Bishop is to consider the
import of such Texts as tell us what a dangerous thing it is to give occasion
to the doubtful to do anything against their Consciences; and he is out of
Conscience to the Sixth Commandment (for fear of destroying him for whom Christ
died) to take heed as he would of his life, to put a man upon any more than he
is convinced he can safely do. When the Nonconformist now does what he can, the
Law of God will bear him out in that which he forbears, and if he suffers, he
has peace in his Soul. If the Bishop likewise shall receive a man upon this
account, as one that cannot require more of him, lest he wound his weak
Conscience, and so sins against Christ, I doubt not but the Law of Charity and
Mercy, that is, the Law which is Gods, will justify him also as to whatsoever
he falls short in the fulfilling the Law of Man.

It is true if the Bishop dispenses, and the Nonconformist exceeds, the
penalty may be sued, if there be any, and any body be so affected. It is Law (I
suppose) in Foro Civili, and we must never Resist: but it is no Law in Foro
Dei, or Conscientiae, for the Authority of those greater Laws of Nature and
Religion, does supersede the Execution, so that there is no guilt (as to God's
sight I mean) contracted in the omission. God says, Thou shall not do any thing
which will destroy thy Brother, or wound his Conscience. The Law says, Thou
shall put him to do thus, and not dispense with him. Whom shall the good Bishop
choose to obey, the Law of his God, or the Statutes of the Realm?

Having therefore thus proposed the Rule, I will proceed to Practice.

There are two things (My Lord) necessary for me by the Act for Uniformity, to
obtain a liberty of the Pulpit. The one is I must read before the Bishop the 39
Articles and assent to them, and you must give me a License; when I have got
this, I may be sent to Gaol if I subscribe not the Declaration in the said Act,
and that is the 2d thing then I must do likewise. If I do this also, your
Lordship must give me a Certificate and that with my License will serve, so
that I count then no man can and no friend will put a bar to my Preaching,
where I am peaceably desired.

Indeed there is the Declaration of Assent and consent required farther of such
as have any preferment in the Church, but if I seek nothing but Liberty to
Preach, this cannot be imposed, because I have no Place to make it in,
according to the Act, and I must therefore in all points else be dealt with no
otherwise than a perfect Conformist.

Now for my doing these two things (supposing my self willing to do both so far
as I can, and your Lordship willing to condescend to me in what I cannot,) I do
apprehend that in reading the Articles, I may take leave as I go along to make
my explication of any Article, and if my sense be such as is agreeable to your
Lordships Judgment, or at least what you judge fit to be allowed, you may pass
me as to the Articles; and if you will then afford me the like liberty of
Explication in Subscribing the Declaration also, I have no more to do but to
set down my explications of the one and the other, and leave both to your
Lordships candor and conscience to receive me or reject me, as it shall please
God and your Lordship.

I begin with the Articles.

The Thirty nine Articles of the Church I receive as Articles for Concord,
(according to the Title) and not as Articles of Faith, and I suppose my self
therefore not tied up to the Authentic sense of the Imposer (as I think we are
in Laws) but to be allowed the liberty of a Doctoral Interpretation; That is,
whereas in a Convocation every Doctor there (or Member thereof) is supposed or
granted, in passing such Articles or Canons to abound in his own sense, so long
as he can but reconcile the words to it. Let a man make any rational
construction of an Article which is agreeable either to the precise words (for
that he may well think to be the mind of some or other of the Doctors,) or to
the sense which he believes to be the meaning of the major part, though varying
from the words (for that, above any, when it can, is to be embraced) it is
sufficient ( I count) in point of Conscience, for his Assent to the same.
Neither do I by an Assent to a thing according to my present Judgment, shut up
my understanding from receiving and owning any farther, or other Truth, whereof
I shall be convinced hereafter. This liberty being foreprized, I do declare my
unfeigned Assent to the said Articles, with these Explications or Cautions.

As Christ died for us, and was buried: so also' is it to be believed, that he
went down into Hell.
Art. 3. I assent to the words, they are Scripture, and my Creed, but I am
uncertain of the meaning.

Christ did truly rise again from death, and took again his body, with flesh,
bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of man's Nature, wherewith
he ascended into Heaven, and there sits, until he return to judge all men at
the last day.
Art. 4. That Christ arose and ascended with his proper flesh and bones, it is
certain, yet whether upon his entering into the heavenly glory (as Enoch and
Elias) this flesh and bones of his were not transformed into a spiritual body,
I do question, seeing the Apostle tells us expressly, That flesh and blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. We may refer this flesh and bones
therefore to his Rising and Ascension, but leave it in dubio in regard to his
Sitting in Heaven.

In the name of the Holy Scripture, we do understand those Canonical Books of
the Old and new Testament, of whose Authority was never any doubt in the Church.
Art. 6. By [Church] I understand the whole Catholic Church, or this Church of
England; for it is evident that there has been doubt made of some Books in our
Canon by Ancient Particular Churches and Fathers.

The Three Creeds, Nice Creed, Athanasius's Creed, and that which is commonly
called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received and believed: for they
may be proved by most certain Warrants of Holy Scripture.
Art. 8. The word [thorowly] I understand only in regard to the Articles of
those Creeds, not in regard to the Proem and Conclusion of the Athanasian
Quicunque vult, which is inconsistent I hold with the Goodness of God, and
Natural Religion.

The condition of man after the Fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works to Faith, and
calling upon God: Wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and
acceptable to God, without the Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we
may have a good will, and working with us when we have that good will.
Art. 10. By the words [no power] and [cannot] I understand a Moral power and
impotency, which lies in such a disposition, as that a man never will, without
the special grace of God: but not so, as if we had no power at all that is
Physical; or as if the terms of the Covenant of Grace were Impossible to any.

We are accounted righteous before God only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our own works or deservings:
Wherefore that we are justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine, and
very full of comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily of
Justification.
Art. 11. By the words [Faith only] I understand what Paul means by [Faith
without works] that is, Faith in opposition to works, that would make the
reward to be of debt, and not of grace, or to works of the Law, works which the
Law requires to Justification (which none have, and if any be justified at all,
it must be therefore without them, not in opposition to Repentance, and
Evangelical Obedience: and though it be for Christ's sake, or his merits, and
not ours, that he accounts us righteous, yet is our Faith, Repentance, and
sincere Obedience, the condition upon which he does it; or rather the
Righteousness it self, which upon the account of Christ's deserving, he accepts
unto life everlasting.

Works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are
not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ,
neither do they make men meet to receive grace, (or as the School-Authors say)
deserve grace of congruity: yea, rather for that they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the nature of
sin.
Art. 13. When good works done before grace are said to have the nature of sin,
I understand that tho such works are good quoad operis substantiam, yet they
are evil quoad modum quo ordinantur ad vitam aeternam, and consequently when
they are said not to be pleasant unto God, I understand, not acceptable unto
Salvation. I judge that the doing what we can through the strength of free will,
and common grace, is not to be discouraged, and to be held in some good sense
preparatory to saving Conversion; yet because there is no full promise made
thereunto as the condition of obtaining that grace which is special, it is
truly said, that such works do not make us meet for receiving, or do not of
congruity deserve the same.

Predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the
foundations of the world were laid) he has constantly decreed by his Counsel,
secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he has chosen in
Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting Salvation, as
Vessels made to honor. After we have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart
from grace given, and fall into sin; and by the grace of God (we may) arise
again, and amend our lives.
Art. 16, 17. I apprehend the Church here does follow St. Austin in the Points
of Election and Perseverance; and when it is said, that, after we have received
the Holy Ghost, we may depart from grace given, it must be understood so, as
that the Elect for all that, shall never finally fall away, but shall
infallibly recover, and be saved.

They are to be had accursed, that presume to say that every man shall be saved
by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame his
life according to that Law, and the light of nature. For holy Scripture does
set out unto us only the name of Jesus Christ whereby men must be saved.
Art. 18. I observe the Church has but one Anathema in all her Articles, and
that seems to be denounced here against all those who do, or shall hold that
any persons can be saved that are not Christians, as if the Death of Christ, or
benefits thereof, and the knowledge of him were commensurate through the world.
But God forbid! I am out of doubt that God has a Government over all mankind,
which is Moral in order to Life and Salvation, and that the instrument of that
Government must be the Law of Grace (the Law of Innocence becoming in the state
of Lapsed Nature, incapable of that end) which being at first promulgated to
Adam after his Fall, and to Noah, must belong to all their Posterity, insomuch
as every one (whosoever he be) that lives up in sincerity to this Law,
according to that administration of it he is under, shall be saved. For my
Assent then to this Article, I do desire the word [by] may be especially noted.
I could not assent to this Article, if it were [in the Law or Sect he
professes,] but being [by,] I hold plainly, that if a Heathen, or any Person
that never heard the Gospel, repents of his sin, and trusts to a good God, and
lives up to the Law (or Covenant) of Grace according to the first Edition of
it, (I say, if any such indeed do, Romans 2.26. Act. 10.35.) and thereby comes to
be saved, it is by the Christian Religion which he implicitly holds in the
substance with us, and not [by the Law and Sect that he professeth] that he is
saved. And this Salvation of his is in and through the Name and Mediation of
Jesus Christ, no less than ours is, who procured that Law for them and all the
World, as well as for Abraham and the Jews under the Old, and for us under the
New Testament.

The Church has power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and authority in
controversies of Faith.
Art. 20. The Church I think has [Power to Decree Rites or Ceremonies,] that
is, some Rites, not any whatsoever, provided she uses due caution, not placing
matter of Worship or Necessity, much less Merit or Justification in them, nor
scandalizing her Members thereby, and not imposing them, when they need not, as
conditions of her Communion: Yet if she does so, and the Imposition be
unlawful, if those Rites or Ceremonies be not sinful in themselves, we cannot
(I apprehend) refuse our submission for all that, so long as the Supreme Power
confirms the same. Again the Church has authority in controversies of Faith,
not to make any new Articles thereof, for that were Antichristian: but upon
mature debate to judge what points are de fide (or necessary according to the
Scripture to be received) and what not: Only this authority when she has done,
is Ministerial, or Declarative, not Constitutive of duty, as Christ's the
Lawgiver's is, and as Princes, or the Supreme Magistrates in his Sphere is so
also. The Clergy in their Convocation is to order and settle them, having first
obtained leave under our broad Seal so to do, and we approving their said
Ordinances, says the King in his Declaration before these Articles.

Whosoever through his private judgment, willingly and purposely does openly
break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnant to
the Word of God, and be ordained and approved by common authority, ought to be
rebuked openly, (that others may fear to do the like) as he that offends
against the common order of the Church, and hurts the authority of the
Magistrate, and wounds the consciences of the weak brethren.
Art. 34. I assent to this Article as parallel with the last mentioned, and I
gainsay not, but the open breakers of the Churches Traditions or Ceremonies
may be reproved for the sake of others: Yet in regard that some of these
Traditions or Ceremonies may be repugnant to the Word of God in the judgment of
some men, which are not to others, I apprehend both that the reasons of such
ought to be heard, and that we cannot condemn any for acting so among others,
as to have always a care never to do any thing against Conscience for Company.

The second Book of Homilies, the several titles whereof we have joined under
this Article, does contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for
these times, as does the former book of Homilies, which were set forth in the
time of Edward the sixth: and therefore we judge them to be read in Churches by
the Ministers diligently, and distinctly, that they may be understanded of the
people.
Art. 35. I receive this Article on an implicit faith, and I desire that may
serve, because I have not read over the Homilies, and cannot assent any
otherwise therefore, till I have.

The book of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and ordering of Priests
and Deacons, lately set forth in the time of Edward the sixth, and confirmed at
the same time by authority of Parliament, does contain all things necessary to
such Consecration and Ordering: neither has it any thing that of it self is
superstitious and ungodly.
Art. 36. I understand by Superstition and Ungodliness, two particular Species
of that which is sinful. I dare not say that there is nothing at all in the
whole Book of Consecration and Orders here mentioned, that is sinful: The
Article does not say so, but that there is not any thing in it that of it self
is Superstitious or Ungodly, that is, sinful upon the account of either of
these particular species of sin. And to this I think I may assent, at least
after I have added this caution, that these Articles were agreed upon in the
year 1562. and new published by King James, and that this book therefore must
be understood of the old book in his time, and not of the book as it is of late
altered with the new Preface put to it, wherein there is one thing especially
(which I pass here nameless) too too hard for my Approbation.

Having thus given my Explication, with what I premised before it, it is fit I
make yet some little farther apology for this liberty. There is a threefold
Interpretation according to Suarez in his excellent Book De Legibus: An
Authentic, Usual, and Doctoral (I think he calls it Doctrinal) interpretation.
I have explained two of the terms in the beginning, and the third needs no
explanation, and I need not it. These Articles of the Church I suppose to be
subscribed generally with this presumption that we may use a Doctoral
Interpretation; but the question indeed may be whether a man can strictly in
point of Conscience give his assent, or subscribe to any Article, unless he
believe it to be true in the Authentic sense, or meaning of the Imposers, I
must confess I have had such an impression on my mind, that unless I believe an
Article in that sense, which I take to be the sense of the majority of the
Convocation that passed the Articles, I could not choose but scruple the
declaring my assent to it for fear of a Lie; and yet do I find that an Usher
and Hammond, the Arminians and Calvinists do subscribe the same Articles
without making any scruple about their diversity of interpretation. I find also
that in the Council of Trent the Doctors differed in most points, yet as soon
as they were but contrived into such words as might salve the contrary
opinions, they passed them as unanimous in the Council, writing after one
against another, and citing the Council for them on both sides. There is this
difference therefore seems reasonable to be made between a Law and a Doctrinal
Thesis for establishing consent in the matter of Religion; That when the one
must be taken still in the Authentic, the other is to be construed in a
Doctoral interpretation. I have intimated it before, I must now give my reason,
which is also said, but not applied. It is because the authority of a Lawgiver
is Magisterial or Imperative, that constitutes duty, and his will is
uncontrollable: but the Pastors authority, or Convent of Bishops and
Presbyters, for agreement in points of Doctrine, is Ministerial and Declarative
only ( I may use the same terms I hope I have before, and nauseate no body)
obliging not, nisi sententia non errante, or no farther than they be agreeable
to Gods Word; and while every one does judge of that, there must be a diversity
of interpretation, it being not equal that so many Articles should be
subscribed by all, but upon that supposition. I never could be satisfied
therefore with that coming off which is proposed by some great and ingenious
men (such as Chillingworth) as sufficient for subscribing these Articles, that
they understand nothing else by it, but an obligation not to preach or write
against them. A gloss both too laxe, because they do not subscribe, I engage
never to write or preach against the Articles, b^ they profess their unfeigned
assent to them, and if this be understood of the Authentic sense, they cannot
profess it: and too straight, because, when they preach upon any such point,
they will speak (do what they can) according to their own Opinion, and so break
their Engagement. It were to be wished therefore, that if ever we have a
Convocation that Sits to do any thing, they would pass some such New Canon
(most fit to be decreed) as may declare that the Articles and Homilies of the
Church are not required to be subscribed, but with this freedom of a Doctoral
interpretation. Were such a liberty authorized by an Act of Parliament, or
Convocation, the conscience were put out of doubt: In the mean while when
others are satisfied with the reasonableness of the thing, whether it be
authorized or not, I finding my self in doubt about it, am forced to this
course, which is to secure my peace by my aforesaid Explication, and my
foreprized declaration concerning the matter.

I proceed now to the Subscription, or Declaration required to be subscribed by
the Act.

Understanding by taking Arms, raising War, or joining in it, and by the King,
his Sacred Person and Authority, I subscribe the first clause thereof, That it
is n^^ lawful to take Arms against the King upon any pretense whatsoever.

Understanding the word abhor, in a cool sense [I disclaim,] and by the
Commissionated those who have, and pursue their Commissions according to Law, I
subscribe the Second Clause of it; And that I do abhor that Traitorous Position
of taking Arms by his Authority (or by Law, that is, upon pretense of it, for
the Position else is impossible) against his Person, or against those that are
Commissionated by him.

The Third Clause I take to be an Indefinite Promise of using Common Prayer,
which in the main I am not against: And I do therefore subscribe, that if I
have a Public Charge or Cure of Souls, I shall in the ordinary constant Lords
Day Service, ordinarily, by my self, or by my Assistant, according to the usage
of the Church, Rebus sic stantibus, Conform to the Liturgy of the Church of
England as it is now by Law established.

Whether this be the sense of the Lawgiver altogether, it may be a doubt: but
in this sense, supposing it to be so, or with these limitations thereunto, if
it be otherwise, I set my name.

The Second Step, BEING A lesser Request, the former not obtained.
IT was the policy of the Contrivers of the Act for Uniformity, that those
Ministers who were engaged in the late times on the Parliament side by taking
the Covenant, should renounce it, or be debarred the liberty of their Ministry
for twenty years, accounting I suppose that if any supervived that time, there
could be no danger in their readmission. There was a clause therefore in the
Subscription besides those before going, which concerned the Covenant, and was
the forest part of this injunction, abiding in force till the last year, and
then it expired. It was believed that many of the Nonconformists upon the
expiration would have flocked in, and subscribed, but I know not of any who
took the Covenant, but my self only who took it not, that have made any trial
upon that occasion. Nevertheless to proceed in what I have begun, having Wrote
this Paper, and presented it to the Bishop the last year (1682) when that
clause ceased, I think good this year (1683) to Print it, upon the account
ensuing.

I do apprehend there is a kind of universal guilt upon the Conformist (some
few always excepted) in receiving our late Impositions hand over head, as they
did, which they should rather have all refused as one man, and required
explanation. How many were there prepared (the good God vouchsafe us all a
sight of our sins, and forgive them) to declare their assent and consent to all
and every thing in a book before they saw it, at least read it with any
examination as they should have done? How many more were there yet more forward
to subscribe a Declaration, wherein there were so many hard things to be
swallowed, before any had wrote about them, or themselves able to digest scarce
any one branch of it? It was their interest to comply, but how they could
declare and subscribe so soon (or perhaps can yet) in Truth, Judgment and
Righteousness, the Lord knows.

On the other side, I am no less sensible of a great deal of weakness and
prejudice among our brethren, in judging things sinful that are not, and
consequently Superstition in placing fear and danger in such things. There is
besides, no little conceitedness of some men's being more holy than the
Conformist, and consequently Pride, Uncharitableness, Judging of others; and if
any Persons shall separate from the public on sinful grounds, it is really
Schism, and in real Schism how many evils are there included?

In this case of Sin and Scandal, which we see on both sides, I would fain know
what way there is for any of us to escape, but by following the rule I have
laid down.

On the point of Sin. If I assent to the Articles, and subscribe the
Declaration without an Explication, then do I assent to what I think true, and
what I think not true in those Articles, and I subscribe that which I take to
be the good sense, and that which is also the bad sense of the Declaration,
which seems unlawful to be done, as what neither becomes a good Christian, or
true Englishman: But if I assent and subscribe with an Explication, then do I
assent only to what I judge true in those Articles, and I subscribe only the
good sense of the Declaration, which seems not only what is lawful, but fit to
be done, both as a Christian, and good Subject, who is to be Loyal to the
Government of the Nation.

On the point of Scandal. If I shall assent and subscribe as others, without
any Caution, Limitation, or Explication, then shall I (quantum ad me) harden
the Conformist (who has Conformed blindly) in his sin and impenitence, and
draw the Nonconformist (who judges it unlawful) to do that which is against
his Conscience by my Example. If I do nothing, or not endeavor what I can, I
nurse up my Brethren in those Evils beforementioned, and give occasion to the
Conformist to say, These men can do thus and thus, more than they do; and
seeing they are such peevish, obstinate persons, we do well to submit to all
that is Enjoined our selves, and persecute them, and so do I become a
stumbling block to the one, and to the other: But if I assent and subscribe
with Explication, (that is, do as much, and only what I can) then do I deliver
my own Soul, neither partaking with my Brethren in these Evils out of which I
strive to bring them by my Example, nor give occasion to the Conformist of any
hardening, who seeing in me a regard to Authority, together with a care of my
Conscience in my Explications, he may come to be judged in his own Thoughts;
and being ready perhaps then to hearken to any ingenuous Admonition, so long as
it is tendered in such a way as is not affected, or done with preference of my
Understanding or Piety above his, but with Humility, and sense of my own
failings, at least in many other things wherein he so much excels me, he may be
brought (the good Spirit of God graciously assisting) to that Repentance which
is meet toward God, and that Reconciliation toward us, which we seek with him.

And now if my Diocesan, or Metropolitan (which I would choose rather) or any
other Bishop (they refusing) will vouchsafe me only this condescension in
subscribing the Declaration, to speak to their Register, that in setting my
name to his Book, I may have leave to do it in these words, According to a
Paper delivered in by me to the Bishop I subscribe, I see no reason but I may
put my name to his Book, as well as to this Paper; and any other may do so too,
giving in the same, or so much of it (for all our Nonconformists have not their
Exceptions alike) as himself needs.

I would urge the Argument of Naamans Servants. If the Nonconformists required
some great thing of the Bishops, for us to come in and unite with them
(especially under our common danger) would not they do it? and will they refuse
us so small a matter? If none of them for all that will be got to grant us
this, then must I commit the Cause of the Nonconformists to Almighty God, to be
Judge therein between them and us in this matter.

The Appendix, BEING My Judgment about coming to Church, and the Case of
Private Meetings.
BEfore I leave my Province, I think fit to reflect a little on what I have
said, in reference to my Brethren of the Nonconforming Party, who will be apt,
many of them, to be offended at me, that I, who am one of them, should be so
indifferent to either side, as I appear, which if it be a fault, I confess it;
I am guilty of that impartiality or writing without respect of persons, which I
cannot help; and if that fault will make the Episcopal Party bear with me more
equally than my Brethren, I think they deserve to be blamed.

Indeed I hope that as for the most part of the Dissenters, it is out of the
true Fear of God that they choose the way wherein they go; but though I think
that Fear of God to be true, I think it not pure and unmixt without Error, and
without Imperfection. They think (I will suppose, for I mean not as to all of
them) the going to Church unlawful, and therefore set up Meetings: As they do
this then, because they are afraid to sin, it is the Fear of God; but as there
is Error in this Fear, doubting of that to be sin which is none, this Fear
turns to Superstition, and Superstition can be no good ground for any thing a
man does. The evil they fear being no evil, the cause for what they do is no
cause, and to separate from the Church without a cause, I hold to be Schism.

For my own part I am persuaded in my Conscience that it is lawful to go to a
Meeting, and lawful to go to Church, and I am sorry we have such a company of
superstitious folks of both sides; Men and Women of the Conformists that think
it a sin to go to a Meeting, and of the Nonconformist that thinks he sins if he
go to Church, when there is no Communion of Christians whatsoever, where the
Essentials of Christianity are, but to separate from them without a cause,
whether on one side or other, is Schism. I say not that every Conformist
therefore that goes to Church, and never to a Meeting, does incur this guilt,
because, though he be locally never at a Meeting, yet does he not mentally
separate from the Meeters, who holds them for all that to be true Christians,
and counts it no sin to join with them in Communion, if he h^d reason: Only he
is himself well satisfied with the Service of the Church, and he has no reason
for his going otherwhere. It is not so on the part of the Nonconformist; there
is a Command of the Magistrate, that he shall come to Church, and if he does
not, he must have some more prevailing reason or cause that will justify his
refusing it, or else his Separation being causless (I must still say) cannot
but be sin, and consequently Schism. If this please some, it may be I shall
displease them in what I say next; and if it displease some, I may next please
them; but I speak my Conscience. A Person is set apart for the Office of the
Ministry; he being not able to conform, is prohibited to Preach in Public;
having a Call in Private, he Preaches in a Meeting; what is there in this,
which the Apostles own case does not justify? Whether it be meet to obey God
or man, judge ye. I think moreover, that the Commission of Christ which
warrants a Ministers Preaching, does also warrant the Hearers; because
Preaching and Hearing are Relata, which will mutually draw one another. I must
add, if some good men farther, out of a sense of wrong to the Ejected, do think
themselves bound to come sometimes and hear such Ministers for acknowledging
their Ministry, and delivering their Souls from participation of the guilt of
those that Ejected them (especially if they were heretofore their own Pastors)
I take this to be so much more Christian, and justifiable before God. But if
these Ministers and People do judge the Parish Church no true Church, or that it
is a sin to go thither (not having any Exception which is particular, but what
reaches all Parochial Congregations) and upon that ground set up their
Meetings, I do not see (this ground of theirs being a mistaken ground, or this
cause for their Separation being such as will not hold, and consequently no
cause) how they can be justified from the aforesaid Imputation.

For the Minister to Preach ( I must inculcate) upon the account of Christ's
Commission, preferring his Masters Authority before Man's, that is, upon the
plea of greater duty, and for the People to come to hear by virtue of the same
Commission, upon the same plea still of farther (or greater) Edification (as
men go ordinarily to hear other Ministers than their own) not in a way of
Separation from the Public Ministers or Parish-Churches, but in Conjunction
with them (speaking still so far as concerns God's word) I do maintain lawful:
But if any of my Brethren do offer another Plea that must draw with it a
separation from the Parish Church, whether it be that of holding such Churches
to be no true Churches, or that the Church does impose such things as
conditions of her Ordinary, Constant Lay-communion which are sinful or
intolerable, As I am of Opinion, that they can make no such plea good; so must
I heartily advise them to take heed, because if they do stand upon such a one,
their Separation being without cause, if the Parish-Churches be true Churches,
and it be no sin to go to them, they know the Charge lies against them. I will
add, To separate from any Church, upon a reason common to others, as because we
have a Liturgy, or the like, is virtually to separate from all that have one,
and consequently from the most of Churches in all Ages of the World.

The truth is, there is such an impression got on the imaginations of some of
the Dissenters, that if they should come in to the Church so as to be subject
to the Hierarchy, and submit to her present Impositions; nay, if they shall but
touch with the Conformist almost in any thing, though only to go to Church with
them, and take the Sacrament there (which yet as to Lay-conformity is in effect
indeed all) they are afraid, as if it were the receiving upon them the Mark of
the Beast (I mean, the doing some very horrid thing they know not well else
what) and were therefore to be cast remediless into the Lake of Fire. A
business really of very sad consequence to our selves at home, as exceeding
scandalous to the Reformed Churches abroad, who have their Liturgies and
Ceremonies as we have, and perhaps some or other of them less innocent than
this of the Church of England.

But I will ask here, What think we of Bradford, Philpot, Latimer, Ridley,
Cranmer, and the rest that suffered in Q. Mary's time? Were there not amongst
these holy Martyrs an Archbishop and Bishops, and did not they go ordinarily to
Church, and receive the Sacrament according to the Liturgy as we do, and admit
of all the Impositions besides in King Edward's days? Nay, what think we of the
old Nonconformists in Q. Elizabeth's and K. James his time, who, though they
laid down their Ministry rather than to conform to some Impositions afterward,
did yet maintain Communion with the Parish-Churches all their days? Did any of
these now, or all these receive the Mark in their right hands, or in their
foreheads by this means? And must they therefore be everlastingly damned?

I argue: The receiving the Mark in the Revelations must be a sin certainly,
because the receiver is cast into Hell for it. But to obey the Law, or to
conform only so far as we can (which is the Rule of these Papers) is the duty
of every man, and no sin.

Again; if receiving these Impositions be receiving the Mark, it must be the
promiscuous receiving them, without caution, (which to beware of is the end of
these Papers) or against Conscience, that is, sinfully receiving them: But to
receive them (as I here propose) with Explication (which is to receive them no
otherwise but so as they may and ought to be received) is to get a victory over
the Mark, avoiding the sin in the doing.

I must confess I am sorry that I have need to say thus much, I wish I had not;
but there are some odd minds, some vehement Revelation-men, some melancholy
Spirits, and I am much assured that such a conception I speak of is not
uncommon to such. As for those that never had any such kind of thought, but
have their rational Exceptions, it will yet be well even for them, when they
shall be able to get off their proper Objections, so as to come honestly to
Church, with a Judgment that is satisfied, and not only to avoid the Law, to be
secured from this also after they have done; who can tell what impression the
suggestions of a man's own heart, if troubled, or the words of another upon
occasion may lay upon him? And as for such as are for disputing the Point, if
they can produce those Arguments as will prove that the Church has indeed
imposed any thing as the condition of her Ordinary Communion, which is sinful
and intolerable, and those Arguments be sound, then must I acknowledge the
Schism which is made by their Separation from her Communion through those
sinful Impositions, must be imputed to her, and the Church of England is the
Schismatic till she removes them: But if those Arguments be not sufficient or
unsound, then must the Schism which is made, be imputed to them. For if the
cause upon which they separate be found no cause (and an insufficient one is
none) I must assert still, that the Separation here conceived being causless,
must be Schism.

But what if it be Schism? There are many such Ministers, and such People, who
are rivetted in the belief, that the Parish-Churches are no true Churches, or
at least, that it is sin to go thither, and what shall these do? I answer, I
need not stand to say first what all will, that these men are to lay down their
Error, and so come to Church, as the only way to escape sin; but seeing they
can never be convinced of that, I must say, there are degrees of Sin and
Schism, and the greatest evil must be most carefully shunned. To set up Meetings
upon the account these do, is sin, is Schism, I take it: but to hold no
Meetings at all, and leave off the Assembling themselves together, so as to rob
God of his Worship altogether, this is certainly more sinful, more wicked, more
intolerable. It appears consequently in the issue, that a Toleration
(understand such a one as is meet, or of such as are Tolerable) is even almost
as necessary to be granted by His Majesty and a Parliament, when we have one,
as a constant and continued Pardon from God Almighty is to this poor divided
Nation.

Not that I deny but there may be Reasons for the Meetings of Dissenters (and
perhaps very many) that will hold, and cannot be gainsaid; and when I say that
separating from the Church upon such grounds as draw ill consequences after it,
and will not hold, is Schism, I do not say that every mere local Separation
from the Parish-Meeting when there is cause, is so, who am sensible what a
Scarecrow has been made of that bare word only, as Mr. Hales has observed.
Suppose a man stands upon his liberty from God and Nature, to choose his own
Pastor for the benefit of his Soul, as his own Physician for the health of his
Body, and so using those means which he finds most conducive to his own
edification, he sits down with such or such a Meeting for his stated Communion,
when yet he refuses not to go to Church, maintaining occasional Communion also
with his Parish, I will not deny but such a man has reason. Indeed, if he
quite leave the Church, I shall suspect, according to my Principles, that his
ground is not good, and that is all one as that he has none.

You will say, if I go to Church, I must own the Parish, and I must own the
Diocese, and I must own the Bishop, and his Government. I answer, and so you
may; but it is not necessary that you own them as of Divine Right, which others
I suppose do. Upon that Hypothesis I must confess I do not see how any
Separation from the Church (unless in case of something imposed that is sinful)
could be justifiable, and the Conformists therefore taking up that Principle,
do generally condemn all Meetings, accusing them without discrimination of
Schism: But it is one thing to own the Parish Church, the Diocese, the Bishop,
and Episcopal Government according to Law, and another to won them as of Divine
Institution.

I apprehend that Particular Congregations, where there is a Pastor and Flock
conjoined for the Worship of God, and carrying on an holy life, are the
Churches of Christ's appointment, and that every Minister of such a particular
People has a power of Governing them, as well as Teaching them, derived to him
from Christ, being Episcopus Gregis, by virtue of his Office, and if any then
shall go to set up an Episcopus Postorum, a Bishop of the Diocese to divest him
that is Pastor of a particular Congregation (or the Minister of the Parish) of
that Authority which Christ has committed to him for governing his Flock
(which he that makes a Diocese to be the only Church of Apostolical
Institution, and the Diocesan the sole Pastor, must do) let him consider what
he undertakes, seeing the burden which is hereby laid on the Bishop, and the
account he must make at the great day for the Souls of so many he takes no
particular care at all of, is intolerable.

I will own the Bishop and his Regiment, but not to the denial of the
Ministers. I will own a Diocese, but not to the unchurching Particular
Congregations. There is another consideration therefore to be had of the Church
than this here understood, and that is, as it is National, and the King the
Head of it. The Church as National is divided into two Provinces, and these
into twenty six Diocesses, and they into so many thousand Parishes. The
Parish Church consists of a Particular Congregation, which is therefore a
Church of Christ's appointment, and the Authority or Regiment the Minister,
Pastor, or Bishop of such a Flock has, is derived from Christ. The Authority
the Diocesan has is derived from the King. The King makes the Bishops (he
might make them if he pleased, as Henry the Eighth by Commission) and he is the
Fountain of their Honor, for they have Baronies, and upon that account sit in
the Lords House; and if we may look on them accordingly as his Officers, to
exercise no other Authority as Diocesans, but what they derive from him, then,
As the Regiment of the Bishop, and of the Pastors are of a different kind, (the
Power or Regiment of the Pastor being internal, or in sacris, and formally
Ecclesiastical, flowing immediately from Christ, but the Regiment of the Bishop
external, or circa sacra, that is, objectively Ecclesiastical, deriving from
the King,) so must the Authority or Government of the one be cumulative to, and
not destructive of the other.

And this is a Notion, which methinks should not be hard of entrance to the
Conformist or Nonconformist. On the one side the Bishop should receive it,
because it grants him his Honor, Dignity, and great Revenues upon a clear and
open foundation, and it lightens his care and work. The Office of a Bishop upon
this Hypothesis may be discharged as that of any other Magistrate under the
King: But the Office of the Diocesan upon the other Hypothesis is a charge he
can never perform, and if he live in the negligence of what he thinks his duty,
and that wilfully, all his life, how can he be saved? On the other side, the
Nonconformist should receive it, because it opens his Eyes, and lets him see
how he may be subject to the Bishop, as he is to the King and the other
Magistrates under him, without molestation to his Conscience. And this should
be the Stone which I would lay for the Foundation (if ever a Parliament would
build upon it) of a sound and lasting Peace in the Nation. Whither this tends,
let the Reader see farther in the twelfth Section of that universally Learned
sort of Gentleman's late Book called The Samaritan.

FINIS.
An Advertisement from the Bookseller.
THere is a late new Book, Entitled, A Private Psalter, composed by the same
Hand that wrote these sheets, which being a Devotional Book, is put in a fair
Character for the sake of aged Eyes, and sold by me, whom the Reader may find
out by the Title page.

Thomas Parkhurst.

An Addition from the Author.
UPon the mention of this Book I have these few words to subjoyn concerning the
same: If I can judge any thing in Divinity, there is hardly any matter of more
near importance to the most of serious Christians than this one thing, to wit,
to be solidly informed what to do, or how to live, and support the Soul under
the case when it has examined itself, and is in conflict and doubt whether it
be in a state of Gods favor, which is all one as whether it be sincere or not.
They that are light Christians, do often talk of their assurance, when the more
weighty Christians are ready to droop and hang the head, as the ears of Corn do
that are fullest.

In the last Section of the evening Office of that Private Psalter, there is a
Determination de industria of this case, according as I was able to admit
Instruction with Devotion into my Design. I am sensible of the smallness of my
Talent, and the greatness of the Concern, and that whatsoever is peculiar, is
in danger to be defective, who must confess my genius has led me to the
seeking a middle resolution in this great Practical case, in regard to Life and
Comfort, as it has usually done in the matter of polemical Opinions. And for
the sake of this case more especially was that Book printed.

If any worthy Person therefore of the Conforming Ministry, who has a Pen
accomplished with the style of the Times (whose fluency, or command of words
may make the task easy to him, which would be burdensome to me) will take the
sense only, or matter of that last Section, I mean the full and whole sense of
it, though nothing else purely but what is there hinted, and enlarge it into a
Treatise of a convenient dimension, as he shall pitch upon a subject to
exercise his parts, which I think like to be profitable to most Christians,
especially to such as are of a tender Spirit, and solicitous about their
Spiritual estate, so if he will bring it to the Bookseller, above intimated, to
put it into the Press, he will not be ungrateful to him, I suppose, for his
Copy.

John Humfrey.


