VINDICIAE VERITATIS.

A NARRATIVE Vindicating the TRUTH, against The Invective, Malicious, and
Slanderous Backbiting Aspersions of certain NON-CONFORMISTS In, and about
LONDON, Passing under the Notion of Presbyterians, and others their Pupils and
Confederates, concerning the Truths published in my little Book of the
Covenants, and the Personal Reign of Christ, lately Printed for Mr. Thomas
Pasham in Fleet-lane; as also their abusing me in their Synodical Sessions at
the Spittle and elsewhere, calling and whispering me to the World, to be a
Jesuit, and a Papist, and attempting to silence me, as well as my Book; because
of their Avaritious Interest of accumulating the Peoples Charity to themselves,
under pretense of caring for their Souls, and keeping them from Errors. And
because I refuse to take my Measures from their Arminian, Antichristian
Classes. Published to prevent the Jealousies of the Godly in London, as also
the Abuse of the Truths of Christ, and further my own Liberty, Life, and
Reputation; for the Churches and Gospels sake.

By the Author JOHN HVMPHRYES.

(...)

Vestri fratres odio habentes vos, elongantes vos, propter Nomen meum,
dixerunt, gloriosus fit Dominus.

Your Brethren that hated you for my Names sake, cast you out, (or said, Stand
farther off us) and said, The Lord be glorified in what we do.

Isa. 66.5. Mont. Obsequium amicos, Veritas odium parit.

Flattery gets Friends, and Truth gets Foes.

April the 9th. 1680.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1680.

A Word to the Christian Intelligent Reader.
IN short, I am traduced for a Jesuit, who have taken my self this twenty years
to be the greatest Antipapist in the World; Who my Accusers are originally, I
cannot tell, they that have thus aspersed me, have made me the worst of
Mankind. Reader, do thou know a Jesuit? Let me give thee some real Marks of a
real Jesuit, though it is hard to do in this Age, yet possible. 1. A Jesuit is
one bred up properly in Jesus-Colledge in Rome, a place I never saw in all my
Life. 2. They are brought up to some Trade or other, that they may the better
insinuate their Errors; this I confess I had never the Happiness to be of, and
so the more incapable of gaining a Living in these hard Times; though St. Paul
was a Tent-maker as well as a Civilian. 3. a Jesuit is always shaved on the
Crown, it is true I have a Periwig, and but little Hair on my Crown, but yet I
was never shaven there. 4. A Jesuit will not, cannot preach up the free Grace
of God, but he must hang his Pipes on some Arminian String, by propping up the
Creature in some Power that in his fallen State he has not, or else when he
tells you of Christ's Merits, he minces them, and tells you, that Christ's
Righteousness and Holiness is by the Spirit communicated into us, and to our
Nature infused, like the Heresy of old Osyander, honest Calvin speaks of; but
he will as soon be hanged at Tyborn, as to confess that it is the very
Righteousness and Holiness that Christ as Mediator God-man, wrought in this
individual Person, is by an Act of Grace given, and by Promise imputed to us,
and received by Faith alone, without Works wrought in us or by us. And he
cannot tell, that Faith and Repentance, and new Obedience are Fruits and
Effects of our free Justification; but he will readily tell you, that they are
Causes and Acts of ours preceding it or Conditions of it. 5. He is a met
amorphosied Creature, now a Quaker, now a Presbyterian, now a Church of England
man, a Baptist, finally, any thing but a true Evangelist, and that he can as
soon be hanged as be, he can pretend to outward Pharisaical Holiness well
enough; and says, it is of the Spirit, yea he can be a Separatist too, but to
believe that Jesus in his Person and in his Room and Stead, did all for him as
to his Righteousness before God, this he cannot swallow: he is an old Pharisee
in a finical, spiritual, pretended new Dress. 6. He allows lying with other
men's Wives, if they please him, and calls Adultery and Fornication but a venial
Sin: and when his Lust is hot, and the Creature weak and tender of Conscience,
it is no Sin at all. 7. No Creature has more Confidence, even to the Extremity
of Impudence than he, for if it be but for papal Interest, he can Murder,
Regiscide, or commit any horrid Act, with the Confidence of meriting Salvation
thereby, yea he can look another man's Wife in the Face, and demand a Nights
Lodging of her, and if she deny him, and detect him, he can as confidently put
it off with a Jest, as if he meant no such thing really: All his Confessees are
his Children, but especially if they be of the Foeminine Gender. 8. He is very
demure, when he is about his spiritual Concerns, but take him at another time,
he is as apt to stumble at a Curtizens Lintel, and at a Firkin, if he miss the
Tavern, as any man living. 9. He is very zealous of obeying his Superior, and
makes it the chiefest Article of his Creed, to be very obedient to them, whilst
in the Method and Course of his Life, he horridly violates the Command of God.
Q. Whether some that look for Attention from others like Diotrephes, be not
infected with the Itch of the Jesuits? 10. He hates Marriage (and living with a
Wife) as his Master does Holy Water, but a Whore is the best spoke in's Cart at
some times.


Farewell,
VINDICIAE VERITATIS.
IT was the frequent Cry of the Jews of old, in their greatest Discrtions from
God and his Covenant, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; thereby
thinking to blind the World and their Consciences with their outward formal
Services and ignorant Zeal, while they and their Children made Cakes and
offered them to the Queen of Heaven, and were found treading the Steps of
Idolators, proud Boasters, fiery Zealots, Oppressors, Covetous, Proud, hating
and persecuting all that did not pin their Faith on their Sleeves, and draw
their Measures from their Lines; though never so corrupt and false. Jerem. 7.8,
9, 10.18. Jerem. 5.20, 21. Jerem. 20.10.11. Of the same Spirit were the Scribes
and Pharisees in our Lords Days, and the furious zealous Jews in the Apostles
times. Mat. 23.5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. and to the end. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
1 Timothy 4.12. And of the same Stamp are many of our zealous and Jehu-like
Presbyterians, in this our day, who would truly have done the Church of Christ
more Service, and the Lord less Dishonor, if they had upon their black
Bartholomew day conformed to the present times; and he that varies from me in
this Particular, either like the Mole is blind, or else like a K. is a
Respector of men's Persons. The Holy, humble, tender hearted and truly
evangelically principled, that have the Apostles Spirit, Phil. 3.13.14.15. by
what ever Names they are called or distinguished, I truly honor them, and love
them with my whole Soul. Quid verba audiam cum facta videam.
Neither would I have attempted this Vindication, but that, not only to the
Loss of my Reputation by calling me Antinomian, but to my Life and Liberty, by
calling me a Jesuit, and that in such a time when so many of that Faction have
been found plotting the Nations Ruin, and the Kings Majesty's Life. Had not
their Envy struck also (though most falsely and intestinely malicious) at my
Life, and the Honor of the Gospel, of Christ, Sardis me auribus accepisse nisi
propter veritatem Riv. Epist. ad Balsac.
I assuredly would have passed all by in Silence, which now I publish to the
World for the sake of well minded Christians, and the Interest of Christ. Even
so many of ours cry out, the Gospel the Gospel, and teach their Pupills to
paratize like Caesar's Parrot, that could cry out nothing but (...), God save
Caesar; (...)
so these can cry nothing but Our Gospel Ministers, our Gospel Ministers, like
Parrots that speak by Roat, what they are taught: when these Disciples truly,
(unless they have learned their Catechism by Head) can say nothing by
Experience or by Heart; for their Teachers are truly nothing less, in both
Principle and Life, having no more Love in their Lives, than the Scribes and
Pharisees had, who gilded the Sepulchers of the Martyrs whom their Fathers
killed, whose Writings and Preachments are filled up with as bad Doctrine, and
as like as an Apple to a Pomewater, as any is in Bellarmine, Scotus, Aquinas,
Huberus, Hemingius or any of the Jesuits and Papists, yet I will not betray my
Folly to say they are Papists, or my Knavery to say they are Jesuits; but this
I think of them, that they ignorantly like the Jews and Pharisees of old, teach
and preach Popery and write it, because they know not the Gospel, Romans 10.1, 2,
3, 4. and herein their Pride also appears, because they hate all that differ or
dissent from their false Principles, Hugo Grotius Papizat. sic ejus Discipuli.
founding themselves upon Arminiasnism, Grotianism, and Papism, rather pinning
their Historical Faith upon men's humane Arguments, than the pure infallible
Word of God, which is able to cut and hamstring all their Sophistry and false
Phillosophy, Col. 2.8. though guarded with the dialectical Spears of Aquinas,
Scotus or all the Popish Schoolmen; as Rivetus in his Epist. to Prince
Frederick, in Vindication of the Gospel against the Jesuits. Gladium verbi
Divini tractent cujus aciem merito reformidant, unde est quodicam retundere
conantur excogitatis varii generis sophismatibus quibus incautos deripiunt. And
I do the more wonder that I who have published my self to the World by two or
three Tracts in open Hostility against the Doctrine of the Romanists, and
Arminians, and also Socinians, and plainly discovered my self to the World to
be so great an Anti-arminian, Papist, Socinian, should be by these Gospel
Ministers called a Jesuit; especially when I consider, that in the Writings of
some worthy men, who like James, Cephas, and John, Gal. 2.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. are
supposed to be Pillars; there is so much stuff as like Popish Doctrine, as an
Italian is like a Roman born; and yet, which adds to my Admiration, their
Readers, and Hearers, admires them with as great Confidence, as if Paul were
preaching, or they were reading one of his Epistles. My Proof for what I now
say, shall be notorious, See Mr. Baxters Saints Rest. part 3. chap 8. p. 270.
And this is the Doctrine that all men may be saved if they will, and then I am
sure, that all men are not dead in Sins and Trespasses, Ephesians. 2. as the
Apostle affirms, and the Psalmist, Psalms 110.3. that Gods People even the
Elect, are not a willing People, till by his Power he makes them so. And that
Testimony of Jerem 4. and 22. V. My People are wife to do Evil, but to do Good
they have no Knowledge. But may be, some may credit Mr. B. before the Apostle
and the Prophet, or take his Interpretation before the plain Words of
Scripture. Part 3. chap. 11. Sect. 3. p. 445.
And in the same Chapter, that infallible Knowledge is not a Certainty of
Faith, now if Gods Promise to a Sinner be infallible, then may a Sinner by
Faith infallibly know it, as John 6.37. and Rev. 22.17. as his Portion.
Bellarmine can say, nor does say no more than Mr. B. and Mr. B. in the same
place says, that he likes Bellarmine the Better. You may if you will hang your
Faith on Mr. Baxters Sleeve, but I will not, so long as Gods Word is unburnt;
and in the same Chapter, he plays the Arminian neatly, and in the last Sheet
of the Book, by affirming that common Grace in all men, and special Grace in
the regenerate, differs not naturally (or physically) as he said, but by a
moral Specification, that is in the comparative Degree. And he says, that
Divines make special Grace to lie in four things; 1. The Love of God, whereby
the Redeemer, Justifies, Elects, and Saves, these being immanent Acts in God,
as the Means extended for all to have the Benefit, if they will. 2. The Spirits
act working and infusing the saving Act into the Soul or habitual Acts, called
Gratia Operans. 3. The Effects of the Spirits work the new Creature, the Seed
remaining or real Holiness. 4. The Exercise of these Habits, and in it lies the
Question about the Sincerity of Grace, and the Difference between common and
special Grace, being as he says, in the Comparative Degree, that is not
Quality but Quantity.
No Divines but Papists, Arminians, and Grotians, and Socinians, ever held this
Phenomenon in Divinity except him. So that men may be elected, loved of God,
justified, redeemed, and the Spirit may apply and infuse Habits and
Dispositions at least, and a new Creature may be regenerated; and yet in the
Acts and Exercise of these Habits, there be not a Comparative Degree of
Excellency, that man may be an Hypocrite; so then God may Love, Justify, and
Redeem Hypocrites. Did ever Bellarmine or any of the Schoolmen or Jesuitical
Tribe, ever speak more to the Purpose, see Sect. 8. chap. 11. and Sect. 6.
beside Aug. lib. de fide. chap. 14. Bona Opera sequuntur justificatum non
precedunt Justificandum, Good works follow a Person Justified, as Fruits and
Justification is an Act of free Grace, that whoever has it, cannot perish, and
by Faith alone it is received, and not by Love or any other Grace. The Just
shall live by Faith, not any other Grace, though other Graces as Love etc.
follow true Faith. And ( quomodo, says Rivet. qui vitam non habet potest
operari?) who can work that has no Life. The Trial of the Sincerity and Truth
of our Grace should be placed in the Love of God, and Acts of free Grace by him
in Christ, and tendered in the Promises and received by Faith. For Grace is
savingly true, though it may not grow: as said David, 2 Samuel 23.5. why then
should Mr. Baxter place the sincere Degree in the Quantity and Exercise, and
Growth of Grace?

Frendeat usque licet Satanas and dira minetur,
Terreat inferni conscia corda metu.
Vnica Justificat nitens in sanguine Christi,
Fructibus ipsa suis justificata fides.
When Satan his hellish Tooth does gnash,
And when Fear of Hell the wounded Conscience lash,
It Is Faith alone, in his Blood Justifies,
And Fruits of Love to men it verifies.
And the Power of the Gospel consists not in the Fruits of Faith, but in Faith
it self. 2 These. 1.8. Acts 16.7. John 6.26. Gal. 3.9. John 3.16. and 5.24. and
20.31. Romans 1.5. 1 Cor. 15.2. 2 Cor. 13 5. Dominus per Evangelium nos vocat,
nos vocanti per fidem respondemus, Calv. fides propria est per quam obeditur
Evangelium, ut fide obediant Evangelio bomines. Mela. on Romans 1.5.
The Power of the Gospel consists in believing in the Son for our Justification
and Sanctification too, yea for all without us and within us. By the Gospel we
are called, by Faith we are sure, not by Works faith Reverend Calvin, Faith is
that properly by which we obey the Gospel, says Mela, and not works at all.
And says Brentius, unto Justification and Salvation no Work is required of God
from us, except Faith alone in Jesus Christ; yet Mr. B. in the same Chapter
tells you, that no man can be justified before certain Acts and Conditions
performed by the Creature. I will not say, this is Popery in a Friars weed, Ad
Justitiam and Salutem parandum nullum opus, aliud efflagitat. Deus praeterque
fidem Jolam in Jesu Christo in Joh,
but I am sure, it is Popery in a Presbyterians weed, which I am sorry for. Mr.
B. says also in the same Chapter, that a Woman may love her Husband, and yet
prostitute her self to twenty other men, and her Love in the Sincerity of it
differs not in the natural Act but Degree Comparative, whether she love her
Husband or these men more. And first, I think such kind of Creatures would be
beholding to Mr. B. if he can persuade their Husbands, If any object, why I
mention these things, now let them know, that for these Abuses of the Grace of
God in Christ, all these Miseries now impendent and hanging over ours, and the
Nations Head; because we have corrupted the pure Gospel of Christ, by immixing
Popish Errors under Pretense of Piety and Holiness.
that they may love them truly, and yet play the Whore with others. Besides,
this is such Divinity that is fitter for a Curtizans Intrigue, than a Christian
Commonwealth. Now If I should hold and defend such Errors, it would be Heresy
in me, but I dare not say it is so in Mr. B. because some men may break an
House, before some may draw the Latch.

I shall give the World an Accout of 1. my Birth and Breeding, Negative and
Affirmative. 2. Of my Religion. 3. Of my coming up to London, and present
Juncture of Affairs. 4. As touching the Objection against my Book. 5. My
Reasons for my Nonappearance before certain Ministers. 6. The Conclusion.


1. I was born of honest Parents, in the County of Salop, in the Parish of Neen
Savage, Anno Dom. 1637 brought up there; and in English Schools all my Days:
and to some competent Degrees in Learning attained, but through the late Civil
Wars, my Friends being impoverished, and my Studies were prohibited. I never
was in any Popish Dominions, nor in France, Spain, Italy, or Germany in all my
Life.

About eighteen years of Age, I went a Voyage into the West Indies, and being
somewhat more than twenty years old, was ordained in Litchfield, to the
Function of the Ministry. My whole Life was given to Study; in the days of my
Minority I attained to some Knowledge in the Tongues, but being kept short of
this Worlds Good, could not attain to that Perfection I aimed at. In the
further Progress of my days, I addicted my self to the Study, of some parts of
Philosophy, Mathematics and Arithmetic, to Physic, and unto Divinity, in all
which I confess my Ignorance too too much, and bewail that I have not been more
laborious being subject to the English-man's Humor, to be aliquid in singulis,
sed nihil in toto. 2. As to my Religion, I was never a Papist, but my Friends
being of the common Protestant Profession, I was the same, de forma, in which I
was bred; till about twenty years of Age, and a little more, God in infinite
Mercy convinced me of Sin, and Wrath, and Hell, and so I was many Months in a
despairing State, till he showed me by his Grace, my Interest in the Blood of
Christ, and gave me Faith to enclasp about him; since which, I humbly confess I
have dishonored his Name many ways, but yet throw Grace, believe, I shall not
be totally cast off, because he has loved me with an everlasting Love. Jer.
31.3. So by his Grace, I am what I am now. Gal. 2. ult. I have been a Chaplain
to the Lord Ward, dead long since, and to a Knight in Worcester shire; and for
Conscience sake Non-conformed, at that Juncture, when I might have had an 100
and 20 l. by the year. Burmingham in the County of Worcester was offered me,
and many other Preferments, which I all refused; and by Faith, cast my self on
the bare Providence of God near this twenty years: I have been in Gloucester
and Worcester Goals, for the Testimony of my Conscience, and for preaching the
Gospel, I have taken the Oath of Supremacy, in the Sense it was given out by
Queen Elizabeth, as may be testified in the County of Gloucester, and have
since preached up and down in many Counties of England, and sometimes taught
Children for my Livelihood, and to maintain my Wife and Children, having a
Wife and three Children now alive, in Oxfordshire. 3. My coming up to London
was providentially: the last year, I preached at Bednal Green at Mr. Howels
Meeting, and many times at Mr. Sharps in Beech Lane at the Morning Lecture
there, before diverse Ministers, and by name Mr. Franklin, and was never
attainted for Jesuitism, or Popery, or any other Heresy. At Michaelmas I went
in the Country, and Mr. Farrington by one Mr. Million wrote three Letters for
me, to come and assist him, and promised me a Comfortable Maintenance; I left a
good School then, and came up near the end of October, 1679. We drew Articles
to this Purpose, and sealed them, and he promised me that Quarter, and told me,
it would be ten Pounds he did believe, but I received at Christmas 3 pound odd
Money, that was all I ever had upon the Account of him, and have in Pursuance
of the Articles, preached since the last Quarter, except a little time I was in
the Country, for Nothing; and when I came up again to L. Mr. Farrington told me
the House was taken over his Head by one Mr. Streaton, and that yet he had so
far prevailed with the Landlords, that if he could produce a Years Rent
aforehand, he yet should have the house, and told me, I must deposit 25 l. of
it. and then I should go Partners with him; I told him, that I had no money,
and was poor, and If I had, I would not lay it down so, and that by Articles I
was to have half this Quarter, and so on without meddling with the Rent, he
replied, that the Articles were worth nothing in Law; and then I began to smell
him out, and told him, then I hoped to have the Benefit of it as well as he, so
we parted about the beginning of April 1680. the next day being Tuesday, at
nine of the Clock at Night, I being sick a bed, Mr. Farington sent one Mr.
Forest for me to come to Mr. Stretton and him, at the Cheshire Cheese in New
Market. I told him I could not then, and it was not a fit time, if I had been
well, the Gentleman told me that Mr. Stretton told Mr. Far. that he had not
taken the House, but because he brought me in there. I desired him to tell Mr.
Far. before Mr. Stretton, that I would have him discharge me, that he might
come to no more Damage by me, and that Mr. Stretton accused me of slandering
him. I said to Mr. Forest, and prayed him to tell Mr. Stretton, that what I
said in the Public place, of him, was by Mr. Faringtons Order, or else I
should not have preached that day; and that I would at any other time meet Mr.
Stretton, and satisfy him, but he never sent for me yet. But it was reported
at Mr. Farrington's Meeting, that a Coach came for me to come to Mr. Jenkins,
Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Turner, but I refused; which Lie I believe, came from that
corrupt Fountain, that once professed in public, that he was given to lying
and Covetousness; which both my Purse and Body have been very sensible of this
16 weaks; well I sent on Saturday following to Mr. Farington to know if I
should continue Preaching with him, he sent me Answer, that he would excuse me,
he would do it himself, since which, I have preached in Compton Street, and do
intend to continue God willing, and never move to trouble Mr. Farington, and am
sorry I have ever. Upon this little Storm, I was to be metamorphosied into a
Jesuit (by whose Malice and Subtilty I leave to God) as Acteon was into a Stag,
that I might be hunted to Death, out of their way; and being one Lords day by
Providence called to preach in Southwark to one Mr. Madocks an honest sober
Gentleman, as far as I know, where I preached upon the Sacrament, and in his
hearing and the rest, neither asserted Consubstantiation with the Lutherans, or
Transubstantiation with the Papists, which I suppose no Jesuit in the World
would deny, if he should preach upon it. Yet for all this, this Monster of a
Jesuit must be brought forth, like Aarons gol-Calf, cast into the fiery
Passions of some self-ended Zealots, and there came out the Jesuit; this
Gentleman Mr. Madocks being as I was informed, at the Spittle at Dr. Ainsloes
Synod, there came the Jesuit out. I will not say it was formed in that Class,
but Mr. Nathaniel Vincent a Gentleman, to me a Stranger, contrary to the Law
and Rules of Charity there publicly (the Act smelling a little of Envy for
Interests sake) traduced him for letting a Jesuit preach, and that he was like
to be as bad, for so doing, nor would his honest Testimony of my Doctrine,
quench their Flames, but in all Have I must come and appear before Mr. V. or I
know not whom, and truly, had Mr. V. been so Civil as to have sent me word to
attend him, though it had been a little magisterical and prelatical, Before he
had Jesuitized me, and traduced Mr. Maddocks; truly I would have gone upon my
Hands. But after he had done me all the Wrong he could, then I supposed another
way of Vindication more pleasing to me, than to prostrate to Self and Pride,
and through Evil to bring out Good: but these men are more versed in the
Corinthian Law to hang a man and then Judge him, than in the Laws of the pure
Love of Christ, and this by my own Experience I have found. And now they have
brought an imaginary Jesuit, out of the Chymeraes of their own Brains; we want
Judicious Moses to grind him to Powder, and cast him into the Waters of
Oblivion; but I heartily wish, that none of the fond Founders of this Jesuit,
be forced to drink in all their Potions, the Powder of this Jesuit, as the Jews
did of their Golden Calf: and I wish a little time do not manifest it. The next
thing is my Book, Libella sua and fata habebant, must come under the Severity
of their lashing Censures, whereas I hear five Objections are made against it,
beside that I did not come to ask their Master-ships Leave to do it. 1. That
about Gods laying Iniquity it self upon Christ. page 11.12.13.14.15. of my
Book. God imputes to Believers Christ's Righteousness, and his Holiness also.
Heb. 13.12. and 10.14. for their Justification and per contra imputed to him
our Sins and Impieties, and then is the Church without Spot and Blemish before
God. Col. 1.22. Ephesians. 5.26.27. compared with Cant. 4.7. and Numb. the 23.21.
and Rev. 14.5. Heb. 1.3. and 10.7.10, 14. Heb. 9.26. and consult Doctor Crisp's
Sermons upon the 53. Isa. The next Objection is, That I affirm that Faith,
Repentance, and new Obedience, are not Conditions of our Justification, that
being freely by Grace, but Fruits and Effects of it. When their Worships shall
please to answer my Book, I shall (God willing) have in Readiness a Reply to
answer this and other Objections, fully to the Satisfaction of the honest
humble Soul. The next Objection is about the personal Reign of Christ, whom I
affirm will with his Saints reign in Person, over the Kingdoms of this World,
and that at the end of the Roman, or 4. Monarchy, and that at the end of the
little Horn, that shall of all the ten wear out the Saints, Christ shall come
in the Clouds, Dan. 7.17.18.21, 22.25, 26, 27. verse Acts 3.19.20.21. Whom the
Heavens must contain till the Restitution of all things. (...), or till the
time that all things that now seem fallen and dead, shall again stand on its
Legs. See Rev. 5.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. the twenty four Elders, the dead Saints of old
and new Testament must reign upon Earth, and the Kingdoms of this World shall
be delivered to Christ and them. Rev. 11.15. and 10.6.7. and then the Mystery
shall be finished that is not yet. For all these Gent. think that they have all
the Truth in the World, like Homers Illiads in a Nutshell, in their Fists --
but Haud parum falluntur, and when Mr. B. for so Mr. Farington told me, that he
said it was Popery to hold the personal Reign. I say when he, with all his
Logic and Sophistry, and School Distinctions, has answered Dr. Homes, Mr.
Mead, Dr. Twiss, Mr. Thomas Goodwin, Mr. Durant, and others: and plainly from
Gods word proved it to be Popery, then will I bethink me to be of another Mind.
-- The next Objection is page 135. and page 136. where first I desire the
Nonconformists to submit to the King of Heaven and his Decrees, for according
to that, shall the Decrees of earthly Monarchs be dispensed, and to think no
Evil of the Kings most Excellent Majesty, though the Parliament do not sit; and
that his Majesty gave us our Liberty when the Parliament abridged it. I
heartily pray that the King and his Parliament may propitiously agree: but I am
thankful for my Liberty, and desire to be obedient in all things wherein I
ought, and leave the Event and Success to the Lord, and to the Prince, whom he
has set upon the Throne; and I hope this is no Token of a Jesuitical Spirit.
And page 136. I bewailed the bitterness of our Spirits one against another,
delivering my Judgment according to my Experience, for this dozen years; and
when I see it better, viz. that there is more indissimulate Love, affectionate
Bowels, Charity to the Poor, and less of Respect of Persons, James 2. to their
gold fingered and glistering professing Gallants, for their outward Bravery;
when I say, I see it amended, and men of differing Judgments tender, humble,
and forbearing Envy to them they dogmatize not with, I shall change my
Sentiment, and sing Te Deum for Joy, but the Proverb is, Touch a gald Horse and
he will wince.

And lastly, my Nonappearance before the Ministers. 1. I affirm that no
Minister did ever as I know of, send directly for me, nor come to me, except
Mr. Farrington, and (as his Messenger Mr. Forest said) Mr. Stretton, to an
Alehouse at nine of the Clock at Night in New Market, when I was sick in Bed.
And upon another time, there came a Gentleman to my Lodging, one Mr. Salisbury
a Coach-harness-maker in Princes street, puffing and huffing at me, who a
little before, had committed my Book to the Flames, to show his Teeth against
the Truths of Christ, which he in Scorn called Heresy, and me a Papist, being
himself both ignorant of the Truth and of Popery, he charged me then that I
said Christ was filthy -- let all sober Persons judge that, if in my Book such
an Expression is -- but we may say, Christ was guilty, because our Guilt was
imputed to him, so he was a Sinner, and the greatest Sinner said Luther,
because our Sins was imputed to him, so was our Filth too; the while he is
still personally and inherently pure, and we filthy and guilty too in that
Sense: but if Mr. Salisbury will needs have the Filth of his Sin to rest upon
himself, and be imputed to himself, till the Spirit has cleansed him from the
Filth in the Sight of God for his Justification (an Office which the Scripture
no where gives to the Spirit, Romans 8.13. it being peculiar to Christ's Blood.
Heb. 1.3. 1 John 1.9) My Answer to him and his Master Mr. Lob is, let him that
is filthy be filthy still. Rev. 22.11. and he that is made Righteous and Holy
by Christ's imputed Righteousness and Holiness, Heb. 13.11, 12. 1 Cor. 1.30. And
also his Guilt and Filth imputed to Christ, when on the Cross. 2 Cor. 5.21.
Gal. 3.13. let him (yea he will) be Holy and Righteous still. I wish Mr. Lob to
teach his Disciples Humanity, for they pretend to so much Divinity, that they
forget their Humanity, for Mr. Salisbury told me peremptorily before Mrs. Sarah
Denton, and Mrs. Allice Porter, that he was a better man than I, and when I
demanded of him, who the Ministers were that I must meet and where, he told me
he scorned to give me an account, then I bid him go and bid his Masters send a
wiser Messenger; besides many other Incivilities that he offered me, before
these forementioned Persons, at my Lodging, and then went, as soon as he had
done, and told Lies on me to excuse his own Incivility and Inhumanity: I wish
Mr. Lob. by transmuting the two last Letters of his Name from Lob to Lag. (...)
which in Hebrew signifies a Flagon, may be so full of Gospel Wine, not
Ignorance, Malice and Envy; that all his Disciples may drink out of him, such
Gospel Truths, as may better enable them to talk of and discern the Truths of
the Gospel, than to burn men's Books without Authority, and abuse their Persons.
But I desire the mighty Lord to change and forgive them, and to convert us all
from Lob to Leb, and so to Caleb, a good Heart.

Also Mr. Farrington told Mr. Forest, and Mr. Forest, Mr. Pasham, that if I
did not come before the Ministers, they would have a Warrant, and bring me for
a Jesuit before the King and Council, and that I was of no University, but bred
up beyond Seas, and had Ordination there. I thank Mr. Farrington, this is my
Reward for preaching for him to uphold his Meeting this 3 Months for nothing;
and suppose I were of no other University than Kederminster-stuff: Why may not
I preach for all that as well as he?

If any object, why I meddle with Mr. Baxter, I answer, I honor Mr. Baxter's
Person, Worth, and Parts, but do not love his Principles. And I am but of the
Opinion of some great Divines in England; whom Mr. Baxter was pleased to tax
with Anti-nominanism, that he with his great and prodigious Parts, has one
time with another, done the Church more Hurt than Good, see Mr. Edw. Bagshaw
against him, and see that Discourse of that Reverend Divine, Dr. O. in his
Append. in the end of that worthy Piece against the Socinians, (...). 2. I
answer, Mr. Farinton told me, that Mr. Stretton told him, that Mr. Baxter would
answer my Book, and that it was damned Heresy; and that the Title of the
Answer was, A warning to the World, how and who they hear. Therefore I have but
anticipated Mr. Baxter, and desire the World, and the Saints, and Believers in
the World, that value their Souls, and the Truth of their Faith and Principles,
to take Heed how they read his Books, in which there is sprinkled here and
there, such Doctrine as may be read in Bellarmine, and other Popish Authors.
See Dr. Willets Synop. against Popery, and Dr. White against Campion the
Jesuit, and Jewel against Hardin, and compare them with Mr. Baxter's Saints
Rest, and other Books, and his Call to the Unconverted, where I must tell him,
I do not believe, that by that Book, one Sinner is truly turned to Christ, and
the true Faith of him. And if any of these Gospel Ministers, so called, will
show me their Authority from Christ, and the Magistrate, to command my
Appearance before their Synods and Classes, or their Power to catechize or
examine me, I will come with Cap in hand and bended Knees, but till then they
must excuse me. And if any Christian or Minister without dissimulate Love, for
brotherly Conference, come to me, or at Convenience desire my Company, I shall
not refuse it. -- And if any object, these are Lies put on Mr. Baxter and
others; I answer, it must then be from Mr. Farrington, who is a Minister of
ancient Ordination, though I cannot tell of what University, and who shall I
believe, if not a Minister. And lastly, if any man would hear or discern my
Doctrine, they may come any Lords day to Mr. Bartons in Compton street, they
shall be welcome; at the West end of Monmouth-street near the white Heart. My
Conclusion is, The great God grant his Majesty's Life long in the Land, the
Churches Liberty, Truths, Propagation, and Christ's Glory and personal Reign and
Coming. I for my part am but the poorest and weakest of Christ's Royal
Ambassadors, and walk daily depending on him for Strength, fearing to fall; but
if I should fall into that Damnable, Debauched, Cursed, Hellish, Swinish
Beastly Sin of Whoredom, and Drunkenness, Lying and Covetousness, deceit and
Craft, to uphold my Lust and Interest, Pride and Wantonness, and should go
about with other men's Works and Doctrine, to preach up Love to cloak my Lusts;
Let then the Ministers, and Church, and People of Christ, except by unfeigned
Repentance I submit and reform, for ever refuse me, silence me, and banish me
their Society, and that, they that then follow me, (though they profess never
so fair) would be as bad as I,

JOHN HVMPHRIES.

ERRATA.
In the Epistle to the Reader, line 15. for and to, r. and into. l. 18. for
this individual r. his individual. p. 2. for deripiunt r. decipiunt. p. 6. l.
18. r. 16 Weeks. p. 3. l. 2. for the redeemer r. he redeemed and.

FINIS.

