A SERMON Preached before the House of Lords, AT THE Abbey-Church of St.
Peter's Westminster, ON Thursday, the 30th of January, 1695/6. BEING The
Martyrdom of K. Charles I.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, Humphrey's Lord Bishop of Bangor.

LONDON: Printed for John Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate Street, near the
West End of St. Paul's. 1696.

A SERMON Preached before the House of Lords,
Hosea X. 3. For now they shall say, We have no King, because we feared not the
Lord; What then should a King do to us?


IF all the sad effects of the Horrible Sin committed on this day were now
ceased, if the reproach that it brought upon our Religion and Nation were quite
worn out of the Memories of Men, and the guilt of it entirely expiated in the
sight of God, we should then have no more to do here, but to Celebrate the
Memory of our Martyred King, as we do those of the Primitive Martyrs, with Joy
and Thanksgiving to God for those Triumphs of his Grace, which so eminently
appeared in him; and conclude our Devotions, with Prayers to God for a Portion
of the same blessed Spirit, that inspired and supported him; to enable us to
follow his Example in holy living and patient suffering. This indeed would be
the most pleasing and comfortable exercise upon this day; and this we hope, may
be the service in which our posterty may sometimes spend it.

But it is to be feared we are not yet ripe for this. The humiliation part has
not yet had its full effect upon us. The guilt of innocent blood, leaves a deep
and lasting stain; not only upon the persons that shed it, but upon the place
where it was shed; How much more (...) King, especially such a King, shed by
his own subjects; the voice of it cries loud for vengance, it will be heard
long after: And however, some may think we have done enough to still that cry
already, and look upon this as an antiquated Solemnity, fit now at last to be
Abrogated and laid aside; yet I humbly conceive we ought the rather for that
reason to continue our humiliation; I am sure we have the more need of it;
because this is a sign, our repentance is not yet gone deep enough: Sincere
Penitents are never weary in repenting and humbling themselves for their sins,
but are continually exercised in all the Acts of Contrition and Godly Sorrow,
till they have both received their pardon, and are past the danger of
forfeiting it by a relapse.

But as some may be weary of their repentance, So th^^e may be others that
^hink they need none; I speak not of them who may perhaps think they were never
concerned in this sin, because they did not live in those days, yet even these
should remember the second Commandment and consider that our Church has taught
us to pray, Remember not our sins, nor the sins of our Forefathers: But I speak
of them who not content to extenuate and excuse the sin, have the boldness to
justify and applaud the fact; acquit the guilty, and condemn the innocent, nay
murder him over again in his Reputation and Honor, which to use his own words,
Were dearer to him than his Kingdoms, or his Life.

Now, when men are thus insensible under the greatest national guilt, and under
a continued succession of Judgments with which God has pursued it for so many
years, it is not only a seasonable, but becomes a necessary duty, still to
humble our selves in the sight of God; still to bewail the crying sin of this
Nation, and not only this particular sin, but also all those public, and
national sins which prepared the way to it; which provoked God to give us up to
to this last degree of wickedness, and brought down the Guilt and Judgment of
this day upon this Nation.

To stir you up to this, I know not what to do better then to represent to you
the ancient people of God, in a condition something like that we were once
involved in by the sin of this day; and to show you their reflections upon it,
that we may form ours in like manner.

In this Text the Prophet gives us the words that were, or might be spoken by
the ten Tribes of Israel, with respect to their present condition. They were
then in a state of Anarchy, after which there was but one short Reign more, and
then the heaviest Judgment of God fell upon them to their destruction.

How they came to fall into this condition, will soon appear upon a short view
of their story about the time of this Prophesy.

These ten Tribes, as they were now divided from Benjamin and Judah, (which
together with Levi, was all that remained to the House of David); are usually
styled the Kingdom of Israel. Which Kingdom was under Jer^^oa^ the second-at
the beginning of this Prophesy, so I conceive Hos. 1. The latter part of the 1.
v. and beginning of the 2d, should be pointed and read In the days of Jeroboam
Son of Joash King of Israel, was the beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea;
but as we read in the words next before, the end of this Prophesy was in the
time of Hezekiah King of Judah, in the 6th year of whose Reign the Ten Tribes
were carried a way Captives into Assyria. So that this Prophesy was in writing
from the time of Jeroboam the second, to the Captivity; during which time the
people of Israel not only continued in the sin of Jeroboam the first, the Son
of Nebat, but alsogave themselves up to several sorts of Heathen Idolatry,
andat last were come even to Infidelity and Atheism, They did not believe in
the Lord their God, as we read in the History of that Age and Nation, 2 K. 17.
v. 14. To which this Prophet Hosea adds, They corrupted themselves, as in the
days of Gibeah, That is, They lived in all manner of filthiness and rapine and
violence, as the Benjamites did in Gibeah, In those days when there was no King
in Israel, Judge. 19. Now the Effect and Consequence of this general Corruption
both of Faith and Manners, was a continual Convulsion in the State and
Government of the Kingdom, unruly factions, and divided interests and parties
among the people their heart is divided, says the Prophet; and this lead them
not only to frequent Mutiny and Rebellion, but even to murder several of their
Kings: Four of the five Kings that Reigned in that interval from Jeroboam the
2d to the Captivity, being violently cut off by the hands of their Ambitious
and Aspiring Subjects. For Zachary the Son of this Jeroboam, in the 4th
Generation from Jehu, (the period which God had assigned to that Family being
expired,) was cut off by Shallum. There ended that Race of Kings that was set
up by. Divine Designation; therefore says Hosea, all their Kings are fallen,
Hos. 7.7. After this there followed a confused succession of four Kings more,
till at length, when Pekah the last of those four Kings was slain by Hosea, not
the Prophet Hosea to be sure, but another that got himself to be make King
about 10 years afterward. There followed (in the mean time for those 10 years)
a State of perfect Anarchy, these was no Government at all, but a liberty for
the factious and bold to make a prey of the more quiet and peaceable. In this
miserable state and condition, which was a sad presage of their approaching
ruin, the Israelites were at last made sensible what mercies they had thrown
away, and what Calamities they had drawn down upon themselves by their
Rebellion. They were brought to confess their guilt, and to acknowledge the
Justice of God in their punishment: for as now they were found faulty, stood
convict and received their sentence, in the verse before my Text; so they owned
the Righteousness of God in it, in the words of my Text, We have no King: And
there is great reason for it, because we feared not the Lord; and having not
the fear of God, What then should a King do to us? that is what could a King
signify to us?

Out of which words, I shall take occasion to show these three things.

1. That then a People are most sensible of the blessing of Living under Kingly
Government, when they are deprived of it; Now that they have lost their King
they confess and lament their loss, and say, we have no King. 2. That the cause
of a Peoples being deprived of their King, is commonly the irreligion and
wickedness of such a People, we have no King because we feared not the Lord. 3.
I shall show how insignificant and ineffectual all Government is without
Religion: We feared not the Lord, What then should a King do to us.
1. Tho I do not intend at present, to enter into the Controversy about the
several forms of Government, yet both the words of my Text, and the happy
Government we live under, will sufficiently justify me, to give Monarchy the
preference of all others. And sure I am, that for three thousand years from the
Creation, we read of no other sort of Government in the world; it was this that
God set up a mong his own people: And this has been Universally received,
approved and continued in most other Nations to this day. But as I do not
design to prejudg the other forms where they are the National and Legal
constitutions; so it cannot be denied that for a Nation that has been always
under Kingly Government, and for Ages together has thriven and prosper'd with
it, where it suits with the genius of the people as well as with their Laws and
Constitution, it is an invaluable blessing still to continue under the
Protection and Conduct of Kings: And it is the saddest condition that can
befall such a Nation, to have no King at all.

But tho this be so, and every man knows it to be true, yet it must be
confessed that very few consider it, while they enjoy the blessing of living
under Government, and do not actually feel the misery of Anarchy and Confusion;
and therefore although Government is certainly the most Beneficial, it is often
seen to be the most thankless office in the world: And tho Kings were anciently
styled Luke 22.5.
Benefactors, and good Kings are sertainly the truest and greatest Benefactors
to Mankind, Romans 13.
the Ministers of God for the good of men; yet they are too often the most
slenderly and ungratefully requited of all others. Men are generally full of
thankfulness to other Benefactors while they are actually receiving their
favors, however they may often forget them; But to good Kings, they are most
ungrateful when most obliged, and slight the obligation, while they are
receiving it. For when they fully possess the blessing of living under good
Government, and may repose themselves in peace and safety under its protection,
while they have all they can desire in this world, in the full and entire
Enjoyment of their liberty and property, and may, if it be not their own fault,
fecure to themselves all they can hope for in another world, by the undisturbed
profession and practice of true Religion; in short, while men are most easy,
and most happy, and owe that ease and happiness, next to the providence of God,
to the conduct and vigilance of the Government they live under; even then, a
great many men are most uneasy, and discontented, and most given to murmur and
mutiny against it. Tho their Governors make it their whole business to promote
the interest, and secure the peace and happiness of their people; tho they
sacrifice all the ease and comfort of their own lives to preserve them, tho
they wholly spend themselves in cares and labors for their good, and freely
expose their own lives to interpose between them and danger, yet people are
generally not only insensible of all this, but also requite it with murmuring
and misconstruing every thing they do.

Of all the Heathen Emperors Marcus-Antoninus, Dion cas; His, Romans lib. XXXI
was, I think, the best Governor, I am sure, he was the most learned and
virtuous man; and yet living in a time of great public Calamities, such as no
man could help, his Reign was full of troubles and discontents, which gave
occasion to several conspiracies and to one open rebellion against him.
Mauricius was one of the best of Christian Emperors, yet his people being
generally discontented, by reason of those taxes which his great Wars made
necessary, a bold Rebel took the advantage against him, and murdered Him and
all his Family. But there is no need to search History, for instances of this
kind, the holy Scripture gives us some very remarkable ones. For we read that
there were very great murmurings among the people of Israel against Moses
himself, tho he acted in every thing he did, by particular direction from God;
tho he had rescued them from the last degree of misery and bondage, tho he had
obtained several signal victories for them against their Enemies; tho he
conducted and sed them with perpetual miracles, and was just leading them into
a firm and lasting settlement, and into the possession of a Land flowing with
Milk and Honey; yet they could not abstain from frequent murmuring against this
great and excellent Prince, while he was present with them, and doing these
great things for them.

K. David was used in like manner by his people, tho he had saved them from
their Enemies, and had delivered them out of the Hands of the Philistines, as
they themselves could not but confess, 2 Samuel 9. v. 9. And tho he had been one
while so popular, that whatsoever he did pleased all the people, 2 Samuel 3. v.
26. Yet by the cunning and artifices of one or two designing men, we see the
whole Nation was turned against him, they cried out What have we to do with the
Son of Jesse? to your tents O Israel. To sum up all in one word, the Israelites
grew weary and murmured under the immediate Government of God himself; 2 Samuel
12. So impossible is it for any Earthly Government to please all, and so
insensible are men of the blessings of it, while they enjoy them; But when men
are once deprived of those blessings, then at least they will begin to value
them in good earnest; when the Crown is fallen and they are sunk into a state
of Anarchy, when every man does that which is right in his own eyes, and men's
lusts and passions are their only Law; when according to Hobb's Law of Nature,
every man may claim every thing, and there is no common Umpire between them; a
short experiment of this Kind, will soon convince Men how great a Happiness it
is to live under Government, and especially under a well tempered Monarchy; and
how great a misery it is to be deprived of it. Then they will effectually feel,
that there is no Tyranny like that of their fellow Subjects; nothing more
Despotick and Arbitrary, more Insolent and Tyrannical, than the Madness of
People without Government: In such a state all true Liberty is lost, by being
turned into Licentiousness; and all Property is thrown into Common, where there
is no Law to distinguish, no Magistrate to stand by and Protect it. The safety
of men's Persons, the good order of their Families, the duty to Parents and
Relations, the modesty of Virgins, the chastity of Matrons, the reverence of
Holy Things and Persons, the sacredness of Religion, the Majesty of God
himself, are all laid open and exposed, and subject to every man's Lust and
Pleasure. In such a state nothing is safe.

When a People is fallen into this condition, or find themselves in great
danger of it, and see nothing between them and Destruction; then to compare
things past and present together, to Reflect upon the Peace and Safety they
once Enjoyed, and the continual disorders and dangers they are exposed to by
this change; this will make men sensible of their folly, and of their contempt
of Government while they lived under it, and were unthankful to God and Man for
that inestimable Blessing.

Thus the Israelites that Murmured so often against Moses, while he lived with
them, heartily mourned for him, when he was taken out of their sight, and by
their Lamentations in the plains of Moab, made some kind of Honorable Amends
to his Memory for their Mutining against him in the Wilderness. It were easy to
show the like in many other instances, but I shall reserve so much of your
time, as will be necessary to speak of that great instance we are to remember
this day.

II. I now proceed to the Second thing, that of this great and deplorable
Calamity to a Nation, in being deprived of their Government, the common and
usual cause is the Wickedness and Irreligion of such a People; this will
plainly appear if we consider these two things.

1. That, morally speaking, no Government can subsist without Religion. 2. If
it could subsist, God will not suffer it, because Irreligion, and Wickedness
provokes God to deprive Men of that Blessing.
1. What notions soever we frame to our selves of Government, and upon what
bottom soever we build it, Religion must be the principal foundation, otherwise
it cannot stand long and steady. For as the obligation of an Oath is the great
band of all civil Society and chief support of all Governent, so that
obligation arises wholly from the persuasions of Religion. Nothing else makes
an Oath strong and effectual, but a firm persuasion that God Almighty is
witness to the making of it, and will avenge the breaking of it, and such a
persuasion is properly Religion; all the other obligations which men commonly
speak of, are altogether vain, and ineffectual; whether they be those of
Honor, or Gratitude, or Interest, or Promises and Contracts, without Religion
they signify nothing at all.

For the Honor of men that have no Religion, and therefore make no Conscience
of what they say or do, it is but anempty word, as they will find that rely
upon it. Humane gratitude in this corrupt and degenerate Age, is alas! a very
short and feeble obligation. Men soon forget benefits, and too often requite them
with injuries. Men's Interests are various and changeable, and he that is a
good subject one day, for his Interest, may the next day be a Rebel for the
same reason. For the Covenants and Contracts of Men of no Principles, they are
no more to be relied on then their words, which are justly to be compared to
the wind for their instability: and tho their words are confirmed with their
Oaths, which all men acknowledge to be the highest and most sacred obligation
that can be laid upon Man, yet all must acknowledge also, that without Religion
their Oath is no obligation at all. For what can the Oath of men that have no
Religion, no fear of God, signify? What signifies their attesting and calling
God to Witness, who believe there is no God at all; or what are the contents of
the holy Book to those who believe nothing of it, but look upon it all as fable
and imposture? Such men's Oaths are the highest abuse and profanation of that
sacred Action, a solemn mockery both of God and Man. Such Men's oaths, even
where they seem to be in earnest, ought no more to be regarded then those vain
Oaths and Imprecations with which they fill up their common discourse. And
therefore such men can give no sufficient security to any Government. So that
wherever the subjects are Irreligious and Atheistical, there the Government
must be very feeble and precarious; the foundation of it is weak and tottering,
and those wicked men are always ready to undermine and blow it up; and will
certainly do it whenever their Interest, or even their humor tempts them to do
it; and they have strength and opportunity to effect it. They may seem indeed
to Act like the most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects for a time, while they are
enriched and honored by the bounty and favor of their Prince; while they
enjoy their own desires and pleasures under his Government, and every thing
goes as they would have it: But if ever they are disobliged or disappointed,
if any thing comes cross to them, then they are full of discontent and clamor,
and the most forward to mutiny and rebel against him. So that those Princes who
have any number of such for their subjects, are not only in an unsafe but in a
very dangerous condition, they hold their Crowns and Lives at the courtesy of
those who (however, they are otherwise obliged) will be ready to deprive them
of both whenever they can gain by doing it. We have Examples of this in three
of those Kings of Israel, which I mentioned to have been cut off in the time of
this Prophecy.

They were, as Josephus tells us, Joseph. Antiq. Jud. lib. ix. c. xi. and xiii.
murderd by such as had been trusted and preferred by them; Zachariah by his
Favorite Shallum, Pekaiah, by a Captain of his own Army, and Pekah by his
Friend and Counselor Hosea.

These Princes had reason to think they had sufficiently obliged those that
killed them; but as we learn from the same Historian, they were irreligious
Men, they had not the fear of God; and therefore they easily broke through all
the Bands of Duty, Honor, and Gratitude; and Sacrificed their Kings and
Benefactors to their own Lust and Ambition. But if Irreligous Atheistical Men
should be true to their Kings, (as you see there is no reason to rely upon
them) they would do much more hurt to the Government they live under by their
ill Principles, than they can possibly do it good any other way: Men that
dispute the Being and Providence of God, lessen the Authority of the
Magistrate, and the Reverence due to him as the Minister and Ordinance of God;
they who deny the Truth of Revealed Religion, and the Authority of the Holy
Scriptures, take away the greatest Obligation to Obedience for Conscience sake;
and lastly, they who deny the Immortality of the Soul, the Rewards and
Punishments of another life, and the Natural differences of Good and Evil,
enervate the Obligation, discourage the Practice, and (as much as in them lies)
destroy the Being of all those Virtues by which the Throne is Established, and
make way for such a torrent of Vice as will soon overwhelm any Nation, and
overturn any Government in the World.

2dly, Beside that Irreligion and Wickedness are naturally destructive to
Government, they do also provoke God to deprive a People of that Blessing.

This the People of Israel had the greatest: Reason to know; for when God
placed a King over them, to Protect and Govern that People, he told them upon
what Condition they might enjoy that Blessing, and transmit it safe to
Posterity:

When God had chosen Saul, and they had accepted him for their King by a
National Consent, 1 Samuel 12.13. Behold, says he, (by the Mouth of his Prophet
Samuel) the King whom you have chosen, and whom you have desired, and behold
the Lord has set a King over you, if you will fear the Lord and serve him, and
not rebel against the Commandments of the Lord, then shall you and also the
King that reigns over you continue following the Lord your God: But then on
the other Hand he plainly warned them of that which would certainly bereave
them of that Happiness: If you will not obey the Voice of the Lord, but rebel
against the Commandments of the Lord, then shall the hand of the Lord be
against you; and as the conclusion of all, v. 25.
if you shall still do wickedly, you shall be consumed both you and your King.

Accordingly we still find their Government firm and steady, or feeble and
declining, according as they observed or transgrest the Laws of God; and that
Observation proved true of them, which St. Augustine somewhere makes of the
Ancient Romans, they prosper'd or decayed as they were Nationally Virtuous or
Vicious; and it is as truly and equally applicable to all other Nations. For
God's method of Governing all Nations is alike, but with allowance for their
different Circumstances. He rewards Religion and Virtue, and punishes
Wickedness and Vice equally (though not in the same manner) every where God's
Blessings and Favors, his Kindness and Protection, are the proper Rewards, and
peculiar Privileges of a Righteous and Holy Nation. Especially the comfort and
happiness of lasting Peace and Settlement, under Just and Religious Princes;
that is a Mercy which will not be thrown away upon a Wicked and Sinful People.
None can expect it should be otherwise, that considers the different ways of
God's dealing with Nations, and with Persons in this life. As to Persons, God
may sometimes permit Wicked Men to be prosperous all their life long, because
if they go hence without Punishment, he can overtake them in another World, and
there he will pay them once for all, with Eternal Judgments, so much the more
heavy, for the abuse of his long suffering, goodness and mercy in this Life:
But Nations having no other life but in this World, God must take them here, or
let them pass altogether unpunisht, which, because the Justice and Wisdom of
his Government will not suffer him always to do, therefore he must make
Examples of them in this World; he may spare them for a time, in order to their
amendment, or to let them fill up the measure of their Iniquities, but sooner
or later he pours out his Judgment upon them in this World, because they have
no being as Nations in any other World but this.

But whereas there are many forts of public National Judgments, such as Famine
and Sword, and Pestilence, and the like; yet none of all these is more heavy
and dreadful to a whole Nation, than the Dissolution of its Government, and
giving up a People to be a Prey to their Enemies, or (which is commonly worse)
to themselves. If this be not the greatest of Temporal Judgments, it is next to
it, and commonly ends in it, I mean their final Destruction.

Upon this Account the frequent Usurpations and Anarchies, that happened in the
Kingdom of Israel, while that of Judah continued still in the House of David,
are justly ascribed to the general Corruption of that Nation, occasioned
especially by the Apostasy of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who, as the holy Text
says often, was he that made Israel to sin. And even in the Kingdom of Judah,
when the House of David came to its period in the Captivity of Zedekiah, their
Fall is attributed to their Sin and Wickedness by the Prophet Jeremiah, Lam.
5.16.
The Crown is fallen from our Head, or the Crown of our Head is fallen, woe unto
us for we have sinned: And indeed it cannot but seem just and reasonable it
should be so, that when a People throw off the Authority of God, and have no
regard to his Laws, that then he should also cast them off; that when they deny
him their Allegiance, he should withdraw his Protection from them, and remove
his Vicegerents from among them.



The chief end of Government is to promote the public Good, and to prevent any
Evil that may endanger the common Safety; and in order to this, the Work of
vernment is to do these three things.

1. To keep Men within the bounds of Sobriety and Virtue, in their Private
Conversations; lest by running out into a course of Vice, they hurt and ruin
themselves. 2. To keep Men also within the bounds of Justice and Honesty, lest
they injure others. 3. To preserve the Peace and Order and Prosperity of the
whole Society.
But none of all these can be attained without the assistance of Religion:

Without that, in the first place, Men cannot be kept within the bounds of
Moral Virtue; it is true indeed that Humane Laws, the hope of Temporal Rewards,
and fear of present punishment, are both necessary and useful to this end; but
it must be acknowledged also that these alone are not sufficient to effect it;
for some Men are so set upon gratifying their Lusts, that in pursuit of them
they will boldly break through all the Laws and Sanctions that Man can invent;
others can find range and scope enough for their Vices, and yet keep within the
bounds of the Laws, or without the knowledge of the Magistrate.

And though good Government may sometimes put such a restraint upon Men's outward
Actions, as to keep them from public and notorious Sins; yet it can never
reach all those various instances of Vice, which the Wit of sensual Men,
assisted by the Devil, can devise; nor can the Magistrate follow them into all
those dark Retirements, which are the usual Scenes of their Lusts; much less
can he look into their Hearts where their Sins are first formed before they are
acted.

The Heart of Man is God's peculiar Province; it is he alone that can discern
and govern the inward motions of the Mind, and regulate the corrupt and sinful
Inclinations of Men; and until that be done, though Men may be brought to be
outwardly regular, they cannot be sincerely and constantly virtuous; their
Virtues will at best be like Flowers without Root; they may appear well for a
time, but they soon wither and decay; and though their Vices may be suppressed,
they are not extinguished, but like a covered spark of Fire, they will be apt
to break out again.

Some will take upon them to say, they can be Virtuous without being Religious,
because they are of Opinion that Evil is its own punishment, and Virtue a
Reward to it self, and that therefore their own Ease and Interest would oblige
them to be Virtuous, though there were no Hell to punish, nor Heaven to reward
them.

But alas, (notwithstanding all the fine things that the Stoics and some
others have said upon this Subject) there are very few Proselytes to this
Doctrine, because as our Nature is now Corrupted, Men cannot but see that to be
Virtuous, they must deny themselves and the gratifying their own Inclinations;
and they must undergo several things that are unpleasant and difficult to Flesh
and Blood, which nothing can sufficiently engage Men to do, but the Belief and
Expectation of those glorious Rewards, which Religion alone proposes to the
truly Good and Virtuous.

A true sense of God's Omniscience, a Contemplation of his infinite Purity, and
a Just consideration of his other Attributes, together with the Assistance of
his blessed Spirit, will cleanse and sanctify the Hearts of Men, and render
them sincerely good and virtuous; but without these, no Humane Government or
Power upon Earth can ever do it.

(2.) In the next place for Justice and Honesty toward others, it will be
absolutely impossible to preserve these, without the fear of God, and a due
sense of Religion.

While Men believe there is an Universal Governor, that has the care and
inspection of all the Actions of Mankind, and that as they are Good or Evil,
Just or Unjust, he will certainly reward or punish them first or last; and
while they believe also that this Universal Governor, requires of them not
only to be outwardly Just and Honest, but also to be inwardly sincere and
upright; to be so far from taking another's right, as not to wish it from him:
While Men truly believe these things, it is an easy matter to preserve Justice
in the World, but without this Belief, Men may live fairly with their
Neighbors for a time, as long as it stands with their Interest and
Convenience; or while their Reputation, or fear of Humane Laws oblige them so
to do; but, alas! all these are too weak to make Men truly Honest, when they
are strongly tempted to be otherwise, if once they can get loose from the
Obligation of Religion, those other things will only oblige them to seem
Honest, but not really to be so. For he that is just only because it is his
Interest, will be as often unjust as he can hope to gain by being so.

And if he value his Credit more than his Interest, yet that will never
restrain him from doing the most unjust and wrongful things, but only engage
him to be cautious and wary in doing them; and if that were all that Men had to
consider, there would be a great number of them that would despise their Credit
and Reputation, and care not what Men say of their Actions, as long as they
find they can thrive by them: And lastly, for Humane Laws it is known to a
Proverb, That they are but like Cob-webbs, which take the little Flies, while
the great ones too usually break through: A great and powerful Oppressor will
find ways enough to invade his Neighbor's Right, notwithstanding all Laws in
the World; and too often make use of the Laws themselves to serve him in it:
Besides this, innumerable Frauds and Thefts, Perjuries and Murders may be
committed, and never come under the Cognizance of any Humane Laws. Those
Wickednesses are the Works of Darkness, and many of them never come to light;
so that no Humane Law can find these any more than it can hold the other. There
must be something to restrain the Strong as well as the Weak, the Crafty as
well as the Simple, to bring all alike within the bounds of Justice and
Honesty, and this must be that which makes Men inwardly and sincerely good,
which I have already showed, nothing else can do but Religion.

3. In the third and last place, for Peace and Order, it must be acknowledged
that though there is a peculiar Sociableness in Humane Nature, yet it is Religion
that is the great Cement of Men's Affections, and the greatest promoter of
Peace and Concord among Men. It is this that is the true Wisdom which comes
down from above, and which not only is it self, but also makes Men to be first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated; and renders Men meek
and lowly, mild and patient under Injuries, courteous and charitable to all
others, and so brings them to live together in Peace and Love.

But when Religion is once thrown off, when that cease to have power over
Men, they are left to their own unruly Passions, to the Dominion and Tyranny of
those fleshy Lusts, which both war against the Soul, and make Men to war
against one another: Such as Pride and Ambition, Covetousness and Envy, Malice
and Revenge, impatience of restraint, and Hatred of every thing above them,
which naturally hurry Men into such Practices as certainly destroy the Peace,
and sometimes the very Being of Societies.

Now how is it possible to preserve Peace and Order where these violent
Passions are predominant? It is as easy to bring the fiercest wild Beasts to
be tame and gentle, as to bring Men who are thus abandoned to their Lusts, to
be meek and peaceable. Nothing can make such Men peaceable, but what can
mortify their Lusts and cure their Passions; and nothing can do that but the
Spirit of God, that Dove-like Spirit which dwells in those Temples which are
dedicated to him by Religion.

The result of all that I have said upon these two last general Heads in brief,
is this, that as no Government can subsist without Religion, nor continue long,
if the Subjects of it have not the fear of God; so on the other hand no
Government can obtain its end, either in promoting Virtue, maintaining Justice,
or preserving the Peace and Prosperity of a Nation, without the assistance of
Religion. And the Conclusion which naturally follows from these two things, is
this, That therefore it is the interest as well as the Duty of Kings and
Princes, and of all the Ministers of Government, (as they desire their own pres
ervation, and the continuance of their Authority, and Hope to do any good in
their Stations) to make it their chief care and business to suppress all
Irreligion and Vice, and to promote Religion and the Fear of God among their
Subjects, without which, (in a word) they themselves can never be safe, nor
their People happy.

And now to apply what has been said, with respect to the present occasion;
all that has been said of the Blessings a Nation enjoys, in having a
Government over it, especially such a Government in the Person of a King, that
makes it his business to do God's work in the World, in restraining men from
sin, and promoting Religion and Virtue: All this these Kingdoms had, in the
most eminent Degrees, in the Person and Governmentof King Charles I. of
glorious Memory. He was a shining Example of Religion and Virtue; there were
all the Motives to it in his Government, both in punishing of Vice and
Encouraging of Virtue. And tho it is true, there were Complaints of Grievances
and Oppressions in his time; as perhaps there will be in all Governments; yet
whatsoever ground there was for them, it is certain, there were such Riches and
Wealth in his Reign, as never were known in England before: The Wealth and
Plenty and Prosperity of England was then the wonder and Envy of all our
Neighbors: And for Arts and Learning, the attendants of Peace and Plenty, we
then surpassed all other Nations in the World. And yet from the beginning to
the end of his Reign, still there were those Complaints, which I less wonder
at, since there were (as I have shown) the like among, God's chosen People, and
that even under Moses's Government, and in the time of David's Reign.

But as this insensibleness of God's Blessings could not hinder his People from
feeling the want of them, when by the loss of those Excellent Governors, they
could better judge what a Blessing they enjoyed in their continuance with them:
Even so it happened among us when our King was taken away. Then there was a
general lamentation; not only his Friends, but some that had bin his Enemies,
joined in it. There was indeed such a general lamentation in this Kingdom at
first, when the matter was fresh, that the like has been never known nor heard
upon any occasion.

It was much aggravated and heightened by a Sense of the manner of his being
taken from us.

If the Lord had smitten him, or, his day had come that he should die; or if he
had descended into Battle and perished; in all this there had been nothing
extraordinary or singular, but that it was the loss of an excellent King: And
that was no more than what Judah suffered in the death of their good King
Josiah: And yet we see what a sad lamentation they made upon that occasion, 2 Chronicles. 35.25.

But there was this extraordinary in our Case, it was that which would astonish
one to think of it, that such a blessing should be thrown away with our own
hands; that such an excellent King should be murdered by his own Subjects! and
that with such unparalled Circumstances, at the Door of his own Royal Palace,
with the Pageantry and Forms of Law, a scornful Mockery of all Earthly Justice,
and the boldest Defiance of the Justice of Heaven: This was horror to all good
Men that saw or heard of it; it broke the Hearts of not a few at that time, and
even now all good Men have that sense of it which they want words to express.

Indeed it is hard to get over this Subject; it is hard to speak of this
blessed King's Murder, without a just detestation of them that were the Authors
of it: But that is not my business at this time. I am now to consider this
matter as it stands between God and this whole Nation.

It was certainly a dreadful and almost an unexampled Judgment of God, a
Judgment that went very near being fatal to us, it was the great Mercy of God
it had not ended in our Ruin. We may therefore be sure there were great
National Sins (sins as great and extraordinary as the Judgment) by which we
drew it upon our selves.

I do not mean only those particular sins which immediately produced this
doleful effect, and which were personal to the Actors in it; but I mean those
public and National sins, in which all had their share, and which first set
the other on Work. They were these that deprived us first of the Protection of
our God, and then made him pour down his Judgment upon us, and deprive us of
our King.

To name nothing more at present but that which was the Fountain of all our
Misery, it is certain (if we may believe them that lived in those days) there
was a very great neglect of Religion at that time in this Nation. I do not mean
of the outward Form and Profession of Religion, perhaps that was never more in
request on both sides, among them that were Contending about it; but the great
defect was in the Life and Power of Religion.

This appeared too much on both sides. On one side, we must confess, among them
who adhered to the Principles of Loyalty and true Religion, there appeared too
great a neglect of the Life and Power of it in them; which gave occasion for
some to say, that their looseness and Irreligion was the Ruin of the King's
most Righteous Cause. But on the other hand, this appeared most manifestly in
them, who, notwithstanding all their great and specious Profession of Religion,
and all their Pretenses to tender Consciences, yet had no sense, and made no
Conscience of their sin, in running out into that Rebellion, and into all those
Rapines, Sacrileges, and Murders which they committed in the Profecution of it.

This great want of the true Power and Spirit of Religion was the unhappy
Fountain from whence all those other sins issued forth, that made up the
measure of our Iniquity, and drew down that dismal Judgment upon us, which we
lament on this day. What then remains, but that we still humble our selves
under the mighty Hand of God; that at the same time we Mourn over the Memory of
our Martyred Sovereign, we also lament those great and National Sins which
deprived us of him?

But while we lament what is past, let us also do what we can to prevent the
like for the future. That is the true end of our Humiliation this day. It is to
be feared we are not better than our Fathers, pray God we are not many degrees
worse. What will become of us, if we continue in such a state of National Sin?
If we continue unthankful to God for those many Mercies we enjoy, and still
murmur against him, because we have not all we would have, and because we have
some allay mixed with them, not considering that we Enjoy much more, and suffer
much less than we deserve.

If we are perpetually reviling and slandering the Government, under whose
Protection we live in Peace and safety at home, while our Neighboring Nations
are overrun with the devastations of War; if like the Israelites of Old, upon
every cross Acoident or Disappointment, or any thing that is uneasy to us, we
break out into Complaints and Exclamations against Moses and Aaron, and are
presently for returning back into Egypt; have we not then just reason to fear,
that God should at last cast us off, and either give us over to the Will of our
Enemies, or to our own Follies and Delusions?

But besides this, when God has delivered us from the hands of our Enemies,
that we might serve him without fear, if instead of serving him, we dishonor
him more and more; if vice and wickedness are grown Common and bold among us;
if blasphemous Opinions against the Godhead of our blessed Savior, and the
Holy Ghost, are divulged and entertained; if men are not afraid to set
themselves directly against God, despising his Holy Word, blaspeming his
Blessed Name, and denying his Providence and Being; if this be our Case, what
Judgments may we then expect, yea, what may we not expect, from the Justice of
Almighty God?

He has showed us a Token of his heavy Displeasure against us, in taking away
that Excellent Queen the great Blessing and Glory of our Church and Nation.

I tremble to think what we have Reason to fear he should do more; but that he
may not do it, that he may not go on to punish, and that his anger may be
turned away from us, let us now turn to him with Weeping, Fasting, and Praying,
with a sincere and Universal Repentance of our Sins.

Oh that all Orders and Degrees of Men among us would heartily join in that
blessed Work, every one of us in particular for our personal Sins, and all
together for our Public and National sins. If such a Work were once set about
in good earnest, it would soon show it self in bringing forth fruits worthy of
repentance; a generous Opposition to Irreligion and Wickedness, and a hearty
Zeal for Religion and the Honor of God. If that holy Fire were kindled in the
House of God, and from thence inflamed our Nobility and Gentry, especially
those who are Magistrates, with hate to sin, and an ardent love t God and
Goodness; how soon would this dissipate those Clouds that now hang over us, and
spread abroad a glorious Light of Religion and Holiness, and of Hope and
Comfort over all the Land. Such Illustrious instances and Examples of Religion
and Virtue, would at once teach by their Example, and Command by their
Authority, a general Reformation among the People; and so bring Religion and
Virtue to be as common and universal as Irreligion and Vice now are or ever
have been. What a Blessing would this be to the Nation? What Strength and
Security to our Government? What safety to our King? And what abundant Honor
to them that should be the Instruments of so much Public Good.

This would add a Luster to their Names, beyond all the Titles and Characters
in the World: This would secure to them a double Immortality; Immortal Honor
to their Memories on Earth, Immortal Glory to their Souls in Heaven.

FINI

