THE AUTHORITY OF THE MAGISTRATE, About RELIGION, DISCUSSED, In a Rebuke to the
PREFACER of a late Book of Bishop BRAMHALLS.

BEING A Confutation of that misshapen Tenent, Of The Magistrates Authority over
the Conscience in the matters of Religion. And the better asserting of his
Authority Ecclesiastical, by dividing aright between the use of his Sword about
Religious Affairs, and Tenderness toward Men's Consciences.

AND ALSO For Vindication of the grateful Receivers of His Majesty's late
gracious Declaration, against his and others Aspersions.

By J. H.

London, Printed for the Author. 1672.

The AUTHORITY of the MAGISTRATE about RELIGION Discussed.
SECT. 1.

I Have met in the Booksellers Shop with some Sheets of late, put out under
the pretense of a Preface to another Book: but with the design of so much
Malevolence, in the abuse of one particular worthy person, that I am astonished
at the man, That ever one of parts and understanding, (though so young a Doctor
as he is) should be so forsaken of his Discretion, of Religion, of Morality, of
Ingenuity, of the knowledge of himself, and all discernment of his duty, to God
and to his Neighbor, as to suffer this Half Book of his now upon cold blood
after so great a Whole one, which was enough to have rid another stomach if it
had been a Stable, to look the World in the face, and his own Cheeks not be
abashed. Alas, that the Talents of our Lord, and excellent parts which he has
given this man, should become to him such a temptation! Not a Novice (says the
Apostle) lest he fall into the condemnation of the Devil. Is it because the
young man perhaps is misled, abused himself, and drawn in by some of eviller
nature and more inveterate, that he can sprinkle himself thus in gall, and
delight his soul in such an insulting malice, petulant hatred, and an
implacable disposition? Can he indeed think and believe or any else for him,
that this is what becomes a Christian, and a Minister, to set himself for so
many weeks as he has been writing this, to the exercise of wrath, revenge,
spite, uncharitableness, rancour, reviling, calumny, wrong, evil speaking? Is
this indeed the serving of God and going to Chapel? Alas, that the zeal of
this Chaplain for the cause of the Church should be shown only in such good
works! Ego quando cuique vel dicendo vel scribendo respondeo (says St. Austin)
etiam contumeliosis criminationibus lacessitus, quantum mihi Dominus donat,
fraenatis atque coercitis vanae indignationis acul^is, auditori lectorive
consulens, non ago ut efficiar homini convitiando Superior, sed errorem
convincendo salubrior. This is a passage it is like this youthful Divine never
read, I am sure he has not yet practiced, and it will be worthy his future
observation. Contra litteras Petiliani, l. 3. c. 1. Shall I be sorry now and
mourn over the man for his sin, which he has sinned against God, against all
good men, and against his neighbor, and wish him with all earnestness to
repent of so great iniquity that he may be forgiven? If I do so, I am afraid it
will do nothing. Shall I excuse him as overtaken with passion, prejudice, have,
precipitancy, unadvisedness, surprise? No, he will by all means be believed
thus insolent deliberately, with a composed mind, and upon choice. Shall I then
commend his Christian bravery, magnanimous charity, and pious adventure in his
agressing of one person, and reproving another of so much eminency and ability
which others are afraid to cope with, merely out of tenderness of Conscience,
and great compassion to the souls of people, least they should be hurt by their
esteem and good name, and for no other reason in the World has he done this.
Why this is possible: But what means then the bleating of the Sheep, and
lowing of the Oxen that I hear? Is this the language or voice of a man so
affected: on of a tongue which sets on fire the course of nature, and is set
on fire of Hell? What! is it then the pride, self conceit, ostentation, vanity,
the arrogance of this young man, and infinite presumption upon his voluble
tongue and parts, which he can draw upon any body (and yet with a heart not
malicious), that has made him do thus, and ^all upon this worthy person so
unworthyly as he has done? who being a reverend man, a Doctor of Divinity, of
so much gravity, of long standing, excelling in Learning, and all sorts of it
for his profession, of Dignity in his time as much as any have been capable of,
a person of not d^constant piety and a studious life, of universal affability,
ready presence and discourse, liberal graceful and courteous demeanor, that
speak him certainly (whatsoever he be else) one that is more a Gentleman then
most in the Clergy, and is accordingly favored sometimes with his Princes
converse, and the general veneration of the people: And for such a man to be
treated after this barbarous prostituted manner, with so horrid insolent a
disdain and contempt, as if he were the vilest Caitiffe, and son of Belial,
with the like expressions, it is such a monstrous piece of immorality in the
thing it self, a villainy to Religion, and indignity to humane nature, a
breaking the hedge of what is Sacred, laying open the enclosures of all modesty
and civility in making the worthy common and level with the infamous, to the
affront of the whole Nation, while every man in Justice is bound to defend his
neighbor from injury (so far as he can) as well as do him none, that we all me
thinks should be ready to rise up as one man to the rebuke of such a crime, and
go with our desires to the King and to the Council, that the young man be made
an example. It is my just indignation at the fact only makes me use this
vehemence in my expression, but my meaning is, that he be brought to public
penance and recantation. And then shall all the people hear and fear, and none
shall do any more so presumptuously:

For the appearance of some method to his Preface, this Author tells us at the
beginning that he intends two things: To say something of the Treatise: and
something of the seasonableness of it. As for me, I have nothing to say of
either of these, they require it not. Only I perceive that is not past four of
five leaves, but himself has done with these two particulars as insignificant
to spend more time upon, and then there is forty more for him to ramble in
about the matter of his former Books, and one new matter he has started, and
against Doctor Owen; which indeed is the Helena that has given life to this
publication. Well! I have no more to say to him about that Doctor: only I have
one thing to offer in the way to the Doctor about him, and it shall be that
advise out of Augustine: Si non aurem solum percutit iracundia criminantis,
verum etiam conscientiam mordet veritas criminis, quid mihi prodest si me
continuis landibus totus Mundus attollat? Ita nec malam conscientiam sanat
praeconium Laudantis: nec bonam vulnerat convitiantis opprobrium. Cont. lit.
Pet. l. 3. c. 7. For the Treatise it self likewise of the Bishop, I leave it to
one who is able if he see it good to examine it. Whatsoever the Book be, or the
person who seems to be somewhat, it makes no matter to me, and perhaps as
little to Mr. B. I meddle not with it. But two things in good earnest there are
in this Preface of general concern, which I must take notice of, for the one
will be worthy of our time, and the other I will not quite slide over.

Sect. 2.

That which I take notice of, and make not my task is this, the resolution he
offers to a certain question he is pleased to raise, what danger there is of
the return of Popery in this Nation. The question is certainly a male-pert
question, and he does as briskly resolve the business. That the Fanatics and
Athists are like indeed to bring it in, but else there is no danger at all of
it. There are, he says, a sort of Athists among us, not like those of old that
expecting no life to come labored only to live merry, and free themselves
from care, but these of our age says he are a sort of Devilish and malicious
wretches, whose proud and arrogant minds make them love mischief for mischief
sake. I doubt there are some persons of note, greater parts, quality and
spirit, that do slight this proud young man, and that that is the English of
these words. It is hard for those that come near of a trade, to like one
another. The Athists of this age (which Mr. Hobs and he, while they put
conscience under humane Authority, are like to make as fast as they can get any
to believe them) are of the same kind, no doubt with those that have been
formerly, though the age generally, is more wicked, and I see no reason why the
Athist, more then the Adulterer, Drunkard, or Sweater, should be willing to
change the Government of our d^ar Church, which is indeed so mild and gentle to
them (as he speaks) to being in Popery, that might perhaps put them into the
Inquisitions or any other Ecclesiastic discipline else, that would punish
them, twenty to one else, more for their Vices and Debaucheries, then others
for the enjoyment only of Liberty of Conscience. On the other hand for the
Fanatics, I must profess I never perceived yet that they are sensible of any
such plot of theirs in hand, and it is huge like if they had any such, they
themselves might come to the knowledge of it. The truth is, it is not the
Fanatics so much as the Episcopal party that raise these jealousies of Popery.
The Fanatics have no Dignities of Pluralities to loose, and it is the loose^s,
and those that fear to loose, that speak. No, let me speak more freely, if
Popery should indeed prevail upon the Nation, it is these Episcopal Bigots that
we must be beholding to for it. For the God of these men, that is Uniformity,
that so blinded their eyes and infatuated their judgments, that they will
ventore the ruin of all, rather then abate any thing for an accommodation with
their Brethren that should join their shoulders against it. That Popery and
Fanaticism are to be resisted by comprehension, is day light: But these High
Conformists are blind, obstinate, perverse. And all must say at the last, it is
they may thank themselves for this.

There are two parts of that Parliamentary Grace, which is necessary to this
Kingdoms better establishment. The one lies indeed in Indulgence or Forbearance
toward all, which is the Nations interest, and this the King seeing has
granted: The other lies in an Accommodation or Comprehension, which is of those
only (that is some) that are capable, and this is the Bishops interest, but
their party will not see it. There are accordingly two sorts of dissenters. One
that own the National Ministry and our Parochial Congregations, and are in
that capacity of coming in upon that account, and desire it heartily upon
condescension to them in some matters: The other that own not our Churches, and
so are incapable to come in, and cannot desire it or seek it.

For the one then that which we propose, is only a farther latitude in the
established order of the Nation, that such may be received. Let us suppose
nothing else required of a man to be a Minister of a Parish, then there is to
the Parishoner to be a Member of a Parish Church, as part of the National. If a
person Baptized will come to Church and hear Common Prayer, and receive the
Sacrament and does nothing to be excommunicated for it, he is, he may, and must
be received as a Parochial member: In like manner if a Minister first ordained
(and so approved in his abilities for that function) will but read the Book of
the Liturgy, and administer the Sacraments according to it, and does nothing
deserving suspension, why should not this suffice for his enjoying a Living,
and exercising the Office to which he is called. Let these Declarations only
which are imposed (whether to be made, subscribed or sworn) be laid aside, or
left at least to our own words, and every Minister (out of the Cathedrals) be
left to their choice about the Cross, Surplice, Kneeling at the Sacrament, and
that is the sum of this business.

For the other, it is not I count righteous or charitable, that any who were
able to come in upon any such relaxed terms, should be willing to have
persecution reached forth on their Brethren that cannot. Besides that
Persecution as well as Preferment are both alike animaters to engagement. If
the Presbyterian be comprehended, he will be satisfied to act in his Ministry
without endeavoring any alteration otherwise of Episcopacy: If the
Congregationalist be Indulged, he will be satisfied though he be not
Comprehended. for that he cannot submit unto: and so shall there be no
disobligation put on any, but all be pleased, and the Churches work, if the
Parliament will, be soon done.

And who is there among you that fears the Lord, and obeys the voice of his
Servants, his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, and build the
House of the Lord. We have indeed his Majesty's late Declaration, Thus says
Cyrus: but where are our Jeshuahs with his Brethren the Priests, and our
Zerubbabels? Where are those heads of our Tribes, whom like the children of
Issachar, God has made wise hearted to know what to do at such a time as this?
Alas, that instead of those words, Let us arise and build, we should hear the
speeches and read the writing of Rehun the Chancellor, and this Shimshai his
Scribe. Be it known to the King that if the City be built, It is a rebellious
City and hurtful to Kings, that they have moved Sedition, in the late War, and
ought to be destroyed. The contest now (says the Prefacer) as it relates to
the real concernments of the Nation is, which shall prevail Loyalty or Faction?
whether such Preachers should be permitted the liberty of making Proselytes,
when all that are seduced into their Communion, are at the same time alienated
from the Government, and listed into a combination against it. How miserably
this tart Gentleman is out, he will see himself in good time, for we do all own
Loyalty, when we do not yet obey their impositions. But who has given license
to the man (if himself were not the Licenser) to make any such saucy reflection
in print as this, upon that which his Majesty with great wisdom has thought
fit to be done? Let him produce any of those who come in and accept the Kings
Grace, that can be accused of the least disaffection to, and much less of
combination against his Government. If he mean the Episcopal Church, why are
not these men as sagacious to combine us with them? Would he have the King no
wiser for his own and the Nations interest, than they are for theirs? It is
pity this so necessary, as well as Royal and kind act of the Kings to this
Nation, should so nettle the high flowen of these Conformists. It is pity
indeed, but they should be offended, because so many honest innocent persons,
who never did them any hurt in their lives, and yet they prosecuted with such
hate, have escaped their talons. For my part I bless God in my inward Chamber,
that he has put in into the heart of his Majesty, to show this kindness to his
people. And that it may fret his and our Malignants the more, I will tell them
how much the rather I am pleased with it, in regard of the Kings free,
constant, universal recognizing of it, especially to those that come to him
with their humble thanks and submission. I will record this one expression of
his to the Ministers of Wilts. Go thank them (says he), and I will assure you,
there shall never be any more persecution for conscience sake, while I live.
These are words of an open, honest, candid, clear, single hearted Gentleman
that we may trust, as having nothing of the counterfeit in them in the Earth.
These are words that I think may serve us, so long as by our prayers we can
keep him, and make those that envy us look black. I do therefore set this up
for my stone of remembrance, and I will engrave my short inscription on it.
Hitherto. For it is true there is something moreover that some of us would
have, but not of the King. To let in any into the public Vineyard, and to make
it signify, must be by an Act against pluralities with it. His Majesty does
see that Comprehension does draw deeper than his single will. And who shall
come come after the King, that has once talked with him, for knowledge in this
matter? Seeing therefore, that by thee we enjoy much quietness, and that very
worthy deeds are done unto this Nation by thy providence, we accept it always,
and in all places most noble Felix with all thankfulness.

But what, does not the King assume an Authority in this Declaration more than
he has, when he himself dispenses with an Act and Acts of Parliament? and what
say you to that? I answer, I will not take upon me to decide such a case as
this is, which belongs to the Lawyers: but as a Divine, so far as conscience is
concerned, (and it is but a man's own conscience he goes by) I will speak my
opinion. The King himself does tell us that the Law does give him such a
supremacy as this in Ecclesiastical matters, and that it is asserted in several
Statutes. Now what reason there is for any of us to believe contrary to his
assertion, unless we our selves were better lawyers than his Council and He, I
know not. I will take the hint from this man, Elias dicat quando venerit. We
all know that the King has power to dispense with some Laws, and for any
Lawyer to undertake to lay down the precise critical note of difference between
those Laws which he may suspend, and those he may not, I believe will be hard:
whereas we that go only by Politics in general think this most easy. The
Supreme Law must overruled all under it; and in all human Laws salus
Reipublicae is suprema lex. It is certain, when any Laws prove disadvantageous
to the Community, they themselves grow into disuse; and when we have power to
suspend our duty, why the King as Executor of the Law, may not suspend the
penalty, or may not proceed so far as this Declaration, Elias dicat quando
venerit. The King I suppose may call the Clergy to make Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, and by his Authority alone, without a Parliament, ratify or put
a sanction on them: and whether then he may not do as much as he has done for
us in this gracious Indulgence, Elias dicat quando venerit. I have observed in
reading the Statute-Book wherein the King's Supremacy is concerned against the
Pope. That the Crown of England is called Imperial: whether that be any thing
or no, to signify his Authority to be absolute without his Parliament in
matters Ecclesiastical though not in Civil) I cannot tell; but if it be, Elias
dicet quando venerit. When in Henry the Eighth's time they took away the
Supremacy from the Pope, they gave the same to the King: and if the Popes
Authority in Ecclesiasticals was undoubtedly over the Parliament, whether the
Kings may not be so also, Elias dicat quando venerit. We know that the sole
power of the Militia, which is one Right of Majesty, is declared to lie in the
King, in some late Acts, when Legislation and the Purse belongs not to him
without his Parliament: and why he may not have such a Supremacy in
Ecclesiasticals which he has not in Civils, as well as one of the Rights of
Majesty and not others, according to the temperature of our mixed State, Elias
dicat quando venerit. Above all, could we suppose the whole Nation convened,
and were to give their vote, whether the King should have this power he has
exerted, or whether it should lie in the power of this present Parliament, and
not in Him alone, I believe the major vote would be for the King. And when in
the erecting of Commonwealths it is the consent of the people, is that which is
the conditio regnandi, or causa sine qua non, and the Authority of self flows
immediately from God upon that condition being put: whether that Prince who is
persuaded in his conscience, he does nothing but that for which he has the
hearts and good-wills of the generality, as in this good deed of his Majesty in
this Declaration, he may not have a good conscience toward God, however he be
judged by men, or the Sages of the Law, I must leave that also till Elias come:
Elias dicet quando venerit, as the Jews speak. I will conclude with that saying
however of Bracton. Si ab co peccatur, locus erit supplicationi quod factum
suum corrigat and emendet, quod quidem si non fecerit satis erit ei ad paenam
quod Dominum expectet ultorem. Nemo enim de factis suis praesumat disquirere,
multo minus contra factum venire, Brac. l. 1. c. 8.

But again in point of Divinity. Fanaticism, and Popery, is sin, Idolatry; and
may sin, any sin be tolerated? I distinguish, there is a Private, and Public
Toleration: and public Toleration is either in the Church, or in the State. No
sin is to be privately tolerated, but every soul is bound to renounce every
sin, and to live in no evil course of life with will and knowledge unto death,
upon pain of damnation. Again, no sin may be tolerated publicly by the
Minister, but he is to reprove all, and spare none, that he may deliver his own
soul: Besides, if any sin be lived in contumaciously to the scandal of others,
such sinners are not to be tolerated in the Church, but to be cast out till
they repent. But to think that no sin therefore must be tolerated by the
Magistrate in the World, or in the State, without considering whether it be
consistent or no with the public peace or welfare which is external, is a
thought that must be unthought again. For the world are Idolators, the World
lies in wickedness, and if the wicked be cast out of the Church, it is into the
World they are cast. Nay surely, if God had appointed every sin to have its
punishment in this World, what need were there of a general Assizes in the
next? I wrote to you, not to company with Fornicators: yet not altogether with
the Fornicators of this World, or with the Covetous, or Extortioners, or with
Idolaters, for then must ye needs go out of the World. This is certain, God
does suffer sin to be, when he might hinder it, and that by a course of
Justice, if he would immediately strike men dead, for example. I cannot but
judge therefore, that though no sin may be done by the Magistrate himself, nor
may he be partakers of it with others, that good may come of it: yet may he
tolerate the sinner in his sin which he concurs no ways in, as God permits it
in the World, viz. when a greater good does accrue to his subjects by that
Toleration, then by the Punishment. Distinguish (say Divines) between cogere ad
fidem, and interdicere exercitio in heterodoxia. Posterius ad euitandum
corruptionem and scandala competit Magistratui. Distinguish again (say they) of
a Commonwealth or Kingdom free, and not free from diverse Religions. Ibi
cavendae, hic tolerandae, sed cum condition ne publica Religionis exercitia
facile concedantur. One would think his Majesty no small casuistica Divine, by
the carriage of this Declaration. I will close this up with that pertinent
passage and Comment of Augustine. Cum Apostolus precipit nolite iungi cum
infidelibus, exite de medio little, non intelligunt neminem coniungi cum
insidelibus nisi qui facit peccata Paganorum, vel talia facientibus favet: nec
quunquam fieri participem iniquitatis, nisi iniquam vel agat, vel approbat.
Contra Epistolam Parmeniani, l. 2. c. 18.

After this, I must confess as to Popery, I do hope that there is indeed no
Foundation of those surmises which this Prefacers question must buzze amongst
us, for all his saying also, that there is none. For to go to bring in a
Religion upon a people which is no more prepared for it, then we are for Popery
in this Nation, were but the committing of a rape or ravishment upon the
public conscience; and possession being got without getting our good wills,
could not likely be long retained, nor could be lost again neither, but with an
exceedingly increased disadvantage to that party. Nevertheless seeing our
Prefacer has offered the supposition, I do both declare the effectual means to
prevent it, and who they are must be the cause of it, if the event comes upon
us.

But the Kings Majesty's Declaration I know sticks still in their stomachs. The
penal Laws are taken off from the Papists, and from the Fanatics. And what
then? I do believe we shall have never the more Papists nor Fanatics for that.
No, they have one Argument, Difficulty and Suffering the less, for their
Church. The penal Laws did but whet their appetite, their own fullness will
serve to cloy them, and give them enough. But the Church is divided, division
countenanced, and is not Schism and Separation forbidden? It has been declared
to me of you, that there are contentions among you. I answer, the Kings
Declaration found these Divisions in the Nation, it does not make them.
Division and Separation simply considered, are neither good nor evil. There may
be reason to divide or separate some persons from others out of prudence, as
the Catechumens from the fully instructed of old, for their greater
edification. It is not all division or separation is Schism, but sinful
division. Such Divisions as the Apostle here also calls Contention. I must
confess I have been a man professed still against Separation: but this
Declaration does seem to me to take away the very sore it self which was in our
separate Meetings till now. It is by Gods providence a Medicinal Declaration.
And I will tell you my thoughts freely, as I use to do when I write. I look
upon the call of a Nation to the Christian Religion, and and the Nations
answering that call, to make a Church National. The King is head over his
people as a Nation, and that in Ecclesiasticals, as well as Civils. As National
head he has appointed the Parochial Churches, and required that all his
Subjects should frequent these Assemblies for the acknowledging, glorifying, or
National serving and worshipping the true God, and Jesus Christ, whom we have
received. This worship and service in the nature of it being intrinsecally
good, and the external order (such as that of place and the like circumstances)
being properly under his jurisdiction, it has seemed hitherto to me, that
unless there was something in that order or way by him prescribed which is
sinful, and that required too as a condition of that Communion, there is no man
might refuse his attendance on those Parochial Assemblies, without the sin of
disobedience, and consequently his separation thereby becoming sinful, it was
Schism. Now Sirs! It having pleased the Almighty to put it into the heart of
the King, not only to forbear and connive at the Nonconformist in their
Preaching, but to allow, appoint, and design by his solemn Declaration, stated
places for their Assemblies (according to the good hand of our God upon him) it
does appear to me that these particular Assemblies, having the Authority of the
Supreme Head of the Church, equally with the Parish Churches, they are
manifestly constituted thereby parts of the Church National, whereof he is
Head, no less then the Parish assemblies. The matter is all one, as if a Parish
only which was too big, should be divided into two, where I say there is
Separation, no Schism. I will undertake to make it good, that the Bishops
Consecration of a Church is not necessary, to the making the Society that
Assembles therein to be a particular Church, or part of the National: but that
the Kings Authority alone is enough for that Relation. Nay I know not but the
King upon the same account might constitute unmaintenanced Bishops over those
particular Congregate Churches, if he pleased, as well as he has maintained
Bishops over those that have Livings, if it were to any purpose at all, and for
his peoples edification. Well now then, if any Licensed person shall gather
their Congregations in a way of opposition to the Parish Churches, which he
has also established, by denial of them to be true Churches, I do account still
that all such partaking thereby with the Novatian and the Donatist of old, must
come under the condemnation of the Fathers and Councels passed upon their
error, and that is that which (...) we call Separation. If any again shall
gather a people in a way of strife, pride, vainglory, envy, contention, which
are breaches of Christianity, when the end of the Commandment is Charity, I
will account this also being sinful, it does make those conventions
Schismatical. But if a man shall come honestly and peaceably in the fear of God
with prudence and innocence, as becomes a Christian, to set up one of these
Meetings by virtue of the same Authority as the Parish Priest has his: I will
desire any that can, to show me now, where the sin is to be found. If he can
show it me I will consent to him, that he shall call all these Meetings
Schismatical still, upon condition that if he cannot, he will pardon them
henceforth who do go to these particular Churches (by the Kings appointment now
parts of the National) with the same veneration and regard as to the Parish
Congregations. We will thank the late ingenuous Author, who advised us to take
heed that Toleration be not abused, and we do show wherein that care is to be
taken, that we may not abuse it: but when he would have had the Nonconformist
under pretense of not abusing his liberty, to take such a course only as not to
use it at all (though the generality of us do judge they should most glorify
God this way) he deserved to be blamed; who upon the conviction, will perhaps
as soon as any, be ready to thank God with us, if a door so effectual be
opened, then we may without offense, and without Schism, join our strength in a
mutual love and concord for the carrying on the great work of man's Salvation
throughout the Nation.

But are not these Presbyterians very Knaves, who stood before on Christ's
Authority for their Preaching, and now take Licenses of the King? While their
plea was the same with the Apostles, that they ought to obey God rather then
Man, we could bear with them; but now we shall never abide them more. I pray
Sirs, good words! As Charity always thinks the best, I see this all will
still thinks nothing but evil. If it were the duty of the Nonconformist
Minister to Preach before his Majesty's Declaration, it must be his duty still:
and if when we have obtained such grace as this is, the Presbyterian should not
accept it, (when there is no more doubt of prejudicing our Ministry thereby,
then the Apostles did theirs, when they had leave of the Masters of the
Synagogues to say on), who would have fallen on the whole party so foully for
refractory and perverse fellows, as these men? It is true, we look on Christ's
Commission to be enough for our Preaching when we judge it for Gods Glory; but
to Preach in such a place, and in such circumstances, is, we count in the
dispose of the Magistrate. The Magistrate has the power of external order, and
may forbid a man to Preach, I say in such a place, when he cannot forbid him to
Preach; or else our Pulpits were our own still, for all the Act of Uniformity.
The Presbyterians take Licenses of the King in reference to the place of their
Assemblies. Nay this authority of the King in slating these places and Meetings
for them, does incorporate them as integral parts, or particular fellow
congregations with those of the Parochial constitution, into the Church
National, united under him as the Supreme Head: which is a matter of that great
weight and consequence, as we have not yet looked about us, to bless God enough
for it. Hereby can the Nonconformist make his public acknowledgement (which
he would have) of the Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiasticals no less then the
Bishop, and yet his conscience not be burdened with the Diocesan. Truly I know
not but his Majesty really has discerned more for the hitting the business of
coagulating his whole people into one Ecclesiastical National society or body
under him hereby, then any of us were a war of, who could not see before any
reason for such proceedings as are taken in this Declaration, which we shall
approve henceforth with a great deal of satisfaction. But did not these men in
the late Wars take part with the Parliament, and now they submit to the Kings
Declaration against an Act of Parliament? Be it so. The Act of Parliament is
against the command of God: The King permits what God bids. Who should the
subject obey, but God and the King? As for the War, I perceive it will still be
ripped up though against the Act of Oblivion. It was not upon the account of
Religion (it must be first known) that it will be owned. In the cause of
Religion if we be persecuted, we may fly, Christ allows us, but we may not
resist. The case then I account a singular case. It was upon the Militia they
began, the old King said. The King and Parliament was divided that is certain,
and the question was, where the Authority (or the most of it) did lie? some
thought in the one, some in the other, and so were engaged. I will speak now
once for all, that the mouths of these men may be stopped with reason, for
nothing else will do it. There are some have thought thus. The Government of
this Nation is mixed. A mixed Government is where the supreme Authority is not
placed purely in the People, or the Nobles, or the Monarch, but mixtly in them
all. The supreme Legislative power in this Nation lies in the King and his two
Houses jointly, not severally, as one Corporation (says Judge Jenkins) or to
speak surely, as one Parliament. The Parliament which is to be one in Law being
divided, the constitution is broken, that being broken, the Government is
dissolved, and the power returned at that season to the people. The people
being at liberty, many men of sober spirits thought themselves bound to go that
way, which would most tend to the advancement of Religion. And this is the true
state of their cause, which, though I my self in my judgment for my university
Oaths sake was otherwise inclined, I do humbly offer, in Justice, for their
Apology. Only I must add this, that the occasion which happened once, that was
the Kings own deposing his power of dissolving the Parliament at that time,
being like never to be again, there is no hurt at all in it. If after this,
these men will yet press us further; I will return that the state of the case
being quite altered, the King brought in again, and with universal consent,
into the old constitution, here is a wonderful kind of thing fallen out, that
the Fanatic, or Anti-Episcopial party of the Nation, are really turning to be
the Royalist, who are for Prorogative, and Supremacy in Ecclesiasticals, when
the Bishops party who have made it hitherto a proverb that without them no
King, are the men bandy against it, for the maintenance of these Acts of
Parliament. And thus much shall suffice as to the first thing offered by the
Prefacer about Popery and the Kings Declaration.

Sect. 3.
I come then now to the other thing that requires our notice, which is a matter
indeed of great moment, and therefore intended by me for the main task of my
present engagement, and that is his asserting an authority in the Magistrate
over the conscience of his Subjects in matters of Religion. So he has
expressed it, and made it the subject of two other Books, and insists upon it
still in this Preface. I am willing therefore to enter into a dissertation with
him about the point: for it will be worthy not only of our two labors, but of
another learned, pious, studious and worthy Knight, who was the Author of the
Papers entitled, Liberty of Conscience; and whom I shall purposely engage with
the Prefacer, that, if it be possible, we may all three together (will we, nill
we) beat out the right determination of the business.

As for the Prefacer, I must needs say, that I take him to be a man of fewer
years and quicker parts, and of a more flourishing Pen than to be fit, at least
of himself, for the undertaking any such point as this is. For either a man
must be of a patient complexion that can read over all that is written by
others about the subject, and then give us the Compendium, according to his
judgment: or he must be able, by fixing long upon one thing, and inculcating
the thoughts of it upon the mind, to frame his own notion, in such a
fore-casting of it through the whole train of its consequences to the end, as
to make it hold together, which is not the work unius Diei, or unius liturae,
to use the expression of the Bishop offered to my hand. I know that the
happiness of the first conceit does much, but it is not the nimbleness of the
Pen, and a torrent of words, does the rest. Nay rather, it is this volubility
of the tongue which is Truth's great Harlot, while the handsomness of the
expression will be ready still to allure away the judgment from that closer
attendance to the dry notion, that Controversal points, or Cases of Conscience,
do require; which should not therefore be writ in the style of this age. For
the language particularly of this person, I cannot but compare methinks to a
like present fashion in the Garments of Women, the superfluity of whose
dimensions may perhaps make their bodies look more stately, but it will trip
their heels up, besides the cumbersomness, if they take not heed to themselves,
or some other come after to keep them from falling. Well! the business this
notable eloquent Gentleman has to do in this Preface, is, for ought I see
really, only to abuse the Non-Conformists, and so fasten upon them some charge
if he could tell what, and against whom in reference to their loyalty or duty
to the Government. But the charge being founded at the bottom only upon his
first Book, or the cause he has there managed, the best way to answer all his
parti^ulars, will be to let them quite alone, without raking the Dunghill up,
and to touch only in general upon the foundation.

There are two passages then I will cite out of this Preface, for there are no
more I count of that nature, which I make my concern. All their exceptions
relate either to the Power in it self, or to the matters of the Command. The
first are directly levelled against the very being of Authority; and
Magistrates, of what kind soever, according to their general pretenses, must
not dare to put any restraint upon their subjects consciences, lest they invade
the Divine Prerogative, overthrow the fundamental liberties of human nature,
and undo honest men for their loyalty to God and their Religion. Now if this
right be claimed without limitation, then the consequence is unavoidable, That
subjects may, when ever they please, cross with the authority of their
Governors, upon any pretense that can wear the name of Religion. But this
being grossly absurd, the necessity of a Sovereign power in matters of Religion,
is granted, and all Arguments that prove it in general necessary to Peace and
Government, are allowed, or at least are not contradicted: for what ever admits
an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, howsoever bounded and limited, admits it; and
that is enough to the first assertion of a supreme Authority over the
Conscience in matters of Religion. Again, after eighteen pages farther, And
they are exhorted above all things to keep their Consciences (i.e. themselves)
free from the usurpation of all human Laws, that is, in effect, they are
forbidden to make any conscience of subjection to Princes: for it is only
Conscience that is capable of the obligation of Laws, so that if they be
exempt, the whole man is at liberty.

By these two passages it does appear to me, that this Ecclesiastical
Politician from the beginning of his setting out to the end, does run all along
in that confusion, as it will be hard to bring him to sorts. But it shall
suffice me to offer two distinctions, which alone as I hope may serve to do
this work, both of drawing him out of his darkness, and convincing others
thereby of the injury of his accusations. Distinguish we then first between the
Authority of the Magistrate over his Subjects in matters of Religion, and an
Authority over the Conscience in any matters whatsoever. It is manifest in the
very expression of his Title, and the customary language of his first Book, and
of this Preface, That he does confound Conscience with the Matters of Religion;
whereas there are matters of Religion wherein the Conscience may not be
concerned, and matters wherein the Conscience may be concerned, and they be no
Ecclesiastical matters. The second distinction then is, between Subjection,
which refers to the Authority residing in the Magistrate himself, and which is
our duty in opposition to resistance or rebellion; and Obedience which lies in
the doing what he commands. It is apparent in the last passage how he confounds
these two things, when the making conscience of subjection to Princes, and
obligation to the Law, is belike all one with him in his present conception.
But that there is a difference to be put between these two, it does appear
undeniably from one consideration, that we are always bound in conscience to
the one, that is subjection: but we are not always so bound to the other, to
obedience. The things that are commanded may be sometimes sinful, or hurtful to
the Commonwealth, and then it will be our duty not to obey them: or they may be
idle, vain, frivolous, which we may choose therefore to do out of prudence, for
fear of wrath, and to avoid contempt and scandal, when we are not otherwise to
hold our selves bound in conscience.

Sect. 4.
To begin with the former. By me Kings Reign, says Wisdom, and if they rule by
God, it is fit they should also rule for him. He is the Minister of God for our
good, says the Apostle. The Minister is to look to his Lords will, and the good
of the Subject is not only their Temporal but Spiritual good. And if he be Gods
Minister for our good, there can be no exemption of Sacred things any more then
Civils from his Authority, under God, for the good of his People. And hence are
we taught to pray for Magistrates, that we may lead peaceable lives under them
in all Godliness as well as Honesty. Kings and Emperors (says Grotius from some
other) are equally to take care of Sacred and Secular things: but only when we
come to particulars, it must be confessed that the jus imperii is more narrow
in matters of Religion, then in other matters upon this one account, that the
Divine Law does appoint or determine more things concerning Religion, and so
takes them out of the Magistrates liberty, then it does concerning other
matters. In hoc Reges sicut cis Divinitus praecipitur Deo serviunt in quantum
Reges sunt, si in suo regno bona jubeant, mala prohibeant: non solum quae
pertinent ad humanam sicietatem, verum etiam quae ad Divinam Religionem, says
Augustine, Contra Cresco nium, l. 3. c, 51. The affairs of Religion I must say
again are of the greatest concernment, and it is not fit Gods Minister should
neglect his greater affairs, to take care only of the less. Besides there are
no matters in the Earth which have so great an influence on Men's spirits to put
them in agitation, as the matters of Religion: and if they were exemted wholly
from the authority of the Supreme Governor, it would be a very hard thing for
any mortal to govern at all. The Non-Conformists therefore deny not the
authority of the King in matters Ecclesiastical. No, they may perhaps be rather
accused shortly for acknowledging it too much, (as has been intimated) seeing
they do accept of his Declaration, nor do they scruple his Title of Supreme
Head. We distinguish indeed between a Civil head of the Church and the
Constitutive head. The King we acknowledge the civil Head or Governor of the
Church of England as well as the State, that is in whom the only Supreme
Coercive authority does lie over all persons in Ecclesiastical as well as other
matters. But as to the constitutive head of our Church as an Ecclesiastical
organical body, it will be hard for those who own not be Bishops jure Divino,
to assign. The National Church hitherto I took to be the Integrum of our
Parochial Congregations, and the Pastors of all the Parish Churches in England
virtually associated (for they are not actually) are I think the constitutive
head of the Church of England under Christ, in that external formal Government
of it, he has committed to them. There is the internal Government of the
Church, which belongs only to Christ and his Spirit, who alone can rule men's
hearts: or the external Government of it. This external regiment is either
formal which belongs to the Ministers: or Objective, which belongs to the
Magistrate. The Magistrate cannot therefore by virtue of his Office enter into
the function of the Priest to do his work, though he can make the Minister
himself do it, and punish him if he neglect his duty. He can give a call to the
Pastoral Rulers to meet and frame Ecclesiastical constitutions; and when
himself cannot make them, they shall not yet be obligatory to the subject,
unless they have his Sanction. This external authority over the Church, which
is Objective (that is, which is conversant about Ecclesiastical affairs, but
does not exercise them, which is Circa Sacra not in Sacris, according to
Constantine of old, Episcopus (...)) does differ from the formal (which is from
Christ to us as his Stewards and Ambassadors, and so to be put in execution no
otherwise then as it is prescribed by him in the word) in this mainly, that the
one is Declarative, that can direct what is Gods will, and persuade to it, and
threaten only with reference to another world; but the other is a power to make
that our duty, which it requires, and enforce it to be done by present
punishments, that is, a power which is juris Constitutinum and Coercive. There
are two sorts then of things, which are subject to the Magistrates Power or
Government. Things or actions determined by God himself in his word: or things
that are less undetermined by him, as neither commanded nor forbidden. For the
former, the Magistrates power does lie in his being made the Keeper of the
Tables, having no authority to change a title of Gods Law; so that his work in
respect of such things consists in protecting those that observe them, and
encouraging such by removing what will hinder, and promoting what will further
them in their duty: as also in his discouraging the Transgressour, by
withdrawing the occasions of their sin, and punishing them for it. For the
latter, the power of the Magistrate does lie in his liberty to determine all
such things as being before not determined, so as by that determination to make
them our duty which were indifferent before; to make it our duty, I say, to
avoid, or do such things according as he requires or prohibits them for the
common edification. Haes sive Sacra sive profana sint (says Grotius)
determinare in alterum partem jus est summae potestatis. Provided always that
such commands as these do indeed answer that end; For seeing power in the
original, is derived from God as Supreme Lord; [ Thou could have no power,
says, Christ to Pilate, unless it were given thee of God]: and it is given of
God to none but for the common good, we are to conceive that the things that
are commanded in Civils are for the good of the Commonwealth, and in
Ecclesiasticals for our Spiritual edification, or else though they must be
done, rather then we resist or suffer, they do not bind us in our consciences.
The will of God that such a one should command, is I say, power in the root.
This will is that he command nothing but for our edification, or the common
good, [According to the power given us of God for edification]: If his command
then be not indeed such, it is destitute of Gods authority, and becoming
thereby a command in foro alieno (that is in foro exteriori only), and in
aliena materia, the conscience (whose adaequate rule the will of God only is)
must be left to its liberty. The Body indeed is bound (says Dr. Tailor), and we
must suffer patiently the evil which we cannot deprecate: but Laws that are
made to purposes beyond these measures do no ways oblige the conscience. He is
the Minister of God for good, says St. Paul, otherwise he is not Gods Minister,
and has to other purposes none of Gods authority, and therefore cannot oblige
the conscience to an active obedience, in such where the power is incompetent
to command. Duc. Dub. B. 3. c. 1. r. 3.

Having then granted and stated one member of the distinction, I must come to
the other, which is, that though the Magistrate has an authority over his
Subjects, in the matters of Religion as well as civil matters, yet has he no
authority for all that over the conscience of any. Conscience is the judgment
of a man concerning himself and actions with reference to the Judgment of God.
It is a faculty whereby we discern what is Gods Judgment of us and our
actions, and there is no man must do any thing contrary to that judgment. If
the Magistrate then have power over the conscience, in any thing whatsoever, he
must have power, either to make us change our judgment of that thing, and
judge otherwise: or else though we judge thus, to do otherwise then that
judgment; that is though we judge that it is Gods will we should do thus, the
command of the Magistrate shall make it lawful for us to do oterwise. The first
of these is against reason, there is no man can make himself, to judge
otherwise of a thing in good earnest then he does judge: and it cannot then be
in the power of the Magistrate to make him do it, any more then it is in his
power to make him fly in the Air, or live under water. This is so manifest,
that this ingenious Author has spoken enough of it himself in his first Book.
The latter is against Piety, for to do the thing which I judge to be the will
of God I should not do, because the Magistrate does command it, is manifestly a
preferring the will of Man before Gods, that is, an having of other Gods before
him, which is the sin of the first Commandment. The truth is, to go about the
making of the Magistrates will to be the rule of conscience in any thing, let
it be what it will, is manifestly to defloure conscience, to make that which is
peculiar to God to be common with man, or profane. For con-scientia importing
in the very word and thing, the judgment of God together with ours, it must be
his will, and that alone must be the rule of it, and if any thing else be once
made its rule, it is gone. If the Magistrate have an authority over the
conscience in any thing, the reason will be the same for all. I mean, if I may
do any thing which I judge contrary to Gods will (which judgment I say is my
conscience), then cannot that be a reason to restrain me in another. The reason
why I dare not commit Adultery, or do the like heinous crime, is because it is
against my conscience, and if that reason be rendered insufficient, that a thing
may be done, though it be against a man's conscience, there is an end of
Religion. If the Magistrate have an authority over the conscience, then must
the internal acts of men be subject to his Government, when it is God only that
knows, and can rule the heart: But Grotius has taught us well here. There are
internal acts of men, and the external. Those acts of men (says he) which do
subiacere humano imperio are his external acts only: and our internal acts can
be commanded no further then they are concerned in the external. The inward
acts of man's soul in general, and much less his conscience are not within his
cognizance, and so not under his jurisdiction. If the Magistrate has power
over the conscience, then good and evil should be founded in jure positivo, and
not in jure naturae: Then might he impose on us a new Faith, nor new Articles
in our Creed: Then must we have no Religion but his Will, and no God but
Leniathan only. It is true that when the Magistrate commands me any thing for
my good, or for the common good though to my loss, that thing is now become my
duty; and as I know it is Gods will that I should obey such commands, I am
obliged in conscience: and if this very nimble Gentleman, will but be contented
with this interpretation, and declare that by the Magistrates authority over
the conscience, he intends not either that he has power to force the
judgment, or the action against the judgment (when upon the last indeed it is
he does entrench), I may descend to the other distinction.

Sect. 5.
The second distinction then, that must bring some light to this young Doctors
understanding, if he be not yet too old to learn, and confutation to his
charge, which he so frivolously without any cause, and to no purpose, does
advance against he knows not whom, may appear with conviction upon himself from
these words, speaking of the Non-Conformists exceptions, which relate (says he)
either to the Power it self, or the matters of the command. If then he
distinguishes well, the power it self and it commands, the duty or obligation
that arises upon the subject, in reference to these which are two, must be
distinct likewise. The force of it cannot be avoided, let him seem never so
much to neglect it. He is pleased indeed, to say that we exhort people in
effect to make no conscience of subjection to Princes, because we say that they
are not always bound in conscience to their Commands; that is because we do
instruct them so about the obligation of human Laws, as they may know they are
not to make the will of the Magistrate, but the will of God alone, to be the
rule of the Conscience. We do therefore here instruct them right, and that
which this man would have, were to pervert them. He does discover plainly his
ignorance of this distinction, and this distinction the vanity of his
accusation. We are always bound in conscience to subjection unto the Powers
that are, we acknowledge this, this, we Preach it, we Print it, and are ready
to maintain it: but we are not always bound in conscience to Obedience: And God
forbid that we should. If he could have distinguished these two things, he
might have spared most of his labor. There is a Book entitled, The Obligation
of human Laws discussed, which I Printed a year since; I must desire my Reader
to get it (and bind it together if he can with this), for they are of two
subjects that do enterfare very much; The authority of the Magistrate in the
matters of God discussed, was the intended Title of this, but I could not Print
it till this Preface now has given me the occasion. I use the expression of
Scripture in the matters of God, because I would include all matters wherein
the conscience is concerned, as well as Ecclesiastical matters. Now I have in
that Book laid down this distinction with one more, as the ground work of my
determination of that point, and I have need to say a little more to prevent
some cavil, which may be raised by this person upon my reproof, which I must
also give him for the next words he uses, viz. It Is conscience only (says he)
that is capable of the Obligation of human Laws, so that if that be exempt, the
whole man is at liberty. I wonder at the Man for this; I do hate this pride
methinks for being indocible and perverse no less then for being ugly. Pride is
an overweening conceit of ones self with the contempt of others. There is
nothing more visible than this filthy pride in this young man, and that Author
who wrote the Friendly Debate, but only with this difference, that I judge this
the more ingenuous or open, the other the more cankered and sly; I pray God
forgive them both with all my heart. It is a base piece of immorality I am sure
in either, that when they have to do with any such person as Dr Owen, of years
so much elder than themselves, and who are not without some reputation at least
with other persons, to use such contemptuous disdainful scorning language as
they do altogether, which arising so manifestly too from the conceit and
confidence alone they have of themselves, does declare them two such Sons of
the morning, such a couple of proud Despisers, that until they do show some
repentance and acknowledgment for their fault, they do deserve really to be
excommunicated out of the good thoughts of all men, that most deservedly
otherwise do honor them never so much. Well! This man cannot it seems
understand how he should be obliged at all, unless he be obliged in Conscience.
He cannot discern belike between an obligation simpliciter, and the obligation
of conscience. He cannot discern that the conscience which judges of our duty
only in relation to God is bound only by a Divine obligation, and that a Divine
obligation may be distinguished from an Human obligation. Is it not indeed
strange that a man of such quick parts, has yet so little solid judgment? Is
it not one thing (thinks he) to be bound to an action, because it is Gods will,
and for fear of Hell, or Divine punishments: and another to be bound to it out
of fear only of the Law, and to escape suffering? Does not the Apostle, when he
tells us, We must be subject not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake,
imply this distinction, that there is an obligation then only for wrath sake,
and an obligation out of conscience? And cannot this exceeding fine witted man
by any means discern this? And will not he nor the Debater learn, though it be
never so ingenuous for them to come here to some acknowledgment, that
themselves as well as others may be able to live in this World under Laws, with
peace to their souls? I do profess sincerely that of all the Books that ever
yet I wrote, I am most pleased in my heart with that Book I now mentioned, as
being a subject so needful for all persons, though it be the worst printed. I
will supply some little I want in it in this place. It is this.

If this Author were a man of as much judgment as wit, he would not have laid
down himself so rawly, and excepted at the thing, but at the terms of the
distinction which I have used with other Divines. For when Doctor Tailor speaks
of the Bodies being bound, and I have said the outward man, in distinction to
the Conscience, it must be confessed that these terms are taken from custom,
and that it does fare with them, as it does usually with other School-terms,
that they will not strictly hold the examination. The Law of man which binds
the subject for wrath sake only, does so bind him to the external act, as the
will to that act must be included; for to bind him in the Body without the Will
were to put him in Fetters, but it is no human obligation. This I have said in
my Book, and I add here, when I say, we distinguish not the Will from the
outward Man, in the Obligation of human Laws, it must be conceived that the
will is guided still by the understanding, and is supposed by some to be
nothing else but the last practical act of it. I distinguish not then the
outward man from the inward so far as the inward acts are necessary to that
which is external, when I distinguish both from the conscience. There is the
understanding (N.B.) that I shall suffer if I do not such a thing, and
therefore I will do it, is one thing: and the understanding that I sin if I do
it not, and therefore I will do it, is another. The one is that our Divines
mean by this term of the outward man still: and the other is the conscience.
You may ask how comes it to pass that when there goes all this to an act the
Magistrate commands, so that the subject in his will and understanding (so far
as to do the thing) is obliged, we do yet call it but the outward man, or forum
exterius, and can distinguish it with all that, from the conscience? I answer,
we call this the outward man upon this account, because it is the external acts
only that are subject to the Magistrates Government, or can be required for
themselves, and the acts of the will and understanding are not required, but
indirectly in relation only to these external acts; therefore I say do we well
call all this still but the outward Man: and this is distinguished plainly from
the conscience, because a man may know that such a thing is not required of
God, and that God will not punish him, though he does not do it, when yet he
does know that it is prudent for him rather then suffer, and therefore wills
it. In the one there is the external act with the will and understanding so far
as that act is concerned: but so long as my understanding is that it is not
Gods will, but man's will that I perform, such a thing may be said to be done
out of understanding (and will as well as by the outward man): but not out of
conscience. It is not my knowledge of a thing, and that I am to do it: but my
knowledge that it is God will, or my knowledge of his judgment of the thing to
be the same with mine, that makes it Conscience. I think I am full enough now.
You may then object, that I sometimes seem in that Book, to make the obligation
of the outward man to be negative, not to rebel; and another time to be
positive also to some act. I answer, it is true that from the beginning, I do
make the obligation of the outward man to lie in both these, a necessity never
to resist, and upon that necessity to act rather then suffer. But interest of
fear or self preservation, binds the reason, as well as the sense. I say true,
and that there is the reason then of the outward man which is one: and the
reason of the conscience, which is another. When my reason is the fear of
suffering, because I may not resist and therefore I will, it is my outward man
is bound: but when my reason is, that the thing has Gods Authority, and it
will offend him if I do it not, and therefore I will, then am I bound in
conscience. A human Law which is for the common good, binds me from reason of
conscience: a Law which is unprofitable or against it, binds me only from the
outward man's reason. There is Candor indeed to be allowed to this distinction
(which I have intimated) as to most terms of Art, but they are not therefore to
be left, both because of their constant use, and also for their profit, in the
shorter cut which we get to what we would have by the use of them. Only they
are verily to be at once first thoroughly understood, and then shall all that
which we signify by them be as completely represented with a word, as if it
were drawn out in the full expression. That which I have to offer upon this,
against the Prefacer and Debater who are companions in this cause, is this,
that whereas they see no more, but to think that the stability of Crowns and
Scepters, and so of all Government does lie in the Ministers, especially the
Episcopal Divines, preaching such Doctrine as theirs, which is to lay an
obligation upon the conscience of the subject to obey them in all things
indefinitely, unless they be apparently forbidden in the Word of God, they are
exceedingly mistaken: for if there were nothing else to support Soveraignity
but that, the Kings Crown might perhaps stick no longer on his Head, then till
the Parliament sits again, seeing we may then very likely have more Laws that
we shall make no conscience to obey, and yet we shall make conscience (God
willing) of our Loyalty to his Majesty, and must do while we live, by the
command of the A^mighty. It is not the point of Obedience then, it must be
inculcated upon which the Government of Kings is established: but upon the
point of Subjection. Let me say it over again. It is not on the point of
obedience out of Conscience: but on the point that we must obey, because the
Magistrate bears the Sword, and that not in vain, that the whole World is
kept in Order. And also upon this point of Conscience, that whether we have
cause to obey or not obey, we must however never resist upon pain of damnation.
Let the Book before mentioned be herein further consulted.

And after this, there will be little reason for our Prefacer to talk any more
of exceptions levelled at the Power it self, by any Pretenses of the
Nonconformist against the Sovereign right of the King in the matters of the
Church any more then of the State, for we own no such, no more then he, though
the way of his expressing himself by putting a restraint upon his Subjects
consciences, is so feat and grating till it be digested, and withal so wayward,
that I cannot but point it to the Readers correction, by what will hereafter
follow. If he has any thing then to charge us with, it must be in regard to
the matters of the command, unto which therefore he proceeds. But then they say
there are some particular things exempted from all humane cognizance, which if
the Civil Magistrate presume to impose upon the consciences of his Subjects [He
should say upon his Subjects, not upon the consciences of his Subjects, for the
Magistrate imposes nothing but upon the outward man, requiring the external
act, and the inward acts follow only so far as they are necessary to the
external], as he ventures beyond the Warrant of his Commission, so he can tie
no Obligation of Obedience upon them, seeing they can be under no subjection in
those things, where they are under no Authority. Now this pretense resolves it
self thus, that they do not quarrel his Majesty's Ecclesiastical Supremacy, but
they acknowledge it to be the undoubted right of all Sovereign Princes, as long
as its exercise is kept within due bounds of modesty and moderation. Which
being granted all their general exceptions. [Very fine, when we have indeed
none at all!] against the sufficiency of the Authority it self are quitted, and
they have now nothing to except against, but the excess of its Jurisdiction. So
that having gained this ground, [Mighty, to gain what never was with held!] the
next thing to be assigned and determined, is the just and lawful bounds of this
Power, which may be summed up in this general rule. That Governors take care
not to impose things apparently evil, and that Subjects be not allowed to plead
Conscience in any other case. This is the safest and most easy Rule to secure
the Quiet of all that are upright and peaceable, and all that refuse subjection
to such a gentle and moderate Government, make themselves incapable of all the
benefits of society.

It is well we are come now at last where the water ^cks. The Nonconformist
differs not from the Conformist in the main point that secures all Government
that is Subjection: but it is in the point of Obedience only we differ. And
here are two questions, The one is about the matters of our obedience in
general, what is the rule, or the bounds that must be set to the Magistrates
commands, that we exceed not our duty to God, while we are obedient to our
Governors? The other is about the particular matters of it, whether the
present impositions of Conformity do keep within that compass, and consequently
are lawful or unlawful?

The latter of these is the pitched Field, between the Conformist and
Nonconformist, and neither of us have a mind to enter into it. Only I will
offer thus much by the way. The Conformists generally do hold that the things
we differ about are indifferent, and consequently thae they may be removed out
of the Church by Authority without sin: The Non-Conformists say generally they
shall sin if they obey them. What then is to be done in the case, but if my
friend be weak and cannot indeed come to me, I must go to my friend, if ever I
and my friend come together? Nay, if he be my friend, there is something too I
must do else; I must part with something, if he need it, and which I can-spare,
to accommodate him with it; to accommodate with him by it. I wish heartily I
might live to see a Law, that no man should have any more then one Cure of
souls, so long as there are others no less able then they, who may take the
burden off their hands. It was upon this account, because they wanted men of
ability, that Pluralities were allowed in the Church at first: and when such
men do abound, it is wicked to continue them. There is one dispensation only
should be authentic for a Minister that fears God to have two Livings, and
that is when he has two Tongues. It is this damned hard Argument at the
bottom, the Priests covetousness and corruption, and not their dispute about
the Ceremonies, that really hinders our Accommodation. I know these sons of the
Horseleech will never be contented with a single portion, whose voice still is
give give: A Dignity therefore with a Living, may be allowed to answer their
double give: but one Dignity, and one Cure of Souls should be all. If there be
any will yet cry give, give, and give, they may be the sons of the Aspe, or the
Adder, for the Horseleech her self must say she never had any such sons as
these, who enlarge their desire as Hell, and are as Death, and cannot be
satisfied.

The former is the question to which we must return, and we are indeed
beholding to the Gentleman, for comprising his Books into the Compendium of
this Rule. The Governor must not impose things apparently evil: and the
Subject must be allowed to plead Conscience in no other case. For the
examination of this position, I will ask in the first place who shall be Judge,
whether a thing be apparently evil or not? The Magistrate judges it good, the
Subject holds it notoriously evil. Shall the Subject take upon him now to
control the judgment of his Sovereign, and tell him that is evil which he
calls good? Who shall say to his Prince, Thou art wicked? I am not sure what he
will first say to this. In the next place, suppose a thing not to be apparently
evil, but thought indifferent by the Prince and his Subjects generally, and yet
some person has his reasons upon deep consideration that prove it evil. He is
convinced in his own conscience upon these reasons. What will this Author judge
now in this case? must he indeed forsake his own judgment and apprehensions,
and acquiesce in the determination of his Governor? I know this Author speaks
after this rate in his first Book: but I am out of doubt that he may never
forsake his conscience (which is that present judgment) for any fear, command,
or advantage in the World. Again, suppose a thing be really indifferent in its
nature, and it is so to me in my Absolute judgment: yet there are cases in
regard of the circumstances or accidents, that make it in my Hypothetical
judgment to be sinful, what will he have us to do now? For instance, There are
things to me indifferent, which yet are heinous in others, and I may scandalize
them in my doing them by my example. It was indifferent to the strong Christian
to eat of meats offered to Idols, who knew that an Idol was nothing, but to him
that made conscience of the Idol, it was Idolatry: now for a man to whom this
thing was lawful, to eat before him to whom it was Idolatry, becomes unlawful,
and he may not do it for conscience sake: Conscience I say, not thy own, but of
that other. God commands, thou shall not do that thing, whereby thy self or
others will be lead to sin if it be done. The Magistrate commands thou shall do
such a thing: Who must be obeyed God or Man? When a thing is evil by accident,
and not intrinsecally evil, if we can separate the accident from the thing, we
must do it: But if we cannot remove if from the accident, that accident makes
it evil, and we cannot be obliged unto sin, by the commandment of man. In the
last place, And why must a man be allowed conscience in no other case? is it
because he has, or is to have no conscience in any cases but such? Does not
the Apostle require of every one in the case of indifferent things, that they
be persuaded fully in their own minds, that they act not but in Faith? Does he
not tell us that if they eat before they are so persuaded they are damned, and
that to him who esteems the thing unclean, it is unclean? Does not the
Apostle speak directly and purposely about things here that are not
intrinsecally and apparently evil, but matters of that nature, which are good
and evil, according to the diversities of men's persuasions? How bold is this
man then to offer us such a rule, which is directly to lead us if we follow it,
against these plain Texts of Scripture, upon the hazard of damnation?

The just and lawful bounds (says he) of this power, have been already
described ( viz. in his former Books) as to the most material cases that can
occur in human life, which may be summed up in this general Rule, before
mentioned. If this Rule then be the sum of what he has offered in his former
Books, it follows, that he being out in this rule, the substance of his Books
must fall with it. But if this then be not the rule, you may ask what is? It is
easy to throw down, but the difficulty is to build. I answer, it is this is
the work and business of my discourse that ensues, and to be presented best by
degrees upon the occasion of what is offered also by another: yet seeing the
Gentleman has engaged me with this sum of his thoughts (which is I count
ingenuously done, though he be out), I will requite him with the like, though I
do some thing prevent my own intentions. I say then that this Author is so far
mistaken in proposing this rule to the Magistrates power over men's consciences,
that it is Conscience it self is the Rule, even the conscience which is in
every particular subject, is the bounds and rule to him of what he must, and
must not do, (how far and no farther he must go), in all the commands of Man
whatsoever. One would wonder to see what obscurity is cast upon Truth by words
and Disputes. There are no Divines but will tell us that it is the will of God,
or the Word of God that is the rule of conscience and the adaequate rule of it,
as Dr Sanderson upon this subject; That it is Gods Seat, with the like
expressions. And what is the meaning of this, but that Conscience is not, and
cannot be under any authority that is human, but is subject to God only? and
yet when we come to this point, and ask how far the Magistrates Authority does
reach in the matters of Religion, they are not able to say, Thus far, as far as
Conscience, even to these Confines, and it must go no farther. It is Gods
Authority must be first, That of the Conscience next, and then the Magistrates.
So long as the Magistrates commands trespass not upon conscience, they are
within his proper Territories, but if they require any thing against that, they
are gone beyond their bounds, and their Authority ceases. The truth is, there
is but Gods Authority and Man's in all, and the conscience has Gods Authority,
which must therefore be over man's. There is no Determination almost in any
point which has been held of difficulty, which in the vertical turn is so
plain, clear, and perfect as this. The Magistrate I say has power over his
Subject in all things, (N.B.) even in all things whatsoever in the Earth, that
he can do (as to the external acts I have said), and the Subject may, or is to
obey him in them, so far as his conscience will let him. Lo, here the true rule
or bounds of Gods own setting in this business. In short, The Magistrate shall
command me in any thing, but my conscience. And who will not be ready to say
now that this is indeed that which they knew, and must wonder that they
themselves did not make the Determination. Indeed how shall a man be subject to
the Magistrate for conscience sake, if the command of conscience had not in it
a Superior and more prevalent Power than his? it would be for his own sake,
and not for conscience sake, if his authority was greater than it. I know I
have something here anticipated what is to follow, in giving my notion so soon,
and at once, but I do it for this reason, because I know also it is the dry
light at last, and that alone, that must be of force for conviction of those
that will receive any, by controversy.

Sect. 6.
I must not yet leave this. There are things in their nature indifferent: and
things apparently forbidden or required of God. There is no difference between
us in the last, God must be obeyed in such things beyond question. Duo sunt
genera actuum imperii qui ad jus imperantis non pertinent, Deo vetita jubere,
Deo jussa vetare. For the other, there is a double case, The case of mere
indifferency, and the case of doubt; That is, there are things which are
indifferent in their nature, and appear so to us: and there are things
indifferent in their nature, and yet appear to us unlawful. In the one case,
the resolution is plain. To do a thing whereof I am in doubt (that is whereof I
am not sufficiently persuaded, it is lawful to do) is forbidden. Whatsoever is
not of Faith is sin. But the Magistrate has not power to command me to sin.
You may say I had better obey doubtfully, then disobey doubtfully. I answer, my
doubt in the one refers unto God, in the other unto Man, and I must prefer God
before Man. If I disobey I doubt that I do ill only because of Man's command:
but if I obey, I doubt I do ill, because of Gods. I must be resolved that God
forbids not the thing before the command of man can take place. I obey then
doubtfully: but I forbear in says. I believe and am assured that God has not
commanded the thing I forbear: but I am in doubt whether he has not forbidden
what I obey. In the other case the resolution in general is, that we are bound
to obedience, but it must be offered not indefinitely, but with the distinction
of a Political and Moral Obligation. When Samuel tells the people the manner of
their King, that he would take their sons for his Charrets, and Daughters for
confectionaries, their Fields and Vineyards to give unto his Servants: Here is
a political obligation on this people to deliver their Children and Estates for
the Kings use upon his command, because the Government was such in the
Constitution that if he did so, they might not resist him for all that: when
yet if any of them could save their sons and daughters, or goods without
violence, or offending the King, no doubt but they might, and have a good
conscience to God. A political obligation then is to be bound to the thing so
as to do it rather then resist: a moral is to be bound to it so, as if we do it
not, we sin: We are bound to obey the King in all his commands of things
indifferent with a political: we are not bound to obey them with a moral
obligation only when they are for the common good. I have used other terms to
the same sense in my other Book, and I am free in them being explained, but it
may be these are less obnoxious to cavil. The Ecclesiastical Politician
therefore (and the Debater both, so far as he goes along with him) has made a
very grievous young Determination in this business, while he so confoundedly
asserts that the Magistrate must be obeyed in all things not intrinsecally and
aparently evil, without any discrimination else whatsoever: whereas the holding
this, is manifestly impious in one of these cases, and tyrannous or intolerably
oppressive to the conscience in the other. There are some things indifferent I
say in their nature, that yet to us are unlawful, while we suppose them
unlawful, or are in doubt of it, and to do them in that doubt is sin: and there
are some things lawful, but so inconvenient, so unprofitable, so grievous,
that we should be loath always when then outward man is, to have the conscience
also charged with them.

I know upon the whole matter, what it is that can mainly be urged. God
commands that we honor and obey our Superiors. This is the duty of the fifth
Commandment. When the Magistrate then does appoint this or that particular
thing, an obligation to it arises upon us as part of that duty: and so the
conscience is obliged by God, and that indefinitely in all Laws. I answer, the
Reader who has read my other Book with this thus far, I will receive this
instruction as one use of the whole, viz. how the duty which God requires of us
the fifth Commandment is to be understood; and it is to be understood thus:
When our Superior commands what he ought, we are obliged by the Authority of
that particular command, so that if the thing be not done we sin: when he
commands what he ought not, as when a Law is not for the peoples good, we are
obliged only by the Authority which is in his person, and so, if that be
preferred otherwise, we sin not though the thing be left undone. And this is
but what is ordinarily affirmed, though not ordinarily so well understood by
our Divines, in their saying that the commands of men do oblige only so far as
to avoid Contempt and Scandal. A determination I must say, to be received only
in such commands, which ought not to be commanded: but not in such where the
Superior commands what he ought. I will express it if you will in other words.
When the Superior commands any thing which he ought, we are obliged for
conscience sake, and the fifth Commandment requires us to do the thing, or else
we break that command, because this thing bears in it the authority of both
Commanders: when he commands any thing which he ought not, we are obliged for
wrath's sake, and the fifth Commandment requires only that we do not resist, so
that if we resist not, we give that honor and pay that duty to the Magistrate,
which we owe in this case. If we suffer with submission, or obey rather then
suffer, or avoid both the grievance and suffering with prudence, neither
bringing contempt on his Authority, or inducing our Brethren to sin, we are to
account that we answer the intent of this Commandment. I must add still that
this is as much too as the Magistrate himself need desire in the Earth, seeing
if he be strict upon it, and the thing be not sinful, he may take any body do
what he please upon this account.

As for our Prefacer, it must be yet a greater reproof to his undertaking, that
in this endeavor of his to set up an Authority in the Magistrate over the
Conscience in all matters External, he is certainly fallen in with Mr Hobs,
whom yet to avoid the odium, he is fain himself to confute. For when that more
considerable person, according to his principles of Government, makes all men
by nature before they come into society, to be in a state of War, that gives
every man right to every thing: which right upon their agreement into a
Commonwealth is given up (he counts) into the hands of the Sovereign to
determine Propriety, so that his will thenceforth becomes the measure of right
and wrong to the Community, he proceeds so far upon the conceit, as to condemn
these two positions. That every man is judge of good and evil Doctrine. That
whatsoever a man does against his conscience is sin. See his Leviathan, C. 29.
Now let us compare this ingenuously as we ought (seeing else it is so bad) with
other places in his Book. That Subjects owe to Sovereigns simple obedience in
all things, wherein their obedience is not repugnant to the Laws of God I have
proved -- C. 31. Again, It is manifest enough that when a man receives two
contrary commands, and knows that one of them is Gods, he ought to obey that,
and not the other, though it be the command of his lawful Sovereign, or his
Father. C. 43. It does appear then, when the Ecclesiastical Politician does
confine the authority he gives the Magistrate over the conscience to external
and indifferent things, allowing the authority of the conscience over the
Magistrates in things intrinsecally sinful, and expressly forbidden by God, he
does but the same which Mr. Hobs does also, if you compare them equally taking
one place with another: But herein are they wicked companions both, that they
should once offer to take away from reasonable Agents, a judgment of private
discretion, in any concernment of conscience whatsoever.

One may easily indeed perceive what the Contents of this young man's papers do
amount unto. He dare not take off all obligations of good and evil from men's
consciences antecedent to humane Laws, as Hobs in that one place (though
otherwhere, as it seems, he intended not so far) has done: because this were
not only the way to ruin Religion, but his name, and to bring all Government
also to ruin, which he engages to assert. But he would take off all
obligations from men's consciences, in the whole business of Conformity,
antecedent to the will of the Parliament and Bishops, so as their Acts must be
the rule of good and evil to us, as to these matters. He does tell us indeed of
a liberty to our Judgments and to our Faith: but when he will allow us to judge
and believe of these things as we do, and would yet have us account that the
public conscience, the Laws, and not the private dictates of our own must
govern our outward actions, it does bring to my mind one passage more in his
Friend. What if a Sovereign forbids his Subjects to believe in Christ? I answer
(says Mr. Hobs), it is no effect, because belief or unbelief never follow man's
Commands. But what if we be commanded to confess with our Tongues? It is an
external thing, and no more then any other gesture, whereby we signify our
obedience, and a Christian holding firmly in his heart the Faith of Christ,
has the same liberty herein with Naaman. Leviathan. C. 42. There are no
passages but this, and that one before cited, that in my reading over that
Book, I observed to be so extreme bad, as folks ordinarily talk: but this I
noted for a Devilish Doctrine, seeing it is offered thus indefinitely; for it
is directly contrary to all the Holy Martyrs belief and practice, and the
express institution of our Lord, that he that confesses him before men, he will
acknowledge, and he that denies him, he will deny, before his Heavenly Father:
Yet if any will be so kind to the old Gentleman as I have been before, to
produce some passages otherwhere, that may confine h^s meaning here to such
compliances of the Tongue and Knee only, as are required in the impositions of
Uniformity, and no other but such, then shall the old Leviathan, and the young
Leviathan agree very thoroughly in their opinion. And why the young one should
fall upon his Sire so foully as he has done, whom above all men being alone of
his side, he should have rather endeavored to excuse, unless out of show only
and for a color, or out of invenility and vanity, he shall for me have the
Tripos, or be the eighth man, who can give me a good reason.

I perceive indeed that two points, (and both of which I have had long in my
thoughts) are harled together through the skein of this Prefacers Discourse,
that is the Magistrates Authority in Religion, and the Obligation of human
Laws: It will be expedient for me to dispatch the one quite out of my hands
(being already done in another Book) to be at liberty to attend the other
presently altogether. By what has been then laid down, it may appear that the
right and relation of a Subject to his Sovereign may be held good, when yet
there are, it may be, some of his Laws not obeyed. Some Laws there are which a
man must rather suffer or dye then obey, as the Roman Emperors commanding
Sacrifice to their Gods: Some we are to obey out of conscience, such are all
the wholesome Laws of a man's Country: Some there are that we obey out of
prudence rather then suffer, which yet we do not judge our selves bound to obey
for fear of sin, or of Gods displeasure. The great question then arises what is
that rule, according to which the Laws of men are to be measured, that we may
know the kind and the degrees of their obligation. This rule I have advanced in
my former Book, and I say that, in matters of Religion the Word of God is the
Rule: in Morals the Law of Nature: in Politicals God has appointed a Rule also
as sure, and that is, the common good. The Laws of the Magistrates, as the
Sermons of Ministers, do carry Gods Authority, and oblige the consciences of
the people so far, and so much, and no further, or more, then they are
commensurate with their Rule: in the one of the Word: in the other I say of the
common good. But who shall be judge whether a Law be for the good of the
public or no? I have made it my business to speak to this at large in that
Book. Every man must have a judgment of private discretion, to compare the
matters which are enjoined him with the Rule, in respect to his own actions: or
else he acts as a Brute, or howsoever he acts, he cannot act out of
conscience. Conscience lies in this very point, my knowledge of this or that to
have the authority of God, but no human law has any authority of his any
further then it agrees with his Rule. Note here, I do not resolve my obedience,
but my obedience out of conscience into my private judgment whether the Law
be, or be not, for the common good. And here I must say no more, because I
refer you thither, where this is made my proper work: and I find nothing
remain (after what you have here and there), that is wanting in my mind, but
the satisfying two Objections, as to the main Determination.

The one of them is this, If the common good be Gods rule in Politicals, then
how may any Law which is not for the common good be obeyed? We may not obey any
command of man against Gods rule in Morality, and in Religion. I answer, if a
thing be notoriously against the Common good, so as to be destructive to it, we
must suffer rather then obey such a command, for this very reason, as we dare
not go against Gods Word, because it is our rule, and Gods rule must be obeyed,
and not Man's. But if a thing be but a little against the common good, or no
more then that the damage to the public by my obeying, will not be so
considerable as my own suffering, then is it for the common good that I obey
rather then suffer. And I observe my rule still; For though some things in
themselves be against the common good, yet may my obeying them commanded, be
for the common good. And this is to be laid down, and supposed that in all
ordinary and common matters it is better for all in general, or more for the
common good to obey, then to resist or suffer. It is for my good, and the
common good I will suppose, that I let the thing alone if I can help it, but if
I must suffer if I do it not, the thing must be of great moment or detriment to
the public, or else it is for the good of most in general that we obey. It is
certainly best if a Master commands any thing that will hurt the affairs of his
House, that it be let alone, if the Boy or Man can escape without his anger or
beating, and it is better the thing be done that hurts him a little, then that
I suffer what hurts me more. This is yet most certain that a Coercive power is
the hedge of all Order in any State or Family, which so long as that is kept
whole, it is safe, and so far as that is infringed, and that only, it verges to
ruin.

The other may be offered thus. The common good is not the end alone of
Government, but the honor of the Magistrate, and the Glory of God are ends
also, which are served by our obedience, and therefore we are bound in
conscience to the Laws, unless they be against the Law of God, whether they be
for the common good or not. I answer, the foundation of this supposition is
upon a great mistake in Policy, which is that all Societies are formed by
Contract between the Governor and Governed, wherein both parties have their
interests to secure, which lays the leven of Civil Wars: Whereas if it be
placed in the mutual agreement of the people themselves in choosing their
Governor and kind of Government, as they judge best for their general
advantage, this, supposing it agreed at first to be absolute, secures it for
ever being set up, and answers the end of the institution. He is the Minister
of God to us for good. I do not like therefore the making any more then one end
of Polity, as of Medicine, and Theology. The honor of the Ruler is but part of
the bonum commune; and is to be distinguished from it no more then the wealth
of the Citizens. The good of one is the good of both. And as I like not the
making Gods Glory, and Man's Salvation two ends of Divinity, for perplexities
that have risen from thence: so do I account that the glorifying God in the
common good of the pars imperans and pars subdita, which both make up the
Commonwealth, to be one end of Politics: and the Glorifying God in man's
Salvations to be the one end of Religion. Let every Art, Science, and
Profession be distinguished by its proper Object and End. I must say then after
this, the Magistrate is honored in our subjection always: in obedience, when
his commands are for the common good, for conscience sake: when they are not,
in our obedience only for fear, and rather then resist: or in taking heed of
any contempt or provocation of him, if we leave his commands undone. So I
conclude, If any receive the information I have brought him, let him give God
the thanks: if any receive it not, the the wrong will be to himself, he shall
do me no hurt.

Sect. 7.
And thus am I glad that I have had opportunity to say all I had need, and
desire, in reference to the subject of my other Book, which the Prefacer has
mingled with the subject of this. I shall now apply my self wholly to the
present Theme. The Magistrates Authority in things Sacred. I will begin as it
were to discourse of it afresh, as if I had yet said nothing of it; and there
are two Books come out some few years since, which do seem to me to offer
something (both in their kind) very remarkable on the subject. The one of them
owes its birth to the Author of this Preface, (who has another also to the
same effect), which I shall only name again in my way, (having been too long
engaged with him already) as being in an extreme on the one hand, while he
gives not only a power to the Magistrate in the Religious matters, which is
well, but a power over the conscience in Religious matters: The other has a
person of honor, and a worthy Student for its Author, who has proposed a
state of the question with some more mature thoughts, and peculiar notion,
which affording me a ground work, for further disquisition, has given me both
the rise and ability to carry the point on to a full Determination. And this
Gentleman I count has given too little to the Magistrate on the other hand in
the matters of Religion, but has gone to make it up with giving him too much
in Moral and Civil matters. I must be forced to tell this to my ordinary
Reader, who else would perhaps hardly believe that it is I, who stand for
Liberty of Conscience, that grant the Magistrate his due power in things Sacred
as well as Civil: and it is he, is not tender enough of it, when denying him
what is his due (the use of his Sword or power) in things Religious, he has
left him without a rule or bounds to his commands in other matters. If I appear
to drive on my purpose in this, and other of my Books more dryly and scantily,
then in a Subject or Subjects so capacious might be expectted, let not the
Judicious Reader impute that to me as a fault, which is a thing so much to be
wished in the writings of others, that I do single out the (...), the main
thing altogether which is to be sought, and I do by no means deflect from it,
leaving whatsoever else the matter may lead to, as more copious, and where none
of the knot lies, to the Volums of others.

Sect. 8.
The first of these Books then, is, A Discourse of Ecclesiastical Polity, the
design whereof, as to the substance, consists in the giving a Superiority to
the Magistrate over the Conscience, that in all doubtful or disputable cases,
viz. in all matters in their nature indifferent (he means according to his
Scope, in all matters now in difference between the Conformist, and
Nonconformist) a man must account according to that Authors opinion, that if
he act against the dictates of his conscience, out of obedience to the lawful
Magistrates commands, he does but as a Christian, and is justified by him in
the doing. A Doctrine that I take to be not only new and Heterodox, but
dangerous to Religion, and the opening a door to the pleasing of man and
seeking prese^ment, above keeping a good conscience before God. In things
apparently and intrinsecally evil, he grants that the Magistrate is not to be
obeyed. But how can this stand on its foundation, if conscience had not
certainly an authority over the commands of the Magistrate, and the authority
of the Magistrate not over conscience, as he speaks? There need no more proof
that conscience must have the superiority in every thing, then to yield it in
any thing, seeing it is the conscience of every particular person is the judge
to him of what God has forbidden; and the command of God must take place of the
command of men in all things alike whatsoever. If this eminently accomplished
young Divine then be not too proud to take it kindly, I would help him out
here, according to the best that I think can be done. There is the conscience
of the universality: and of particular persons. When he says, the Magistrates
Authority is over the conscience, let us understand his meaning to be only as
to the conscience of such particulars, which in some sense may be granted,
while he passes any Law upon the account that it is according to the
consciences of the Generality, notwithstanding it proves against theirs. And
then whereas he speaks often to this purpose, that the conscience being in
doubt, a man should in all matters indifferent make the Law, or will of the
Magistrate his rule; Let us understand him favorably, that he means only when
a man is satisfied in the main of the thing that it is lawful, and there
remains only some scruples that are fit to be shaken off; in which case Divines
I think do ordinarily advise it to be safest to obey the Law. But this is to be
known also, that the conscience is not to be accounted doubtful in this case,
but satisfied; and troubled only as the Travellour is with the Scrupuli the
gravel in his Shoe, which he throws out and walks on; whereas if his feet be
really wounded, and he does so, he may be undone. That this may be the better
relished, I will entreat this person to take good heed, only to a certain
Book, which is another such a one as his, and came out then, and I suppose he
likes well, a Book entitled Toleration discussed, where he may read these
passages for his instruction; Am I to believe every thing to be indifferent,
which the Magistrate tells me is so, though it be wicked? No, he answers, (
Sect. 21.) You are bound there by a Superior Law, and to your self you are
Judge. Again, I am so far (in another place) from advising you to renounce your
reason, that on the contrary, I would have you absolutely guided and concluded
by it: and only to obey for quiets sake, so far as you can possibly obey in
conscience. Again, The Magistrate is a public Minister, and his Commission
reaches not to particular consciences. On the other side, there is as little
reason for any ones private opinion to operate on a public Law. So that if I
mistake not, we are upon accord thus far, That every particular is to look to
one, and the King to the whole. Again, The King is accountable to God for the
welfare of his people, and you are accountable to God for the good of your
little particular. If you cannot obey the Law, do not, but abide the penalty.
And finally, when he has balanced all the interest he can for the Law, with
this alone of Conscience, he has the same cloze. And yet I say stick to your
conscience. I do cite these passages with pleasure, to see a reverence to
conscience in the heart of the Gentleman who wrote that Book, and that merely
out of conviction, when the Divine who wrote this Discourse of Ecclesiastical
polity has so carried it, as if in the whole matters which are now in
agitation between all parties in the Nation, the Magistrates Authority alone
should satisfy every body. When the Dictates of a private conscience (says he)
happen to thwart the determinations of the public Laws, they in that case
loose their binding power, with several passages to that purpose, which is
certainly a fair beginning (as is intimated) for the making the Rulers favor,
and a man's own advancement, very quickly all his Religion. The Magistrate then
(which I offer, as what himself, and this Gentleman intends) in the passing any
Law, the matter whereof is against any of his Subjects consciences, is to be
conceived to go by a Judgment on the Generality, and those Laws to be supposed
according to conscience, because they are according to his own, and those of
the generality, when else they could not be passed without sinning against God.
In the mean time every particular man for himself is to obey only with
subordination to his conscience, and is not to have Ghostly encouragement, to
go against the Dictates of it, upon any score. Which as it may serve for the
information of the Divine, who will receive it perhaps from such a hand, when
he would not else from mine; so may it give me occasion to ask the Gentleman
two questions: The one is, what if any such things should again come to be put
in a Bill at the House, which the King does believe really is against the
conscience of the Generality, or of such a particular number at least, as is
fit and necessary for him to take cognezance of them? Can he pass such a Bill
in point of conscience? The other then follows, whether the pressing this
Nation in the main to Conformity, is not really such a thing at this season,
when the generality are so divided in their opinions? I require here no more
candor in the Gentleman then what he has shown in that last work. Who as I
found him a lover of learning and reading in these present deboshed times,
should not escape my praise (notwithstanding others odium) for his industry and
sufficiency, (especially as one of the Laity) if the design of his writings had
been but as commendable as the example.

Sect. 9.
The other Book is, those papers entitled Liberty of Conscience, which are of
another complexion, and molded with no less ingenuity of matter, then the
other in expression. I am very well satisfied with the fullness, aptness, and
conviction of the arguments for that Liberty I read there: nevertheless I do
apprehend the main state of the very point, does require farther ventilation.
If I do provoke that Learned and excellingly worthy person by this means to
write again on this Subject, I shall (I think) do the World some service, and
perhaps bring more light to my own understanding.

The substance of the whole in his stating this business, I take it comes to
this; The Magistrate is the Officer of God to see his will executed, which
un^er the Gospel he must do in that manner God has appointed* and therefore he
must not use the Temporal Sword in the concerns of Religion. In this Position
thus said down, I must confess I judge there are some clouds, but not without
Truth under them. The clouds are to be removed, the truth maintained, and that
liberty which is irrefragable to the conscience, must not be lost.

In the first place therefore, There is a distinction among D^vines, which is
the foundation this Gentleman goes upon, that he has drawn beyond the Staple.
This distinction, if you consult their common places on that Head De
Magistratu, you shall find made by these two questions: Whether the Magistrate
is to take care of Religion? Whether he is to compel his Subjects to it? And
when the former generally is granted, the latter is denied. This studious,
person, it is like, meeting with this hint in some of his Books, has suffered
a deception into these thoughts, that the Magistrate therefore has indeed
something to do about Religion, but he is not to use his Sword about it. For
the making his conceptions out, after he has ingenuously off^red three
opinions as extremes, in some that make the Magistrate the sole judge of all
matters Spiritual and Temporal: in others that affirm the like power but to be
exercised in Spirituals, in a perfect subserviency to the Clergy: in a third
that make him have nothing to do but in civil matters only, he does endeavor
to find himself a middle way, wherein the Magistrate shall have his something
to do (a he speaks), and not all to do in these matters, and then offering his
notion of what has something he has to do, is, which is to be the great
Officer or Minister of God upon Earth to see his will, which in Religion be
accounts only what he has revealed to be put in executive, he does put in for
the resk^ing that Liberty, which he would assert for the Conscience, that under
the Gospel he must do this* in the manner also that Christ has appointed, and
so not by the temporal Sword. A great mistake! The office it self of the
Magistrate is to bear the Sword, and by that to act or effect what it has to
do. Where a person has no power of Coercion, he acts not as a Magistrate, but
as another man, and to say he may not use his Sword in the concerns of the
Gospel, is all one as to deny him any Authority any care, any concernment about
Religion at all. The Sword says Bracton does signify potestatem Regni, and
this must be laid down for a truth undeniable, that unto whatsoever the Power
or Government of the Magistrate extends, his Sword must. What he can command,
he may compel: and where he cannot compel he cannot command. It is in vain (I
mean) to talk of rule, if he have not power to punish when his command is not
fulfilled. The meaning then of our Divines by their distinction at first, is,
that Faith indeed cannot be constrained, and so men are not to be driven into
Religion by force, but yet that the care which the Magistrate is to have, for
maintaining the true Religion being received, is Authoratative, and to be
managed, not precario, but by his Sword, is with them also out of question.

In the second place, Here is a difference seems to be put between the Law and
the Gospel, as to the Magistrates seeing Gods will executed in the manner he
has appointed: whereas that manner God has appointed in seeing his will
performed, is only that his Officer should act agreeably to the light of
nature, or right reason, in applying such means as are proper to that end,
whether under the Law or Gospel. For magistracy it self, and the manner of its
actings both, so far as concerns Gods appointment, we are to consider does
derive from Nature, and not from Positive Institution. By the manner which
Christ has appointed under the Gospel, he must either mean something in
opposition to the use of the Sword: or not in opposition to it. If something in
opposition, it must be as much as if he had said that the Magistrate must see
Christ's will executed by some other way then the use of his Sword, whereas
there is no other way or manner qua Migistrate, he can see any thing done. The
use of his Sword is nothing but the using his Authority or Office, which I have
said just now, and that he cannot act as a Magistrate any otherwise. If he mean
something not in opposition hereunto, then cannot his consequence be valid,
that the Magistrate must see Christ's will done, only in the manner he has
appointed, and therefore not by the use of his Sword, seeing the causing it to
be done in Christ manner, and the use of the Sword will stand together. And
what is it then indeed he means by this manner Christ has appointed? I turn to
his Book and apprehend by this manner he understands nothing but by the means
and Ordinances Christ has appointed. The people are to be brought into
Christianity and obey the Gospel, but it must be by preaching, and the use of
the like means; for Faith comes by hearing, and by force a man cannot be made
to believe. Well now the Magistrate is to s^e the means Christ has appointed
to be used for the setting up the Christian Religion, therefore he must not use
his Sword to the end. I answer the direct contrary does follow, therefore he
may use it, seeing by his Sword or Authority it is that he must cause these
means to be administered. It is true the will of Christ is that the people
believe in him, and obey him, but it is not his will that they should believe
in him without the use of the means. How can we believe without a Preacher?
when the Magistrate then here is to see his will executed, the meaning is, he
is to see the means used, that the people may be brought to believe and obey
him, and to this purpose he may and must use his Sword, if there be occasion
for it. He may and must punish the Minister and others, if they neglect to do
their Officer.

In the third place, this position seems to put a difference between the matter
of Religion and other matters, in reference to the consequence inferred; viz.
as if the Magistrate acting in seeing Gods will executed in no other manner
then God does approve, must not use the Temporal Sword in Religious, when he
may in other matters: whereas there is a difference indeed to be put between
Things and Things upon this account (for some things come not within the Verge
hereof, and some do), but these Things and Things are not rightly stated
Religious and Civil matters. This cloud doubtless arises from hence. In regard
that in matters of Religion the Conscience is supposed to be concerned, when it
is not ordinarily in other things, therefore are Religious matters conceived as
reciprocal here with the whole matter of conscience, wherein indeed the
distinction does lie, which is to be made in opposition to other matters.

The fourth cloud is upon the consequence it self. It follows not from the
Magistrate acting in no other manner then God approves in the seeing his will
performed, (...) ^ot use his Sword in the concerns of Religion. The King of
Ninive Decrees a fast in honor to the true God, not be neglected we may be
sure without punishment by any. Nebuchadnezar Decrees that no body speak amiss
of the Jews God, under the pain of being cut in pieces. Attaxerxes gives
Commission to Ezra, that whosoever would not obey the Law of his God, judgment
should be executed, whether unto death, or unto banishment, or to confiscation
of goods, or to imprisonment. Indeed these Princes being Heathen, who believed
more Gods then their own, are not to be conceived to decree any thing hereby
against their proper Religion, or the consciences of of the people upon whom
this is imposed: but for the use of Sword, in the matter of Religion, as in
other matters it is express in these instances, to pass by what may be heaped
hither from the Kings of Judah.

The last cloud or clouds then follow, that having had difference made there
where it needs not, we have indeed no difference made there where it needs. For
besides that when the Magistrate is said to be Gods Minister to see his will in
general to be executed, it ought to be laid down with restriction to men's
outward acts only, and a salvo to his power constitutive of duty in indifferent
things, there are moreover these two Distinctions mainly lacking for the
determining this matter; and which are the groundwork of the whole Exercitation.

The one is, that whether things be Religious or Secular, under the Gospel or
under the Law, we must distinguish between those outward acts which are against
men's consciences, and those that are not against them. This is the chief thing
to be held fast. In such acts which are against men's consciences, it is true,
and a vehement truth, the Magistrate acting in that manner, God has appointed
cannot use his Temporal Sword. It is not agreeable to the Law of Nature, or
rule of human reason, to work upon the conscience with outward force, and the
manner God has appointed the Magistrate to act in (as was said even now) is no
other but to act agreeable hereunto. Yet is not the reason for this, upon on
which I choose to stand here, so much, from the manner wherein the Magistrate
is to act (least that alone be to infirm to bear the stress is laid upon it):
as from the matter he is to see done. That which he is to see performed is Gods
will, and I say that those acts; (these outward acts he were otherwise to see
done) which are against men's consciences, are the matter of his forbidden will;
and so must he let them alone; But as for all other outward acts of men, which
are not against their consciences, Let the Magistrate see that what he requires
be for the good of his people, either for their Spiritual or Temporal good, (as
whatsoever he requires, which is not against Gods Law, we may conceive like to
be), and whether they be Religious or Civil, he is under the Gospel as well as
under the Law, Gods Minister, and bears not the Sword in vain.

The other, distinction which must not be forgotten does lie in the difference,
I put between a forcing men to that which is against their consciences: and
restraining them sometimes from that which they think they are bound to do. The
one of these may be lawful, fit, reasonable, and without which the Government
it self can hardly be secured: when the other is never to be held so, upon that
one reason mentioned, and is irrefragable. Here then are two Questions in those
ingenuous Papers, proposed to the life, as the sum of what could be desired if
they had but been directly answered when proposed: The one is, How far men must
be suffered to do those things which they say they are in conscience obliged to
do? The other (...), How far they may be commanded and enforced to do such
things, which they indeed believe and say they are in conscience obliged not to
do? The substance of th^se Questions the Gentleman I perceive took to be one,
and so passes them off. But as the putting a diff^rence (I account before) as
to some things which (in relation to what is asserted) admits none: so must the
confounding that here, wherein the difference bring put is so much to purpose,
needs lead him into darkness. To these two questions therefore I answer,
instead of those Papers.

As to the former, which is the case only of restraint, I doubt not but men may
and ought to be restrained often times in many things, unto which they think
themselves to be obliged, and that for this reason: Because that although God
does require every man to act in whatsoever he does according to his
conscience, yet he requires not in every thing that is according to his
conscience, he should act. His conscience may be Erroneous, or the thing not
expedient, if lawful to be done. Again, the Magistrates conscience and his are
two; He may think he is bound in conscience to act (suppose in preaching
seditious Doctrine), yet if upon restraint he acts not, his conscience cannot
accuse him of sin, because he cannot help it, and the Magistrates restraining
him is good, and thereupon the does it, for avoiding the evil that would follow
if he should suffer him.

As to the latter question, which is the case of constraint, viz. the
constraining of men to do any thing which is against their conscience, I say
the Magistrate has in that case no Authority, and that for this one reason,
which is to be insisted on to the last breach of these Papers, viz because,
this is manifestly against his Office or work, who being to see Gods Will
performed, does hereby directly endeavor the contrary. His will is the man
should never act against his conscience whatsoever comes of it, and he is
forcing him hereunto. Let me add, Either the conscience of a man is in an
error: or it is in the right; If it err not, a man's conscience is as God to
him, who can say a word against it? If it be erroneous, I say Gods will lies in
both these things: that a man should not do against his conscience, because it
is his conscience: and that he should not do according to his conscience,
because it erres, but that he should lay down his error, and so act. And this
is the meaning of that which Divines do say, that such a conscience does ligare
not obligare. The Magistrate accordingly may not compel him to that which is
positive to act against his conscience: but to that which is negative, viz. not
to act according to it: and if he do, and do wickedly, no doubt but he may
punish him for it. And so having offered you my Determination, I am glad I can
confirm it and that with two testimonies likewise, most of sufficient credit.
The one is St. Austin in his second Book, and Chapter 83. against Petilian, who
pleading the unlawfulness of compelling them to Religion, Austin answers: Ad
fidem quidem nullus est cogendus invitus, sed per severitatem solet perfidia
castigari: Si quae erga vos leges constitutae sunt, non eis benefacere
cogimini, sed malefacere prohibemini; nam benefacere nemo potest nisi elegerit.
The other is Grotius, who letting nothing almost escape him, which is momen^ us
in any Author, has fallen in upon this very quotation. Suspenso pede hic
incedendum, ut illi qui Divinae Humanaeque ordinationi resistant, non tam
cegantur benefacere, quam malefacere prohibeantur; Quae duo in hoc ipso
argumento Augustinus olim provide distinxit. De Imperio summarum potestatum
circa Sacra. C. 6. S. 10.

There are two Notes I must leave farther; The one is that when I have laid
down my two distinctions for the determining this point, you must take beed of
going away with one of them. I know S. Augustins seventeenth Chapter in his
second Book against the second Epistle of Gaudentius, has this Title, quod ad
veritatem cogendi sint etiam inviti, which he makes good with these two
instances, of the King of Ninives commanding his people to repent: and the
Servants compelling them to come in to the Feast under the Gospel. But neither
of these Commands I hope (and as I have said) are to be supposed against the
consciences of the one or the other, but only they were unwilling and
negligent, and so had need of importunity and enforcement. I deny not therefore
but the Magistrate has power (N.B.) of Constraint and Restraint in the matters
of Religion: but I say he has not power of Constraint in matters Religious (or
other matters) which are against a man's conscience. The other Note is, that
when I have distinguished between Restraint and Constraint in the matter of
Conscience* (not in the general matters only of Religion), it does not seem to
me safe to descend to particulars, what is, and what is not to be restrained:
but in general the Magistrate may use a due restraint when he has reason, and
it is not fit he should restrain any when he has none. There is reason the
Magistrate should restrain a John of Leyden, and Knipperdoling, when he has
indeed none against a peaceable Owen, and honest Kiffin. The Roman Emperor may
have cause in general to take heed of innovation, and yet have no cause to
disturb the Christian, of whom Pliny wrote to Traian. By this means shall it not
follow either that Christianity should be ever kept out of the World, or that
when Religion is established, it must be overturned again by faction: but that
such a liberty only be allowed to conscience, as is consistent with the
Articles of Faith, a good Life, and the Government of the Nation.

SECT. 10.
Suppose we now then a Magistrate desirous to bring his People to a Religion,
or to a Uniformity in that way of worship he himself best approves; What may he
do therein? The first thing he may and is to do, is doubtless to take care that
the people have Instruction; that the Word be preached, and such means used
which are proper to convince their understandings, and satisfy their
consciences, that they may submit to it. This is the chief I count he is to do.
In the next place he may and is to cause all those impediments to be removed,
which may obstruct them in the reception of this Religion. So Cyrus by his
authority repressed the Jews enemies, and made the way open for their return,
and rebuilding Jerusalem. In the last place, the Magistrate may tender all the
encouragements and advantages (with a restraint of the same to the refusers)
that he can possible, to win them over to the way he conceives good for them.
When he has gone thus far he must make a stand, and consider in good earnest
whether that which he would impose, be against their Consciences or no. If it
be not he may proceed to lay his Injunctions upon them; whereby an obligation
does fall upon the conscience (supposing the thing reasonable, and for the
common good) to do what his will is; and if they do it not hereupon, he may by
the infliction of punishment (that is by his Temporal Sword) enforce them to a
due obedience: In sum, He may do all and the very same in the concerns of
Religion, as he may do in the other concerns of his Kingdom, upon that
supposition.

But if it be against their Consciences, he can proceed no farther. He cannot
lay any obligation on the Conscience, which is contrary to that wherein it
stands bound already; and where he can lay no obligation on the conscience, he
cannot ex imperio command; and where he cannot command and oblige the
Conscience (as human law does bind it, which how, and how far it does, is
stated in my other book), he cannot justly punish the man for not doing that
which he was not bound to do. So that we see here where the Magistrate must not
use his Sword, even while he is using it, and acts not as a Magistrate but by
it. He acts by his authority or sword, in seeing the means used, helps
administered, obstacles removed. He can, and may force others (whose duty it is)
not to be wanting in this, when he cannot then enforce the end to which he
causes these means to be used. He cannot (I mean, he ought not) punish any man
only because his Conscience is not wrought upon by the means which he has used,
and so does not what he would have him. In this case, it is not he, or the man
either can help it, and he may as well beat his Dog for not whistling.

Upon this account, there is very good reason that regard be had so much the
more to things that are not attainable without supernatural help, that they be
not enforced as other things. So that we are to understand well after this,
that the distinctions between the Religious and Secullar things, in reference
to the Magistrates Authority, or using his Sword, is for all what is before
said, to be held so far as it will reach: but that is only to a majus and minus
of his Care, not to the specification of the state of our business. My meaning
is, that in things not Religious, but Moral only, or Civil, the Magistrate is
more free as to his commands, and using his Sword than in matters of Religion;
or he is to take more care of what he imposes in the one, than he need to do in
the other: but that will not advance to the stating the point hereupon, that he
has Authority, and may use his Sword in Civil and not in Sacred concerments.
The King under the Law was to have the Book of God by him to this end, that he
might govern the people according to it, and consequently use his Authority in
the things of Religion: And so Jehoshaphat (to name no other) appoints his
Officers for the doing justice in the matters of God, as in the Kings matters.

This Proposition, The Magistrate may use his Sword in Civil, but not in
Religious affairs, is not a true Proposition, and therefore can determine
nothing. And this Proposition, The Magistrate is to take more heed how he uses
his Sword in supernatural, than in natural or civil concerns, is a true
Proposition, but not a sufficient determination. The main Question still
remains. What are those things wherein the Magistrate indeed has no power, or
may not use his Sword? Upon the knowledge of this must the stating the business
depend; for when we know in what things he may, and in what he may not use his
Authority, the matter is at an end. Here are we now therefore to think upon it,
what are those reasons, why the Magistrate is to be more careful in the use of
his power in Religious than in other matters, and if it be any where, it is
like to be there that we shall find a bottom to determine the main issue. To
know these reasons, look whatsoever difference there are to be made between
Religious and Civil matters in respect to the Magistrates using his Sword about
them, and they must be these reasons.

The first difference then between Religious and Civil things, that may be
offerred as a reason why the Magistrate is to take more care of using his Sword
in the one than the other, is, That Religious things are supposed to be of
supernatural Revelation, which cannot therefore be known and done without Gods
grace, and it is not fit the Magistrate should punish a man for the want of
that which God does not give him: When in Moral and Civil things he has the
knowledge of them only by Nature, and the practice of the Realm. Now then if
this will serve to determine the Question, the Proposition drawn from it must
be this: That in all matters that are of supernatural Revelation, the
Magistrate may not use his Sword, but in all other he may use it. But this
Proposition is alike false with the first, That in all Religious he may not,
and in all Civil he may. The Law given by Moses was by Revelation, but the
Magistrates might punish the breakers of that Law. The Gospel is by Revelation,
but the Magistrate may punish those that keep from Church out of Irreligion.
The example of the man that was put to death for gathering Sticks on the
Sabbath, is a president uncontrollable, that a man may be punished for his
Presumption, when he may not for his Conscience, in the matters of Religion.

The second difference between Sacred and Civil affairs, which may be another
reason why the Magistrate is to take more heed as to the one than to the other,
is, That the World cannot be governed without the exercise of his Authority in
Civils, when if the world were without all that which is of supernatural
Revelation (and consequently, if he meddles not at all with those things) it
might. It appears then reasonable, that in what the government of the World can
be without, the Magistrate should not be so pressing, when in that which it
cannot subsist without, he must. Let us then again draw out what is here, and
try if it will do. In matters which the world may be governed without, the
Magistrate must not use his Sword; but in matters without which it cannot be
governed, he may. This Proposition labors with the same failing: for, the
Magistrate may use his Authority in things which the world may be governed if
it were without, because he can use it in religious matters, as has been
instanced already from Scripture.

A third difference between Sacred and Civil things; and which is a reason, why
the Magistrate is to be more careful of his injunctions, and using his Sword in
the one above the other, is, Because it is more like that the things he imposes
in Religious concerns should be against men's consciences, than in Civil or
Moral matters, and the Magistrate has no Authority over the Conscience of any.
It is the commandment of the most High, that no man should ever do any thing
against his Conscience, and the Magistrate cannot use his Authority, but for
God. Now let us see if this at last will serve for the determining the
question, and if it will, then must this proposition be true. That in all
matters that are against men's Consciences the Magistrate has no authority, and
cannot use his Sword; but in all matters that are not against their
Consciences, or that are according to them, he may use it. And this proposition
I count is true and certain, and to be maintained even in Religious and Civil
matters; and so is the foundation concluded upon by me to establish our
Determination.

SECT. 11.
There is one thing yet seems wanting: I do speak here to one branch of the
main position as false, while in things Religious, though they could not be
known but by Revelation, and the world could be governed without them, I affirm
the Magistrate has authority, and may use his Sword, as he may in other
matters; that is, provided they be not against men's Consciences. But as to the
other branch, in things Civil and and Moral, which men may know by natural
light, and in which the Government is more concerned, I have not said whether
it be true or false. I will proceed therefore and declare, that as the Position
laid down at first, or the worthy maintainer of it, goes too low in denying the
Magistrate the use of his sword in Religious things, which is to be granted (I
count) herein as in other matters, to wit, upon supposition of both to be not
against, but according to their Consciences: So does he go too high in yielding
it in Civils, without the same limitation, whereof we must be still as tender
as of our Eye, or of our Salvation. I do think also, of the two, the last is
the more dangerous extremity.

I argue then, If the Magistrate may not use force, or the temporal Sword in
Religious affairs, because such things are of that nature as the Conscience is
like to be concer'd in them; and if it be against their Conscience it is
unlawful: then when the Conscience likewise is concerned in Civil things, he
may not use the Sword neither. For if the ground be good in the one, it must be
good in the other; if it will not hold in both, it may be denied in either.
Again, the things perhaps are Civil things, but the man, or men, makes a
Conscience of them, and so the case must be the same to them, as if it were in
Religion. To make a conscience of a thing is to look upon it as commanded or
forbidden of God, and to go about to perform or avoid it upon that account. But
to do or leave a thing undone upon the account of the command or prohibition of
God, is an act of Religion. Consequently though the thing be Civil, yet so long
as a person, or persons, make a consciscience of it, it is all one to them, I
say, as if the things were religious, and the authority of the Magistrate can
be no more in the one than the other.

I will propose some instances. Doeg accuses the Priests to Saul. He hears
their cause, condemns them as Traitors; commands his Servants to do execution
upon them, they refuse the execution; It is against their Consciences. Saul
here has no authority over those Servants in this case either to command them
to act, or to punish them for not acting against their Consciences. If they
obey him they sin against God. Saul might urge here the thing was of Civil
concern, and if all should do as they did, that is, question the Judges
sentence, and refuse to execute it upon pretense of conscience, the Government
could not stand; yet this wont serve, they must not act against their
Consciences for all that. If he falls upon them for it, they must bear it; but
it will be tyranny over them, and injury to Heaven; the superiority of whose
authority over his, being the thing in effect they asserted, by that refusal.
You may say, this is an instance indeed in Civil things, wherein the Magistrate
had not authority; and consequently when Civil things are imposed against a
man's Conscience, the case is the same as in Religious. But you will add, the
Consciences of these men was in the right, and you would have some instance in
Civil things where the Conscience is erroneous. I will offer you therefore
other instances. A Garrison under Scanderbeg is besieged by the Turks, it has
but one Well in it, a Traitor throws in a dead Carrion. The Soldiers are under
a superstition that the water hereupon is unclean, and that they cannot drink
it without sin. Rather than do so they yield the place, otherwise impregnable.
This instance I once used elsewhere on another occasion. let me offer you one
more authentic out of the Machabees. The Jews are of the general persuasion
that they may not fight on the Sabbath. Their enemies come upon them on that
day on purpose; rather than act against their Consciences they suffer
themselves all to be slain. I will ask now upon this persuasion of these men
that the doing these necessary things, as drinking that water, and defending
themselves was sin, whether the Captains of those Soldiers could command them
to drink, or to fight and force them to it? Nothing can be pleaded of more
moment in any case. The whole Government and their lives depend on it, and the
light of nature might teach them that necessity should take place of their
superstition. Nevertheless until they had consulted the thing and their
Consciences were satisfied of the lawfulness of it; that is until they came to
find out the substance of what Christ afterward revealed, That man was not made
for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath for man, There was no Captain or Governor (I
suppose) could have power to command them, or force them in the case. I will
descend to an instance frequent in the present Nation. It is a Civil thing for
any of the King's Courts to grant a Writ for a man to come, and give his
testimony by Oath to any Cause that is before them. I will suppose now that
some, and that many, have received the impression, that it is unlawful for them
to Swear at all, and thereupon they refuse to Swear. It may be urged in this
case, what a civilly evil opinion this is, which is both destructive to the
Government (in the Administration), and injurious to particular persons, who
may be undone in their Estates for want of such an Oath. Nevertheless there are
many of the Quakers ready to go to prison themselves, and lose all their own
Estates; and we may suppose their Lives, rather than they will be induced to
swear. I ask, What will you say now to this case? Has the Magistrate power
over these men's Consciences? If he has, he may command them to judge, otherwise
than they do, and punish them that they act according to this judgment. And if
he can command and use his Sword upon them, to make them swear, he may, to make
them come to Church; and if he was a Papist Magistrate, to come to Mass; and if
a heathen Magistrate, to sacrifice to Idols. If he have not power over their
Consciences, and to command them to have other judgments, then must he let them
alone (as generally our Justices have done), or challenge an authority to make
men act against their Consciences, which is to use the power which he has from
God, against him. If you think there is here some difference between such cases
as these, and that of the Machabees before, it matters little: But if you make
none between them, but say the Commanders of those Jews, and those Soldiers,
might have compelled them in those cases; I say, if any of them could, they
ought; and they should not have been said then to dye in their innocence. I say
again, if they might, then can a Magistrate command and force a man to act
against his conscience; then can he command him to sin; then can he command
what God has forbidden; then must man be above God. The earth it self methinks
can as soon be moved, as this foundation.

SECT. 12.
What shall we say then to these things? Shall we complain that God Almighty
has put in man such a sturdy thing as Conscience is, which makes him so often
to become refractory to the commandments of his Superiors, whenever they do
but require any thing against it? No, there is good reason, God should maintain
to himself an Authority above any mortal in the earth, and that his name should
be glorified by his servants, in the confession of it to be world. Or shall we
complain of Government, desiring to be rid of it, as that which is so uneasy
to our Consciences, that we cannot hardly serve God, but we must disobey man,
and incur danger about it? Shall we rise up therefore in rebellion, and acquit
our selves? God forbid! It is the will of Heaven who has put into the heart of
man an awe to his invisible being as our supreme Lord, to constitute the
Magistrate to bear his Image and representation in the earth, that in his
person, himself may be honored, so long as we obey only with subordination to
his will, and the common good, which is the end of his appointment. If neither
of these, what then? Shall we be even content in this state of corruption and
imperfection, when the Fall has brought so much difficulty upon all things
else, as well as Government, to offer the best composition we can between the
duty the Magistrate owes to God and his people, and the obedience the people
owe to him and their consciences; so that we may not put off any truth which
stands irrefragable by the pleading inconvenience, when these inconveniences
are by prudence to be prevented, and if we do it but as well as we can, that
is, as the state of man's corruption, or human frailty and infirmity will allow,
it suffices, and the rest must be born. Shall we agree upon this? if we shall,
I have but a little more to say hereunto, and I have done.

The Office of the Magistrate is to make the Laws, and to see to the execution.
In all things as well Religious, I have said as Civil, which are for the
peoples good, he may pass, and execute any Laws, so long as they be agreeable
to the Word of God, and men's Consciences; but he can command or enforce nothing
which is against men's Consciences. This is delivered already. Those things now
which are against men's Consciences (let us consider in the last place, which
has been intimated also from one or two occasions before) are either such as
are against the Universality, or against so many of their Consciences as the
Magistrate is to take Cognizance of them: or, against the Consciences only of
so few as is not meet for him to take cognizance of them. In the first case he
is not to pass such a Law I count upon any terms; if he do, he sins against his
Charge, and he has no authority to sin himself, or cause any to sin. In the
second, we may suppose that the Consciences of a few particular persons only
are not sufficient to put an obstruction to any law really good for the
Community, but it is to be accounted for the universalities sake, to be
according to the subjects Consciences, and not against them. But when I have
said thus as to the passing of the Law, I must say also that in the execution
of such Laws, I hold that even those particular persons ought to be regarded.
In order hereunto,

There are some that pretend conscience of a thing, when indeed they make none
of it. Understand not this so, as if all that could not give a reason
sufficient for what they hold, did not make a conscience of it (which has
cause a great prejudice and false reckoning of this business); but when they
believe not the thing really in their heart to be so as they pretend.

When men pretend they make a Conscience of a thing, and indeed do not, I would
have the Magistrate above all men to execute the Law upon such, (supposing they
judge that Law righteous), and make them an example. If you will say, But how
shall a Magistrate know this, seeing no man can judge of another heart, I
acknowledge readily this is a difficulty, and the chief thing which requires
the Magistrates prudence and faithfulness: Yet this I say, That every man for
all that being judge of his own acts, and the punishing of forbearing a person
being what the Magistrate does, he must go, and can but go, according to his
judgment. He uses the Mediums as a wise man does, and lawfully may take his
conjecture (the tree is known by his fruit), and it is not necessary it should
be certain, but only that it be certain he so judges, and if he be convinced in
his Soul, and indeed judges the man's profession only to be pretense, it is his
own judgment, and nothing else can determine him. Although where the person is
serious in what he declares, and not under any public note of perfidiousness,
the rule of Charity, which hops all things, and believes all things, and
thinks no evil, must incline him to the best construction.

When men do truly make the conscience they pretend, let the Justice take heed,
and see that he likewise reverence Conscience, no less than they do. If the
penalty be such only as the man is like to endure it without scruple, rather
than do that which is against his Conscience, the Magistrate may be the bolder
in executing that Law upon him: But if it be such as he is like rather to do
the thing against his Conscience than suffer it, I would not be that Magistrate
who should put such a Law in execution upon any. In the mean time every
particular man for himself is to look to his Conscience as his Judge in the
business of his Soul, and account that authority void to him whatsoever it be,
that commands any thing contrary to what that dictates. And the supreme
Authority is to conceive that those that act under it will use prudence upon
that account. Which prudence I fear me really in this case can hardly be
Christian but it must come to this, That either they must totally forbear, and
not so much as threaten prosecution of the Law upon such a person: or else
persuade him first to resolution, to bear the penalty, and not do the thing
against his conscience. They must in effect say thus to the man, If this thing
be against your Conscience we advise you not to it. If our prosecuting the Law
upon you will make you do it rather than suffer, we dare not prosecute you to
destroy your Soul: but if you will for the sake of the general commodity, or
good example, bear the punishment rather than do the thing, and we be assured
of it, then can we do our office without hazard, either of yours, or our own
damnation.

SECT. 13.
After this, I begin to think what does hinder, but that this worthy Knight my
friend and I should reconcile? As for the main business, we hold together
against any that shall oppose us, That in all matters of Religion, the
Magistrate may not use his Sword to force any against their Consciences; and so
long as we agree in the main, we may have leave to abound each in his own sense
otherwise. The difference then we have under this agreement does I suppose lie
in two things. The one is, That in things Religious this Gentleman seems to
deny the Magistrate the use of his Sword altogether, and I deny it him not, but
merely when such things are against men's Consciences. And herein methinks he
should come over to me, for seeing Liberty of Conscience is the thing mainly he
is engaged for, in the denial of the Magistrate the use of his Sword in these
things, there is no need he should deny it at all when Conscience is not
concerned in them. The other is that in Civil things he grants the Magistrate
the use of his Sword, as over liberally as he takes it away in Religious;
whereas I suppose that as long as there is still the same reason, that is, so
long as the thing is against a man's conscience the Magistrate may not force
any one to it, whether it be Civil or Religious. And herein indeed should I be
as ready to come over to him, who knows how prudent it must seem in standing
for Liberty, to confine it to things of Supernatural Revelation, lest the
Magistrate be offended if we touch on Civils: but that if I did so, I must
really forsake the Patronage of Conscience, which I am not willing my self, nor
that this Gentleman should do. For if we grant once that Conscience may be
forced in any one thing, there may be the same or the like reason urged to
force it in another, and so in all, and then here liberty is gone. If we will
not stand by her in all distresses, we cannot defend her in any. The ground of
alls is, Conscience is a thing which can be ruled by none but the Almighty. And
for as much as all Authority or power resolved into its original, is, the will
of God that such a one should command, it seems not a thing consonant to reason
to suppose it the will of God that a Superior should require that of a person,
which it is his will that person should not do.

Things then which are Civil may be so in themselves, and yet come under some
consideration which is religious, or may have Religion incidental to them. If
this worthy Gentleman be content to hold that in things Civil under every
consideration that is but civil, the Magistrate may use his Sword without
scruple, I yield to him: but if a thing secular does come under a consideration
which is religious, and in that consideration is against a man's Conscience, I
cannot conceive, but that the case is the same here as if the matter were it
self Religious. For whatsoever the thing be, in that respect, as he makes a
Conscience of it, I have said before, it is a point of Religion to him.

The Fifth-Monarchy-man thinks in his Conscience, he may not pay Taxes. A
strange opinion! Against Scripture, Sense, and Righteousness: Yet if you ask
the man his reason, he will bring you a Text perhaps out of Daniel or the
Revelations, and the sum of all will come to this, that if he does, he thinks
verily he shall receive the mark of the Beast, and be cast into the lake of
fire and brimstone, and rather than venture that, he will chose to suffer,
though it were death. I count this man now as one in a Fever, that is, touched
in his head, and who can help such a conceit? his opinion is grounded on the
Revelation, and we agree, that in matters of supernatural Revelation, the
Magistrate may not force any against their Consciences. What then shall he do?
I answer, In this case, and the like as this is, it is the management only of
the Laws with prudence, will decide such difficulties. It is against the man's
Conscience, voluntarily to pay his Tax, it will wound his Soul if he does: but
it is not against his Conscience, nor will it wound him, that he is assessed,
and that the Officer comes, and distrains, and pays himself. So long as he
bears his testimony by a non-payment, he is willing to have the money taken by
force. And thus does the Officer do right, for the Law is, he shall pay, or be
distrained: and the man keeps his Conscience, and no hurt is done. But if a
Magistrate would not be content here, unless the man pays his money in specie,
and by way of acknowledging his Authority from God, or else he will hang him,
or burn him, I have not a heart so hard to justify any such rigor, which
appears more than needs. Unto this instance, no doubt but we may suppose many
more, wherein there may be required of persons some things which are apparently
their duty (as this rendering to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, is,) by
the Law of God, as well as man, and yet in regard of some principles some have
received, or some circumstances they are in, they are against their
Consciences: You may ask therefore in general, Does not the Magistrate well to
use his Sword, and execute the Law upon offenders in such cases? I answer, no
doubt but he does; because he acts upon supposition, that such things are
according to their Consciences, and he is not to suppose otherwise:
Nevertheless, if it come within his cognizance, that the thing indeed is a
matter of Conscience to him, I do humbly apprehend, and say, that the great
duty of Charity which he owes to his brothers Soul, and is above any Law of
man, ought to prevail with him for some such middle course in the execution of
the Law, that neither may the man be hurt in his Religion, nor the public
suffer by his ill example: but that both his Conscience be regarded, and
righteousness also take place.

You may say perhaps, You would indeed have the magistrate have a care, and not
force a man to any thing against his Conscience: but you think notwithstanding,
he may very comfortably punish him, if he do not what was enjoined. I will ask
then, For what could you comfortably punish him, for being true only to his
Conscience, which is to be faithful to God? I do not find, if I were a
Magistrate, that I could have any great comfort in that. Indeed if a man were
doing, or does a thing which is evil or destructive to the Government and
common good, though it be according to his own Conscience or judgment but what
he ought to do, I think the Magistrate may punish him with comfort, and may
restrain him more comfortably from what he would do: but I do not think he may
punish him with any such content for not doing that which yet were good, so
long as it is against his Conscience. My reason I give is this, Because in the
one, the man does what God would not have him: in the other, he does what God
would have. God would not have him do evil because of his erroneous Conscience,
but that he should lay down his error and do good: but God will have every man
so regard his Conscience, though erroneous, that he must not do any thing
against it, for any fear or advantage in the world. Again, as for what cause, I
will ask, For what end could you punish him? Is it for the most ordinary end of
punishment, the parties amendment, that is, the making the man do what he now
leaves undone? I answer, Then your distinction here becomes void, when you say,
you would not force him to any thing against his Conscience, but you can punish
him; for the Magistrates forcing a man to any thing against his Conscience, is
to punish him for not doing the thing to make him do it. Or is it only for
example sake to others? If so, Then must these others be either such as the
thing is also against their Consciences, and then I say, you are no more to
punish one man, to enforce others thereby to do against their Consciences, than
to force himself to act against it: Or these others must be such as it is not
against their Consciences, though against his, and in such a case, if their be
indeed a punishment can be inflicted, so as will not be inductive, either to
the man himself, or others, to do the thing which is against their Consciences,
but will only induce others, who can do it according to theirs, to the doing, I
am not careful though it be executed upon any; yet cannot say steadily, that
you may execute it, because the very nature of punishment is such, as unless it
be for a fault, and that which deserves it, there is no other end without this,
can justify the infliction of it. You see at last still unto what all will be
reduced. Things are, or things are not against men's Consciences. And there is a
forcing positively, or negatively. Understand these terms as I have unfolded my
self, and so judge of the weight or insufficiency of my Undertaking.

SECT. 14.
I remember in the life of Josephus, when some of the Trachonites came in for
rescue to the Jews, where himself was Governor, and the Jews would thereupon
constrain them to be circumcised, or else let them not abide with them, he
would not permit that injurious zeal, alleging, "That every man ought
according to his own mind, and not by man's compulsion, to serve God. In our
English story (to suit this), when Ethelbert the first Prince that received
Christianity of the Sexon Heptarchy, was converted by Austine, sent hither by
Gregory, and many thereupon came into the Church, it is said, "He specially
embraced those that came in, but compelled none, for he had learned, that the
faith and service of Christ ought to be voluntary, and not of constraint. It
helps much to establish the public Tranquillity (says the Imperial Edict of
Constantine and Licinius), for every man to have liberty to use and choose what
kind of worshipping himself pleases: And for that intent is this done of us, to
have no man enforced to one Religion more than another. "A Prince who would
draw his Subjects divided into Sects and Factions, to his Religion, should not
in my opinion use force, says Bodin. Which he enhaunses more particularly from
the example of Theodosius toward the Arrians. John Barclay (not William that
wrote adversus Monarchomachos) has a Discourse on purpose to this effect about
the Calvinists (as it is thought) under the name of the Hyperephanians, in one
Chapter of his Argenis. "It was observed by the Popes Council (says
Guiccardine) that the prosecution of Luther, since it was not accompanied with
their own Reformation, did increase his Reputation; and that it had been a less
evil to dissemble the knowledge of such a matter, which would perhaps have
dissolved of its self, than by blowing at the brand, to make the fire burn the
more. There may be some Notes conferred with this out of Davilah, upon the
deliberations of the Politic Katharine Regent of France, about the
Pacification in her Son Henry the Thirds time. I will rest in one, after Henry
the Fourth succeeded. That great Prince thought good to declare himself
Catholic, but gets that same Edict for Liberty to the Hugonats, to be renewed
and passed the Parliament of Paris; "By which means endeavoring to remove
suspicion from their minds, and confirming them by good usage, together with
some gifts and promises to the chief Heads, he insensibly took away (says the
Historian) the pulse and strength of that Party; so that those that are versed
in the Kingdom believe that a few years of such sweet poison (if he had not
been disabled in this course through want of money) would have extinguished
that Faction, which so many years of desperate War, had not with the effusion
of so much blood, been able to weaken. "Violent courses (says my Lord Cook) are
like hot waters, that may do good in an extremity; but the use of them does
spoil the stomach, and it will require them stronger and stronger, and by
little and little they will lessen the operation. "They that love this
Commonwealth (says Judge Jenkins) will use means together with the restitution
of the King, to procure an Act of Oblivion, and tender Consciences a just and
reasonable satisfaction, else we must all perish first or last. I will crown
the rest of these Testimonies with that experienced advice of our late King to
his Son our now consenting Sovereign. "Beware of exasperating any Faction by
the crosness and asperity of some men's passions, humors, or private opinions
employed by you, grounded only upon the differences in lesser matters, which
are but the skirts and suburbs of Religion, wherein a charitable Connivance,
and Christian Toleration often dissipates their strength, whom a rougher
opposition fortifies, and puts their despised and oppressed party into such
combinations as may most enable them to get a full revenge on those they count
their Persecutors, who are commonly assisted by that vulgar commiseration which
attends all that are said to suffer under the notion of Religion. I set down
these passages which my self occasionally have noted: I may add many more out
of others.

It is not like in the three first Centuries of the Church that any thing is to
be found in the Christian Writings for the use of the Sword in Religion, while
themselves were under it. In the next ensuing we have Constantine, Constantius,
Jovian, Valentinian, Valens, Theodosius; and after those, Honorius, and
Arcadius may be cited for their larger permissions, especially toward the Jews,
by those that will be at the pains to do it. In the year 386, Idacius and
Ithacius were condemned by the Gallican Bishops, for being Authors of bringing
the Priscillianists to execution. And St. Augustine no doubt with the Fathers
generally are against any Sanguinary Laws in this matter. Nullis bonis in
Catholica Ecclesia, hoc placet, si usque ad mortem in quenquam haereticum
saeviatur. Contra Cresconium l. 3. c. 50. Hence were they called Ithacians, and
held for Heretics who maintained that those who erred in Religion ought to be
put to death. And it is observed it was Dominick was the first that brought up
the fire among Christians upon that account. Withdraw from them, avoid them,
says the Scripture, (...), but not beat or persecute them as the Heathens do,
says Ignatius. For it is an unheard of strange kind of preaching the Gospel
(says Gregory) to exact belief (as the Egyptian their Bricks) with stripes.
Decere arbitramur (say Theodosius and Valentinian) nostrum Imperium subditos
nostros de Religione commonefacere. They chose not to say, Imperare, but
Commonefacere; signifying that Religion ought not to be forced. Nihil enim
(says Lactantius) tam voluntarium quam Religio, in quasi animus est
sacrificantis aversus, jam sublata, jam nulla est. Religio imperari non potest,
says Cassidodore. And, Suadenda (says St. Bernard) non imperanda. Praecepit
sancta Synodus (says a Toletan Canon de Judaeis), Nemini deinceps ad credendum
vim infer. And the new Law (says Tertullian) does not vindicate it self
ultore gladio. The Jews took no such course (as pestilent as their Doctrine
was) with the Sadduces; nor Christ with the Samaritans. See Luc. 9.55. Mat.
13.28, 29. Jo. 18.36. Jo. 6.67. And will ye also go away, says Christ to the
Twelve? Which are words removing all force and necessity from man in the choice
of his Religion. So Chrysostom, Athanasius, Cyprian, I may add Augustine and
Salvian, all, or most out of Grotius, put his two Books, De jure belli, and De
imperio summarum potestatum circa sacra together, in certain places. And at the
last let us hear that learned and judicious man himself, for as the man is,
such is his strength. Quid de illis armis dicemus quae inferuntur populis
aliquibus eam ob causam quod illi Christianam religionem sibi propositam
amplecti nolunt? Duo notanda dicimus. Prius est veritatem Christian religionis
argumentis mere naturalibus persuaderi non posse, quo fit ut penitus in animum
admitti nequeat nisi secretis Dei auxiliis accedentibus, quae si quibus
negantur id fit ob causas plerumque nobis incognitas, ac proinde humano judicio
non punibiles. Alterum hoc est, Christo novae legis auctori omnino hoc
placuisse ut ad legem suam recipiendam nemo hujus vitae poenius aut earum metu
pertraheretur. De jur. bell. l. 2. c. 19. I forget not Camerarius in his
Historical Meditations, who l. 3. c. 18. has a discourse, as learned, full,
and grave as need to be upon this argument.

For all this, there is a difference I account to be held firm, between the
forcing of people to the profession of a Religion which they have not received
yet into their minds and belief (and so cannot worship God in it, who is a
spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit and truth): and the preventing or
restraining exorbitances in that Religion which a Nation does already profess.
I cannot drive any person (over whom I have the greatest power) against his
will unto God; yet should I not methinks, if I can help it, let him go to the
Devil. Notandum (I remember the same Grotius has it otherwhere) puniri delicta
non tantum quae direct alios laedunt, sed and quae per consequentiam. Religio
autem suos habet in societate humana effectus maximos. It cannot be denied by
me that Hezekiah, Josiah, Asa, Jehoshaphat, threw down the High places: Nor
that some good Emperors through the like care of Unity in Religion, forbad
Heretical and Schismatical Conventions, gave their Churches to the Orthodox,
laid mulcts upon the ordainers, and the ordained amongst them, debarred them
from Preferments, yea even from their Rights by Testaments. And if in all this
they are defended, by Austine against the Donatists (See his first Book against
the Epistle of Parmenian, and De Horum correptione, more at large), it may be
believed that the use of some sort of temporal punishments for the reclaiming
of Schism and Error, which cut not men off from repentance as death does, was
not abhorrent altogether to the ancient Church. Exhibitus igitur and convictus
Crispinus, december tamen libras auri (quam mulctam in omnes haereticos Imperator
Theodosius constituerat) intercedente Possidio, non est compulsus exolvere.
Cont. Cres. l. 3. c. 47. It were perhaps easier to say what is lawful, then
what is fit, and to speak more that is true, then convenient for the season.
The Commonwealth (says Patricius) is as a Ship, quae omnium manibus officioque
indiget. A leak in a Ship (says my Lord Cook) hereupon) is timely to be
repaired. For as it is in the Natural, so is it in the Political body, Non
morbus in plerisque sed morbi neglecta curatio, corpus interficit. Jnst. part.
4. c. 1. p. 50. I will add what I find a few leaves before, ( page 35.) when it
was demanded in a Parliament of Henry the Sixth by what means they might have
good success, the answer is thus set down. Eritis insuperabiles, si fueritis
inseparabiles. Explosum est illud diverbium, Divide and impera, cum radix and
vertex imperii in obedientium consensu rata sunt.

The scope of all this leads to reconcilement, and the middle path between the
Oppression, and Licentiousness of the Conscience, that the due Liberty thereof,
and no more, being maintained, the care of Religion may not be neglected, nor
good Laws be condemned; but different minds may be born, yet dangers stopped,
and the Church upholden. In omnibus vero tenendus est modus aptus humanitati,
congruus charitati: ut nec totum quod potestatis est exeratur: and in eo quod
exeritur dilectio non amittatur: in eo autem quod non exeritur, mansuetudo
monstretur, August. cont. Cres. l. 3. c. 51.

I descend not now to any particulars in reference to the entendment named; for
I know how touchy the age is, and that the proper Anvil to have such things
beaten upon, were Conventus sapientum, or magna servorum Dei frequentia, in the
style of some ancient Lawyers. There is one thing only yet I cannot pass as
what is more conspicuous in that Father last cited; who having occasion in
reference to the Donatists, to consult with his Brethren about this matter, he
tells us the result they came to was this; Non esse petendum ab Imperatoribus
ut ipsant haeresim juberent omnino non esse, poenam constituendo eis qui in
illa esse voluissent, sed hoc potius constituerent ut eorum furiosas violentias
Catholici non paterentur. That is, they would not have their Legates desire of
the Emperor to pass any such Law that no man should be suffered to be
Donatists, or that if they were, they should be punished only for being of that
opinion: But that the violences they offered against the Orthodox might be
repressed, and particularly that the mulct which by a Law of Theodosius was
laid on Heretical Preachers, might be inflicted on these men that were
disturbers. Indeed the Emperor afterward hearing of the fury of their
Circumcellioes, passed some Laws more severe than Augustine would have desired,
against all the Sect: And that Father, it must be acknowledged, in many places
of his several Books, does seem to rejoice much in the great success they found
by them; insomuch as I will not omit one or two of his expressions. Multi
qualem causam haeresis haberet nunquam antea cogitaverunt: mox ubi caeperunt
advertere, and nihil in ea dignum invenire propter quod tanta damna paterentur,
sine ulla difficultate Catholici facti sunt. Docuit enim eos sollicitudo, quos
negligentes securitas fecerat. Again, Non vel tot sunt illi homines qui sua
voluntate pereunt, quot liberantur per istas leges ab illa pestifera pernicie,
Fundi, pagi, viri, castella, municipia, civitates. De correptione Donatistarum,
ad Bonifacium.

By this little and by all the rest, we may see what a difference there is, and
ought to be of judgment, according to diversity of states, and circumstances in
this business. It is certainly true on both sides; On the one, that Laws and
Punishments are ordinarily the direct means to suppress any evil that is
growing, and consequently any party, sect, or opinion, that the Ruler shall
think fit to suppress: On the other, that Persecution is the most quick and
active course, to engage the hearts and spirits of the believing and zealous,
in their way which is Religious, and wherein they judge that God still must be
obeyed before man, above any other (even of Preferment it self) that could be
invented to do it. And consequently, when we have stated the Magistrates power,
whereby we come to see what he may strictly do in these matters, we must leave
him at the last to prudential considerations still, whether he had best to
exert that power or no, and what is best in the exerting of it, according to
the condition of this people. For my own part, I am here in Genere
demonstrativo, not in Genere deliberativo. And I may debate with that Gentleman
in the one, unto whose Arguments I would refer to choose of any, in the other.

There are two Rules in the Preamble of the Statute primo Mariae. The one is
that the state of a King stands more assured by the love of his Subjects,
than in the dread and fear of Laws. The other is, That Laws justly made without
extreme punishment, are more often, and for the most part better obeyed than
those that are made with that extremity. Unto which the before named Lord Chief
Justice Sir Edward Cook subjoyns this sentence, Mitius imperanti, melius
paretur. I will close up all with that gracious end of one Speech of the
present Lord Keeper to the Parliament. If any just grievances shall have
happened, his Majesty will be as willing and ready to redress them as you to
have them presented to him: And his Majesty doubts not but you will give
healing and moderate Counsels, and imprint that known truth in the hearts of
his Subjects, That there is no distinct interest between the King and his
people, but the good of one, is the good of both.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 26. lin. 12. for then read that. p. 28. l. 11. r. we shall perhaps. p.
59. l. 14. r. allowed to plead. p. 66. l. 17. for preferred r. preserved.


