THE OBLIGATION Of Human LAWS Discussed.

By J. H.

(...).

We are to give to Princes and the Powers that are set over us by God, such
Honor and obedience as may not hurt us. Polycarpus.

Too rigorous were it that the breach of every Law should be held a deadly sin,
a mean there is between these extremities, if so be we could find it out.
Hooker.

London, Printed in the Year. 1671.

Reader,
THese Papers were prepared against Easter Term last year, but the Printers
failed us. Nevertheless the Subject being of perpetual occasion, and so long as
there is any Commonwealth and Laws there is none can say, I have need of thee,
I see no reason to hinder the coming out now to the same public advantage.

The Author.

I Have perused this Discourse and do judge it will be of singular use unto all
such as desire conscienti-ously to order their obedience unto Magistrates in
civil things: For although it is written in the way of a defense of what was
formerly more briefly offered unto the same purpose, yet the subject matter of
it is so managed, and the truth asserted in it so vindicated from the
opposition of another, that the understanding Reader, will be satisfied in the
proper Rule of civil things, and in the reasonableness of every Man making a
Judgment of their own actions in reference thereunto.

J. O.

THE Obligation of human Laws discussed.
CAP. I.
WE have before us a famous question, which is not only of great moment,
constant use and concernment, but of so much difficulty, and doubtful dispute,
as that some learned men of great note in the Romish Church, have judged it fit
only for the Pope in Cathedra to determine it. I am not furnished so much as
with my own books, which are from me, and much less with so many others as it
would require to inform my self, or my Readers, in the several judgments, of
all, or the chief Doctors in the Schools, with other Divines, and Lawyers, who
have written of this point. But this I take to be notorious, that there are
many of very great magnitude in the Church or Schools, with multitudes of
several sorts of Divines, who have, or do hold, that humane Laws bind not the
Conscience, whereof God only is the Lord, and which can be bound be nothing but
his authority, as will be confessed. On the contrary there be others and
perhaps of no less, or of greater eminence and number, who yet on both sides,
when they oppose one another may not defend themselves from extremity, but that
there is a mean according to the judgment of sober and indifferent men, to be
sought in these things, if we can light of it.

I must confess I should very hardly expect any thing but confusion in my own
thoughts if I trusted my self altogether to books, among such variety. By the
little I sometimes read concerning this dispute I must need say, it did but
serve to leave me at a loss, and how I have since retired my thoughts more into
my own mind, to look upon that writing which is congenial with us, even those
principles of truth which nature and so God has implanted in man's own heart,
and having proposed from the result of all a determination so plain, and in the
middle path, being careful that neither conscience should be left loose and
dissolute, nor tied by Man's command or Laws, any farther then God does tie it,
It has pleased the reverend Author of the friendly debate, by an opposition in
a Postscript to his Appendix to draw me out to my defense, and a farther
explication, mainly of what I have in a lesser room before written.

I perceive there is an expression fell from me among others of respect,
concerning the Debater, that has moved him to so much indignation that I know
not how I shall pacific him, for a man shall not lightly see two or three
sheets of paper written thus tetrically upon so small an occasion. I received a
case from you, a very weighty one it is, and as weightily and solidly resolved,
if the casuist may be his own Judge. So he goes on; I must confess I looked on
this person as a Man of a most modest, humble, pious, ingenuous, calm temper,
and I have the same opinion as to his worth and abilities as I had, but I do
not like the spirit of this appendix, there is in the Apologist so much
gentleness and care of offending, as has seemed too much. On the contrary,
here is in these papers such a deal of animosity, indignation, and that indeed
which in women we call vixenish humor, but especially such an inveterate
espousing of a party, with that disdain and contempt of every man, and thing,
that appears against himself, or cause, that there is no do with him.
Nevertheless I must needs say for my own part I am not yet converted to his
opinion, but that I must think still that a Nonconformist who has not taken
the Oxford Oath, may live within five miles of a corporation and yet be a good
Christian, or Minister of Christ.

And what is the ground for such an imprudent expression as this was, and that
he should continue the justification of it? The ground of all does lie on this
single point as himself has it, whether humane Laws bind the conscience? In the
resolving which point he is come here to an acknowledgement that there is
difficulty.

He that finds none (says he) may well suspect that he does not fully
understand it. And why is he so angry then, when he laid down his matter so
inconsiderately in his first book; without any distinction or provision for
any, that I should say only he was not so reflective as he ought, upon all the
things at least, as he was to look to in so great an undertaking? Alas, that
there should be so much vanity and elation of mind, in impotent man, that if
you commend him never so much, for what is worthy in him, you must give him
more then he deserves, or he will account what is due, but a disparagement to
him.

If you will praise a Man for his valor, and say he is as valiant as Hector,
or Judas Maccabeus, it will not serve, unless you say also he exceeds Hercules,
and make him wiser too withal, then Solomon, and all Kings. I could be
contented, to have wanted his good word (says he) upon condition he had not
said -- What? why something that is innocently true, he names, but that which
sticks, is, that I count him one more happy in his expression and other
abilities then in his depth or reflectiveness on the things he offers.

Whether I have herein judged amiss, or not, I will be content to come to some
trial with him, and that I may treat with this Postscript in some method, it
is convenient I should in the first place propose the determination of this
case, or question, as I have tendered it together with his conception,
understanding or apprehension of it. In the next place that I should take
notice of his objections against it. It is convenient then that I and he take a
review of the determination which he has proposed in the place of it. And
lastly that I answer to his exceptions, either here and there occasionally as
they fall in upon me, or more fully and industriously, at the end.

CAP. II.
FOr the foremost, I wonder the less that this debater does show so much
disdainful contempt of my determination, when he is possessed with so much
prejudice, as gives him not leave to mind the very main distinctions I offer
him in it. After he has therefore in the ensuing, first three leaves fallen
upon a passage of providence, which I have set down as proper and indeed
peculiar to the matter of the Case, he enters the List with these words. This
is sufficient to show what may be expected from this new undertaker, who will
appear I don^t not as lame in his Reasonings as he does in this, and prove as
unfit to determine cases of Conscience, as to make observations of providence.
I do not know what kind of gust one may have of the same thing which pleases
another, but it does become any inge^uous mind to think, that all men are not
cast into the same mould, and to take heed therefore, least by censuring of
that which the most of others approve, he brings his own Judgment into
question, and becomes the less regarded himself for it. And really if the
spleen and extravagancy, of five sides and a half, and no less of about twenty
leaves in all, to no purpose but abuse of his paper, do not show more what may
be expected in this stale undertaker, who has come out now this fourth time to
debate; then that observation of mine will discover in me, I am mistaken. For
my part let the determination of the case be found as solid as that observation
upon the matter of it is pertinent, and I shall have no cause to be moved by
his censure. But what is that which has moved him thus? why, he makes me
(says he) such a pittisul Gamester that I am not reflective (here he quotes
the Page wherein I have delivered that heinous word) upon more removes then one
of those many I ought to see. -- Yet I have done my endeavor to comprehend him
and to fathom the bottom of his deep discourse. I must confess I have expressed
my self in these words he quotes, I speak verily according to my thoughts, and
I cannot help that. But one would think by these words, we should have at least
so much integrity now from this person, as to set down my determination at
least in my own words, being so few, if not made better by his, that the Reader
might judge whether he does indeed look to the bottom of what I have offered,
and if after these words he yet does not, he may be ashamed, to express himself
thus, and show such a spirit as this is.

Well in my case, I distinguish then first, between the authority of the
Magistrate, and of his Laws and Commands. To this purpose there is a
distinction which Dr. Field has, parallel with it, to wit, between subjection
and obedience, subjection is that which is due or proper to the Magistrate, or
to the authority residing in his person: Obedience is that which is due to his
commands, or to the authority of his Laws. By subjection we are to understand
all that which stands in opposition to resistance, and so subjection in one
verse in the Apostle, is aequivalent with not resisting in the other; and the
word in the Original does kindly serve this purpose. Now subjection being what
is opposite to resistance, and what is due to the Authority which resides in
the Magistrates person, it is what is; and must be always due; so that we must
never resist, but be subject, because this authority always resides there. But
obedience which is proper to his Laws, or commands, is not due always, because
there may be some Laws, or things, commanded, devoid of Gods authority, and
then if we obey them not, we do not sin. This is acknowledged, or very near it,
in two cases, by this person; in a case of sin, and in a case of intolerable
grievance, from whence others will follow.

The other distinction is between the obligation of the conscience, and of the
outward Man. Let this learned person now take of his eyes from the paper, and
consider but a while before he reads on, what he thinks I mean by, and to what
use I put this distinction, and he may take the best conjecture whether he be
not short in his comprehension of it. The outward Man let us know then is
obliged by the penalty, the sword, or wrath: and by Gods command not to resist,
or to be subject in reference to his authority residing in the Magistrate
himself. There are two things then you see go to the binding the outward Man,
Gods command of not resisting, or being subject to the Powers, and the
Magistrates sword, and force. If we must never or by no means resist, then the
Magistrate may make us do what he will, or else we must suffer. We cannot avoid
suffering but by resisting or obeying, Resist we never may, obey we must then,
if we will not suffer, unless the case be in the matter of sin, wherein we all
agree in one, that we must always suffer. The Conscience is obliged only by
Gods will, which is the adequate Rule of Conscience. I will explain it farther.
There is Gods will, and Man's will, a divine and humane Obligation. When God
will have a thing to be done as well as Man, I do account the Conscience is
bound, because the Obligation is divine: but when Man will have it done, and
God requires it not, but only his will is that whatsoever be imposed, the
subject however must not rebel, I do account the Obligation to the thing to be
humane altogether, and the outward Man bound only. Jus Regis vocatur (says
Grotius I remember somewhere) non quia Rex ita agens just ageret sed quia it a
agenti nemini liceret vim ullam opponere. That is as much as to say there is a
double right a Magistrate has in his commands or actions; A moral right when
he commands, or does, those things which he ought to do, or command: or a
Political right, (called by Samuel the manner of the King) when though he
commands or does those things he ought not (or what God does not allow, but he
is accountable to him for them,) yet the subject may not resist him in those
commands, or acts, and deliver himself from them by force. When the Magistrate
uses the first of these Rights, I account the conscience is obliged: when the
second the outward man only. The terms are used we know by grave Divines such
as Bishop Downham (to name no other) in his tract of Christian Liberty: and it
will be one benefit of these papers, if we can retain with good discretion, and
sense, what is so useful, as rather then be without, we shall still use though
with none. And by this distinction it does appear, how all that danger which
hitherto this man has fancyed consequent to my determination, does fall away
as the leaves from the trees in summer. For so long as we do all acknowledge
the authority of the present Magistrate in his person with our subjection
thereunto, that in no case it is lawful to resist, whereby the outward man
comes to be bound, so that if he will, and when he will, he can force it to
obey by his sword, there is not so much as any certain disobedience, and much
less is there any danger to his Government, through Insurrection, or Rebellion,
that follows from my opinion.

If in Religious things, or moral, when the Magistrate commands any thing
against a man's conscience, and the Subject does not obey, his authority
nevertheless is preserved, though he cannot force them in that case to
obedience if he would: how shall we think but in things which are secular,
where be can force them to obey if he will, that there is any danger to his
Government, for their obeying such and such a Law only because they dare not to
resist (I mean for Gods sake that they dare not) and not out of conscience
else? I would have this worthy, and intelligent, but at this time over engaged
person, who yet sees not all the removes which are to be seen in this business,
for all his anger at me for my thinking so, to consider whether there be not
many learned Men, Writers and others, who hold that the Laws of Men do not
obleige the Conscience at all; and that they cannot, seeing Conscience is Gods
Throne, but the external man only* and does he think that all such must be so
shallow that they are not able to avoid his extemporanous consequences, or that
they see not the weakness of such a Gamester (seeing he calls himself so, for
it was not I used that word) who has not come yet so far here, as to
consideration with himself? For I say, is there any Men of parts or learning
thinks he, that fear God and are Christians, who hold it lawful to rebel, or to
destroy all Society and Government. (...) And if not, how comes it to pass he
should not resolve with himself, that certainly if such consequences which he
would fasten on me will be avoided and denied by those that hold that human
Laws do never bind the Conscience, they may and must be denied by me with more
facility, who have determined that human Laws do with a distinction bind it,
but not indefinitely as he does.

And what is that distinction then which after these two other not comprehended
by the Debater, does determine the question in hand? That we are to be always
subject as to the Authority of the Magistrate himself I have said and yet that
we are not bound always to obey his commands, that is, we are not bound always
in Conscience, when yet we are bound in the outward Man. This being said, the
determining distinction concerning his Laws or Commands, which do bind, and
which do not bind the Conscience is this. The commands of the Magistrate are
either such as are agreeable to Gods will, or not agreeable to his will. Those
that are, bind it: Those that are not, bind it not. The Reason is, because the
authority the Magistrate has to command, is derived from, and to be founded in
Gods will. In the way, The Casuist (says this benign Debater) seems to have no
low op^nion of his own performance, but rather thinks we may chance to be
beholding to him for a new Invention. Here says he, is that very mean indeed
for ought I know which is wanting. A great discovery! and for ought I know may
any body reply that which is not wanting but the very dangerous extreme into
which the people are apt to run, as he is to follow those with whom I have had
to deal. As for those with whom he has been dealing I presume it will be found
there is nothing of this determination in what they have said; if and I did not
esteem it uncommon, I should (I must confess) have restrained it. Or if I did
not think it considerable, I should have held my peace also. But after this
scornfulness of his why did he not present us with that mean which follows in
the words of the Case, that the Reader might judge, whether it be any discovery
indeed, or none, or whether it deserves this Man's contempt or not? For as Cato
said of Cicero when he played upon the Stoics opinions (which another has
noted) Cicero makes others laugh, but is himself ridicuculous: So say I, this
person strives here to offer me and my determination to contempt, but the
things I have said will bear themselves out, and he does but discover hereby
his own desert. What is that mean then which follows? The words in the Case are
these. That the Laws or Commands of the Magistrate (even in Political and
indifferent things) does no less then bind the Conscience, when he is the
executioner of Gods will, but though the outward man (out of the Case of sin)
may be bound if you will, the conscience cannot be obleiged, and ought to be
still kept free, when he is the executioner only of his own. It may be the
Debater will not yet be beholding to me for this, and he may choose, when
perhaps others will, and take it never the less kindly for that. It fares with
those that beat their heads about notions, as it does with Miners; they are the
condemned Men, and the Gold they dig becomes others: Never the less the Man
that has been digging and finds a Vein, may say, what he has found is Gold
as well as another, and without pride. He does not commend himself, for his
commending the Gold. I think verily that that which I I have here dug is the
mean, the Golden mean we are to find in this case, and not an extreme wherein I
follow any as he says: but the avoiding both extremes. The one is of those who
hold that human Laws do not bind the Conscience at all: and the other such as
hold as this Man did when he first unadvisedly set out, and therefore will
continue of the mind still, that they bind indefinitely without discrimination,
at least so far by all means, as Dr. Manton his good Neighbor, and every one
such as he (whatsoever the breakers of other Laws may be) might be none of
Christ's Ministers or good Christians on that account.

Well! The will of God which determines the commands of Man to be obligatory or
not, upon the Conscience, must be considered in the concerns of Religion: in
things moral: and in things civil or Political. The rule or Law of God in
things Religious, is the Scripture. The rule or Law of God in things moral is
the Light of Nature, which also is the will of God, as the word is. The Rule
and supreme Law which God has appointed for things Political is the common
good. If the Magistrate command any thing in Religion and it be not according
to Gods word, then Conscience cannot be bound to it as Religious, though the
outward Man I think therein also is bound, if it be not against Gods word. It
the Magistrate command any thing of moral concern, if it be against the Law of
nature, or common principles of Light in Man, that is the moral Law in the
heart, the Conscience cannot be bound but must refuse it. If he command any
thing which is civil or Political, and it be against the common good, then is
it not agreeable to Gods will, being not consonant to the rule he has
commanded for civils, and consequently the Conscience cannot be obleiged by it
upon that account. In the mean while so long as it is not against conscience
otherwise, that is so long as it is not sin, the outward man is bound, and if
the Magistrate will constrain a person to it, rather then suffer he will obey.

There are several books and Sermons of Ministers about Religion, which do bind
the Readers and Hearers by virtue of Gods will: but the supreme Rule is Gods
Word, unto which consequently, if what they have said; or writ, be not
consonant, the Conscience is not bound, and according as the Conscience of a
Man is convinced, whether that which the Minister says be agreeable to the word
or not, so is it bound, or not bound by it. The case is the same in Laws. The
Magistrate does give us such and such particular commands, or Laws. His
authority he has from God. The will of God as the supreme Law, or Rule, in
Politicalls, is, that the common good be attended and advanced. They are Gods
Ministers a sending continually upon this very thing. So far as his Laws, or
commands then are agreeable to the common good, so far is his Authority good,
and must obleige the Conscience being from God. And so long as a man is
convinced in Conscience, that they are agreeable thereunto, he must be in
Conscience obleiged: but if he be sincerely persuaded that such or such a thing
commanded, be not for the public good, the case is but the same with what I
said in Religion, when the Ministers exhortation disagrees with the word. The
Magistrate is but Gods Minister in Politicals, and his commands disagreeing,
with the supreme Law, the common good, the Conscience cannot be obleiged in
this Case. Nevertheless, so long as the outward Man is in the Magistrates
power, and the Subject may not resist, he can command obedience, out of the
case of sin, when he pleases to exert his Sword.

Before I pass off, I am made a little sensible how apt our question may be
wrested into a dispu^e about Terms. It is hardly proper to say this or that Law
binds the Conscience, for Conscience is the discerner of my duty, and it were
more proper to say my conscience binds me to this Law, then that this Law binds
it. It is scarce proper neither to say the Conscience is bound, seeing it is
the person is bound. Conscience is placed in the understanding, and when a
thing becomes a Man's duty, the will is obleiged rather then the understanding.
It is not easy likewise to apprehend how the outward man is bound with
distinction to the Conscience, considering that this obligation has it is rise,
and virtue, from our duty of not resisting, unto which we are always bound in
Conscience. The term Resisting likewise is liable to diversity of acceptance.

It is convenient therefore for me, in my way to give the sense of my Terms (if
it be not yet done enough) to prevent needless contention. By human Laws I
understand the declaration of the will of the rightful Governor, what he would
have his Subjects do, I will not also put in the end of Laws, in order to the
common good, because that will presently spoil the question. For where the
efficient is our rightful Ruler, and the Law serves indeed for that end, or
has it is right final cause also, there is no question of its obligation. Yet
if I leave out the end the question indeed may be whether such a declaration be
a Law, rather then whether it binds. Nevertheless as I make a case of
conscience of it (and count all our Acts of Parliament Laws) it is all one in
effect to me, whether you say, such a Law binds not, or such an Act or Law is
no Law, and binds not. Ex quo intelliges eos qui perniciosa et injusta populis
jussa descripserius, cum contra feceriut quod polliciti pro fessique slat^,
quoduis potius tulisse quam leges. Cicero de legious. By Conscience I
understand a faculty in Man of descerning Gods Judgment concerning himself and
Actions. It is more proper to say a faculty is obleiged, then an habit, or an
Act; and that faculty which man has hereunto, is charged (whilst himself is)
to judge whether such a thing commanded be his duty in relation to God, or not.
By obligation I understand the constitution of a due; Obligare est jus
constituere. By obligation of the Conscience I understand the constituting a
thing to bedue from me so that if I do it not I must account or judge that God
will condemn me for the neglect, or the making a thing my duty so that if I
leave it undone I sin. The obligation of the outward man I account the
constituting a thing to be due from me so as if I do it not, I may not resist,
though I be punished; or I may be punished, and ought not to resi^t, though I
could avoid both the thing, and punishment by resistance. The word, lacere,
says Grotius (from one line of whom, a man shall have more Instruction
sometimes then from another book) is distinguished in id quod impune fi^, and
in id quod v^tio caret. So must we say the word obligare, is distinguished into
that which if we do not the thing makes us liable to punishment ( in foro
humano, or according to the law:) or that which if we do it not makes us liable
to sin. That is, there is an obligation human only (which we have had before)
that ties us to obedience upon the penalty of the law: or an obligation divine
also, which ties us to the duty upon the pain of Gods displeasure, and eternal
condemnation. The one of these we call the obligation of the outward man, and
the other of the Conscience. By resistance, lastly, I understand the repelling
force with force. The word resistance, may be taken largely or strictly.
Resistitur contra Imperium agendo aut vim vi reprim^ndo. I take it in the last
and strict sense. Let me yet note one thing more, when we distinguish in the
obligation of human laws, between the outward man and the Conscience, we do not
distinguish the outward man from the will, when we distinguish it from the
Conscience. The will is wrought upon under both obligations, through fear of
man's law, and through fear of Gods. If you divide the outward man from the
will, you cannot bind it, but Physically, by putting it in Bonds and Fetters.
But the obleiging it by the will, is binding it with an human obligation; and
that I account too, is not morally, but politicaly (as I have intimated,) to
wit as human laws are, norma humani judicij, the man who breaks a bad law, is
according to that law to be adjudged to its penalty, and in sensu politico
humano is an offender of the law so that if he be punished by the judge, who
judges by that law, he must submit, yet seeing the Law is no other then such,
he is not made a sinner by that breach, or to be condemned by God. To sum up my
opinion then without the terms, that those that will may assail me fairly in
my sense I am persuaded as Gods will is not man's, so every command of man in
indifferent things is not the command of God: but that when there is no
declaration of the magistrates will, but it does make the thing he would have,
to be due from us so, as he may punish us by his law for the not doing if he
please, and we must bear it without defending our selves by force, and
consequently he may compel us to any thing not sinful by that means: yet does
not every declaration of his will, make the thing he requires to be our duty,
so, that we are necessarily guilty of sin, if it be not done; but contraily
though many a man lives and dies in the breach of some laws and statutes of the
realm (so long as they offer no contempt to the Ruler, nor scandal to their
brethren, nor resist if they be brought to suffer) they may be good Christians
for all that (to come to our first lock which our debater) and servants of
Christ.

And here I have no more that I know needful to be supplied, but only to do
this: to produce what I have in my Case it self, that the main notion I offer
here, and there may appear to be the same: and to vindicate that authority
which alone sufficed me then, and shall now, for my confirmation. The words
which I offer in my Case are these. Power (say I) is a right to rule or
command. This right in the nature of the thing must arise from the grant or
will of the supreme Lord, which is God; without whose will (or that grant or
Charter which is an act of his will) no power can be derived to any. Now that
grant or will of God which constitutes any to rule, or to be his Minister,
being for the Peoples good, (He is the Minister of God for our good says the
text) it must follow that whatsoever is not indeed for the peoples good, the
Magistrate is not to command, because it is Gods will that he commands only for
their good. And it he do command any matter that is otherwise, that command
has no authority as to the Conscience at all as being without the warrant of
Gods will. I know I have set down this in a few lines, but it has been the
fruit of several thoughts and years. I thought good to confirm it with one
testimony of Dr. Tailor, and I perceive this debater seems offended, and to
accuse me of disingenuity for it, as if I had done him wrong. It is necessary
therefore that I turn again to that Dr. and see; only I must say that I am glad
(I must confess) that I have here such an authority as this Dr. so full for me,
nevertheless Dr. Tailor is not (as far as I know in a tittle) the author to
me; but a witness to the light I offer. In the third Book of his Cases, and the
first chapter, he comes to treat of human laws, and what obligation they pass
on the Conscience. In his first rule he tells us, the Conscience is obleiged
directly and actively to obey the Laws of Man. Several learned Authors,
together with Nine Arguments to the contrary, are proposed, which he having
very hardly assailed, comes to his next Rule, that human Laws bind not when
there is any intolerable, or grievous evil in the obedience. To make out this,
be proceeds to a third Rule, that the Laws of our superior, that are not just
and good, do not obleige the Conscience, and then showing what Laws are such he
tells us, that a Law is unjust that contributes not to the public advantage.
What can be more orderly and desirable to my purpose! Only yet to be more
sure, it is fit, I cite also some few of his expressions. This is the limit of
a Princes power, so far as he relates to conscience, for beyond this the
conscience is not bound. Again, If a Prince make a Law that is not for the
public good, it has no sanction but fear, and no tie upon the Conscience.
Again, all such things as are against the good of the subjects, the Law it self
declares it to be no Law, that is, to be more then the superior has right, or
leave to do. Again, Laws that are made to purposes beyond those measures, do no
ways obleige the conscience. He is the Minister of God for good (says St.
Paul) otherwise he is not Gods Minister, and has to other purposes none of
Gods authority, and therefore cannot obleige the conscience to an active
obedience in such, where his power is in incompetent to command.

CAP. III.
IT will be time now to come to see what he has objected against this
Determination. The proposition I am to maintain, and he to oppose, is this.
That the laws of a common wealth, and particularly an act, or the acts of
Parliament in this nation, that are nor for the common good, do not obleige the
Conscience of the subject. Though we acknowledge in the mean time, our
alleadgiance and subjection to his Majesty as the executioner of the laws, that
our outward man is bound still, and spared through his clemency. It is true
that there is a question fallen in, who shall be judge, whether that which is
commanded in a law be for the common good? and I shall be ready to speak with
the Debator about it, in its order: but in the mean while if it were not for
that, what would this reverend man have had to say against the main
determination.

In the first place he tells us, that I am a notable instance of my Lord B^^^ns
observation, that there is a little dry Light in the World. I remember Plutarch
has a tract of self praise, and among several things he has against it, one
thing he says for it, that there is some cases, and particularly in the case
of a just defense, a man may speak of himself, or any thing of his own, as of
another. Under Plutarchs Apology, I will say I do believe this, that in this
particular I am indeed an instance that there is but little dry light in the
World. For let this Debater set himself to read as many books as he can, yet I
suppose he may find but few, if any that determine this case altogether as I
do. I know the same Light has shone in on Dr. Tailor in several passages, when
yet it is mixed with such abundance of other matter, that if this Man may be
judge he would be ready to cite him as of opinion against me in it. There is
lumen siccum therefore, and lumen maceratum indeed. I remember the distinction
well, my Lord Bacon has it, in his advancement. And I will say yet, that the
Light which this Debater pretends is macerated Light, Light steeped in a
prejudiced mind and fetch^ from the conceptions of others, and mostly perhaps
from that Dr. whose clearest rays he wont receive: When the determination
which I have offered has been beaten out from my own thoughts, and will be
found that lumen siccum (notwithstanding his abuse) which is to be attended in
this matter. I am become a fool in^glorying (says the Apostle) ye have
compelled me.

In the next place he produces two places of Scripture, that to the Romans,
Wherefore you must needs be subject not only for wrath but also for Conscience
sake, and that of Peter, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake. I answer, these Texts speak of subjection and not of obedience;
subjection to the Authority, residing in the persons of the Magistrate, and if
you will in the Government it self: not obedience which is proper to their
commands. I his appears from the first and second Verses. Be subject to the
powers that be. He that resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God.
The Powers no doubt are, but the Laws and Commands of men be not I hope the
ordinance of God with this Man. Wherefore you must needs be subject, It is the
same word and spoken in respect to the resistance before, and in reference to
their persons: it is not wherefore you must needs obey all their particular
commands for Conscience sake, when for Conscience sake we must suffer, rather
then obey some of them. So likewise in Peter, every ordinance of Man, is every
human creature in the Original, that is, submit to every sort of Governor, or
Government, whether to the King as supreme, or others under him. This is plain.
Out of these Texts therefore may obedience arise, from the conscience of not
resisting, but no direct obligation on the Conscience to obey actively can be
deduced from hence. Again the Apostle tells us in these places, that the
Magistrate is Gods Minister for our good, a terror to evil doers, and
encourager to well doing, with the like expressions. Upon this account he can
be supposed to command only for the common good, and when a Law or Command of
the supreme Magistrate is such, I deny not but it binds the Conscience no less
then he. This is sufficient between us, that no Argument possible can be drawn
from either of these places to serve his turn, seeing a Law must be supposed to
be against the common good, and yet to bind the conscience according to him.
Moreover, this I must say ag^in is most evident that obedience indefinite
cannot be proved by these Texts, because some commands of the Magistrate may be
evil, morally evil (as has been intimated) and we must not obey them: or
civily evil, and then though we do obey for the Swords sake, and because we
must not resist, the Conscience is not bound in such a Case.

It is therefore a pievish obstinacy in this person to persist in these
following words. We are no considering when and in what cases a Law may cease
to obleige and quite alter its Nature, but whether while it does obleige and is
in force it lays a tie on the Conscience or no? and to this we say yes. Laws
while they are obligatory bind the Conscience. Because the Scripture faith so,
and we say so indefinitely, because that is the Scriptures language also. First
it is certainly false that all Laws of Men do indefinitely tie the Conscience,
and therefore the Scripture does not say so, nor can say so, which must be
granted by him in the case of moral evil. Secondly this Debater is utterly lost
that he would not learn of me to distinguish between the obligation of the
outward man, and the Conscience; an obligation in foro extertori sive politico,
and in foro interiori sive conscientiae. For it is false again that he says we
are not considering when and in what cases a Law does cease to obleige, for
this is the very thing we are considering, in respect to the Conscience; and as
for the obligation of the outward Man, he has not yet thought of it. And I say
as Dr. Tailor has again and again, that such a Law, as is not for the common
good, has none of Gods authority, and so ceases to be any Law as to the
Conscience, when yet we being not to resist, (as is and must be often said) the
outward man by the Sword may be brought to obey. Thirdly the speaking that Laws
while they do obleige (or are of force) do tie the Conscience, in this Man, who
has not received yet the distinction of the obligation of the outward Man
Politically, and the inward Man which is morally, is extremely sensl^s, and
consequently false if he understood the sense. For Laws that are obligatory or
do obleige the outward man, that is are Politically in force, may yet be
morally null, as to the Conscience, that is, obleige it not, when being not for
the common good I say they are without the authority of Gods will. Fourthly
there is a manifest bar and contradiction in these words to his own
determination after, if he durst been plain in it. For here he will be so
obstinate to say still that human Laws bind indefinitely, nay and suborn the
Scripture to false witnessing in affirming that they say so, when they say only
be subject indefinitely (while he makes all Laws (that is Universally) and
indefinitely aequivalent here, least he come off upon that word,) which we must
not do, and yet in the end he is forced to come to confession and acknowledge
(seeing Dr. Tailor will tell him so, from whom he will borrow that he has) that
moral Divines and Lawyers (and I had hoped he were one of the first) do
determine that human Laws bind not in the case of intolerable grievance. I
have cited these words in the way something more acrimoniously then any other
passage hitherto, not that I have cause to be angry at them, as I have at
others, but to show occasionally how I might take up this Gentleman likewise in
the rest of these raw Sheets, if I had a mind to exagitate that weakness which
hitherto (till his eyes be opened farther by this controverting the point) is
such as may have that epithet given to it at present which the Scriptures does
in one place give unto darkness (though I acknowledge his sufficiency
otherwise,) even weakness that may be felt.

In the third place he wont allow my little comment on Paul. The Scripture
says the Magistrate is Gods Minister to us for good. Very true, and the
Apostle makes that an argument why we should be obedient to him because it is
for our benefit. But this Casuist turns the words another way, and makes them
an outlet to disobedience, by taking that to include an exception to the
general precept of subjection, which is in truth nothing but a reason to
enforce it. By this passage and such as this I take my conjecture of the
happiness of this man's expression, which makes what he says very often to look
considerable, when if it be reflected upon with more thoughts (but that this
Man himself tells the Apologist somewhere that he is no melancholy Man) it
signifies nothing. If there be any thing substantial in these words it must
hold, if it he put into others; and then must this be denied that when the
Apostle tells us the authority the Magistrate has from God is for the peoples
good, we may not argue thence that he has no au^hority from God for their
hurt. But this arguing is good, and therefore this passage is but words. For
indeed, is there any man that serves not Levi^than but God, will maintain that
the Magistrate has any au^hority committed to him of God but for the public
benefit? Let this person take heed he turns not God into the Devil, and
destroys all. If he dare not maintain that, then whatsoever is commanded
against the public benefit has no authority to bind the conscience; and it
will be in vain for him to talk idly of the danger he apprehends from my
determination which has none in it, when if he look not better to himself he
must be upon the justifying Tyrann^, and bring ruin upon the World. Again
suppose we build nothing on the very Text, this is a principle in the law of
nature, as c^ea^ly written in man's heart as that he is a sociable creature to
wit, that the end of Government and Laws, are for the good of the community,
and consequently that there should be none, but for that end. From hence then,
that the good of the community being the supreme Law as the general and
ultimate end, of whatsoever is commanded, it must irrefragable follow, that
whatsoever Law is made or is to be made, it must be over ruled by this supreme,
and have its obligatory power originally from thence. We know in all Laws or
any other things in the world, the inferior must give place to the greater or
to the chief. God requires sacrifices and mercy, both are his Laws, it these
interfare, mercy must be exercised and sacrifice binds not. It is no plainer in
the earth that the elements give way from their own natures to serve the World,
then that the greater or chief obligation must vacate the less. I might fill a
side with instances, if any else could not do it. Whereas this matter then is
written with a sunbeam on the heart of man, and the Apostle has an intimation
of it, it is but very sit and agreeable to reason, that we fetch a comment on
the sex from that book he has touched, that is the book of nature, or this
natural Light which will convince every man, that the public good being the
end of society, there can be no power from God but for that end. Again it is
true the Apostle from hence argues for subjection, and he may say that he does
not argue for any thing else. But what then? when Paul argues one thing from
this truth, may not another argue from thence also something too? St. Paul
argues well, the Magistrate is the Minister of God for our good, therefore we
must be subject: And Dr. Tailor argues well, and therefore he has none of his
authority for other purposes; or that Law that conduces not to the public
good cannot bind the conscience, because it has none of Gods authority.
Moreover, the Apostle argues for subjection, and that indefinite, but I say he
argues not, nor may be construed to argue for obedience indefinite, and
therefore howsoever these words tinckle, there is no doubt but we may and must
make an outlet from these and the like Texts, that in some cases of the
Magistrates commands, we may not think our selves bound to obey in point of
Conscience, though in regard of non-resistance and subjection, there is no
disobedience does follow in the case. We say not that this passage of the
Apostle does include an exception to subjection for that is Universal and
indefinite; but we can say it must include an exception to indefinite or
Universal obedience, that is as to all the Magistrates commands, because there
may be many of them wicked, unjust, or morally evil, unto which we are not
bound, and consequently, say I, nor to such as are civilly so.

In the fourth place we have this passage wherein appears the greatest weight.
A Law is not merely the signification of the Magistrates judgment what is
good, but the declaration of his will, that we do it, and God having given him
his authority to command us, this declaration carries with it an obligatory
virtue, to bind us to the execution of his will under the pain of sin. As for
this, The declaration of the will of the Lawgiver does indeed immediately bind
the outward Man against disobedience by resisting, or to whatsoever is contrary
to subjection (that is it binds us Politically) but as for doing the thing out
of conscience (that is to be bound morally) I like well that this learned Man
has delivered himself so judiciously as to put in that, which is the true and
only ground of all the obligation that the Conscience can be capable of under
the command of Man, and which does administer therefore the solution to what he
offers. I answer then to that branch which he has of Gods having given the
Magistrate his authority, and we say that God has given the Magistrate no
authority to command any thing but for the common good, which is a truth for
which I need not again quote Tailor or Hooker, as I remember well that I might,
or twenty learned Schoolmen perhaps and others to this purpose, but that it
were not worth my time and trouble to go to their books, Seeing there is indeed
scarce any truth can shine more clearly from the Light of Nature and the end of
policy. And the Law of nature must be acknowledged the foundation of all Laws,
and the measure of their obligation. I do therefore advance here this argument
which I think is a stone that cannot be removed, and it is the Sum of my
determination. Whatsoever is not agreeable to the will of God, or carries not
with it Gods authority cannot bind the Conscience, because the Conscience has
an absolute and immediate dependence on the will of God, and his will is the
adaeq^ate rule of Conscience. But for the Magistrate to command any thing that
is against the common good, is disagreeable to Gods will: or such a law carries
not with it Gods authority. E^go whatsoever is commanded, or what law soever is
not conducive to the common good, can not obleige the Conscience. So that it
must not be under the pain of sin, but under the sense of wrath, and necessity
that we must not resist, that we actively obey in such a case.

In the last place he quotes Dr. Saunderson and I must confess I shall put the
less trust hereafter on this man for any matters of controversy, or cases of
weight for this presumption he seems to have upon one great name, when nothing
else for ought appears, but Dr. Saunderson having resolved this case, has
given him the confidence to write in such an Imperious fashion as he has done
these sheets, upon a subject whereof he seems to have had so few thoughts
before. As for that Dr. I have read his Lectures de obligatione conscientiae,
and dejuramento, and the first body of his Sermons. I do believe him an
excellent Casuist, and to speak freely wherein that excellence lies, a man of a
clear head, but yet not for all that, of so searching a head, nor quite so
learned as such a one as Rutherford, in his way; and by no means on the Earth,
of so large a head, so great a wit, and incomparable sufficiency as Dr. Tailor.
Well Dr. Saunderson in his ninth prelection puts this case, what if a
Magistrate intends only his own profit or ambition in a law? does that bind? he
answers yes. Because that though the Lawgiver may have an ill intention? the
Law may tend to the common good. This is well resolved. In a case or two
farther then he puts this other, what if a law be unprofitable to the public
and something noxious? he answers it does oblige, if the thing may be done
without sin. This resolution is ill; for if the reason of the obligation in the
former case was good, and the true right reason, then when there is not that
reason, a law obliges not. If we must obey out of Conscience when a law does
tend to the common good though the Lawgivers intention be bad, then though the
Lawgivers intention be good, if the thing commanded tend not to the public
advantage, the Conscience must not be obliged upon the same account. And thus
Dr. Tailor resolves them both, it is in some transient passages, which I will
not stand here to find out. But let us hear Dr. Saundersons reasons. The first
is, Because every man ought to mind what belongs to his part and duty, and not
trouble himself about other men's. But what reason is this? it does belong to
every man to mind, yea and to consider and determine whether his Conscience be
obliged by a law or no. His second is, Because our duty is to obey, not to
command or ordain. And what reason is this? our duty is to obey if what is
commanded be agreeable to Gods will, else we cannot be obliged to it in
Conscience though we do it. These two reasons indeed are twins, both Stillborn,
and say nothing. The resolution is ill, and nothing is to be said for it. But
what means he by these reasons? The subject is to obey the Law, not make the
Law, and he troubles not himself to judge whether a thing be good in reference
to the Magistrates act, but his own. If the law pass, he may obey it in the
outward man whether it be civilly good or no, and not trouble himself. But if
he come to the point, whether it bind his Conscience or no, he must consider,
whether it has the authority of God in it, and consequently, whether both it
be Lawful, and conducive, to the public advantage. I may add (says the
Debater himself,) though the Magistrate ought not to ordain any thing but what
is for the peoples good, yet when he does otherwise, it will be more for their
good to obey him, then refuse obedience. I answer if the Magistrate ought not
to ordain any thing but what is for the peoples good, then must the ordaining
any thing not such, be against Gods will. But the Conscience cannot be obliged
by any thing against Gods will; or the Conscience is obleiged by nothing but by
Gods will only. Ergo no Law or thing commanded us which is against the common
good can obleige the Conscience; and so has he cut his own throat here out of
self conviction. Nevertheless as to what he says else, there is one remove yet
this Debater sees not, and that is we distinguish between non obligation of
Conscience, and disobedience; it may be that prudence, and such considerations
as he urges, or others may prevail with a man in the outward action to o^ey,
when yet he accounts himself free from any obligation on his Conscience.

There is one thing after this. I feel upon my own mind. I find it not in these
papers: but I cannot hardly be faithful if I omit it. It is this. Suppose a
Father or a Master, bids me do a thing, I conceive it like to prejudice his
affairs, and e^ve it undone: If this Father or Master be discreet, he will
commend me for my care, and be so far from charging me with disobedience as
that he will account I have done his will better then he declared it. Upon this
I have been apt to determine that the commands of men, and Gods, do thus
differ; The one binds unless I can give a reason which is more considerable for
the forbearance then that which appears for obedience: the other binds both as
the rule and reason it self for my action. I think again, suppose I tell this
reason to this Father or Master, and they will not admit it, but require the
thing to be done notwithstanding, the prejudice which shall acrue. If it be in
heat I may do well yet to forbear, upon my belief that they will take it well;
when their thoughts have cooled, and the Wisdom herein of many faithful
servants have been proved. But if I be persuaded fully that they will be
displeased presently, and not pleased after, it seems to me here I am bound to
obedience in things not sinful, though they be commanded to my own and their
hurt. I answer to this. In the first place it is sufficient that a Child, or a
Servant is not indefinitely bound to do every thing they are bid, but that when
they have such a reason as they judge their Parent or Master will be satisfied,
and better pleased that they forbear the command, they may leave it undone. If
their reason does not satisfy, they may be reckoned in the case of such as
have no reason. In the second place when they have better reason to, forbear it
then do it, I may hold that they are bound to doing only by virtue of the
Authority residing in the Parent or Masters person, and that they may not (...)
has been said about the Magistrate, will that otherwise they were free toward
God in their Consciences, who accepts of no other but a reasonable ^^^vide. In
the third place, I offer this, there is a diversity of Authority. The
Government of Parents, and Masters is not the same with that of the Magistrates
over the People. The Soverainnity in some Common wealths is in a single Person;
in others it may be in the Nobles; in others in the Common body. That
Government which i^ ^y a Monarchy is either Despotical or Royal. The Government
of this Nation is a Royal Monarchy regulated by laws, These laws are (...) by a
Corporation of King, Lords, and ^^^m^nds, called the Parliament, wherein the
three Estates are assembled to consult what is for the common good, now though
we may suppose (without granting) that the subjects of a despotical Government
who have no propriety of goods nor liberty of person (as children and servants
are in the house) may be bound to do what the Lawgiver commands though it be
to their common disadvantage, because he may command any thing for his will and
pleasure only and not their goods: yet cannot we in our nation be so bound,
because it is not to be supposed that the lawgiver does require any thing for
his own will and pleasure, but for the common good altogether. To suppose
otherwise is to suppose a change of the Government, from Royal to Despotical,
which is a supposition to be abhorred The three Estates are assembled (says Sr.
Tho. Smith de Rep. Ang.) to consult what is good, that is what is for the
common good as before: and so long as this is their general end and intention,
and the Law is the will of the Lawgiver, it appears that if any thing really
be not for the common good, it has none of their will and intention, and
consequently does lay no obligation on the consciences of the people.

CHAP. IV.
I Proceed to that determination which he brings in opposition to mine, if I
can find it, and know what to make of it when it is found. The case (says he
about the beginning) depends on this single point, whether human Laws bind the
Consciences. In resolving this, he acknowledges a difficulty. For if on the
one side we say (says he) the Conscience (...) not concerned, I beseech you
what is? nothing but our common discreton, to help our selves out of the reach
of the Princes Sword. So says Dr. Tailor. If Conscience be not obliged then
nothing is concerned but prudence, and care that a man be safe from Rods and
Axes. If on the other side we say that Consci^nce is obliged, then there may
follow great perplexities when any thing is commanded, that proves an
intolerable grievance. And this is also from Dr. Tailor, who does determine
thereupon that in danger of death and intollorable grievance human Laws oblige
not the Conscience to obedience. And what does this Debater determine? why
truly when he comes to it at the end, The moral Divines and Lawyers (says he)
do grant so. Well! These Divines and Lawyers are such as Dr. Tailor knows, but
what says this Evangellicall Divine and no Lawyer himself? why he has said
already that human Laws bind indefinitely, and he cannot find in his heart to
go from it. Let me ask him then how comes it to pass, that he pretends to some
better Medium then I have propounded in this Case? Those that say human Laws
bind not the Conscience at all, and those that say they bind it indefinitely
without distinction, are both in an extreme. I and Dr Tailor have a Medium: and
what mean is that which this man will set up in opposition to us? Here I turn
to the place in his sheets and I find his words come to these. I think good
briefly to direct him in a better Medium then any that he has propounded to
find out the several degrees of sin against human Laws. Ridiculous! if this
person would have offered us a better Medium to determine the Case in hand, we
ought to have thankt him: but as for a Medium to this purpose. what is it to
me? Is there any question or undertaking of mine about this in the least
throughout the Case? If I had a mind to know the difference or degrees of sin
against human Laws, I need not come to his I think good briefly, Dr. Tailor
has laid down at large Rules of distinction, or the measures by which we shall
prudently conjecture, at the gravity or lessening of the sin of disobedience to
human Laws. The truth is, if a man may guess at such a thing, this person as it
is like upon the quotation, gets Dr. Tailor, where, in one place there being
those Rules of distinction, and in another he finds, cautions for those that
reduce into practice the rule he had laid down, that human Laws, not good,
oblige not the Conscience, he apprehends these to be both good materials for
the building something against me, but when he has brought them here together
into his books, there is no work for ought I see will come of them, and he may
return them back where he had them. Here are a parcel of cautions, and notes
of degrees of sin against laws, his cautions in the Dr. who giving liberty to
the Conscience in some cases as not bound by human laws are very significant,
that we may yet walk unblameably in such cases: but as for him who gives none,
but makes the law of man to bind indefinitely, he has nothing to do, but to
require Universal obedience, upon the pain of sin, and can admit of no
transgression under any caution what soever. His rules of distinction likewise,
or of the degrees of sin against human laws, may have good use in the Dr. but
how will they serve his purpose? the case (says he) depends on this single
point, whether human laws ^ind the conscience. that is whether we sin, if we be
not obedient to them? It follows then when this single point or question is
resolved, that they do bind the conscience indefinitely, and that we do sin if
we obey not, the point determined; and as for the discourse of the degrees of
sin, it is another point, that never comes between us in controversy. In the
mean while if this be the determination of the point which is single, what is
become of the pretended difficulty? There is not the least difficulty in this
case at all, if that be all the determination.

Let us suppose the Negative extreme to what he holds, that the conscience were
never concerned in human laws, and that to his words, I beseech you what then,
it were replied tho outward man, which politickly is bound, and may not resist,
it were a question might require more consideration, whether every man's own
security, and consequently the common discretion alone of all men, to keep
themselves only from the danger they threaten, would not be a sufficient
preservative of them: so far is this person wide who speaks so slightly, as if
we should then care for the Princes commands not a straw, when we our selves
have known while we were boys, and made no conscience of the command of any,
yet did we observe what we were bid more certainly through co^rtion, then the
most of us God knows do now the divine precepts through the due conscience we
owe to them. And if so, there is the more reason for this Author to be
considerate, how he bends thus to this other extreme, wherein he brings us into
that open perplexity, which himself sees, but cannot find the way out, either
with his distinction of sins, or ca^u^ons which will not suite his resolution
of the question.

Obedience is not to be denied (says he in the first of these cautions) but
when a law is against the public good. This is the prime indeed of all the
Drs. cautions, and what alone perhaps is enough to be regarded. For when the
Dr. and I do both make this to be the determining distinction (though he has
not spoken indeed so dryly of it, through his large invention and multitude of
matter as I do) between what does and what does not oblige the conscience, in
the matter of human laws, if a man does but observe this caution, the main of
his care is over in this business; he neither will, for the saving of his own
damage, dare to neglect the public interest: nor will he omit obedience but
when he can render a reason. The rest of his cautions I will not concern my
self in, who have the same power to alter these, or frame others, to the over
ruling truth I offer, as they had who at first did frame them; but as for this
which I have named, the very proposing of it in the first place, when the Dr.
brings it in after others, does seem to carry in it some conviction on this
person (when otherwise it no ways serves his purpose) that if a thing be not
for the common good, it cannot in good earnest bind the conscience.

For his distinction or degrees of sin, the main design of opposing my
determination thereby being frustrate, let us see to what use else he can put
it. That may stand him perhaps in some stead for his own excuse, which will not
stand his reader in any for his satisfaction. This Debater then we know in his
late books, having designed to expose the Nonconformist to derision and
contempt, as much as he could, for the withdrawing the people from Schism, and
recalling them to Church (to speak honestly of his end) has thought it fit in
his first book to b^gin his charge of these men with the breach of the Oxford
Act, the charge is very high upon this, that they are not good Christians, not
Ministers of Christ. To this end persisting in the same mind, through his books
even to this Postscript of his appendix, he gives us these notes for the
discovering of the greatness of a sin against human Laws, the Issue whereof
comes to this, that though there may be several Instances of persons besides
living in the breach of other statutes the sin of the Nonconformist against
this act, must come under thos^ more hainou^ aggravations, that when such are
excused, yet as for th^se, we may find he had reason to say what he did, not to
use any other then his own words. And what is that then he will acknowledge ^e
has said? I never said that no man can be a good Christian that transgresses
an Act of Parliament: nor that every transgression of a statute is a deadly
sin: Those are inventions of his own upon occasion of a single Instance which I
gave of defyance to a Law wherein some men live, mark my words, from whence he
draws as Uninersall proposition. And does ^e say so. Let me turn to his book
and see how he can come of thus. The Nonconformist, speaking of his Minister,
the matter is thu^ Ushered in; How can he be a Minister of Christ ( says the
Conformist) who is disobedient to his Sovereign, whom Christ blas to obey? And
then Instancing wherein, he urges this Oxford Act, and concludes, therefore he
is not a good subject, and consequently no good Christian or Minister of
Christ. Let any man judge here whether these words, How can he be a Minister of
Christ who is disobedient to his Sovereign? be not aequivalent with this
proposition. No man that is disobedient to his Sovereign is a Minister of
Christ. With what face then can he accuse me with drawing an Universal
proposition from his words, when there is one express in the book, and from
thence this conclusion is deduced? I never said, does he mean these are not his
very words? away I nor do I say they are, but does not what he says amount
plainly to this very sense? I prove it. Therefore (says he) he is not a good
subject, and consequently not a good Christian. I argue with him from hence
this person is a man of Reason and Logic. Here then is a conclusion, no
conclusion can be good but from an Universal proposition. This Universal
proposition must be this, that whosoever i^ disobedient to his Sovereign, or
transgresses an Act of Parliament is no good Christian. And the Universal
proposition in his book is this, which howsoever we understand (to help him
out) that he means, whosoever transgresses any act of Parliament in such a high
and hanious manner as the Nonconformist does the Oxford act, yet still is a
Universal proposition: either this person therefore must renounce the words in
his book as illogically or falsely concluded, which yet he cannot do, neither
but by acknowledging the universallty, and the denying the truth of the
proposition: or else he must be ashamed here of this unjust accusation of me,
who have done but right to him. But if this denial will not serve him, he is
no^ desti^ute of other shifts. There is no occasion (says he) for thi^ question
whether every transgression of a Statute be no less then a deadly sin, unless
he is of opinion that all sins are equal. By these words he does seem
manifestly here to make some escape upon that term deadly sin, and then he must
distinguish between sin and deadly sin, which no Protestant will allow him to
do, who say that all si^ is mortal; and there was nothing else intended by a
deadly sin, but a sin that deserves or makes one guilty of death. Indeed if
this Person can tell me of any little sin, in opposition to a greater, which a
man may knowingly and wilfully live in, without repentance unto death, and it
shall not damn him, or do him hurt, then I shall like well of his coming off
here, upon this term: but if he cannot, then will not this serve, he must seek
another shift. And what is that in the next place, for he is brought here into
a shuffling condition, that is plain? why we must distinguish between a wilful
living only, in the transgression of a law, and the living in the defiance of
it. The instance I have (says he) is of the defiance of a law in which some men
live. This word defiance therefore he has up three or four times, besides the
cotation in the margent, and bidding us mark the word. But I pray why must the
Waggoner that every day transgresses the law concerning his Wagon, or any
other the like instance, be accounted with this man only to live in the
transgression of that law. and the Nonconformist in his non observance of the
Oxford act be adjudged to live in the defiance of it? Alas! who does not see
here into what a pitiful shifting case he is driven? or who does not perceive
what is worse, that is, the animosity, pevishness, or overbe^tness (to speak
with candor) of the man^ mind against the Nonconformist, which does hinder
him the coming off here with that ingenuity as he should do, which is by
confession of several of his imprudent speeches, and craving pardon for the
intemperance he has used. But in the last place, there are still degrees of
sin, and the man that breaks other laws may not be so deeply guilty as he that
lives in the breach of the act at Oxford. Let us see then what he can allege
for this. The more needful a Magistrate judges a thing to be done or avoided or
the more his will is set upon it, the greater or less is the sin of him who
breaks such a Law. Now he argues from the Preface and the Penalty of the Oxford
act, how much the will of the lawgiver is set upon the observation of that
act, unto which I answer, besides that Dr. Tailor does toll us that the
greatness of the penalty does sometimes show the smalness of a thing that is
forbidden (as tha^ which else would not be regarded) and not the haniousness of
the transgression: it does appear that the will of the law givers in that act,
was set upon the Nonconformist taking the oath there prepared, as that they
would have enforced them to by so great and present a danger, and was the thing
which seemed to them so apt to prevent, the evil supposed in the preface, when
as for their living within five miles of a corporation otherwise, we cannot
think the minds of the Majority to be at all engaged in it. Now this Debater
should have endeavored to give the Nonconformist satisfaction in referrence
to his taking the Oath, if he would have served the State according as the will
of the law-givert were then set, but this was a task which he has declined,
although he was put upon it, and directed to their objections, in the defense
of the proposition.

There is something after this, which may be said, that though this distinction,
or degrees of sins will stand him in no advantage for the opposing my
determination, or justifying his censure of the Nonconformist to be no good
Christian, yet may it be of use to him to alleviate the harshness of his
judgment in the main, that human laws do oblige the Conscience so as without
discrimination he that observes them not, does sin. Hence when he proposes the
case of a lawgiver enjoining a thing to some particular good, for the public,
and it appears that he is mistaken, this Debater does continue still (such an
obedient Soul has he above others) that though he be not bound to be of the
lawgivers judgment, yet does he take himself bound (he means bound in
Conscience) to follow his will even while it were better for the public it
were other wife or dained. There are casts we know sometimes wherein by the
change of things and occasions (as in Seiges) that which was for the public
good does suddenly turn to its hurt. In such instances we are not to obey a law
says Aquinas, which Dr. Tailor has noted: and there is no doubt to me in the
Case, where the lawgiver is mistaken in a matter, the like reason ought to
prevail. But if he be thus resolved, let us know how the degrees of sin will
help him out at a need. Let me suppose a poor man who is render in his
Conscience and fears God, coming to this reverend Person and telling him this
case. His Grandfather got a^^^^ttle money, and built him a small Cottage on
such a waste ground, his Father lived in it, and bestowed more cost of it, and
has left it him, where he and his wife and children have lived comfortably
upon his labor: but now it has so happened, that being the other day at his
Masters where he wrought, he heard one read a certain book called the Friendly
Debate where he perceived, about the very beginning that the Author was of the
mind that a man could not live in the breach of the Law of the Land, and be a
good Christian: and he has understood long by his Father that it is against
the Law for any cottage to be erected withot four acres of ground belonging to
it. Upon this he being afraid of his condition in regard of his open living in
a known wilful transgression of a statute of the Realm, wherein he cannot think
but that it is a very plain defiance of a-Law as that book speaks, he is come
to him to see what he can offer for the re^eiving his Conscience. If this
author here deal roundly and plainly with the man, he must tell him that there
is no remedy but he must pull down his house, and he and his wife and children
be turned to beging, rather then by his living in a known sin without amendment
he should be damned. It he deal otherwise, then he may tell him that though
indeed every transgression of a human Law be sin, yet there are degrees of sin,
and this sin of his is a less sin then that of the Nonconformist living in
the breach of the Oxford Act and therefore he should be of good comfort and go
home in peace. I pray now will this indeed serve a Conscientious man: It is
nothing to him that another's sin is greater then his, he is to look to his own
soul, and if he lives in the least sin with full knowledge and consent, and
hardens his heart in it, he cannot see how he should be saved. So that unless
you satisfy him, and that upon good ground, that every transgression of a Law
is not sin, and then show him how his transgression is but such a one you are
not able to stand him in any stead in his Case. I remember a text of our Lord
which I have often thought upon, that by a man's words he shall be justified and
by his words he shall be cond^m^ed. The ^harises were men very holy in their
profession and did tie very heavy burdens upon others, but when they were to
perform the same themselves they were it is like backward enough: our savior
Christ therefore meets with them, for these shows without reality, and words
without performance. Verily I say unto you that for every Idle word a man shall
speak he shall give on account for it at the day of judgment. The word Idle in
the Original as without work says Causabone de verborum usu (...) is contracted
of (...) every Idle word is every word without deed; and must import thus much
(whatsoever it does more) that when men make strict professions, and determine
so rigidly in points of duty, and do not answer their own dictates and sayings,
let them take heed lest by their words (least ex ore tuo) as being Idle words
they bring not themselves into a just condemnation. I will therefore advise
this worthy person, and all men in resolving Cases of Conscience that they take
heed of setting down any matter for the binding of others, then according to
which in their own practice they dare be content to be judged by. The
determining the obligation of human Laws Indefinitely on the Conscience is more
then any mortal can bear. For my own part I will protest that whilst I allow
the Conscience to be bound, by the Law of men when those Laws tend to the
common good, yet do I not hereby cut my self of from the reserve of any liberty
that may arise to me from a farther disquisition: although I count it but
necessary both to give my reason why in sincerity I hold so, and to deliver my
conception of that obligation.

It is a saying of the Ancients, a man is not born for himself only, but for
his Country which is not writ only in Cicero, but in the heart of all men, for
this is a truth throughout the earth, and delivered by God all along his word,
while he makes our own selves to be the rule of our carriage toward our
Neighbors, that we mind not our own things only, but every one the things of
others. Though we study and seek the tranquillity and peace of those with whom
we live: and consequently in all Societies and Communities, we should regard
the public concern, even above our particular advantage. These are general
moral precepts which are writ I say in the heart of man, and to be proved in
Gods word. The Magistrate I account now is Gods Minister, to consider of, and
then design and appoint the particular things or instances wherein every one in
their several places are serviceable in these duties and ends; and upon that
designation of the particular things, the obligation flows from those general
precepts of God, upon the Conscience, for their observation. I say there is the
general Institution of God for Societies, and that men in society shall mind
and endeavor in their place the public concern, and not their own only. The
Magistrate is his commissi^ted Officer to design appoint or set apart, and so
declare the instances or particular things which are conducive to this good of
the community which they all are bound to intend upon the designation,
appointment or declaration of these things, the obligation flows immediately
from the general institution of God upon the Conscience for the observing of
them, when there could flow none else from these particulars themselves. The
particular laws or things themselves we know are not the precepts of God, and
the Conscience is obliged only by Gods will; but the general institution of
society, and that we should seek and endeavor in our place the good of the
Public as our own, and above our own, in such particulars as be conducive
truly to that end, is of God; and the Magistrate (I say) according to his
office designing these particulars, we come (not ratione consequentis, or
absolute, only because such things commanded, but ratione conseq^^ntiae, or ex
hypothesi, because such things commanded do come under the divine institution)
to have the Conscience bound to their performance. From hence it follows
likewise that if these instances or particulars do not indeed come under the
service of these general duties or end, such a law is to be looked upon as cut
off from Gods institution, and so can have no authority derived to it from God,
for the obliging the Conscience of any, when yet the outward man (out of the
case of sin) is still acknowledged to be bound. The particular commands of the
Magistrate does (I say) bind the outward man: but the general institution or
the moral duty in general of seeking the welfare of the Public, and not our
own only, is that which binds the Conscience which otherwise were not bound.

As for the fifth Commandment, which requires honor and obedience (such as is
meet) to our superiors, I do not here distinguish it from, but include it in
this general institution, for that command must be understood as a
comprehensive thing, containing in it the whole commission, the superior has
from God, which granting him his power to command, does also set the bounds and
limitations to that power, that he command no other things, or no otherwise
then as he has appointed: and upon supposition that the superior acts only
according to his commission, that is, according to his prescribed duty, or rule
in civil things, this Commandment of God do^^ lay an obligation on the subject
to obey him out of Conscience. If you will say upon this that the Magistrate
has a derived authority from God, for this very act of determining the
material obj^ct of our obedience, and therefore besides the obligation which
flows from his institution when the matter is determined, the Consc^ence must
be obliged from the Magistrates determination it self, by virtue of that derived
authority from him, I have no need to gain say it, and whether you will make it
a double obligation, or an obligation from a double causality, or a mixed
obligation divine and human, it matters nothing to our dispute, so long as Gods
authority in the things commanded, or his allowance that they be commanded be
first acknowledged, before we look upon the Conscience to be indeed concerned
in them. This is certain, every authority that is derived must be limited, and
that according to the will of him from whence it is derived. The authority God
reserves in his own hands is that alone which is unlimimited and infinite. Now
the limits God has set the Magistrate as to the determining the particulars of
his subjects duty (which is his power of making laws) comes to this, that he
choose them only out of that general matter that is conducive to the end of
government, the public good (that is to observe the rule of things political):
If he shall therefore appoint any particular things for his own profit,
pleasure, or humor, which come not under this general matter, (to wit, quae
habet rationem publici commodi) as God has prescribed, it is manifest that he
acts not according to his commission, and so can have no power derived from
thence, for those acts or laws, and consequently however such laws do bind us
in his courts, they are of no validity in the court of Conscience. We will
acknowledge in whatsoever he commands an authority divine for his Office and so
if he will inflict the penalty we must not resist. But we can not acknowledge
Gods authority in this or that exercise of his office. that we should do the
thing out of Conscience. In short, we are indeed bound upon the penalty of his
law, (if you will) but we are not bound upon the pain of sin, to obey the
Magistrate in every case.

I must profess here in the words of truth, and soberness that so far as so
mean a person as I am can di^cern^ there is a great deal of darkness has
spread it self upon the face of the earth, and more especially over many
learned men, who when they have forsaken that light which they have flowing
immediately from God, on their hearts to to seek unto the Cisterns of others
works and books, they have been not only misled themselves, but bereft us of
many truths of the clearest evidence, and greatest concernment, such as this
particular^y concerning the obligation of human laws, how, when and how far the
Conscience of man (which belongs directly only to the Regiment of Gods its or
can be bound by them. If we will therefore but go as near as we can to the
fountain, and look into our own minds, into all which God shines according to a
several measure with his light, though he influence but some with his saving
grace, we may find, that as we are instructed in matters of Religion to seek
unto supernatural revelation, and so to account that whatsoever is agreeable to
the rule of Gods word is obliging to the Conscience, and what is not cannot
oblige us as worship: and as in matters of morality, what is and what is not
agreeable to the law of nature, does or does not oblige us as virtue or vice:
so in these matters which are of a cival or political concern only, we do find
that the rule which God ^lmighty has written in the heart for us to judge by,
and is the supreme law in such matters, (which in words also is famously
acknowledged) is the common good: so that according as any thing commanded in
human laws is agreeable or not, to that rule which is Gods rule for these
things, the Conscience is bound or not bound by the same. Nay as things are not
only religiously or morally good and evil according as they agree and not agree
with the word of God, and the moral law in the heart, but the more or less they
agree with the rule, the more or less good or evil are they: so the more or
less any thing commanded in a law does agree with the supreme rule of God, or
law, in these political things, by so much the greater or less is the sin of
not observing them. So short indeed is this Person and others in their notes of
the degrees of sin against human laws, that the formal difference it self of
these aggravations or diminutions in respect to the conscience (whereof alone
Divines should speak when this man's differences from the will of the law giver,
belongs to the Lawyer) is not considered. And now when it has pleased God
Almighty by so inconsiderable a vessel, and in such a kind of careless and
unregarded expression, (which others may mend) that the exellency of the truth
may appear to be the more from him, to deliver to the world this law of his, to
govern and resolve men in these cases, I do not know how few, or how many there
be that will receive it. When Moses went up to God into the Mount, and brought
down the law of the two Tables, it was a glorious matter? there is no man can
go up to God now in that manner: but every one may go to him, (if we search
after him who is not far from any of us as Paul speaks) as he dwells in that
light which he has put into our hearts, and from thence (as one who has been
conversing there rather then with the videturs of men) have I brought you down
this law, or rule of his will in Politicalls, which though the generation of
men no where, even amongst the most savage, is without, yet have they taken
notice of it so little hitherto, that waxing vain in their own imaginations,
they have not understood, when they have acknowledged, that this indeed is the
supreme law to all others that are human, by which they must be tried, approved
overruled, and according to which, and to which alone, can the Conscience of
any be obliged in their obedience which they yield to these matters.

CA. V.
THere remains the last thing I have to do, which is the surveigh of this
Debaters exceptions, or other passages not yet considered, and to say something
to them according as they are of moment. This general does contain the
principle thing the Debater stands upon, and which requirers the larger field
for my debate with him, I shall devide that one business, therefore into three
succeding Chapters, and leave a last for the rest.

CAP. VI.
THe great and principal exception he has, and which will deserve the pains,
is upon a question which comes in as necessary to be asked upon my
determination, and it is this. It being supposed, and to be granted, that the
will of God is that alone which does oblige the Conscience, and that according
as a thing commanded in human Laws does conduce to the pub^ick good or not, so
is it agreeable or not to his will: the question is who shall be judge, whether
a thing commanded by a Law be for the common good or no, and consequently
agreeable to Gods will and obligatory to the Conscience. I answer every Man
must be Judge on necessity himself in reference to his own action. I prove
this. Every Man must judge of his own actions whether they be agreeable to the
will of God or no. But to judge whether a thing commanded by a Law be agreeable
to Gods will, is to judge whether it be conducive to the common good or not.
Therefore every Man is judge himself, whether a thing commanded be for the
public good or no, in reference to his own action. Again, to judge whether we
are bound in Conscience to any thing commanded in a Law, is to judge whether it
have Gods authority or not. But a Law or any thing commanded by a Law has Gods
authority or not, according as it is conducive to the common good. Therefore a
Man must judge, whether that which is commanded him in a Law be for the common
good or not, to judge whether he be bound or not bound to it in Conscience. I
must needs say there are some have had occasion to be more ready to resolve
this question, then otherwise they have desired. We have had late impositions,
and thought many times in what sense they might be taken. We have come quickly
to see, if they be taken, it must not be in any sense of our own, we can frame,
which were most loose; but it must be in the imposers meaning. This meaning is
not certain, but some have believed thus and some otherwise. In the upshot then
this is that I have been brought, in my last thoughts, to conclude, that if a
Man after the best means he can use for the understanding the Imposers meaning,
can take what is imposed in that sense which he verily believes in his own
heart to be their meaning, he shall do well and ought to take it; if he cannot,
he must for bear and choose to suffer. Being thus prepared in order to the
determining a man's own act, about the taking an imposition, when the question
lies upon the meaning of the Lawgiver, and the subject I count being changed
only into his general end in this, I had no cause to stick here, where there
is but one and the same answer to be given to all such questions. To wit, that
notwithstanding there may be several good cautions of thinking reverendly of
our superiors judgments, and not leaning too much on our own, with the like
words used in the way, we must come to this result at last, that according as
every man for his own part (after the best enquiry or exercise of his reason he
can make) does believe in his very Conscience whether the thing commanded in a
Law be for the public good or no, I mean it in reference to his own doing it,
that is most plainly according as he believes in his own soul that the doing
the thing which is commanded (by his example or otherwise) is conducive to the
public good or not, so must he account it agreeable or not to Gods will, and
his Conscience accordingly be bound, or loosed in regard to the performance.

I will convince the Debater from his own mouth and from the thing it self.

From his own mouth we have a Case has fallen very luckily before mentioned.
What if Magistrate mistake in a Law, and the matter be not conducive to that
end for the public he ordained it? He answers he is not bound to be of the
Magistrates opinion, but may judge it better the Law were otherwise, yet thinks
he is bound to obey it. But if this man and so another may be, and is, of a
contrary opinion to the Magistrate, that the thing commanded is not for the
public benefit, as he acknowledges in that Case of his own putting, then has
he acknowledged in effect all that for which he cavills so much at me upon my
answer to this question.

For the thing it self, In the first place no mortal man on Earth, can have
power to make me, or him, or any understand, to think, or believe otherwise
then we do. If I do think then, that such a thing commanded be not for the
common good, so I shall think, and must think do what the Magistrate can, or my
self either. And it (...) do believe so then do I judge or believe that i^ is
not according to Gods will, and consequently that I am not bound in Conscience
(...). If you say I should not think so, it is unlawful to judge so, you
contradict this man, who says, he is not bound absolut^ly to be of the
Lawgivers opinion, that all such things are for the public good as he
decrees; which is as truly, as stoutly said against himself, for the matter
will not bear it to be otherwise. In the second place, Conscience is a faculty
which God has put into Man, to judge of his own actions, in reference to his
approving or condemning him for them. Whatsoever actions then are accountable
unto God at the great day, are to be judged at present by Conscience. We are
accountable now no doubt to God for our civil actions, as well as others; and
when in matters that are civil, those things have or have not his approbation,
as they do, or do not conduce to the common good, it follows that every man
must judge of the things commanded him, whether they be or they be not to the
common good, that he may be accountable unto God, according to what he is bound
or not bound in Conscience by them. In the third place our Protestant Divines
in their cont oversy which the Papist Do judice, do allow to every man a
judgment of private discretion which is the same with this judgment of
Conscience, that what means soever we use for our information, we must be the
last judges our selves of the things we do, whether they are agreeable to Gods
will or not, and according to our own belief must resolve upon the practice or
forbearance of them. It seems to me now a thing unreasonable and injurious unto
mankind, if we shall take away from the subject this judgment of private
discretion in things that are political which we cannot but allow them in all
other their moral and religious actions. If there be an infallible judge in
Civils we may expect one in religions matters. But if there be no Pope nor
Counsels but may err in their Canons, there are no Lawgivers but may err in
their Laws, and there is no cause why any should indeed be more shy of granting
the subject this judgment of discretion in reference to what the Prince has
Enacted, any more then what the Church has declared, but only that they could
not so well tell the rule to judge of things Civil as they could to judge of
Doctrines and moral Precepts. As God therefore has given us the Scriptures
for a rule of religion, that when any thing is required of us to believe or
practice as necessary to Gods worship or our salvation, we may and are to try
it, by this rule, and can be obliged thereby no farther then we do judge it
agreeable to this rule: and as in morals he has given the law of nature for
our rule: so has the Almighty given to man his rule also in things political
(which he has written in his fleshly tables, as sure as there is any law of
nature, and that is Gods will, as the scripture is) whereby the Laws of every
Commonwealth are to be tried and judged, the Lawgiver being accountable to
God according as he acts by it, and the People obliged in Conscience, so far to
obey his will as he commands agreeably to it: and this Rule or Law as I have
before said, is the common good. Things are religiously good or evil as they
agree or agree not with the Scriptures. Things are moraly good or evil as they
agree or agree not with the Law of nature. Things politically good or evil as
they agree or agree not to the public advantage. If I am commanded any thing
about my religion I will go to the Scripture, if that commands me otherwise I
cannot obey it. I will go to the moral Law in matters of virtue and vice. In
political things, or things required by human Laws, I must go to this rule I
have proposed: I must judge of them as good or evil in their kind by that. If
my doing the thing will not answer the rule, I am not bound in Conscience to
active obedience. In the last place if this be not granted, when you allow the
subjects to be reasonable agents in things religious, or moral, that may bring
what is superior command's of that nature to the rest of Gods will, you turn
them into bruites in things civil while they may bring what they are commanded
to no test, in relation to their own actions. If you deny me my judgment of
private discretion, you will not let me act as a man. Indeed this person will
have the liberty to judge otherwise then the Magistrate does, and yet be bound
in Conscience to obey, which is to be beneath a brute, for the best act
spontaneously, and follow the dictates of their sense, if they be not hindered.
But this man will have his judgment one way, that the thing is not good, and
his will and actions another way, and that not upon constraint from without,
but upon the principle of Conscience, which is a contradiction against all good
sense. But as for others and this man too otherwhere (who makes it a placing
our selves in the throne to determine otherwise concerning the public welfaer,
then the proper judge of it does, so consistent is he with himself, and such
need has he to be angry if one advise him to be more reflective^ on what he
writes (...) that will not let us have a judgment different from the Lawgiver,
and so to act only upon theirs, they make men to become Horse as the and the
Mule, upon whom the rider gets up, and they must go on, the why, and the
whither as the driver pleases. But if this be the Issue which this man's opinion
will lead us to, and this son of Circe should expect by the conjuration of
these few leaves to transform us presently out of our humanity, that we should
be content to be governed hence forward without, the exercise of our own
reason, or assent that is, not to act out of election, but to be moved in
civil obedience only as we are driven, we shall have little cause to be very
forward to hearken to him. He may lay down his Penn and take a Whip in his hand
and go Whistle.

But let us hear his exceptions to this answer. Who shall be judge whether a
Law be for the public good or no. His answer is ready at his Tongues end, for
he needs not go deep for it. The Magistrate must judge, what is for the public
good for the making the Law, and we must judge as to our obedience to it. Then
which it is hard to write any thing more inconsiderate and dangerous. I do
acknowledge this to be my judgment, and for which I have offered here some
reasons, and it is not his saying this answer is inconsiderate and dangerous
ought to prejudice it, if it be well adviced, and there be no danger indeed in
it. For neither does this man know the previous thought on other occasions upon
which this has been set down: nor has he yet understood the state of my
opinion right, that he should charge it with any of those consequences, as are
but the Lions, and the Bears, the Chariots and the Armies, that fly in the
Clouds of his own Immagination. But let us hear the reason of this wonderful
decision which he has as ready as he had his answer. Because says he every
man is made by God the judge of his own actions, I cannot for my life see how
that follows from this, though I have put his reasoning into the plainest form
that ever I could. It is pity but this man's life should be saved, and
therefore I will tell him my reasoning Those Laws, I was showing, which be not
for the common good are not agreeable to Gods will, or have not his Authority,
and so bind not the Conscience. The question upon this was as it is set down,
and the answer and the reason with the addition of the words following. Because
God has made every man judge of his own actions, and consequently of all
circumstances, whether they are agreeable or not to his will for his forbearing
or doing of them. If God then has made every man judge of those things which
he is to do in all the circumstances, whether they be agreeable or not to his
will, then must he judge whether those things that he is commanded to do in
human Laws be for the common good or no, because those Laws only are agreeable
to his will (I had laid down before) which are for the common good, and those
that are not are devoid of his Authority and bind not the Conscience. This I
deny not to be my very substance, and as the reasoning is manifest, and will
appear so (I doubt not) to the indifferent, so must it not be thought to be
inculcated too often, either there, or here, seeing no man can stand safe in
dispute, but he that knows what is, and when he is upon his foundation. For the
man's disdainful expressions I have (I account) my satisfaction, and he his
sufficient reproof, that he has no more cause for them. It is not sense to say
the Magistrate must judge what is for the public good in reference to his act
of making the Law, and we in reference to ours of obedience to it; for he does
not only judge but enjoin, when he makes a Law; which leaves us no liberty but
to judge whether his will and Gods do not clash together. And why is not this
sense, what reason is this that (...) is not sense? if he could have said the
Magistrate does enjoin, and not judge at all before he enjoins it, then he
might have pretended to say thus. But if the Magistrate must not enjoin any
thing before he has considered, and judges it to be for the common good, and
if he does enjoin any thing that is not for the common good he has no
Authority from God for it, then does it appear necessary, that we do consider
likewise, and judge whether it be for the common good, and have his Authority,
or else we cannot be bound in Conscience to it. And thus you see very good
sense, evidence and fullness in this answer to the question and that the
Magistrates will, declaration of his will, or enjoining a thing, does not take
away our liberty and duty, to consider when he has enjoined it, whether we be
yet in Conscience in obliged, or in prudence only, and the outward man to
obedience. The mistake of this person is that he thinks we may not judge of a
Law, but only whether it be against Conscience, when we must no doubt judge
also whether it be obliging to Conscience, or otherwise how shall we make
Conscience of it? We are not to judge only whether it claspes with Gods will,
but whether it agrees with it. If the Magistrates will be not against Gods
will, yet if it has not his will and authority with it, it is not obligatory
to the Conscience. The Magistrates will binds not asunder from Gods, In morals
the case is not thus, whatsoever is not according to Gods will is against it:
But in civil and indifferent things a thing may not be against his will, that
is against any moral precept (as our obedience I speak of to some human Laws)
and yet have none of his Authority for it. Thus prudence, the preservation of
my self, and the Magistrates honor, may prevail with me to do a thing which I
think otherwise I have no obligation to do in my Conscience.

I will yet add. I distinguish my obedience, and my obedience out of
Conscience, or my obedience out of other general rersons, and my obedience out
of Conscience, to this particular command. I do not resolve my obedience, into
a judgment of private discretion whether a Law be for the common good or no,
for I can apprehend easily that when God has required the Magistrate to make
no Law but according to this rule, no unjust, or unprofitable Law, he has not
yet commanded that I should never obey such a Law. I may obey out of a general
implicit apprehension of duty; or a singular love to my superiors person, for
fear of his displeasure: to avoid the danger of the Law: or out of several
prudentiall considerations, regarding the Magistrate, my self, or others: when
yet If I come to the point, whether I am bound in Conscience to do the
particular thing commanded, that is whether there lies a divine obligation on
me as well as that from the Law to do it I am on necessity then to examine it,
by the rule which God has set me, and that being no other but the common good
in politicalls, I must resolve my obedience out of Conscience into this
judgment, when I resolve my prudentiall obedience otherwise. It may suffice me
therein, so long as the thing is not sinful, that I am obliged by man. It may
be but very rare if. I question my Rulers commandment, which is like to be only
perhaps in some grievous pressure. If the Law be bad, my obedience yet and my
example may do good, nor does the Magistrates abuse of his office I hope take
away my liberty to endure it if I please. The true ends moreover hapily of
obedience, may be obtained, when the end of Ruling is neglected. Nay the common
good may be promoted possibly, by my yiedling to a Law when the Law it self
does cross it. And farther my disobedience may do more hurt to the common good
then the obeying that hurtful command would do. So far am I from
discouraging any from obedience to human Laws (as a thing generally good and
prudentiall) when I would keep the Conscience free, and not have it burdened
with sin for every want of their performance. I see indeed by this and other
learned persons, what an immagination they have got, that if I resolve the
question whether I am in Conscience obliged to obey such a Law, by my private
judging of the thing commanded whether it be agreeable or not to the common
good I do usurp the place of the Ruler and make myself only my own Lawgiver,
as they are apt to speak. But this is a mistake, for besides that when I judge
of the thing commanded by its Rule, this judgment of mine is not the maker of
my duty but the discerner of it, and so I do not become any Lawgiver to my
self in the business: I distinguish the obligation of a human Law, and the
obligation of Conscience (formaliter. and simpliciter) by that Law. If I
resolved the whole obligation of human Laws into this Ru^e, and my judgment of
the Law by it, so that I held it must never be obeyed on other reasons, or that
if I were punished for not obeying, I was not bound to submit, then did I offer
injury indeed to my Ru^er and usurped his Government. But if I resolve only the
obligation of my Conscience by that Law into this rule, and my judgment of it
accordingly, I usurp no power of the Magistrates, which I leave him still over
the exterior man, but I keep God only as I ought in his own feat of the
Conscience. And verily if the Conscience of man be concerned in every human
law, I would fain know, how any of our great Clerks can say that human laws
bind not in the case of intolerable griveance. If God does command me to do
the thing, it is not any griveance of mind can excuse me, but if it be man
indeed commands it only and not God, the griveance will be reason enough for me
to call it in question, and to avoid it if I may; but the reason of my
non-obedience, must not have this foundation, that it is my grievance, or that
I cannot endure it, but that consideratis considerandis, I am not obliged to it
in Conscience.

CAP. VII.
THus far his exceptions are but words, let us pass now to his reasons against
my answer.

His first reason is, It is no easy thing to judge what is best for the Peoples
good, Kings themselves find it necessary to have their Councets to advise about
it. To judge what is best for the Peoples good is indeed a high matter. To
judge only whether a thing be for the common good or not, is another matter.
The judgment of every one is free, and any body may judge of any thing as he
is able, and as he will. The Cock may pass his judgment on the Pearl he
scraped up. That which comes to carry any stress upon judging, is the
consideration of the effect that depends upon that judgment. The judging of a
thing which a Man himself has to do, has this effect depending on it, the
doing his duty, every one is to judge of all those things and circumstances
which belong to his own acts, whether or no they be agreeable to Gods will,
that he may do as he ought; and the rule of this will in politicals, I have
declared. There is the act now of the Magistrate, and the act of the Subject.
There is a great difference of the concern or moment that lies on a judgment
of the same thing when the act of the one depends upon it, and when there
depends upon it the act only of the other. The act of the Magistrate is to make
the law, and see it executed; the act of the People is to obey it. By this
first reason of his against my answer, do I see good reason for it, and the
sufficiency of it. The Magistrate judges whether a thing be for the common
good, or according to our supreme rule in reference to his passing it into a
law, and then to cause it to be executed. The People and every particular
person does judge, whether the thing commanded be for the common good, in
reference only to the obligation of their Consciences to obedience. Upon the
judgment of the Magistrate, there does depend an effect of universal
concernment, that is the obligation of a whole Nation to live according to the
Law he makes, upon the judgdement of each particular when the law is made,
there depends no concern but a man's own, and that respecting his inward man
only. Now its certain that the Magistrate in regard of such an effect as
depends upon his judgment, has need indeed of the greatest wisdom, and the
ablest Council, and he cannot be too cautions in his proceeding, seeing if he
be mistaken, and the Consciences of the Subjects be not obliged by such a law,
yet are their persons liable to be compelled and they must not resist, which
may prove a vast inconvenience, and to be avoided only by a right information
at first about the matter. But as for a private person who judges not what is
best for the peoples good (as he speaks right in regard to the Magistrate) but
only judges of the thing commanded whether it be agreeable or not to the will
of God, or the rule of his (which he has given to the world about Politicals,
if they forget not to mind it, to wit) that it be in ^eneral for their good,
the effect which (I have said) does attend such a judgment, is of that nature
only as requires no greater understanding or discretion, then every man has
for himself to act by in all the rest of his life and conversation. He judges
here according to his Rule in these things, as he does in other of his actions
according to the word whether he be bound or not bound in Conscience to them.
And God requires of him to judge and act but according to his talent in all
business whatsoever. He will acknowledge the outward man to be bound, and in a
matter of his soul which concerns no body but him, or the inward obligation of
his Conscience, you must leave him to God and his own Judgment.

His next reason is, That when Men know what is conducing to their good, they
are not apt to do it without a Law. And what does this prove or contradict? It
proves it good therefore that the people have a Lawgiver or Governor, and that
he should be wiser and better then they, as Plato may urge it: But does it
follow they may not therefore judge, whether the thing commanded be for their
good; Surely this will be a good reason why the people should judge of it. For
if the good they conceive in it, is the reason they admit to have any Law, and
the argument to press them to obey it, then must they judge of that good, and
whether it be conducive to that good or not. In the mean while the difference
of the reason and ends, (which is distinguished, in the Magistrates judging of
a thing to be for the common good or not, and the peoples does sufficiently
declare the weakness and vanity of such speeches, as this Man has several of.
He that makes every Man judge of what is for the peoples good, takes away the
principal power of the Magistrate. And why so? as if it were an act of power,
and that usurped for any but the Prince to have a judgment of discretion over
his civil actions. Again, if the people be able to judge of that there is no
need of any Law or Lawgiver. As if when men knew their duty they needed no
Magistrate to make them do it, and that while himself too is telling us the
need of Laws, because men a^e not like to prefer the public good though they
comprehend it, before that of their own particular persons. I cannot I
perceive, be thoroughly intent to answer what is insignificant, but the
substance in the main of these two reasons comes to this, that every man is not
able to bring the thing commanded by the Magistrate to the rule, so as to judge
whether it be for the common good or not, and therefore they must act only upon
the judgment of the Lawgiver, and consequently be no reasonable agents, in
their Political obedience. For satisfaction therefore to this, Let us conceive
the Magistrate commanding something moral or Religious, there are no
Protestants but do hold that every man for himself must bring here what is
commanded to the rule of the moral Law and Scripture, and according as himself
believes it consonant or not to the rule he judges it, so is he bound to obey
it or not to to obey it. Now let any man who has but the heart to think and
speak with integrity, consider whether a rude and illiterate man that never
could read a word in the Bible, be more able to judge whether a thing commanded
by the Magistrate be agreeable or not to the word of God; or whether it be
conducive or not to the common good? suppose the Waggoner as unlearned as any
man, I will ask whether such a man be not more able to judge of the Law
concerning Wagons, that is whether it be good for the high ways and
consequently whether he had best or not observe the act, then to judge whether
the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, or whether whatsoever is
contained in the whole Book of Common Prayer with the Rites and Ceremonies, be
agreeable or not to the Scriptures of the old and New Testament? I suppose
there is no man will have the hardi^sse to oppose such a manifest conviction.
And if in regard to his practice, this man and every other that uses the
Common Prayer must judge as well as he can of the lawfulness of it, or else he
cannot act in faith: and so likewise of all those doctrines or practices he
yields unto them, then will there I hope be no stumbling block left here upon
this account, I do advance therefore and rest upon this one argument, if the
incapacity, unfitness, or little ability that some men have to judge of what is
required by the Magistrate, whether it be agreeable or no to the common good,
be a reason sufficient for the denying to the subject such a judgment: then
must the lesser ability of such to judge whether that which is required be
agreeable to the word of God, be a reason sufficient to discharge them from
judging of it by the word. But the consequent is false, and therefore the
antecedent. By the way, observe, if any man distinguish between judging of a
Law whether it be for a common good: and judging of the thing commanded by a
law, or rather of a man's own doing the thing commanded, whether it be for the
public good or not, I am to be understood of the last, when I say the
Magistrate judges of the thing in reference to his passing it into a law and we
judge of it so passed in reference to our obedience or obligation by it.

His third reason is the same with the first. The people are so far from being
able to judge, that the wisest Princes find it difficult, only we have more
words for the enlargement; which consist partly in a grave kind of discourse
from a passage of a Bishop Bramhall, of the several things and circumstances
that the Lawgiver is to weigh in his making of a law, which the people cannot
consider and attend unto: and then in an idle descant upon this, that it is not
fit therefore that laws should be suspended till the subjects be agreed they
are for their good, with the like words, as if there were any indeed ever
dreamed that a Lawgiver, who is with us the Parliament, could not make a law
until they had consulted the people first, whether they all of them judged the
matter such, that if it were passed into a law, they should be bound in
Conscience to the performance, and before they had an affirmative answer from
them (who must be made loath too to be satisfied about it) they could pass no
act or statute of the Realm. This is the sense in which this man let his pen
run here, and then concludes. The Prince is in an ill case who has such
subjects, and he is not in very good, whose Divines begin to instill such
doctrine into them If there be any thing in those more words and the same
reason that seems of moment, it is already answered I count by distinguishing
the part of the Lawgiver, the subject, whose judgment of a thing commanded in
a law already passed, for the satisfiying himself whether he be obliged in
Conscience to the doing, can by no means prejudice the act of the Lawgiver in
the passing the law as is manifest, nor does it throw it down being passed. For
this is a mistake in this person very palpable, as if a human law could not be
of force unless a man's Conscience be obliged by it. I observed this in him
before where he said, Laws while they do oblige tie the Conscience, and that
the cause of his error was the want of present knowledge to distinguish between
Political and moral obligation. The obligation which is on the Conscience is
moral and can be no other, and passes on it I have said from Gods institution
of our general duty: but the obligation which is Political belongs to the
outward man and may stand good when the moral ceases, and for as much as this
obligation of the outward man it self does so arise from the commandment of God
for subjection, and that we should not resist, it may appear to the impartial
that will consider aright of what is said, that the question or single point
between this man and I concerning the obligation of human Laws, in reference
only to the conscience, is really and in good earnest very little or not at all
material to the Magistrate, or the civil Government, which way soever it is
determined. And when there are so many learned men of diverse sorts who exercise
their liberty in maintaining the opinion of either extreme without control or
prejudice to the world, its a thing hardly becoming either a temperate mind,
or modest Learning, or that I should have most expected from this Author a
free Theology, to express himself in this manner, as if a man could not
endeavor the finding out a middle way that is so needful in such a
controversy but he must be adjudged one that is broaching of something against
the State, and deserved correction.

His fourth reason is, Grant the subjects such a power (that is, a power only
of judgeing of their own civil acts) and in a little time no law shall be
observed. He proceeds, Taxes will not be paid. He goes on. There will be
Insurrections and Rebellion. Upon this, he brings in certain narrations, of the
Subsidy of Head money in Richard the Seconds time and what followed; of the aid
granted to Henry the Seventh in his third year and the Northern Rebellion; then
of a subsidy in his thirteenth year when the Cornish-men took up arms, then of
the case of Henry the eight about Aliens, and of one John Lincoln a Broaker
that was hanged. See more in a certain dialogue between a Couceellor of state,
and a Justice, he has in his study; for this it is for the man to light on a
new book, he must by all means be teling us of what he was reading last. And
thus had we at the beginning of these Papers from the tenth argument of
Bellarmine against Image worship, the relation of the Iconomachi and what
befell them in the time of Leo Isaurus; in the time of Constantinus Copronomus;
in the time of the horrible cold and freezing of the Pontick Sea, the drought
after, and the death of the Emperor, The man has a strange fruitful
application. This brings to my remembrance an advice once I received from an
ingenious and prudent Woman, who seeing me over engaged in dispute sometimes
with an Anabaptist, who was a man of much talk and being not willing I should
be so much concerned: you must not says she, argue with these men in the way
you do; you lay down the subject, and speak upon that, and then think to hold
them to it, and are moved when they speak from the point, and so are
confounded; but you should (says she) give them leave to speak so long until
you can lay hold on something that they say, and whatsoever it is, you must
speak of that; and by this means while you take them up still upon their last
words, whether it be to the point or not, you will never want matter no more
then they do, and by the use of their own weapon may deal with them. I must
profess if this man who has so apt an expression, do come to get this knack of
it, as he appears to have in these continuations and apendix, he may continue
his continuations while he lives, and I know no body able to dispute with him,
unless I could light on the fellow that would preach with any body, but it
should be (he said) in a Negative way, And Peter went to Antioch. He went not
to be drunk, here he speaks of drunkenness, gluttony, and all manner of excess.
He went not to lie with women, there he speaks of fornication, and uncleanness
and all other deadly sin. But he went to preach, there he speaks of the
Scriptures from Genesis to the Revelation, of the Fathers the Schoolmen, the
Councels, and all the books that ever he read to this day.

For the reason it self without its appurtenance, I have I account prevented it
in the state of my opinion. The state alone of what I have said, will wipe off
any such mistaken consequence, which he would injuriously bring upon it. It is
one question whether we are to observe a law: and another whether we are bound
in Conscience to observe it. The question between us in the bottom of the point
is not concerning outward observation: but the inward obligation of
Consciences. And the truth is as I was saying at the close of the other reason,
that this business does not really concern the Magistrate, or the Commonwealth
directly at all (though indirectly and ex consequenti any thing may concern any
body) for what is it to the Magistrate or the community, so long as he can
enforce the thing to be done if he will, whether a man does do it out of
Conscience, or out of discretion only: out of fear of God, or fear of the law,
or his sword. The Magistrate cannot take any cognizance out of what principle a
man acts; the judgment is not within his jurisdiction, and if a man does not
act out of Conscience, he cannot make him. It is sufficient, so long as a man
acknowledges his authority from God, that he must therefore be subject and must
not resist, and consequently if in good earnest he stand upon it, and will have
obedience from him, let it be in any thing but sin, there is no help for him
that is, he may not help himself by resistance) but he must yield to it,
whether he will or no. This is that which secures government, and Governors.
Let every man be held bound in Conscience but thus far, and as for the rest, it
is a matter concerns each ones own soul only and his private peace, and it will
become those that are prudent to be very tender what they determine in the
business.

It is true this reverend Person thought I believe he had spoken well in his
saying, that it is hard to write any thing more inconsiderate and dangerous
then that I have: but if a man should write any word against subjection to
Magistracy, or his own present Magistrate, or that it were lawful to resist if
the Magistrate should impose any law against the common good (when yet it is
not sin, I account many times not to obey it, and escape if we can without
resistance), this let me tell him were dangerous (I cannot say more dangerous
because the other is not dangerous,) that the man may receive some shame and
conviction for his own being so inconsiderate in his censure of what he
understood no better. This Debater shall not have I will warrant him, a breath
or Title of this nature from me. Nay if a law be good I mean politically good
(and a law is politically good where it is for the common good,) I am ready to
believe and hold it is obliging, obliging to the Conscience, not only that we
must obey rather then resist (which we must do if the thing be politically
evil, unless we count suffering to be better) but if we could escape with man,
we must yet do it, I count least we offend God, if a law be not politically
good, I say we must not resist for all that, and upon that account rather then
suffer we are liable to obedience. And what is there now, or what reason is
there that any should desire more. Let us here our man of Proverbs. A man must
not resist (says our Casuist) that is express, and rather then resist he must
suffer, but this is to steal a goose, and stick a feather; I thank him first
for this, that he has not left out this passage wholly in this place, least
his Reader else might have thought me indeed some dangerous person, whereas
these words have acquitted me; and I answer, that this Goose he speaks of my
stealing, is the thing ought to be stolen or removed, and that which he makes
so light of, is to be brought in the Room of it, to wit, this man is of opinion
that human laws even all laws indefinitely bind the Conscience, so that a man
must sin if he break any of them, This is his Goose, that is, his foolish
opinion, an opinion intolerable: and instead of this, that which I would bring
in is, that though we conceive there be some laws, which if a man sometimes
observes not, he is not to charge himself with sin, yet if he be compelled by
the lawful Magistrate, rather then resist he must suffer, and rather then
suffer obey. But why must he (says he) when he is already persuaded that he
need not unless he be forced? this is strange! where is this Debaters reason! I
say he must, though he should not sin else by neglect, because he is forced,
and cannot help it, but for avoiding of suffering, he does it. But wrath or
suffering is not to be feared when the multitude is agreed not to be injured. I
answer here is the want of the distinction which this author would not take
from me, between the authority which is in the Magistrates Person, and that of
his commands. The one is from God immediately, the other mediately by virtue of
the things commanded being for the common good, and so particulars of that
general moral duty which is required of God. Some may use other words to
express this distinction by the Magistrates authority it self, and the exercise
of it in his commands or laws: but this must be known that distinguish we must
here to the same sense I intend, and be very careful too of the distinction or
we shall be lost. If the multitude be agreed not to do a thing that is ill, it
is well I take it, and as they ought, it was manifestly Jonathans case. But if
they agree together not to suffer, if the Magistrate will enforce the thing,
let there be but the least Officer will act in it, then they resist, and sin
against God, and it is not justify able upon any terms, suppose a whole army
and but two men in it will stand by the Prince, he may. I must affirm to speak
strictly on the point of Conscience, by these two men alone, punish a whole
army for any thing they refuse to do, and they must bear it, and cannot help
themselves, but with sin which they must not do. For he that resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God, and receives to himself damnation. We
know the case under Maximinian, when a whole legion of Christians were
commanded to sacrifice, and they chose rather to suffer decimation twice over,
being executed man by man, rather then defend themselves while their lives were
at stake, and the sword was in their hands. Such a Conscience ought we to have
of our subjection (and so much does the concern of government and the whole
World lie upon it,) when of obedience as to some particular commands we need to
have none. In short there lies no obligation upon Conscience sometimes to obey,
but there does always not to resist, and that both serves the Magistrate turn,
and suffices when he pleases to have a civil thing done.

CAP. VIII.
I will not yet leave his last reason, seeing he lays so much stress on it,
and his strength of all comes to this. I do not take here his very words, but
matter which he may express as he will otherwise. The People must not be
allowed to judge of their own actions, which are commanded by the Magistrate
about civil things, because they will be swayed by their own interests, and
judge those Laws against the public good which are not for their private
profit: by which means unless they be taught and hold that all Laws
indefinitely do bind their Consciences, they will notwithstanding the
Magistrates power, absolve themselves from what they please, no Laws will be
observed, and all Government come to the ground, Unto this as his substance,
besides my answer I have already given, I shall crave leave to offer a few
considerations.

In the first place, this is certainly a shal^^w apprehension, which must
suffer a conviction from the constant experience of the world. For how is the
world governed? there is not one of a hundred that observes the Laws out of
Conscience; if they did, then must they for ought I know be careful to g^t the
Statutes and read them as their bibles, which one of a thousand never do. But
men understand, it they do such or such things, they are l^able to be sued, or
to be bound to the Sessions or the like, and to avoid the danger of the Law,
they observe it. Now it is a foolish thing to say the Laws will not be
observed, or the world will not be governed, unless by another means then that
by which it is governed, and the Law are observed. Our Nations and Heathen
Nations, and those Nations which never had the fear of God to believe a
judgment to come, have been kept under the observation of the Laws of their
Country by these means.

In the second place, this is not only against universal experience, but it
confronts the very institution of God, the appointment of the Magistracy, God
has made the Magistrate his Minister, and put the sword into his hand, for the
ordering and governing Societies, and Common wealths, and if this indeed will
not serve that purpose, then you render his institution insufficient, and make
his Minister to bear the sword in vain. The Law (says the Apostle) is not made
for the righteous, but the disobedient and unrighteous. If all were righteous
and would of themselves make Conscience of doing what they should do, there
would be no need of Magistrate or Law: but when the Law and Magistrate is
appointed for this end: to bring the refractory to order, and those that make
no Conscience of what they do to be ruled, how fond must the imagination be
which conceits, unless men do first believe themselves bound in Conscience to
obey, they will not observe the Laws?

In the third place, if it be for some persons particular interest to break the
Laws, it will be the concern of others that they be forced to keep them if they
be indeed for the common good: and so shall they join with the Magistrate in
his causing the execution of them. This indeed is that which upholds all Laws
that are good. The public interest being greater then the private does uphold
them. Whereas if a Law be not really for the public good, this is one certain
reason at the bottom of its invalidity, and decay, because it has not root
enough, upon the public utility, to maintain it self against particular
enchroachments. If a Nonconformist come within five miles of a Corporation
there is no body hurt by it, and no body like to be concerned at it, were this
a thing truly conducing to the public good, then must the public be
disadvantaged in their breach of that Law; and if the public, then must some
more eminently, and those should be as much concerned, that they obey as
themselves to avoid the observation. By the way, when the advantage for the
public does not countervaile and exceed the private loss or damage that
particular persons shall suffer by a Law, such a Law I take to be unjust, or at
least Politically evil, and binds not the Conscience. However that which I here
affirm is, that whether men make a Conscience of a Law or not, if the Law be
good: the public advantage will prevail (when the Magistrate is minded) or
cause it to be observed.

In the fourth place, it is a thing very unpolitick to offer to the world any
principle upon which it should be governed, which is other then that which does
govern it. If the world be governed by the Magistrates sword, and the
Conscience only that we must not rebel, and is governed as well as ever it is
like to be governed: it is but an unhinging the world to pretend they must
receive this principle, that human laws bind the Conscience; or else there will
be no need to obey, seeing the People may join and choose not to be forced as he
speaks. It is a saying, if a Horse knew his strength, what might he not do? he
would not let man ride him and use him as he does. If the world knew their
strength, that the Magistrate indeed could not punish them whatsoever they did,
unless they joined with him one against another, when there is just cause for
it, they might shake off every yoke: but as the whole body of the People cannot
be made to know this, so as at once to agree upon it, any more then the Horse
can, though every particular man does know it: so were it an utterly ruinous
thing to speak of it if they could. It is true if the people did agree together
(which agreement is their strength, and they cannot know one another present
minds all) that they would not be forced, they might choose: but then when they
made no Conscience to resist, how should this man think upon his principle,
that they would make such Conscience to obey.

In the first place, it does seem to me a pernicious thing to the souls of
pious and tender Christians, to lay any such load upon the Conscience which is
more then it can bear. I say there is no temptation hardly more dangerous to
the undoing of a soul, then to press it upon such things as goes beyond it, and
over sets it. If a man does believe he is bound to make Conscience of every
command of his superior and Law of the Realm or else he does sin, it is enough
to make him cast off all the Laws, and when his duty is made so grevious to
him, that it seems impossible for him but to live in sin, to be ready for
resistance next, and then all Magistracy is gone. The way to have some Laws
obeyed out of Conscience, is to take off its obligation from others; and if a
Magistrate indeed might choose whether his Subjects Consciences should be bound
by all his Laws or not, there is good reason for him to be content that the
matter should be as it is. They are bound in Conscience not to resist, and he
knows not his own strength if he desire any more: although when a Law is for
the common good, then is there Gods command also which takes place. There is
one thing I cannot but add, which might make another consideration, what if a
despotical Prince was so wicked, as resolving to be damned himself to seek the
damnation of all his people, and should thereupon make so many Laws, and about
such trivial things on purpose, that none of his Subjects might regard to keep
them, but live and die in the wilful breach of them: I pray let this Debater
tell me really whether according to his opinion it does not lie in the power of
such a Devil as this is, to carry a whole Nation to Hell with him.

In the sixth place, let us suppose the Consciences of men were bound
indefinitely to all Laws, does this Author think really that the belief of this
would make the world to observe them, and so maintain Government more then the
Magistrates sword? I doubt me he is here more wide: we see too well that when
the worldly or carnal interest of men is concerned, what little regard
Conscience has. It were happy indeed for the Earth if the fear of God Almighty
did but prevail more with the Generality then the fear of a suite at Law, or a
Penalty of twenty shillings. If interest will prevail with a man, to judge a
thing commanded him to be against the common good, when it is for it, the same
interest of his it is like with such a man would prevail still upon him not to
observe the Law, though he were bound in Conscience to it.

In the seventh place, then those few honest persons that would observe a Law
if they thought themselves bound in Conscience to it, not withstanding their
private interest be against it, will likewise make the like Conscience in their
judging of a Law, so as not to be biased by their particular concernment to
think otherwise of it, then does comport with the public advantage. And this
in effect will come to the same issue.

In the last place. I will offer you one president to pin the basket. It
pleased God in the late times that this case became Dr. Saundersons own case.
The Act of Uniformity bound the Minister to read Common Prayer. This Law the
Dr. acknowledges to be of force, for all the Times; but if he observes the Law
he must loose his living. Upon this he considers of the Act, and when he looks
on the immediate particular end of it, he can find nothing but that their
remains obliged to it. He then looks on the general and ultimate end, and that
he conceives right to be the public good, which is intended or is to be supposed
to be intended in all laws. Upon this end he comes to the consideration whether
all circumstances being weighed, it be conducive for the common good for him to
observe this Law or not: and being in the result fully persuaded in his own
mind that the benefit to the public could no ways countervail his particular
loss and suffering he concludes it lawful by the neglect of that Law to retain
his living. There is a sober person having read my Case showed me a Manuscript
of the Doctors (but would not let me write any thing out of it) for the
confirmation of my judgment. I cannot relate either the whole matter or words
of it, but these two things I affirm for truth in it. That be comes off upon
the consideration of the general end of the Law, the public benefit: and
judges himself whether his observing that Law were conducive to that end in
reference to the determining his own practice. And here I have (I account) my
full weight for my self, and think I had best to fetch the poor man before
also, who finding no sufficient relief from this Author about his Cottage, may
meet with it from this instance to his satisfaction, and it will come to this,
whit^ seems a little more then I have yet quite sai^^ that not only when a Law
is politically ^^vil, but when it is good in regard of its general observation,
yet if a man be persuaded fully in his Conscience upon such du^^ considerations
and cautions as he ought to take, that his particular keeping of it under the
present circumstances he lies, is not so much for the common good really as his
not keeping of it is (which I will take to be plainly this poor man's case
instanced, who if he holds not his house must with his Family presently fall on
the Parish), he is not to charge his soul with sin for his wholesome breach of
it. After this I will yet subjoyn a little more in reference also to some
others. When the Apostle gives us this precept, obey those that have the rule
over you, though there be no words added by way of exception, it is to be
supposed the things they command are for our edification, this being a
condition necessarily employed to all rightful obedience, that the Ruler has
authority in what he injoynes. But the Minister has authority only for men's
edification, and has none in things against their spiritual good, according to
our authority (says the Apostle) for edification, not destruction. The Case is
the same with the Magistrate. His commands that have authority must be to our
civil good. It is a mistake therefore (how ingenious and ordinary soever it may
seem in some that say, the people have liberty to judge indeed, whether a thing
commanded be lawful, but not at all whether it be convenient. That by all means
they count it to be denied, as if the allowing any such thing would presently
(as this author fancies too) subvert all Government. I hese Persons I perceive
therefore distinguish not between judging what is sit for the general, or
universality, which judgment indeed is proper to the supreme Magistrate: and
judging what is fit for a man's self only to do. All things are lawful for our
(says the apostle) But all things are not expedient. I will not be brought
under the power of any. a Christian judges for himself of both these; of the
lawfulness and of the expedience of his own actions. If this be not granted
then must he be brought under the power of indifferent things, which he ought
not to be: and then does he submit himself unto the Ordinance of man or the
human Creature as his servant and not as free and as the Servant of God. Again
these persons have not yet considered what I have been telling still in these
papers, that this liberty is assumed of us in reference only to the Conscience
or to our obligation in for interiori; and that while the outward man i^ still
acknowledged to be bound, there is n^ danger at all to Government in the matter
On the contrary side there is this intolerable snare, or evil consequence does
follow on the denial hereof, that every time any human Law (the matter whereof
is not for bidden of God) is not observed, the subject must sin, and
consequently if he live and dies knowingly and wilfully, in his neglect he must
be damned, I will yet propose therefore one or two instances. There is a
Statute in Henry the eights time (if I mistake not) which remains unrepealed,
that no man shall brew with Hopps. I do ask hereupon whether there be any
Brewer in this Nation knowing of this, that can be saved? I do not find my
Debator can answer me this question; and I do not doubt but there are many
Brewers that are honest men and good Christians, as well as I believe he is. If
you will say that this Law now is antiquated through disuse; I will ask then
what think you of those Brewers that disused it at first? was they all damned
necessarily who wilfully brought it into disuse? the Case is a frequent Case
as to all the like Laws, and you must come at length to this, that those who
observed not this Law at first did judge it was not good for the Nation, or not
fit to be kept: and upon that judgment are to be justified. It follows then
both that a Law against the common good binds not the Conscience: and that
every man for himself may judge whether it be so or no in reference to his own
acting. Another instance shall be this, suppose a Father or a Master lays some
strict charge on his Son or Servant to lay out a Thousand pounds on a Commodity
which is more perhaps (but for his Credit) then he is worth by half. This Son
or Servant in going to do it, bears of the growing or coming in of this
Commodity by great quantities in some parts of the Kingdom, and upon his own
discretion alone and good consideration of what may fall our, forbears, his
Father or Master perhaps now at present is grievously chased: but within few
days the price of the Commodity falls half, and then he sees that if he had
been obeyed he had been undone. From hence do there appear not only the
necessity, but benefit, of allowing a judgment of discretion unto Persons of
capacity, under the commands of their Superiors; and that I say not merely to
judge whether the thing commanded be lawful or unlawful in reference unto God
whereof there is no question: but whether it be convenient or inconvenient to
that end or outward good which by that command is designed. It appears also
from both these instances, that the commands of men do not by virtue of the
fifth Commandment it self bind the Conscience immediately and absolutely, but
mediately and ex hypothesi, to wit upon supposition those commands are good,
human laws Dr. Tailor will have it bind the Conscience directly and properly. I
do not love to dispute about terms, but if any think he intends immediately, he
is out, for they do bind only by the intervention of Gods will, he argues, the
authority of the Magistrate is Gods authority. I answer the authority which is
in the person of the Magistrate as Gods Minister is Gods authority, and binds
directly and immediately to subjection: but the commands of the Magistrate have
not Gods authority, unless the things commanded be agreeable to his will, and
then it is by the intervention of his will, I say, that the Conscience is bound
to obedience. A third thing appears that the Conscience of man is not bound by
virtue of Gods authority unto every command of our Superiors though the thing
commanded be in a matter sometimes which of it self or its own Nature, is
indifferent because the consideration then of the external commodity, or
discommodity only, could not justify the breaker of any of them. If as soon as
a Father or Master had forbidden any thing, the Commandment of God took place
immediately, and he thereby is to be reckoned to forbid it too, this Son or
Servant might not break such a command though he did gain a thousand pounds, or
though either that Master or Father should be undone by it There be several
examples might be fech't from Histories of great Commanders and Ambassadors
that to a chieve some great exploits have been forced to leave the instructions
of their Princes, for which though at their return they have begged their
pardon (out of form) as being obnoxious to the Law, yet have they had that
Conscience of their own fact toward them and toward God, as not only to be
free from sin, in that disobedience, but to expect some signal reward for the
service of such transgressions.

CAP. VLT.
THus much for his grand exception, I must now look out for others, or any
passage else that requires Animadversion.

At the first there comes to my view in General, the cavilling way which he
uses toward me, as if when a Man wanted a good answer, he should show an ill
Spirit, which I would not believe in this Author. I perceive he pretends often
that the Apologist does wrong him and so accuses him of falsifyings and
impertinences, which are his frequent words: But in the mean while I wonder he
should not see how notoriously he is guilty of both these fine things himself.
It would be no great matter (says he) if the Casuist imitated not these men
only in their phrase, and not in their weak reasonings, and then produces an
observation I have of providence in transitu, as if I argued something from
thence, which if he could tell what, he would confute no doubt, and he well
might, wherefore it is manifest I lay that passage down and make no reasoning
at all upon it, neither do I imitate any bodies phrase, nor tie my self to any
part, And if this then be not falsifying neither shall his four or five sides
after about Image worship, be any impertinency: nor his six or seven pages in
another place about the Taxes and Insurrections there has been in this Nation:
no though he should tell you the whole Life and Death of Wat Tyler, and Jack
Straw, with a more perfect Narration yet of that Dr. Standish, unto whom John
Lincoln the Broker came when he was to preach at the Spittle on a Monday in
Easter week. This should also be no impertinency, but a forceable confutation
of whatsoever is said by the Apologist or me. He may next tell us any other
story as well out of the Chronicles. Of Jack Cad^, and his Cozen Mortimer. Of
Lambert Simuel and the Lady Margret his Aunt. How might he have mauld us with
the Relation of Perkin Warb^ck, and Thomas Plamm^ck, and Robert Ket with his
Oak of Reformation, and then killed us quite dead with an arrow our of Robin
Hoods bow? In the Reign of Richard the first there was the noble Earl Robin
Hood, and one little John, and an hundred stout Fellows more, robbed the
Passengers upon the High way. And what indeed is it that we may well think of
such a Roving faculty we see in this Authors last books, but that the Man's pen
has got a leoseness, and that is the reason he has so be spattered the poor
Apologist, whose ill luck and my good one it was, that he came between him and
me. This is the reason that makes him come abroad so often, in a Debate, a
continuation of that debate, a continuation of that continuation, an appendix
to that continuations continuation, and a Postscript to that appendix to that
continuation, of the continuation of the Friendly Debate. Nec dum fini^us
Orestes. I must needs say here, I have been tempted to use some expressions
that perhaps might be grateful to many who are willing to have a person (as
they are apt to speak) met with in his kind, but I remember there is a
self-denial to be used in our writings as in our conversations, and there is an
office of Love and honor we owe to worthy persons; and when I may use such
expressions as these I think from the example of Elijah, I must use no
bitterness from the command of the Apostle, nor any word from an offended mind
from the example of our Savior and Lord.

The next thing which presents it self to my notice is a passage which has a
malignant aspect on my opinion, or on what I have said, yet shall be found but
a friend to it. I am sensible now and then of a learing hint from this engaged
man, I choose to be a little free with him, seeing he has chalked out that way
to me, but do reflect again on that word as having too aptly or truly expressed
the thing, whether I had best let it stand. By a learing passage I understand
any such as reflects any thing upon me, which seems to him to render me
obnoxious, besides the being slighted above what is just. Nevertheless when I
perceive he speaks out of ignorance, that is out of the want of a fuller
understanding in this particular matter, of what he reproves, I am sustained
with my own opinion and the integrity of it. Although too, while he conceits
his knowledge so superior, it is all one for me, to taste his Spirit. When I say
ignorance, to wit hitherto, in reference to this point, I understand not this
person to be an ignorant person. No I hold him to be a learned Man of very much
ability, and the least of his sufficiency I take to be for dispute. I compare
not my self with him. I know the shortness of my household stuff yet this have
I, that when a particular point gets into my head, it costs me more thoughts
usually then others will bestow upon it, and consequently ought not in every
thing I say, be so readily contemned. In the most points that ever I studied I
could arrive ordinarily but to this, that there is reason on both sides. That
to be dogmatical is not safe. I do sometimes speak for a thing out of courage,
to bear it up against the stream, rather then out of pride. I have scarce ever
come up to so much confidence in any point as I have in this in good earnest,
and if I show it too much though i^ be out of the simplicity of my heart, I
could help it if I would, but that I think the world requires it, and the
matter will bear it, for I am my self a piece of dust. The passage is this, The
Casuists principle if persued will prove the very same with that in the
perverse meaning of it so much cried up, when all our mischiefs began, salus
populi suprema lex* for the right understanding of which maxim I refer you to
the last Lecture of Dr. Saunderson. It is very much that this person should see
at first glimp^ upon what foundation all that I say does stand and that this
foundation is made good by Dr. Saunderson, and yet that he should go to put
such a slur as this on it, without any good consideration or honesty.

As for the maxim which in the words is fercht from Cicero de legibus, out of
what o^d Roman Law soever he had it, in the truth it is no less ancient then
Magistracy or Government it self, and shall stand so ^long as there is any in
the World. There be some have abused the holy Gospel and turned it into
wantonness, but the abuse of the Gospel is no cause sufficient to throw off the
Gospel. No more is the abuse of this maxim sufficient reason to hinder any the
patronage of it. You may as well lay aside the Gospel in Religion, as this
truth out of Politics, without which neither any society or Commonwealth, or
the World it self could stand. I do hugely like the design of this Dr. in that
Lecture which is the vindication of that Maxim, that every one may safely
embrace it, and I assent to all so far as I remember he has said of it; but
yet I must needs say, I think not the Lecture most sufficient of his Lectures,
who appears rather as himself accounts, something out of his proper study, when
he is drawn upon it.

That which he says is no less truth then obvious, that under the word populus
we must comprehend the supreme Magistrate as well as the Subject. It is trite,
that Plebs and Populus in Political Writers are distinguished, and this may be
most convincing that in Ciceroes time (whose words these are) the Roman people
was a Commonwealth, so that the supreme Magistracy it self lay in the body of
the people, so far it is from any Justice or Right, that any should make use of
this maxim to suppress the chief Magistrate by it. The good of the people in
their public capacity is the good of the Commonwealth. A Commonwealth
consists in the order of superiority and inferiority. The Commonwealths good
then is the good of Magistrates and Subjects, the common interest of one is
also the Interest of the other. There being no consequence deducible therefore
from this maxim for the people to rise up against the King any more then
against themselves, or their own welfare, There is one question I think wanting
in that Lecture of the Dr. whereof neither he (as the truth is) nor this man
have yet cast any right account, It is this, How comes it to pass that when
this maxim does warrant the subject in not obeying some Laws which are made by
the Magistrate, it will by no means warrant any subject to rise against or
resist the Magistrate if he will execute them upon him? The answer to this will
be like the invention of making the Egg stand an end, that is so apparent and
easy, that you will wonder it should not be seen already by every body. When
the common good then or the good of the community, is said to be the supreme
Law, it must be understood most undoubtedly in reference to those laws which
are made for the community. Ex illis haec suprema lex esto. If there be any one
of such consequently does clash with this, which is the chief or superior to
them all, that is, if there be any law made which is not indeed for the common
good, then is the subject manifestly discharged by virtue of this maxim from
any obligation to it, in the point of equity or conscience. But it is as
manifest likewise, that we are not to understand this maxim in reference to
Gods Laws. To wit, The common good is the supreme Law to all other Laws of the
State, to ^ll human Laws, which are made to that end, the public good of civil
society: but it is not supreme to Gods Laws, or to any Law of God religious or
moral which are made to another end, to wit the glorifying of God, not in order
to our civil happiness, but our everlasting salvation. When God says Thou
shall have no other Gods but me, a Roman or a Greek might not say no it is son
the good of our Country that many Gods be worshipped, and the common good must
take place of other Laws. For besides that it is false to think it for the good
of any state, to have more then one God; The Law of the common good is to take
place over the Common wealths Law, or is the supreme Law, I say to all human
Laws, but not to Gods Laws, which comes not under any subordination to such
good but do concern the salvation of Men's souls. Now it is the Law or command
of God that Magistracy be set up, that we be in subjection to the powers that
are, that is the present Magistrate that we have, and that we resist not. This
is no less his Commandment then that we have no other Gods but him. If there be
any then will argue we are not obleiged in Conscience to obey a Law which is
not for the common good upon the account of this maxim: Therefore we are not
obleiged in Conscience to subjection to the Magistrate if he rule not for the
common good upon account of the same, he is greatly mistaken. Because this
maxim as we are to know, was Originally intended so is to be understood on
necessity, in reference to the Laws of men, or the Common wealths Laws only,
and not in reference to the Commandments of God. Again, when a human Law passes
for the good of the community, the common good being the supreme rule and
measure of all, every one judges and ought to judge (upon the pinch of the
question) whether the thing commanded be for the common good, that is, whether
it be agreeable to the supreme Law, and according as he judges and believes it
to be or no, so is he obliged in Conscience or not to it. But when a Magistrate
rules not as he ought, and so we are free as to his inordinate commands, there
is no man may judge whether he himself, or the Government it self be for the
good or no. You will say why? Because the powers that be are of God, and his
Ordinance, and whether the Ordinance of God be for our good or no, there is no
mortal may question or is to judge. God has himself declared this that he is
the Minister of God for our good even Nero was, and no man may once offer to
determine contrary to Gods declared word, or tell the Almighty he says not
truth. Consequently when a Law sometimes does pass that is not for the common
good, and a man judging of it according to truth is not obliged in Conscience
to obedience, vet the Magistrate himself being for our good (God having
determined so and man's judgment being confined by his) even by this maxim it
self that the common good is the supreme Law, he must be still bound to
subjection. And what now is become of this man's reproach which he has laid to
my charge with so much falsehood, and little judgment? as if Dr. Saunderson and
he were for this maxim in the right sense, and I was for it in the perverse
meaning, when it is plain that indeed neither he nor Dr. Saunderson (how worthy
soever in their pacts otherwise) understood this maxim^ in the full import of
it, seeing else he would have determined the main case no otherwise then I do.

And this brings me to another passage of this Debater, which I was willing to
reserve ^ill now, both for the agreement of it here, and for making a discovery
of some of this ^uthours strong reasonings, who counts mine ^o weak. It is
resolved by the Casuist, that if the Magistrate command any thing for the
Peoples hurt, there lies no obligation upon the Conscience to obey, and they
are made judges of what ^s for their hurt. If then he require them not ^o
resist and they find this is for their hurt, they are not bound in Conscience
not to resist. Is not this very goodly? Does not the Gentleman show us here
indeed what a fathom it is that he has, as he speaks somewhere? why this can
be no less sure then Bonaventures Son, or Bradwardines brother! What if the
Magistrate should require us not to resist? If it were the Magistrate only
required this, there were no doubt but we might resist if he hurt or wrong us,
as well as not obey his Laws if they be for our hurt. But it is Gods
Commandment that we resist not, and if he shall do us wrong or hurt we must
bear it upon that account. It is but suffering according to his well and that
is the reason why the Magistrate and Government it self safe, when the
Conscience is yet at liberty (...) avoid, if we can, any unjust, unreasonab^^
noxious, or unprofitable Law for the peop^^ You will say are we not bound to
obey h^^ Laws, as well as not to resist his authority^ I answer, there is this
difference, we ha^^ no command from God that says you m^^ obey this or that
particular Law of the Commonwealth, or that you must indefinite^ obey them all
seeing some may be unjust some wicked, some vain; But there is a La^ or command
from God to be subject to the powers that are: whatsoever they are, and (...)
whatsoever they are, that is rightful power (for else the devil may come in)
and the we must net resist. I say moreover that to be ruled by the common good
in civil affairs designed by his Minister, I take to be a Law of God of the
same Nature as to be subject to the Magistrate, and to fear himself.

After this, there is one passage more I will not pass because it looks lightly
and is a concession against himself, but does not satisfy if the word may nto
offend) without a farther remove upon it. It is this. It is supposed when a
case of intolerable inconvenience happens that it being not the intention of a
Prince to make his Subjects miserable, he would not have made that Law if he
could have foreseen such a mischief, and upon that account it ceases to be a
Law, and looses its obligation. I remember well that some indeed speak thus,
and when any take a Latitude in applying it to an individual case it will come
to this, that supposing the Lawgiver to consider the circumstances that this
or that particular man is in, it is presumed that he would consent to the
breach of his Law by that person, and upon this presumption there may be many
perhaps that absolve themselves from several pieces of obedience. That which
may be said for this is, that if the Lawgiver is to be supposed not to intend
to make his subjects miserable by a Law; he is to be supposed not to intend to
make any one miserable for he cannot simply do the one any more then the other.
Eadem est ratio unius cujusque and Universorum. If such a Law makes this or
that particular man miserable if he keep it, he will judge it to be the
Lawgivers intention, that he be dispensed with, that those should observe it
who are made happy, or at least not so distressed as he by it. There is
something I suppose of solidity in this, if we can find out for it a right
bottom. There is no particular person can say if the Lawgiver had foreseen
this or the particular man's inconvenience he would no have made the Law,
because Laws in the nature are confinements and streightnin^ to particular
persons for the good of the community. But this he must say, the
notwithstanding the will of the Lawgiver is indeed, that the generality should
keep the Law being for their good, yet it is to be understood with exception,
to such a ca^^ or cases, as his is. If he can give a reason now for this that
will hold, it is well. The saying he made not his Law to make an^ simply
miserable is true, but in Relation to the public he passed it though some
should be distressed by it: He cannot say therefore that he made not this Law
to make him miserable, but this he may say, that he made not this Law to make
him or any man miserable, but for the advantage of the community, seeing for
the benefit of the public (...) any one may be made to suffer damage, whereas
to make a Law that any might suffer it without advantage to the public is
unjust. There is necessity then to come here to my foundation and that is this.
That the general end of every Law and Lawgiver is (or ought to be and so is
supposed to be) the public advantage. When any case then general or
particular is such that it is not for the public benefit that a Law be
observed, or that it is more for the public good that it be not observed
rather then observed, the Lawgivers intention is to be supposed from the
general end, that it should not be obligatory to the Subject. His intention is
to oblige us to such a thing for the public good. But if such a thing in such
a case be not for the public good the obligation ceases being forsaken of his
intention.

There is much may be said here, beside what we insist on before from the will
of God.

At the close he presents us with the testimonies of two or three learned men
for obedience to all lawful commands of our superiors. He might have taken the
harmony of confessions, or most Divines common places, and added as many more
as he pleased of greater authority. He might find expressions too as strict as
any from some of our Nonconformist Divines. But that which is to be answered to
all is this, that we are to apprehend such passages to be still spoken upon
supposition that the Laws or commands of the superiors be good and wholesome
Laws.

They may put in the word lawful only, but under it this must also be employed.
The honest and learned Mr. Perkins therefore when he speaks of our duty to the
Magistrate, does judiciously use such terms. We are bound to observe the good
and wholesome Laws of the Nation whe^ein we live.

When he and others speaks thus it is plain that in the bottom of their minds
they apprehend, that if the Laws and commands of men be not good and wholesome
Laws or commands, they are not accordingly bound to them, that is not in
Conscience bound, though the outward man be at the Magistrates service. And
this I take it is that Light which does even almost Universally flow into the
Souls of men, at the first consideration of these matters, and as it is of
Nature, it is from God. But who shall judge whether a Law be a good or
wholesome Law or no? This I know may be again asked. It is a good and wholesome
Law I account when the thing commanded be for the common good. And I reply who
shall judge whether that which be commanded be lawful or not? It will be a
thing most foolish to say, that he who has passed the Law as good already must
be judge, for then it might be no question. You will say that every man must
indeed be judge of that. I say then that if every man must judge whether the
thing commanded him in a Law be according to Gods word or not, which is a
matter of so much more difficulty and concernment to his Soul, and where of the
most of men are so much more indeed incapable to judge with soundness, and yet
every one must judge for himself according to his ability in reference to his
own practice, why should any scruple to have the same said in the question
whether it be for the common good, being what is easier done and a less matter?
The sum of the whole sheets will come to this. The most both of Religious and
Learned men are at a loss (through their dispute and jangling I suppose when
the matter else perhaps were more plain) in their conceptions about the
obligation of human Laws. Two extremes we hear. The one that they bind not the
Conscience at all; the other, that they bind indefinitely, that is, all bind
under pain of sin. A middle path I have effered in resolving the case. We see
where it is the opposer does pinch. They will not allow the subject to be a
reasonable agent in Politicals, when they cannot deny him to be so in Morals
and things Religious. If they will allow us a judgment of discretion in
Civils, They must be ignorant, or consider not, that the common good is the
supreme Law. That the supreme must overruled the subservient. So long as any
know not this, they are in darkness and bondage: But the Scintillations of this
truth and Doctrine that I here have brought, are the feeds of Light and Liberty
to the World. In which liberty the considering Christian will stand fast, and
the tender will rejoice in consolation.

THE END.
Reader,
BEfore I sent these Sheets to the Press, at first I showed them a Learned Dr.
a person of note, as of ability, and I received his thoughts of them in the
words which you find in the beginning. Being returned from the Printer, I had
opportunity to show them to another of the like eminency, and I received
presently a full Sheet from him upon the subject, I will make bold to set down
thus much of it which follows.

The Office (to wit, of the Magistrate) and exercise or administration being
distinguished, you truly say that he that is not bound in a particular case to
obey, yet may be a Subject still (which is the relation of one bound to
ordinary obedience) and Rebellion which is the casting off this subjection, i^
forbidden notwithstanding a particular Law may be disobeyed.

A Law made against God or the safety of the Commonwealth is no Law in sensu
uni voco but it is in sensu ae^^^v^^o vel analogico, and does not p^^perly bind
the Subject.

All men in their wits (that are masters of such discourse) are agreed that
judicium est vel publicum vel provatum. Publicum est vel civil; Magistratus,
per gladium exe quendum: Vel ecclesiastum, Pastorum, per verbum and clares
exequendum: Et privatum discretionis est omnium. No Man ever obeyed without it,
for authoritas imperantis agnita, is the objectum formale obedientiae and
answers the question Quare obedis?

The Magistrate being by Office entrusted with the bonum pubeicum the Subject
is not called to try every one of his Laws whether they are suited to the bonum
publicum or not, much less to be critical and busy out of his place.

But being not bound to be blind or or careless in a notorious case or such of
which he has full and lawful cognizance, he may and must discern what command
is against the common good.

R. B.


