THE Healing Paper: OR, A Catholic Receipt for UNION Between the Moderate
Bishop and Sober Nonconformist, Maugre all the Aversation of the Unpeaceable.

By a Follower of Peace, and Lover of Sincerity.

For we must needs Dye, and are as Water spilt upon the Ground, which cannot be
gathered up again: Neither does God respect any Person, yet does he devise
Means that his Banished be not expelled from him.

2 Samuel 14.14. LONDON, Printed for B. T. and T. M. 1678.

THE Epistle Dedicatory.
SEeing Dedications are become Customary, I will choose me a Patron for this
Book, as a Papist chooses his Saint. He fancies such a one will be Propitious
to his Affairs, and addresses himself to him in his Prayers, but knows not
whether he hears him or no. The Person whom I choose to make this Dedication
to, shall be the Honorable Mr. Speaker of the House of Commons, whom I know
not, nor he me in the least. If he did, this would be Flattery, which now is
Adventure; and might be but a Blurr, which now is Honor. I do fancy that
Person to be an impartial perspicacious Gentleman, and that he will therefore
like the Honesty and Innocence of these Sheets. I do Fancy, that as it is hard
to find a Parallel to him in sufficiency for his Province, so it is not easy
(in the circumstances Speakers are) to have a Man in the Chair of more
Integrity (or natural Bias) to the Public Good; and so far as I know, to the
Protestant Cause. I do fancy that he will not therefore in good earnest turn
off any seasonable well-digested Motion (if any be tendered in the House) for
Moderation in the business of Religion. I do think him verily a man Unconcerned
for the Nonconformists, but not Malicious to Good People; and though Portly,
not so High as to be Offended at a Mean man's good Conceit of him. I am
persuaded, that in my sphere, I cannot put a greater Dignity upon him (if he
serves our End) than by the peculiarity of such a Dedication. If he deceives
me, and proves one that designs any thing Evil, and not the best things for
the Church of God, let him answer it to the Almighty: He shall be no longer my
Patron on Earth, nor Saint in Heaven.

The Author.

To the Reader.
THE Design of this Paper is to chalk out the Way for the Parliament (if they
shall kindly please) to Open the Door of the Church for us: but if they will
not, to Draw the Latch, and come in our selves. And it shall yet come to pass,
that there shall come a People, and the Inhabitants of many Cities, and go to
one another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek
the Lord of Hosts; I will go also.

The Healing Paper.
IF I had any longer hope or trust in our Public Physicians, that they would
lay to heart the Breaches of the Church, and endeavor the Cure of those Wounds
which she has received in the House of her Friends, by some Universal
Accommodation of Protestants one with another; which would be the strength of
the Nation against Foreign Enemies, and the Security of our Religion at Home,
I should forbear the Studying out any of these lesser and private Remedies in
our case, for fear of being guilty of the Healing the Hurt of the Daughter of
Gods People slightly, which were a fault indeed if I could do it better: but
when no more can be done, God forbid I should cease to offer my last mite to
the Work, in showing the way that is yet left us (and consequently the duty for
ought I know on both sides unto which were are bound) how to do it; not
distrusting the favor of God, and many good men in the Action.

There is a Rule therefore I must lay down between the Nonconformist and the
Bishop for my proceeding in this great Design. I will suppose them both
sensible, that an endeavor after Concord as brethren in the same Reformed
Religion, is an undeniable duty; and that a wilful neglect of it cannot be
Answered unto God by either Party, whosoever of them shall be found in Default.
The Rule then for Accommodation which I have to offer, in the Name of God, as
equal to both, is this: That the Nonconformist be ready to do in the sincerity
of his Conscience what he can; and that out of the like conscience to God, the
Bishop do bear with him in what he cannot; so long as by this means, or upon
these terms, they so agree and unite in the Main, as the Established Order be
kept up in the Land. It is but Reasonable the Bishop look to This, and it is
Necessary that We look to our Consciences. The Rule is in order to the End;
and if they will abate to us in the Circumstances, or in the Lesser things
enjoined, so much as we may preserve our Consciences, and abate no more but
that the Establishment (which being made by King and Parliament requires our
Subjection) may be preserved in the Substance, or in the greater concerns of
it, I see not, but for Peace sake, for our Souls sake, for the Churches sake,
the thing should be done. The Nonconformist is to consider well the import of
such Texts as require Subjection to the Higher Powers; and he is out of
Conscience to the Fifth Commandment to comply with their Injunctions to the
uttermost that may give them satisfaction so far as he can without Sin. The
Bishop is to consider the import of such Texts, as tell us what a dangerous
thing it is to give occasion to the Doubtful to do any thing against their
Consciences: and he is out of Conscience to the Sixth Commandment (for fear of
destroying him for whom Christ dyed) to take heed as he would of his life, to
put a man upon any more than he is convinced he can safely do. When the
Nonconformist does what he can, the Law of God will bear him out in that which
he does not; and if he suffers, he has peace in his Soul. If the Bishop
likewise shall Receive a man upon this account, as one that cannot require more
of him, lest he wound his weak Conscience, and so sins against Christ, I do not
doubt but the Law of God will justify him also in whatsoever he falls short in
the execution of the Law of Man. I know the Law does indeed make no difference
between those that would do what they can, and those that do any thing less
than all it requires; but the great Law of Charity, Mercy and Righteousness, or
of Meeting to others that measure as we would have met to us in the like case,
does require other things. This is a Truth to be made known and propagated to
the Nation, that all Laws or Injunctions of Men whatsoever, which are not
consistent with the Law of Nature, or Word of God (so far I say as they are
inconsistent therewith) are void, null, and no Laws. Nihil minus sunt q am
leges, as Cicero (De legibus) does express it. That is, (I will interpret him)
they can lay no obligation on the Conscience (which is the essential property
of a right Law) as to the observance. it is true, if the Bishop Dispences, and
the Nonconformist come short in any thing, the Penalty may be Sued, if any be
so affected. It is a Law in foro humano, and we must never resist (This we mu^^
venture, and can but be in statu quo): but it is no Law in fo^^ Dei, or
Conscientiae; for the Authority of these greater Laws of Nature and Religion
does supersede the Execution; so that there is no guilt contracted in the
Omission.

And having said this, I do not care to profess my self one, that am prepared
to come into the Church upon these Terms; that is, I will come in upon Quarter;
for I can come in no otherwise: If the Bishop will give me Quarter for my
Conscience, and spare me in the things, which it were a Killing me to do while
I am in Doubt, I will yield in the rest. We will, we must yield (I judge) upon
these Terms: To do what we can, if they will but do (upon this score, I say, of
those Superior Laws) what they ought. There are no Texts which require Unity
among Christians, To be of one mind, To speak the same things, To have one
Heart: No Texts, that require Love and Fellowship with one another as Brethren,
the Following of Peace, a Tenderness to one another Consciences, and taking
heed of Offending any of Chist's Little Ones, and the like matters: No Texts,
that forbid Schism and Divisions in the Church, with the Evil Concomitants and
Effects thereof in the Nation, but they are all Warrants to the Bishop, for his
Forbearance and Moderation in the Execution of these Laws, when his
Non-Conformist-Brother cannot obey them without sinning against his Soul. God
says, Thou shall not do any thing, which will destroy thy Brother, and wound
his Conscience: The Law says, Thou shall put him to do thus, and not dispense
with him. Christ says, You must do thus, You must do these things. The Law
says, You must do that which is otherwise. Whom shall the good Bishop now
choose to obey, the Law of his God, or the Statutes of the Realm?

Not that I will find fault with my Superiors, or with their Laws; only as
the Apostle says of the Law of God it self, We know the Law is good if a Man
use it Lawfully: So must I say upon supposition, that these Acts for Conforming
be in themselves, for the peace of the Church, so long as they be Executed upon
fit Reasons, and such Persons for whom all Laws are indeed to be made, ( The
Law is not made for the Righteous, or the willing, says the same Divine
Author, but the Unrighteous and Disobedient): Yet when they are Administered to
all alike without putting any difference between the Willing and the Unwilling,
the Ready and the Refractory, that which was intended for Good, is made Death
unto us, (to speak still in Holy Language) by becoming instead of a means for
promoting of Peace, an occasion for establishing our Divisions. I see indeed
that most Men with whom the Laws are entrusted, do act ordinarily, as if all
they were concerned in the hurt that comes by any Law, were no more but to
impute it to the Lawmakers, and to account themselves clear before God and
Men, so long as they are but exact in putting the same in rigorous Execution:
whereas there is no power given, or can be received by any, but to the great
ends of Gods Glory, and the common good of Men (for all Power is of God), and
consequently no such trust is committed to them but in Subordination to the
higher Laws of Nature, and Gods Word; so that if these Laws and Man's Laws do
come in any instances of Life to clash, as commonly in matters of conscience
they do, there is prudence to be used in such a discernment between Persons and
Persons, those that are truly, and those that are pretendedly conscencious, and
between things and things, what will profit the Church, and what will tend
only to public offense, that both the ends of Government may be kept up, and
the greater Laws take place. According to the authority the Lord has given us
(says the Apostle) for Edification, and not for Destruction.

Neither do I once imagine that the Bishop can dispense with me in any
Imposition committed to his trust, so as that his dispensation should be my
warrant for my doing otherwise then the Law requires I should do, either in
regard to Man, if he will prosecute the Law upon me (as I have intimated
before) or in regard to God if it were any Sin or Evil in me to break it: But
he can bear with me as to his part, which is enough (for I may then venture
others, I have also said,) and it is the superior authority of God which is
the warrant both to him and me upon which we must be justified, in my
conformity only so far, and his requiring no more. The Law, it is true requires
more, and it requires him to require more, but the greater Law (I say) of the
Ten Commandments of God, which is sum'd up in this one Word, Love, the
transcript of the Law Eternal upon Man's heart, must overruled, and relaxes the
obligation as to both of us in the sight of God. And thus when we do what we
can for union on both sides, and no more than we can on either side: When we
bear with one another, in the things wherein we differ, and bear one another
burdens as we are bound in the common accidents of our Lives, we shall Compound
(I hope) for our failings or Nonperformance to an Act of Parliament, by our
fulfilling the Law of Christ. Be of the same mind (says the Apostle) one
toward another. Mind not high things, but condescend to Men of low estate.

In fine, Our eyes have almost failed us in looking out after every Session of
Parliament to do something for Union, and they do it not. It is another course
then must be sought; The Bishop alone and we must resolve to do the business
our selves. That which we cannot get done by a relaxation of the Laws, may be
obtained by little and little, by a Relaxation of our stifness on both sides.
If the concerns of the Church lies near any one of their hearts, than his own
bare Honor and Worldly interest does, he will venture as we do, and what we
cannot procure by an Act, we must force by Example, and the Authority of
Heaven, and the Protestant cause shall be our Broad Seal for what we do.

Having thus proposed the Rule, I must proceed to Practice. We have several
Impositions therefore to come under consideration, and they are the Old, or the
New.

For the Old, there is in the first place the Common Prayer it self which I
must confess for my own part I do commonly hear, and in the Ordinary daily
service I do not think unlawful to read. And God forbid I should, when we have
had so many Holy Men in the Marian Reign ready to lay down their lives for the
Matter of this Book. If I find scruple in respect to some things in the
By-Offices, or in any thing of the Occasional service, I will either my self
wave it, or leave that work to some other to perform. There is next an Assent
required to the Articles of the Church of England, unto the Doctrine whereof
according to the statute of the thirteenth of Elizabeth (that is so far as is
expressly required) I do not find but the Nonconformists generally are ready to
subscribe of their own accord. I have a few exceptions for my own part, which I
doubt not but they will be allowed me to make, being consonant to the Judgments
mostly of those that conform, and contrary to theirs, more generally who do
not; I may name some of them ere I have done. There is then the Subscription in
the Canons, and Canonical Oath of Obedience, which being not imposed by Law, or
a statute, but by a penal Canon; and that only rendering the Bishop upon
neglect obnoxious to a suspension from giving Orders, or Licenses to Preach for
a year, which is never like to be prosecuted, nor I suppose used to be, it was
heretofore very ordinary for many Bishops to forbear the exacting of either of
these (which were abated to me without any regret at my Ordination): and I
shall hope that what has bin done in former time out of favor, will be done
now out of conscience, if this Rule laid down does, as it ought, take place.

For the New Impositions, there are three of them in the Act of Uniformity, the
Declaration, the Subscription, and Reordination. The last of these
[Re-ordination] I have passed, yet as to others I must say this. That to be
Re-ordain'd to the Work of a new Charge, I am fully persuaded is Lawful, and
consequently, that this matter may be easily Compounded, between the Bishop,
and him that scruples the thing (for too just Reason otherwise) upon this said
Account. The foremost, the Declaration, is to be made to the Congregation, and
I think to do thus. I will Read the Common Prayer in the Ordinary daily Service
(which I have said I hold Lawful), and then I will declare my Assent and
Consent, to all and every particular I have Read. And I do not doubt, but this
will be as good a Declaration to the Churchwardens, as if I had used the Words
of the Act and no other. I will not conceal from them that I save my
Conscience, but will venture it. If it be told the Bishop, I will expect that
he should be more like to Connive at that which is entrusted with others, than
to Indulge any in the Second, and chief thing that remains, which is committed
only to his trust, and wherein, if we obtain not some Condescension from him,
we must continue in our ejected Estate. And this is the Subscription, in
reference to which mainely, I do now present to the Public this Paper; and in
pursuance of my own Rule of doing what I can, I am willing for an Authoritative
use of my Ministry, to Subscribe the words ensuing.

This Declaration in the Act of Uniformity, viz. I do declare that it is not
lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the King; and that I
do abhor that Traiterous Position of taking Arms by his Authority against his
Person, or against those that are Commissionated by him; and that I will
Conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is now established; and
I do Declare, that I do hold, that there lies no Obligation upon me, or any
other Person, from the Oath commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, to
endeavor any change or alteration of Government either in Church or State; and
that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of
this Realm, against the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, I subscribe
with these Limitations or Exceptions.

The first Clause I hold Indefinitly true in a due and a fair state of the
Point, as it is maintained by such eminent and faithful Assertors of the
Authority of Princes, as Arnisaeus, Barclay, Grotius, Sarrania, and the like
Authors: And upon such a meet State of the Position (prout prudens definierit)
supposed, I do Subscribe That it is not lawful to take Arms against the King,
upon any pretense what-so-ever.

The Second Clause I allow with this Interpretation only, which I think to be
the Mind of the Legislators. By the Word Abhor, I understand in the cool Sense,
no more than I Disclaim; and such a Position I count Traytorous, if it be made
use of for Rebellion: And I understand by the Word These that are
Commissionated by him, such only as are Legally Commissionated by him, and in
the Legal Pursuit of such Commissions. It could never be the Intent of the
Majority of Parliament to advance the King's will above Law; and therefore,
this being their Meaning, I do in this Meaning, (or with these Explanatory
Limitations to their Meaning, if I be mistaken in it) Subscribe That I abhor
that Traiterous Position, of taking Arms by the Authority of the King, against
his Person, or against those that are Commissionated by him.

The Third Clause, is a Promise which I dare not make, but with the Reservation
of a necessary and just Liberty, both for my Conscience, in any matter or thing
wherein I doubt; and for Prudence, in regard to Time, Place, and Circumstances;
to act, as appears to me most conductive to the Interest of the Church, and
Edification of the People: And with such a Reservation as this, I Subscribe
That I will Conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is now by
Law Established.

The Fourth Clause I can Subscribe to readily, as to my self, because I never
took the Covenant, (I was convinced, I remember, by the Oxford Reasons, and it
was against my Conscience): But for the Words, Nor any other Persons, I must
put in this Restriction; to wit, Nor any other in a Private Capacity, or Acting
in a Private Capacity. It is true, (as I think) that every Man is bound to seek
the Reformation of the Church in his Place: But it is as great a Truth, that it
is not the place of Private Person, or any one, to endeavor any Reformation of
the Church or State, be it never so good, but with the Concurrence of the King,
or in such a way only, as is agreeable to the Constitution of the Kingdom.
Nay, as he may not act, he may not exhort, persivade, seek, or pray in a
Seditious way, to have it done. Now, for-as-much, as this Covenant did lay an
Obligation on the Subject, (in their Opinion) to endeavor the Reformation of
the Church, without the Consent of the King in his Parliament, I do apprehend
that Obligation in that respect to be void, and Subscribe That I do hold, that
there lies no Obligation upon me or any other Person, from the Oath, commonly
called the Solemn League or Covenant, to endeavor any Change or Alteration of
Government, either in Church or State, by any Means, or any other way, than
with the Consent of the King in an Act of Parliament.

The Fifth Clause does require a Distinction between the Act of Covenanting,
and the Matter Covenanted. I dare not Subscribe, That this Oath in the Matter
Covenanted, was in it self Unlawful, because I must then (I think) be
Uncharitable to the Reformed Churches abroad, whose Government is not as ours
by Bishops: But I do suppose, that the Oath in the Act of Covenanting, or the
Oath, if taken for the Act Complexly considered, was in it self Unlawful: So
that, he that took it, did as I count, do ill in it, or did that, which in my
Judgment was unwarrantable. A Combined endeavor to pull down the present
Government of the Church, and set-up another, without the Consent of the King,
and against it (upon supposition only, which no doubt, will be generally
granted, that the King did not lose his Authority in the Sight of God, on his
withdrawing from his Parliament, which must also be so understood, or else,
how could they at the same time in one Branch of the said Covenant, own the
King, and his Authority, and swear to maintain them?) must be, I judge, a Breach
of the Subject's Duty, required in the Thirteenth to the Romans. But the
Covenant was such an Act. Or thus, To own the King, and his Authority, in the
same Oath, and yet to Swear to change the Government without his Will, and
against it, is, I think, in it self Unlawful. Such an Oath was the Covenant.
Thus far I Subscribe to this Clause, That the same was in it self an Unlawful
Oath, and I draw no farther.

The last Clause is (so far as I know) undoubtedly true; and therefore, I must,
and do Subscribe And imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm, against the known
Laws and liberties of this Kingdom.

This is what I can, and am ready to Subscribe; only, I must first make it
Public: I cannot satisfy my Conscience else, to propose it in Private to the
Bishop, though it should obtain, unless I Publish it: Both because of my
Brethren, that I may avoid Scandal; I mean not the Scandal of Displeasure,
which I care little for; but the Scandal tending to Sin, or to wound any of
their Consciences by my Example: And also, because of the Bishop; lest I should
draw him into some Condescension, out of his present Goodness and Benignity,
which he might Repent after; unless he be first come to a Resolution of Mind,
and so acts out of Conscience; and that alone will bear him out against any
Inconvenience, that can ensue: And more-over, because of my own Soul and
Temper, that cannot endure to do any thing of this Nature, but what is open and
fit for a plain Honest sort of Man to do. And here there is but one thing in
the general, wherein I seek favor of the Bishop, which I must explain on the
same Account.

I am sensible, that a Liberty of Subscribing this Declaration, or submitting
to any Imposition in our own Sense or Interpretation, is a Favor signifies
nothing: For, no Man that acts in Judgment and Conscience, can make any
Interpretation of a Law or Imposition, but what he believes to be the Meaning
of the Lawgiver: If I am not satisfied then in that Meaning, I have no other
Interpretation to make; and if I am satisfied in that Meaning, I need no Favor
or Liberty to be given me; for there is none can take this away from me, which
necessarily goes to a Judgment of Private Discretion. I shall not care what any
Bishop, or Judge upon the Bench may say, to thwart me in the Case of the
Oxford-Oath, since I Published my late Paper (unless I feel some Wavering in my
Mind, or doubt in the Interpretation there delivered), notwithstanding some of
my Brethren were so much concerned here-to-fore, with the Words of one about
it. I should be afraid of what he said, if it were in a Suit of Law; but, the
matter is otherwise in a Case of Conscience; where I am to be justified by God
alone, and not by a Jury. But to have a Liberty of Subscribing or Submitting to
an Imposition, with some Restriction, Limitation, or Exception; this is indeed
a Favor, which I seek in this Declaration. An Interpretation gives me Liberty
(I count) only as to the Words, while I am yet tied up to the Meaning of the
Lawgiver. A Limitation gives me Liberty, as to the Meaning of the Imposer, as
well as to the Literal Construction, and that is a great matter. I cannot
Subscribe this Declaration, without such a Liberty; and with such a Liberty, I
can Conform also to other Impositions. I know, that the Bishop can give me no
such Liberty, as to limit, restrain, or make any Exception to the Meaning of
the Law, any more than I can dispense with my self, I have said: But, if he
shall be got to pass me for his part, I do not question, but I shall pass after
with others, I have said also. And as for the matter of Conscience in it, I
have laid down my Rule between us, and the Superior Law of Almighty God, shall
be the justification of us both in the pursuance of it, I have affirmed
likewise.

I will here add one Argument. If there be any evil in this (the Subscribing
with Limitation), it must be either in regard to the Fifth Commandment, or the
Nineth: Either because it is against our duty of Obedience to the Higher
Powers, or against our duty of Sincerity and Truth. Here is no Sin against
Truth and Sincerity, for therefore do I make these Restrictions or Exceptions,
that I may not forsake Truth, but keep my Sincerity in what I do. I declare to
all the world, I will not go a step further than my Conscience goes along with
me; and unless I have this liberty, or take it, I will not go on. And here is
no Sin of disobedience to my Superiors because the Law of God forbids me to do
more. It is a case decided by the Apostle, and yielded, that when the Law of
God has laid an Obligation on the Conscience already, the Law of man to the
contrary can have no place. If my Nonconformist brother sins not that
subscribes Nothing of this Declaration because of his Conscience, then do not I
sin that make my Limitation. If it were a sin to make any of these Restrictions
or Exceptions, how shall they be justified by the greater Law, that is the Law
of God, who refuse to Subscribe any thing, because they cannot Subscribe to all
upon that account? If I sin in doing what I can, how shall Obedience to the
Higher-Powers be a Duty? And if I sin in doing only what I can, how shall my
Brethren be acquitted that make no trial at all, and do nothing? And yet do I
make no doubt of their Integrity.

To frame any interpretation of the words of a Law, and so Subscribe them in
that sense which a man believes is not the meaning of the Lawgiver, is a
prevarication of the Law; for he pretends to Subscribe to the Law when he knows
he does not, seeing it is the Lawgivers meaning, and not the bare words is the
Law: but when I declare that I do not Subscribe to the Law in such or such
particulars, but on others, Here is all the plainness that can be, and so no
breach of Sincerity; and here is a doing what I can, and so no neglect of my
duty. If any be ready to reply to me, then you should have done thus, and been
more express upon the particulars of this Declaration, in showing what we may
agree to, and whereunto we are to make our exceptions: I would have that man to
know that I have done thus, and with solicitude so far as does serve me, or
save my own Conscience; and it may suffice him that I have broken the ice, or
opened the way for him to do that farther as he would have had me do, if his
Conscience be not satisfied without it, and he can get leave to do it Neither
will my Shoes serve his feet, or my Gloves come on his hands: nor will my
Limitations be the measure of every man's coalition.

Indeed I am sorry here to be more Subtle then this comes to already. The
Bishop I suppose will give me liberty to Subscribe in my own Sense, and this I
have said signifies nothing: but I must recall my self. It is nothing I mean,
unless we state this liberty of our own sense, and know what we agree upon by
if. I by a liberty of our own sense any Bishop shall heartily understand my
Subscribing this Declaration in such a sense as I can, though I believe it not
to be the meaning of the Law, and he accepts of that, and lets me express it,
this is no other then a liberty of Exception, and we must beware that we stick
not on scruple; when we agree upon the matter. In the way, one thing is to be
put out of doubt, that, though in Subscribing to an Imposition we must be
supposed to subscribe it in the meaning of the Imposer if we say nothing, yet
if we make our Limitations or Exceptions, and express them (with leave to do
so) we contract no guilt, or are obliged no further in Conscience than we
consent thereunto and take the obligation on our Souls, as may appear in the
Oath between Rahab and the Spies. I am sorry therefore (I say) that I am forced
here to be more critical and nice, than I would be. I can be content to
distinguish an Interpretation and a Limitation, but I am very loath to
distinguish any further, between the Last and an Exception, which vertually is
implied in it, nevertheless seeing I am breaking my own way, and I cannot help
it, and seeing the use of words we know is to express the mind, and every man
consequently has liberty over his own words to explain and distinguish them as
he please, I will in the first place distinguish for once these things. An
Interpretation, A Limitation, An Exception. An Interpretation let me say
requires the Sense or meaning of the Lawgiver, and that altogether, and all of
it. A Limitation requires that meaning, but not all of it. An Exception
signifies a denial of it. Again I must distinguish of the Submission to an
imposition upon favor, or without any. In my former Paper about the
Oxford-Oath I laid down a Rule to strew the way for our coming up to an
imposition (where we can) without favor in those that administer it: In this
Paper I proceed to lay down another for our submission in case of favor, when
we cannot submit to the Imposition unless we obtain it. I must in the last
place yet distinguish more-over between the Subscribing to an Imposition in the
form of words wherein it is enjoined, and the having liberty of our own
expressions. I must confess, I have several times proposed this expedient for
accommodating us to the Laws, that our present Impositions might be required of
us only in the matter and the End; that is, if we can come up to them so far as
to agree in the chief substance of the thing enjoined, and answer the end of
the Imposer, it should suffice, though we expressed our Consent in our own
words. This would make out Subscriptions easy, and every one could tell what to
do for himself: but supposing that this will not be granted, I am put against
my will upon this curiosity.

Let us suppose then an Exposition made of any Injunction according to the
meaning of the Lawgiver. If I assent to all of it, I may submit to it, and
need no favor: If I assent to part of it and not to all, I must have the
favor to make my Limitation: If there be any Clause in it that I cannot assent
at all unto, I must have leave to put in my Exception, or I cannot submit to
it. In the first case, when an Interpretation alone does serve me, I may
Subscribe to an imposition in the form of words wherein it is enjoined; and so
long as I can do so, I may offer my interpretation for the avoiding of Scandal
whether the Ministers of the Law are willing or not, they must receive me. In
the last case; when an Exception is need-full, I cannot ( I think) Subscribe to
the form of words without prevaricating with the Law, and they that Administer
the Imposition may (and I suppose will) refuse me the license of using my own
expressions: In the middle case, wherein I have need of a Limitation (which I
accounts less than an Exception, and more than an Interpretation) I may
Subscribe ( I think) to the words, because there is a truth in the words with
my sense, and my sense is the meaning of the Law giver; only because I cannot
subscribe to all their meaning, I must have favor to express my Limitations,
or restraint of the words to that sense, or else I cannot Subscribe them ( I
account) with faithfulness: but if I have the liberty to do so, I am ( I think)
to steel my mind against all Scruple; and if any comes into it, to cast it out.
The Consideration of that one Text alone Be not righteous over much, will bear
me out ( I apprehend) in such a Subscription.

To be yet Clearer, if I can be possible, If by a Liberty of my own Sense
(which I suppose the Bishop will give me) he shall understand my giving the
sense of the Law, or declaring what I believe to be the meaning of the
Lawgiver, and then Subscribing to the Imposition in that Sense, which is a
proper Interpretation, here is no advantage to me, or favor, but what I may
take my self: If he shall understand my declaring a sense of my own, though I
believe it not to be the Sense of the Imposer, this is a great favor; but I
see not how I can be Subscribe to the words of the Imposition, and he will not
give me leave for all this, to Subscribe in any other form: If he shall
understand my Subscribing so far as I can to the sense in the words enjoined,
with liberty of Restriction of them to this meaning (which vertually includes
an Exception against what I cannot assent unto), here I do humbly believe both,
that I may Conscionably Subscribe, and he be satisfied in the matter. If we be
tied to the Meaning of the Lawgiver every jot, the way is too Straight: To
frame to our selves any Meaning without Regard to the Law giver's is a Way too
Wide: But to Subscribe to the Meaning of the Imposer so far as I can, and to
forbear in what I cannot, is the Way which I think safe, and which I seek in
this Paper. Only I must add one thing after this, that where there is no Form
of Words imposed, the Liberty of a Limitation and of an Exception comes to one;
and as I now distinguish these two Words, I may again confound them, according
to my occasion.

Having thus distinguished then between an Interpretation and a Limation or
Exception, I must yet proceed so far as I do go, to apply the same to my
present Subscription, that I may avoid all mistake and ambiguity, and
Consequently the laying a stumbling block before any.

In the first Clause I do not Subscribe to the proposition which it contains
Universally but Indefinitely, To wit, with the Restriction of it to such a
prudential state of the question as may be gathered out of such Authors I have
named. It becomes a Loyal Subject to Subscribe that Tenet, and it becomes an
Honest-man to Subscribe it no further, or no otherwise, than such learned and
excellent persons upon study, were able to maintain it. There are several cases
which are put by themselves by way of Limitation of it, yet so long as we may
believe, that none of them came into the Minds of the Majority of Parliament in
passing the Law, and there were Actually none of them as could be put in regard
to our present King, we are to look upon it as the Intent of the Act, that we
should consequently object no such Cases to our selves in Subscribing to this
Clause; so that, though I here use my Liberty of Restriction in regard to
Others (which I must tell) I might be content my self (as I suppose in the
Oxford-Oath) with an Interpretation only. Nay, I do not need any of this
Caution at all, in regard to Sovereign Majesty it self, but in regard to those
that are at his Commandment. For, let me understand by Taking Arms, the Raising
an Army, or a War (which I take to be the true Sense in Construction of Law),
and by the King, his own Sacred Person only: There is no Case I know, but I may
Subscribe, That to take Arms against the King is Universally Unlawful.

In the Second Clause I am more fully persuaded, that I do offer the true Sense
of the Acts, Of Uniformity, and that at Oxford in reference to the Position
which is Renounced; and I am sorry at my Heart to see it possible for so many
of Judgment and Temper as there are, to be capable of any such Pre-occupation
of Mind, as to harbor once the Thought of another Interpretation, which cannot
be made but by supposing it the very Intent of the Parliament in those Acts, to
advance an Arbitrary Authority in the King above the true Regal Power he has
by Law: And yet has the late Discourses of People about the Test and later
Matters, with Stories thereunto appertaining, brought such a Jaundise on our
Imaginations, that makes every thing look Yellow and Jealously to us, as we
even quite forget that the Meaning of these Acts is, and must be, the Sense,
Mind, or Purpose of the Parliament, or Major Part of both House at the time
when they passed them, and that is, when there was not the least Breath of any
such thing as an Arbitrary Government talked of, or suspected by any. It is
plain enough, there was in the Prevailing Part, (I say not in the Major Number,
which is against Reason and Charity to think) an inveterate Resolution to
suppress one sort of Men they hated, which are now the Non-conformists, and
that indeed was all the Plot in that time which was going. For let us suppose
such a Question had bin proposed at the passing these Acts, Whether the King
should have a Power for the time to come, to raise Money and make Laws without
a Parliament? Can any Man's Heart serve him to believe, that such a Motion
would have bin entertained, or such a Vote by any Means under Heaven have bin
obtained (or could be yet) from the Majority of both Houses? To put the
Question, Whether by those Commissionated by the King in this Clause of the
Subscription, and that of the Oxford-Oath, is meant any but the Legally
Commissionated, or such as can justify their Commissions and Actings by Law, is
all one in good earnest with the Knowing, as to put this said Question. And how
then does any Man that understands (and considers that he understands) himself,
make a doubt of my Interpretation? It has bin talked, that when it was
endeavored by some in the Upper Hose, to put the Word Legally into the Test at
the time when that was in Agitation, it was refused: But what of that,
supposing it were true? Must this be the Reason on Necessity, because they
intended to make the Government Arbitrary? I am given to understand, for
certain, that when this Clause came into motion, they did unanimously Vote,
that by the Commissionated, the Legally Commissionated, and nothing else was to
be understood, without any Contradiction: So that the Reason why they put not
in that Word, Legally, could not be because they had another Meaning, but
because this Meanning was so manifest, so undoubted, and yielded by all, that
there was no need to do it; As also, lest by the Insertion of more than needs,
they might give occasion to People for the time to come of questioning still
the Legality of the King's Commissions. So easily are we misled by Reports,
which are always Partial, and often mistaken. Nay, what if it were in the
Thoughts of some Court Flatterers, who are not always the King's Friends, to
advance the Prerogative above its due Height? Did we not see, that as soon as
this Suspicion did but enter in the Thoughts of a few, what a stir it this Test
was but in the Upper House only, there is no force at all in the Argument, what
a few Men at such a distance were contriving (if they were): so long as it is
not to be imagined that the Major Part of both Houses, at the time when the
Acts were made, had the least Intention, or Thought of any such matter. I will
add, that I am assured for my own part by certain Testimony, that the King
himself has said it more than once, not only in his Public Speeches which may
be thought Popular, but in his Private Retirement upon apt Occasions, that he
really desired and sought no more than his just Prerogative, without
Intrenchment on the Peoples Liberty. As he needed not, so he would not have
said this to some upon the Occasion I know, if he was not Cordial in it. And if
he should be of another Mind more lately (which it were a Wickedness in us to
think), yet were that nothing as to the Acts of Parliament which have bin so
long passed. Nay, that I may cut off this very Suggestion also, Duke Laudardale
in his Speech to the Convention of Estates at Edinburgh, now must lately, July
1678. has these Words. Majesty has these Eighteen Years in all his Kingdoms,
solemnly professed his Abhorrence of Arbitrary Government, his Ruling by the
Law, and his Inviolable Care to preserve the Liberty and Property of his
Subjects. I should not, I must confess, inculcate this thus much, but in regard
to the Oxford-Oath, and that the Conscience of a Man is indeed as tender a
Point as the Throne of a King. For, as for this Subscription alone, if any can
be of another mind yet, he may put in his Particular Exception, and say, I
Subscribe to it as unlawful to Resist any Commissionated by the King, if their
Commissions be according to Law: if they be not, I hold the contrary.

In the Third Clause I have one thing to remember, which is to declare, that I
apprehend not that any Man by his Subscribing to conform to the Liturgy, does
engage, or stand engaged because of that, to forsake his Brethren presently who
conform not, and come no more amongst them; or that he does debar himself
thereby the Benefit to hear them, or deprive others of his Labors to Preach
with them, at least if some of the Common Prayer will but be suffered to be
read by him. I understand no such matter by it: if any others do, I enter my
Exception. For, as I am one that have ordinarily gone to my Parish Church, not
only joining in the Public Prayers, but receiving the Sacrament there, and
never yet elsewhere, though I am a Nonconformist: So, if I shall conform (that
is, so far as I can (which does but fix me so much more firm in that wherein I
conform not), I intend not but to be the same Man still, as to the keeping in
with my Brethren, and to do as I did; which is to be sometimes with them, and
for the most part with the Parochial Congregation. I am convinced, that it is a
great Fault of the Nonconformist and Conformist both, who fear God, that they
keep no more Fellowship with one another, which were the nearest way to make up
Difference, and to understand better what is to be done by both for the Peace
of the Church, and for the Sake of our Religion. And here I must advance a
little in this Clause; I think it enough for a License to Preach, to Subscribe
the same with the mentioned Limitations: but if I should find in my heart to
take upon me a Parochial Charge, it were more fit, and in order to that Work,
to Subscribe more strictly. In short, So far as I Assent and Consent, so far I
an say, I will Conform. For this is uniforme, and that I may be express in that
I do, because it stands me upon; I am come to an Agreement, upon Treaty, to
change this Clause thus, which differs little in the Import.

The Third Clause is a Promise, as I take it, to Read Common Prayer, which I am
not against; and do therefore Subscribe, That if I have a Public Charge, or
Cure of Souls, I Shall in the ordinary Lord's Day Service, by my self, or by an
Assistant, according to the Usage of the Church, conform to the Liturgy of the
Church of England, as it is now by Law Established. Only, if upon any occasion
(or Reason) I shall sometimes shorten the Work, I will not be held a Breaker of
my Promise for that: Nor shall the Omission of another, be laid to my Charge.

In the Fourth Clause there is some Distinction, and my Restrictions or
Limitation on that Distinction. I will add here some few Words for Explication
of the Restrictions. I do say, there lies no Obligation from the Covenant on
any Person [in a Private Capacity, or Acting in a Private Capacity] to
endeavor any Alteration of Government. By which Words I understand not only an
Exception to such who are Public Persons that Act in Parliament, which I
express in the first Words [in a Private Capacity] but to all others likewise,
Acting in such a way, as (or in no other way than) is warrantable by the
Constitution of the Land, which I express in the Word superadded [or Acting in
a private Capacity]. The Government of this Nation is a Mixed Government, and
there is something of it in the Hands of the Popularity. The People may choose
their Representatives for Parliament, and tell them what they would have done,
and persuade them to endeavor it, and Petition both Houses for it (nay, they
Vote in them), and in all this, Act, I count in a Public Capacity though
Private Persons, so long as they do Act by Virtue of the Constitution. I must
account likewise, if any seek the Reformation of the Church, or any other Good
for the Nation, in Praying to God for it, or Preaching (suppose one Preaching
to the Houses) and Persuading to it, and the like (if you scrue up the Word
Endeavor to that Height), with the purpose only of having it done in an
orderly way, by a due Proceeding in Parliament, that this is to be held
Equivalent, because whatsoever is done this way, is warranted (I say) be the
Constitution. I dare not then deny, but there does lie an Obligation on every
Man in the Parliament as Public Persons, and on all Private Persons likewise,
so far as they can act in a Public Capacity thereunto, to Honor God, in
seeking the Reformation of the Church, and the Public Good: But I Subscribe,
that there lies no Obligation from the Covenant upon my self or any other
Person, to endeavor the same any otherwise but in a Political Capacity that is
only as it can be obtained by a Rightful Act of Parliament. If any think, I
have not expressed thus much aptly or fully enough in its place, let him mend
it to his own Mind who has occasion for it: If suffices me, (as I have for the
general once intimated) if I have here and there together (as Master of my own
Sense and Explanations), delivered my self from Scruple.

In the Fifth Clause, I do the like as in the fourth, and then give my reason
why I Subscribe upon the Restriction. I dare not say that nothing in the
Covenant is Lawful or Obligatory, They covenanted against Schism, Popery, to
Repent and amend their lives; This must oblige those that took it. Nay I dare
no say that it is unlawful top make any change of Government. The power of the
Keys is committed by Christ to the Minister, or his own Officers; The Bishop
commits them to the Chancellor, who is a Lay man, and yet executes that
Charge. Who does doubt but if the Government were changed in this point, it
were lawful? Nay I do not say that a change of the Hierarchy it self, of the
Archbishop and Diocesan Bishop invested with the sole power of Ordination and
Juridiction into the Primitive Episcopacy, acting along in these things with
the Presbyters, is in it self unlawful, but that it lies in the power of a
Parliament (if they please) to do it. When I do then thus put in my exception
as to the Matter Covenanted (even the Alteration of Government) precisely
considered, and rest my self only in showing how this Oath in the Act of
Covenanting was indeed in the Complex consideration (in regard to that matter)
obivously unlawful as I judge, and give my Reason: if this shall content the
Bishop and serve my turn, I may have cause to acknowledge his candor, but none
of my brethren have any, to be offended at me for what I do.

In the last Clause I find no need of any Exception or Interpretation.

That which remains therefore now in regard to this Subscription, is only to
put my had to my Paper, which if I obtain hereby the use of my Ministry (and
none can convince me of sin in it) I am content to do: If I obtain it not, if
shall suffice me to have made the trial, and the matter shall be all one in
point of Conformity between God and my soul, as if I were clear altogether, and
had put no name at all to it. J, H.

Thus much then for the Subscription. I have offered my Rule and I have
proceeded to Practice; which I have done in the General, and in this
Particular. I have no more to say of that. Of the former, the General, there
are several branches mentioned before, and there are some of them wherein I
perceive it neeedfull to make yet some further declaration; more especially,
Concerning the Common Prayer, Concerning my Second Orders, and Concerning the
Church Articles. And when I have also done this, my work is not quite done, I
have something to leave then (if it might be obtained) on other hands.

For the first, the Common Prayer. There are many particular things, little and
great, in some part or other of the book, which I must profess really I cannot
give my unfeigned assent and consent unto, and think, that any man who is severe
at any time upon his Conscience, can hardly choose but be startled at. I
remember some years since, a Conformist Minister using the Common Prayer in his
house, gave me this reason. It was required (he said) of all Ministers, and
turned me presently to this passage in the Preface before the Prayers. And all
Priests and Deacons are to say daily the Morning and Evening prayer, either
privately or openly, not being let by sickness, or some other urgent cause.
From that time, I perceived I was no man for the Declaration of Assent and
Consent to all, and every thing, contained in, and prescribed by this book; and
also that by the shift of those words [to the use] I could not help my self. I
dare not give my consent to the use of any thing which I never intend to do. I
do, and I shall use at home my own Prayers. In the other Preface before
Ordination, there is a difference of Order (or Office) asserted between Bishop
and Presbyter (which was put in also in this new book on purpose) when such men
as Field, Mason, Davenant, Mead, Usher, do hold a difference in Degree only. I
cannot assent to this, because I was otherwise engaged in print before this
book was enjoined, and I cannot retract my opinion without conviction. In the
same place, there is this passage, but with more words. And to the intent that
these Orders be reverendly esteemed, no man shall be accounted or taken for a
Lawful Priest, or be suffered to execute the function, except he be called
according to this for me, or bath had formerly Episcopal Ordination. Reader,
can thy heart consent to this? Art thou so assured that the nation lies under
no guilt in turning out so many Ministers who were Ordained only by Presbyters,
as thou dare partake in the deed by thy Consent? My heart I am sure will not
serve me to do it. In the Athanasian Creed I cannot assent to the Proeme and
Conclusion by no means, and God forbid they should be true. The whose Creed and
Articles of it I believe, but I believe not that every one that don't, is
incapable of Salvation. I will mention one more peculiar thing (and it is a
great matter) that sticks with me being against my written judgment. I
perceive the Liturgy though all its Offices does lay the Notion of the Church
upon so narrow a foundation as the Congregationall men do, and I think that
without some other Hypothesis, we cannot defend our selves against Separation.
It is not upon the Christian profession in general in opposition to other
Religions, but upon the profession of no less than a true saving faith the
child is baptized, when the Sureties in the name of it self, and not of its
Parents, do answer actually, Credo, Abrenuncio; Having thus professed faith or
repentance, it is said to be Regenerate in the Office performed; Upon the same
profession renewed, when the child comes to more years, it is Confirmed; No man
is then admonished, or presumed to be allowed, to come to the Sacrament but
upon an assured faith; And none are burried but according to a Church judgment
of Charity (as Professors), they are, and must be accounted, to go to Heaven.
I cannot tell well how to relish this, for here is no bottom methinks for a
National Church. I must have such a Notion of the Church (Catholic, National,
Parochicall) as a Polliceor according to the Catechism may serve for a persons
entrance into it, and all the Ordinances of Worship and Discipline be means
after to excite him unto grace and his duty, as well as to edify him when he is
holy unto Salvation. This is no place I know for such a discourse; Only I am
not willing to be Choked in it, by swallowing this Pear of Assent and Consent.
In the Orders of Deacon I never approve since my self was faulty, that a man
does Solemnly promise to perform that Office (the duties hereof being read to
him) when he is made Priest also at the same time, and immediately casts off
that Charge. In the Rubricks to the Communion, Baptism, and Burial, if I
consent to every thing prescribed, or to the use of every thing there
prescribed, I must not deliver the Bread and Wine to a man, if he scruples to
Kneel at the Sacrament; I must turn away his child from baptism, if he
Scruples Godfathers; and if the Child dies before it is Christened, though the
parents be my dear friends, I must not allow it Christian burial. These are
hard Instances in my mind, and I could easily make up the number twenty, which
I believe the indifferent Reader would count reasonable exception. I must
distinguish therefore (as I here carefully do) the Ordinary appointed Prayers,
and Service of the Liturgy, from other Matters on the By; which I declare no
Assent or Consent unto. And when I come in, or seek to come in to the Church
upon the terms of Moderation, I do declare my self Ipso facto a Nonconformist
still to the Severity of these Impositions; bearing indeed thereby, only a more
distinct, fixed and assured testimony against them. Nevertheless being sensible
of the Scandal which is given to the Nation, who see generally no other
difference between us but our refusing to read the Common Prayer, and do think
us very exceeding refractory persons who will not comply in the things we can
do, I do resolve for one, by the grace of God (without turning to the left hand
in doing any thing which is against my conscience for preferment, or to the
right in contenting my self with Suffering only and doing nothing), to set my
self as it were in the Market place, and if any Bishop shall give me a call
(that is fitting) into the Vineyard (when I seek to them) upon the terms of
this Paper, I shall not refuse them, though it be almost the Eleventh hour with
me. I shall not stick out with them I believe upon the account of reading
Common Prayer. I will trust in Gods power, it he has work for me to do that he
will give me assistance to do it: and if they will not let me come in upon
these terms to Labor, I will trust in his Goodness that he will forgive me
when I am found Idle. The Nation shall see at whose door the fault Lies by my
experiment. For I do profess my self one who can neither stretch my Soul
beyond its staple, nor yet will give off upon despondence, or on the
presumption only that it will not serve me unless I do every thing to a
tittle, which is the prepossessed judgment of most of my brethren when they
have made no trial, and which I would humbly reprove therefore by my Example.

For the Second, Reordination. I will here make my Remonstrance and
Confession. I will set things at rights between God and my Soul, and between my
Soul and the World. I am one that was ordained by Presbyters in the late times,
and re-ordained since by the Bishop. I was persuaded into it before I had
studied the point, and brought my self in distress. I was fain to take such a
course for relief of my Soul, as nothing could have drove me to, but that
distress it self, which I would not lie under again for the World. Not that I
was any way touched in my Intellectuals by it, as some that never knew me have
bin apt to talk ever since, which I must assure them is a tale, and there was
no such thing ( I thank God) in the least. I have reason yet to say this,
because I know the temper of my mind being Melancholy and Thoughtful, and so
apt to be intent on any one thing that has got into it, whether of Notion or
Business, I do not often, and I cannot sometimes recall my self from those
thoughts to an attendance on the present company I am in, or discourse that is
going so freely as others, which makes my unheedfulness liable to the censure
of those that are not used to me; Besides that, being One resolved generally to
follow my own conscience in what I write, or do, whether it please or displease
others, the Offended (who are commonly on both sides) may be apt to put some
such slur upon me, at least, while in any thing I go but in a way uncommon. As
Paul therefore said, when Festus had got such a conceit of him, so must I. I am
not Mad my worthy Brethren who are strangers to me, when I differ from you,
(and from those also, whom I do know) in what I write, or act: But what I do (
I trust) are deeds of Soberness, and I speak forth the words of Truth. I
acknowledge, the Church in her giving Orders does intend the collation of an
Office to the Presbyter distinct from the Bishop, that is an office without the
power of Ordination; and consequently if a Presbyter ordains any, the
Churchmen must hold such an ordination to be void, because the persons that
confer the orders have no power to do it. But I must confess my thoughts about
Orders are something different from others. I do not think that the Spiritual
power, or ministerial authority is conveyed to us by the hands of any, but does
come Immediately upon us (the conditions on our part being put) from the
institution of Christ. I apprehend consequently that whatsoever be the
intention of the Church in her giving Orders, such a power must be derived from
Christ to the person ordained as is intended in his Institution: and so long as
we find not any distinction (which is touched before) of Order or Office
(though we allow one as to Degree and Eminency) in the Scripture between Bishop
and Presbyter, the authority of one in regard to God must be the same with the
other; and the laying on the hands of the one be of the same validity in
Ordination as the imposition of the hands of the other. We do read, that God
has set in his Church, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, but we
find not Bishop and Presbyter enumerated as two of them. I enter not into
dispute here, but I am one that dare not give way to the making void of my
Ministry and all my ministerial acts for a dozen years, or more, before I was
Ordained by the Bishop, for that were a heinous crime for me ( I think) to do:
yet will I be content as to the Exercise of my Office now, to own my authority
from him. I was a Minister before in foro Dei and Conscientiae: I was made a
Minister then ( I will account) in foro Ecclesia Anglicanae. I acknowledge I
did ill in my circumstances to take second orders: and yet was I too extreme (
I doubt) in my renunciation, or in the way of my renunciation again of them. If
any man thinks that Orders give the spiritual power, and makes us Ministers in
foro Dei, it is apparent that a Man who is a Minister already cannot be so made
a Minister again. Consequently if I have formerly writ any thing that seems to
countenance Reordination to the Office (which is good earnest my Hypotheses
never favored) I do rennounce it all, and those second Orders, on that account
( I humbly crave the Churches absolution and benediction): But if Orders be
only a Recommendation of us to the grace of God for the work unto which a man
is called, there is nothing in Reordination to scare any; and as my second
Orders may serve me for the Exercise of my Ministry when my first will not, I
do, I must, retain them to that purpose, if I be received (on my terms
otherwise) into the Church. I crave pardon of God for my faillings on either
hand, especially where my case in the work crept in to deflour my Sincerity in
such a piece of Self deny all as I know else what was. The prevailing interest
of my heart (I hope) was right in the sight of God in what I did, yet dare I
not justfie my self, but commit my case unto my Judge, imploring his mercy and
begging his pardon. For when there is nothing almost that I do, but upon a
severe Examination I can find some slaws in it my self: If thou O Lord,
should be extreme to mark against me what I have done amiss, how could I
abide it? I will bind my self therefore (If I be fit) so much more to my duty,
and in some kind of penance for my infirmity, shall be the more content that I
take that course to make my return to the Vineyard as no man else has
endeavored, at least in such a Manifesto as this is. And to the same end, I
shall yet commit this ensuing Memorial to Posterity.

Notum sit omnibus ad quos haec spectant, me J. H. legitime and Canonice ab
Episcopo Bathoniensi ordinatum fuisse; Quod cum praegrave nimium Conscientiae
meae ob priorem aliquam Ordinationem a Presbyteris sine Episcopo collatam visum
est: Ordinationem hanc denuo receptam non ad Ministerij Officium, sed ad ejus
Exercitium particulare, ubicunque vocatus (si vocatus) fuero, habendi; eaque
habita utendi, egomet mihi, and Deus meus (facillime omnia in quibus peccavi
mihi condonans) potestatem facimus.

For the third, the Nine and Thirty Articles. I must confess my self in this
one thing something more difficult to be satisfied than others. It is but
distinguishing of the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church (which includes the
Government and Ceremonies), and the most of my Brethren can Subscribe to these
Articles without Scruple. And no more than an Assent to the Doctrine ( I think)
is required by the Statute. But I am one much in doubt concerning the Doctrine
of some of our Articles. I do think that the Article of Justification, and the
Eighteenth Article in the Authentic sense of them are questionable. These
words in the Eleventh article, That we are Justified by Faith only, are
expressly contrary to the meaning of St. James: And the meaning of those that
composed the Articles at that time (who had not the Light which is going now)
was I believe contrary also to the meaning of St. James: Their mistake I
apprehend Obvious, who took St. Paul's justification, by Faith without the Works
of the Law to be all one as by Faith only. In the Eighteenth Article likewise I
believe it was the judgment, and so the meaning of the Composers, that no man
who is not converted to the Christian Faith can be saved, and consequently that
every Heathen Man in the World must perish. For this is consonant to the
beginning and end of the Athanasian Creed, that whosoever believes not that
faithfully, and keeps it whole and undefiled is undoubtedly Damned. But for my
own part, I cannot be of this Opinion, which seems to me inconsistent with the
Goodness of God, and Natural Religion. I have offered some little Light and
Argument for the salvability of some Heathen (in my Book lately come out,
entitled Peaceable Disquisitions) that will not, or cannot (I think) be
withstood by the Considerate and Equal. I have offered also in the same book
that reconciliation of Paul and James which I believe to be the Right. I can
believe no otherwise, and I must have liberty therefore of some exception in
these two Articles (and perhaps in some others) from that which I believe to be
the Authentic Sense of them, or I cannot Subscribe them. Nay, to say something
that may seem strange, I can subscribe the words of one of these Articles, and
yet not to the article (without dispensation) because I think the meaning of
the Imposers to be more than the words come to. I verily think the Composers of
the Articles did believe that all Heathen are excluded Salvation, yet do they
proceed to their Anathema here (which they have in no other Article) with wary
words, which is not pronounced against any that say only some Heathen may be
saved, but against them who presume to say that every Man shall be saved by the
Law or Sect he professes, so that he be diligent to frame his Life according
to it, which is a Doctrine I abhor my self as being against the sense of what I
offer in my Book named; the scope whereof is to show, that there is but one
Rule, Law, or Religion for the World to obtain Life by; That this is the Law of
our Lapsed Nature, which is God's Grace administered under a threefold State; Of
the Heathen, Of the Jews, Of Christians; That our Advantage over them lies (as
the Apostle speaks) in our having the Oracles of God, which (including the
Minstry and Ordinances) are (we know) those further (and our ordinary) Means
which they have not, to bring Men up to the Performance of that Law, that is
the Condition to us and them of obtaining Salvation by it. This makes that
Advantage so significant, that in comparison of the state of the Jews (or
Commonwealth of Israel) and much more in comparison of our Estate; the Heathen
wanting these means, are said to be dead in their Sins, to be without God,
without Christ, to sit in Darkness, and the like, (that is (I say)
Comparatively to us, or Secundum quid) when yet they are under the same Law (I
affirm) in the Substance for Life as we, and we know not but more than a few of
them live with acceptance up to it. When some Men will have Christians saved
only by Morality and Good Nature, it will be time, and no Fault for others, to
make the Heathens Salvable by Grace and Christ Jesus. This is not indeed here
(or there) my concern to pursue: But that I have to observe to my present
Purpose, is (as I am saying), that though I know none that do scruple the
Literal Sense of this article, which is, That no Man can be saved by any
Religion, but the True Religion; yet so long as I believe, that the Imposers
did mean more, to wit, that no Man can be Saved in any Religion but the
Christian, which is another Matter (As a Man may be Saved in Popery, but not by
it; He may be saved from Popery, in Popery, and so from Idolatry in
Heathenisme): I have bin in suspense still how to Subscribe this Article,
unless it be only to the Words, with Exception to the Authentic Meaning. There
is a threefold Interpretation, An Authentic, Usual, and Doctrinal
Interpretation, as Suarez has it De Legibus. I will therefore advance here one
Notion, which will be received (I think) as Consonant to the Judgment of most
Men, as soon as they have laid it to Consideration. It is this, that though I
account all Laws in general are to be taken in that Sense only, which we
believe to be the Meaning of the Law giver, because the Law is his Will, and it
is not the Words, but his Meaning is his Will: Yet do I judge, that in these
Articles of the Church, which are not Laws, nor Articles of Faith, but Articles
for Concord, that is, in the Words of the Cannon, Articles for the avoiding
Diversities of Opinions, and for establishing of Consent touching true
Religion, there is no Man to be staked down to the Authentic Interpretation
(which I account that, as a Man believes to be the Meaning of the Majority of
the Convocation that passed the Article), but to be allowed (or rather, he is
supposed to be allowed, and to take) the Freedom of a Doctrinal Interpretation
(which is, any Judicious Explication of such a Thesis or Doctrine, as some of
the Eminent Doctors of the Church, or other Pious and Learned Author or Authors
have offered to the Nation; or indeed any such as a Man himself shall tender,
which in the Literal Grammatical Construction of the Article (to keep to the
King's Declaration before the Articles) appears Rational, and is satisfactory
to his own Conscience, and much more if it be allowed by the Bishop). My Reason
is, because it must be conceived, that when any Council, Synod, or Convocation
of Divines do meet about an Agreement upon any Articles or Theses concerning
Religion, they are generally of diverse Minds in the debating the Points, and
every one is to be supposed free in the Delivery of his Judgment, until they
come to draw up the Article or Doctrine into such Words as they are all to
consent to; and then if it be Composed so, as they can yield to one another in
the Words which they agree upon, it is to be understood, that there is an
Universal Allowance tacitly granted from all to one another, of abounding in
their own Sense, and so they came to a Coalition. There is the Meaning then of
the Majority; and a Universal Meaning. The Universal Meaning is above the
Meaning of the Major Part. The Meaning of the Majority I believe in some of
these Articles, to be such as I cannot Subscribe them in their Meaning: But
forasmuch, as I apprehend it the Universal Meaning, that every one of those
that are to pass their Vote in Establishing the Article, should have the
Liberty of his own Sense, so long as he can but agree with the rest in the
Words, or in the Literal Construction of the Article, if I bring an
Interpretation of some Doctor, or one of my own, which may be supposed to be
the same with any one of them who so consented to it with difference of
Explication from others, then must I be supposed to have the Universal
Allowance of the Convocation for that Interpretation, which I call a Doctrinal
Interpretation. I will confirm this by the Notoriety of the Practice in the
Council of Trent. The Doctors differed in most Points, but as soon as (through
the Expertness of one of the Presidents, famous for that Knack) they were but
put into Words as might salve their contrary Opinions, they passed their Votes
as Unanimous in the Council, although they writ after also one against another,
citing the Council for them on both sides. To this purpose are the Words of the
King, in his Declaration for the Ratification of the Articles to be considered.
We take Comfort in this, that even in those curious Points, in which the
present Differences lie, Men of all sorts take the Articles of the Church of
England to be for them. The Arminians with Doctor Hammond, and the Calvinists
with Bishop Usher do Subscribe them, and find out their own different Sense in
them. I will leave it therefore on the File, as the fit Matter of a new Cannon,
if ever we have another Convocation, to be declared, that the Articles and
Homilies of the Church are imposed, and to be Subscribed, not in the
Authentic, nor in the Usual, but in a Doctrinal Interpretation. There being a
Latitude in all Controverted Points, and consequently some Diversity of Opinion
to be allowed to Brethren, for the abounding in their own Sense in the same
Religion, or else there can be no sufficient Foundation of Unity amongst any
considerable Number of Men of Free Judgments in the World.

In the mean time, if the case be put, what a man shall do that scruples or
doubts of the truth of any of the Articles, whether he may satisfy himself
with such an Interpretation before it be Authorized by a Convocation (or
otherwise), I must answer that I apprehend a great deal of reason for it, but
dare not pass such a determination. If I scruple any thing my self I shall
declare it, and unless I am satisfied in that sense of the point as I believe
was the meaning of the Imposers, I must fly to my remedy, not of an
Interpretation, but of the liberty for Exception or Limitation, and that indeed
does my work. This Scrupulosity, and rigor of my mind for avoiding every thing
of a Solemn lie (though never so small) does make me wish for such a Canon, or
the allowance of a greater Authority, by some Act of Parliament.

I will therefore now turn me to the Higher Powers, for I must beg their Pardon
for this Endeavor of mine to make my return to the Vineyard before they have
opened the way for us, who can alone Legally do it. I would hereby, kindly
provoke them to think at last on some Explanatory Act for Uniting the
Protestant, and restoring the Ejected; who have now been out of our Livings
above Fifteen year, and no evil we hope has been found in us, besides our
preaching sometimes, and praying, and the keeping of our Consciences. And
because it is said, commonly by the Members of either House, that if they knew
what we would have, or thought we know our selves, they would do it; I cannot
forbear to present them with the Materials of such a Bill, in telling them
what we would have, from what is said already; if they will but bear with the
repetition. For when the obtainment of such a blessing for the Nation is even
near past my hopes, yet must it be still in my prayers; I may not be wanting to
it in my endeavors; and it cannot be beyond my Wishes.

Whereas then, there are many jealousies arose about Popery (to frame a
Preamble, as well as a body for such a Bill out of what is before delivered,)
which makes it even necessary to the peace of the Nation, that the Protestant
interest be united and strengthened by all good and lawful means, and to this
end there being this one proper expedient, to wit, the removing the occasions
of Division which several persons do find to themselves in those late
injunctions which yet were intended to the same purpose of Concord in the
Realm: That which we would have, is, that the Parliament would be pleased that
a Bill be prepared for Peace and Union, which might bear some such Title. An
Explanatory Act for agreement amongst Protestants, and for Ease in the business
in Religion. In which Bill I would have such an Explanation of these
Impositions, and such Alleviations in regard to the tenderly considerate, and
peaceably Scrupulous, or, soberly, not factiously Conscientious (who will never
be won) as may do our business.

In the Act of Uniformity, By the Declaration of Assent and Consent to all
things, and every thing, contained in, and prescribed, by, the two book, of
Common Prayer, and of Ordering Priests and Deacons, there is no considerate man
of the Parliament ever (I hope) understood that these books are in every minute
particular infallible, or free from that defect which is incident to all humane
Composures; but they understand I suppose, that they are in the maine contents
to be sincerely approved and used: I would have it therefore be here
sufficient, if this Declaration be made to the use of the book in the Ordinary
daily Lord's Day service, which we can consent to, or that we may make it with a
license of Exception against any matter or matters (out of that Service) which
the Bishop shall think meet to be dispensed with upon Convincing reason;
Provided only that the Ordinary constant public Service of the Liturgy obtains
Consent and Practice. And for the Ceremonies, which are, and have been always,
and on all hands held only for indifferent things, I wish they might be left to
the Consciences and prudence of Ministers and People every where (excepting the
Cathedralls,) to use them, or forbear them as they judge it most meet for one
another edification; for so some Bishops I believe, if it be left to them,
will sometimes be apt to determine themselves. Provided that if any person will
have his child baptized with the sign of the Cross, or stands upon any thing
else hitherto required by the Service Book, if the Minister himself Scruple the
performance, he shall always have some Assistant or Curate to do it.

In the same Act, By the Subscription, before treated, As I believe there was
no new Ill or strange thing intended by any of them, but the rightful
maintenance only of the Kings authority against Rebellion: So do I apprehend
that the Interpretation and the Limitations which I do here humbly present with
an unfeigned impartiality upon the several Clauses of it, may pass their
public approbation or allowance; which therefore I would have to be done, as a
matter of kind satisfaction to most Men's consciences, and of grievance to no
Body. Only for that part of it which is enjoined but to the year 1682, it
might do better perhaps to be made to cease presently, and be no longer imposed.

And forasmuch as there is an Oath also in the Act of Oxford required of all
Non conformist preachers that reside in any Corporate town, or come within five
Miles of it, whereof I have Printed a former Paper, and given the
Interpretation throughout as I believed it to be the very sense and meaning
only of the Act, without limitation or exception, which cannot therefore be
refused, insomuch as I dare, and do appeal to a Vote of the two Houses whether
I have delivered their minds or no: I would here have it only put to the
Question; and if it be (as I doubt not) indeed their sense, that they would
declare it. This will make that Oath straight be generally taken. Or else, I
will propose this rather (which is better) that it may suffice any man to enjoy
the right of this freeborn liberty to go where he will in his own Country, I
mean to escape the penalty of this Act, and serve him also instead of the
forementioned Subscription, to take that Oath in this form of words following.
I A. B. do swear, that I hold it unlawful upon any pretense to take Arms
against the King, his Government, or Laws: And that I disclaim that dangerous
Position of taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or any Legally
commissionated by him in the Legal pursuit of such Commissions: And that I will
not endeavor any alteration of Government in the Church or State in any way or
manner not warranted by the Constitution of this Kingdom (that is in a
seditious manner), or any otherwise then by Act of Parliament.

It being required moreover in the Act of uniformity (which is another of the
things also before Mentioned) that every Minister who enjoyes any Living shall
be ordained by a Bishop, and there are several persons of late who in case of
necessity for want of Bishops took Presbyterian Orders, I would have the
Parliament declare it their intent (for redeeming their credit with the
Reformed Churches beyond the Seas), not to make it absolutely necessary for
such persons to be reordained to the Office, but that it may be enough for them
if they receive this second Imposition of hands to the Exercise of their Office
in the New charge unto which they are, or shall be appointed, and that the
Bishop may, and shall frame his words accordingly. This is the only way that I
could find out, for peace to my own mind (as I have told before) in this
business.

And whereas there is a Subscription also in the Canons and the Canonical Oath
of Obedience imposed on most Ministers by the Bishops (mentioned before
likewise), which have given some of the greatest occasion to Non-conformists
heretofore, and which yet have never passed into a Law by any Act of
Parliament: I would here have it enquired by what Authorty one of these is
imposed, for I know none; And for that which is found in the Canons, being what
is more than needs, because included in other injunctions, I would have it
Exauthorized, and that nothing more of this nature might be imposed on us than
is made necessary by the Act of the thirteenth of Elizabeth. Provided
nevertheless, if the Bishop be unsatisfyed about any particular Person, he
shall be ready to offer a due acknowledgment of his reverence to Bishops in a
laudible Testimony thereof under his hand, and of his fair regard to the main
substance of the three Articles contained in that Canonical Subscription in
such expressions as shall best satisfy his own Conscience, and be approved as
sufficient under the hands of two Episcopal Doctors, or allowed by the Bishop.

And in regard there has bin great offense taken by conscientious Ministers
(which is a thing has not yet bin mentioned) at the Bishop, or his Courts
commanding them to read then sentence of Excommunication against some or other
of their Parish, for such faults as they think not at all worthy of so great
censure, or else be exempted from the execution of that charge; and that the
Bishop or his Court provide some other person that is satisfied about it, to do
it. And I would have none forced to give the Body and Blood of Christ to any,
but to whom they can, in point of Conscience.

In the last place, To the intent that a free search after Truth may be
encouraged, and many other Scruples avoided upon that account: I would have
them Authorize this one thing which I have offered, as more peculiar in this
Paper; which is, That though an Authentic Interpretation, which is the Sense
and Meaning only of the Lawgiver, be that Interpretation which is to be
regarded as the Substance of all Laws, seeing no Law, as no Scripture is of
Private Interpretation: yet in all matters of Words merely and Phrases, an
Interpretation that is Usual, and in all Articles, or Theses for Concord (which
I distinguish from Laws) about Religion, and the Homilies of the Church, a
Doctrinal Interpretation be sufficient for an Assent or Subscription to them.

These are the Things, and there is no less than these, and (I think) no more
than these, which are necessary to reconcile the Moderate Conformist and
Nonconformist, which is one Part of my Design, and Accommodation. If they
will pull out Nine Thorns out of our Feet, and leave a Tenth, we cannot go
along with them. Be it resolved therefore by the Grace of God, and both Houses,
that if any Person be willing to conform to the present Establishment of the
Church of England, and her Service appointed upon these, any of these, and
every one of these Explanations, Alleviations, Declarations, Lenitives, or
Cautions, he shall be admitted to any Ecclesiastical Preferment, and enjoy the
use of his Ministry without Molestation. All Statutes, Canons, or Laws to the
contrary notwithstanding.

To pass now to the other part of this Bill or Design, which is Indulgence; In
the way, Because the very Superintendency of Bishops, and that Subjection to
them which is required by the Constitution of the Realm is, or may be, an
Hindrance to many sober Ministers, and other Protestants of coming into the
Church, who are ready to consent to the Doctrine, but not to the Discipline or
Government of it, I would have them declare, That so long as any Person or
Party do acknowledge the King's Supremacy, as Head of the Church in this
Nation, and obey their Ordinary in licitis and honestis, upon the account of
his Authority committed to the Bishops, and their Officers, as Substitutes of
his for the Exercise of that External Objective Regiment Circa Sacra, which is
granted by all our Divines to the Higher Powers in every Nation, it is much as
is, or can be required in Law to the owning Episcopal Jurisdiction; and shall
serve them to all Intents and Purposes, no less than a professed Belief and
Acknowledgment of the immediate Divine Right of it. That is, Although there be
some that cannot acknowledge our Diocesan Prelates to be Christ's Officers
distinct from the Elders in Scripture, yet so long as they can live peaceable
Lives in Obedience to them, as Ecclesiastical Magistrates under his Majesty for
the keeping the several Congregations in their Precincts to that Gospel Order
which themselves allow, and for Supervising their Constitutions in things
indifferent, that nothing be done but in Subordination to the Peace of the
Kingdom (which is a Notion wherein the Judicious of every Party may acquiesce)
it is enough for their Reception into National Church-Union. And this is so far
from Derogating from the Bishops Office and Dignity, that it were a way to be
chose in Policy to advance it; while it makes his Authority significant to the
Presbyterian, and Independent, as well as to the Minister that has a Living;
and rears him an Inspection over the Gathered, as over the Parochial
Congregation.

And forasmuch then, as there are moreover some Ministers of a good Life, that
cannot according to their Judgments allow of our Parochial Churches, nor the
Book of Liturgy; but do choose to Worship God and Jesus Christ in the way of
their gathered or separate Congregations, and crave the Protection and Clemency
of the King upon their Allegiance, as other Subjects enjoy (the Conscience
being obnoxious to God only, and not capable to be constrained by the Rigor of
Laws, or by the extremest Execution of them): If the Parliament Men would know
further what we would have, I would have these Men all forborne and let alone,
thinking this Advantage the Churchmen have over such, to be enough, that they
have the State-Countenance, and these are incapable in their way of all Public
Emolument till they come into them.

And to the intent the Forborne may be wrought upon by the proper Motives of
their own Good, and at their own Time, I would have (as the other designed Part
(I say) of such a Bill) such a Universal Act of Grace be granted, that all and
every Christian-Subject throughout his Majesty's Realms, that profess
themselves of the Reformed Religion, be pardoned all Faults and Penalties
whatsoever incurred upon the account of any forepassed Nonconformity, and that
they shall not, during so many Years to come (as shall be Voted) be vexed or
persecuted any more for their Consciences, in the matter of Religion. Provided
they commit not any heinous Crime worthy of Punishment, but carry themselves
Innocently and Peaceably, both with Submission to all due Order in their own
Churches, and without Disturbance to the Civil or Ecclesiastical Government now
settled in the Nation.

There are these two Ingredients that are necessary to the Happiness of the
Kingdom. Union and Liberty. Union is for strengthening the Church for God:
Liberty is for strengthening the Land, for the King. There is Trade to be
encouraged, and Wars to be Managed; and Liberty of Conscience serves these ends
against our Civil Enemies in helping us to more hands; as Union serves us
against Popery, and the Enemies of our Religion. And what indeed should we do
with our Brethren that differ from us in opinion? Shall we smite them? No, but
set Bread and Water before them. Persecution will make them more zealous and
combine them, but liberty must brake them, or win them. They must have time.
And if the naming what time may not be waved, and I may speak who spoke the
rest, I would set it during this Kings Reign, that so every Man may pray for
his Life, and he may have the Title (more augustly) of Carolus Clemens when he
dies.

And for the making our Union of better signification to the Concerned, and
more effectual prevention of that Scandal which is raised on the Clergy
through the Covetousness of some (A fault that we Ministers are taxed with
generally, even when we seek but things just, and these therefore must take the
more heed) who heap up to themselves all the Preferments they can get, which
are neither agreeable to their Labor, or their want; nor to the duty of that
tremendous calling unto which they are called; but by this means, many other
Ministers are deprived even of necessary maintenance for their families, and an
occasion is administered to themselves of pride (an undecent immeasurable
Exaltation above their rank and birth, to the envy of others), Of carelessness
(through the impossibility of a due attendance on a double or trebble charge),
Of more worldly mindedness, a looser life, and so of ill example of ten times
unto their flocks, whereby the Souls of many Parishes (which ought to be more
precious to the Minister than his Maintenance) are sinfully neglected, to the
offense of Almighty God, and the hazard of their own, and their peoples
Salvation: I would have no Clergyman henceforward be suffered to enjoy any
more than one Living, or Cure of Souls, and one Dignity at one time; and that
every man without exception, that has more than one of either, should
immediately give up the rest to be distributed among those who shall be
Comprehended, or brought into the Established Order. Which that they may also
be obtained, and possessed with a clear Conscience, and that grievous
Corruption of Simony may be extirpate out of the Land, I wish that Every Patron
that shall hence forward present his Clerk to any Living, may have the Oath
called the Simoniacall Oath imposed on himself, no less than on the Incumbent
(which I perceive (since I writ this) is petitioned for by the Scholars of
Oxford) and if he refuses to take it, that then the Bishop should have
immediate power (taking only the same Oath) of presentation in his Room.

By such Materials as these put into the hands of a Skillfull workman, by the
Order of our Master builders, and by such a course, or courses, as this, or
these, thoroughly persued, the name of the great God would be exceedingly
honored, in the integrity and ingenuity of those Gentlemen who have Benefices
in their donation; in the self deny all of those Ministers who have Pluralities
in in their possession; in the restoration of several ejected painful
Laborers into the Vineyard; in the general advancement of Piety, and that
interest which is Heavenly, above worldly advantage; in the unity, peace, and
mutual agreement of Brethren in the same function differing mainly in things
indifferent; in the universal good will among the People; and in the
established Happiness and Prosperity of the Church of England to future
Generations. In that time shall the Present be brought unto the Lord of Hosts,
of a people scattered and peeled, meeted out, and trodden under foot, to the
place of the Name of the Lord of Hosts, Mount Zion.

Deo Gloria Authori Condonatio.
An Advertisement
Reader, I thought here to Reprint my Paper about the Oxford-Oath, which seems
to be made necessary by my Reference to it (p. 31.): but because the Matter
thereof is incident with that of the Subscription, I suppose it may be spared.
I must signify also, that whereas I have dropped the two Letters of my Name in
reference to my Subscription (in p. 19.): I cannot, and I do not let it go, as
one that is a present Actual Subscriber, but as one under Deliberation to
proceed (or not) as I can, and no otherwise than I can, according to my
Conscience, with the flow have of others Advice, and my own settled Judgment.
Adieu.

FINIS.
A Postscript.
THis Paper being a Countermine against Popery, I do think fit to hasten it
out, that the Members of Parliament may have competent time to consider of it
this Session. I did not think the later Part would have been so seasonable, as
I humbly believe it may be now to the most of those who desire a long Life for
the King, and the Growth of the Protestant Religion. It was almost Despair set
me on the Work, and now there is a little Hope got into my Heart, that
something may come of this Endeavor, and God's Blessing be upon it. The Reason
why I annex this Half Sheet to the rest, is because I find it necessary in
regard to that one Clause in the Subscription, And that the same was in it self
an unlawful Oath. I desire the Reader here to remember, that I subscribe not
this Clause by virtue of an Interpretation, for I think the meaning of the Law
giver to be more then I can subscribe unto: but by virtue of my Liberty of
Exception and Restriction. I do therefore distinguish between the Matter
Covenanted, which is the Extirpation of Prelacy, or Change of Government: and
the Act of Covenanting, which was their swearing to endeavor it. I would have
the Reader then note also, that I subscribe not that the Oath in the Matter
Covenanted was in it self unlawful: for this Matter Covenanted (I have said)
may be considered Precisely in it self, or Complexly with its Circumstances,
and more particularly under the Circumstance of the King's Remonstrances
against the Covenant. I do believe, that an Endeavor of any Alteration of
Government under this Circumstance of the King's Prohibitions that is, for any
to go about it without his Consent and against it (as I speak) was Unlawful,
though I suppose it not so under the contrary Circumstances (if the King had
allowed it), and consequently that it is not so in its self, if we respect
only this Matter Covenanted: But for as much as an Act becomes Evil upon every
Defect, when all Circumstances must concur to make an Action Good, and he that
swore this Covenant could not swear to the Matter Precisely, but Complexly
considered, that is, to the Matter under this Circumstance with others, I do
apprehend that the matter being thereby rendered evil, the Oath as taken for
the Act of Covenanting, in regard to this Circumstance was in it self unlawful.
It may be pleaded, that the Covenant maintains the King and his Authority to
the full, and limits this Endeavor to men's Places and Callings, and that there
was therefore nothing in this unlawful. I reply, If any man should argue
rather, that the supreme Power of this Nation does lie in the King and the
Parliament as one Corporation, and when they were divided (and the Parliament
could not be dissolved) the Constitution was at an end, or Interstition; That
consequently every one, and any one, might covenant, at that time, to set up a
new Government without the consent of Either, King or Parliament, by the way of
an Agreement of the People, This were to say something: But to own the King and
his Authority, and swear to maintain it in the same Oath, wherein they swear to
change the Government (when he declares against that Change, that is) without
him, and against his Authority, this is vertually a contradiction in Adjecto,
and makes the Oath in the very act it self of swearing (if that be, or may go
for, the Oath in it self) unlawful. Again, To swear that in our place and
calling, we will endeavor to change the Government when the King refuses his
consent, What is it, but to swear to do that, in the doing whereof we must Act
out of our Place and Calling, seeing there is, and can be, no Endeavor of that
kind in our Place and Calling, but what is done with Subordination to his
Consent in an Act of Parliament? You will say perhaps, It is true, that they
entered this Covenant without the King 's Consent, but the Meaning of the
Covenant was, That the Change should be made, and endeavored to be effected
only by his Consent. I return, To enter into Covenant to Change the Government
when the King by his Remonstrances and Declarations did declare that he would
not consent to that Change, and prohibited his Subjects to enter into such a
League, was I suppose in it self Unlawful. Or thus, To Swear against the King
's Will or Prohibition to do a thing which to do without his Will is unlawful,
is in it self. (I take it) an unlawful Oath. Such was this Covenant. But to
proceed, It is too well known that it was the Scots brought in this Covenant,
and that it is (or was) a Principle of theirs, That the Reformation of Religion
belongs to the Kirk, so as they may (or might) set it up, or endeavor the same
without the Consent of the King, if they obtain it not (which is a Principle in
my Apprehension directly repugnant to that Supreamacy which the English
Subjects give to their King), and it was apparent, that the Covenant was
carried on by the Parliament and Army according to that Principle; so that if
any piously judicious Man shall scruple his Soul with the Belief that this was
the Meaning of the Oath, That they should endeavor a Reformation to be
effected only by the King 's Consent, and not otherwise, I have two things to
offer him for his Conviction; to wit, The constant Practice of the Covenanters
to the contrary, and this one Argument, wherein alone I shall rest. To swear to
endeavor a Change of the Government when the King refuses his Consent, must
either be with Intention to do it without his Consent, or else be a vain Oath.
But to do this in a disorderly way without his Consent, or to take the Oath in
vain, either of the two, was in it self (I suppose) Unlawful. Ergo, This Oath
was in self an unlawful Oath. I would not have any of my Brethren therefore
here to be stumbled (as they are apt to be) so soon as they discry the Scope of
this Subscription to tend to a Renunciation of the Covenant; for if we may be
permitted to Renounce this Covenant with this Liberty of Exception of what is
Good and Obligatory in it, and Restriction of the Renunciation to that only
which is Unlawful, as the Endeavor of any Alteration of Government in a
disorderly way, without the Consent of the King (as they did in the late times)
was, I see no reason why they should not be as forward to such a Renunciation,
as to any other the like Injunction. For my own part, to rid my self of this
Scruple quite, which in regard to the Words in it self, have been apt to stick
upon me still in this Clause, I will conclude thus. If the meaning of the
covenant by endeavoring the extirpation of Prelacy, was only to endeavor the
reformation of the Church in subordination to the Consent of the King with his
Parliament, I put in my exception against the Clause: but if the intent of it
was to have us endeavor any such thing without his consent, and against it, as
the practice of the Covenanters did show, and as it was generally (I think)
understood, I do Subscribe to this Clause, And that the same was in it self an
unlawful Oath, as I do to the rest, with my Liberty of Limitation. It is but an
honest thing (I judge) for me, and others (if they will follow), to do what we
can; and so long as I do no more than I can, I shall not (I hope) hurt my
Conscience. If the Bishop will be contented with this Rule, and we be also
contented with it, what shall binder our Concord? When the Ministers of the
Roman Policy have so long been hatching up Sects amongst us, and fomenting our
Divisions, and even now plodding at one Thrust, or one Blow (if Fame have any
more in her Trumpet than Sound only) the general Destruction of our Religion,
it is time (or there is Reason), for the Parliament to think on Union; or for
the Bishops and us, to come to Composition. Then Abner called to Joab, and
said, shall the Sword devour for ever? Know thou not that it will be
Bitterness in the latter End? How long shall it be then ere thou bid the People
return from following of their Brethren?

The Author.

Some further Advertisement.
LEt the Reader note, that where I speak still of all Endeavor to change the
Government without the Consent of the Supreme Authority to be unlawful, I
understand it of that Change altogether that is Public, and concerns the
Church as National. I meddle not with Reformation otherwise. I also Advertise
the Reader, (seeing I have a Side to spare) That it has bin in my thoughts (I
must needs tell him) ever since the Ejecting Act, to offer something (the best
I could) for our Rulers Condescension to our Scruples: and for our Submission
to their Laws. That is to be Equal on both sides. As I have formerly therefore
sent out several Papers on the First Errand; Here is two sent now upon the
Second. My Paper about the Oxford-Oath, and this Paper. I have some Sheets more
by me (under Twenty) that carry Things a little Higher, if not quite Home; and
I could not let them therefore come out, till this Paper should make their Way
for them. They have bin long ready, and bin seen by many, as Bishop Wilkins,
Judge Hales, and the like Temperate Persons. I shall Entitle those Sheets, A
Peaceable Resolution of Conscience concerning our present Impositions. When
that Book also is come abroad (out of which I have bin borrowing something or
other still for the Papers and Books that since passed from me) I shall have
accomplished my Purpose, and intend to have done for ever about these Matters.
I must add, that I have just now Received this ensuing Letter.

To my Honored Friend, Mr. (...) in Oxenden-Street.
SIR,
I Thank you heartily for your Kindness, in sending my your Healing Paper so
speedily. This Day I received it, and red it to my great Satisfaction. I fully
agree with the Rule which you have laid down in order to Peace and Concord; and
judge, that in the whole Management of the Desgine, you have done Honestly and
Prudently. I firmly believe, that Union by a reasonable Accommodation, is
Religions Interest. The Relaxation that would suffice you, I think would
suffice me. In the Terms of Conformity as explained and limited by you, with
whose necessary Restrictions, there is no material Difference between you and
me, as I discern. (...) My carnest Prayer is, that God would prosper this your
Design of Peace; And I am much persuaded, that Good will come of it.

Chichester, October. 12. 1678. Your Obliged and Affectionate Friend and Servant,
John Corbet.



