A MODEST and PEACEABLE INQUIRY INTO THE DESIGN and NATURE OF Some of those
Historical Mistakes That are found in Dr. Stillingfleet's PREFACE TO HIS
Unreasonableness of SEPARATION. WHEREIN The Innocence of Protestant Dissenters
is cleared up and Vindicated from the indecent Censures of the Doctor.

By N. B.

Out of thine own mouth will: judge thee.

Luke 19.22. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns
in Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel, 1681.

To the REVEREND Dr. Stillingfleet.
SIR,
IT IS well known unto you, that the Ruin of England, and of the Churches of
Christ in it, has been ever since the First Reformation, aimed at by the
Papists, whose rage has not only appeared in the many little Plots that have
been from time to time discovered; but even in their Rebellions and
Insurrections in King Edward's days. The Spanish Armado in Queen Elizabeth's.
The Gunpowder Treason in King James, etc. and this l^te Hellish Conspiracy,
which was designed for the utter Extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and
the Universal destruction of all the Professors thereof, whether Episcopal, or
Dissenter. For which reason, this is no time to add fuel to the Fire of
Protestant Dissentions. Nor is it meet to insist on any matter of Indifference
so far as thereby to hinder a firm and lasting Union among Protestants. If the
Dissenters can without offense to God, and wrong to their own Consciences
comply with the Terms imposed by you for Union, their noncompliance is a sin,
that in its tendencies advances Popery: But if the Dissenter cannot
conscientiously conform to your Impositions, as they really cannot, and you can
without sin make such easy Overtures for Peace, as may be grateful to
Dissenters, your refusing in this case to comply, does sufficiently evince You
to be the Divider, and Promoter of the Papacy.

The Dissenters being sincerely desirous to do the utmost they can without sin
for Union, you greatly injure them in representing them as Enemies thereunto.
It Is true, you cry up Union, Union, but you will not part with what you judge
but a trifle, for it. You cry down Dissenters as enemies to Peace and Concord,
as Schismatics, Factions and Seditious, as Friends to Popery, exposing them to
the greatest contempt and rage of your Considents, as if their Consciences were
but Humor, their sense of Scripture but fancy, their Sincerity in embracing
the Protestant Religion but Hypocrisy, their Zeal (...) Reformation but a
blasting it, and their Opposition unto Popery a promoting it. But is this fair
and equal? Does such a Procedure become the Learning, the Gravity and Religion
of Dr. Stilling sleet? Can you in your more cool deliberations reflect on all
this with uninterrupted peace? What, without any rebukes or checks of
Conscience?

SIR, Can you consider, how untrue, as well as how severe the charge is with
which you load your Dissenting Brethren? or can you think on the many mistakes
on which you ground your charge, and yet believe that all this may return to
your comfortable account another day? Methinks there is a smart rebuke
attending the method of your Procedure, namely, that in your reproaching the
Dissenters as Promoters of the Papists designs, you should unawares make a
discovery of your self as such an one; for certainly you have in your Preface,
yea and in your Book, said enough for the advancing the Papisls Designs, just
as F. Thomas Maria Carasa, who in his delineating the Excellencies of Pope Pius
the Fifth did most exactly (though unawares) give the Pourtraiture of
Antichrist: for Dedicating some Theses unto this Pope, he did it thus, PAVLO V.
VICE DEO, etc. some Novelles of which, being sent unto Venice and elsewhere, it
was soon noised about the City, that 'twas the Picture of Antichrist, for that
the Inscription paVLo V. VICe Deo, contained in the Numerical Letters the
number of the Beast in the Revelation, 666. Of which my Author Mr. Bedell in
his Answer unto Mr. Wadsworth's Letter, says, Whom could they blame but
themselves, by their approving of such an Inscription as unawares by the
Providence of God should so plainly characterize Antichrist? In like manner it
may be said of you, seeing in the management of your smart charge against
Dissenters, you have unawares (if not designedly) closed with such Principles,
and magnified such Arguments as prove advantageous to none but the Papal
Interest, whom can you blame but your self? or how can you observe the nature
of this unwary slip, without some inward chick?

That you should expose your self in such circumstances without any
provocation, does abundantly suprize, and that in so many a particular
instance, beside what I have mentioned under the third head in the following
Enquiry, is considerable: For,

1. You say, That it is no improbable that the Jesuits were the first setters up
of spiritual prayer; you mean of its public exercise, or speak not to the
purpose, seeing it is that the Dissenters plead for in their Debates with the
Episcopal, and it is that by which they gain so much in the esteem of the
people. But this the Jesuits are against, they agreeing with you in that they
are only for the exercise of free Prayer in private and not in public, just as
the famous Mr. Hooker, who speaking of Private Prayer, says, Hooker. Eccles.
Poii^. ^ib. 5. page 223, 225. Ed. ult.
That '^^s a duty performed by us as men, and that we are at our own choice,
both for time, and place, and from, according to the exigence of our own
occasions in private. -- But public Prayer must be according to some
prescribed form. Which exactly agrees with that of Bellarmine, Azorius, and
Filliucius; all Jesuits. 2. You charge your Brethren as if they had opposed an
Absolute, or an Apostolical Antiquity, because they believe not your Hierarchy
to be such; but you unawares have fallen in with Bellarmine in exalting such an
Antiquity he pleads for, supporting it with such arguments as are setcht out of
the Jesuits Storehouse, to the great dissatisfaction of the old Episcopal
Protestants, as I have shown out of Mr. Chillingworth. 3. You insist much on
the Hierarchy, as if it had been the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion, but
unawares have so far gratified the Jesuit, as to be freed from their black
Character of Heresy; for it is observed by some Episcopal Divines, De Desper.
Calvin. cause. ^. 11.
that Cudsemius the Jesuit says, That the Calvinian Sect in England, may
either endure long, or be suddenly changed in a trice, in regard of the
Catholic Order there, in a perpetual line of their Bishops, and the lawful
succession of Pastors received from the Church; for the Honor of which we use
to call the English Calvinists [ i.e. the Episcopal] by a milder term, not
Heretics, but Schismatics. 4. You represent the Dissenters as subservient to
the Papal interest, because they are not for uninstituted ceremonies, yea you
suggest as if a Ceremony had been in greater estimation with you than the peace
of truly tender Consciences; whereby you do unawares furnish the Jesuit with a
strong argument for the necessity of a Ceremony; for says ^ellarmine,
Ceremonies are a momentous parts of worship, because there have been great
Dessentions in the Church about Ceremonies, which ought not to be about lesser
matters. 5. You say the Dissenters by their Nonconformity have blasted the
Honor of the first Reformation; But as this is untrue, even so you have by
insisting on it unawares advantaged the Papist.
1. That the Dissenters do judge honorably of the first Reformation, may appear
from the account we give of it thus:

As it must be acknowledged, that there were in these Lands many concerned for
a Reformation about Transubstantiation, and some other things before Henry the
Eighths, even so in his time a Reformation of the Hierarchy and Ceremonies
began, which was carried on by Edward the Sixth that Pious Prince, the wonder
of his age; in whose time, although the Reformation went on gloriously, yet
very slowly, because of the many Hindrances were in its way. For,

1. Many of the Episcopal Clergy being zealous for their old Superstitions, yea
even the Bishops of London and Winchester, did much mischief in impeding the
Reformation. 2. The generality of the people devoted to the Traditions of their
forefathers, would rather run the hazard of the loss of their lives, than of
one ceremony. As appears, 1. By the many Insurrections and Rebellions in
several Counties, especially in Cornwall, and Devonshire. 2. From the great
Neglect shown concerning his Majesty's Injunctions, and Proclamations, Acts of
Parliament, and diverse Letters sent from the Council unto the several Justices
of every County for the promoting Reformation. 3. The unhappy Divisions between
the Kings Uncle the Duke of Sommerset, the then Protector, and other Lords of
the Council. To which add, 4. The Kings being under age, (which was abused by
the Papist) and also the shortness of his Reign. All which duly weighed, it
must be consest even by the greatest enemies to our Religion, that 'twas a
wonderful Providence that so great a Progress was made in so short a time.
Sur^ly 'twas Digitus Dei, and the Instruments employed in so excellent a work
deserve our greatest Praises, in that they acted so wisely in the management of
the work of Reformation, which was carried on thus gradually. For, 1. Though
Tho. Dobb was cast into the Breadstreet Counter, where he died for speaking
against the Idolatry of the Mass, beside one John Hume, we find no other
Prosecution of Poenal Laws against Protestants. But, 2. Commissioners were sent
out to endeavor a present Reformation as to some Particulars. 3. A Parliament
called for the Repealing some Poenal Statutes. Free liberty given publicly to
profess the Gospel. Many zealous Freachers before Banished, Licensed to return
and Preach. 4. Certain of the most Grave, and best Learned Bishops by his
Majesty's Order assemble at Windsor. Castle, who did draw up a form of the
Administration of the Sacraments, which was sent abroad into the several
Diocesses, about which there arising great Divisions and Schisms among the
Episcopal Clergy; 5. His Majesty engages the Bishops, etc. to compose that
Book, Entitled, A Book of Common Prayer, etc. which was approved of, and
established by the Parliament. Yet, 6. Though this Service Book was so
admirably well suited to the capacity of the Vulgar, who were so zealous for
their old Superstitions, the People being ignorant, made an Insurrection in
Devonshire, and Cornwall, to whom his Majesty in a Letter expresses himself
thus: As for the Service in the English Tongue, it has manifest reasons for
it. And yet perchance it seems to you a New Service, and indeed is none other
but the old, the self-same words in English which were in Latin, etc. Act. Mon.


Thus the first Reformers, as indeed, even so in the apprehension of the
Dissenters, did their utmost in King Edwards days, and in Q. Mary's did
discover a zeal of doing more, might they furvive that Persecution: In
pursuance of which Resolutions, several who either suffered under Q. Mary at
home, or were in exile abroad, in Queen Elizabeth's time, did seriously attempt
a further. Reformation, for their doing which, they have been branded as
Schismatics, Dividers, and promoters of Popish designs by such as will not so
far honor the beginnings of King Edwards Reformation by endeavors to promote
it. All this you know, and therefore in obliging all to rest satisfied with a
Reformation wrested out of Popish hands in a time of the greatest difficulties,
which could ^ot then be more than what Popish Bishops, such as Bonner and
Gardiuer conformed unto, you do greatly advantage the Papal interest by drawing
us gradatim from our greater Reformation, unto what was carried on in King
Edwards days, and it may be for the same reason you will persuade us to that of
Henry the 8th, which is but one step further back, and so on.

But whether you have not offended God in this indecent procedure, I leave to
your own more serious considerations, humbly beseeching you to meditate on
those following hints given us by a Reverend Divine of the Church of England
(Mr. Down,) who in his Preservative against the contempt of the Ministry,
expresses himself thus, It is a fearful speech of St. Chrysostom, Quis unquam
Clericum lapsum panitentem vidit? Whoever saw a Minister recover himself after
a fall by repentance? And indeed it is but seldom seen; for the fins that are
single in others, being double in him, and an idle word in another mouth being
as it were Blasphemy in his; God punishes him more rigorously than he does
others. -- The strongest wine turns into the sharpest vinegar, and the
Noblest Angels sinning, became the vilest Devils. In like manner it is with us.

Reverend Sir,
You cannot but be sensible of the dangers we are in, of the necessity of Love,
Peace and Concord among our selves, and consequently of the evil tendencies of
the method you have taken, in the untrue Accusations you have laid in against
the innocent Dissenters, the mistakes you are guilty of in the prosecuting that
your design, and the unwary slips that prove advantageous to our common enemy
the Papists, and in fine of the service this inconsiderable tract may be of, in
setting you right; I say you being sensible of all this, my concluding request
shall be, that you will put the most candid comment on this essay, and join
with me in this Letany.

From all Factions and Seditions. Mischievous Impositions, sinful Separations,
etc. Unjust Censurers, and False Accusers;
Good Lord deliver us. I am Your Faithful Servant N. B.


ERRATA.
PAGE 32. line 22. read such. Page 33. line 8. read some one. Page 34. line 1^
dele by.

A Modest, and Peaceable Inquiry into the Design and Nature of Dr. Stilling
fleet's HISTORICAL MISTAKES, etc.
SUch are the Calamities of the Reformed Churches both at home and abroad, so
great and so many, that it highly concerns all true Protestants to do their
utmost for the Defense of them. Our Enemies are men of Bloody Designs, Active
Spirits, Undaunted, notwithstanding the most surprising Disappointments, and
unwearied in a brisk Prosecution of their Hellish Plots, turning every Stone if
possible to Ruin us Eternally, and nothing but a sincere Reformation, and a
firm Union among our selves can contribute in any measure (unless God act by an
uncommon Prerogative) toward our safety. Our own Divisions, Heats, Animosities
and Quarrels, are but as the Enemies sword sheathed in our own Bowels; our
mutual Jealousies, undue suspicions and Revilings of each other, tend but to
the strengthening the Popish Interest and the hastening our own Rume, unto
which, if ever we perish by the hands of the Roman Faction, we must assign the
great Cause of our Miseries; But it is a special Providence of an Infinitely
wise and Gracious God, that it is in the heart of our Sovereign, and the
Parliament to Unite and save us; the which Noble Design may be compassed,
unless the Episcopal and Dissenting Clergy by their own indiscretions impede
and hinder it.

For this Reason, it is become most unseasonable to beat the Drum, or sound the
Trumpet for a Protestant Civil-wordy-War; To contend at this time about
Trisles, or to mind the Tithing, Mint, Cummin, or Annise, when the weighty
matters of the Protestant Religion are in Danger: To be over-severe in
Unnecessary Impositions on the one side, or over-scrupulous in opposing just
compliances on the other, is to contend about the Shadow, even when the
Substance is ready to be violently taken from us by the mighty Torrent of
Popish Treachery, etc. If our Learned Worthies, whether of the Church of
England, or among the Dissenters, will dispute the Matters in difference, why
may it not be done with more Calmness and Serenity of Mind? what need of
Personal Reflections, Angry or scolding Repartees? what need of a Metabasis, a
running from the Subject Matter, to wit, from the Argument to the Disputant?
Does it in any manner inlighten the Mind, or convince the Gainsayer, what are
the advantages of such a procedure? Methinks it ought to be matter of
Lamentation, rather th^n Triumph, to see the Church in its present bleeding
posture, and with all our Champions, whose strength should be turned against
the common Enemy, to be at Daggers point among themselves.

That such a Contest as this, between the Reverend Dr. Stilling fleet, and his
learned Adversaries should happen at this Juncture, cannot but sill the hearts
of all sober Protestants of every persuasion with sad Thoughts; but that it
should be managed with so much smartness, must much more afflict us. It Is true,
Dr. O. after the occasion was first given, returned his Answer to Dr. S's.
Sermon not only learnedly, and judiciously, but, with that even Temper, became
a Protestant Divine; and I wish that such others as engaged in the same quarrel
had so managed it, as to deserve the same Character. It Is admirably expressed
by Franc. a Sanct a Clara, in the Preface of his Tract de Predestinat. etc.
Mali habentibus opus est medico, non severo, sed benigno, non dicteriis
arictando, sed dictis placidis modo solidis, aggrediendo. Solid Arguments
clothed with the most pleasing words are more convincing, than those that are
offered either two smartly, or too facetiously. But whilst we carry about us
the bodies of Sin, we can more easily declaim against humane infirmities, than
amend them; And when we have done our utmost, there must be a Regard to the
humor of a Disputant, yea, and a mutual forbearance, beside that respect,
which must be had to our Readers, who either will not consider what has not in
it somewhat grateful with the Argument, or who think no Argument strong, but
what is satyrically expressed.

But the Ball is up, and smart blows have passed, and every Party inflamed. The
Reverend Dean of Paul's thinks himself unjustly injured by his Opposers; and
that he may be even with them, has sufficiently reflected on all Protestant
Dissenters, falling into the Error for which he rebukes some others. The
Dissenters in like manner judge themselves as highly wronged by the Doctor. The
Honor of the Dr. is impeached, the peace of the Dissenter broke, and their
hoped for Liberties in hazard, which being so, it is become a difficulty to
fasten on a just expedient for the accommadating this pernicious controversy:
The fury of the sire is such, that who ever will attempt the quenching of it,
is in danger of being consumed by the Flames thereof; for either the one or the
other will be displeased; for though something must be said to clear the
innocent: Yet what Person soever undertakes it, must either speak the Truth and
offend the Doctor or conceal it, and grieve the Innocent to the wounding his
own Conscience. But notwithstanding these Intricacies, I will presume to make
this modest Essay in a sober Address unto the Dr. beseeching him heartily to
interpret my Zeal for Truth, Faithfulness to the Protestant Religion, and Love
to the peace of the Church, and his and my own Conscience. Not that I design to
engage so far in the Skirmish, as to concern my self about what so many a
Learned and Judicious Person as the Drs. Adversaries, are more immediately
obliged to consider: I will not invade either of their Provinces, and yet I
will make some inspection into the Nature of that charge, with which he seems
to endeavor the blasting the untainted Reputation of truly Loyal and sincere
(though dissenting) Protestants. In pursuance of which end.

1. I will propose the design of the Drs. History, being charitably; disposed
to distinguish between the finis operis, and operantis for though the end of
the Work it self cannot but in its tendency prove pernicious to the Protestant
Religion; yet I hope the Dr. designed it not as such.

2. I will show his mistakes concerning the account he gives of the Dissenting
Brethren, and evince that the Reasons urged to engage the Reader to believe
that the Dissenters, are a People carrying on the Popish Designs, are of such a
Nature as cannot but move a thinking and unbyassed Mind to Judge the Author
himself to be the Person who alone under a disguise does so.

3. I will acquaint you with the great disadvantages the Dr. Exposes himself
unto, by the Method he has taken to reproach us: The Principles From which he
must and does raise the Opposition he makes against Dissenters, being such as
are found in Bellarmine, and the most noted Champions of the Roman Church. And

4. In fine I will in a way most fair and candid evince, how reasonable it is,
that the Dr. (if he will do the Protestant Religion, and himself but right;)
make either a more full, distinct, and clear discovery of his thoughts, or a
Retractation of what in this late Discourse he has suggested.

1. The Design of the History in the Preface is to misrepresent Dissenting
Protestants by his false Accusations, which are That they do carry on the
Papists work for them, that they hold such Principles, as by evident
consequences from them do overthrow the Justice and Equity of the Reformation,
preface. p. 6. and out of Bishop Sanderson it is asserted, That the Dissenting
Brethren, though not intentionally and purposely, yet really, and eventually
have been the great Promoters of the Roman Inte: rest among us. -- I do not say
(adds the Dr.) that such men, (namely the Dissenters) are set on by the
Jesuits; But I say they do their work as effectually in blasting the Credit of
the Reformation; as if they were. p. 10 -- But if we trace the footsteps of
their Separation as far as we can, we may find strong probabilities, that the
Jesuitical Party had a very great influence on the very first beginnings of it
-- And the Papists could not but please themselves to see that other men did
their work so effectually for them. p. 16. The Papists could not have met with
better Proctors ( i. e. then the Dissenters) they did the Pope very good
service, and he would not miss them for any thing. -- The Pope could not have
fitter and apter instruments for his Purpose. The Dissenters were made the
Engines of the Roman Conclave.

Thus it is evident that the great end of the Drs. History, if not of the whole
Book it self, is to represent Dissenting Protestants to be but the Jesuits
Instruments, that is, to be men, not worthy of any favor from a Protestant
Prince, for surely such are the Jesuits Engines. But as no suggestion can be
more untrue, even so nothing could proceed from the Drs. Pen more unseasonably;
what should provoke him to be so invective and satirical in this juncture of
affairs is not easy to determine, or what was his end is as difficult to
imagine; whether it was to cast contempt on the Wisdom of the Parliament, who
entertain other sentiments concerning the Dissenters; or whether to gratify
the Roman Faction, by acting so sutably to the Jesuits measures as discovered
by Mr. Dugdale and some others, which is to revile the Dissenters, as the Dr.
has done; to the end the common People may be prepared to believe, that
whatever horrid Plots the Papists are carrying on, are but Presbyterian; The
which can no sooner be believed, but his Majesty's most Loyal Subjects are
exposed to the merciless cruelty of the bloody Papists, who will not boggle at
false Oaths, to accuse them of the worst of Treasons under the Name of
Presbyterians, or Dissenting Protestants. Or whether it be to cast a Bone of
contention into the Parliament House; thereby to prevent the uniting and
strengthening the Protestant Interest, as well as for diverting the House from
such other Methods as are most necessary for the impeding the Future growth of
Popery; or whether to raise one of the severest Persecutions against that Loyal
and truly Protestant Party; which cannot be weakened or impoverished but to the
advancing the Papal design; whether any one, or all of these particulars have
been aimed at by the Dr. the Searcher of Hearts, and his own Conscience does
best know. But whatever was the Authors end, it is most uncontroulably true,
that if these several Mischiefs do not proceed from the Discourse, it must be
considered as a signal Providence, to which alone we are owing for such
preventing Grace. But

2. To Exercise the Charity of collecting such Arguments as are subtly
Insinuated for the ensnaring the Credulity of some of his Readers; The which I
will with the greatest fairness set forth in their strength, and then descend
to a detecting the Mistakes.

1. To give the Dr. the greater advantage, we will consider his Arguments to be as
numerous as is possible, after this following method.

1. The Dissenters have embraced the Jesuits Principles about Spiritual Prayer,
and a more pure way of worship. 2. They have blasted the Reputation and Honor
of the first Reformation. 3. They oppose Episcopacy, and innocent Ceremonies
notwithstanding their Antiquity. 4. They have separated from the Church of
England, and have caused great Divisions. 5. They accepted of his Majesty's
gracious Toleration given them 7 or 8 years ago. 6. They have since the
discovery of the Plot closed with the people in an over fierce opposing the
papists. Ergo the Dissenters are the Jesuits Instruments designing the
Destruction of the Protestant Religion, This is the Drs. Conclusion, drawn from
these six weighty considerations.
2. To inquire into the strength, or rather the mistakes of these weighty
considerations.

1. The first Argument.
It Is not improbable that the Jesuits were the first setters up of Spiritual
Prayer in England says the Dr. as appears from the sutableness of the
Dissenters pretenses about Spiritual Prayer, to the Doctrine, and practice of
the Jesuits, This is evinced from the Jesuits admiring Spiritual Prayer, as may
be seen in their writings, preface p. 14.15.16.

I answer.

1. The whole the Dr. does suggest is but a Probability, not a certainty, but
why the Dr. should hint his probables in a matter of this moment I leave to his
own Conscience,

2 It Is most undoubtedly true, whether the Dr. knows so much or not, That
Spiritual Prayer and free prayer was many an hundred years observed, and
practiced before there were any Jesuits in the World, whence to assert
Spiritual Prayer to be one of the Jesuits Arcana is an argument of too much
ignorance; for who knows not, that the Christian dispensation is the
dispensation of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8. etc it is the Spirit that was
promised as a teaching Spirit on Christ's departure, John 14.16, 15, 26.16.7, 8,
9. which Spirit as it does convince of Sin, of righteousness and of judgment,
even so does it teach and enable the Children of God to cry Abba Father; that
is to pray, Gal. 4.5, 6. Romans 8.26. Thus Free Prayer or Spiritual Prayer is
clearly revealed in Scripture. Unto whom then are we owing for the Knowledge of
this Truth, unto the Word of God contained in Scripture, or unto the Disciples
of Ignatius Loyola? what, must the Honor of the Discovery be ascribed to the
Jesuits, although thereby the Primitive Christians, and the Ancient Fathers are
most unjustly reproached? Or, because this Gospel Doctrine shines forth so
Gloriously, that such as are envelop'd with the Cloud of Popery, cannot but
epsy some of its Rays; must we therefore conclude that it has its Rise and
Origin from thence? What do the Papists know nothing besides those Notions of
which they were the first Inventors. What think you of the Doctrine of the
Trinity, etc. is that also a Jesuits Fiction?

Really I am not a little surprised at the Indecent manner, after which the Dr.
treats the Holy Spirit, the third Person in the ever blessed Trinity, by
ascribing its work, Namely, spiritual Prayer unto the Jesuits, as though such
are the works of the Spirit, that they cannot be distinguished from the
Inventions of the Jesuit; and that the Dr. should thus expose himself, the
honor of his Learning, or good will to the Protestant Region in a case so
plain, is astonishing; who knows not, that the Church of England it self, is
as much, or more so, for Free and Spiritual Prayer, than the Jesuits are; The
heaping up Authorities for this, would be but to follow the Doctor, in raising
a suspicion of the Churches Orthodoxie; when as Free Prayer in Private, which
is the utmost the Jesuits are for, is allowed us by the Church of England; yea,
and commended to our Practice, with helps vouchsafed us by some Worthy Divines
of this Church; as so many expedients Adapted for the obtaining the Gift of
Free Prayer, which is not, as I humbly apprehend forbidden any Minister in
Public; supposing he neglects not the prescribed Forms. But to consider the
Drs. Integrity in the History he gives concerning this, by whom it is suggested.

1. That the Jesuits are for free Prayer in Public.

2. That Free Prayer is the Jesuits invention; If this be not the scope of the
insinuation, to what purpose is it mentioned? But if it be, I will evince out
of the Jesuits own writings, that they acknowledge Free Prayer to be known by
the Fathers; and that they allow it only its private Exercise, even as others
of the Romish Faction; and the Doctor himself, etc. do. Azorius Moral. insti^.
lib. 9. c. 29. Illud vero Pauli; ipse Spiritus postulat pro nobis. Augustinus
in lib. de bono Persever. c. 23. interpretatur. q Poftulat, q Postulare nos
docet, aut facit, quemadmodum illud, Matthew. 10. quod dixit Christus Apostolis.
Non vos estis qui loquimini, sed Spiritus Patris vestri, qui loquitur in vobis,
non quod vere loquatur, sed quod ad verum loquendum vim, facultatem, auxilium
and gratiam largiatur, sic Postulat, quia postulandi, and orandi vim, and
potestatem tribuit and facit ut postulemus. Et it a Augustinum secuti explicant
Paulum eo Loco Primasius, Beda, Anselmus, ut etiam Sedulius. Fulgentus Epist.
ad Probam de Omit. and Compunct. Cord. Et quia frequenter a nobis ofsenditur,
necessarium est, ut frequenti Oratione, and jugi Cordis compunctione,
mitigetur. Compunctio enim cordis excitat Orationis affectum: Oration hunnlis,
divinum promeretur Auxilium. Compunctio cordis vulnera sua respicit: Oration
vero, med^l^m Sanitatis exp^suit. Et ad haec quis idoneus? Quis enim vel orare
competenter valeat; nisi Medicus ipse nobis initium desiderii Spiritualis
infundat? Aut quis Purseverare in Oratione queat: nisi Deus in nobis hoc quod
caepit, augeat. etc.
Azorius the Jesuit expresses himself thus most freely vid. That of Paul, Romans
8.26. Where it is said, the Spirit makes intercession for us, Saint Austin in
lib. de bono Persever: c. 23 Does interpret it thus, the Spirit teaches us to
pray, or makes intercession according to that expression in Math. 10.20. for
it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father, which speaks in you,
not that the Spirit does truly, or properly speak, but that it vouchsafes the
Power, Help or Grace to speak the Truth, even so the Spirit prays, because it
gives out the Power, and Grace of Prayer. Austin, is as to this followed by
Primasius, Bid, Anselme, and Sedulius, so far Azorius. But I will add, and by
Fulgentus, who says because we frequently offend God by our sins, it is
necessary that we often by Prayer and compunction of Soul attempt the pleasing
him. Compunction of heart stirs up the affection of Prayer, and an humble
prayer obtains Divine Assistance, Compunction of Heart respects our Wounds,
Prayer seeks for a Remedy; but who is sufficient for these things, or who can
pray as he ought unless the Physician himself infuse into us the beginnings of
Spiritual prayer? or who can persevere in Prayer unless God increase in us what
he has began. I might instance in many others, but this is enough to show that
Spiritual Prayer is not owing unto the Jesuits for its Invention or Discovery;
and therefore I will proceed to inform the Dr. that the Public Exercise, of
Free Prayer, is not approved off by the Jesuits, For as concerning public
prayer the Jesuits do differ from the Dissenters if not from the Church of
England, agreeing with none that I know unless with other papists and with Dr.
Still. for though private and Free Prayers are with Azorius and other Jesuits
terms promiscuously used to express one, and the same thing, yet public Prayer
must be according to some certain prescribed form, This is the sense of
(Vincent Fillincius,) yea of (Bellarmine) and before him of (Durandus,) it
being proved by Bellarmine to be thus appointed by the Milevitane Council Can.
12. yea by the Toletan, 4. c, 2. and by Pope Gregory. etc

This being so the Dr's mistakes are apparent, and the Truth is.

1. That the Jesuits were not the first inventors, nor the first bringers in of
Spiritual Prayer, Spiritual Prayer being owned acknowledged, and privately
practiced ever since the Apostles days, for the Church never did for bid its
use says Fillincius.

2. That the Jesuits ever have, and still do zealously oppose the Public use
of Free Prayer.

3 That wherein the Jesuits, and Dissenters agree as to this, it is in no other
respect then wherein the Universal Church agree with them.

4. That wherein the Dissenters and the Dr. differ about Spiritual Prayer, the
Dr. closes with the Jesuit, our difference if any being about the public use
of Spiritual Prayer against which the Jesuits are.

2. Argument.
The Dissenters have blasted the Reputation and honor of the first
Reformation, which is the great thing the Jesuits would Fillincius Tract. Qust.
Moral Ttract. 23. c. 3, N. 67.6.8. de Bellarm. de bon. oper. impartic. lib. 1
c. 10. nemo enim potest certam formam orandi prescribere, nisi qui praeest.
Itaque in Concilio Milevitano, can. 12. Sic legimus: Placuit, ut Preces,
Orationes, seu Missae, quae probatae fuerint in Concilio, ab omnibus
celebrentur. Nec aliae omnino dicantur in Ecclesia, nisi quae a prudentioribus
tractatae, vel comprobatae in synodo fuerint. Et in Concilio Toletano. IV. c.
2. Statuitur ut in tota Provincia idem officium celebretur. Et Gregorius Papa
VII. in Concilio generali numerum Psalmorum, and Lectionum officii Divini
praescripsit, ut habetur. Can. In die, de consecratione. did. 5. c Durant. in
sent. lib. 4. did q. 15.12.
be at, for says the Dr. Preface, p. 9. What is it which the Papists have more
envied, and maligned than the Church of England? What is it they have more
wished to see broken in pieces? that is, than the Constitution and Government
of this Church? Did not Cranmer, Ridley, and Hooper, and Farrar, and Latimer,
all Bishops of this Church, suffer Martyrdom by their Means? Had not they the
same kind of Episcopacy which is now among us, and which some now are so busy
in seeking to destroy. -- Is all this done for the Honor of the Reformation?
Is this the way to preserve the Protestant Religion among us, to fill men's
minds with such prejudices against the first settlement of it: to go about to
make the World believe, that the Church Government then established, was
repugnant to the institution of Christ, and that our Martyr-Bishops exercised
an unlawful Authority over Diocesan Churches? Such men do the Jesuits work for
them as effectually, as if they had been set on work by them.

1. In answer, it must be carefully observed that the Papists do not so much
envy, and malign the Episcopal Government, it is the Drs. mistake, for the
Hierarchy, or the English Episcopacy is not so formidable a thing in a Jesuits
Eye; neither is it their principle or Interest to destroy it.

1. Not their principle, which is for the conserving Episcopal Government, for
1. The Papists plead most zealously for that difference, there is said by the
Church of England to be between a Bishop, and a Presbyter, 2. They deny the
peoples right of calling their own Ministers. 3. Assert that the Church has
power to institute new Ceremonies.


1. They do distinguish between a Bishop, and a Presbyter, and with the Church
of England assert, that the Catholic Church does acknowledge a distinction to
be between a Bishop and a Presbyter, and that the Bishop is jure divino,
greater than a Presbyter; and this Bellarmine, and the Romish faction insist on
in opposition to the Reformed, namely in opposition to Wickliff, the Lutherans
and Calvenists, whence they go on with the greatest malice against the
Protestants; to the end they may Haereticate and damn every Soul among 'em, and
say that the Bishop only has power to ordain, and that if any be ordained by
Presbyters, that Ordination is null, which is according to that of Gregory III
in his Epistle to Boniface, from which they proceed, as I shall show
immediately) to deny the Lutherans and Calvenists to be true Churches for want
of the right Administration of Sacraments, that is the product of the want of
true Ministers, or which is the same, because they have not Ministers
Episcopally ordained, so Bell. de Cleric. lib. 1. c. 14.
Bellarmine. Whereby it appears that the papists are not against this part of
the Prelacy of Bishops.

2. That the People have no Interest in the Vocation, or calling of their own
Ministers, is also the Principle of the Church of Rome. For Bellarm. de Cleric.
lib. 1. c. 2. etc. 7.
Bellarmine in stating this point, says, that the Controversy between them
and their Adversaries, to wit the Reformed, is about the Right of Creating
Bishops or Presbyters in the Church, and he asserts that Martin Luther, John
Calvin, Mat Illyricus, Brentius, Chemnitius, and others of the Sectaries, i.e.
of the Protestants, do hold, That no one is Lawfully called, or chosen to the
Office of a Bishop, but by the consent and suffrage of the People, and
therefore they infer (says Bellarmine,) that there are no Bishops or Pastors
among the Papists rightly called, for want of the suffrage of the People: But
on the other side, the Church of Rome concludes, that the people have no right
to call their Ministers, and that although the People did formerly choose their
own Ministers, it was through the Concession or Connivance of the Popes. And
therefore they say that the Heretics, or the Protestants have no true
Ministry, no right Administration of Sacraments, no Church, no Salvation, (for
extra Ecclesiam nullasalus.) The Reasons they give against the Peoples Election
besides many others, are these; drawn

1. From the Indiscretion of the People, and consequently their inability to
judge of the Capacity of the Person to be Chosen. 2. The greater Number of the
people are Foolish, and the viler sort, and consequently-will choose men like
themselves. 3. Such a practice is obnoxious and liable unto sad Tumults, etc.
Not remembering that the people, who are to choose, must be considered as men
fearing God, and that there is care taken that the person to be Chosen is out
of such a number, as are by the Godly and Judicious approved of, as men of
Competent Abilities, etc. In this also the Principles of the Jesuits are far
from destroying the Church of England.
3. That the Church has power to institute new Bell. de effect. Sacram. lib. 2.
c. 29. Quaedam caeremoniae instituuntur ad solum ornatum and significationem,
ut vestis alba Neophytorum, Lumina cercorum, etc. and de his agimus. -- c. 30
Fatemur enimomnes Catholici Caeremonias Ecclesiasticas non esse praecipuum
cultum; nec ab iis pendere essentiam and essicaciam sacramentorum: nec habere
vim Justificandi, ut habent sacramenta, proinde inferiora esse sacramentis, nec
esse approbandos ritus qui pugnant cum verbo Dei, nec esse nimis
multiplicandos. Et cap. 31. Sed quicquid de hoc sit: nostra propositio solum
asserit contra haereticos, licere Ecclesiae instituere novas caeremonias non ad
justificandum a peccatis mortalibus sed ad alios fines. -- Omnes nostrae
caeremoniae sunt bonae and divinae: nam indicantur in genere a Deo and
probantur multis modis 1. In ipso testimonio Pauli, 1 Cor. 14. Omnia honest,
etc: 2. Cum Deus jubet obediri praepositis, in genere jubet servari omnes leges
Ecclesiasticas, quorum non paucae sunt de caeremoniis.
Ceremonies, which Assertion they thus limit. 1. Not such Ceremonies, as are
repugnant to the Word of God; but 2. Such as are generally contained in that
Scripture, Let all things be done decently and in order, and that they are not
to be preferred to the Sacraments, nor must the same efficacy be attributed
unto them; they only assert against the Heretics, that it is lawful for the
Church to institute new Ceremonies, not for Justification but for other ends.
The white Garment being for Ornament and Signification. All this Bellarmine is
express in, and therefore not against this part of the Church of England. That
I abuse not the Episcopal, nor Bellarmine, will soon appear to such as will but
seriously consult the sense of the Church of England and Bellarmine, who are
express in asserting all this and much more; namely, that as the Decency of the
Ceremonies is one Reason why we must observe them, so our Superiors Command is
another.

Thus the Principles of the Jesuits, and other Papists being so much for a
Prelatical Episcopacy, so much against the peoples Choice, and so much for
Ceremonies with the mentioned Limitations, how is it possible that the Dr.
presumed to assert that the Papists aim at the destruction of what they too
much contend for against the Generality of our Reformed Divines? But*

2. It is not the Interest of the Jesuits to destroy Episcopacy, or eradicate
the Ceremonies, and thereby break the Constitution of this Government. It Is
probable they would add unto the Constitution, but the destroying it they
abhor. For, 1. A great part of their bait would be lost, if Episcopacy be
ruined* What more evident than that the Papists aim at our Bishoprics; not at
the destroying them, but at the possessing themselves of them. It Is the
Episcopal Grandeur, Church Honors, and Church Lands that they would be at. 2.
The Jesuits know, that it is much more easy to introduce their Religion under
the shadow, and name of Episcopacy, and Ceremonies than otherwise. What
difficulty is there in drawing the vulgar to the whole of Popery, under
pretenses of a more firm establishing Episcopacy, and a making the Ceremony the
more splendid and solemn. 3. May there not be an alteration in our Doctrines,
when no alteration in our Government; and might not the Papists gain greater
advantage by their being made Bishops, than by the Ruin of Bishoprics? 4. It
is not dangerous to break Constitutions, especially since the destruction of
Episcopacy may be attended with the Royal distribution of Church Lands among
our Nobility and Gentry, than which a greater blow cannot be given the Papal
interest in England, as appears by the Heroic actings of Henry the 8th. in a
like Case.
Are not the Papists sensible of this? Whatever the Dr. may think, there are
the highest Reasons to engage us to conclude that the Jesuits dread nothing
more than the destruction of Episcopacy and the removal of the Ceremonies.

. 2. That the Reputation of the first Reformation is not hereby blasted, nor
are the first Reformers in the least Reproached But* 1. The memory of these
Worthies, namely, Cranmer, Ridley, and Hooper, etc. is precious unto the
dissenters, who can distinguish between their Episcopacy and their Martyrdom,
they not being Martyred for Episcopacy but for renouncing transubstantiation,
etc. They sealed those Truths with their blood unto which the Dissenters desire
to give in their Testimony, in abiding by them faithful to the Death.

2. These famous Martyrs we honor, yea and the Reformation they carried on, it
being a wonder, that in less than six years time, they should do more toward
Reformation than all the Bishops in England besides have done in almost six
score years, They went as far as possibly they could in that juncture, and
probably would have gone p^ri^passu with Luther, Calvin, etc. had they the time
and opportunity.

3. I find in the Report of the Examination of William Nixon, had the 20th. day
of June, Anno, 1567. before the Lord Mayor, and the Bishop of London, that Mr.
Nixon gives this following answer to the like objection made then by the Bishop
of London, which is most pat to this of the Doctor. We condemn them not, we
should go forward unto Perfection, for we have had the Gospel along time among
us. And the best of them that did maintain it, did recant it at their Death, as
did Ridley, sometime Bishop of London, and Dr. Tailor. Ridley did acknowledge
his fault to Hooper, and when they would have put on him the same Apparel, he
said they were abominable, and too fond for a vice in Play. Which is sufficient
to evince, that if these Bishops had outlived the Marian Persecution, they
would have gone on toward a greater Reformation.

4. It Is very considerable, that those very Persons* who were so zealous in Q.
Elizabeth's days for Episcopacy, were persons of whom it is recorded.

1. That in the time of Persecution they were men of the same Principles with
Dissenters.

2. That after the Persecution was over, they did proceed with the smartest
Prosecution of Laws against them.

1. That in the time of Persecution, Q. Elizabeth's Bishops were of the same
Principles with the Dissenters concerning Ceremonies, etc. for this consult the
Letter of Mr. D. Wy, written about the Year 1570. who says, That such Bishops
as fled in Q. Mary's time, or else tarried here under the Cross; had cast off,
renounced and forsaken all this Trumpery, i. e. (the Ceremonies) for the which
the Peace is now disturbed, and afterward for their promotion sake put them on
again. The like in a Letter written by Mr. A. G. to Mr. Coverdale, Turner, etc.
who speaking of the Ceremonies, says, That all these things were abhorred, as
Popish Superstition and Idolatry among the English Gospellers, both Bishops and
others; when they were under Gods Rod in Poverty: But they have now learned
Courtly Divinity, to ground all upon Policy.

2. That when these very men were raised to Honor, they began to be very
severe in persecuting their Brethren, and their quondam fellow-sifterers, the
Dissenters Yea, to discover greater enmity against them, than against the
Papists. This may be seen in a Letter of Dr. Wy. They say they would that all
Trash and Trumpery were out of the Church, [meaning the Ceremonies] and yet
they stretch the utter most piece of their Authority to the keeping of it. And
a little after it is said, 'I could rehearse by Name a Bishops boy, ruffainly
both in behavior and apparel, at every word swearing and staring, having
Ecclesiastical promotions, a worthy prebend, no doubt: I could name
Whoremongers being taking, and also confessing their Letchery, and yet both
enjoying their Livings, and also having their Mouths open, not stopped, not
forbidden to Preach. I know also some, that have said Mass diverse years, since
it was prohibited, and upon their Examination confessed the same, and yet are
in quiet possession of their Ecclesiastical promotions. I know double-beneficed
men, that do nothing but eat, drink, sleep, play at Dice, Cards, Tables, Bowls,
and read Service in the Church; but these infect not their Flocks with false
Doctrine, for they teach nothing at all.

Thus it is evident, that Gods Commandments are fain to give place to man's
traditions; and yet still all these are but small matters. Verily the
punishment is great I wonder what punishment they would use, if they had
transgressors of great matters in handling, that deal after this sort with such
as offend (and yet offend not at all) but as they say, in such small matters.
But this must not be mentioned, least the Honor of the first Reformation be
blasted, that is, the Dissenters must submit not only unto the greatest
severities with all manner of Patience; but moreover, though Gods Truths be
neglected, and a sinful Ministry countenanced, they must remain in silence,
least the reputation of these men be blasted. That surely must be the meaning
of the blasting the Reformation. But

5. Notwithstanding the severity exercised against the Protestant Dissenters;
even when the Papists escaped the smartness of the Law, yet it is observable,
that the Queens Council, whosew sdom and firmness to the Protestant Religion
has been renowned all the World over, did then discover themselves to judge
otherwise of the Dissenters, than the Ecclesiastics did, yea, although the
Bishops were then very basie in turning the dege of those Laws that were
designed for Papists, against Dissenters; Yet that wise Council did distinguish
between the Papists and Dissenters, and thereby plainly discover, that the
Dissenters there, were far from carrying on the Popish design, as appears by
their Letter sent to their Justices on the complaint of the Dissenters, made to
the Right Honorable Lords of Her Majesty's Privy Council.

A Copy of which Letter sent from the Right Honorable the Lords of Her
Majesty's Council, I will as I find it in a part of the Register insert.
AFter Our very hearty Commendations; whereas we are informed, that heretofore,
at your Assizes in your Circuit diverse good Preachers, and others Godly
disposed, have been indicted (by color of Law,) for things not so much against
the matter and very meaning of the Law, as in some show, swearving from the
Letter thereof; Namely, for not using the Surpless, resorting to Sermons in
other Parishes, for want at home; leaving out some collects on the days of
Preaching, for using private Prayer in their houses, and such like. All which
we suppose comes to pass by the practice of some Informers, not so well
disposed in Religion, as also of men returned upon great Inquest. Many times
such as be still in Ignorance cannot broke the Gospel, and being in love with
the License of former times, cannot so well endure the present plain Teachers;
who by laying open their faults, would draw them to a more precise, and
Gospel-like Life. These are therefore to require you, and heartily to pray you,
that in every sitting of your Circuit, you sift and examine the affection of
such Informers, touching Religion, and thereafter give ear to them. As also to
have a special regard, That the Inquest at large may be Religions, wise, and
Honest: And if (notwithstanding your diligence in this behalf,) such Jurours
(nevertheless) creep in (as by like information molest good men) that yet your
speech, and whole proceedins against them at the Bar, (or elsewhere called
before you) may be according to their quality: not watching them at bar, or in
the indictment with Rogues, Fellons or Papists, but rather giving apparent note
(in the Face of the Country) what difference you hold betwixt Papists (
dissenting from us in the substance of Faith to God, and Loyalty to our Prince)
and these other men, which making some Conscience of these Ceremonies, do yet
diligently, and soundly Preach true Religion, and obedience to her Majesly:
maintaining the Common peace in themselves. and in their Auditory; so shall the
Country thereby learn (at the Assizes) better to reverence the Gospel, and
love the Ministers and Professors thereof. Thus promising our selves thus much
at your hands, we bid you heartily Farewell, From, etc.


Thus you have the sense of Q. Eli. Council, and may have the like sense from
our Parliament now.

These things being so, let the Impartial Reader judge who it is that has
blasted the Reputation of the first Reformation.

Whether 1. Those that remained faithful to these Principles of the Martyrs and
other Protestant sufferers in Q. Mary's days, or those that receeded from
them. 2. Those that hazarded the loss of their Liberties and Benefices for the
sake of Protestant Principles, or those that persecuted the Protestants, when
the debauched Papists were favored by them. 3. Those that would carry on the
Reformation as far as Luther and Calvin, and the generality of the first
Reformers, or those that gratified the Papists, by putting a stop to so
Gospel-like a procedure, reviling Junius and Tremelius, as German-Drunkards,
etc. as some of the Episcopal Clergy did in Queen Elizabeth's days. 4. They who
acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a true Church, having a Ministry rightly,
i. e. Episcopally ordained, when all the Reformed beyond the Seas, are
reproached for want of it, or Those who concur with the Reformed.


3. Argument.
The Dissenters oppose Episcopacy and Innocent Ceremonies, notwithstanding
their Antiquity. It Is asserted by the Dr. Pref p. 4, 5. That when the People
find the undoubted practices of the Ancient Church condemned as Popish and
Antichristian by their Teachers; they must conclude Popery to be of much
greater Antiquity then really it is; and when they can trace it so very near
the Apostles times, they will soon believe it settled by the Apostles
themselves. For it will be very hard to persuade any considering men, that the
Christian Church should degenerate so soon, so unammously, so universally, as
it must do, if Episcopal Government, and the use of some significant Ceremonies
were any parts of that Apostasy. Will it not seem strange to them, that when
some humane policies have preserved their first Constitution so long, without
any considerable Alteration, that the Government instituted by Christ, and
settled by his Apostles, should so soon after be changed into another kind, and
that so easily, so insensibly, that all the Christian Churches believed, they
had still the very same Government, which the Apostles left them; Which is a
matter so incredible, that those who can believe such a part of Popery should
prevail so soon in the Christian Church, may be brought upon the like Grounds
to believe, that many others did. So mighty a prejudice does the Principles of
our Churches Enemies, bring upon the cause of the Reformation.

I Answer, There are these things to be distinctly considered.

1. Whether the not embracing the Episcopacy does any way advantage the Papist.

2. Whether there is any such strength to be found in the Drs: reasoning.
First, From the Antiquity of Episcopacy. And Secondly, From the Argument
produced to prove its Antiquity, to wit, the Improbability of introducing
Episcopacy, and Vninstituted Government, into the Church without some noise and
clamor. I say, Whether there is any such strength in these reasonings, that
none can oppose them, without giving too great an advantage unto the Papist.

To the first, Namely, Whether the non-embracing Episcopacy does any way
advantage the Papist.

1. From what has been already said, It Is sufficiently proved, that the
non-embracing Episcopacy does rather prejudice then profit the Papal interest;
for which Reason.

2. When attempts have been made by Francise. a Sancta Clara for the
accommodating the differences between the Church of Rome, and the Church of
England, he ever with indignation excepts against the Puritan, as a people no
way reconcilable to their Church, yea, when he proves it easy to heal the
breach between them, and the Episcopal.

Moreover, 3. Whoever consults Becan, opus. Tit. 10. Calvinistae in Scotia and
Anglia vocantur Puritani quia puram Calvini Doctrinam per omnia sequuntur.
Becanus the Jesuit, will find; how he seems to honor the Church of England,
by giving credit to the reports they make against the Puritans (who are so
called by the Jesuit, because they embrace the pure Doctrine of Calvine) to the
end they may thereby from the mouths of some Protestants, viz. of the Church of
England, condemn all the Reformed Churches abroad, the Jesuits malice being the
more inflamed to see so many Dissenters in England, that justify the
Reformation made beyond the Seas.

2. The Doctors discourse about the Antiquity of Episcopacy; and the argument
enforcing it, must needs be of great weight with the Doctor, it having been for
diverse years a furbishing in the Jesuits School; and is the Diana of the Roman
Church at this very time, the great foundation, and Basis of that tottering
Superstructure, this is their only Alpha and Omega, their first and the last,
whence if the Reformed oppose their Hierarchy, their Ceremonies, their
Inventions, their Corruptions; this is that unto which they sly, tanquam ad
Asylum, viz. These things must be Apostolical, because it is impossible they
should be introduced into the Church without any noise. Really the Doctor has
done this argument the greatest honor imaginable, but whether the Church of
England are owing unto him for this piece of service, I much doubt. That this
is Bellar. de notis Eccles. lib. 4. c. 5. In omni insigni mutatione Religionis
semper ista sex demonstrari possunt. Primo Auctor ejus. II. Dogma aliquod
novum. III. Tempus quo caepit. IV. Locus ubi caepit. V. Quis eam oppugnaverit,
etc. -- Nihil autem horum adversarii unquam de nostra Ecclesia post Apostolica
tempora demonstrare potuerunt. -- Nunquam ostenderunt, quis eam oppugnaverint,
tamquam nuper ortam. -- Hoc argumentum ab Antiquitate semper usi sunt veteres
Patres contra Haereticos ad ostendendam veram Ecclesiam.
Bellarmine's Thunderbolt against the Heretics, consult him, and you will find
him exactly so. To rehearse the many Arguments produced by the Reformed in
beating down this Popish Error, would be endless, whoever reads any learned
Protestant cannot but be furnished with a multitude of Convincing
Considerations, that are urged against this Doctors Argument.

1. Nothing being more apparent, then that the Scriptures of the New Testament,
the Antientest Writings the Christian Church can produce, as the infallible
discovery of the first Constitution of Christian Churches, how ancient soever
Episcopacy or Ceremonies are, if not to be found in the New Testament. It is
not the Ancient or first Constitution. This is our Religion, and whoever
receeds from it, does but give too great advantage unto the Papist, there being
several Ceremonies in use among them, whose Antiquity does equalize that of any
observed by our Church.

2. It Is well known, that if we had the fullest account of the Rise of
Episcopacy and Ceremonies, as to the time when, the place where, the Persons by
whom they were introduced, our Faith could not thereby be more Divine
concerning these things than now it is, for the Testimony would be but Humane,
grounding a Faith that is only so.

3. We have a very short account of the transactions of the first 300 years,
the persecution of the Churches being so severe and bloody, which is enough to
evince, (because of the inconsistency of Episcopal grandeur with a persecuted
state,) that neither Episcopacy, nor pompous Ceremonies were then in their
Glory.

Again,

4. It Is certain that those Errors creept in gradually, the Iniquity being a
Mystery, that began even in the Apostles days, and I remember that I have read
in the Annals of Said Ibn. Batrick, an Alexandrian Patriarch, who lived about
200 years after the Turkish Hegyra, that in Alexandria, the Constitution
gradually altered, first from Presbyters to a Bishop, and thence to a Pope,
though not to an Universal One.

Is it not then sad, that there must not be an urging Protestant arguments
against the Antiquity, etc. pretended by the Papists, but Popery is advantaged?
What advantage is it to them to see the Temple of their Diana ruined, their
City of refuge demolished? I beseech the Doctor to be serious in this weighty
and momentous point, and to deal freely, openly and generously in this
particular, and declare unto the World what his apprehensions are of Dr.
Potter, sometimes Bishop of Carlisle, or rather of the Learned Mr.
Chillingworth, a Son of the Church of England, whose excellent treatise
entitled The Religion of Protestants, a safe way to Salvation, i^ so applauded
by Dr. Bailey, sometime Vice Chancellor of Oxjord; as also by Dr. Prideaux and
Dr. S. Fell; or rather what would the Dr. rejoyn unto the Answer that is found
in Mr. Ch^llingworth, unto his great Argument about Antiquity and the
Impossibility of an Errour's becoming Universal in so short a time. Though some
Protestants confess (says Mr. C. to the Papists) some of your Doctrines to be
ancient, so long as it is evident, even by the Confession of all sides, that
many Errors, I instance in that of the Millenaries, and the communicating of
Infants, were more Ancient. Not any Antiquity therefore, unless it be absolute,
and Primitive, is a certain sign of true Doctrine. For, if the Church were
obnoxious to corruption (as we pretend it was) who can possibly warrant us that
part of this Corruption might not get in and prevail in the 5th, or 4th. or 3d.
or 2d. Age? [This notwithstanding what Dr. Still. does suggest about the near
approach unto the Apostles days.] especially seeing the Apostles assure us,
that the Mystery of Iniquity was working though more secretly even intheir
times. If any man ask how could it become Universal in so short a time? [Attend
good Dr. to the answer for this is your own Question] Let him tell me how the
error of the Millenaries, and the Communicating of Infants, became so soon
Universal, and then he shall acknowledge, what was done in some, was possible
in others. Thus we see how Dr. Still. to the end he may be even with the
Dissenters relinquisheth the good old Protestant Principles, unless this of Mr.
Chillingworth approved of by Dr. Baily, Dr. Prideaux, and Dr. Fell, and the
generality of the Church of England be Popery.

Argument 4.
'Our Divisions give great advantage to the Papists; and the 'Dissenters by
their Separation have caused the Division.

To this I Reply,

I. That it is most apparent that Divisions among Protestants have given the
greatest advantages imaginable unto Popery; as to this, the Dr. and the
Dissenters I verily believe, are agreed. But,

II. The great Quaery is, who occasions, or causes these Divisions? for it is
the Divider only, that is subservient to the Roman Interest, which being so,
our enquiry must be, Whether the Dr. etc. or the Dissenters are the Dividers?

The Dr. suggests as if the Episcopal Clergy were most entirely resolved for
Union, but it is the Dissenter that is the divider, who is an Enemy to Union,
but a Friend to Schism, and U^just Separations. We were (says the Dr.) in some
hopes, that Men so wise, as the Nonconforming Ministers represent themselves
to the World, would in so Critical a time have made some steps or advances
toward an Union with us. Instead of this, these we discoursed with, seemed
farther off than before. For (says the Dr.) God forbid that I should either
design, or do any thing which tended to obstruct so blessed a work, as a Firm
and Lasting Union among Protestants would be. But my business is to show the
Unreasonableness of those Principles and Practices, which hinder men from such
an Union, and lay a Foundation for perpetual and endless Separations. For upon
the Principles laid down by some of our Dissenting Brethren, let the
Constitution be made never so easy to themselves, yet others may make use of
their grounds, and carry on the difference as high as ever. Which will render
all attempts of Union Vain; and leave the same weapons ready to be taken up by
others.

So far the Dr's Mistakes, which in these few words, are many. For,

1. The Dissenters are at this time as much for Union according to the Terms of
the Gospel as any can reasonably desire. It Is for Union they breath, and Pray,
and most industriously and sincerely endeavor, being engaged hereunto by
Interest; for as long as Divisions continue, they are exposed to the worst of
Miseries. 2. The Principles of Dissenters are most admirably suited for a firm
and lasting Union with all such as will adhere to the Terms proposed in the
Gospel. 3. It Is the Dr. that falls in with Bellarmine giving the Papists the
greatest encouragment to an abiding by their persecuting Principles, even when
he dissents from the Church of England. 4. It Is the Dr. that has done his
utmost to obstruct a firm Union among Protestants.
That all this, to the Satisfaction of the Judicious, and impartial Reader, may
be evinced, I will propose in short the true state of the Controversy, so far
as I apprehend it; and then detect the Dr's Mistakes, as to those but now
mentioned particulars.

In giving the state of this Controversy, I must intimate wherein there is an
agreement; and wherein the Difference does lie.

1. We are agreed in Doctrinals, and in all the Substantials of true Religion.

2. The Difference then is about lesser matters, and the Case is this;

The Dissenters are fully convinced in their Consciences from the strongest and
most powerful arguments, That the Word of God contained in Scripture, is the
only rule of the whole, and of every part of true Religion. And that what is
not according to this Rule is no part, of Protestant, or of the true Christian
Religion. This great Principle occasions a twofold Controversy, the one with
the Papist only, the other with the Church of England also.

1. With the Papist; for by this Principle, we are engaged to reject whatever
Doctrines they impose, that are not agreeable to this Rule, and consequently we
reject their Doctrines about Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, Indulgencies,
etc. because they cannot be found in Scripture. Although there is no Text
expressly forbidding these things, yet since they are not to be found there,
either directly, or by consequence, we must lay 'em aside. The Papists, it is
true, make a great bussle, saying, where is it asserted in Scripture, no
Purgatory, etc. We reply, where is the affirmative to be found. They say, that
our Religion, as distinct from Theirs, is composed of Negatives only, which
have no foundation in Scripture; We rejoyn by denying their Assertion,
concluding, That the Scripture is a sufficient Rule for our Direction
concerning all Religion; and what is not found there, is not to be embraced as
a part of our Religion.

2. With the Church of England; Though we have not this Controversy as to
Doctrinals, yet about Worship, and Church Government we have The Dissenters
being fully persuaded, that so far as any Doctrine about Worship, or
Church Government, is made a part of our Religion, it must be brought to the
Rule of the Scripture; whence if not according to it, though not expressly
forbidden, yet it is to be exploded. As for Circumstances of Worship, as Time
and Place, pro hic and nunc, etc. they are no part of Worship, etc. but as
touching such Ceremonies, as are made a part of Divine Service, let it be
Surplice, sign of the Cross, or Salt, and Spittle, or the Chrisme, we reject,
as not sound in Scripture. It being the Principle of Dissenters to adhere to
the Scriptures, and to comply with every Scriptural Term of Union, and with no
more.

This being so, if any part of their Service, that respects no Divine Precept,
be proposd as a part of our Religion, yea and as such a necessary part, as to
be the term of our Communion with them, we are fully convinced, That it is a
sin, and not to be complied with, unless we give up the whole Cause to the
Papists.

For either the Scriptures are the whole, and only Rule of the whole, and of
every part of our Religion, or not. If not, then let us return to Popery, or
where shall we go for a complete Rule of Religion? But if it be a comple^t
Rule, then whatever is introduced into our Religion, as a part thereof, and not
agreeable to the Scriptures, must be considered, as what ought to be rejected;
whence either the things imposed on Dissenters, and required as terms of our
Communion with the Church, are a part of the Religion of the Church, or not; If
not, if no part of their Religion, why do they impose 'em on us as terms of
Communion, or what, may we be fully of their Religion, and assent and Consent
to every part thereof, and yet be incapable of their Communion, if so, who are
the Dividers? I leave it to the Judgment of the Wise. But if it be a part of
their Religion, it is either agreeable to the Scripture Rule, or not; if not, we
cannot conscientiously comply with it, for this is to make that a part of our
Religion, which God has not: but if according to the Scripture rule, why do
they not produce the Scriptural Considerations, that are the Media, by which
they would prove so much; or How comes it to pass, that they are judge d but
Indifferent things, that are neither commanded, nor forbidden; whereas,
whatever is according to the Scripture must be according to the revealed Will
of God, for the Scriptures do but contain the Revealed Will of God, and
therefore, whatever is according to the Scripture, must be according to some
Command in Scripture, since a Command is but the Revealed Will of our great
Legislator, and if according to such a Command, not Indifferent; but if
Indifferent not according to the Scripture, and consequently no part of true
Religion, and therefore not to be proposed as a term of Union; or if proposed
as such, it cannot without sin be complied with.

The Church of England then imposing what in their judgment is but indifferent,
and consequently what cannot be a part of their Religion, do impose as a term
of our Communion with them, what is in our Consciences sinful.

What must be done then for Peace and Union, who must yield? The Dissenters
will part with every indifferent thing, rather than break the Peace of the
Church; but the Clergy has been hitherto unwilling to part with any One
Indifferent thing: Yea even now, though the whole of Our Religion is in great
danger, yet rather than what is no part of it should be lost, let Religion it
self Perish. The Church without sin can part with their Indifferent Ceremonies,
but Dissenters without sin cannot comply with them. What then must be done for
Union? must the Episcopal comply in things wherein they can without sin, or
must Dissenters sin, and loose their peace with God for Union? The whole of the
Controversy is this, Whose Honor is mostly to be valued, that of the
Episcopal Clergy, or that of our Lord Jesus Christ? for the Episcopal cannot
make any Abatement of these indifferent things consistent with their Honor;
They have once imposed these things, as terms of Union, and cannot now
Honorably recede the least Iota; The Dissenters, they cannot stretch their
Consciences to any sinful Impositions, but by dishonouring the Lord Christ:
What then must be done? must we to the dishonor of the Lord Christ, stretch
our Consciences and sin, rather than that the Honor of Episcopal Grandeur be
fullied by a compassionate Condescension about Indifferent things, wherein they
can without sin Condescend, and which would be really more for their Just
Honor?

This is the state of the Case; The Dissenters would Unite, but cannot; The
Episcopals can, but will not. The Cannot of Dissenters, and the Episcopals
Will-not does make the Division. But who is the Faulty Divider? If the true
Reason of our Division lay on the Dissenters Will-not, when they Can, 'twould
be easy to conclude them Obstinate, and Perverse; what not to do what they Can
for Peace? But since they would, but cannot without sin, how can they be the
Dividers.

From what has been said, it is evident, that as it is the Interest and Desire,
even so it is the Principle of Dissenters to Unite; Of their sincerity
concerning which, they have ever given Illustrious instances.

1. In Q. Elizabeth's days. In a part of the Register, it is thus expressed of
the Dissenters; Whoever of them in word or deed gave out any just suspicion of
Unpeaceable dealing? Nay have not they striven for peace, in their Ministerys,
in their writings, in their Examples more than any? -- But Notwithstanding this
they have been arraigned among Felons, and Thieves; They have been imprisoned
to the uttermost, and defaced, and yet they are silent. And Mr. Dudley Fenner
in his Defense to Dr. Bridges; anno 1587. says, All this they did patiently
bear, and came daily to the Prayers, to the Baptisms, and to the Sacraments,
and by their Examples and Admonitions kept many from Abuses, whereto rashness
of Zeal would have carried them, yet now for their labor to their great grief,
they are openly slandered, etc. Yea, upon every irreligious man's complaint in
such things as many times are incredible, to be by the Pursuivants sent for, to
pay two pence for every Mile, etc. even when their Families were impoverished.
But as has been already hinted, the Providence of God gave them favor in her
Majesty's Council, who were convinced of their peaceable disposition, and the
regard they had to a walking in all good Conscience before the Lord.

2. That the Dissenters at this time are fully sensible, that they are engaged
both by Principle, and Interest against the least compliances with the Church
of Rome, and consequently to embrace any just proposals for Union, will appear
from what is declared by diverse of them in the account, they give of the
Grounds, and Reasons, on which they desire their Liberty; where it is express,
That unto the Resolution of a steadfast adherance unto the Protestant Religion
in Opposition unto Popery, we have (say they) many peculiar engagements. For

1. Our Principles concerning Church Order, Rule, and Worship, wherein we
differ from the Church of England, are not capable of a Compliance with, or
Reconciliation unto those of the Papacy, but are contradictory unto them, and
utterly inconsistent with them. Where there is an Agreement in general
Principles, and men differ only in their Application unto some Particulars,
those Differences are capable of a Reconciliation; But where the Principles
themselves are directly contradictory, as it is between us and the Papists in
this matter, they are capable of no Reconciliation. 2. We have no Interest*
that may be practiced on, by the Arts, or Insinuations of the Papists. For we
are neither capable of any advantages by Ecclesiastical Domination, Power,
Promotions, with Dignities and Revenues belonging thereunto; which are the
principal allurements of the Papacy; nor are engaged in any such Combination
Political, or Ecclesiastical, as that the contrivance of a few, should draw on
the Compliance of the Whole Party; These things being ut^erly contrary unto,
and inconsistent with our Principles, the Papists have no way of attempting us,
but by mere Force and Violence. 3. Our fixed Judgment being the same with that
of all the first Reformers; namely, that in the Idolatrous Apostasy of the
Papal Church, with bloody Persecutions, the Antichristian State foretold in the
Scripture does consist, We are for ever excluded from all thoughts of
Compliance with them, or Reconciliation unto them. 4. Whereas our Principles
concerning Church Order, Rule and Worship, are directly suited unto the
Dissolution and Ruin of the Papal Church State, whence the Papists take their
VVarranty for all the evil contrivances, which some of them are guilty of in
this Kingdom, and will so far as they are taken out of the Scripture, at length
effect it; We can have no other expectation from the Prevalency of their
Interest in this Nation, but utter Extirpation, and Destruction. We are
therefore fully satisfied, that our Interest and Duty in Self-Preservation
consists in a firm Adherence unto the Protestant Religion as established in
this Nation, and the Defense thereof, against all the attempts of the Papacy.
So undoubtedly true it is, That the Dissenters are engaged both by Principle
and Interest to oppose Popery; and in order thereunto, must (being directed by
the Light of Nature) use all Proper means for the strengthening themselves
against this Irreconcilable Enemy, the Papists; The Union of Protestants being
the most proper Mean, they are Ruined if they do not unite when they may.
Propose any Terms, how difficult soever unto Flesh and Blood, but not Sinful,
and they will close with them.

Thus I have shown, 1. That the Dissenters are moved by Interest to desire
Union. 2. That their Principles also engage them to do so, and consequently the
Dr. is mistaken as to these Particulars.


I will now proceed to show,

3. That it is the Dr. who falls in with Bellarmine, entertaining the same
Principles, and arguing from the same Topics with him.

1. As Bellarm. de notis Eccl. lib. 4. c. 10. -- Certum est, concordiam esse
signum Regni dei, quod stare debet in aternum; Discordiam autem, Regni Diaboli,
quod tandem ruere debet.
Bellarmine does in the general highly extol Union, Peace and Concord in the
Church, making it a note of the true Church, even so the Dr. (though he does
not make peace and concord a note of the Church, yet he) does speak enough of
its excellency, and desireableness; For Union is a lovely Name, which is in
great esteem even among such, as will not part with a Toy, a Triste for the
obtaining the Thing. But

2. Notwithstanding the great commendations given this Union, it is not easily
obtained, for most frequently the anteceding Dissentions are between those
different Parties, that are unequally interested in the Favor of the State in
which they are; whence things usually come to this issue, Those that are
uppermost, impose many Uncertain, and Unnecessary things, as terms of Union on
their Inferiors, with which the more weak and inferior Party cannot
conscientiously comply. The Imposer is deeply affected with the tremendous
consequences of the least condescension; The Non-complier is mostly employed in
minding the Unhappy tendencies of severe Impositions. The One declaims against
the Unreasonableness of Separation, the Other against the Mischief of
Impositions. And Bellarmine, and Dr. Stilling fleet have had the advantage of
the Pleasure of Imposing; they Agree in these particulars.

1. Dr. Still. suggests the Impossibility of a limited Toleration, and therefore
in his discourses about it, his opposition is made against a General, or an
Universal, and Unlimited Toleration, even so Bell. De Laicis. lib. 3. c. 18.
Sunt qui docent Reges de Religione non debere curare, sed permittere singulis,
ut sentiant prout voluerint, modo non perturbent pacem publicam. -- At hic eror
Perniciossimus est, and sine dubio tenentur Principes Christiani -- dare
operam, ut ea sides servetur quam Episcopi Catholoci -- docent esse tenendam.
Bellarmine. (There are says he,) some, who assert, that the Magistrate may
permit all to think what they list concerning Religion, and live as they
please, supposing they break not the Public peace of the State; but this is a
most pernicious Error. Without all doubt, Christian Princes are obliged to
endeavor to keep their Subjects to the same Faith, the Catholic Bishops teach
them [yea as to every Punctilio.]

2. As to what the Dr. asserts about the Danger of receeding from the settled
Constitution, as if Toleration would break all in pieces, and not answer the
end, namely Peace, even so Bell. ubi sup. Libertas credendi perniciosa est,
etiam temporali bono regnornm, et publicae paci, ut patet primum Gregorio lib.
4. Epist. 32. Et cap. 19. Sancti patres docuerunt, ut non solum fidei symbolum
sed etiam ominia al^a Dogmata fidei, licet Minuta videantur, inviolata
servemus, nee propter haereticos ullo modo immutari patiamur. -- Catholici
noluerunt, and Imperatori scripserunt, nefarium esse de rebus jam definitis,
aliquid immutari: Et si quid justarum sanctionum fuerint immutatum, non
propterea pacem futuram. -- Esse p^sse. This and much more against the least
Relaxation.
Bellarmine, who says, 'That the Holy Fathers obliege us to keep inviolable,
not only the Apostles Creed, but also every other Opinion of Faith, though it
may seem very minute, and inconsiderable; neither must we for the sake of
Heretics [or Schismaticks] in any manner suffer an Alteration. -- The
Catholics would not, but wrote to the Emperor, that 'twas very wicked to
alter any thing concerning what was formerly determined, for if there should be
an alteration of Paenal Laws, Peace would not ensue, even as the Dr. It Is
impossible to satisfy all Dissenters, and uncertain whether any considerable
number may be gained by a Relaxation.

3. Twill be difficult says the Doctor, on a Toleration, to keep Factions out
of the Church, for upon the Principles laid down by some of our Dessuting
Brethren, let the Constitution be made never so easy to themselves, yet others
may make use of their ground, and carry on the differences as high as ever;
Even so Bellar. ubi supra -- Non potest liberum esse in uno quolibet dogmate,
quin eadem ratione liberum esse debeat in omnibus, etiam in iis, quae in
Symbolo Apostolico continentur. -- Si ergo credo Ecclesiae tradenti mihi
Symbolum Apostolorum, quod non scio aliunde esse Apostolorum, nisi quia
Ecclesia dicit. Eadem ratione, credere debeo Sanctos invocandos, quia eadem
Ecclesia hoc dicit, vel si hoc possim non credere, eadem ratione possim non
credere symbolum illud esse Apostolorum. Thus the Dr. and Bellarmine are
agreed, only Bellarmine has the advantage of a Popish Principle to countenance
his opinion, which will afford the Dr. very little relief, unless he will own
it, and oblige 0103 0 us all to believe, as the Church believes, from which if
we receede in one thing, we may for the same reason receede in every thing,
because the Church enjoynes a Ceremony with the same strictness it does the
Apostles Creed.
Bellarmine, who says, 'That Liberty concerning one Opinion cannot be allowed,
but for the same Reason it must be so in every thing, yea, even as to those
Doctrines which are contained in the Apostles Creed.

But as in this, the Dr. and Bellarmine agree, even so the Dr. and the Church
of England differ, as appears by what is most express in Mr. Chillingworth, who
says, I have learnt from the ancient Fathers of the Church, that nothing is
more against Religion than to force Religion, and of St Paul, the Weapons of
the Christian warfare are not carnal. And great Reason; For humane violence may
make men counterfeit, but cannot make them believe, and is therefore fit for
nothing but to breed form without, and Atheism within. Besides if this means of
bringing men to embrace any Religion, were generally used (as if it may be
justly used in any place by those that have Power, and think they have Truth,
certainly they cannot with Reason deny, but that it may be used in every place,
by those that have power as well as they, and think they have truth as well as
they) what could follow, but the maintenance of truth, but perhaps only of the
profession of it in one place, and the oppression of it in a hundred? What will
follow from it but the preservation peradventure of Unity, but peradventure
only of Uniformity in particular States and Churches; but the immortalizing the
greater, and more lamentable divisions of Christendom and the World? And
therefore what can follow from it, but perhaps in the judgment of carnal
policy, the temporal benefit, and tranquillity of temporal States and Kingdoms,
but the infinite prejudice if not the desolation of the Kingdom of Christ? And
therefore it well becomes them who have their portions in this Life, who serve
no higher State, than that of England, or Spain, or France, nor this neither
any further then that they may serve themselves by it, who think of no other
happiness, but the preservation of their own fortunes, and tranquillity in the
World; who think of no other means to preserve States, but humane power, and
Machivillian policy, and believe no other Creed but this, Regi aut civitati
Imperium habenti nihil injustum, quod utile! Such men as these it may become to
maintain by worldly power and violence their State Instrument, Religion For if
all be vain and false, (as in their judgment it is) the present whatsoever, is
better then any, because it is already settled; And alteration of it may draw
with it change of States, and the change of State, the Subversion of their
fortune. But they that are indeed Servants and Lovers of Christ, of Truth, of
the Church, and of Mankind, ought with all courage to oppose themselves against
it, as a common Enemy of all these. They that know there is a King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, by whose Will and Pleasure Kings and Kingdoms stand and
fall, they know, that to no King, or State, any thing can be profitable, which
is unjust; and that nothing can be more evidently unjust, than to force weak
men by the profession of a Religion, which they believe not, to loose their own
eternal happiness, out of a vain and needless fear, least they may possibly
disturb their temporal quietness. There being no danger to any State from any
man's Opinion, unless it be such an Opinion by which disobedience to authority,
or impiety is taught or licenced, which sort I confess may justly be punished,
as well as other faults; or unless this sanguinary Doctrine be joined with it,
that it is lawful for him by humane violence to enforce others to it. Therefore
if Protestants did offer violence to other men's Consciences, and compel them to
embrace their Reformation, I excuse them not.

4. Although the Dr. speaks so much in favor of Union, aiming at it, (as it is
said) both in his Sermon, and his late great book, exposing Divisions as what
chiefly gratifies the Papist, for which reason reason none can hinder Union, or
contribute any thing toward the Continuation of our Divisions, unless they
will strengthen the Papal Interest, yet the Dr. does his utmost to prevent a
Protestant Union, and consequently to maintain Divisions to the a vancing the
Papacy among us.

That I abuse not the Dr. will soon appear with much Conviction to any that
shall but consider.

1. That the Dr. is fully apprehensive from Twenty years experience, That the
term of our Union must be made more easy, or it is impossible that the
Dissenters should conform, which terms cannot be made more easy, unless there
be an alterat on of some Paenal Laws, against which the Doctor does express
himself with very much warmth. Preface p. 85.
That a general unlimited Toleration to dissenting Protestants will soon bring
Confusion among us, and in the end ^opery. -- And a Suspension of all Paenal
Laws that relate to Dissenters, is the same thing with a boundless T^le^ation.

I am heartily sorry to find the Dr. under this transport, and wish he would
give himself the Liberty of thinking, though but for a few honrs, for then
surely he could not but find himself obliged, when more cool, to correct what
was the product of an indecent heat, and consequently distinguish between a
boundless Toleration, and the suspending each Panal Laws as relate to
Dissenters only. Does not the Dr. know, that the Paenal Laws against Dissenters
are only such as engage us to a strict conformity to Episcopacy and Ceremonies,
forbidding the Worshipping of God in Separate Meetings: The Paenal Laws that
relate to Sabbath breaking, Drunkenness, Swearing, Felony, Murder, Adultery,
etc. affect the Dissenters no otherwise than the Conforming Clergy, for which
reason, seeing a Boundless Toleration is an indulging Drunkenness, Swearing,
Lying, etc. the Dr. must mean, That the not conforming to Episcopacy and
Ceremonies, and the Worshipping God in Separate Meetings is the same with
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Perjury, Adultery and Murder, which if true, the
offspring of a Toleration would be as the Dr. says, Confusion. And is this
the Dr's meaning; has he such high Thoughts of the Divinity of an Humane
Ceremony, that what man soever neglects it, is as a Murderer, or such low
thoughts of worshipping God in a separate Meeting, that it is as Felony? Is not
this the equalizing Humane Inventions with Christ's Institutions? Or rather is
it not to represent the Dissenters as Persons that are as vile as the worst of
men, and that it as much concerns the Magistrate to punish a Dissenter as a
Drunkard and a Felon. This shows the Reason why Dissenters are punished as much
as Swearers, and therefore unless the Parliament incline to favor Debauchery,
let them not entertain the Thoughts of giving the Dissenters any Liberty. But
what is this but to close with Bellarmine, who says, for the same reason,
Liberty is given in the same point, it may as well be so, in the greatest
Article of the Creed, i. e. But the Dr. must pardon us, if we are so charitable
as to believe that whatever sentiments some of the Inferior Clergy may
entertain concerning Dissenters, or the Dr. himself in the midst of his
disturbed thoughts, yet these are not the apprehensions of the grave and
Judicious Clergy of England, nor of the Dr. when free from these intemperate
heats. They all see a difference between a Conscientions Dissenter, and a
profane Debauchee, and that the former may be tolerated, when the latter is for
his wickedness severely punished. However this is enough to prove that the Dr.
is against the showing any compassion to a tender Conscience, though for the
sake of Union.

2. The Dr. does set a greater value on the Honor, and Reputation of men, than
on Union, or the relieving tender Consciences in order unto Union. If (says
the Doctor, page 89.) any exped^ent can be found out for the ease of other men's
Consciences, without Reflecting on our own, if they can be taken in without
Reproach, or Dishonor to the Reformation of the Church; I hope no true Son of
the Church of England will oppose it. These are the Dr's. Terms; for the
understanding which, it must be observed that the Dissenters Not-conforming to
Episcopacy and the Ceremonies is a judging them Unlawful, which is a casting a
Reproach and a dishonor on the Reformation of the Church, for this supposes,
that the Reformation of the Church of England, is not so agreeable to the
Scripture as it ought to be. Whence unless Dissenters can obtain their Liberty
in a way consistent with the Honor of their Clergy, it is not to be allowed
them, that is, Unless they can wound their Consciences, and fully conform, no
Union. All which does plainly intimate, that an higher esteem is to be had for
the external worldly Honor of men, than for tender Consciences. But is this
the way to heal our Breaches?

There are several other instances that may be insisted on to show the Dr's
dislike of Union, as well as of the relieving tender Consciences, which are
clothed with so many an uncomely reflection, that 'twill be difficult to
discover just resentments of them, without falling under the Dr's Censure of
being Intemperate, etc. and therefore I will wave them, knowing that there are
some others more Able, and more Concerned to consider them. So much as to the
Dr's many Mistakes about this Fourth Argument.

Argument the 5th.
5. The Dissenters accepted of His Majesty's Gracious Toleration, given them
Seven or Eight years ago.

It Is the Advice of the Jesuit Contzens (faith the Dr.) in his Directions for
the reducing Popery into a Country, that it be done under a pretense of ease
to tender Consciences. The like in a Letter of Seignior Bellarini, that there
be an Indulgence promoted by the Factious, and seconded by the Papists. Yea,
and Coleman owned at his Trial, and after sentence declared, That possibly he
might be of Opinion that Popery might come in, if Liberty of Conscience had
been granted, and it is acknowledged, that the Declaration of Indulgence, 167^
was of the Papists procuring. But notwithstanding this by one of the more
moderate party of Dissenters wrote, A public vindication of their accepting
the Licenses, and in the year 1675. There was a book printed, entitled The
Peaceable design, or an account of the Non-conformists Meetings, by some
Ministers of London. In an Objection it is thus put. But what shall we say then
to the Papists. The Answer is, The Papist in our account is but one sort of
Recusant, and the Conscientious and Peaceable among them, must be held in the
same Praedicament with those among our selves, that ^ikewise Refuse to come to
Common Prayer. To which the Dr. adds, what is this but joining for a Toleration
of Popery.

To all which I shall speak distinctly, and in doing so, consider these several
particulars Couched in this Fifth Argument.

1. That it is the Opinion of the Papists, that a Toleration might advance their
Interest: 2. That when a Toleration was given through the Papists Instigation,
the Dissenters embraced it. 3. That the Dissenters concurred with the Papists
in the attempts made for a general Toleration.
1. To the First, That the Papists apprehended a Toleration advantageous to
their Interest.

Here it must be duly observed, that there is a difference between a
Toleration, and a Toleration, viz. between a Limited and Unlimited Toleration.

2. The manner in which a Toleration may be given unto Dissenting Subjects, may
be different.

1. That a Toleration limited to such Dissenting Protestants as are sound in
the Faith, and Peaceable, should advance the Papal Superstition, is not easy
to comprehend, nor is it said that the Papists apprehend so much. Probably the
Jesuits Contzens, Seignior Bellarini and Coleman might think, that a general
Toleration to them, as well as to the Dissenting Protestants might advance
their interest, but that a Toleration to Protestants only should contribute any
thing toward the reducing this Land to Popery is unimaginable.

It Is a known Maxim in the Roman Church, that Ignorance is the Mother of
Devotion, which is true only with reference to the Papal Superstitions. Let the
light of the Gospel be removed, and Popish Darkness will soon spread it self
over the Face of that Land; but as long as the knowledge of the Gospel remains,
it is not easy to introduce Popery.

For which Reason a Toleration to Dissenting Protestant Ministers is so far
from advancing, that it destroys the Papists Interest. And this is no more then
what the Indulgence granted so graciously by His Majesty did effect, it giving
as great a blow to Popery, as has been given it in diverse years before. For
multitudes who formerly living most lewdly, were prepared for Popery, being
since convinced of the Truth and excellency of Religious conversation, are most
firmly engaged to venture their Lives, yea, their All in the defense of
Protestant Religion. What then should tempt the Papists to conclude a limited
Toleration to be an Engine prepared for the accomplishing a Jesuitical design
is to me unknown, unless they had a respect rather to the manner of its grant,
than unto the Toleration it self, fancying that as his Present Majesty indulged
Protestant Dissenter without his Parliament, according to the same Rule the
Popish S^^^^ssor they had within their ken, might without his Parliament
indulge the Papist. But this is only a conjecture of which our Statesmen are
most competent Judges, and which whether right or wrong it is not to be insisted
on by the Clergy of either way, they (...), so Vamcet to treat of
State Affairs, which never succeeds better than when under the management and
Conduct of Statesmen, nor never attended with more unhappy Issues, then when
the Clergy like busy bodies will (...), i. e. Inspect the Diocese of the
Laity, and concern themselves about what they understand not. But what though
we grant, that the Papists thought a Protestant Indulgence would advance their
Interest, seeing their thoughts have no more of Infalibility in them than their
Doctrines, why does the Dr. insist on their fancies? What were they never
mistaken? But the Dr. suggests that Jesuits might creep in under the Notion of
Dissenters; And can they not rather slide into great preferments under the
Covert of a Gown, a Cassock, a Surplice? The Temptation surely is greater, and
the way much more easy.

2. The Dissenters it is said accepted of this Toleration, yea, and wrote a
Public vindication of their accepting of it. What then? are they therefore
Popishly affected? What, is Gratitude to our Prince confined to Papists, or
their Instruments? I cannot but wonder at the discourses of some of our Clergy,
who delight in nothing so much as in railing on the Dissenters, as Seditious,
Rebellious, and what not, and yet most angry with Dissenters, because they are
not so, as appears by the many Invectives, that were written against our
thankful acknowledgments of His Majesty's Clemency. But though this Dr. and
some others are angry, yet it is the Resolve of Protestant Dissenters to be
ready on all occasions to show their Loyalty and thankfulness to his Majesty
for every instance of his Bounty toward his dissenting, but most dutiful and
loving Subjects.

But wherein is the Papist gratified by that Toleration, what did he gain by
it? Did he enjoy more liberty after, than before? Methinks, the import of the
great cry of our Clergy is this, That the Dissenters must not be permitted to
enjoy, as much as the Papists, and be on even terms with them, to the advancing
the Protestant Religion. For this is evident, that when there was no
Declaration for Indulging Protestants, there was no prosecution of Paenal Laws
on Papists; yea, when the Clergy were most severe in prosecuting Protestants;
the Papists knew not practically what a Paenal Statute meant, and yet our
Church men very silent. But his Majesty according to the Gracious Propensions
of his heart no sooner extends his Clemency toward the Poor Dissenting
Protestants, but the cry is Popery, Popery, that is, poor Protestants in a
Bears, the Papists skin, are envied and malign'd.

3. The Dissenters wrote favorably of the Tolerating Papists.

Answ. 1. Before the Discovery of the Plot, the Papists were judged Loyal
Subjects, though Saperstitious, etc. even by our Governors and Clergy. Does
not Dr. Stilling fleet remember, that a R^verend Divine, a Son of the Church,
no way inferior to himself, did write ex industria in favor of the Loyal
Papist? Is the Church of England therefore for Popery? How then can Dissenters
he so, seeing the reason for the one and the other is the same, with this
difference, namely, The Dissenter gave but an hint, which did rather discover a
confidence in, and humble de^ercing to the Wisdom of our Magistracy; who did
not judge meet at that time to be brisk in a prosecuting the Paenal Laws
against them for their Recusancy: but the Plea of the Episcopal in favor of
the Roman Catholic was more than an hint, it was a considerable Treatise. But

2. Since the Discovery of the Plot the Papists are better known, they are now
known to be Implacable Enemies to a Protestant Prince and Kingdom; to be
Turbulent, and Unpeaceable: Whence the Tolerating them, and the Kingdoms peace
are become inconsistent, and as the one is advanced, the other necessarily must
be overthrown: For which Reason, our Superiors, Ecclesiastical and Civil, do
see cause to pass another Judgment on the Papists than formerly they did,
whereby the Dissenter may with the greater freedom appear against them, giving
our Sovereign, and the Parliament the fullest assurances of Loyalty to His
Majesty, and Faithfulness to the Protestant Religion, being ready to hazard
their lives and their all, in the defense of them and it. How then can they be
supposed Favorers of Popery, or rather how can Dr. Still. Discourse after this
manner? For, if such as are under the lash of Paenal Laws for Conscience sake,
must be thought to be Popishly affected, for not animating the Magistrate to a
Prosecution of Paenal Laws against other supposed Conscientious, and Peaceable
Dissenters as the Papists were then judged to be, by many of the Church of
England, and this before the Discovery of their Horrid Plots, I say, if the
whole Party of Dissenters must be thus exposed, so severely for such an hint as
that was, what shall we think of Dr. S., who speaks so favorably of the
Papists, suggesting even now, that when Men's heats against the Papists, which
are said to be beyond the just bounds of Prudence, Decency, and Humanity; are
over, it will be thought great hardship for the Papists only, to be deprived
of the Liberty of their Consciences, when the wildest of the Fanatics are
allowed it. What, may the Dr. insinuate so much in their Favor now, and not
expose himself to the Censure; and must a Dissenter who spoke not half as much
in other times, be so severely treated? But whether the Dissenters are
favorers of the Papal Faction, will more fully appear by the Answer that shall
be given unto his 6th. Argument.

Argument 6.
The Dissenters, since the Discovery of the late Horrid Plot did close with the
People in an over-fierce opposing the Papists. For (says the Dr.) now the
Dissenters tack about, and strike in with the Rage of the People, and none so
fierce against Popery as they, whereby they mar a good business by over-doing
it. Praef. page 34.

This is suggested more than once, but because of the strangeness of the medium
at this juncture, and its unmeetness for its designed end, I Will not be
overcurious in considering it; It being well known that Popish Plots are laid
so deep, the Plotter so cruel, yea, and so resolved for Protestant Blood, the
Blood of our Prince, our Nobles, our Gentry, our Ministry, and People, that
unless we by a serious and humble Repentance return to God, putting our Trust
in the Lord, and assume an undaunted Courage, we are a lost People. To be at
such a time cold and indifferent, is to relinquish and abandon our Religion.
For if there be any Fire of Zeal against Papists in the house, it cannot but
flame out at the Windows at this time; for the stormy winds of Popish Cruelties
and Treasons, desolating Threatenings, and implacable Fury, are such as must
cause the least spark of Zeal for God, and the King, etc. to break out into a
flame, that cannot be hid; Which may be, even when our Zeal does not transport
us to any Irregular or Illegal proceedings, which can only deserve the Epithets
of Indecent and Inhumane; with which Protestant Dissenters cannot justly be
charged, and therefore the Surprise is the greater to find such an Intimation
in so Judicious, and Wise a Person as Dr. S. In what respect does, or can the
Dr. accuse them? Are the Dissenters too Zealous in Declaiming against Popish
Principles, and Practices? Do they represent Papal Treasons to be more heinous
than they are (i. e.) more bloody, or more Inhumane and Cruel? What acts of
Inhumanity have they exercised? or in what respects have they been transported
beyond the just bounds of Prudence, Decency, or Humanity? Why is not the Dr.
more particular in his Charge, seeing Dolus latet in Generalibus? It Is their
Joining with the People (the Dr. adds) but in what? In Petitioning his Majesty
for the Sitting of the Parliament, surely the Dr. will not now judge that to be
seditious? Is it our Readiness, when called thereunto to hazard our lives to
save his Majesty's? or what? seeing the Dr. does not fasten any particular
crime on the Dissenters, and the Dissenters being Innocent, have no guilty
Conscience to accuse them, nor are they able to divine; It cannot be expected,
that we should be more full in the Consideration of it, neither is there any
need, for enough has been said to clear the Dissenters from the Vnbecoming
Reproaches, the Dr. would fasten on them; Yea, enough has been hinted to
evince the Dr's. Mistakes to have been Great and Many.

III. I Will now proceed to the third Particular, and give a Summary Account of
the Unhappy Tendencies of these Great and Many Mistakes, as they are adjusted
for an Advance of the Papal Interest.

. 1. It Is Remarkable, That Notwithstanding the Honorable Apprehensions the Dr.
may have of the Reformation, very little, if any thing, is hinted concerning
the most Principal part thereof, namely, Protestant Doctrines: The which I do
the rather observe, because it has been of late years, the sole care of our
Ecclesiastics to secure Protestant Religion, without using any Mean for the
preservation of Protestant Doctrines; and accordingly new Declarations,
Subscriptions and Oaths have been offered for the more firm establishment of
Church Government, even when our Doctrines have been sadly vitiated by some of
the Sons of the Church, without any other notice, than the Complaints of a Few,
such as are Dr. Tully, etc.

. 2. That Episcopacy, and Ceremonies are considered by the Dr. as the Glory of
the English Reformation, the Bulwark of Protestant Religion, even Episcopacy
and Ceremonies, as dissented from by the Nonconformists, (i. e) That
Episcopacy, and those Ceremonies unto which the Dissenters cannot
conscientiously conform. It Is this that cannot be dissented from without great
dishonor unto Protestant Religion, viz. The Reformation; which, strictly
considered, is no part of the Reformation, (i. e.) as much of these things as
Dissenters agree not unto, cannot be justly called Reformation. For what parts
of the Papal Episcopacy and Ceremonies are rejected, the Dissenters heartily in
their rejection close with the Episcopal; that is, so far as there is a
Reformation; But, as to the Particular wherein the Difference lies between the
Conformist and Nonconformist, there is no Reformation on the Conformists part.
I am not now disputing against Episcopacy or Ceremonies, but supposing them
Apostolical; yet I assert, they cannot be considered, as a part of Reformation:
For Reformation does presuppose some Anteceding Corruption of the thing to be
Reformed; Reformation consisting in the removing the Corruptions, and therefore
we do not say, that the Protestants Reformed what was never Corrupted; for
instance, The Doctrine of the Trinity, not being corrupted by the Church of
Rome, the Protestants are not said to Reform it, even so, That Part of
Episcopacy and Ceremonies, which is considered as Apostolical, and has been,
and still is maintained by the Church of Rome, that part if adhered unto, as
Apostolical by Protestants, is but the Retaining an Uncorrupted part of our
good old Religion, and not a Reforming it, Thus even do the Becan. Opusc. Tit.
II. Quest. 9. Hanc Hierarchiam ex part retinent Calvinistae in Anglia -- extra
Angliam penitus rejiciunt. Quo nomine male audiunt ab eodem Rege, qui in
Monitoria praefatione ad Imperatorem, Reges and Principes, de hac re ita
scribit; Quo studio in Episcoporum and Ecclesiasticae Hierarchiae defensionem
semper incubui, eodem in confusam illam Anarchiam, and parilitatem Puritanorum
invectus sum. Et infra, Mihi praecipuus labor fuit, dejectos Epistopos
restituere, and Puritanorum Anarchiam repugnare. Et rationem addit, quia cum in
caeteris rebus ordo quidum de dispositio sit, etiam in Ecclesia esse necesse
est.
Jesuits consider it. But granting that the Retained part of the Hierarchy,
etc. may be considered as Reformed, it still must be asserted,

1. That it is no Part of the Lutheran, and Transmarine Protestant Reformation;
for, they consider it as what stands in need of a Reformation.

2. That the Dr. making this the Great Part of the English Reformation, does
but exalt a part of the Papal Hierarchy under the name of Reformation, for
which Reason, even other parts of the same, may deserve his Applauses under the
same Notion, and what is this but to reflect on all Protestants besides
themselves.

. 3. This Reformation in Conjunction with the Papists, an adhering unto the
Praelacy of Bishops, and in Opposition unto most other Protestants, an
exploding Godly Peoples Right of choosing their own Pastor. And Thirdly, an
introducing such little Ceremomes as do but prepare the way for greater.

. 4. All this is most admirably accomplished with the Help of Bellarmine, and
other Jesuits in that, this Noble Superstructure is fastened on the Foundation
of Antiquity, and Universality, the sure Notes of what is Apostolical; for,
(says the Dr.) if this should be a Corruption how comes it to be so Antiem,
and so soon Universal, even insensibly without any noise.

. 5. This is a Receeding from the Church of England, and a Rebuilding what the
Church has demolished, a setting too great an Honor on those Jesuitical
Arguments, which have been exploded by the Church, as appears out of Mr.
Chillingworth; and therefore as one Apprehensive of their weakness, the Doctor
does proceed.

. 6. To the old Argument, vide Mischievous Impositions, as what cannot but most
effectually compass his end, that is, under the notion of opposing a
Toleration, to introduce a smart Prosecuting of Paenal Laws against such, as
cannot receive Convictions from the foregoing Arguments. That the Dr. writes
against such a Toleration as consists in the suspending those Paenal Laws,
which are against Dissenters, is evident: And what is the meaning of this, if
he designs not the urging a Prosecution of Paenal Laws? Does a suspending the
Paenal Laws any otherwise displease him, than as it prevents a Prosecution of
the Law against Dissenters? And if by these Laws Dissenters must be prosecuted,
for not assenting unto what they cannot conscientiously assert. Is not this
laying our Faculties under Violence, or a Forcing Religion, an introducing
blind obedience with a Whip? That such Doctrines are pleasing to the Papist,
might be easily proved from the advantages they have taken from Mr. Hooker, and
some others; who have expressed themselves too liberally in their Invectives
against Dissenting Protestants, and that the Dr has no way gratified the
Episcopal Protestants by Relinquishing their Doctrine, is to be seen in Mr.
Chillingworth, who has shown the pernicious consequences of such Impositions.
Namely,

1. As it may occasion an Uniformity in some particular Churches; even so it
does Immortalize the greater and more Lamentable Divisions of Christendom, and
the World.

2. As it may in the judgment of Carnal Policy advance the temporal benefit,
and tranquillity of Temporal States, and Kingdoms; even so 'twill be followed
with the Infinite Prejudice, if not the desolation of the Kingdom of Christ;
and therefore this is a Doctrine that becomes none, but such whose Creed is
Regi aut Civitati imperium habenti nibil injustum, q^od utile, who dread the
change of State, least it should change their Fortunes. But

3 This cannot be profitable unto any King or State, because Unjust, for
nothing is more evidently Unjust, than to force weak men by the profession of a
Religion, which they believe not, to loose their own Eternal happiness out of a
vain and needless fear, least they may possibly disturb their Temporal
quietness.

I hope, seeing the Dr. will find these Arguments in one of the Church of
Englands discourses, he will give some heed thereunto, and perceive how he has
unawares given advantage to the Papist.

Thus the Dr. in his pretenses against Popery, falls into the Error for which
he reproves the Dissenters, which I have evinced out of his own Preface, as
compared with the Jesuits with whom he accords, and with the Old Protestants,
from whom in some of these things at least, he dissents, The which I have done
with the greatest fairness and integrity, without any design of forcing his
words to speak what is not according to their Grammatical sense, and common
acceptance, omitting the insisting on several points, that might be spoken
unto with greater disadvantage unto the Dr. But aiming principally at the
clearing the Innocent, who are by him accused, and the showing into what
Mistakes his transport has carried him, I hinted no more than what was
necessary in order thereunto, carefuly shunning as much as the Subject matter
would permit any such expression, as might be judged by the Dr's own intimates
Indecent; humbly apprehending that the Dr's Mistakes are but evincements of the
emotions of that Corruption, which in part is in the best of Saints on Earth,
which calls rather for our Compassion than Triumph, knowing that we our selves
are but men of like passions. For which reason I will draw to a close in
speaking to the Fourth thing.

4. That to the end the Dr. may do himself, and the Protestant Religion but
right, it is necessary that he be either more distinct, and full in a further
explication of his sentiments, if he be misapprehended, or that he will be so
Candid, as to go on in following Bellarmine in one thing more, namely, in that
it deserves due esteem and regard by a second Retractation, if these mistakes
appears to be such as they are by me represented.

1. If the Dr. has not wronged the Dissenter, nor closed with the Jesuit in
his arguings against Dissenters, it is most apparent, that his words need an
Exposition, for whatsoever unprejudiced Person considers, what has been said
in the foregoing Discourse, may easily perceive, that if we must judge of his
meaning by his writing, it is as I have said; But, if not so, I beseech the Dr.
to exercise his Candor in inlightning us, assuring him, as soon as I can
understand that I have in any respect misrepresented him, I will be so Just, as
to acknowledge so much, and do my utmost for the clearing him, and in order
thereunto have this only to add, That I do not say, the Doctor has consulted
the Jesuits, for what he asserts so agreeably unto their writings (God forbid I
should assert what I do not know) But this I say that the Agreement is as great
in those instances I have mentioned, as if he had, and that if he has not
consult'd them, I know not what can be assigned as the true Reason of this
strange agreement, unless it be, that sometime great Wits jump, or, that such
is the State of the Controversy between Him, and Dissenters, that there is no
way so effectual for the confuting us, but by proceeding on Jesuitical
Principles, and using Popish Arguments. But

2. If I have neither mistaken, nor misrepresented the Dr. as, I verily
believe, I have not, seeing the Dr. is fallible, and may see cause to alter his
Sentiments unto these particulars, as well as he has done with reference unto
some others, the He would be so Self-denying on his receiving Convictions, as
to intimate so much unto the World.

1. That the Dr. changes his judgment concerning some Notions relating to
Religion, is neither a wonder to the World, nor should it be a Reproach unto
him, or any other Person, that for sufficient Reasons does so. Yet

2. Whenever any considerable Tract is with the show, and seeming strength of
much Reason published to the World, through the Varnish of which, in process of
time, the Author espies Mistakes and Error, as the Author acts ingenuously in
Publishing so much unto the World, even so he ought to do the World that piece
of Justice, as to be at the pleasing Trouble of confuting it himself, seeing
otherwise, much mischief may be done the poor weak Reader, who thinks the
discourse to contain the same Reasons, since a a Retractation, which it did
before, may through the Influence of of those Arguments, that are in it, be
obliged to adhere unto Error. Moreover as to the Dr's. Case, it is presumed he
does not retract the whole, and every part of his Irenicum, and therefore
'twould be necessary somewhat be done to show, what needs Explication what a
Retractation, and for what Reasons a Retractation; and the like as to this
present great Book, a part of whose Prefaced I have Animadverted on, which
Animadversions are of such a Nature, as cannot but engage the Dr. to do
somewhat of this kind; even as Bellarm. Recog. Scripsi, Deo test, quod verum
esse existimavi, non gratiam hominum, vel propriam utilitatem, sed Honorem Dei,
and Ecclesiae Commodum respiciens. Neque in scriptis meis aliquid a divinis
literis ^aut sanctorum Patrum Regulis alienum, sciens, posui. Quin tamen
scriptumest Prove. 10. in multiloquio non deerit Peccatum, quod etiam de multa
scriptione dei posse non dubito S. Augustinum imitatus, etc.
Bellarmine himself in a like Case has done, who, in the End of his
Disputations has his particular Recognitions, prefacing it in these words, God
is my VVitness, that what I have written is no more than what I judg^d to be
the Truth, which I wrote not on any unworthy design of pleasing others, or
profiting my self, but with an Aim at Gods Glory, and the Churches Benefit. Nor
have I knowingly receeded either from the Rule of the Scriptures or Holy
Fathers, However, since it is said, Prove. 10.19. In the multitude of words there
wants not sin, which I Question not but may be said of much writing, I will
therefore imitate St. Austin, i. e. in his Retractations, etc.

That we may exercise the Charity in hoping that the Dr. does not at any time
publish That to be a Truth which he believes to be an Error, and with all
finding the Dr. to mistake, yea sometimes sensible of his Mistakes. I have
presumed to recommend unto him not only St. Austin, but also the great
Bellarmine as a Pattern for his Imitation, it being an Honor to follow him in
what is Right, when no way so as to those particulars, wherein he is an Enemy
unto the Churches of Jesus Christ and the True Protestant Religion.

FINIS.

