AN ANSWER TO Dr. Stillingfleet's Book OF THE Unreasonableness OF SEPARATION,
So far as it Concerns the Peaceable Design, With Some Animadversions upon the
Debate between Him, and Mr. Baxter, concerning the National-Church, and the
Head of it.

Against whom have thou Exalted thy Voice, and Lifted up thine Eyes on High?
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Three Bibles in Cheap side, near
Mercers-Chappel.

AN ANSWER TO Dr. Stillingfleet, etc.
IN Dr. Stillingfleet's Book, there is one thing I meet with, that I perhaps
can better tell how, than another, to Answer. It is in his Preface, where he is
going about to make the Nonconformists a kind of Parties with the Papists, as
if they were joining with them for the bringing in of Popery; and for the proof
of this, he produces one Evidence. I will set down his own words, and Answer
the Allegation.

In Ann. Dom. 1675. there was a Book printed, Entitled, The Peaceable design,
or an Account of the Nonconformists Meetings, by some Ministers of London. In
it, an Objection is thus put: But what shall we say then to the Papists? His
Answer is, The Papist, in our Account, is but one sort of Recusants, and the
Conscientious and Peaceable among them, must be held in the same Predicament
with those among ourselves, that likewise refuse to come to Common Prayer. What
is this but Joining for a Toleration of Popery? If this be not plain enough,
these words follow; But as for the Common-Papist, who lives Innocently in his
way, he is to Us as other Separatists; and so he comes under the like
Toleration.

This notable Book, with some few Additions and Alterations, has been since
Printed, and with great sincerity called, An Answer to my Sermon. And the Times
being Changed since, the former passage is thus Altered: The Papists is one
whose Worship to Us is Idolatry, and we cannot therefore allow them the Liberty
of Public Assembling themselves as others of the Separation. Is it Idolatry,
and not to be Tolerated in 1680? And was it Idolatry, and to be Tolerated in
1675? Or, Was it no Idolatry then, but is become so now, and intolerable
Idolatry too? The latter passage has these Alterations; Instead of He is to Us
as other Separatists, and so comes under the like Toleration, These are put in,
He is to Us (in regard of what he does in private, in the matter of his God) as
other who refuse to come to Common Prayer. Now we see Toleration struck out for
the Papists, but it was not only visible enough before, but that very book was
Printed with a design to present it to the Parliament, which was the highest
way of owning their Concurrence with the Papists for a general Toleration: And
the true Reason of this Alteration is, that Then was Then, and Now is Now.

For the Answering this Evidence. In the first place, this Book the Doctor
mentions, was drawn up by One man (though put out by Others) and the first
Mistake of the Doctor is, to lay a Charge on the Party of the Nonconformists,
for a passage which indeed concerns but One person only.

In the next place, the Reason of bringing that passage into the Book was,
because the Objection is so Obvious it could not be Baulkt; and the Consequence
appearing to the Author Undeniable, he thought it but Honest to yield it. The
Doctor then is mistaken next, that believes (or pretends) the Reason of the
bringing in that passage, was on purpose only to Favor, or fall In with the
Papists. That which is said in Right to All, ought not to be interpreted in
Favor to Any.

In the Third place, for the Alteration mentioned, it is to be known, that when
the Author had drew up this Book, he left it with a Nonconformist Doctor to
show it to his Brethren; who returned it after a while, telling him, That they
Disliked some passages in it; which made him put it into some other hands, who
afterward, while he was Absent, printed it. They altered nothing, but when it
came out, the Author indeed found his Brethren Offended at some things, and
that passage most obnoxious to Exception: so that he presenrly made his
Emendations, and seeing the Book ill Printed, intended in time to have another
Impression. Upon this, it appears the Doctor is again Mistaken, in regard to
this Alteration which he Quotes, who judges the Reason of the Change, to be
only because of the Times. The True Reason (says he) is, because Then was
Then, and Now is Now. The True Reason, as if he knew it, when you see how
perfectly he is out in his Confidence, as well as his Conjectures. The making
the Emendations which he did, at the present Season, is a Demonstration. The
Nonconformists are here Suspected or Impeached by this Doctor, for Favoring
and Joining with the Papists, because of a passage in that Book; when the very
Reason of Altering that passage was, because of their presumed Finding Fault
with it.

In the Last place, we have here, not only a Mistake in the Doctor (which might
be born) but an open Wrong or Injury, if it be not want of Consideration. The
Doctor Thinks, or Speaks, as if the Author (in Re-printing the Book) had
Changed his Opinion; wherein I count he most of all is Out, and most to Blame.
He who drew up the Book, is not one of that Humor, as to Turn with the Times,
but rather against them. The Opinion he offered in the Year 75, is the same
with what he holds now in the Year 80. Here is an Alteration indeed as to more
Words, or some other words, but the same Opinion or Solution, with the
Difference only of a farther Explication of it, and nothing else therein
(besides avoiding offense) intended. The Author had been wary in declaring the
Toleration he proposed to be a Limited one, and provided against the Jesuit
upon reason of State, and showed his dread of Popery in Dominion, but had
omitted the distinction of a toleration in regard to Public Assemblies, and
the Private exercise of a Man's own Religion. He explains himself therefore by
way of supply, signifying that what he said at first, should be taken in regard
to the tolerating the Papist only privately, as his meaning really was then,
and is now but fullier expressed. This is the Opinion he recedes not from
(whether peculiar to himself or not) that No Man should be persecuted merely
for his Conscience, if there be no other Reason. Whether a Man be a Dissenter
of one kind, or of another, The Common Rule of Christianty must be remembered
(he says) still, that we do to all Men, as we would be done by, and that with
what Measure we mete to others, it shall be met to us again. These Words remain
in all the Impressions.

And now for the Title, I have this also to Answer. The Book as it came out An.
75. was then gone, and now Reprinted against the Parliament Sat; but they not
Sitting, was laid by till the Doctor's Sermon coming out, it was thought
Seasonable. The Doctor Charges the Nonconformists Meetings with Schism. This
Book gives an account of their Meetings, and Vindicates them from Schism: and
forasmuch, as something was Inserted in regard to the People (whom his Charge
mainly concerns) when the Ministers only were Vindicated in the First Edition,
and the first Sheet was new Printed over on purpose, and the Doctor named, it
was sent out with this also in the Title. There was no Concealment that it was
a former Book, it was still called The Peaceable Design, and said to be
Renewed; but there was this Addition, and this Reason. And so I have given an
Account of Doctor Stillingfleet's Book, so far as concerns that Author; and do
not doubt, but the Doctor will have an Account also from others so far as it
concerns them, in due Season. As Mr. Baxter, Mr. Alsop, Dr. Owen.

And here I had thought to have given over, and got one of these Friends to
have put so much for me in one of their Books: but when I remember there is a
Postscript to the last Impression of the Book mentioned, and what there is
said, and with what openness; I must needs say, that I did expect something
from a Candid person, more like a Gentleman; that is, so much Ingenuity as to
cover a Fault which was confessed, rather than expose it, if there were any:
but I see there is nothing of this Nature, no such Ingenuity I thought, to be
expected from the Doctor.

I am sensible of his Spirit, and that temper I observe in him, from a few
Words let out of his Soul here and there, in this Ironical Way of his, which is
a sufficient Indication of what kind of Estimation he has of himself, in his
contempt of others. I will give one instance in a place somewhere, where he is
speaking of Mr. Alsop. He begins his Sentence, This Learned Man, but before he
ends it, he tells us of an Admirable Piece of his Reading: so that when I was
thinking him to be in earnest, I find it only to disdain him. I do therefore
hate such a counterfeit Epithet as this is, and these fleering Expressions. It
is all one in good earnest, as if he should more at large speak thus to his
Readers. Readers, you may perhaps think that Mr. Alsop is a Learned Man; but
alas, What is he in comparison of me? I am the Man that have all Learning in
me. It Is I have done such Feats, especially against the Papists. I am the Man
that have Killed the Philistine.

I forbear to mention a place where he Treats this same Worthy Man, after the
rate, as if he were some Person distraught, which is a vile Abuse, but that is
not the thing I Note.

Another Instance I must not forbear, in regard to Mr. Baxter, and it is this,
That when he at first names that Good Man, he tells us he Pitties him. Mr.
Baxter belike, is one scarce worthy of the Doctors Conquest, but fit for his
Compassion. And can the Doctor here be in good earnest? Mr. Baxter certainly is
not an Enemy so Contemptible, nor the Doctor I hope quite so Elated, as he is
Idle. The Doctor is one who may look on himself to have Abilities in some
regard, which Mr. Baxter has not; but if he should really value himself mith
Mr. Baxter, upon the account of a Profound Divine (which one may think here he
would be at), he is a Man who must want that Modesty in good Earnest, whereof
he makes a Show in the Beginning of his Book, upon a Comparison of his with
Jewel.

The Doctor has Learning, and has apt Words, and is a ready sufficient Man:
but Mr. Baxter is really a Man Extraordinary, and whose Talents are of another
sort, than the Doctors can reach unto. Mr. Baxter is one, I will say, like the
Man in the Neighborhood, who is first up, and all the Neighbors come for Fire
to his House: that is, one from whom the present Age do fetch Light, and unto
whom the Ages to come will bring Honor. Neither care I for any Bodies saying
this is Odious, for the Old-Proverb shall not hinder me to end the Comparison.
The Doctor is one as well as others who may be willing to Learn (or else I am
sure be will have the more need to be Taught) of that Man whom he Pitties.

It is fit after I have said this, that I make it good. And there is a Dispute
between these Two, concerning the National Church, will help me to do it. If
there be a National Church, it must have a Head, a Constitutive-Head, says Mr.
Baxter: and therefore asks the Doctor where the Constitutive Regent part of the
Church of Eng- is to be placed? It is a matter of Polity the Doctor is put
upon: The Question also seems something Perplexed, it may be on purpose to try
the Doctor, but this we find, the Doctor is posed, that is flat, for he cannot
Answer, but is driven to say there is no such Head, and that there is no need
of any; which is the Absurdity unto which the Opponent would drive him. If ever
any Boy in the higher Form at School, was posed by his Master, the Doctor here
is posed, who is indeed in Mr. Baxter's Hands, no other but such a one, when he
takes him on such a point, where his Books, and Polite Style do not serve him.

That there is a Government in the Church of England, I hope the Doctor does
not doubt, who pleads for Conformity to it. Where there is a Government
established, there must be a Political Society; Every Political Body consists
of a Pars Imperans and subdita. Does, or does not the Doctor know this? If the
Church of England then be a Political Church, it must have a Regent part, and
this Constitutive Regent part must be Assigned.

The Doctor here is indeed something more Unfortunate in his Reading, than he
uses, or else it need not be so hard for any, to find out, where the Head, or
Regent part of every Political Society is, or must be placed, whether Mr.
Baxter contradicts it or not. There are therefore certain Rights of
Sovereignty, Iura Magistatis (as Writers of Politics do call them) or
Prerogatives, and where those Rights are invested, there the Headship must be
placed. The chief of these Rights is Legislation. Wheresoever then the Power of
giving Laws to any Society is found, there must this Constitutive Regent part,
which Mr. Baxter enquires for; be Assigned. The Church of England, now we know,
has Her Laws: There are Laws Ecclesiastical, and these are called Canons, or
Constitutions. We must then enquire where it is, the Power of Making these does
lie. And here we find, that the Archbishop of the Province, with the Bish^ps
and Clerks making up a Convocation, do frame these Canons.

If the Doctor now could but prove, That the Hierarchy of the Church thus
Congregated, were certainly of Divine Institution, so that there needed no
other Authority, but of the Convocation only, for their Ratification; then
could he perfectly assign to us such a Head as Mr. Baxter seeks. But forasmuch
as there is no Authority in the Convocation when they have Composed their
Canons, to Impose any of them upon the Church, or to oblige the Conscience of
any by them, until they are ratifyed by the Authority of the King; it is
manifest both that this Hierarchy of the Nation is but of Human Right, and that
the King alone (the Power of Legislation, which proves it, lying only in him)
is, and must be, the Head of the Church, in this Kingdom.

And that this certainly is so, it is declared in the Statute of Henry the
Eighth, That the King shall be taken for the only Supreme Head of the Church,
called Ecclesia Anglicana. To understand this, The Church may be consid^red, we
are to know, as Universal, and so is Christ the Head of it, and can only give
Laws to it: Or as Particular, and so the Pastors are Heads, and Rule it: Or as
National, (to wit, as it is according to the Statute Ecclesia Anglicana) and so
the Magistrate is Head, and makes Laws for it.

I will add; There is something Essential to the Church of Christ, and
something Accidental. That there should be Persons, who Meet to Worship God and
Christ, and be put in Order for it, is of Christ's Appointment, and Necessary
to his Church. Of these Particular Persons and Churches, the Catholic Church
consists. To be Particular then, or Universal, is of Essential Consideration to
Christ's Church: But to be National, is of Accidental Consideration. That all
the People of a Land should be Christian, and the Magistrate also, is (I say)
an Accidental thing to the Church, which may Exist where that is not: Upon
which account, though the Magistrate be none of Christ's proper Officers, yet
may he be Head of his Church, and Constitutive Head of it, as undet his
Dominions, because he is Head not in any Essential, but in this Accidental
Consideration of it.

I will now set down the Doctor's own Words. Page 301. We deny any Necessity of
any such Constitutive Regent Part, or one Formal Ecclesiastical Head, as
Essential to a National-Church. For a National Consent is as sufficient to make
a National-Church, as an Universal-Consent to make a Catholick-Church. In this
Determination of the Point, when the Doctor denies any Necessity of such a
Head, I hope, he is not so frivolous, as to believe One in this Nation, and not
to tell it. So long as the Church of England is a Political Church, and has a
Government established, it must have its Regent Part, as well as the Part
Ruled; and to deny the Necessity of One, is all one as to say there is None.

I press the Doctor: Is it a Political-Church, or no? If it be, he must find it
a Head: If it be not, then it is only a Community of Christians, amongst whom,
it must be supposed, there is no Government (as yet) introduced; and then shall
our Ecclesiastical Laws, Canons, and Constitutions, our Bishops and
Archbishops, with the whole. Constitution we have already, be hurled in the
Dust. The Doctor will be a fine Champion for the Church, if he persists to say
this.

We deny any Necessity of any such Constitutive Regent Part, or one Formal
Ecclesiastical Head, as Essential to a National-Church. The Doctor here, who is
posed with the Question, is confounded with the Terms. He should distinguish
between a He^d, and a Formal Ecclesiastical Head; a Regent Part, and an
Ecclesiastical Regent Part; a Constitutive Regent Part, and a Formal
Ecclesiastical Head of the Church of England. Though a National- Church has no
Ecclesiastical Head, it has a Head, a Regent Part, a Constitutive Regent Part,
under this Accidental Consideration of the Church as National, though not under
the Essential Consideration of it as the Church of Christ.

If the Doctor had light upon it in some of his Books, that the King of England
represents Two Persons, an Ecclesiastical Person while He presides by His
Authority in the Convocation, and so is Head of the Church; and a Civil Person,
while He sits with the Parliament, and so is Head of the State, and upon the
account of both, the Fountain of all Obligation upon the Subject, both from the
Canons of the Church, and Statutes of the Realm, I cannot tell how he might
have put Mr. Baxter to it: But so long as the King is not indeed both Supreme
Magistrate, and High Priest, as the Maccabees were, and neither of them think
otherwise of the King, than Magistrate only, (that is, Supreme Coercive
Governor) it is this which is here said, must be the Expedient to remove the
Bone from between them.

It is said in Scripture, That Kings and Queens shall be Nursing-Fathers and
Nursing-Mothers to the Church. As they are Fathers, they are Heads: As
Nursing-Fathers, it shows their Power is not Internal to the Church, but
External, as Divines speak, that is of another kind than that which is proper
to Spiritual Fathers, the Pastors, or Christ's own Officers. The Authority of
Kings over the Church, is Objective, (they say, Circa Sacra) not Formal: That
is, it is Objectively Ecclesiastical, and Formally Civil. And as this is so, I
apprehend in like manner, that the Society of Christians in a Nation (as the
whole Nation are such) is Objectively a Church, and Formally a Kingdom, or
Commonwealth of Christians; and so may the Christian Magistrate be the
Constitutive Regent Part of it.

Well! But what Argument has the Doctor to prove that there is no necessity
for a National Church, to have a Constitutive Head, essential to it; that is
essential to it, not as the Church of Christ; but under a National
Consideration? He has no Argument, but brings another Instance, and that is of
the Catholic Church visible, which he says, has no Head neither. The Doctor
is miserably driven to the Wall, when he is driven hither. There was never any
Protestant doubted, but that Jesus Christ is the Head of the Catholic Church;
and if he be the Head of it as Universal, he must be the Head of it, whether
Visible or Invisible. But Christ is not (says he) a Visible Head. Poor! If
this were true, it is enough that he is the Head of those who are Visible: but
yet he is out even in this, for though Christ be not Caput Visum, he is Caput
Visibile. He is not seen on Earth, but he is seen in Heaven. Nay, he was seen
on Earth by Paul and Stephen, and will Appear as he is at the Great Day.

And what thinks the Doctor of Christ before his Ascension; was he Head then?
Nay, did not Christ while upon Earth give Laws for his Church, appoint
Officers, and Commission his Apostles to gather Christian Societies in the
World? And is not his Government over them, a Visible Ecclesiastical
Government, where the Officers are Visible, and the Members Visible; and is not
he the Head then of the Church Visible? Are not making Laws, and Appointing
Officers, the Rights of a Head?

When that Article was put in the Creed, I Believe the Catholic Church; I
would ask the Doctor, Whether this Distinction of Visible and Invisible was
used in the World? And if it was not, when it arose, it could not take off any
thing of Christ's Headship. When both Visible and Invisible were but one, he
must be Head of both. Again, there are some Learned Men deny a Catholic Church
Visible. The Doctor does hold it. And what if they should advance against him
this Argument? If there be no Catholic Visible Head, there is no Catholic
Church Visible. But there is no Catholic Visible Head. The Minor is the
Doctors, and the Major is to be denied of no other but the Doctor.

Let us proceed to the bottom. We have sounded the Doctors Invention; let us
try his Reason. There is no necessity of such a Head (says he) for a National
Consent is as sufficient to make a National Church, as an Universal Consent to
make a Catholic Church. This is the Doctors Reason. It is Consent alone makes
a Church or Society, though it has no Head. The Consent of a Nation makes a
National Church, the Consent of All Christians the Catholic Church, the
Consent of a Particular Company, a Particular Church or Congregation. This is
his bottom, and it is something, but exceeding rawly spoken.

Let us understand therefore, where there is a company of Persons, who have no
power one over another, that might receive mutual Advantage, if United to that
end; such a Company are called a Community. If they agree together for the
obtainment of that end, to come into an Order of Superiority and Inferiority,
that makes it a Society, or Political Body. If the end be for that good which
is only Temporal, it is called a Commonwealth: if for that which is Spiritual,
it is a Church. The Doctor now is to be asked, What Consent it is that he means?

If he means by his Consent, the Agreement which People make at first, when
they enter into Society, it is true, that their Consent is the Foundation: but
the Doctor here I hope does see that this Consent is for the having a Head, and
Government, and the pitching upon the Sort, or Manner of the Government they
would have; which Agreement is called the Constitution. It is not this Consent
therefore the Doctor should mean, which is not also applicable to the Catholic
Church (in which he Instances) whose Head and Government is not of Man's
Election, but of the Will of God only.

By the way for the National Church, It is true, that Particular Churches in a
Nation, being of Divine Appointment, the Pastors or Ministers who have the Rule
over their Flocks In Actu Primo, that is, the Right of Discipline and Censure,
may agree to a delegating that power In Actu Secundo, or the Exercise of it
(for Reasons of Prudence) to a Superintendent, called a Bishop, who shall be
Supervised by an Archbishop; and that the Archbishop, Bishops, and Clerks,
chosen out of themselves, met in a Convocation, shall have the Power of making
Laws, or Canons, by which they will be Governed. Upon such a Consent, as this
here appears a Political National Church in the Constitution, wherein is an
Ecclesiastical Formal Constitutive Regent Part, or Head over an Organical Body
for the Administration, and that founded upon the true Bottom, upon which all
rightly constituted Societies do stand, the Agreement of the Community. The
Regent Part here is placed not in One Person (which does not need) but in One
Corporation, or United Assembly, whereof the Archbishop is but a chief part,
as the Bishops are: and I would humbly ask Mr. Baxter what he thinks of it. For
as for the Doctor, I think not him a Competent Judge, not so much because he is
not versed in that sort of Study, as the other is; but because of his departure
from himself in the Prudentials of his Irenicum, and being thereby now engaged
to maintain the Government of our Church to be of Divine Right, he must not
receive this Notion, which, let it show him never so clear and firm a Ground to
build the same upon, does make it of Human Institution.

If by his consent, he means the consent of every Man in particular, to be of
such a Church or Society, it is true that a Man's consent does make him a
Member, so as without it he could be none: but the Church or Society, must be
supposed to be Formed before of the Ruling, and Ruled Part, and his Consent to
be a Member, is a consent to be Ruled, and to own such a Head, as well as to
enjoy the Benefits of such a Society. This Consent is the Condition upon which
he has right to be a Member, it is the Ratio Fundandi of his Membership, and
the Condition upon which the Ruler has Authority over him in particular (when
we suppose he may otherwise be at his own choice): but if a Man shall fancy
that this Consent does make a Church or Society, as the Form that Constitutes
it, as they must do, who suppose a Society to be Made, Formed, or Constituted,
by this Consent without a Head, or the necessity of one; it is such a raw,
injudicious, indigested Conception, as could have never once swum in the
Thoughts of so Learned a Person, if he had a faculty for beating out a Notion,
so good as he has for Books, and negligence toward others that endeavor it.

It is true, there is no Political Society, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical,
but there must be Consent and Union; but it is not this Consent, and Union only
makes it a Church or Commonwealth. A Vicinity may have Concord, nay a Herd;
and there is Consent in a Society in Fieri, not yet Organized, or Unformed.
There is something that gives the Name and Being, and makes a Society to be
that which it is, in specie different from others, which is not I say Consent,
but it is an Order of Superiority and Inferiority upon Consent, that does this;
and that is all one, as to be the Form that Constitutes the Society: And
Consequently, when I find the Doctor (being at last drawn to it) come to such a
Determination as this about the Point, that There is no necessity of a
Constitutive Head, because a National Consent makes a National Church, I must
pronounce it such a grave Nothing, such a speaking Nothing with Gravity, and
pretense of being Wiser too than his fellows, that if he do not come to be
ashamed before Mr. Baxter has done with him, or has reason to be so, I will be
exposed to shame my self for my speaking thus freely, plainly, and honestly, as
another person perhaps would not do.

The truth is, it is pity the Doctor did declare his Heart while he was Young
against the Divine Right of Episcopacy, seeing he has occasion now for another
Opinion. Whether out of Prudence or Conscience, whether for want of more Light
then, or more full Light now; it is God, and himself knows, and I Judge not.
But I do perceive this, that it has exposed him much, and that not only to
such a saucy Man as Mr. Alsop, to style him This Weathercock: but to such a
serious Man as Mr. Baxter; to drive him into such distress. For so long (I must
still say) as the Doctor is engaged to hold the Government of Episcopacy, as it
is exercised in the Church of England, to be of Divine Right; he must maintain
also her proper Constituting Officers to be of Christ's appointment, and then
find out a Constitutive Head of it, or he is gone. And seeing he cannot do
this, but is forced to grant there is no such Head, and that there is no need
of any, it is plain that his Cause is lost.

I will sum up my Answer again. The Doctor's Determination is, We deny the
necessity of any such Regent Part. For a National Consent is as sufficient to
make a National Church, as an Universal Consent to make a Catholic Church. It
is well he says, As Sufficient, because, That may excuse him something, if
neither of them be Sufficient, as it appears they are not without a Head. I
have distinguished therefore two Consents. A Consent that goes to the Making a
Society or Church; and a Consent for coming into the same, when it is Made. A
Consent that goes to the Constitution, and a Consent, that goes to put a Man
under the Administration. When the Doctor Argues from the Catholic, to a
National Church; that, As an Universal Consent makes the Catholic Church: So a
National Consent the National Church; he must not be understood to mean it of
the Former Consent, because there is no such Consent as that imaginable, in
regard to the Catholic Church. There can be no coming together possibly of the
Community of the whole Christian World, to agree to such a Constitution. The
Catholic Church is not made by the consent of men, but is of God's Ordination
altogether. Nor can he be understood of the Latter consent, because a consent
to be a Member of a Church or Society already Made, is not that consent which
goes to the Making it.

A consent to be a Christian, or of the Church Catholic, is to consent to have
Christ for my Lord and Head. But how a consent to have Christ for ones Head,
should prove that Consent makes a Church without a Head, is a reasoning I am
yet to understand. For the former consent, there is here none of it: And from
the latter, there can be no Argument.

Again, The Catholic Church Visible in its Nature, can never be Organical. It
has a Head, and all the Particular Churches in the Earth, are the parts of it.
Nay, there were at first, Universal Officers, gifted with proper Gifts, as the
Gifts of Tongues, suitable to such an Office: But these were only to gather
Particular Churches throughout the World; and it never was the design of the
Head, that there should be a Form of Polity introduced into an Ecumenical
Society, that by the Organs of Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs, General
Councils, and a Pope, a Catholic Visible Government should be Administered so,
as to make the whole Earth a Political Church. And consequently, the Doctors
Arguing from the Catholic to a National Church, cannot be good. Not only
because there is no such Constitution as this by consent imaginable (which I
shall say principally) as to the Catholic Church (The True Head of this Church
being not chosen by Man's consent, and the False Head, I hope, we are never
like to choose): But because, upon supposition that the Doctors Consent (some
way or other as he means) did make it, he must suppose this Universal Church,
as such, to be on Earth, a complete Organized Body, or he must make the
National Church an In-organical Body; and by either way he drops his Cause.

I do now wonder therefore at the Doctor, what these first Apprehensions of
something indeed, he knew not what, in his mind, should mean. How a man, whose
Parts are so great, should be so slender in his Reasonings; and why he should
undertake the Resolution of such a Point, as he is no body at, at all.

The Doctor certainly has no reason therefore, to insult over any body, or
contemn any, and much less to Pity Mr. Baxter; which Pity, by interpretation,
is Slight. Mr. Baxter is a man that is not to be Pityed, nor indeed to be
Envied; for we usually don't aspire to be equal to Singular persons. The Doctor
has his Excellencies other ways, but he has not Mr. Baxter's. The Doctor's
Soul is made of Freestone, you shall have from him Polished Learning; Mr.
Baxter's is made of Flint, you shall have from him Acute Truth. It is the
Flint, not the Freestone, that strikes Light. A quick Apprehension; a d^ep
Judgment, a vast Invention; Exquisite Notion. A Pen consequently, that is but
turning the cock, and it will run at any time a Sermon full, or a Book full, as
he has Occasion. There is a Book I understand, of his now sending out, which
has been many a year in Study (He is usually too sudden); it is a Methodical
system of Divinity, fit for Students at the University. I believe, that many of
our Episcopal-Divines will speak lightly of it, but not read it; For my part,
through his having this one Chief Work, happily in Latin, I rejoice from my
heart, that Foreign Divines who are not yet Prejudiced, as Ours are, will come
to know him. Above all yet, Mr. Baxter is a Holy Man, who will be for ever
greater in his own Refusing a Bishopric, than the Doctor can be in Getting
one; if the present ill managing of this Cause does not preclude his having any.

And now, I could not Answer it to my self, if I should leave this Discourse
without returning to the Matter, to make some Improvement of it. From this
piece of Doctrine then before (wherein I wonder how the Doctor should stumble
so at noon day) that the Church of England is so far Erastian, that She will
not admit of Two Coordinate Powers with respect to the Church and the State of
this Nation, but does choose to Own and Acknowledge the KING to be the only
Head of Both; we have a Door opened for Union, which has hardly been thought
on by any of those Pious and Learned men, whose Souls heretofore have so much
breathed after it.

Archbishop Usher has left us his Model for an Accommodation: And it has been
upon the hearts generally of all Moderate Persons, that a reduction of such a
Government into our Church, as was in in the Primitive Times (when there was a
Consessus Presbyterorum joined with the Bishop in all his Acts of Ordination
and Jurisdiction) were the Way, and only Effectual Way to our True Happiness
and Reformation. Unto which, if one thing more might be Added, that is, If the
Common Prayer might be new Cast (it being fit, that such a Vessel for the
Sanctuary should be all of Pure Gold) so as the whole of it were composed of
Scripture Phrase altogether, leaving nothing at all liable any more to
Exception, unless the Imposition of a Form only (which I doubt not but is also
Justifiable by Scripture-Instances, as well as Sound Reason) it might go near
to put an end to all Dissension among the Sober and Peaceable of the Nation.

It is this I know is apt to recur into the Imaginations of Good Men, and
forasmuch as there was lately two Bills prepared, for Comprehension (or Uniting
the Protestants), and for Indulgence (or repealing the Penal Statutes); I shall
not I hope incur any blame if I apprehend that such Men who are most
considerate, and intent upon the Interest of God, in what they seek, do, or did
look upon either of such Bills, as no other than an English Interim,
preparative to this Higher Concord, and Union of the Bishop with his
Presbyters, according to the Primitive Pattern mentioned, as soon as more
mellow opportunity, and well advised Piety, should administer unto such farther
Perfection.

Nevertheless, in regard there is no Uniting of a Nation, can be supposed by
any Model, but such as is of H^man Contrivance; and there are Multitudes of
Holy, and Learned Men in this Kingdom, that do believe the way of their
Gathered Congregations, is after a higher Pattern, than this of Primitive
Episcopacy it self, i^ there were any hope of the return of it; it is manifest
that there is no Society which is National in England, could be formed on these
terms, because these Congregational Men can never recede from that which is of
Divine Appointment, for the sake of any Antiquity whatsoever. They do hold
Particular Churches to be of Christ's* Institution, and Diocesan of
Ecclesiastical Consent only, and under the Notion of Divine Right, it is Sin to
them, to Submit to any Bishop.

There is another Notion then, that must be advanced to take in these Good Men
of This Way, as well as those of the Parochial and Diocesan Way, into one
Political Body, for the making up the National Church of England, whereof the
King is Head, as I have been speaking: and that is by an Act of Parliament,
Legitimating these Meetings of the Nonconformists, so as to become thereby
immediately Parts of the Church, as National, no less than the Parochial
Assemblies. It was a good thing in the House of Commons, that they were about
to free many Innocent Men, from the danger of the Penal Statutes; but the
making such Meetings to be Legal, is a Design of another Nature, of a far
greater, nobler, and vast Importance.

The Nonconformist as well as Conformist, The Congregationalist as well as
Presbyterian, do acknowledge the King's Supremacy, and can take the Oath. The
one, as well as the other, therefore do own an External Regiment of the
Magistrate over their Churches, so as to be punishable by him* for any neglect
of the Gospel Order, which themselves profess; or for any Rules they make, or
Things they do, which are repugnant to the Peace of the Kingdom.

If it shall please the King consequently, to commit any part of that Authority
of his, which he has Circa Sacra, to be exercised by the Bishops, as
Ecclesiastical Magistrates under him, they can submit to a Visitation under
them, upon that account: though they acknowledge them not to be Christ's
Officers, bearing, or having any Internal Church Power from him, over them, or
any other, but their own Charge.

Upon which account it appears further, how the outward Dignity, and Grandeur
of the Bishop need not be Diminished, but enhaunced; and his Superintendency
extended over the Congregational, as well as the Parochial Churches: Provided
only, he will but keep within his Line; that is the Line of the King, and
meddle not with Christ's Jurisdiction. Neither will they envy him his Barony,
and sitting in the Parliament.

And if it should seem farther good here to a Parliament in one and the same
Act, that Legitimates such Meetings, to appoint that unto the two Clerks, which
are Elected by the Ministers of every Diocese; there should be one more chose
by the Congregationalists, likewise, for every Convocation; to join with them
in Consultation, that such Canons, and such only may be framed, as tend to the
propagation of Holiness and Peace, throughout all the Churches, as we^l
Congregational as Parochial; who does not see, how by this means, one Organ
more should be added to this great Political Society, for deriving an influence
from this Head, to these Parts of the Body, as well as others, which now seem
neglected, and to have no care taken of them.

And this brings into my mind, a Text of the Apostle. God has tempered the
Body together, having given abundant Honor to that part which lacked: That
there should be no Schism in the Body, but that the Members should have the
same care of one another. From which Text (if I may go a little about, to come
the nearer home) we may understand where the Core of that Evil we call Schism,
does lie; and that is mainly in the Want of that Love, and that Care which the
Members owe one to another. It will follow, that whosoever they be, whether
Conformist or Nonconformist, who do care least for the Concord, and Edification
of the whole Body; those are like to be found most Guilty of that Sin in the
Sight of God.

The Nonconformist Minister does often come to the Parish Church, but the
Conformist Minister comes never to his Meeting; and, Which then of the Two, is
the greater Separatist?

The Meetings of the one, and of the other, as they are Particular Churches,
are Churches of Christ, and Parts of the Universal, and so of Divine, through
Quatenus Parochial, of Human Institution. They both agree in the same Doctrine,
and the same Sacraments. They have one God, one Hope of our Calling, one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism. They differ something indeed in Opinion about the
Church, as to the external Constitution, and Discipline of it, and about some
Rites and Practices, which makes them go into distinct Congregations. But is
their going only to two Meetings enough to make Both, or Either of them, to be
Guilty of this Sin of Schism?

Separation I take it, in its self, simply considered, is neither Good nor
Evil; and there must be something that makes such a Separation to be Sinful, or
else it is not to be accounted Schism. If a Man shall Separate from the Parish
Church, upon the persuasion that those Churches are no true Churches, I take
such a Separation to be a high breach of Charity, which must therefore render
it Sinful, and Consequently Schism. If any shall Separate out of Pride,
Contention, or any the like Sinful Cause, or to any Sinful End, as Worldly Gain
(for to some, Gain is Godliness), or Vain Glory: this will make such a
Separation to be still Sinful, and so Schism.

It were the part then of such a Convocation before mentioned, that is, of
Ministers consisting of both sorts, to be sure to agree upon this, That,
Neither Church (or any Members of Either) shall Unchurch one another: and, That
no Man should depart from the One Church to the Other, but upon a sufficient
peaceable Reason, under the pain of Ecclesiastical Censure.

They should not permit any person unlearned, till come to very grave Years
(which are past Heat and Ostentation) to Exercise in these Meetings: They
should decree the Doors of such Meetings to be kept open, that the Magistrate
may be secure against Sedition.

They should determine many things of such a Nature; but especially, that when
a Man has his choice to be of what Congregation he will, in regard to Fixed
Communion, as he finds it most conducive to his Souls Edification; yet should
he be allowed, and enjoined to come Occasionally also to the Parish* Meetings
(so far as he can in point of Conscience), for the testifying his Union with
the Body, as the Church is National in this Kingdom. And I would have persons
likewise, who come for their Stated Worship to the Parish Church, to go
sometimes to the Meetings also without scruple, by the way of Occasional
Communion.

I will here deliver my own Soul. I know that the Laws of the Magistrate that
are Good, do Bind the Conscience: but there are two Cases that Loose a Man from
Obedience. One is, When that which is Commanded, is against his Conscience: and
the Other is, When that which is Commanded, is Superseded by a Duty of greater
concernment. I cannot say for my part, that to go to Church, and hear
Common Prayer, is against my Conscience; though a thorough Conformity in all
things, on the Ministers part, is like still to be so; seeing the Doctor
himself does shrink from a Defense of the Lawfulness of That: but this I can
say, that when it is my duty to go to Church, and my duty also to go Preach
(supposing I am called to one of these Meetings), the leaving undone that Duty,
which is the Less, for the doing the Other that cannot be done otherwise, is no
Sin, or Evil, as I am persuaded in my Judgment. And it is upon the Plea of the
Greater Duty, that the Peaceable Design does stand.

I know well how my Brethren state Their Case, They will have going to Their
Meetings, to be for their Fixed Communion; and allow Occasional Communion with
the Parish Church, to defend themselves from Schism: but I, for my part must
confess, that I see not, and cannot see my Defense to be so Safe, unless I take
the Parish Assembly (where I have convenience) for my Fixed Communion, and my
Preaching in the Meetings, and the Peoples going to them, to be Occasional
only, for our Greater or Farther Edification. The Doctor therefore should
indeed have taken particular Notice of this, and Providing only against such
Preaching to be at that time, when Public Authority requires the General
Attendance otherwhere, he should, by giving an Approbation to such a State of
Our Cause, have consulted his Own, both with more Judgment, and with more
Moderation, then for ought I see he has done, or was able to do.

Indeed if the Scene were altered, I need not be so wary. If these Separate
Assemblies were made Legal, the Schism presently, in reference to the National
Church were at an End. Schism is a Separation from that Church, whereof we
ought, or are bound to be Members: If the Supreme Authority then loose our
Obligation to the Parish Meeting, so that we are bound no longer, the Iniquity
upon that account, is not to be Found, and the Schism gone. It is one Act of
Parliament would give a full Answer, to all Men's Arguments.

In the mean time, the Non-conformists I know, have other Pleas besides One for
what they do. They think themselves bound in Conscience to Meet, and Preach,
and account it Serving God, and Doing their Duty. The Doctor and others call it
Sin and Wickedness. When I Hear such Sayings therefore, and Read such Books, I
may still bear Reverence to the Persons, but I do not in my Heart, care one
Penny for what they say; for, there is a Conscience within quite above such
Words. They may cry, This is Schism; There never was such Horrible Schism, as
this Practice, heard of, before in the Christian World says one very serious
Author, whom I name not: but I am not moved for all that. I cannot think a
Nonconformist Meeting such a Horrible Creature (considering how our case in
England now stands) as these Churchmen generally would make it. The great Bear
(I must count still) has been lead so long about the Streets, that the very
Children are no longer afraid of it.

Not but I am sensible of the dangerous consequence into which our Divisions
may bring us; but who can help it? Who is the Cause of them? Who is in Fault,
is the Question. Who is it can Remedy these Terms imposed on us as necessary to
Communion? The Nonconformist has no Conscience of Sin upon him in the thing;
and if he cannot have Peace with his Brethren of the Church, upon any terms but
Full Conforming, it is God must be the Judge, and the Bishop and Presbyterian,
the Doctor and Mr. Baxter, shall know which of them it is, that are to Blame at
the Great Day. And wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my
servant Moses?

The Doctor had no Need to lay out his Parts upon such a Design as that he has
under his hands: Nor has he Reason (I must inculcate) to Despise or Scorn, no
nor to Slight, or Neglect any body, though the Meanest person.

There is a late Reverend Conformist (for so I take him to be) who in a certain
Book, Entitled, Liberty of Conscience, in its order to Universal Peace, has
deserved better of us. I suppose (says he) there is a Society, or Societies of
Christians, that hold Christ the Head, and the great points of Union; but
refuse to Ioyn in such Opinion or Practice, as they conceive not Allowable by
the Word of God; nor can they, that require their Compliance, pretend on their
part, that the things are Absolute Necessary to make a Member of the Body of
Christ: In this case, I say, he is only the Schismatic that has not a Love,
that has no Sympathy with the Body; and therefore, if neither has, they must
be both Schismatics. I should not fill so much room with a Quotation, but that
I am taken with the Genius of the Writer. He is a man quite Unknown to me, but
he has a fine Spirit, and his Book savours of it: That is, so Generous, so
Candid, so Benign toward the Dissenters; as the temper is quite contrary, in
the Authors, of the Friendly Debate, the Ecclesiastical Polity, and the
Unreasonableness of Separation.

I am concerned, I must needs say, that I put these three Names together; Not
that the Authors of either of the first Books, are men of less bright Parts, or
that the Books have less Excellency of their kind, in them, than the last, but
because of the reason, why I do it. For I must confess, it is a matter of real
Offense to me, that a man who is so Learned a man, so Honored a man throughout
the Nation, should prove a Proud man, a Disdainful, Contemptuous person; Which
Temper, if it be Indulged, is so un-endurable by God and Man, that it will hurl
any one into the dust: And I cannot do any better Service in the Earth to this
otherwise very Worthy and Excellent Doctor, than to contribute the best I can
to my utmost, for bringing him to some Ingenuous Sense and Amendment of it. And
so I leave him to the World, to judge who is most fit to be Pityed, the Doctor
himself, or Mr. Baxter. Thou shall not Hate thy Brother in thy Heart, but thou
shall in any wife Rebuke him, and not suffer Sin upon him.

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. Line 11. in some of the Copies the word Last is put for First. p. 26.
l. 3. for shall read still. p. 27. l. 18. for own read once.


