PEACEABLE DISQUISITIONS. Which Treat Of The Natural and Spiritual Man.
Preaching with the Demonstration of the Spirit. Praying by the Spirit.
Assurance. The Arminian Grace. Possibility of Heathens Salvation. The
reconciliation of Paul and James The Imputation of Christ's Righteousness; with
other Incident Matters.
In some Animadversions On a Discourse writ against Dr. OWEN's Book of the Holy
Spirit.

By JOHN HUMFREY.

Doing nothing by Partiality.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Three Crowns and Bible, the lower
end of Cheapside. 1678.

Peaceable Disquisitions.
CHAP. I.
Of the right understanding of the Apostles Natural and Spiritual man, and of
Preaching with the Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power.

HAving met with a Book entitled, A discourse concerning the operations of the
Holy Spirit, in confutation of Dr. Owen upon that Subject, I cannot but be
tempted to make some Animadversions upon it, whether out of consent to the
Author in many things, or dissent in others: for a Resentment to see how
nothing almost of this Doctor's can come abroad (though in matters only
practical, and not polemical) but there is a generation of men upon the wing
ready to fly upon it, as if they were never satisfied unless they could render
that worthy person quite useless to the Church in all his Labors, is enough to
put me upon it.

I do acknowledge that this fresh Antagonist of his does appear to me to be a
man of very smart abilities, and of a masculine style, regarding his
conceptions without affectation of words, for which I value him, and I am
beholding to him for the pleasure which he has given me in the liberality of
his notions: yet do I think really that he and his consorts, such as the
Author of the Ecclesiastical Polity, and the like, are to be blamed for two
things.

The one is, their Immorality (as I judge of it) in treating such men as Doctor
Owen as they do, with so much slighting and contempt, and that without either
any regret of conscience for the injustice and wrong (which to speak unworthily
of the worthy must be) or due reflection upon their own mortality and
imperfections: And who are we, that enter into comparison?

The other is, their intrenchment on things sacred with the same boldness and
liberty of sarcasme as in things common; whereby in their endeavor to expose a
Party, and this Doctor to scorn, they do bring Religion it self into a lighter
estimation. I speak this chiefly in regard to some Books writ by way of
Dialogue; for I find this Gentleman restraining himself one place upon that
account.

I will suppose this Author to have studied Divinity about Ten years,
allotting his former life for other accomplishments, and the Dr. to have
studied these things Forty years: I do think now, if this Gentleman had had a
little misgiving in his mind at the consideration of this imparity, and
thereupon expressed, if not more Respect, yet some more Modesty toward the Dr.
it would have cast some better grace on his undertaking.

In this Preface, the Dr. belike having said in one of his Books, speaking to
the people, You are in a miserable condition, if you have all this while relied
upon the authority of men in heavenly things. This seems to imply (says the
Gentleman) that all men are in a state of damnation who rely upon the honesty
and wisdom of their Spiritual Guides in matters of Faith: But -- I hope some of
those do so firmly believe the Truth, upon the Testimony of God's Ministers, as
to live according to it; which if they do, God forhid that I should say they
are in a damnable condition. If I may take my conjecture from this less
virulent passage in the Preface, into what odious constructions the Drs. words
are like to be wiredrawn still throughout the Book; it will be to no purpose I
count for me to go about the redeeming the Dr. from abuses, which are so
multiplied upon him of all sorts, and on all occasions, as pleases these
Authors prejudicate minds: but to attend rather other matters, which shall
administer occasion for the striking of light, or the free pursuit and
improvement of Truth, that shall offer it self as we go along, to our mutual
edification.

This is my opinion, that Dr. Owen is a man of that eminent Learning, and all
sorts of Worth, both as a Sholar and Civil Gentleman, that he deserves other
Treatment from these men, and is above my Vindication.

In this Book, after the Preface, we have an Introduction, and Seven Chapters.

The Introduction presents us with a dissertation about one place of the
Apostle, which is much canvassed in the Arminian Controversy, and does
therefore require our first attendance, The words are these, The natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him:
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.

By the Natural man, this worthy person understands one that is governed only
by Reason: and by the Spiritual man, he understands him that receives and
judges of things by the Scriptures. The natural man now (says he) receives not
those Doctrines of Christianity, the truth whereof is not discoverable by
natural reason, because they are foolishness to him, in that they cannot be
proved hereby: and he cannot know them, because they are spiritually discerned,
that is, because they are made known only by Revelation, which the natural man
either has not, or rejects. See here an interpretation which looks grave and
solid as well as ingenious; but whether it be indeed the right or no, we are to
judge by the consistency of it with the place. In the twelfth verse before the
Text, the Apostle says, That we have received the Spirit of God, that we may
know the things, which he had before called the deep things of God: And in the
verse next after the Text he tells us, The spiritual man judges all things. It
is apparent then that the spiritual man in the one verse, and he that has
received the Spirit in the other, must be one: But the Revelation of the
Scriptures without us to judge of things by, and the Spirit of God within,
either inspiring these things, or operating on the mind to understand them, are
two things, and consequently, if the Spiritual man be him that has received
the Spirit within to know the things of God, it must not be him that has only
received the Scriptures, and rejects them not. Besides this, a man may receive
the Scriptures as the Revelation of God, and judge of Doctrines by it, and be
much skilled in the letter of it, as the Socinians are, and yet not receive the
great mystery thereof, God manifested in the flesh: And how does the spiritual
man judge of all things, if this be the spiritual man? Nay, how can it be said
of him, that he is judged of none, seeing as he judges all things by these
Scriptures, so is he judged of all, in what he holds, by the same?

There is another interpretation therefore (for it is another, and this Author
must not compound his with it) to be laid down in the second place. By the
natural man, which is (...), we may understand him who has only the (...), or
reasonable soul derived from Adam; and by the spiritual man him who has
received the (...), or that Spirit which is from Christ. The first man Adam was
made a living soul, the second Adam was made a quickening spirit. This Spirit,
as it was promised to be poured out upon men in the latter days, which was the
time of the New Testament; so do we find it given ordinarily at their Baptism
and Confirmation; as we read in the Acts, and as we find in this Epistle. The
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit with all. Where we
have this Spirit given, and that to every one: and the Manifestation of it,
(...). That manifestation possibly might be by some Shechinah, sometimes on the
heads of the baptized: but the certain meaning appears in the following verses,
to be by the miraculous gifts then poured out. Among which gifts, one of them
was the Discernment of mysteries, Spirits, that is, Doctrines; and so is the
Spirit given and received (we are to suppose) in this place. We have received
the Spirit of God, says the Text, to this effect, That we may know the things
which he has freely given us. The whole meaning then is thus, the (...), the
man who had not this Spirit then poured on him, could not discern those things
of the Spirit as others of them could, who had it, because these hidden things
were discoverable by that miraculous gift; and he having not the Gift to
discern them, must judge of them by natural reason only, and so they were
foolishness to him; when as to them who had it, they appeared the Power of God,
and Wisdom of God. And of this Spiritual man so interpreted, that is, the
inspired man, one that had the mind of Christ in the last verse, and that
received the Spirit in the tenth, for this effect, the discernment of these
things; it is easy to understand how he could judge all things, and be judged
of none, in regard that this insp^ration within could be discernable to himself
only; and so the text and context, and the whole chapter shall be made to
agree throughout, one verse with another. Nevertheless there is one
inconvenience this interpretation is liable to, as will make it to be refused
by most men, when we have said all we can. It is this, that if this be the
meaning, then must this whole place be applicable only to those Christians in
the Apostles days, and no Christian at this time can be concerned: That is, if
this be the sense, then is there no man now that has received the Spirit of
God, that he may know the things of God; no spiritual man now in the true sense
of this place, but all must be natural men only, as having not the Spirit
according to this interpretation; when yet the giving of the Spirit otherwhere,
and in the sense of other Texts, is a branch of the New Covenant; and he that
has not the Spirit of Christ (St. Paul says in another place) is none of his.

There is a third Interpretation therefore, that by the Natural man and
Spiritual man we are to understand the Unregenerate and Regenerate man, that
is, one that has not, and one that has received the Spirit to the ordinary
effects of it, which is illumination and sanctification. And this is the most
general Opinion and Interpretation which is received by our Divines, and so
taken up by Dr. Owen, however elaborately he has improved it: so little reason
has this Gentleman, or any others, to make any assault on him for that matter.
When the unre^^^^rate man then in the Text is said not (...) things of the
Spirit, or Doctrines of Christ, (...) he cannot (that is, morally cannot)
receive (...) meaning of our Divines in general is this, that (...) does not,
or cannot receive or discern them so as to savor them, or relish them; he does
not, or cannot embrace them in his heart, as good to him, or so, as to lead his
life according to them. In short, he cannot receive them so as to apply them.
And this is a Truth never to be gainsaid by this man; though which of the three
Interpretations is to be preferred, I pass not my own judgment.

Let us hear this Author's Objections. The Doctor (says he) does grant that
an unregenerate man may assent to the truth of the things of God; and if he can
assent to them, he can see a conformity in them to God's Attributes, and a
suitableness to the ends of the Gospel; and if he can see this, then will they
not appear foolishness to him; and consequently he can know them. Every one
will answer to this. There is a Speculative and a Practical knowledge. When our
Divines say, the unregenerate man cannot know these things, they understand it
of a Practical knowledge; he does know them special lively, but he has no
vital, experimental knowledge of them: And when the reason is given in the
Text, because they are spiritually discerned, we must expound spiritually, i.
e. by the assistance of God's Spirit, according to this third Interpretation.
The Natural man does not receive, know, or discern these things of God, as able
(I account) to apply them, because they are discerned only by a supernatural
assistance of the Holy Ghost; which they, having not, cannot do it. I will
answer farther. The Spirit may be given and received to diverse effects: on her
for illumination and conviction, or for conversion and sanctification. If the
Natural man, who is one without the Spirit, has not the Spirit at all to
illuminate and convince him, he believes not the Doctrines of Christ, though he
hears them. There is no man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy
Ghost; and while he in his heart believes them not, they are indeed to him but
foolishness; when if he has the Spirit but to enlighten and to convince him,
he may dogmatically receive them, going so far; and yet until he has the
Spirit also to convert him and sanctify him, he cannot discern them (I must
still say) so, as to apply them to his salvation.

Here are three Interpretations then proposed to them who please to strive for
mastery: I have but one Note more to add out of this Author. By being
spiritually discerned (says he, speaking of these things in the Text) is meant
their being known, understood, and judged of by the revelation and testimony of
the Spirit. Thus much is right, and must be agreed upon by all three
Interpretations; only their difference then also must be laid down. This
revelation or testimony of the Spirit therefore, is either external, or
internal. The first Opinion (which is this Author's) will have this revelation
external, and so shall he that has the Scriptures only, be accounted to have
the Spirit, and to discern these spiritual things. The other two Opinions will
have this testimony or revelation internal; so that without the Spirit's
operation within, the man is to be held a Natural man, and not to understand
these things. This internal revelation of the Spirit then, is either
extraordinary in the miraculous gifts and discernment of the Primitive times;
and the second Opinion is, that the place is to be understood of these gifts,
and such workings of the Spirit as do not belong now to ours: or it is ordinary
in the work of illumination and conversion, which still continue in the world:
and the third Opinion (which is the Drs.) rests in this, as of most concern to
us, and most easy of admission.

There is a fourth Interpretation. By the (...) may be understood the Sensual
man; and by the (...), the intellectual contemplative man. The Platonists do
distinguish their (...), and some of our Platonical Divines do favor this
Exposition. To confirm it, there is that Text in Jude may be produced, where
the (...) are so translated, sensual, not having the Spirit, with other places
where (...) and (...) are opposed. This Note by the way I take up however, that
(...) and (...), are indeed the same: But this interpretation I think too
extremely opposite to the first, which is our Authors; for these men's spiritual
man is no more than his natural man; and I am satisfied with him, that no man
of the highest attainment by contemplation can be able to find out any of these
things in the text which depend on Gods Sovereign Will, and can be discovered
only by his Spirit. For, As no man knows the things of a man (says the text)
save the spirit of a man which is in him; even so the things of God knows no
man but the Spirit of God. These things of God are (I say) the arbitrary
councils of God's will for the saving man by his grace in and through Jesus
Christ, which lies not within the scheam of Nature, and come not therefore
within the ken of humane understanding; unless they be made known to us either
by inspiration of them into our selves, or by the Revelation of them, through
the Spirit, by others.

There may be happily more Interpretations than these (for I consult not
Commentators): but if any be apt to mingle the two former into one, for
confutation of the third, because it is Dr. Owens, I do apprehend such, to
betray a precipitate disaffection, rather than a ponderous judgment. I know
that the first and second (this Authors, and the Friendly Debaters) may be made
use of to confute the third, which is the received interpretation, and the
Doctors: but so may the third and second be used to confute this Authors: and
yet that will neither make the first and second, nor the second and third to be
the same. That interpretation which gives such a sense of the Chapter as makes
the receiving the Spirit there applicable only to the Christians in the
Primitive times, cannot be the same with that which gives such a sense of it as
makes it applicable to Christians now, whether all of them, regenerate and
unregenerate who have but their Bibles, as this man will have it, or those only
who are partakers of it to the effect of Regeneration, according to Dr. Owen.

Let us look the Gentleman's Introduction now again over, and we shall find that
the braggery of that Interpretation which he has advanced to confute Dr. Owen,
does lie herein, that every one who has the Scriptures, and does not reject
them, must have the Spirit in the Text to discern the things of God, and the
Doctor must be a very proud man who does number himself among such, and will
allow the Regenerate only to know them. This must be shown by all means, what
an absurd person the Doctor is, who will have an almighty, irresistible, new
light brought into the soul by the Holy Ghost (that is, a work of illumination
on the mind, and conversion on the heart) to enable a man to discern these
things, when by the Spirit according to him we are to understand the outward
revelation of the Word only, which all have, to enable them to discern the same.

There is one notion for all this, which is much inculcated by him, that seems
to verge upon a mixture of the two first Interpretations, by setching in
something from the second into his, which upon the account of corroborating, is
but some confounding himself first, for confutation of the Doctor. The Apostle
(says he) proposes the demonstration of the Spirit, and of power to judge of
the truth of the Gospel; and he also proposes the comparing spiritual things
with spiritual to judge of the sense of the Doctrines of it. Again, Things that
are spiritually discerned are those which be discernable only by the revelation
of the Spirit. That is, by the testimony of the Spirit in miracles as to the
truth of them, and by comparing one divine revelation with another, as to the
meaning of them. I love the Author for this, because, I must confess, it seems
to me to be very neatly spoken; and yet it is but a tale when he has said it.
The Apostle distinguishes not the truth of the things of God in the Text and
the meaning of them. It Is he makes the distinction, and puts it on the Apostle,
as if he intended that which came not once into his mind: Nor does the Apostle
propose these two ways of discerning things spiritually, but himself proposes
them. I do not think the Apostle to be so double minded as to understand two
things by this one expression, spiritually discerned. If he intended by it that
the truth of the things revealed was discerned by the testimony of the Spirit
given thereunto by miracles, he intended not by it that the meaning of them is
discerned by the testimony of Scripture. And e contra, if he intended the
later, he meant not the former. The Apostle, I believe, had but one meaning,
though these two things be true asunder. There is no man can be sure that by
the demonstration of the Spirit in this Chapter, and the comparing spiritual
things with spiritual, the Apostle intended two things, or two ways of that
Spirits testimony: it is more likely that the later expression does de
industria expound the former. To wit, that when we find out any truth or
doctrine by comparing one Scripture with another, this is the demonstration of
the Spirit intended in the place; which I shall have occasion to suppose again
by and by, in regard to another Writer. If they are two sorts of testimony, no
man can be sure that he intended them both (I say still) by that one
explanation. And who can tell moreover whether the Apostle meant, by his
comparing spiritual things with spiritual, the comparing one inspiration with
another (which belongs to the second): or one Scripture with another, that is
the revelations of the New with those of the Old Testament (which is proper to
the first interpretation). The man who had a Revelation within must have the
truth of it and meaning both confirmed to him by that inspiration, so that to
distinguish of the truth and meaning of a doctrine inspired (that is as to
such) is certainly of no signification: And as for those who judge of any
doctrine by the Scriptures, they are but rightly to understand the meaning, and
they have the truth by that understanding. Where the Revelation or Doctrine is
divine, the truth and meaning are one another. As for the confirmation of
Christianity by miracles, and more particularly by the effusion of Gifts in the
Primitive times, it does not belong to this Author's, but the second
interpretation.

And from hence arises another objection against the Doctor, It is from the
demonstration of the Spirit we read of in the fourth verse, by which, this
quick Divine (I suppose) after the famous Author of that book entitled the
Friendly Debate, does understand the miraculous operation of the Spirit in
those times. When the Apostle preached the Gospel at first, the Holy Ghost fell
on the hearers, and they spoke with tongues, underhood mysteries, and could do
miracles. This was an undeniable testimony to the divinity of their Doctrine,
so that no man can Preach (out of doubt) with such demonstration now in our
days. If this then be the meaning of the Spirit in that verse, it must be the
meaning of it in the verses following (that is to judge tightly, and the defect
of this ready man is here, that he hit not on our intimation before).
Consequently, as this demonstration of the Spirit (if it be so) is by those
miraculous gifts: the receiving the Spirit there must be in those gifts, and
particularly the gift of discerning, so the spiritual man must be him that had
that gift, the Natural man him that had it not, whereby the one could judge of
all things (that is, those things in the Text), the other could not know them,
upon that account. And this is both against the Authors, and the Doctors
interpretation. The Doctor understands the Text so as no man can discern the
things of God spiritually, unless he be regenerate: this Gentleman to oppose
this, will have all understanding Christians be able to understand them
spiritually, because they have the revelation of the spirit in the Scriptures
(and why not demonstrate them so by the Spirit likewise); And yet is he
unhappily lead (I apprehend by the Friendly Debater) to give such an exposition
of one of the verses of this Chapter, as the rest being carried on accordingly,
his own interpretation and the Doctors both are quite gone: That is, when this
ingenious man has offered so handsome a sense of this Text as to render the
place gratefully applicable to all Christians, and in so much larger a capacity
than the Doctor (as the unregenerate are more than the regenerate) he does by
one inadvertant leading concession fall into theirs, as does make this place
proper only to the primitive times. Such need have they who are too forward in
charging others with inconsistencies, to look to themselves, that their own
writings be consistent, with a mature judgment, and the fear of God, in doing
to others as they would be done to by others.

I will therefore now turn to some words of the Friendly Debater himself, and
in the mean time make this stand. The revelation which a man has from without,
and the understanding accordingly this receiving the Spirit by having the
Scriptures, and judging all things by them, is one thing: and the revelation
which he has from within, and understanding the receiving the Spirit by the
miraculous gift of discernment, by which he judges of these things, so as
indeed he can be judged of none, is another. Either let this Author cleave to
his own Exposition, and forsake the other; or let him forsake his own, and
cleave to the other. And hereby shall all arguments gathered from this place of
Scripture, about any point in dispute in our days (such as are the doctrines
of free grace, and free will, and of the subject of this Authors Book, (the
operations of the holy Spirit) be laid to sleep, and give us no trouble.

The words I mean of the Friendly Debate, are these, because they afford us
some farther necessary matter.

The Assembly of Divines when they direct men how to perform their Ministry do
not speak so in their Directory as to be understood; since they cannot
prophecy, nor speak with tongues, nor demonstrate their doctrine by miracles,
as the Apostles did. I would gladly know what they mean by delivering the truth
in the demonstration of the Spirit and of power; I am apt to think it would
puzzle a new Assembly to tell us in plain words what they intended by that
phrase. Let me desire you not to use words without sense belonging to them, and
to entreat your Minister that he would hereafter forbear to pray to God, he may
speak so as no body now can hope to do. I wonder at you, that you should not
discern the Apostle speaks there of the wonderful work of the Holy Ghost. I
doubt your Minister is not enlightened, because he does not instruct you better
in the Scripture.

I do not here dislike this liberty of conception in so well-studied an
Interpreter of Scripture as I take that Writer to be, that when the Apostle
speaks of his own Preaching in the demonstration of the Spirit and of power he
accounts it to be understood of that confirmation of the Christian Doctrine by
the miraculous gifts as was in those times: yet when he proceeds to so
universal an adventure as to forbid every Minister to use that expression
henceforward any more in his prayer, the singularity offends.

In the Liturgy we have these words in a prayer. Almighty God who alone workest
great miracles, send down upon our Bishops and Curates the helpful Spirit of
thy gr^ace. This expression does allude to the mission of the Holy Ghost at
first on the Apostles, when there appeared eleven tongues and f^r on ea^h of
them; and the Church does pray here in this sense, that God who wrought that
great marvel on the Apostles in sending down his Spirit and gifts at first, in
that extraordinary manner and way as he did upon them for sitting them for
their Office, would be pleased to vouchsafe the grace and gifts of the same
Spirit on our present Ministers (whether superior or inferior) in that
ordinary manner and measure full, as is sit for such as do succeed them in that
great employment. I may presume (I doubt not) to say the same here, that
suppose the Apostles Preaching in the demonstration of the Spirit and of power
to lie only in those miraculous gifts or effects of the Holy Ghost now ceased,
the Minister while he prays to God for his blessing that he may preach so, is
to be understood in the like allusion and meaning: to wit, that as God enabled
the Apostles in their time to speak in the demonstration of the Spirit and of
power, whatsoever that was; so he would assist him in such a way and manner now
as is but suitable to the present work and his ordinary operation.

Thus much I say upon supposition of our second, and this Debaters
Interpretation: but I must confess I do not find my self convinced in the
reading the Text, that this interpretation is indubitable. (...) (at leas^ for
Dr. Owens, and his (...)) from the place against it.

1. I see not any thing that will restrain our sense (...) n^cessity to that
meaning, and we are not to be (...) in our allowances to the thoughts of
others, who keep to the analogy of faith without cogent reason. 2. The
demonstratiin of the Spirit and of power is opposed to the excellency of
speech, or enticing words of man's wisdom. But the Apostles speaking with
tongues or his miraculous gifts does not oppose the eloquence of man or
excellency of words, but rather agree with it. That which does in the most
direct sense oppose the excellency of speech and enticing words of man's wisdom,
is plain truth which the Spirit teaches. 3. The Apostle proceeding on in the
Chapter speaks not of himself only, but of the whole Church. Now we have
received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we
might know the things which are freely given to us of God. That which all the
faithful do know by the Spirit as well as the Apostles, cannot be miraculous or
extraordinary. Such is the demonstration here. Or thus, That which is common to
all the faithful, and not peculiar to the Apostles and primitive times, or to
any particular person, cannot be miraculous or extraordinary. Such is the
receiving the Spirit here, and consequently the demonstration of it. 4. Those
things the Holy Ghost teaches a man by comparing one thing with another, as
spiritual things with Spirituals, which is by way of study and discursive
reason, are not demonstrated in a way miraculous and extraordinary, belonging
only to the Apostles and not other Ministers of Christ: But such was the
Apostles speaking here, Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's
wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things
with spiritual. 5. The following comparison between the natural man and the
spiritual man, that one receives or relishes not the things of God as
disagreeing to his judgment, and the other does, seems more aptly to be
understood as it is ordinarily of the regenerate and unregenerate, than of the
extraordinarily inspired only, unto which this most curious Interpreters
thoughts must lead him. 6. In the last place, I humbly offer an interpretation
of this expression, which if it be not the very meaning of the Text, as much of
that which is urged here seems to attest: yet will it be sufficient (I hope) to
justify our Prelates, Universities, Doctors, with the most of the Ministers of
the Church, as well as the Assembly, and the more plain and honest meaning
Country-Preachers in their using the same so ordinarily as they do in their
prayers. It is this: To speak in the demonstration of the Spirit is to deliver
the very truth of Scripture, or the plain sense of the Spirit in Scripture, in
opposition to humane conceit or invention: and to speak so is to speak in
Power, because a man may expect that assistance of the Holy Ghost to accompany
such Preaching which he cannot upon other.
The Preaching of the Cross is to them that perish foolishness, but unto us
which are saved it is the power of God. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes.
Ye received it not as the word of men, but as it is in truth the word of God.
The receiving the word as the word of God and not of man, is the receiving it
in power, and the preaching it accordingly so, is the preaching it in power;
and what that power is does follow, Which effectually works in you that
believe. Our Gospel came unto you not in word only, but also in power and in
the Holy Ghost. This is my Covenant with them, My Spirit which is upon thee,
and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
and of thy seed, for ever.

CHAP. II.
Of the Substance or Contents of the Authors four first Chapters, wherein I
make my self concerned but little farther.

I Return to the Doctors Opposer, and I come now from his Introduction to his
Book. Of this Book there are two parts. The first is to show us what the
Scriptures hold forth concerning the Spirits operations. The second is to
confute many pernicious Doctrines of Dr. Owen. The first and second both is
indeed to do this: but the second shall do it all together. And this part he
has reserved, I suppose, to come out hereafter.

The first part then having this subject, The Spirits Operations, does contain
seven Chapters.

In his first Chapter he explains to us what he means by the Spirit, and by its
Operations. The word Spirit (says he) signifies three things. The Mind, the
Temper of the mind, the Holy Ghost, and he understands it of the last. I have
two things to say here. The one is, as to his second signification: The temper
or disposition of the Mind, is either of Nature only, and belongs to the Spirit
of man within him; or of Grace, and belongs to the Spirit of God, that works
it. Of this Temper, the Author must be understood to speak, when he speaks of
the Spirit of Faith, Fear and Love. The other is, that there are more
significations of the word Spirit than these, which himself knows. Every spirit
which confesses seth Christ, in John, is (I think) as much as every Doctrine.
Which by the way does put me in mind to say thus much, that when this Author
comes to speak of things which are common heads, and only require a grave and
comprehensive Divine to marshal them, he does methinks appear to me so lank, as
I cannot tell well whether that which he says be solid or no, because I am
sure it is not full: though when he falls upon several particular things, he
seems to look through them well. By the operations of the Spirit he understands
(and defines them) those which are on the mind, to cause certain qualities,
promised in the Gospel, and continued in all ages. I have two things therefore
to say here likewise. One is, that though this were never so much too short,
there is no body in the main of what is said, is like to contradict him. Dr.
Owen by the Spirit understands the Holy Ghost, as he does; and by the
Operations of it, what he does. And why then will he fall foul on the Dr.? When
he agrees with him in the substance, what need is there he should pursue a flea
in the circumstances of words only, or variety of expression? Another is, that
where he excepts at the Doctor for alluding in his words to some Texts that
speak of miraculous gifts, and so cannot be applied to us, and also for a
critical note (he had before) on the Hebrew word [put on him] Isa. 42.1. from
whence he collects that in Gods giving us the effects of his Spirit, the Spirit
it self is also given, I will compound with this Author. The Doctor shall
submit his critical note to the Spirit of the Prophets, and this man shall let
the Doctor speak but the same things by way of allusion to Scripture (whether
they be proved thereby or not), which other Divines do speak and affirm
ordinarily without that allusion.

In his second Chapter he shows us what these effects are, for the producing of
which, the holy Spirit is given; which he undertakes to do here from that Text,
Luke 11.13. where, After two parables of the man asking three Loaves for his
Friend, and of a Son asking Bread of a Father, our Savior tells us, that God
will give his holy Spirit to those that ask him. From hence he gathers that the
effects for which God gives his Spirit are such as are needful, because it is
Bread the Son and the Friend asks: and profitable, because a Fish and Egg also
is given. Here he tells, that our need is to be measured by the end; That the
end is our salvation. Consequently, the Spirits operations on the mind are to
produce all those effects as are necessary to eternal life. These are Faith,
Knowledge; All Virtue or graces which make us practical Christians; and
Perseverance. Here are his needful effects: then his profitable, and not
necessary, are degrees of Goodness, which are more highly so; or degrees of
Knowledge, that are less profitable. Here he discourses whether God does give
the Spirit for these things profitable upon our asking; and tells us, God may
give us things better or more suitable, and so deny them. Then he shows us how
the Spirit is prayed for in the Lords prayer, because when we ask for any grace
or virtue, we ask for him to work it. In the whole then of this Chapter we have
nothing against the Doctor, or the Doctor against him, but a good Sermon I
suppose we have, which he might have preached somewhere, and adapts it to this
occasion; which makes it look (though well, yet) feat, and unlike a beaten
Divine; who in showing what the effects of Gods Spirit are, would have cast
them into some proper and fuller order, and then proved them by Scripture, and
quite let alone this Sermon.

His third Chapter is about Regeneration, which he makes room for by an
Objection, that this will be thought but a lame account of those qualifications
that are needful to salvation* seeing one thing most necessary thereunto is
omitted, and that is Regeneration. And here then must Regeneration be brought
in and shown us, that it is not such a thing as Dr. Owen makes it, but is
comprised in his Moral graces and virtues. Regeneration then as a state (he
defines it) is to become a sincere Disciple of Jesus Christ. And here, though
one might well require a little more accuracy in a definition, there is no body
like to differ with him upon the matter. The Doctor may use other terms and
expressions, and he uses these, but they both intend the same thing. This is
certain, He that does righteousness is born of God. The Doctor belike has
said, that Regeneration is a proper Term, and he will prove it to be
metaphorical. Be it so. The Doctor must be heartily understood then, that he
means, it is a proper metaphor. To wit, that there is such a secret and
powerful work of the soul signified thereby, as does bring in a new disposion
into the inner man, as well as reforms the outward life, which is, that only in
effect he contends for. Let them grant (says the Doctor) that their Moral
reformation of life does proceed from a Spiritual reformation of our nature,
the difference will be at an end. And what says this Author? He answers. This
difference is at an end before it began, for we have always granted it. And
why is the difference up then, that has no beginning or cause for it? The
Doctor is perhaps too warm in the allusion, but the meaning is acknowledged the
same with his, who is as it were quite cool and off from it. There is indeed
one point as to the manner of the Spirits operation, wherein these two
Champions will differ, but that belongs to another Chapter. Here he speaks of
Regeneration only as a state, and therefore I pray let him be quiet yet a
while, till he comes thither.

In his fourth Chapter he lays down the several graces of the holy Spirit;
which having done once before, I cannot apprehend it to be momentous in his
making two Chapters of it. These graces then again are Faith, Teachableness in
order to it, All Christian virtues, The improvement of them, Progress in them,
Perseverance to the end. To this we oppose nothing, and there is no dissension
with the Doctor. The Doctor (or another) perhaps would have marshalled these
things otherwise: but that all these are the operations of Gods Spirit, or such
effects for which the Holy Ghost is to be implored, is beyond dispute amongst
us. What he has thrust in here upon that subject of Gods dwelling in good men,
I take to be another excellent good Sermon.

CHAP. III.
Of Assuranee and praying by the Spirit (the subject of his fifth Chapter) with
indifferency whether it be by a Form, or conceived Prayer.

I Come to his fifth Chapter, which is to show us what effects we are not to
expect from the Spirit, having shown before what effects (as he reckons them)
are promised by it. And there are three pretended gifts (he says) which are
none of these effects, and so may not be hoped or prayed for upon that account.
Immediate Revelation of the sense of any Scripture; Absolute assurance of our
particular election; and the dictates of Extempore prayer.

These are three things belike he designs to have a sling at, which he may do,
but I must tell him in the way (whether any thing of this kind may be expected
from the holy Spirit or not) I am not satisfied with his argument, or the way
of his bringing it about, that the effects for which we are to pray to God to
give us his Spirit, are only things needful, and therefore we may not expect
his help in extemporary prayer, and these two other matters. This indeed may be
argued from the Parables in the context, that the gift it self of the Spirit is
a thing needful. A gift which next to Gods giving his Son is the greatest and
most necessary to mankind; for as Christ was given for our Redemption, the
Spirit is, and must be given for the Application. But that the effects of the
Spirit being given should be confined by him to these only he mentions, or such
only as he can fetch Scripture for (unless he could bring Scripture also to say
there are no more), is such reasoning as before a year is gone over his head,
may give him occasion to believe that some things may seem strong in a Sermon,
that are not fit for a Book that must undergo a discussion.

I do not think he has spoken this as a close Polemical Divine, nor yet that
he has laid down the method of those benefits which we have from the Holy
Spirit, as a Comprehensive Preacher: For when the Holy Ghost is not only our
Sanctifier, but Comforter, and promised and sent to the Church as the
Comforter, it is strange that the Consolations of the Spirit should be left out
in the draught of those effects, which we are to expect from him. And when the
Spirit is first given to a man to unite him to Christ, and this Union is the
primary effect of his having it, and by means hereof, all saving influences
from the Head is derived: this by another would not have been forgotten.

The Holy Ghost is given (I count) for our Sanctifier, our Comforter, and our
Guide. Regeneration is to be comprehended in Sanctification, as the beginning
of it, and Union is supposed to both. I cannot serve God without his grace, I
must therefore have the Spirit to Sanctify me. If I serve him, I must be
supported in his service, I must therefore have him to Comfort me. When I am
supported in my duty, I know not what uncertainties may befall me in all my
spiritual and temporal concernments in this life, and therefore I must have him
to Conduct me, and lead me in all my affairs, so as they may work together for
the best, which he has promised to those that love him. Under this head now of
the Spirits heavenly Guidance, are all those things that are good for us, and
not absolutely necessary, to be reduced; seeing we know not what to pray for as
we ought (as we shall have occasion farther to speak of that Text by and by)
but the Spirit helps us, that is, we know not in many things ( temporal, says
this Author, and I will say in spirituals too) what is best for us: and it is
the Spirit that is our Guide as to these things, and Intercessor for them: so
that, be it the true Sense of a place of Scripture, or Assurance, or assistance
of us in our Prayers, or any thing else that we would have, we are, under the
safe conduct of his word, and unperceptible motions, and with the resignation
of our wills unto him, (as our great disposer for all good), to set our selves
to our duty, and leave the issue to him. I will add, it were better that this
man never wrote this Book, than that in the promise of God's giving his Spirit
to us, we should be discouraged from praying to him, and trusting in him, for
our direction in all the concerns of our souls, and outward conditions; who is
the Comforter of the afflicted, the Sanctifier of all the faithful, and our
Guide unto death.

To his three things now in order.

For the first of them, it is manifest, that in the Primitive times one of the
miraculous gifts then given, was the gift of Interpretation; and there is no
body that I know does pretend to any of these wonderful gifts in our days. I am
sure this Author cannot charge any thing of this kind upon Doctor Owen, who is
a person of that industry and learning, as his excellency in this gift is well
known to come another way. As for these arguments then, that the thing is not
needful; and if profitable, that it is more profitable to our selves, and to
others, to get the sense of any Scripture by enquiry and study, than by
immediate Revelation (which if we could have it so, is as certainly false, as
that Gold is not so good as Brasss) they may be spared, seeing there need no
proof of this, that we are now to expect no Miracles from the Spirit of God.

For the second, there are two points about Assurance, which this Author does
confound; The one is, the assurance that a man is in a state of Grace; and the
other, an assurance of Salvation. That a man who is in a state of Grace can
never fall away sinally and perish (which is the Doctrine of Perseverance), is
a point of the Synod of Dort against the Arminians and Lutherans. Whether a man
may be assured that he is in a state of Grace or no, is a Point between
Protestants and Papists? For the former, Perseverance depends on special Grace,
and that on personal Election; and I perceive this Gentleman hangs his head at
that: but as for the latter, we may be in doubt what indeed his mind is. One
would think by his arguments at the beginning against Assurance, he should be
no Protestant, but he is; for we have his express words for it, If we be the
Children of God, it is certainly possible for us to be assured of it. I must
ask him then, is Assurance a good thing? St Paul had it, and St. John had it,
Hereby we know we are passed from death to life, -- and, By this we know, that
we know him -- If it be a thing then that is good, it must be an effect of
God's Spirit: and this is proved, The Spirit also bears witness with our
spirits -- This witness is our Assurance, and consequently it may be prayed for
according to the promise in Luke, as well as any other of the profitable
effects he has mentioned. Whether it be a thing needful, is a question not
needful, so long as it is good. It is an Egg, I hope, to argue with him, though
it be not Bread. The only difficulty here is, to state this Assurance. It is a
controversal point, and his one term Absolute will do little to the decision.
When our first Divines defined Faith by a Persuasion of special mercy, so that
without this assurance, they must think a man could not be saved, this was the
most dangerous extreme on one hand: and that no man at all without Revelation
(according to the Trent Doctors) can be assured that he is in God's favor, is
the extreme on the other. But for the stating this assurance aright, between
the Protestant and Papist, To be a certainty not of Faith, because the
Scripture gives no testimony to any particular person, but a certainty moral
(or of hope), which must be such as excludes doubting, that is, all sinful
doubting, though not fear, or all fear that is, the fear of diffidence or
distrust, but not the fear of pious solicitude, is a work requires from me more
deliberation, and more paper. This I will say only, that there is a neutral
truth in the most of these Controversies that must be found out, in regard both
to Practice as well as Theory, or we shall neither have our Consciences nor
Judgments well pacified in these matters.

For the third thing then I will take a little more room; for, as I have had,
and took an occasion before, to speak of Preaching by the Spirit, or with the
demonstration of it; so I think it also seasonable; suitable, and profitable to
speak of praying by the Spirit, unto which this Author himself, and much more
the Friendly Debater, has given such ample opportunity, I wish I might not
call it, in regard to man) good devout Christians, provocation. There is one
Text therefore in regard to this matter, as there was one in regard to the
other, that requires our more serious consideration. It is, Romans 8. 26, 27.
Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us,
with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that searches the hearts,
knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because be makes intercession for the
Saints, according to the will of God.

The Apostle speaking in the eighteenth Verse before the Text, and in the
twenty eight after it, about the afflictions of this life, which God's Children
endure, whereby they are conformed to Christ in sufferings, as they shall be in
glory, this ingenious Author does apprehend that the exposition of these words
is to be confined to that matter altogether. We know not what to pray for as we
ought. That is, we know not what is best for us in this mortal life, in regard
to these troubles, persecutions, or miseries, whereby God intends sometimes to
do us much good; and we are therefore to seek to him with submission to his
will in these things; having this encouragement in our hearts, that the Spirit
of God is our Guide (as I said before, where this Author left it out) to direct
us under all these Providence, and to be our Intercessor also to obtain for us
that which is like to prove best. He knows what that is, and stirs up in our
souls many earnest desires after it; which, seeing we cannot reach our selves,
these desires cannot be uttered by us; that is, are unutterable on that
account; but so long as our requests are put up by him in those desires, God,
who knows the mind of his own Spirit, hears these petitions, and grants those
very things which are best; that is, which he means: so that these things do,
and shall certainly work together for our good, as the Apostle says in the
place, so long as we love him,

This is in length the contents of that interpretation (and I suppose,
according to his mind) which he has sedulously proposed, both with authority
and dexterity enough, if he were but as tender withal of preserving that
support and warrantable expectation from the Holy Spirit, which we have ground
to take up in this place. I like well, of all that is expressed in regard to
afflictions, unto the illustration of which sense the Apostles own example (in
his praying himself to have his troubles, the thorn in the flesh, removed, and
God's seeing it best for him, rather to afford him his sufficient Grace) does
opportunely conduce: but I do not approve by no means the slaking down the
interpretation of these words to that matter only. And much less will I give
way to Doctor Hammond's translating the word (...), Misery: for seeing there is
twenty places perhaps where the word is taken in this sense, Infirmity, to one
where it is taken in the other for Affliction; I must hold it but right to give
it here (according to our Translations, English and Latin) its ordinary and
genuine signification.

There is a great deal of comfort in these dear words of the Text, that the
Spirit helps our infirmities. We are sensible with how many of them we are
encompassed, not in regard to the thiugs without us, so much as within us: and
if the weaknesses, frailty, shortnesses, imperfections, of our natures,
persons, abilities, tempers, conditions, be not provided for by the Divine
succor, we are undone. I look upon the man that will go to take away from me
the comfort of these words, and this place, in regard to my addresses unto God,
as him that is coming to pick my Lock, and take away my Treasure. I will not
suffer this man to rob me of my trust, in the conduct and assistance of God's
gracious good Spirit, in the very making and pouring out my Prayers for all the
good that he and Doctor Hammond can do me with both their Books. I do hate to
put the name of Formal men, or Formalists on any party; yet seeing some of all
parties are such, I cannot but declare that man to be a Formalist to me, who
shall offer to speak the least thing wilfully to damp the prayers of any the
humblest ones, or weakest ones, in whom the Spirit of God does dwell.

There is another interpretation then of these words, and of the matter
intended in them, that will carry it, I think from the former. The word
Likewise which ushers in the Text will carry it. When I consider the Context,
the words in Verse 28. following the Text does almost persuade me that the
matter this Author has proposed, may be intended; and I am pleased that it is
likely; but the word Likewise does import plainly, that the matter intended
must relate to the words before, and not to those that follow; and they carry
it (I say) otherwise. The Apostle therefore in this Chapter speaking of Gods
Children, and thinking presently of the evils they endure, does, for our
support upon that account, fall to telling us of the freedom we shall have in
another state; in comparison whereof, these things deserve not any reckoning.
This is in Verse 11. Of this state then in the verses following he treats, as
that which is expected of all the Creatures, and by Us, a state of liberty and
glory, which we hope for, though we see it not, and with patience wait for it,
in the Verses immediately foregoing. And then in this Text it follows, that
likewise we also through the Spirit pray for it. Likewise the Spirit also
helps our infirmities: Mark it, likewise, and also. This must hold the same
matter together in this, and the former Verses. For we know not what we should
pray for as we ought. What is that then, but we are not able in this life to
comprehend any thing to purpose of that state of glorious liberty whereof he
was speaking. We know not what we shall be, says St. John, but we shall be like
him. Things there be that are prepared for us, but what they are, neither has
the eye seen, nor ear heard, nor can the heart conceive truly of these things,
which yet we hope for, and so pray for, the Spirit exciting these desires in us
who knows them, and makes intercession by these groans or desires which are
unutterable, both in regard to our selves in that we know not the things of
Heaven, and cannot utter them; and in regard to the nature of the things which
are expressly called by the Apostle when he was ravished in his Spirit up
thither to see them, (...), things not possible to be uttered: And yet are they
prepared for us, though above our comprehension; and God who does above what we
are able to ask or think, and knows what is the mind of his own Spirit, will
grant them; because this Intercession is by his appointment, and we are to
support our hearts, that this time is coming, when not only all these miseries
shall have an end, but we shall see Gods end in them all, in making them work
for us, a far more exceeding weight of Glory.

Here are two interpretations then which I leave to the Reader; and he perhaps
may choose neither of them: but in both of them that objection which is obvious
from the Lord's Prayer is prevented. Christ has taught us what we are to pray
for, and yet does the Text tell us that we know not what we should pray for as
we ought. There are things in the Lord's Prayer which we are to pray for, and
know that we ought to pray for them, and do pray for them; yet do we know them
but in part; and we are more short in our knowing how to pray for them, as best
for us. When we pray for deliverance from evil, and temptation, that includes
our present troubles; and these are the things we know not, according to the
first Interpretation. When we pray that God's Kingdom may come, that includes
the things of heaven; and these are the things we know not, according to the
second Interpretation. That which cannot be denied in regard to these two
Petitions, must be acknowledged in all others under a like condition. There is
little reason for this Author then to pick a quarrel with Doctor Owen for
attributing too much to the assistance of God's Spirit, in the making our
Prayers (who is so very cautious to allow any thing but in regard to the matter
of them) when there is so much more included here in the Spirits praying for
us, and that for the things we know not; as it may make any man at a stand who
goes about to limit the Holy One almost at all, for fear of presuming on the
Ark of his imperceptible operations.

Having said this, I have but three or four notes more upon this Text, which
must not be waved. It is to be considered first, we have the Spirit put here
into the Office of Intercessor, and there is a practical case requires
satisfaction. Christ has promised again and again, that whatsoever we ask by
Faith in his name, according to his will, we shall have it. There is many a
good man now troubled at this, that he has prayed often, and not been heard.
It must be answered therefore upon this account, that whatsoever request we
make, or any one makes, with the qualifications expressed, it is, and must be put
up to God by the Holy Spirit; and though it be not answered according to our
mind, it is according to his, who makes intercession for us. A second note is
this, that though the Apostle be supposed to bring in these words, [ We know
not what we should pray for as we ought] with regard to the Context, it will
not follow from the instance of one or other of these particular matters to be
intended, that all others must be excluded; but rather, that the universal
matters of Prayer, so far as they are subject to the like condition, must be
certainly also concluded. Note in the third place, that though there does
appear some reason from the objection mentioned, for limiting these words, [ We
know not what to pray for] there is no reason for limitation of the first part
of the Text [ The Spirit helps our infirmities.] For when it is affirmed that
it is by reason of our infirmity that we know not what to pray for, it does not
follow that therefore that is all our infirmity. We have many more infirmities
to be helped than this, in making our Prayers. Note in the last place, that
though the groans unutterable in the Text be expounded in both these
interpretations, with regard to the matter prayed for, they may very likely be
better expounded with regard to these infirmities, to be helped: that is,
though we are such (many of us) as are so weak that we cannot utter our
requests, or frame our desires into petitions; yet by the Spirit we are
assisted some way, to put these small unutterable groans with his good motions
together, so as they are accepted in Heaven, It is not by reason of the
intensiveness or greatness, but because of their smallness (said Master
Perkins) that these groans are unutterable.

I do not think therefore that it is in this Authors power to divert that
favor which this Text does cast upon those Prayers which he calls ex tempore,
the Ancients ex pectore; feeing such Prayers do follow, or slow most genuinely
from the motions that are upon the soul; and which, so long as they are good,
we are to ascribe to the Holy Spirit. And when this is granted on all hands,
that he does excite our affections, who is there can say, what influence, or
how much, that work alone has, or must have, on our expressions? The Holy
Spirit being intimate to our souls, can affect us when we are not sensible of
it, and produce effects upon our minds in that manner as if they were merely
the effects of our own reasoning, says this very Author. And why then do such
able and good men (for such I hope they indeed are, and that they do not speak
what they do, as Scoffers) let such Discourses and Debates as these come from
them which carry a tendency in them to repress that devotion, that has in it,
or pretends at least, the most of warmth and enlargement of affection in this
duty, as if a coldness or beadishness in the performance was to be preferred as
more safe and wise, when Christ that has taught us to pray, does also exhort
us to fervency and importunity? I cannot tell what they would have by it,
unless it be that all should come in to the Liturgy, or else they should have
no other Prayers. But this is more than can be expected in conscience. The
circumstances of praying in a Book, or without, is not so material as that they
should be so earnest. I am a professed Neuter against extremes, and will apply
that saying of the Apostle, If we be besides our selves, it is to Godward; and
if we be sober, it is for your cause. And so having got over this one Text, I
will now present you my poor thoughts more closely on this subject, with
reference to Liturgical and Extempore Devotion.

There are four things here therefore to be distinguished and presented. The
Spirit of Prayer. The Gift of Prayer. Praying in the Spirit. Praying by it, or
with it.

The Spirit of Prayer I apprehend to be no other than the Spirit of Grace or
Regeneration, with the connotation of its operation on the soul, in regard to
this duty. There is no Christian born of God without this, whereby he cries
Abba Father; as no man born after the flesh without his breathing. There is no
holy thought, meditation, desire after God, or request that is acceptable to
him in Christ, but it is from this Spirit of Adoption or Prayer. It follows
then, that forasmuch as any gracious and regenerate man may use a Form if he
pleases, and some such have used a Form sometimes as well as Conceived Prayer,
that it is a conceit exceedingly extravagant, and in no wise to be approved, to
think that a Liturgy or use of a Form is inconsistent with the Spirit of
Prayer. Suppose we saw those holy men, Bradford, Rogers, Philpot, Saunders,
saying their Prayers out of the Psalter, and blessing God for the Book of King
Edward. I will pour upon the house of Judah and Jerusalem the Spirit of Prayer
and Supplication.

The Gift of Prayer I account to be a natural or acquired, not infused ability
or faculty of expressing the thoughts and affections with fluency or readiness
in Prayer. It does depend chiefly I think upon an aptness of memory, retaining
the sentences and very words of Scripture, when others can retain the sense
only; together with a warm fancy, and a tongue that is voluble. In short, it is
a ready utterance, which must be always distinguished from the former. I
remember a person, who was otherwise of large parts, filled with all present
matter for administering a word in season to the weary, who in praying sometimes
alone with me, I have observed to hum and hack so in his Prayer, that I never
heard any so unable to express himself in my life, who yet would use only
conceived Prayer; and in the mean while I have been so assured of the Grace of
God, and eminency of that Grace in the person, of that sincerity in his duty,
such an humbling under sin, fervency in his petitions, melting under the sense
of God's mercy and pardon; and in a word, a heart it self no less broken than
those words, that I cannot but be satisfied beyond doubt, for ever since, that
the Gift of Prayer is one thing, and the Spirit of Prayer is another.

Now forasmuch as the gifts which are administered to men by God's Spirit, are
bestowed for use, and the edification of the Church, if a Liturgy or form of
Prayer were imposed on the Clergy in opposition to that provision which God
has made and appointed for the good of his Church, that is, Gifts unto men for
the work of the Ministry, or if the Bishops would not suffer them to be
employed to the end they are given, I do not know any argument of so much
weight, and like to be prevailing with Religious people against Common Prayer
as this allegation, As every one has received the gift, even so minister the
same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold Grace of God. But we must
not judge so of our Superiors. The Churches imposing a Liturgy, and set forms
on the Minister is to be looked on as cumulative to his gifts, and not as
destructive to them. There is the gift of Prayer, as of Prudence and Knowledge
to Ministers, as they are single, and as they are in conjunction. These forms
of Prayer are the exercise of the mutual gifts of the Churches Pastors in
conjunction; and when this Common Service of theirs is performed in the Pew,
the Minister is lest to the use of his single gifts in the Pulpit, without any
prejudicing the one by the other. Indeed, if the Common Prayer be made a Napkin
to wrap up the Talents of any, I will not justify the abuse of that, which
has its use and commendation upon other reasons. And yet by the way, I do not
know moreover, whether all those Texts which speak of gifts for the Church, and
which argue power thereupon to profit with them, are not to be understood of
the Spirit in those times; so that when it was manifestly injurious to the Holy
Ghost himself then, to forbid the use of those Gifts to any, which he had
ministered to them to that end: it may not be so altogether, as to those natural
gifts and talents that men have now; which notwithstanding they are not to be
denied to be also from the Spirit, (seeing even Bezaleel and his fellows skill
in working in curious works, is attributed to him, and every good gift is said
to be of God). I question whether the person himself be either so engaged to
put them to that particular use, having them from nature to general service, or
that there does appear the like injury to God and the Church, in some restraint
on them, as there would be in the other. There are diversity of Gifts, but the
same Spirit.

Praying in the Spirit I apprehend to be praying with those qualifications
which are wrought in us by the Spirit, and prescribed by him in the word, to
make our Prayers acceptable to God. Praying in the Spirit (say Practical
Divines) consists not in a copiousness of words, but extent of affections. The
actuating of all does lie in the operation of the Spirit on our hearts in this
duty. We must pray also according to God's will, which is another qualification
in Prayer: and when a man does pray according to what the Spirit has directed
in the Word, he may be said very appositely to pray in the Spirit.

Two things there are then more particularly, wherein I will place this
operation. The one is, the Spirit does many times pitch the heart upon those
objects or things which are most fit for us to ask. The other is and then does
excite our desires, and enlarge our affections about the same. The Spirit also
helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought,
but the Spirit it self makes intercession for the Saints according to the will
of God. I will not doubt to quote this Text again for thus much. It is said
that Satan entered into Judas when he went to betray his Lord. And Satan moved
David to number the people. It appears from hence, that Satan puts evil
thoughts in the heart, and pitches them on objects he tempts them withal. The
Spirit of God doubtless does no less in the good actions which he stirs up in
Gods Saints, He puts good thoughts in the mind, and represents things to us
(says the Author of the Friendly Debate himself) more clearly than we could
make them by all our reasoning. I might perhaps cite something from this
Gentleman to suit with this, but I think the subject here too grave, to make
him my Authority. When the Spirit is said to help us (in the Text before
exagitated) to make our Prayers even about things our selves know not, and to
intercede for us therein according to the will of God, it cannot be imagined
but thus much must be allowed to that operation, whatsoever farther he does for
us. Now then when the Spirit does not only move the affections in relation to
the things the heart is upon in those groanings mentioned to be unutterable,
but pitches the heart upon these things, those very things or objects
themselves (sometimes at least) that are most suitable to our wants, which he
knows better than we: and most agreeable to God's will, whether we regard his
promises and word, or the will of his providence, and what he is minded to
accomplish for us, wh^^ he alone does know, and not we: it does seem that the
prescribing a set form to our prayers does indeed put some stint to one part of
this operation (I say i^ really seems so), which is the suggesting good
thoughts, or the good things themselves into our minds, or pitching our hearts
upon the things he knows best for every one when the Minister does not know it:
though it puts no stint to him in his operation on the affections, exciting or
enlarging them after those objects, or the petitions which the Church has
prescribed. And how far this will go for the preferring of Conceived Prayer
before a Form I leave to that learned and able Doctor of the Church, and this
ingenious person who is following him, to give judgment.

There are many reasons in regard to the Minister, if he has no Gift, or if he
have, and have not grace, least he be puffed up in the ostentation of it, and
of the Congregation under some considerations, why a set form is more eligible,
when in regard of the humbly godly, who are endowed with the Gist and Spirit
both: there is this reason from praying in the Spirit to be alleged for
conceived prayer (I must say, in the Pulpit) out of that Doctors own words
before named, as nothing for ought I know, can be put in balance against it;
for notwithstanding the severity of some reflections he has upon such as are
of that mind and practice, I do not see any reason at all why a fluent
expression, a raised voice, a zeal in the delivery, a melting soul touching
phrase out of Scripture, with newness and variety of the same, and the like
circumstances, which many times pierce the heart that is slat otherwise, and
has (...) of all we can to quicken it, should any way be derogatory to the
sound and wholesome requests otherwise which a man puts up to God in his
prayer^. And consequently, if such circumstances indeed as these which will
raise the affections are incident to conceived Prayer, which are not to a set
form, then has that worthy Doctor administered an effectual reason why the very
same material petitions or confessions of a Prayer are better oftentimes when
delivered extempore than in form, and consequently an argument for one above
the other, even while he is seeking occasion hereby to blast conceived Prayer.
And why indeed (let me ask) should not the Church be as ready to use those
Gifts which God has given unto any, to excite the people the more in their
Devotions, as well as they are to make use of Organs, and diversity of Voices
in their choosing Singing-men and Singing-boyes to that purpose? The same Psalm
in an Anthem has another operation on the heart of a devout Conformist out of
the mouth of a Choire, than it has in a private Parlour. And if a
Nonconformist does find the like experience as to an Extempore Prayer above
any Composure, why should that Doctor, or this person be any less pleased with
it? The use of a man's Gifts in prayer is but an Organ of God's making, a
warbling, and holy descant upon the plain requests of the heart, to affect it
the more with them: and an Organ is the use of those Gifts, as I may say, which
are of man's making, or which man has given to the Church, for the same end,
to wit, the enlivening our dull affections, while we are meditating, praying,
and praising the Almighty.

To return, we know that Christ bids his Disciples, when they were brought
before Magistrates, they should leave it to the Spirit to direct them what they
should speak, without solicitude for matter or words. It is a modest rule when
any thing extraordinary is promised to the Church, that it is to be expected at
first; but afterward we are to look only for what is ordinary. I believe that
such assistance as that but in an ordinary way and manner is always to be
expected by the godly with faith in all they are put upon for his glory: and
upon supposition of the Spirits suggesting sometimes the very objects into the
Ministers mind (in such a way as is agreeable to spiritual operation though we
are ignorant how) which he knows does befit the present frame of the
Congregation, How much more likely is the performance of the duty after these
motions, when there is a gift in the Minister to follow them, to affect the
hearts of all present, then the performance of it after a form of man, whether
of another, or his own composure.

This I must say with faithfulness (who am not for the rust of any Ministers
parts, seeing he has such continual occasion to use them), yet not without
these two or three cautions. The one is that in the prayers which the Church
has composed we may humbly conceive that the Spirit of God did pitch the
hearts of those who were to join in their gifts (or judgments) for the
composure, upon those objects or matter which is most agreeable to our public
Congregations, as it does the heart of any single Minister upon those things as
is most agreeable to his will for the present occasion. Another is, that if a
Minister has not the gift to express himself without study, and does therefore
take pains for his prayer as for his Preaching, having a gift perhaps upon his
pains and study (though none else) that does equal, if not excel his that has
the best without it, he may expect the same assistance on his study, that the
Spirit should help his infirmities as to the putting in his mind those things
which are most conducive for his people to receive, and most agreeable to his
will to give, as any other may, who has the readiest gift to follow his
present motions. The last is, that though a Minister therefore should take heed
of drying up his gifts by one constant form in the Pulpit where he has
liberty; yet if any do so I do hold that it is not a sufficient ground for his
people to run from him into separation; for though that will make his Ministry
the less comfortable, as the Ministry of one who has less gifts must be less
comfortable than one that has greater, yet the majus and minus does not vary
the species, and this reaches not to make the service unlawful. Besides, he who
prays with the largest gifts of prayer does but offer a stinted form (which is
said commonly) as to the hearers particular state, and the stinting of the
Object does not yet stint the Spirit however in his operation on the
affections. Praying always with all manner of prayer and supplications in the
Spirit.

Praying with the Spirit, or by it, in the last place is that we find in the
days of the Apostles when they had extraordinary administrations of the Spirit
in gifts that were miraculous, insomuch that they spoke with tongues and so
preached and prayed. Those that spoke (I apprehend) understood not themselves
what they delivered, but every one in whose tongue they spoke were edified, and
therefore we read of some that did interpret. Those were such it is like as had
skill in more tongues than their own, or else in case there were none such, the
fame miraculous power might enable some for the interpretation as others to
speak. Thus praying with the Spirit is opposed to praying with the
understanding: and the Apostle prefers praying with the understanding before
it. There is no person had cause therefore to brag of this, if he had it; and
there is none of any sect among us that pretend to it. And so I think (having
said what I intended otherwise), that neither the Gentleman, nor I, need to be
put to any more words about it. I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray
with the understanding also.

CHAP. IV.
Of the closer judgment of the Author (in his sixth Chapter) which is
Arminian; and of Election, Free Will, and Grace, upon account of his opinion;
Of the salvability of Heathen, and other incidental matters.

I Descend to his sixth Chapter, which is to show us, who those are to whom the
Spirit is promised and given. These persons are Believers, who yet are not holy
persous. This is his Notion. They cannot be holy till they have the Spirit to
sanctify them, and yet they must believe and pray because that is the
condition upon which the Spirit is given. The holy Spirit consequently and his
special grace is necessary to Good works or sanctification: but Believing is
antecedent to it, or must be in a man's power, before it.

I must confess I am made sensible of the sagacity of this Author upon my
reading this Chapter, which I did not heed so much before, and I perceive which
way his mind is hankering. It was this very light which carried St. Augustine
so much in his first writings. The doctrine of Pelagius at the first broaching,
consisted mainly in this point, that God did give his grace according to men's
merits. This doctrine seemed to the Father too arrogant for man, and derogatory
to God. That the grace of God and eternal life is given to some, and not to
others, is manifest. That the reason must be in regard of something that one
man does and not another, seemed to him undeniable. That good works should be
it, appears against the Scripture, not by works lest any man should boast.
Besides, if a man should be allowed to be able to do any good works to merit
Gods grace by the strength of nature, what need were there of prayer for aid
from God or the help of his Spirit? Man should have need of industry here, not
prayer. If not works then, what must it be but that which is so often
contradistinguished to works, and that is Faith? For the Scripture that says
not of Works but of Grace, does say likewise, It is of faith that it may be of
Grace. Here then is that which must be in man's power. That a man could not do
good works without grace St. Austine always asserted, for this was his meaning
when he says that good works do not preceed but follow justification,
understanding by justifying, the making a man just by inherent grace, as the
Schools do after him. But that a man can believe if he will by the use of his
natural faculties only, is what he did maintain readily, thinking no body could
deny it. According to this clear apprehension prehension as he then took it up,
he did proceed to his doctrine of Election, which being defined by the Ancients
before his time always ex praescientia, he now determines to be of this Faith
foreseen. It must not be ex operibus praevisis, because that will oppose grace,
but ex praevifa fide, and that will salve all objections. We are to conceive of
other things to follow agreeably, as Arminius that acute and I think pious
Divine has since taken up the notion (when Augustine himself retracted it) and
upon his own stock improved it.

It is me now (I must say) something notable to see the seeds of the same light
springing up in this Gentleman as formerly actuared two such searching Divines
as Austin and Arminius were: and I cannot therefore without guilt of
disingenuity pass over any thing which he has offered for the farther
cultivation of it. For doing this, I observe he enters first upon an adventure
to make some change of our terms in Divinity. The state of nature, and a state
of Grace are terms that signify Regeneration and Unregeneration with all men,
even in our practical Books: and he will have us by a state of Nature to
understand the state of a Heathen; and by a state of Grace, the state of every
one under the Gospel. The Gospel now bringing a man into this state, a state of
Grace, he distinguishes of this Grace the Gospel brings. And it is either that
which goes before our Faith, or follows it. That which goes before he accounts
it all Common Grace; that which is given after it, special Grace. Ordinarily,
by the way, that grace which is given to the Reprobate, as well as to the
Elect, we call Common Grace, and that which is peculiar to the Elect we call
special grace, whether before or after Faith. But he offers his reason. The
Grace which the Gospel brings, is either (says he) that which is given upon
condition, or that which is given upon none. That which is conditional must be
given only to some, because it is some only perform that condition, and that
which is given but to some is special Grace. That which is given upon no
condition, must be therefore (or rather may be) appropriated to all, and so is
Common Grace. Thus he Theologizes, when we ordinarily do not account it common
grace, because every one has it; but because the Reprobate as well as the Elect
have it: and we do not call it special Grace only, because some have it, but
because the Elect only have it: so that, that Grace which is given but to some,
if it be given to any Reprobate as well as the Elect, we call not special, but
common Grace. Well, but these terms being premised, that Grace now which he
calls special, the grace of the Gospel, is promised on the condition of Faith.
It is Faith is the first thing upon which all depends. If this be not in the
power of every one, the terms of the Gospel shall be unperformable. And that
this Faith may be in our power, he will have a preventing Grace (which is not
the Grace it self of the Gospel, that being all conditional, but some Divine
assistance accompanying it) as enables every body that hears the Gospel to
believe, unless they wilfully reject it, He is afraid of Pelagianism, to allow
that any do or can believe of their own strength without Grace (though Austin
when he entertained this man's thoughts, made no scruple of that) and therefore
he will help out the good Father here very kindly with the intimation of a
Grace, that being not confined to any condition, must be common, and so belong
to all who are brought into that state, which is a state of Grace, the state of
being under the Gospel. when Christ says, Go preach the Gospel, he that
believes not shall be damned. It is repugnant (he argues) to the goodness and
justice of God, that he should withold that assistance as is necessary to
make this condition possible, and believing without such Grace is impossible.
Upon this Grace then, which all have, who have the word preached, a man becomes
his Believer. This Faith or bare Christianity with Prayer is the condition of
that promise, that God will give his Holy Spirit to those that ask him. The
Spirit being given, we are to improve his Grace. This improvement is the
condition of that farther promise, that God will dwell in us. That God will
give us his Spirit, and that he will dwell in us, are the principal promises of
Grace in the Gospel, I consent with this Author, understanding Grace only of
these operations. This implies a plentiful communication of farther degrees of
Grace for perseverance. Upon the condition of perseverance we shall be saved.

Lo here the notion of this worthy Author, wherein I think I have done him and
my Reader right to present it with all the light about it, as I was able to
draw it from him. I will now requite the ingenuity and liberty of his opinion,
with the like freedom in my Animadversions.

In the first place I do apprehend that these things have lien in the mind of
this Gentleman, not yet seven years; and I think that a man had need to take no
less time than Jacob served for Rachel, to consider well before he wed himself
to a Party in the controversy of the Five points, especially if he take to
that side which stands condemned by the Synod of Dort, with our British Divines
in it; who being sent thither by Authority, were to determine nothing we may be
sure, but what was agreeable to the Doctrine of our Church; and also when the
Father who first sprang that notion which this Author is in quest of, did upon
most mature deliberation himself forsake it, and that only (as I believe) upon
a full conviction from the Scripture, which led him into the Doctrine of
Absolute Election, which this man as suddenly rejects, as he maturely embraced,
showing himself even fond of it in all his latter Writings, even to the death.
Which makes me add this moreover, that forasmuch as I see several of our
younger Divines, being of more quick parts, so forward upon these points, I
will pass my conjecture, that by that time they have well bred their teeth,
they will not perhaps be so much in pain (as they seem now to be) to run into
disputation (as they do) either with Calvin, or Doctor Owen.

In the second place I cannot lightly give the Gentleman my approbation to his
new coin. I am sensible of so much hurt and ill consequence that may come of
this boldness to go about to alter terms that have gotten into our Divinity,
when it is not that of the Schools only, but of our Sermons and practical
Books, that this Author is not aware of what he does. It is the raw Divine will
take up these terms, and when he comes to use them, he will be so confounded
himself, and confound the people that hear him, that they will be as those that
speak in a strange tongue, one to another. For instance, what if a green
Preacher comes and tells his Congregation after this Author, that all that hear
him are in a state of Grace? What if he comes, and preaches on, that the Gospel
gives no ground for us to expect any special Grace till we perform the
condition of the Gospel? How odd must this appear to the hearers in any
judicious Congregation, when we know the first Grace (we mean effectual) is
given without condition? Yet let this Author explain these words for him; that
by special Grace we must always understand Grace promised to qualified persons;
so that all he means must be, that that Grace which is promised on condition,
is not given till we perform the condition, the matter admits of no
contradiction. Besides this evil, the new forming of terms which are received
to other significations in the Church, is methinks but like a man who has some
very curious work to engrave, and when he has all those tools in his shop that
are made on purpose for the doing that work, he will use his knife only. This
may indeed commend the rarity and industry, but not the wisdom of that workman,
who could have done his business better, if he had used those Instruments which
were ready by him, and proper for it.

In the third place there is one thing I must needs observe, wherein I think
this Gentleman in his Hetorodoxy to be a little too Orthodox; and that is in
his ordering the scheme of his notion so, as that the homo Evangelizatus only
shall be the subject of God's Grace: that is, when he does hold forth a common
Grace vouchsased to all who are under the Gospel, enabling them to believe, if
they will, upon which the promise of the Spirit belongs to them, and so the
special Grace of it upon Gospel conditions unto everlasting life; he does leave
all the world besides in such a state, as is without all Grace, and
consequently in a remediless condition. Whereas he may find in the Schools,
that there is an universal Grace maintained by many, which they call sufficient
(and which indeed is that which this Author means by his common Grace), as no
man is without, whether Heathen or Christian; in the improvement whereof,
farther degrees are attainable upon the Habenti dabitur, till it comes to be
effectual; so that it shall lie upon the liberty of the will in every body,
whether they be saved or damned. I know the Author may desert these, and not be
singular in this point of his opinion, so long as he has the Fathers
generally, St. Cyprian and St. Augustine more particularly, the Papist and
Protestant Churches, with the eighteenth Article of our own on his side: and
that which may please this Author something more. I remember Arminius in some
place of his works, does expressly exclude all Heathens from salvation; though
many that have tread in his steps otherwise, have been more kind to the
Nations. I have some little light therefore here (or I believe it to be so) to
offer to this very susceptible person. There is a threefold Government (in
one, to speak accurately) that God has had in the world over man in reference
to his chief end, the salvation of his soul. The first was by the Law of
Nature, the second, by the Law of Moses, and the third by the Law of Christ.
Before God gave his Law unto Israel, the whole world was under that Law, which
is written in the heart. God must govern man by that only, when there was no
other. This Law now, writ in man's heart (we are to know) is twofold; for
Nature coming under a double consideration, as entire, and as fallen, the Law
must be double; the Law of innocent nature (or Law of Innocence), and the Law
of lapsed nature, which is the Law of Grace or mercy toward man in regard to
that condition. To express it more fully, there is Lex Naturae (...), and Lex
connaturalis gratiae; The Law of Nature, and the connatural Law of Grace, as
Suarez has it in his Book De Legibus. I am pleased much with the terms, though
I found not that he did well understand them, or explain them himself. Only
thus much he says, that the Ancients before Moses, who were governed by the Law
of Nature only, must have this Lex connaturalis gratiae together with it, or
comprehended under it; or else no man then upon earth could be saved: which is
a truth so evident, as makes the proof of that Law, by that reason alone, to be
good. When he terms this Law then a Law connatural, I understand by it, that
this Law of lapsed Nature, this Law of Grace, or remedying Law is written in
the heart of man, in regard to his fallen nature, no less than the Law of pure
nature it self was. The Law of Nature, as I take it, is the dictates of right
reason, declaring to us our duty to God, to our selves, and to our neighbors;
and the light of the same reason will dictate to us, when we have failed in
that duty, to repent and turn to God with trusting to his mercy and pardon if
we do so, and not else. We do find it legible in our hearts that God is good
and wisely gracious to pity our infirmities, and consider our lost estate, and
necessary frailty, as that there is a God, and any worship that is at all due
to him. There is mercy with thee that thou should be feared. And these
Characters thus engraven in the heart of man, is the same law of Grace in the
practical contents, as is more largely paraphrased upon, by the Prophets in the
Old, and the Apostles in the New Testament. There is no difference at all in
the Substance (as Divines speak) but in the Administration. It is as one lately
has expressed it lively) no otherwise than as a Book thrice Printed; the
second Edition is larger than the first, and the third most complete and
perfect. This I will say, the Covenant was still on foot; the Condition
sincerity according to their light; men were judged by it, and many saved. Here
only is the difference, that the foundation on which all this is laid, the
Mediation, Righteousness and Sacrifice of Christ, comes not to be revealed but
in Types, and darker promises, till the promulgation of the Gospel. Now, I say,
that though the Heathen be not under (or have not) this Law of Grace, in the
third and last setting our, or in the state under the Gospel; yet they are
under it (or have it) in the state of the Ancients, or as they had it in the
first promulgation; and upon supposition that any of them do according to the
light they have, live up in sincerity to this Law; I dare not be the man that
shall deny but through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ (procuring this Law
or Covenant for them, as for us, and all the world) they shall be saved even as
we, and we shall be saved even as they. Not to leave this yet. I have learned
from Cicero, that all Laws must be derived from the Divine Reason and Will. I
have learned from others, that this Reason of God in his Government of all
things agreeably to his own nature and the nature of his Creatures is the
Eternal Law. I have learned from the Scripture, that there is a Law of Works,
and a Law of Grace. I do learn by consequence that these Laws (as frames of
Gods Government over man) must be reconcilable with the Eternal Law, or the
reason of his Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness; the one of them being fit for
the estate of man in Innocence, the other for his Lapsed condition. How these
Laws do now consist, and not consist with one another, while the Scripture
says sometimes we are freed from the Law, and sometimes that it is
established, That not a tittle of it shall pass, and that we are not under the
Law, but under Grace, I do not intend here any full decision. I will draw only
one chief stroke toward it. The Law may be considered as the Rule of man's
duty, or Measure of Good and Evil according to his own nature, and Gods: Or as
the Instrument of God's Government over man, or Measure of his dealing with us,
or judging of us, according to our discernings. It cannot be conceived but so
long as the Nature of God and Man is the same, and Good and Evil (which
consists in an agreeableness to them both) is the same, the Law of Nature must
remain unchangeable as the measure of our moral actions: But as it is the
instrument of Gods Government in the world, it is as certain that through the
Mediation of Christ (who has satisfied his Father for our breach of it) it is
relaxed so as we are not dealt withal according to the tenor of the Law, in
the matters of this life, or of that which is to come. I distinguish these two
things, a Rule of Life, and a Rule for Life. A Rule for Life is expressed in
these words, He that does them shall live in them. We are freed from the Law
upon the later account: we are made free to it in regard to the former. That
is, we are under the Law so as we are still bound to live according to it: but
we are delivered from it so as (through mercy, and the merits of Christ) we
shall not be judged by it. There is Norma vitae: and Norma judicii. The Law is
of force as a rule of Life, or Duty: but we are not under it as a rule of
Judgment. We shall be judged says St. James by the Law of Liberty; and Paul
says, according to my Gospel. Blessed be God for this truth. Now that the
Government of God over the whole world is by the Law of Grace, and not of Works
(thus much being said imperfectly only for light in the way), does appear as
the Sun or Moon in the Heavens. For God has not left himself without witness,
in that he does good, and gives us fruitful seasons. These are effects of his
mercy, which he could not show to the world as he does, if he dealt with it
according to the Law of Works. When Abraham pleads with God for Sodom that he
would spare it if there were ten righteous persons in it, it is manifest that
he must account of Gods Government over the earth to be a Government of Grace.
That the righteous be as the wicked, that be far from thee (says he) shall not
the judge of all the earth do right? If God should do but right to the best of
men according to the righteousness of the Law of Works, there could be no such
pleading as this. Neither is there any righteous, no not one, says the
Scripture, nor could God have accepted of Abraham himself for one, had there
been nine besides, but upon the account of the Law of Grace. It is a
righteousness consisting in a condecency of his Goodness and Mercy, and not in
the Rule of his district Holiness that Abraham intends. When the Prophets call
upon Israel to repent and to do righteousness that they may live, it is a
perpetual discovery that God dealt not with them according to the Covenant of
Works. The Law admits no repentance, and there is no righteousness that a man
can live by according to the Law. It is such a righteousness then they must
mean still, which is the same with the just man's faith, whereby it is said he
shall live; and that is the righteousness of faith in the Gospel, or
righteousness of God, which lies in a conformity to the law of Grace (See
Mediocria, about the beginning of my Paper of the Covenants). We are righteous
according to this Law, when we perform the condition: God is righteous
according to it, when he accepts us thereupon, unto Pardon and Life. We have a
most signal instance in the Ninevites, of these two things I do here stand
upon. If Gods government over the Heathen was not by the Law of Grace, how
could the Ninevites by their repentance have diverted his judgments? And if
this Law had not been connatural with fallen man, so as to be written in their
hearts, how could they trust in God, that upon their forsaking sin, and their
turning to him, they should find mercy, and be saved from destruction? Both
these things (I say) have in this one instance their full evidence. And what
think we of Cornelius the Centurion and Roman, how could his Prayers and Alms
be accepted with God, if Cornelius as well as Paul, a Roman as well as Jew,
were not under the same Government of Grace, when there is nothing we do but is
imperfect, and liable to a curse by the Law of Works? And what shall we
conclude then from both instances, but that which Peter upon conviction himself
concludes? Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons: but in
every nation he that fears him, and works righteousness is accepted of him.
There are three things go to a Law. That it be for the public good, That it be
the will of the Lawgiver, That it be promulgated to the subject. That the Law
of Grace is good for the world there can be no question; That it is Gods will
the world should be governed by it, appears by what is spoken, and that this
Law has been promulgated to mankind, appears both in the general notice of it
in men's hearts ( I will write my Law in their hearts says God in the New
Covenant, as distinguished from that of the Jews), and in the express
declaration of God to our first Parents, that the seed of the Woman should
break the Serpents head, and in his Covenanting with Noah, which must be
understood without dispute in regard to them, and their posterity. Now when
such a Law has been promulgated to Adam and Noah as belonging to all the
world, being to come of them, it must be proved that this Law is, or has been
somewhere, or at some time, again repealed by God, or else must every man and
woman in the world be under this government of God according to it, and
consequently be in a capacity of Salvation. I will to these Reasonings, add one
syllogism. It is not the hearers of the Law, but doers shall be justified. This
is express in one Verse of the second to the Romons. But same Heathen are doers
of the Law, though not hearers of it. This is affirmed in the next Verse. For
when the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in
the Law, with the rest following. Ergo, some Heathen are justified and saved.
If any cavil and say that no man is a doer of the Law, he must be answered that
the Apostle here speaks of such a doing only as is supposed to be among the
Jews that were godly, or Jews inwardly in the Verses after. And I renew my
argument. They that are doers of the Law according to the sense of such Texts
as make the keeping the Commandments of God necessary to Salvation, such as
when Christ says, If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments; and
such as when the Apostle says, They that by patient continuance in well-doing
seek for glory, shall have eternal life, that is, They who are doers of it, as
all that are Jews inwardly and in the Spirit do keep it, and no otherwise, to
wit, not (...) but (...), not according to the rigor of the Law, but according
to acceptance by the equity of the Gospel, They, I say, shall be justified and
saved. But some Heathen are doers of the Law in this sense, which is the sense
of the Apostle. Ergo, some Heathen are justified and saved. I confirm the Minor
by the words ensuing, that we may be sure we have the mind of the Apostle.
Therefore if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the Law, shall not
his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision? And shall not uncircumcision
which is by nature if it fulfill the Law, judge thee, who by the letter and
circumcision do break the Law? It follows that such as these therefore are
Jews inwardly, and in the Spirit, though they were not outward Jews, or in the
flesh, or of the Circumcision, as is apparent in the words already, and the
last Verses. They that are Jews inwardly and in the Spirit then (I follow my
argument), though not outwardly so and in the flesh, do fulfill the Law in the
sense of this place and are justified. But such are some of the Heathen here
according to the Apostle. Ergo, some Heathen are justified and saved. And what
could be desired more full and convincing, if it were not for the first Verse
which follows in the next Chapter, which does yet add such abounding
confirmation to it, as I must profess my self perfectly stricken with the
evidence, as with a Beam of light never to be withstood, or any more to be
doubted. What advantage then has the Jew above the Gentile? These are the
words. It cannot be imagined by me now, that this question could be offered
after he had said thus much, if there were such a difference between these two,
as that one of them only was under a possibility of Salvation. It is brought in
as an objection to his foregoing assertion in this sense, that if this be true,
there appears no difference in the matter, whether a man be Jew or Gentile,
seeing he that has the Law only written in his heart, and keeps it (that is in
sincerity), shall have the benefit and be saved, as well as he that has it
written in the Bible. The Apostle does as good as answer, This is true, yet is
there a difference, Chiefly because that unto the Jew were committed the
Oracles of God. I interpret not these words, but give this paraphrase. The
Heathen were under the same law of Grace for life, as the Jews, but the Jews
advantage was, that they had it in the second promulgation with this privilege
of Ordinances: and our advantage is the like over them, that we have it in the
third and last promulgation, by the Gospel. I argue then once more. If this was
the chief advantage the Jew had over the Gentile, that one had the Oracles of
God and the other had not, then was there not this difference between them, as
my Gentleman does make, that one is only in a state of Nature, and the other in
a state of Grace; or that one was in a capacity, and the other under an
impossibility of Salvation; for this were an advantage of a far greater nature.
But this was the chief advantage. Chiefly because -- Ergo. The Objections
against this Doctrine are two. The one is from the Scriptures, which in many
places in the New Testament do require quire faith in Christ, or believing the
Gospel, as the condition of Salvation. He that believes not shall be damned. I
answer, As the Apostle says of the Law, Now we know that whatsoever things the
Law says, it says to them that are under the Law: So say I of the Gospel,
whatsoever things of this kind the Gospel says, it says to those that are
under the Gospel. Where the Gospel is Preached, and the Revelation is
sufficient, so that men wilfully reject it, such are left without excuse. The
case of such is dangerous indeed, and these Texts applicable to them. If ye
believe not that I am he ye shall die in your sins. But as for those who never
heard the Gospel, or when the Revelation has been insufficient for such
conviction, the case (I hope) is otherwife, The case is (I think) as I have
said; and our good God will not require of any, more than he has given. The
other objection is from the authority of men, or of the Church more generally,
that condemns this opion: But I count the testimony of Christians in this point
is for themselves, and so partial; I suppose it taken again upon trust, and
followed by the most for want of light; I believe also that if they had had but
this light only that I offer, they would have determined as I do. It is true, I
grant, as our Church thinks, that there is no Religion by which a man can be
said, but one only, that is the true Religion; but this is a great truth here
to be received, that Christianity in the root, according to what is said, is
indeed the universal Religion of mankind (whom therefore ye ignorantly worship,
him declare I unto you): So that the (...), those that live according to
Reason, such as Socrates, Heraclitus, and the like men, were Christans, though
they were not so called, according to Justin the holy Martyr in his Apology,
whatsoever Ancients besides we have for us. Which doctrine nevertheless (to
salve most fully the eighteenth Article of our Church at first mentioned) is
not once to be thought on, or harbored, but as it is compatible with this
certain Position, that there is no way (for all that) under Heaven whereby a
man or woman is, or was, or can be saved, but in and through the only Name and
mediation of our Savior. For other foundation can no man lay than that is
laid, which is Christ Jesus.

In the fourth place, I must require a better explanation from this Author, how
every man and woman that has the Gospel preached to them, are brought into
such a state of grace, as to have that assistance from the Spirit of God which
enables them to believe, and many of them effectually unto Salvation: and yet
that it is the Believer only is the Object of that promise that God will give
his Spirit to them that ask him. There are two of his Chapters where he
enumerates the effects of the Spirit, and he does in both make faith to be one
and the chief of those effects (that he may not find here any evasion): yet
does he make faith the condition of that promise. How will he come off here?
Until a man be a Believer, or have faith, the promise of Gods giving his
Spirit belongs not to him, and yet is faith (and teachableness in order to it)
an effect of the Spirit. That which is promised on a condition, is not obtained
but by our performance of the condition, himself argues somewhere. If Faith
then be the thing promised, how can it be the condition of the Promise? If the
Spirit that works Faith, or the Spirit in regard to this effect is promised to
the Believer, then is Faith made a condition for obtaining it self, when it is
made so, for obtaining the Spirit that gives it. If we must believe that we may
have the Spirit, how comes Faith to be the effect of having it? To be the
condition which is antecedent to it, and to be the effect also which follows
it, is methinks incompossible. He may shist perhaps, and distinguish. There is
a Faith that makes a man a Christian or his Believer: and a faith that makes a
man holy and is saving. The one may be the condition of the other. Well, I will
ask him then of the former, Is that faith I pray, the effect of a man's own
strength or freewill: or of the Spirit? If he say the first, what thinks he of
that saying of our Lord, Without me ye can do nothing, that is, nothing to any
saving purpose (to use the apt words of this Author otherwhere) when it is
something I think to purpose to do that as shall qualify a man to be the
Object of this promise, that God will give him his Spirit upon his asking, and
the promise otherwise did not belong to him: Especially seeing this Gentleman
thinks it Pelagianism to allow so much without grace, and therefore does he set
up his common grace to avoid that danger. If it be not of our selves, but of
the Spirit, then have we here one of his Operations, (though the Spirit is
promised in Luke in regard to all its effects and operations, if that which the
Author says in two Chapters about it, be valid) and so the difficulty returns.
How shall a man have the Spirit for this operation or effect before faith, and
yet faith be the condition of the Spirit and its operations? If he say that the
grace which he calls common, or the Spirit as not promised, does work in a man
truly one sort of faith, or so much of a saving faith, as goes to the condition
of the promise: and that another sort of faith then, or so much more as is
lacking to our faith, does flow (as the effect only thereof) from the promise
after, when we perform this condition, he will be put very hard to it in such a
work as was that of Paul's conversion, and be forced to more curiosity than
enough, in so critical a determination.

In the fifth place, I have one argument to advance against this Doctrine of
his, which is known Arminian. I will urge but one, because it is the common
cause, and he may find out as many more as he will in others. It is this. If
there be that grace which he calls common vouchsafed to all under the Gospel
without any difference of election, so that there is the same and no other
prepared for him that believes, and for him that believes not, which common
grace then is left to the liberty of the will of every individual person to
cooperate with it or not; and as a man does so, or does not, he brings himself
into a state of Salvation, or remains in a state of wrath (this is the
opinion), then must Man himself, or then must the Will of every man for
himself, make the difference between him and another. But this, according to
the judgment of most after Austin, is flat against the Scripture, Who has
made thee to daffer from another, and what is there, O man, that thou have not
received? I must add by way of strength to the Argument, that upon this
Hypothesis it follows, that, that which is the less only, or least conducing to
man's Salvation is attributed to God, and that which is the greater and most
conducive thereunto is ascribed to man himself. It is more to believe and
repent, than it is to have power to believe and repent. The promise of Life and
Salvation is not made to him that is enabled to believe, but to him that does
believe, and obey the Gospel. Now by the Arminian doctrine there is this grace
carefully provided, which shall enable every man to believe and repent, so that
the fault shall not lie on God if they do not, but on a man's own will: but the
will or willing it self must arise from that liberty which they are as careful
to reserve unto man. That which is the lesser thing then (I say) the ability
(through divine Help, Assistance or Grace which is sufficient for the impowring
every one) to believe and be saved, is ascribed to God, and acknowledged from
him: but that which is the greater, which is the chief, that which does the
work, the act it self of willing, of believing and performing the terms of the
Gospel, is made the effect of man's own free will. And yet farther to confirm
the same argument. The power to do is one thing, and the will and doing
another; The grace one thing, and the cooperating with it another. If we have
power now or assistance only from God, and the will be of our selves, then is
there something, even this willing it self, this believing it self, this will
to believe (or cooperating with this common grace) that is the greatest thing,
which we have not received, but is of our selves, or from our own strength. I
do not doubt but I may press this yet more closely if this Author should give
the occasion; and I must advise him heartily to be very considerate, what he
answers to this argument; because I have picked it out as that which I take to
be the most momentous of any which are ordinarily urged by the Orthodox in this
matter. I will close it up with that Text, Work out your salvation with fear
and trembling, says the Apostle. This implies that a man has power, or that
if he will work he can. It is in vain to exhort any to do that which is not in
their power. That which is less than [the power to do if we will] is I count in
man: but that which is the greater [the willing and doing] is aliunde, of God,
as it appears in the words following. For it is God that works in us to will
and to do of his good pleasure. So contrary are my apprehensions here to this
Gentleman's. A man must have power (he thinks) by all means from God (to this
end he brings in his common grace), but the will must be of himself. I think
now quite otherwise that power is of nature, for that is the less: and to
reduce that power unto act, to will and to do, that is of grace, for that is
the greater, or that which is most. It is not of him that wills and runs
(to wit, that he wills and and runs, says the Father) but of God that shows
mercy.

In the sixth place then, I have a mind to tell him some little of what I think
of this grace he calls common. The term Grace (we must know) which is all one
with Favor, does import a respect shown to some which is not to others, and
does horein differ from Justice, which respects no person above another, but
does distribute that which is due to every one without partiality. It is
otherwise in Grace, for there are two things quite contrary must go to the
making any thing a matter of Favor; it must be a thing not due, or of right,
for then there is place to exercise Justice, but not Grace, and it must be
given out of Choice, it must be vouchsafed to one and not another, when it is
due to neither. When this Author then, and the Schools do speak of a Grace that
is Common and Universal, they seem to be teachers of something wherein they
understand not what they speak, or whereof they affirm. There is the grace of
the Gospel, or that Grace which the Gospel publishes, which brings Salvation to
all men, the Objective grace of it, consisting in that faithful saying worthy
of all acceptance, that Christ died for sinners, or that those that believe
and repent shall be saved, or that God is Good, and those who turn to him,
though they have sinned, shall find merey, which is the substance of the whole
two Testaments, and that indeed is. Universal, and belongs alike to all the
world. There is no man or woman, or no people but they are under the Law of
Grace (purchased by Christ) for life and salvation, I have said; and say, that
the Gospel of this Grace, or the discovery of it, is so far universal also, as
there are none but by tradition from their Parents, or by some Teachers, as
Noah was to the old world, teaching this Law (for there never was any other
righteousness since Adam fell, but of this Law only to save any), or by the
dictates of their own hearts, did, or do understand it in some measure, so that
if they live up to this Law according to the light only which they have, they
are not only under the possibility, but in a state of Salvation. This is a
noble truth and worthy of God and his goodness, and I cannot part with it. But
for that Grace which is the subjective grace of God, consisting in those
operations of his Spirit that bring over the hearts of men to perform those
terms which this law of grace requires of us, To speak of that as common and
belonging to all, is (I say) to speak of what this Author knows not, because
these Operations are for certain secret and indiscernible; and to affirm of
that which he knows not, what is inconsistent with the nature of what he
speaks. For if those operations belong to all, and are not vouchsafed to some
peculiar persons only with discrimination from others, they are not Grace. This
is so true, that when I say, the grace of the Gospel which is Objective is
universal to all mankind, if there were not other creatures besides men, to
whom Redemption and Reconciliation is not vouchsafed as to us, it could not be
called Grace. It were a Benefit, and infinitely great, but not properly Grace.
There is a world of fallen Spirits, as well as men, and there was nothing due
to the one or the other but punishment: yet when no kindness was due, the Son
of God came from Heaven, and took on him our nature to redeem us and not them,
this makes the Redemption of Christ to be grace to us. And now when the
benefit, or benefits purchased by Christ are applied to particular persons by
the operations of the Spirit working Faith and Repentance (which are the
conditions upon which they are applied) in some persons and not in others, if
these operations were indeed common and vouchasafed to those that believe and
repent not, as well as those that do, this Application were not of Grace. Where
there is none refused, there is no election. If one be not preferred, and not
another, or before another, there is no Grace. The ground of this opinion of
sufficient grace common to all, has arose as I conjecture, from an
apprehension that the help or assistance of God (which we call grace) is
conversant about the Power which is in man, so that a man is enabled thereby
only to act, but the Will or actual willing is of himself. St. Austine, I
remember, does tell us, that this was the conceit of Pelagius, and he sets
himself therefore to prove, that Grace is conversant about the will; it is
Grace (says he) that inclines the will, it is of God to work in us to Will and
to Do of his own good pleasure. And indeed I do not see how it can consist with
the nature of the Spirit of God, who is God, that is, with the simplicity of
the Divine Nature, which is devoid of all composition, Subject and Accident,
Power and Act, how any operation can be attributed to him, but in regard of
some effect. If there be such an operation then imagined, which is sufficient
only to produce such an effect on man, but it is hindered by the resistance of
his will, here being no effect, there is no operation can be ascribed to God,
in whom there is but one eternal standing Will, the Will being not taken for
the Faculty neither, but Act. Besides this determination of the Schools that
God is a Pure Act, and can be capable of no new operations, but only as he is
denominated an Agent from such continued new effects (wherein my own
understanding, I confess, must be ever at a loss); there is this plain thing to
be thought on by every body, that no wise person who is not destitute of power,
does operate without Effect. It Is true, that the Scripture somewhere speaks of
resisting the Spirit, and receiving his grace in vain: but this is not to be
understood (I suppose) so, as if there were no effects wrought on such souls,
but that there are farther effects, saving effects, and it is to be attributed
to the obstinacy or wickedness of their Wills, that those effects are not
wrought also. I must therefore deliver here my opinion of this universal
sufficient Grace which I find in the Schools, and in the Arminians, but
confined to those under the Gospel by this Author; and I do think really it is
an invention only to put off St. Augustine, and to escape the condemnation of
Pelagius, in a point, which in the substance of it, they judge fit to be
maintained. The point is this, that if man does do what lies in his power, God
in his justice will give him his grace, Facienti quod in se est Deus non
potest, nec debet denegare gratiam, which I mention the rather, because I see
this Doctrine laid down in some good Books of late without suspicion of
Pelagianism in it. Well! If any say now, that man by doing what he can of his
own strength does obtain Gods grace, this shall be Pelagianism, and be
anathamatized by the Schools themselves: but if he say, that by doing through
Gods grace what he can, he shall obtain (or merit) more grace, and so
justification and life, it shall be the doctrine of the Church. Let it here be
but supposed then, that God gives his Grace or assistance to All that they may
act, and that which Pelagius would have, is brought in for good Doctrine
without any heresy at all in it; and this is the device of the Arminian from
the Schools, which if it were in rerum naturae, as in men's Books, I do
apprehend that Pelagius or Austine would have light upon it; and then would the
one have received Pelagius opinion with more candor, and the other would have
defended it so cleverly, as never to have been condemned. But if this universal
sufficient grace was indeed never thought upon till after their time, I wonder
not that Pelagius and Austine could not be agreed, but I do wonder that any who
believe this knack should make so much matter of it whether they agreed or no.
I think it really but much at one to hold that every one has power by Nature,
as to affirm that all have Grace. If Grace be as common as Nature, why is it
called Grace? Not that I see any hurt in holding Sufficient grace, provided
that Effectual be held also. If universal grace be brought in for exclusion of
special grace, I can by no means admit of it, for that some persons have that
grace from God whereby they are effectually wrought upon and saved, and not
others, is beyond disputation. If sufficient grace common to all, and special
too, be held so, as it be conceived that no man for all the one, does ever
savingly believe and repent, or is truly converted, till he have the other
also, there is no hurt in it, but I see no need of it. What need is there of
Grace only to bring us power, which we have already? There is no man shall be
condemned for his cannot, but his will not. Every man then must have power. A
man has his faculties, his Understanding, his Will and his Executive power.
the object is proposed, His duty known; There is nothing to hinder, He may act
if he will. The Scripture indeed speaks of a Cannot, that we can do nothing,
that we are dead in trespasses and the like: but all these expressions put
together comes to this, to wit, such an indisposition on the soul, as that a
man certainly never will of himself. This is the Scriptures cannot truly
defined. (See Mediocria, in the Paper of Election), which otherwhere therefore
is ordinarily called a will not. You will not come to me that you may have
life. There is Natural power still, where yet there is Moral impotency, as
others have it. And it is no absurd thing (I hope) to say a man can do what he
can; that is, he can do, what he has natural power to do. Here then I will
stick, Power is of Nature (I said it before), but to exert that power into act,
is of Grace. Power is of Nature, but to Will and to Do, is of God. There is no
people but have the Object (I count) and some light of it (in their measure) so
that every body may live according to what he has, and be accepted if he will.
I grant this to the Pelagian, to the Schools, to the Arminian, that every one
may, if they will: The Spirit says come, and the Bride says come, and
whosoever will let him come. What (...) I say more? Whosoever will believe and
repent, may believe and repent; whosoever will be saved. may be saved. This I
say with them, but I must then say again with the Orthodox, that if any will,
it is of the grace of God. If he will, it is of Gods grace against Pelagius. No
man comes to me unless the Father draw him. If he will, it is of Gods special
grace against the Arminian. But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep.
As many as were ordained to salvation believed. In short then, whosoever will,
may (or can): but no man will (though he can) without grace, and this grace.
Here is the decision of this great controversy. And as for the Arminian grace,
what good of that, which if one had it not, he should have pleaded a Cannot,
and been excused: but by having it he must be condemned?

In the last place, seeing I perceive this Gentleman is listed for Arminianism,
I care not if I tell him yet some more of my heart about it. I am pretty
sensible how things hang together. If God intend to give grace and salvation to
a few particular persons, it is suitable that such only should be redeemed; and
if this grace be free as decreed absolutely to these, it is suitable the will
be not free, so as to be able to choose or refuse it; It is then agreeable that
those be kept by the same almighty power to salvation. Here are the five points
on one side. On the other hand, If a man that has grace, is to take heed lest
he fall, it is suitable that grace be such as might be refused at first, as
well as it may (after) be lost; That the will consequently is free, so as to
cooperate with it or not; That Christ therefore has purchased but the same
grace for one as well as another; That Election then be of such persons as use
their own liberty, and Gods grace, as they ought, when those that do not, are
justly rejected and condemned. I must declare now, I find here no aversion in
my mind against the last set of opinions, but rather some disinclination to the
former. I feel my genius more afraid of a captivity by that we call
Orthodoxism, than by any thing else; which makes me come with less prejudice to
read Vorstius, than Rutherford, or Twisse. I have no preocupation, therefore I
am sure on my affections, whatsoever I have on my judgment in these points.
Nevertheless there is a chain laid on my soul from the holy Scriptures, which
holds it fast. The chain consists of these links, Personal Election,
Regeneration, and that, Few shall be saved. These three Doctrines I must say,
are so concatenated (in my mind) one with another, that so long as any one of
them will hold, it is in vain to make any attempt to get loose from either of
the other. I cannot but confess many times they are grievous to my mind, and I
could wish they were otherwise, but if they are the dictates of holy writ, I
must pray to God to forgive my reluctance, and submit to them. I have had
indeed sometimes in my soul some other notion of Election than is expressed
ordinarily by others. I have looked methinks on the deliberations of the
Almighty with his Son from eternity (to speak after the manner of men), to be
how they should be glorified most in the Salvation of man: and there are two
ways to that end, the way of Works, and the way of Grace. If man being made
after Gods image, does live according to the law of his Creation, and stand in
that estate he must be happy and glorify his Maker in a method of works: but
if he be left to himself, and fall, and be recovered by the rdemption of the
Son, and then have a new Law for his fallen condition, and continued help, to
live according to it, then shall God glorify himself in man's salvation, by the
methods of his most wonderful grace. Now what if Gods election from eternity be
nothing else but this design, that man's salvation shall be in a way of Grace,
and not of Works? He has chosen us in him (says the Text) that we should be
holy. I put the Emphasis on the words, in him. It is Christ has procured the
new Law, according to which we may be holy and accepted, when else we could not
be holy by the Law of our Nature; and so it is not by the works of
righteousness which we have done, or works by that Law, but by the renewing of
the Holy Ghost, or his assistance to perform the Law of Grace; so that when it
is said other-where, Not of works lest any should boast, it is added, For we
are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus to good works. We were created at
first to a law of righteousness, but this being once broken, unless we had had
a new Law purchased by Christ, and a new Creation through him, we could not
have been righteous any more; so that it is not of works, which are properly
man's own, according to the Law of his Nature, but of those which we are created
to in Christ Jesus; to wit, those which are called the righteousness of God (as
being of his invention or appointment) in opposition to the Law, that we are
saved. This is typed in the children of the Flesh, and the children of the
Promise; and this may be the meaning of these words, It is not of him that
wills and runs (that is, it is not in the way of works) but of God that
shows mercy (that is, but of Grace). This is delivered here, I know, roughly
and darkly: yet may it serve another man to think upon, when I my self do not
pursue it. There is in the Papers called the Middle way, something of this in
that of Election p. 15, 16. and something more accurately in that of the
Covenants p. 6, ad 13. There is another notion of Election; To wit, the
choosing of persons or a people to a Church State, or the privilege of
Ordinances, and so unto the peculiar government of God or Christ over them upon
that account. He has given his Statutes to Israel, he has not done so to
other Nations. Thus Abraham is the first Elect we read of. Thou did choose
Abraham, and broughtst him out of Ur, and made a Covenant with him, in
Nehemiah. That was by way of preamble to Gods gathering a Church out of his
seed, who was to be his people. Hence is he said in several places to have
chosen them, not for their deserts, or their number, but because he loved thy
Fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them; and hence have they the
titles of a peculiar people, and a chosen generation, with many the like
expressions. In the New Testament likewise we find those who receive the Gospel
have the same titles, They are said to be engrafted into the Jews Olive, that
is, into their external Covenant and Church State, and to be a chosen
generation (as the Jews were) a royal Priesthood, and a peculiar people,
insomuch as when the Apostle writes to a whole Church, he calls them Elect, as
well as Saints and sanctified in Christ Jesus; And the faith of Gods elect may
perhaps be thus interpreted the Christian faith. Blessed is the Nation whose
God is the Lord, and the people whom he has chosen for his own inheritance.
These notions I mention, but must travail no further in the search of them,
because I am held by the other doctrines I have named, Regeneration, and That
few shall be saved. For if these two Doctrines be not capable of some other
notion also than what is commonly understood by them, they must fix me in the
like received notion of Election. If there is such a thing then (in the first
place) as Regeneration, that is a work of grace on the souls of some persons
whereby they are begotten again to a holy life, as well as to the relation of
the children of God, then is Election, I must say, actuated in such persons.
The Schools distinguish between Eternal and Actual Election, and this work of
saving conversion or effectual vocation they call Actual election. Election is
the preparation of effectual grace for some persons that they may be saved, and
not for others. This effectual grace then vouchsafed to any particular person
in, or for his regeneration, is the execution of Election. Such dependence have
these doctrines upon one another, that we shall not need to enquire farther
what is Election, which we understand, and prove by this effect Regeneration,
better than by any man's definition, or arguments. If we cannot come off
therefore about Regeneration, as well as Election, we must be determined by the
one, in our judgment concerning the other. For the helping us out here, this
Author has said something; That to be regenerate is to become the Disciple of
Christ, and that is to be brought into the Church or Church State, which agrees
with the second Notion before of Election. He that is a Disciple must be
baptized, and to be baptized is to be both again by water, and incorporated
into Christ, and he that is but externally in Christ is a new creature, as one
of that world to come in the second to the Hebrews, which is said to be put in
subjection to Christ, that is the Christian Church under the Gospel. Agreeably
hereunto this Author tells us out of Dr. Hammond, that the proselytes of the
very Jewish Church were called recensnati upon this same account. Regeneration
then may be a Relative term only, or but Relative grace, whether in regard to a
Spiritual, or External relation. What this may do now with others, I know not.
This Author does make Regeneration to consist in a Real work on the soul as
well as others, while he defines the regenerate man to be one that does not
only become a Disciple, but a sincere Disciple of Christ; for this includes
that effectual grace which proceeds from Election. And yet if we could get off
from both these Doctrines, Election and Regeneration, there remains farther the
third Doctrine, That few shall be saved, from which there is no man I ever yet
read, Arminian or Antiarminian that sought an escape. They are words out of our
Lords own mouth [Few there be that find it], and the Evangelist that set them
down could not be mistaken in Christ's meaning; There is no man's heart can serve
him to think so, because they were inspired in what they writ, If this be a
truth then, that few shall be saved, it is a truth that it is Gods will that
few shall be saved; and consequently if his will, his decree. If it be Gods
decree then, that few shall be saved, I cannot be solicitous any farther about
Personal or Absolute Election, There appears to me really to be a greater
dishonor put upon Gods goodness and infinite mercy to make him decree
salvation to all, on such conditions, as a few persons only (left to their
liberty) shall thereupon be able to be saved, than can be cast merely on his
justice or righteousness, to decree that grace, or such grace to these few
persons, that shall effectually bring them to that end. And what though,
Salvation sometimes be taken also as Election in Scripture, in reference to a
man's being brought into the Ark, that is, into the Church, and so we are said
to be saved by baptism, as it is said, Save your selves from this untoward
generation, and as they which were added to the Church are said to be saved,
and as salvation is said to be of the Jews? What man's reason can serve him to
believe that Christ speaks of this salvation? If it could, Are there not more
that come into the Church, than are eternally saved? There is doubtless a
double Election and Salvation in Scripture, Temporal in this sense before
spoken, in relation to a Church State, and Christ's government of us by the
Gospel: and Eternal in this sense of Salvation whereof Christ is speaking, when
he says, And few there be that find it. Such is our Election, and such is this
Salvation; Election from Eternity, and salvation to eternity, and both meet in
Regeneration. For regeneration, is Actual Election, and Inchoate Salvation.
There are three that bear record in Heaven, and three in Earth, says St. John.
These three agree in one, and those three are one. I will say so here, There
are three things that bear record in Scripture, Election, Regeneration, and
That few shall be saved. These three agree in one, that is, in their testimony
for the Orthodox against the Arminian, and so for St. Austine, the Synod of
Dort, and Dr. Owen, against this Author. And these three are one, in their
concatenation one with another. Election is the preparation of that special
effectual grace which works our regeneration, and our regeneration is the
begetting in us that life, that spiritual life which runs on to eternity.
Effectual grace is the Execution of Election, and entrance of Salvation. Grace
is glory in the infancy, and Glory is grace in full age, at maturity, or in
consummation. These things are thus linked, and this is the Chain that holds
me. I do endeavor to make the chain as casie as I can, and get as much room in
it as I can by going the middle way, but I am held under it. If you cannot
break every link, you shall never break any one of them; or if you could, it
were in vain to do it. And now would I look into this Gentleman's heart how it
can serve him to meditate a reply to these things. I will tell him in his own
words the issue it must come to. But what if the Scriptures teach, that the
promise of Regenerating grace are made only to those that are absolutely
elected to glory (This hereby, I count, is proved in the very root of it)? I
answer (says he) If this can be once shown, I have done; or if it can be made
to appear but probable by the Scriptures, I shall begin to suspect all my
reasoning against it. For I heartily believe the Scriptures to be the word of
God, and all my Reasonings shall submit to this one Proposition, Whatsoever God
has said that is true. This is said well, and so well said as I will end this
Chapter with it, and I think we must both end the Controversy with it. They
shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is the
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; and those that are with him, are called, and
faithful, and chosen.

CHAP. V.
Of the Resistibility or Irresistibility of the Spirits Operations, in
reference to his last Chapter.

I Come to the Authors last Chapter, which is, concerning the manner and
measure of the holy Spirus operations. And I observe here the Controversy of
it, the Doctrine of it, and the Use of it.

For the Controversy of it, it may be reduced to two Questions. Whether the
Operations of Gods Spirit be by way of moral swasion, or physical operation?
and whether these Operations, or the effectual grace of God on the heart in a
Sinners conversion be irresistible? I will content my self with the last point,
unto which the other I conceive, may be reduced; and this is a controversy (as
others before) which has the Arminians on one side, and Synod of Dort on the
other. The Dr. is for the Synod we may be sure, and this Author for the
Arminians. The only thing to be understood between both, is, what they mean by
the term irresistitle? If the Dr. has received by it an apprehension, as if
the work of grace on the soul was such as disarmed the will of its liberty, and
left it no power of resisting, according to that saying which this Author
quotes for his, that the Will cannot make use of that grace which it can
refuse, the Doctor is out; for the Will cannot be without natural liberty of
refusing or willing, and if that beraken away, it is destroyed: but if herein
he be miseited, or his intention perverted, and he does hold only that this
work is irresistible in regard to the event, that is, where that grace which is
effectual, is given, it will infallibly have its effect, the Doctor is in the
right. Again, if this Author, by resistible, undersiands, that where this grace
is given, or where the Spirit thus operates, the will has not only power of
resisting, but many times does resist, so that Christ may say but to any one
who has that grace, I would, and you would not this Author is out; for this
special effectual grace flows from the decree of Election, and can neverfail:
but if he mean by resistible only that though the will be carried by it, and
does not resist, yet it has power still to resist, so that its liberty for all
that cannot be lost, he is in the right. The decree of Election, and this grace
that flows from it, is not consistent with a contrary event, but they are
consistent with a contrary power, a power, I mean, to do the contrary. They
will certainly and infallibly carry the Will, because Gods will must stand, and
his decree cannot fail, but the power of doing the contrary, (or not doing) is
not inconsistent with the certainty of the thing being done. The power of doing
otherwise, and doing otherwise are two things. Where the Decree, and Grace is,
they infallibly produce the effect, that we shall not do otherwise: but the
power of doing otherwise is untouched. The thing is necessary in regard to the
decree, and it is free or contingent in regard to this power in man to resist.
Man has power to resist, so grace is resistible: but it is irresistible in
regard to the act or effect. When the power then and liberty remains, this work
of God upon the soul is not by such a way of physical operation, as the raising
one from the dead, or as creation is, but it is by such a way as is suitable to
a free creature, who is brought to act out of election; it is by Argument and
the Word, as well as by the Divine motion. It is therefore, for ought I see,
neither by mere physical operation, nor only by moral swasion, but by an
omnipotent persuasion. By such a sweet attemperation to the faculties, as will
infallibly carry the Will, and yet not by compulsion. If you ask me any
farther, I will be exculed. I remember Christ speaking of this work, compares
it to the wind which we cannot perceive, either whence it comes, or whither it
goes. And if we cannot tell the things that are with us, how shall our vessels
comprehend the ways of the most High; the workings, the manner, and the
measure of the working, of the Spirit of God? I must add this only which is
open, Let the term irresistible be expounded right, I am for the Doctor; Let
the term resistible be expounded right, I am for this Author. When I agree then
with both of them, if they both will agree with me, we must grow all friends in
this point.

For the Doctrine of the Chapter it comes to this sum, which I can give here
in the words of the Author. The holy spirit of God does in that manner work his
graces in us, that they are still the genuine effects of the Evidence and
Motives of the Gospel; Of the natural use of our faculties, the understanding
and will; and of our own care and diligence in using the external means of
grace. His operations in us make us capable of recovering our selves by
degrees; and all the while there is no sensible difference between them, and
the natural operatious of our minds; and yet we are sure we have his
assistance, and help in all the good we do, and without it we can do nothing at
all to saving purposes. This is the Doctrine, which if no inferences but
Orthodox be drawn from it, I take to be sound. We have then some Use of it,
which is also very good. There is but a little of it, but if he had been more
in that, and less in quarrels with the Doctor, it had yet been all better. And
so God bless the hopeful Author in his Studies.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Authors Calumniations of Dr. Owen, and some reply to them.

Having thus done with the Book, there are some passages require my reflection
upon them, for the Doctors vindication. The Doctor is accused of Nonsense, of
Contradiction, of Error. It is fit that some thing should be said in reference
to the two latter, though it be but a rudeness to go about to answer any thing
to the former.

For the first therefore I will say this only. If the Doctor has expressed any
thing darkly, that this Author cannot make sense of it: such a place, or
passage as to him, is to go for nothing. That is all in civility to be said of
it.

For the second, There is one instance I will mention about Election. The
Doctor in one place of his Book, speaking (I suppose) to a profane person, yet
presuming on his Election, tells him, He cannot believe his Election any
otherwise, but as God reveals it by the effects, that is, until he believe,
and repents he cannot conclude he is Elected. In another place speaking (I
suppose) to the tender serious Christian, who is yet in trouble about his
Election, he says, He cannot justly doubt of his Election, until he be in such
a condition, as wherein it is impossible that the effects of Election should be
wrought in him. This the Author makes a contradiction: but it is only the
distinguishing between these two things, A not concluding, and A concluding
not, and the Doctor is cleared. The man who sees not the effects of Election on
his heart, and in his life, cannot conclude that he is elected (here is the not
concluding, which ought to be): And the man that sees them not, cannot conclude
for all that, that he is not Elected, because they may be wrought in him before
he dies, (here is the concluding not, which must be avoided). So the one is
rebuked, and the other supported (as they should both be). Such are the Doctors
contradictions.

For the third, which is the Doctors Errors, I must distinguish of Error. There
is Human Error, Error common to man, It is the nature of man to be subject to
mulake, to be deceived, to err, says the Orator: and there are Pernicious
Errors. This Gentleman's accusations are of both sorts.

For the former sort, There is two or three places where this Author is very
confident upon the Doctor for his saying that the Spirit is given to us in his
Person as well as in his Effects, which methinks I cannot pass, because I do
not know well whether the Error be in the Doctor, or in this Author, or in my
self. I am apt to think, that it is too much to say that the Spirit dwells
personally in any man, though we are said to be the Temples of the Holy Ghost:
and that it is too little to say he is given only in his gists, graces, or
effects. I would say rather, that the Spirit is given it self for these
Effects. I look upon the Spirit of Christ to be given to us for a principle of
life and union with our Head, from whom we have (through this Spirit) the
communication of all saving influence unto a holy life. It is the received
opinion that there is an habitual righteousness infused by God in the soul for
our justification according to the Schools, or according to our Divines, for
our Regeneration; and that this is the principle of life and power in the soul
unto holy operations. I must confess here I do not receive this Doctrine, I
have it somewhere in my Mediocria, I think more cautiously, but I do really
believe no infusion of habits. I count that the Spirit by a motion on the Will,
exciting it to act, does incline it to farther acts by the impression which is
made, and that the habit then is acquired by the iteration of those acts and
delight in them, or love to them, shed abroad in our hearts by the same Holy
Ghost given to us. I do believe consequently, that it is the Spirit it self
dwelling in us (as the Scripture understands its own expression) which is that
principle of life from whose constant secret and unperceptable aid, does
proceed all those actions which are holy and good, and acceptable to God. I do
believe there is a time when Christ gives his Spirit to every one of his Elect,
for uniting him to himself as his head, and that this union is effected
immediately by that communication, and that through this Spirit all vital
influence must be derived to us. I cannot frame my self to say the Spirit is
personally in us, but he is in Christ's members as a principle of life and
spiritual action, and as the formal band of that union which we have with him.
Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. As the body is one,
and has many members, and all the members of that body are one body; so also
is Christ. I cannot tell well therefore how to brook some expressions as I find
somewhere in this Author, and in another before him, that when the Scripture
speaks of our having the Spirit of Christ, and having it so as to be led by
him, and if we have not the Spirit of Christ, we are none of his, they are
willing to interpret the having Christ's Spirit, to be only the being of his
temper and and disposition, which is the bringing down the Scripture to our
ordinary converse, and seems to me unholy. I hope these men do believe the
Christian faith, and do reverence his mysteries. And there are these three of
them, The mystery of the Trinity, The mystery of the Incarnation, and the
Mystical Union between Christ and his Church. It is true that Christ is not a
Natural head but a Political, as opposed to natural, but not as opposed to
mystical. He is a Political head as he governs us, and as we are in subjection
to him: but he is also a Mystical head, vouchsafing to us that spiritual
influence which enables us to obey him. He governs us, and so is our head: but
he governs us by his Spirit which is infused (though I think no habit be); and
when we are lead by this Spirit, as there is Rule, there is Influence, and this
Union must be Real and Mystical, and not that which is Political only. Suppose
a man whose head was high as the Heavens, yet so long as the same soul animates
all the members, the feet as in the head, it is one man: Christ our head is in
Heaven, and we on earth; yet as the same Spirit is in us which is in him, the
head and members make one die, nay in the words of the Scripture, one Christ. O
Agrippa believe thou the Prophets? O thou Author of this Book against Dr.
Owen, Believe thou these mysteries of the Christian Religion? I know that
thou believe.

For the later sort, There is one place in his Book, where we have two of his
pernicious errors together. The Doctor belike has said, that though a man
should reform his life, and be changed from vice to virtue, and that by hearing
the word preached (This is the most I count he says, and which may be
exemplified in Herod, who heard John, and did many things), yet if there be not
an habitual righteousness infufed, it signifies nothing to regeneration. To
this purpose is it only and altogether the Doctor speaks. Hereupon this
Gentleman breaks out and challenges him before his own party (as he speaks) and
before the world, for contradicting the Scripture [He that does Righteousness
is born of God], and then charges him with Pelagianism. He professes he is in
earnest, and that this is rank Pelagianism, that the Doctor allows so much to
be done without saving grace. I have the more reason to be moved at this,
because a certain person of quality, and of a ready judgment having this
Author by him, turned me to this place, as if the Doctor was much to be blamed;
when I must needs say, that this Gentleman has no where exposed himself so
much in his Book as here, where he endeavors to expose the Doctor. There is no
man that reads practical Divines, that lay down characters of the truly godly
man, the sound Believer, and how far the Hypocrite may go, but does know they
speak commonly as the Doctor does, and there are few, one would think, so
inconsiderate or raw, but should also know here how to distinguish so easily,
as between the matter of what is done, and the manner of the performance. Good
works may be considered quoad operis substamtiam, or quoad modum quo ordinaniur
id vuam aevernam. There is no good act (no not the least that can be done) is
performed in that manner as it ought, or as it is required to be accepted in
order to salvation, but a man must be born of God according to his text, and
have the assistance of the Spirit: But for the matter of the work (or of our
duty) this Author must consider better, that the Regenerate and Unrepenerate
are alike as to that. One can hear, and pray, and give alms, and abstain from
evil as well as the Other; and many times the veryest Hippocrite pretends most.
Nay, what says this Gentleman to Socrates, Aristides, Epimomdas, Plato,
Plutark, Cato? What says he to Almanzor that Mahomet in Einperor, whose life
is set out by Sir Walter Rayleigh in a little Book for such singular virtues,
especially as to his goodness and righteousness, that I find him not paralleld
by any Christian. Will this Author censure Sir Walter for a Pelagian, for such
a narration? or will he make me one, if I believe it? Or will he come over
here, and when he has placed such in a state of Nature, and so out of a state
of Grace, will he allow an Heathen or Mohammedan to be a regeherate person? Has
the Gentleman read Ruiz, or one such a kind of Schoolman as he, all over? Let
him see when they have denied against pelagius all ability in man to do any
thing, even but to give an occasion (which is active and not passive only) to
infuse in us their justifying grace, whether they are also ignorant of some
such distinction. It is no Pelagianism in the Schools, to say a man can do many
things civily, morally good, through the power of nature, education, custom,
for company sake, for glory: but it is so, to say he can do any thing without
preventing grace, in order to his justification. There is no need therefore of
such vehemence, nor of any such expressions he uses otherwhere [I will desire
the Doctor to consider whether the Father of lies be not the representative of
such shameful Writers, as he is the example of]. These kind of words are not
well. There is a great deal of acrimony, I see, with a little truth mixed
methinks, like the fire and hail that ran together in one of the Egyptian
Plagues, in the Books of many late rising adversaries to this learned pious and
reverend person. It were happy if the opprobrious words of the prejudicate,
would make thewise mend their faults. It were well also if such an
inconsiderate confident piece of elation of mind (as here indeed is) be but
repressed with the shame and blushes of another. Let the righteous smite me, it
shall be a kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall be an oil, and not break
my head.

CHAP. VII.
Of Dr. Owen's Book of Justification, and of the reconciliation of St. Paul.
and St. James, and the Imputation of Christ's righteousness upon his account.

HAving said this for the Doctor, I have a little now also to say to him. I was
reading his later Book of Justification, when this Author came to my hands, and
I had thought of making some remarks upon it. I am not satisfied with what he
has offered for the reconciliation of St. James and Paul on that subject. This
is the reason I suppose (that is the most solid) why so many do choose here of
late to go with the mediocrian, or steer the middle way, in that point. I
perceive that Dr. Tully with our first Reformed Divines, and this excellent
Doctor, are for distinguishing of Faith, and Justification, but will not let
us, by no means, distinguish of Works for the reconciliation of the Apostles. I
do wonder at this. The Apostle James and the Apostle Paul do both agree, that
we are justified by Faith. The one says, we conclude that a man is justified
by Faith; and the other says also, it is by Faith: Their seeming difference is
only about works, when one says by Faith without Works, and the other, by
Faith and Works also. And how then comes it to pass that we must not
distinguish of Works, but of Justification and Faith, to compose the
difficulty? I will offer the Doctor therefore here one Argument, under his
favor, which shall be but one, and that not as others have, (so far as I know)
for then it were like he had already weighed it. It is this. That Justification
which St. Paul speaks of, is that Justification which we have in that Text of
Genesis, where it is said, And Abraham believed, and it was accounted to him
for Righteousness. Or, That Juslification Paul speaks of, is that Imputation of
Faith for righteousness which is spoken of in that Text in Genesis. That
Justification which St. James speaks of, is that Justification which we have in
that Text in Genesis, Or, is that Imputation of Faith for Righteousness, as is
spoken of in that Text in Genesis. Therefore St. Paul's justification, and St.
James justification are the same Justification. Again, That Faith which St.
Paul speaks of, is the Faith that is spoken of in that Text in Genesis, or the
same Faith as was imputed to Abraham for righteousness in that place. That
Faith which St. James speaks of is the same Faith which is spoken of in that
Text in Genesis, Or the same Faith that was imputed to Abraham for
righteousness in that place. Therefore the faith that St. Paul speaks of, and
the faith which St. James speaks of, is the same faith also. And when the Faith
is the same, and the Justification the same, we must distinguish of Works then
out of question, to reconcile these Scriptures. Of Works then let us
distinguish; and the distinction is this. There are Works which are
inconsistent with Grace and Pardon, so that if we had them, we should have no
need of Christ's righteousness or sacrifice, but the doing of them would make
the reward to be of debt, or make life to be due out of district justice, (He
that does them shall live in them), That is, Works which the Law requires unto
Justification. And these are the Works St. Paul speaks of, and the reasons
which he alleadges why we are not justified by these Works is, because no man
has them. This is that which he apparently urges (for he ascends in his
dispute from the Law of Moses, to the Law of Nature, which concerns both Jew
and Gentile) in his three first Chapters to the Romans, so that if any man be
justified, it must be without them. Therefore we conclude (says he) that by
faith without them (that is without having them) a man is justified. There are
then Works also which are consistent with Pardon and Mercy though we have them,
so that when we have done these, we do need the righteousness and satisfaction
of our Redeemer to cover their imperfection, and for acceptance of our
persons, no less than if we had Faith alone without any, and these are Works of
sincerity required of us in the Gospel. It is no ways derogatory, I say, to
Gods Grace and Christ's Merits, for a man to be justified by these works, any
more than to be justified by Faith alone, in regard to Debt or Merit, upon
which account St. Paul excludes works in his Disputation. It is of these Works
I must say, (as the Apostle says it is of Faith) that it may be of Grace. And
these are the Works St. James speaks of, when he says, By Faith and Works
also; that is all one as by a Faith working by Love in Paul's words otherwhere.
And the being justified by Faith working by Love, or by a Faith productive of
Works, or by these Works and Faith also (which being such Works as fall short
of the Law, and do need grace and forgiveness for their acceptance with God)
is all one with St Paul's by Faith without works of the Law, or without such as
the Law requires unto justification. Thus are Paul and James reconciled. I will
advance hence then my former argument. That justification by Faith without
works which St. Paul speaks of, is that Justification, or that Imputation of
Abraham's Faith for righteousness, which is spoken of in that Text in Genesis.
That justification by Works and Faith also, which St. James speaks of, is that
Justification or that Imputation of Abraham's faith for righteousness, which is
spoken of in that Text in Genesis. Therefore St. Paul's justification by faith
without works, and St. James justification by faith and works also, or by works
and not by faith only, is the same in the two Apostles. The medium upon which
all three Syllogisms depend, is the Apostles citing the same Text, both of
them, for that which either of them assert, while one says by faith without
works, and the other by works and not by faith only. The major and minor
therefore in all three are undeniable; and in the conclusion of the last, I am
sure the Doctor and I shall agree together.

I have another thing to offer to the thoughts of the Dr. that whereas he tells
us of a Commutation between Christ and us in his taking upon him our sins, and
our partaking of his righteousness, I do apprehend this expression and doctrine
to be Christian, holy and good, according to the sense of that Text, He was
made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; and the
like places: But only there is a difference to be put between the use of the
notion against the Socinians in the point of Satisfaction, and the use of it
against the Mediocreans in the point of Justification. I do believe such a
Commutation as the Dr. speaks of, is necessary to that great work which Christ
undertook for Mankind, as it concerns the whole world in the procuring
Reconciliation and Life for all upon the terms of the Redeemer; for if he had
not taken on him our sins, to suffer in our behalf (which is his being made sin
for us) and fulfilled the whole Law also for us, that God might without
dishonor to him as Rector, dispense with it, so as to impute to us our faith
and imperfect obedience for righteousness (which is our being made the
righteousness of God in him) there would have been no satisfaction offered, and
consequently no Reconciliation or Redemption: But as for such a Commutation in
the point of Justification, which concerns particular Believers, I am yet to
learn what to make of it from this Reverend person. To enquire then to the
bottom, the foundation of this Commutation, is laid (I see) by him in the
Mystical Union between Christ and his Members, which must pertain therefore
only to such, and that as a fruit or effect of the Spirit of Christ given to
them (if it be so) to that end: When this indeed is a thing that does not
belong at all to the operation of the Third person of the Trinity, but to the
work of the Son, and the arbitrary ordination of the Father. Whatsoever
influence Christ has upon the soul as our Head by the operation of the Holy
Ghost; or whatsoever is an effect of the Spirit when once given for uniting us
to him, it must have this Union for its ground or foundation: But whatsoever
arises to us from Christ another way, and is no effect of the Spirit, it may
not be ascribed without contradiction to that spring from whence it comes not.
The Dr. judges right, that such a Communication with Christ cannot indeed be
rationally thought on, but we must conceive of some Union presently which is
the ground of it: But there is a double Union between Christ and us. The one is
by taking upon him our Nature, and the other by giving us his Spirit. The
blessed Commutation the Dr. speaks of, does not depend upon that Union which we
have with him by the Communication of his Spirit; for this indeed is no ways
any effect thereof: But it does depend on the Union which he has with us in
taking upon him our Flesh. Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of
flesh and blood, he also took part of the same. Again, He took not on him the
nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham, and in that seed our
Nature; and as he took our nature, he took on him our sins; for he took our
nature only to this end, that he might redeem Man, when the Angels whose nature
he took not, were not redeemed. Wherefore when he comes into the world, he
says, sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have thou prepared
me. A body is prepared for Christ, that he may be a sacrifice to answer those
Types under the Law, which without him could signify nothing, The Beast for
the Propitiatory Sacrifice had the sins of Israel laid on him; and this is
exhibited in that saying of John, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world: And of that in Peter, Who his own self bare our sins in his
own body on the Tree. It is manifest then that this Commutation which consists
in Christ's taking upon him our sins, that he might be a sacrifice for them,
and fulfilling the duty of the whole Law (which we were bound unto, but broke)
to procure new terms, in the performance whereof we might be righteous, and so
accepted upon the account of his merits (which is his becoming sin for us, that
we might become the righteousness of God in him, as I have said before, and
have need to say again) does belong to that Union which Christ has with
Mankind, according to that Text in the Hebrews, He that sanctifies, and they
that are sanctified are of one; that is, of one flesh, as appears by what
follows; and not to that Union which he has with his Members only, according
to that Text in the Corinths, He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit; that
is, it belongs to that Union which is Hypostatical in Christ's taking our
nature with the Divine Nature into one person, and not to that Union which is
Mystical, according to the supposition of the Dr. There is a distinction then
to be remembered, which we have often in Scripture, and that is of Christ in the
Flesh, and Christ in the Spirit. We must make a difference accordingly between
what he did for us, as he was in the flesh, and what he does for us in the
Spirit, or by it. That which he did for us in the Flesh (I speak it
indefinitely) must belong to All, for the flesh he took, was the flesh of All;
and hence is he said to die for All, to taste Death for every man, to be a
propitiation, not for our sins only, but for the sins of the world. That which
he does for us in the Spirit, is peculiar to his Members, and the Elect to whom
he gives it. I speak of the Spirit as a principle of Union and Life in Christ,
and not as Author of common gists. I argue now. It is certain that the
Righteousness Christ performed, and the Sacrifice he made for us, was performed
and made in the Flesh. It is certain that in this Righteousness and Sacrifice
is contained all that he undertook in our behalf, as he sustained our part in
the work of his Mediation for Man's Redemption. It is certain that the
Commutation the Dr. speaks of, must be supposed unto Christ's sustaining our
part in this work. It is certain consequently that this Commutation, and the
part Christ sustained in the performing this Righteousness, and offering this
Sacrifice, does belong to Christ in the Flesh, and so must be universal for all
the world, and does not belong to Christ in the Spirit, to be appropriated to
his Church or Members only, which is this Learned Drs. apprehension throughout
his Book. Let us distinguish then now at last between the Impetration of our
Redemption, and all those benefits we have by Christ, and the Application of
them. The Impetration belongs to Christ in the Flesh, and the Application to
Christ in the Spirit. (I mean by Impetration, obtaining by Sacrifice and Merit,
and distinguish it from Intercession). Christ took our Flesh to procure our
Redemption; he gives us his Spirit to apply it. Now I have this notion to offer
the Dr. under his correction if I be out, and under his candor to receive it,
if it be light; that this blessed Commutation he speaks of, and rightly
magnifies, does go to the Impetration of our Redemption, and the benefits we
have by Christ, and not to the Application. If this Commutation between Christ
and us, of his Righteousness for our sins, did go to (or was made in) the
Application, I see not how any more than one man could have it. If Christ makes
the Commutation with Peter, and so takes his sins, and gives him his
Righteousness in exchange, this Righteousness of Christ must now be Peter's,
and so Paul and James and John cannot have it. It must not be therefore
conceived sure, that this Commutation is made with particular persons, or that
it does go into the Application, but that it goes into the Impetration of those
benefits we have by Christ, which being procured for all upon condition, there
is no particular person but by the performing that condition alike may (and by
that means only can) enjoy them, one with another. To make this quite clear,
there is but one cloud to be removed, which does (as I suppose) hang on the
mind of most, in thinking something more of the Spirit's Application of what
Christ has done for us, or of his Merits and Righteousness to the soul, than
there is. But this is all that I am able to understand of this Application; to
wit, that the Spirit by his grace enables us to perform the conditions upon
which these benefits are procured for us; and so they become ours, and the
Merits and Righteousness of Christ are said to be so in regard to those
effects. They are ours for the Impetration of these benefits, but they cannot
be ours in themselves, that is, not ours in regard to the Application. What.
Christ did for us in the Flesh, was to reconcile our salvation to God's glory,
and the ends of Government: What Christ does in the Spirit is to reconcile our
spirits to what God requires of us, and so to qualify us for our possession of
the benefits which he has purchased in the flesh. The benefits are ours, and
we enjoy them as being impetrated for us upon that condition, which through the
Spirit (given for the Application) we perform, and Christ's Righteousness and
Merits being ours in regard to these effects it may be said to be imputed to us
if our Divines please. If there be conceived any Commutation with Christ of his
Righteousness for our sins, or any imputation of it unto us any otherwise than
thus in regard to the effects, I understand it not. The principal effect of
Christ's Righteousness and Sacrifice (which both together making up
satisfaction to God for man's sin, God is reconciled, and comes to new terms)
is the obtaining the Law of Grace for us, according to which we may be
righteous, or made the Righteousness of God in Christ, in the Scripture phrase
(See my Middle Paper of the Covenants in the six first leaves), and upon this
Righteousness, as the condition performed, all other of the effects or benefits
depend. In the Application it is true, that we have the benefits, but from
whence do they come? It is not from any act of ours, we are not our own
Benefactors; nor from any work of the Spirit. That we do, is the performing the
condition, and that the Spirit does, is the supplying us with grace to do it:
But the condition is not the cause of the benefits, only causa sine qua non,
which being put, the benefits flow to us by virtue of the Impetration, from the
merit of what Christ has done. Many (says Mr. Truman) make this their strong
hold, that faith alone is the receptive grace, and not repentance and sincere
obedience: but there is no such thing as receiving Righteousness,
Justification, Pardon. Justification, right to Heaven, Righteousness, comes on
men. The free gift came upon all to Justification. By the offense of one,
judgment came upon all to condemnation. As condemnation comes upon men without
any act of receiving it, it is a resultancy from the Law upon disobedience: So
Justification, right to Heaven, is a resultancy from a Law-promise, the
condition being performed. This I look on not only as pretty, but in regard to
what I apply it very solid. It is from the Covenant-promise, or through the Law
of grace immediately, and so from the Impetration of Christ and his Merits at
last (or ultimately) that the benefits come on us, and all that we do toward
it, is only our performing the condition. Comes this blessedness then on the
Circumcision only, or on the Uncircumcision also? It is to be observed a little
farther, that when the Scripture speaks any thing of this Commutation, we find
it attributed only to God and Christ, and that as a thing past and done, and
never to the work of the Spirit, which is still a doing. It is said therefore
that the Lord has laid the iniquities of us all, or made all our sins to meet
on Christ, in the person of the Father, and that Christ took them, bare our
sins, with the like expressions: But I read nor a word of such a work as is
still to be done, which the Holy Ghost's were, if it belonged to him. It must
be conceived therefore that God and Christ in their everlasting transactions
between them, about the redemption of Man, agreed upon this matter of
Commutation, which (however the Dr. expresses it) in the root, is Christ's
undertaking to stand in our stead according to the Law of his Mediation; which
Law he performing, this business actually was accomplished, and we have the It
is finished, declared on the Cross: So that be it whatsoever it will, it does
go, or did go into the Impetration, it cannot go into the Application of our
Repemplion. To come home then quite to the Dr. How Christ's Righteousness is
imputed to us in regard to the Impetration of the benefits we have from him, or
how it is made ours in regard to the Effects impetrated, as those effects are
purchased by it upon condition, I understand; but how it is imputed to us, or
made ours in the Application by the Spirit in any effect, or in the effect of
Justification, any otherwise than other effects, I have had my eyes opened so
long about this point, as I begin to see at last with much ado, nothing of it.
Adoption, Salvation, and other benefits, as well as Justification, are effects
of Christ's Righteousness, or of Christ's purchase, and when we believe and
perform the condition, we receive Adoption, and have a right to Salvation as
well as to be Justified. Adoption is by faith, Salvation by faith,
Justification by faith. As faith concurs to the one, it does to the other. Here
only is the deceit. Justification is Gods accounting a person righteous, and
this being upon the account of Christ's righteousness, the understanding is
entangled, as if we were made righteous by his righteousness in some way, as
must render us to be justified otherwise by it, than saved. There never was any
dispute about the imputation of Christ's righteousness to our Adoption and
Salvation, and yet it is a certain truth, that it is imputed to us in regard to
these effects, as in regard to Justification. The righteousness of Christ then
does concur to our Adoption, Salvation, sub genere causae efficientis, as the
meritorious procuring cause of them: if it concur any otherwise unto
Justification, that is sub genere causae formalis also, as the formal reason no
less than the procuring cause of it, it is a matter (I must confess) of my
Admiration; and I must crave of the Doctor farther instruction, or the
ingenuity to accept this slender endeavor of mine for his own satisfaction.
And the third Captain of fifty went up, and came and bowed before Elijah and
besought him, and said unto him, O man of God, I pray thee -- And he arose and
went down with him.

I have many other thoughts in my mind to offer the Doctor, or this Author,
which I will forbear, for I remember that the Gentleman has a second part to
come out, that he intends more particularly against the Doctor. I will
therefore stay a while upon such matters that are already proposed, and see if
he performs his intention; and it will be then time enough (if it be like also
to do good, and be fit) to confer a few more notions with him. For I like my
man much for his Natural parts, and Free-Divinity: as I must note him a little
for deficient in his Ethics and Civility, so long as he has to do with such
an Adversary. I cannot commend him for this usage of the Doctor; who is one I
must confess for my own part, that I value for his Worth, I love for his
Courtesy, I am pleased with for his Candor, and I think my self happy, if at
any time I get but a little of his Company.

THE END.
READER,
LEast I should not have occasion (or least I should not take it, if I have) to
write again upon these matters, I must tell you of some things I find wanting.
I have not commended this Ingenious Person for his very apt Exposition of some
Texts, as I think he deserves, if I had examined them well enough to do it.
Again, I have not declared my scope in the discourse I have about the Natural
and Spiritual man, in the beginning of the Book. If one imagine my scope to be
only to confute this Author, he will make little of me, and less of himself. My
scope is not to invalidate the Interpretation he brings, which I acknowledge
fair: nor to advance the other, which I impute to the Friendly Debater (because
I took my first hint from him) but in the cultivation of it any man may see in
whose mind it is harbored: Nor do I confirm the Doctors against this Authors
opposition, to prefer it before either: But I do impartially endeavor the
elucidation of the place, as a searcher after Truth, to this end, that he who
has the best faculty of discerning, may have all the light I have to his own,
to make judgment. This is not the manner ordinarily of others. And this I do
also, that by such indifferency of mine, I may put some discountenance upon the
over-peremptoriness of this worthy Young man, who, when he sees his own Notion
to be reasonable, does forget that the Doctors, or mine, may be reasonable
also. Another thing is this, Unto the Objection against the salvability of
Heathen [because Salvation is by Christ, and they have, no Faith in Christ, and
no knowledge of him] I have omitted something at large, that I must give you
intimation of here in a little. Salvation is by Christ, I have determined (I
suppose well) in that he has procured a Law of Grace by which we are governed,
and shall be judged; and so long as the Heathen, or all the world, are under
that government of grace as well as we, Salvation must come to them upon the
same account of Christ, as it does to us, if any of them perform the Condition.
And what if the Heathen knows not this, that it is Christ that has procured
this remedying Law for us, and them, yet is that nothing, as to the truth of
the thing, for so it is, and those that live well, have the benefit of it. If a
ransom be gathered for the Slave at Algiers, he is freed from his slavery no
less for that, because he knows not the Friends that did it. The Disciples
were partakers of Redemption by Christ, when they knew nothing of his Sacrifice
till after his death and resurrection. And what did the Jews know, if the
Disciples knew no more? For Faith then, As there is a threefold Administration
of the Covenant of grace according to the state of the Heathen, the Jew, and
the Christian, according to what I have said: So is there a threefold Faith in
regard to these three Administrations of it. Faith is diversified according to
its Objects, or the Revelations which man has from God. I have not room here
for Explanation. Though a Heathen has not that Faith as is required of the
Christian under the third promulgation of the Covenant, or was of the Jew under
the second, yet has he such a faith as belongs to the first, and so long as
that faith he has, does work by love, or by sincere obedience to God, it will
justify him, as ours will. And this is the meaning of that Text, But now is
the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: The righteousness of God
is the righteousness of this Covenant, which has been ever a foot, as in my
Paper of the Covenants I show, and from faith to faith, is from the faith which
was sufficient in the first and second, to that which is now required in the
third and last Promulgution of it. I have not said this full enough, but it is
necessary to be intimated; And in the the room that is left I must give notice,
that I let these sheets be a sticht Book, that my Papers of the Middle Way may
be bound up with them, because they are of the same Nature. There was four of
these Papers, about five sheets a piece. Of Election and Redemption; Of
Justification; Of the Covenant, Law and Gospel; and Of Perfection. They are
complete none of them without one another, for what I found wanting in one
Paper, I took liberty to supply in the next, though of another Subject. My work
is to dig the Metal, the Refiner is another Trade. The Point of Justification
that got out first from me, is not perfectly stated till the Reader has read
both the six and seven first leaves of the Covenants, and the beginning of
Perfection. These (...) (...) together, I entitled Mediocria, and from (...)
in these present Sheets I do once or twice call those who are for the Middle
way in these Points, Mediocrians. There are several places in them very needful
for him to see that reads these present Disquisitions; but six or seven first
leaves of the Paper of the Covenants, Law and Gospel (before I come to treat
those Subjects themselves) I suppose to be most necessary; though the last
Point I think most maturely stated. Those twenty sheets, and these fourteen
together will make a sufficient bound Book.

J. H.

ERRATA.
Page 58. line 31. for discernings read deservings. p. 92. l. ult. for die r.
body.


