A RELATION OF THE Miraculous Cure OF SVSANNAH ARCH, OF A Leprosy and Ptysick,
Wherewith for some Years past she had been sorely afflicted.

Psalm. 75. 1. -- For that thy Name is near, thy wondrous Works declare.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. and sold by R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane. MDCXCV.

THE PREFACE.
THE Works of God call for serious Observation from all who are Spectators of
them, and are very instructive to the Children of Men. By these God may be said
to speak Once, yea Twice, yet Man perceives it not. We are with the utmost
Diligence to apply our selves to the right understanding of the Voice of God in
them, Psalm. 111. 2. The Works of the Lord are great, particularly the Works of
Creation, which do always speak with a loud Voice to the Inhabitants of the
Earth, Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his Handiwork. Day unto Day utters Speech, etc. The
visible Heavens, so vast and spacious, richly adorned with Sun, Moon, and
Stars, which are admirable in their Course, and powerful in their Influence;
these are a legible Book, wherein we may read what a glorious Being God is, who
is the Maker and Former of these glorious Creatures: and from the Consideration
thereof reflect on Man as a vile contemptible Creature; Psalm. 8. 3, 4. When I
consider thy Heavens, the Work of thy Fingers, the Moon and the Stars which
thou have ordained, what is Man that thou art mindful of him? etc.

And as the Works of Creation are great, so the Works of Providence (whereby he
governs, preserves, orders and disposes of all things in the World) are great
also, especially in and for his Church and People; the Infinite Power, Wisdom
and Goodness of God being abundantly manifested in them. These Works of God are
to be narrowly inspected, found out, and searched into by all those that take
Pleasure therein: And it is a God-provoking Sin not to regard the Works of the
Lord, and the Operations of his Hands. For this Sin God threatens to destroy a
People, and not build them up, Psalm. 28. 5. Sometimes God goes out of his usual
Course of Providence, and works miraculously (an eminent Instance whereof we
have in this Narrative). This he does sometimes immediately, Mark 6. 52. Joh.
2. 11. sometimes mediately, Mark 9. 38, 39. Acts 4. 16, 22.

Here might be considered what the glorious Design of God is in his miraculous
Works.

As, 1. To convince an Atheistical Generation of Men, that there is a God that
acts above the Power of Nature or natural Causes, 2 Kings 5. 15.

2. That those who contemn and under value the Lord Jesus Christ (through Faith
in whose Name Lepers were cleansed, the Blind received their Sight, a Bloody
Issue stopped, etc.) might be convinced that he was the true Messiah, yea God
as well as Man.

Though Christ came in the Form of a Servant, yet the Glory of his Deity
sparkled forth in diverse Ways, and on diverse Occasions, particularly in his
miraculous Works, which none but a God could do, Joh. 9. 3. and 2 11. Christ
turns Water into Wine, and thereby showed forth his Glory, even the Glory of
the only begotten of the Father.

The Disciples of Christ wrought Miracles; but this they did in the Name of
Christ, Acts 3. Whereas Christ wrought his by his own Divine Power, which may
justly strike a Damp upon those who of late have been so unhappy as to deny the
Divinity of our Lord Jesus.

3. Christ's miraculous Works are designed to strengthen the Faith of his
People; John 2. 11. When Christ had wrought that Miracle of turning Water into
Wine, it is said, his Disciples believed on him. They believed before, but now
they were confirmed in their Faith.

And if so, then Christ's curing the Leprosy and other Distempers in our day,
which in the Judgment of the ablest Physicians were incurable, is not slightly
to be passed over.

That diverse miraculous Cures have been wrought of late, immediately by the
Divine Power of Christ without humane Means, is not to be denied by any but
such as are hardening themselves against Christ and his Works, as the
unbelieving Jews did, who though Christ had done many mighty Works amongst
them, yet they believed not on him, John 12. 37.

Amongst other wonderful Cures which the Lord Jesus has lately wrought, this
seems not to be the least which he has wrought on the Body of Susannah Arch;
of which this Narrative gives an impartial Account.

She is known to be a Woman of an holy Conversation, enjoys much Communion with
God, and is a Member of a Congregation, meeting in Devonshire-Square in London.
She lives at Battle-Bridg in Southwark, where any that desire it may receive
further Satisfaction.

A NARRATIVE of the Miraculous Cure of Susannah Arch, of a Leprosy and Ptysick,
wherewith for some Years past she had been sorely afflicted.
I Susannah Arch do solemnly declare, in the Fear of God, that my Distemper
began about four Years ago with an extraordinary Itching and Scurf on my Head,
and afterward it spread over my Body. This continued about three Years before
I advised with any Physician to know what it was; and then my Husband died,
whose Death was attended with many aggravating Circumstances, occasioning much
Sorrow and Grief; all which conduced to increase my Distemper. Under my great
Distress of Body and Mind I was lamenting my self, saying, What, a poor
distressed Widow! a poor afflicted Widow! Then the Lord was pleased to give me
in that Scripture, Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but gave him up
for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us all things? This I took as
a Bond from the Lord, wherein he was pleased graciously to bind himself to
supply all my Necessities, which was much to my Support at that time.
Immediately after my Husband's Burial, being left in a poor and desolate
Condition, that Scripture came to my Mind, Job 1. 21. Naked came I out of my
Mother's Womb, and naked shall I return again. The Lord has given, and the
Lord has taken away, and blessed be the Name of the Lord. Under these sad
Exercises I was helped to consider, that my outward Condition was not worse
than my Lords and Master's; of whom it is said, Matthew. 8. 20. The Foxes have
Holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man has not wh^^e
to lay his Head. Then was I helped to say, I have lost all, and yet have all;
and to plead with God in the Words of Jacob, Genesis 32. 12. Thou said, I will
do thee good. These and many other precious Words were powerfully impressed on
my Soul for my Support and Comfort.

After these Troubles my Distemper much increased, and then I advised with Mr.
Forty an Apothecary, who told me my Distemper was a Leprosy. I asked him
whether it was curable: He told me, it was not curable. Then was I advised by
his Wife to go to one Mrs. Griffin, who is skilful in curing Scald Heads, and
she persuaded me to go to the Hospital, but I found a Reluctance in my self
thereto, having a Persuasion in my Mind from the time that Mr. Forty told me it
was incurable, that Jesus Christ would cure it. Nevertheless considering that
Passage of the Woman that had the Bloody Issue, though she spent all on
Physicians, yet this did not hinder her being cured by Christ when she came to
him: So I concluded my going to the Hospital might not hinder Christ's curing
me: Thereupon I was satisfied in my self to go; and when I presented my self to
the Physician and Surgeons, they told me it was a Leprosy, and asked me what
I desired of them. I desired to be an Out-patient, and they prescribed me some
things, but I had no Faith in the Success of them, and so took but one Dose,
and threw the rest away, looking to an higher Hand for my Cure. However I went
a second time, and then they who gave out the Medicines, seeing my Distemper,
told me, it was in vain to spend my time in attending any further on them, for
it was a Leprosy, and could not be cured. Not long after this I was sent by a
Friend of mine, on her own Account, to Dr. Bourne, and I took that Opportunity
to show him my Distemper: And when he saw it, he lift up his Hands, saying,
Good Lord have Mercy upon thee! it is a Leprosy. He likewise told me, there
might be something given to curb it (but not to cure it) if I had wherewithal
to defray the Charge. I told him I was a poor Widow, and so concerned my self
no more with him. I went away from him full of Comfort, having this Persuasion,
that Jesus Christ would be my Physician, and would cure me.

After this I was sent by the same Friend, and on her own Account, to Dr.
Clarke, and took that Opportunity to discover my Case to him, who knowing me,
sympathized with me, saying, Alas, poor Woman, it is a Leprosy! I asked him
whether it could be cured: He told me, that something might be given to check
it, but not to cure it; and that if I would go to Mr. Humes an Apothecary, he
would give Directions to him, and would do what he could for me. But having no
Hopes of Cure from any humane Means, I concerned my self no further with him in
this Matter. One Reason why I had no Expectation of Cure from Man was, the
occurring of that Scripture frequently to my Mind, Mat. 8. 2. Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. This I was enabled to plead before him with
some Degree of Confidence that at last I should prevail.

After this another Friend and Neighbor of mine being sick, desired me to go
for her to Dr. Nicholls; and when I had discoursed with him concerning my
Friend, I asked him what he thought of my Distemper? who answered, Alas! poor
Woman, how came you by this Surfeit? I asked him what the Distemper was? and he
likewise told me, as the others had done before, that it was a Leprosy, and
incurable.

This I can truly say, that all along my Faith was fixed on the Lord Jesus
Christ: It was on him I did and was resolved to rely, who in the Days of his
Flesh, when on Earth, cured all Diseases and Sicknesses among the People; and I
was confident, that he had the same Power now he was glorified in Heaven, as he
had in the Days of his Humiliation.

There is one thing I think good to remark, viz. when I considered that I was a
poor polluted unclean Leper, I was under some doubt (though afterward I
concluded it was from Satan) whether I might and ought to come to the
Congregation of the Lord's People to whom I belong, to partake of that Blessed
Ordinance of the Lord's Supper amongst them. Laboring under strong Conflicts
about this Matter, as I was going to the Congregation, that Text came with
Power on my Soul, Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has
made you free, and be not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage. By this
Text I understood that the Law of the Leper, being part of the Ceremonial Law,
is done away; and so that Doubt was removed.

Upon the last Day of May, 1694. at Night, when I was asleep in my Bed, I was
pleading with God in those Words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 57. 2. I will cry unto
God most High, unto him that performs all things for me: And then I thought I
saw a Man standing by me, and laying his Hand on me, saying, I will be thou
clean. I answered, Lord, if thou say the Word, it is done. To which I
received this Reply, All things are possible to him that believes. I answered,
Lord, I believe, help thou my Unbelief. To which it was answered, He that
believes, needs not to say, but is whole every whit, (the Hand being all the
while upon my Hand) and thereupon I awaked, and perceived that it was a Dream.
From that time (though I grew worse and worse) I was strongly persuaded that I
should be made whole.

The next Morning a Christian Friend of mine came to see me, and brought a
Woman with her, telling me, that she had brought one that could cure the
Leprosy. I then said to the Woman, Can you cure the Leprosy? She said, Yes. But
said I, You shall not cure me, for I have thrown my self on the Physician of
Value, and he will cure me: And though you, or all the greatest Doctors or
Chirurgions in London, would give me a great Sum of Money, you should none of
you take me in hand.

After this I had diverse Conflicts and Temptations to weaken my Confidence; but
God was pleased to give in diverse seasonable Words for my Relief, and for the
strengthening of my Faith: As at one time that Text came with Power on my Soul,
Mark 11. 22. Have Faith in God. And at another time that Text, John 11. 40.
Said I not unto thee, that if thou would believe thou should see the Glory
of God?

And at another time that Text, Heb. 10. 35. Cast not away your Confidence
which has great Recompense of Reward.

And whereas I had been afflicted with a Ptysick for many Years, wherewith I
was laid up every Winter; in November last it pleased the Lord to remove that
Distemper, without the Use of any humane Means. And this was to me a Token for
Good, that God would likewise cure me of my Leprosy. Soon after this, being at
Mr. Beverley's Meeting, and hearing the People talk of a miraculous Cure of one
that was lame, I asked one that sat by me concerning it: and she told me, that
a Maid that had been lame 17 Years was miraculously cured on a sudden. Then I
told her, I was waiting at the Pool, believing that I should be made whole.
From that time my Heart was drawn out to wrestle more earnestly with God for
Cure, crying out, Lord! why not I? why not I, a poor Leper?

In December my Distemper growing worse and worse, both on my Head and Body, I
met with some inward Struglings, but was helped to say, in the Words of Job, I
know, O Lord, that thou can do every thing. I was likewise helped to say,
from that of the three Worthies, Dan. 3. 17. My God whom I serve is able to
deliver me: However I am resolved to trust in him.

And now to give a true and faithful Account how I was healed.

On the 26th of December at Night I went to Bed, as bad as ever I was; and in
the Night I had grievous and sore Temptations from my Adversary, who told me I
had no Faith; and that if I had Faith I might be healed; those Words being cast
into my Mind, O ye of little Faith: and I was tempted to think I had no Faith,
and that God did not love me, but I perceived this was to beat me off from my
Confidence in God. Then was I helped to look back to former Experience, and
remembered that about 30 Years ago, when I was under great Distress about the
State of my Soul, being under a deep Sense of my Sin. I was helped to cast my
Soul on the Lord Jesus Christ. And from that Consideration many times since,
when I have been in great Distress, with respect to my outward Condition, I
have been enabled to cast my bodily Concerns upon him; and then I cried out,
Lord, I have cast my Soul upon thee, and my Body upon thee, and now I am
resolved to cast all my Diseases upon thee. Then was I helped to plead with
God, saying, Lord, if I have true Faith, if thou love me, if I have an
Interest in Christ, take away this Distemper before I die. Then Satan suggested
to me, that I had sinned with a witness in that I had limited God. But I was
helped to renew the same Petitions to the Lord, knowing I had not limited the
Lord, only that he would cure me before I die. Then that Scripture was brought
to my Mind, Jam. 4. 7. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from thee. From which
I was encouraged to resist him, knowing that he was a conquered Enemy. Then I
lay quiet and with a composed Mind till Morning. Next Day I found a mavelous
Alteration, being much better and more cheerful, which was discerned by a
Friend of mine, who told me, that she did perceive that I was much better.

The next Night after this, which was Thursday Night, as I was in my Bed, I put
my Hand to my Head, first on one side, and then on the other, and felt Skin on
both Sides of it, which at first was surprising and amazing to me. Then I said,
Lord Jesus! have thou begun? thou will carry it on. When I arose in the
Morning, and had taken off my Head-clothes, I found the Scurf was gone from off
my Head, only there remained like a little Cap on the Crown of my Head, which
was easily taken off with a Comb, which I made use of for that end: And then
appeared firm Skin all over my Head. At the same time my Distemper, which was
spread over my whole Body from Head to Foot, even to my very Toes, was likewise
taken away. And whereas I had neither Skin nor Hair on my Head before, my Hair
is now grown to the Admiration of them that behold it. And to this Day, through
the Lord's Goodness, I remain free both from Leprosy and Ptysick.

Jan. 16. 1694/5. SVSANNAH ARCH.
SOME of us whose Names are subscribed have had certain Knowledge of Susannah
Arch's Distempers, and also of her Cure: And we are all fully satisfied in the
Truth of what is contained in this Narrative.

William Kiffin, William Collins, Robert Stead, Richard Adams, Edward Man, John
Piggott, Benjamin Dennis, William Draycot, Robert Bartlett.




The Certificate of Charles Nicholls Doctor of Physic.
ON the 29th of September last, Susannah Arch coming to me on the behalf of
another Woman, desired me to tell her what her own Distemper was? I gave it, as
my Opinion, that it was a Leprosy, and could not perfectly be cured, but
something might be given to check it, or keep it under. Furthermore, I coming
this Day into Southwark, I saw this Woman cured of her sad Distemper; and by
what I have heard her say, and is related in the foregoing Narrative, I do
verily believe that it was done by the immediate Hand of God, as the Fruit and
Effect of her Faith. I must say that I stand in Admiration in beholding this
Woman cured.

In witness of all which I set my Hand this 18th Day of January, 1694/5.
Charles Nicholls.

The Certificate of Mr. Thomas Forty, Apothecary.
I Understand I was the first Person that Susannah Arch came to enquire of
about her Distemper, as she declared; and I do testify, in the Fear of God,
that I did and do believe she had a Leprosy, as is inserted in this Narrative;
and I have seen her several times since she was cured: and by my conferring
with her and others, I do declare, that I verily believe she is perfectly
cured; and that it was not done by any humane Means, but by the immediate Hand
and Power of Jesus Christ, as the Effect of her Faith.

In witness of which I set my Hand this 18th Day of January, 1694/5. Thomas
Forty.

The Testimony of Mr. Robert Hume, Apothecary.
I Robert Hume do declare, in the fear of the All-seeing, Heart-searching God,
concerning Susannah Arch, whom I have known for several Years, as follows,
viz.

1. She was, to my Knowledge, grievously afflicted with an Asthma, commonly
called a Ptysick; yea I have seen her scarce able to go along the Street so
fast as a Child of two Years old. When her Husband was ill of the Sickness
whereof he died, if she went but cross the Chamber, she would pant like one
almost expiring, insomuch that I thought she was more like to die than he: and
so she commonly was in the Winter, especially in such Weather as increases that
Distemper.

2. One Day she came to me, which I think was about July last, and showed me
her Head, saying, Sir, Can you tell me what I have got here? I answered, It is
a Leprosy (for so I think it was indeed, according to the Description of the
best Authors): Ay, says she, so every Body tells me, for I have been at the
Hospital, and they all say so of it, and tell me there is no Cure for it. I
advised her to go to Doctor Clark, to hear what he would say of it. In a little
time after she came and told we, she had showed it to Dr. Clark, and that he
was of the same Opinion with the rest, however desired to speak with me about
it: I went to him, but do not punctually remember what he said, but this I
remember, that he looked upon it to be a very sad difficult Case; so that I all
along took it for granted that he looked upon it to be a Leprosy, and that
there was no Hope of Cure, for he ordered nothing for her.

Now as to these Matters I do further declare;

1st. As to her Asthma: I could not but admire when I was with her a little
after she was cured of the Leprosy, and saw how she went a pretty way along the
Street, and up a pair of Stairs, and that in frosty Weather, without puffing
and blowing, as she was used to do. I did take particular Notice how she could
speak without fetching her Breath longer than a great many that never were
afflicted with any such Indisposition.

2dly. As for the Leprosy: It was no less Wonder to me, that when I came to
look upon that which formerly was in my Judgment Leprous as Snow, I found now
was become as the Flesh of a young Child. I do verily believe she is wholly
cured of it, there being all Symptoms of Soundness, and the Hair does grow
apace. Let any doubtful, make what Search they will, I am not afraid of being
found in a Mistake in this Matter.

To the Truth of this Attestation, I have hereunto set my Hand this 12th Day of
February, 1694/5. Robert Hume.

FINIS.

