AN HUMBLE Representation OF THE SAD CONDITION Of many of the KINGS PARTY, Who
since His MAJESTY'S Happy Restoration have no Relief, and but Languishing
Hopes.

TOGETHER, With Proposals how some of them may be speedily relieved, and others
assured thereof, within a reasonable time.

Printed for A. Seile, in the Year, 1661.

An Humble Representation of the sad Condition of many of the Kings Party, etc.
WHat Miseries and Persecutions we Royalists have suffered, for 19 years past,
None, I presume, is a stranger to, that could see, or hear. The War began with
the Plunder of our Goods, and Seizure of our Rents, And it ended with the sale
of our Estates, or, (at best) a Composition, which engaged us in debts, The
Burden whereof, where the Parties were either indebted before, or had Families
to provide for, could not but be ruinous to them: Such of us, as had no Lands,
but lived by their honest Endeavors, were not only thrust out of their proper
Employments, but made incapable of any other, that could afford them a
tolerable subsistence; so as, many (the most deserving of their Country) have
been forced to part with their Inheritances to buy them bread, Others (of free
and generous minds) have languished in tedious Imprisonments, Few, in
Comparison of the rest, by singular Providence, and Frugality, have preserved
themselves.

With what Courage and Constancy of Affection, we have owned our Cause, and
Party, even then, when, but to name them civilly, was Treason, and worse, (if
worse could be;) With what Faith, and Perseverance we have expected our Kings
return, With what invisible Comforts, we have supported our feeble hopes, at
their lowest Ebbes of outward Possibility, whilst all the Politicians derided
us, as fond and credulous Persons, who, with the Purgatory of wise men,
purchased only the Paradise of Fools; A kind of Alchymists, or Jews, who looked
for a Messiah, that would never come; And this Confidence (grounded chiefly on
our Integrity,) how it engaged us in attempts, which, perhaps were more honest,
than prudent, by opposing Plots to Counsels, and Tumults to the best Armies,
will not (I trust) be forgotten by English men in our days.

Let it not be once Objected, That our endeavors were not successeful: Rather,
let it be Construed to our Advantage, That though our Valor was at first
unfortunate, yet (through Gods Blessing) our cheerful patience has at length
fulfilled our hopes, by degrees, inclining the hearts of the most obstinate to
a relenting; Wherein, as our Trials were so our Triumphs are now the greater;
For to prevail by Loyal Sufferings, is the Prerogative of true desert.

We joyfully, indeed, partake in the Glory of His Majesty's Restitution, the
Peace of our Country, the security of Laws, and the Prospect of future
Settlement is most pleasant to us: But, alas, we are still exposed to the same
necessities, Nay many of us are in worse Condition, as to livelihood, than
ever, Partly by exhausting our selves with unusual: Expenses, That we might
appear (like our selves) concerned in his Majesty's welcome, and Coronation;
Partly, by prosecuting honest, but fruitless, Pretenses, Chiefly by the fate of
Poverty, which, seldom, continues, without increasing, And (for Accomplishment
of our Misery,) Hope, (which, hitherto, alone, Befriended, and Supported,) has
now forsaken us.

Were our pressures moderate, or common, we should never mention them, but wait
yet further upon Providence; for we reckon our Martyrdom so honorable, and
our Cause so dear, that none but extreme Exigents would be sensible on that
behalf, such poverty being (we are sure) without reproach; Had we complied with
any of the late Usurpers, otherwise than as Prisoners must comply with Gaolers,
we should not have dared to look backward, not presumed to look forward; But
Innocence, and Extremity, together, embolden, or rather compel us to litter our
Complaints, where, we think, we may challenge (at least) a favorable Audience.

For, since the Cause, we so earnestly contended for, was (indeed) least of
all, our own (who might easily have saved our stakes, as many others of the
same persuasion did) and but in part the Kings, principally our Countries,
whose Liberty, and even its Being was at stake; It may seem a hard piece of
Justice, that the price of public Freedom (when restored) should be the Ruin
(only) of such, as, with their utmost perils (chiefly) asserted it; And the
Nation will appear (at least equally with his Majesty) concerned in an
Expedient, Lest if the Martyrs, and Champions of their Country be, now, by it,
forsaken, (they being disabled by their sufferings, and others by their ill
success discouraged,) Hereafter, in the like Exigent, (which God prevent,) our
Liberties should find neither Champions, nor Martyrs.

It grieves us, in all serious Companies, to meet with these and the like
Reflections; How will it discourage our tender Plants of Loyalty, to be the
Spectators of its Ruin! How will it multiply Neuters, to observe noble
Families extirpated, and their Estates possessed (as many will be apt enough to
collect) by wiser men, (viz) such as took the strongest side! And may not the
next Generation, from such Premises, draw this Conclusion, He loves danger too
well, that loves it for its own sake?

Certainly, It were too much ignorance in us to suppose, that his Majesty is
able to contribute, in any proportion, to our relief; Rather, we are sensible,
that should He impoverish himself, to gratify us, He would soon be in a
Condition, neither to support us, not himself; Besides, we are satisfied of his
kindness toward us; But our recourse is (properly) to the Parliament, who,
(being equally concerned,) can relieve us more powerfully, and with less
exception, wherein, we doubt not of his Majesty's gracious Concurrence, and
Furtherance.

Wherefore, not to importune his Majesty (who no doubt, has a real and tender
Sympathy for us) we do, (with much freedom, but with all submission,) declare
to our Representatives, (as to good Englishmen.) That, as we, on our part,
shall for public good, as cheerfully Subscribe to the general Indemnity, (when
by their wisdoms confirmed) as any that have Benefit thereby, so, if they, on
their part, shall, (by Confirming it,) intercept those Remedies, which the Law,
(our great Birthright,) would afford us; We conceive, they Oblige themselves to
study somewhat of Recompense, Least they give us subject of Complaint, That (in
such an Oblivion,) they did, but too well remember our Enemies, and only forget
Us.

And in truth, we hope, that the people in general, whose peace is (thereby)
Established, our friends in particular, whose honor is (thereby) asserted, but
especially our late Adversaries, whose Interests are (thereby) redeemed at our
Expense, will, frankly, approve of such moderate satisfaction to us, as the
Parliament, in their wisdoms, shall think reasonable.

The rather, for that the Arrears of the late Army and Navy (though contracted,
(most of them) in times of Usurpation) being, in effect, discharged, Those of
his Majesty's party in Ireland, provided for, by special Allotments, in his
Majesty's late gracious Declaration, concerning that Kingdom; The Purchassers
of Crown and Church Lands protected by his Majesty's Commission in their
Favors, The Clergy, not only restored to their Improved Possessions, but to
fines of twenty years growth, many private Persons rewarded with great Gifts,
Offices, and Honors; We only shall seem abandoned as worthy of nothing but
pity from those that will vouchsafe it, unless our Condition may be considered
by our Country, in this Parliament.

Wherein, for their Encouragement, we assure them, Our Pretenses are not lofty,
we covet not to engrosse the plenty of the Nation, by purchasing Palaces and
Parks with our Debenturs; No; the sum of our misfortune is, That, in this
Estate, we are not only burden some to our selves and friends, but useless to
our King and Country; Alas, we have too long conversed with Ruin, to conceive
vast hopes; And, if (upon serious scrutiny) greater difficulties should appear,
than we imagine, It is our known Fundamental to acquiesce in the Judgment of
our Superiors, Only we beg, That our Case may be judged, to deserve some
public Consideration; For (however) it will much enliven us, to find our
selves not wholly despised, but that Expedients to relieve us, are, (at least)
debated, For which we humbly Offer these our Proposals.

















(viz.) For some of them, good Hospitals, the Founders whereof, doubtless,
(could they speak out of their graves,) would so direct; For others, reasonable
sums, or small Annuities, but duly paid, That they may no more depend on
private Alms, which many cannot find, and some cannot seek; This, we suppose,
will prove rather matter of Care, than much Charge.

Majesty's direction, amongst the surviving Officers and Soldiers of his
Majesty's Armies and those of the late King, of blessed memory, who never
received any recompense of their Service, Whose number being much contracted by
time, and other Accidents, The Bulk will not prove so great, as, perhaps, it
seems.



FINIS.

