THE Middle-Way In One Paper of JUSTIFICATION. With indifferency between
PROTESTANT and PAPIST.

By. J. H.

Doing nothing by Partiality. LONDON, Printed for T. Parkhurst, at the Three
Bibles in Cheap Side. 1672.

Of Justification.
IT is a trouble to to me often, in reading Polemical Divinity, to see how men
that walk in a vain show to others, and disquiet themselves in vain, are
governed by Prejudice and Party: it is a hard thing many times, and a man must
be very witty, and strain himself to pick a fault in his Adversary, for matter
of contention; when a little pains only to understand him, and the least
candor, or, but a bare equality, in the interpretation, would bring him
whether he would or no, almost, to reconciliation. The truth is, the Papists do
abuse the Protestants, and the Protestants abuse the Papists, and that is the
sum of most of our great Controversies. I judge the like between Arminian and
Calvinists, and other Contenders. If Luther has said it, or Calvin has said
it, it must be Heretical: and if the Council of Trent have delivered it, or
Bellarmine said so, it must be dangerous, it savours of the Harlot, it is the
abominable doctrine of the Church of Rome. Amongst the many contests between
this Church and us, there are few which are carried on with that affection and
concernment, as the dispute of Justification. St. Paul was the first that
engaged upon this point, and not without some warmth against those that opposed
him S. James is the next that has spoken of this Subject. The Primitive Church
and the Fathers after them have accorded pretty well with both; but the
Schoolmen as I take it, by pressing some passages of the Fathers over-closely,
having obscured the grace of the Gospel, our Protestant Churches have risen up
as it were under the standard of St. Paul, that is under his words, and the
Roman Church under the words of St. James, and come out into a set Battle,
which serving only to raise up dust, darkness and doubt among the most, it is a
conference I count between the Leaders, I mean a plain understanding or
adjustment only of the one united certain sense of both Apostles, inspired by
the same holy Spirit, that will, that must, and does give light to the
intelligent and impartial, to uncloud the errors on each side, and end the
quarrel.

The word justify is from the word just, and one may be said to be made or
rendered just, by infusion, or by plea. Our Protestant Divines do all teach us
that the word is a forensical term, and is to be understood in opposition to
condemnation, for which they have good Scripture: the Papists do tell us, that
to justify a sinner, is to make him righteous, and understand by it, in effect,
the same thing with sanctification. St. Augustine it must be acknowledged has
lead them this way. Gratificavit nos in dilecto, gratificavit a gratia, sicut
justificavit a justitia. De bono perseverantiae, c. 6. Christus justificat
impium faciendo ex impio Christianum. Christ does justify the ungodly, by
making him of one that is wicked, a holy man, or a Christian, Contra litteras
Petiliani l. 3. c. 45. There is his book De spiritu and littera, where he has
the same up, and from whence a man may pick out his judgment on this point
rather then any where lose that I know. I did expect to find more, De fide and
operibus, but I perceive it does mainly respect another matter: we may see also
his Book, De libero arbitrio and gratia. The judgment then of this Father which
leads the Schools in their disputes about these matters, as to the main, comes
to this. That God of his own goodness only, or free will, to wit, according to
Election, does vouchsafe the holy Spirit to some Persons, who does infuse his
grace in their hearts; which grace is that which disposes them to all
righteousness, and is the same according to him, otherwhere with Charity, which
fulfils the law, and so justifies us. And in this sense does he tell us, that,
Bona opera sequuntur justificatum, non praecedunt justificandum; that is, Good
works do follow the Person justified, and do not go before justification. The
meaning whereof with him is, that we must first have this grace infused (which
habitually enclines to our whole duty both unto God and to our Neighbor), that
is, the making the ungodly a just man, before he can do any thing that is good.
Pelagius doctrine was, that grace is given according to our merits: but St.
Augustines doctrine is, that grace is first given, and good works follow.

When the Apostle then does tell us that we are justified by grace, this Father
I say understands by it this infused grace, that is, an habit of righteousness
infused into the heart, for fulfilling the law of God, and so justifies. Lex
data est ut quaereretur gratia, gratia data est, ut lex impleretur. The law is
given that grace may be sought, and grace is given that the law may be
fulfilled. De spir. and lit. c. 19. In correspondence to this, when the Apostle
says we are justified by faith, he tells us, that it is by its impetration of
this grace. Impetrat orando, he has it in another place. Faith carries us to
God, when we cannot fulfill his commandments our selves, and by the infusion
of this habit he enables us to do it, and thereby are we justified in his
Opinion. Quod operam lex minando imperat, hoc fidei lex credendo impetrat. Lege
operum dicit Deus fac quod jubeo: lege fidei dicitur Deo da quod jubes. That
which the law of works requires by threats, the law of faith obtains by
believing. In the law of works, God says, do what I command: in the law of
faith, we say to God, give what thou command. Ib. c. 12. Opus quod qui
fecerit vivet in eo, non fit nisi justificato: justificatio autem ex fide
impetratur. The works which he that does shall live in them, are not done but
by the justified: and justification is impetrated by faith. c. 19. Lex non
evacuatur sed statuitur per fidem, quia fides impetrat gratiam qua lex
impleatur. The law is not made void, but established by faith, because faith
fetches from God his grace whereby the law is fulfilled. c. 30. Now when he
accounts that this grace which makes us just, or this infused grace is obtained
by faith it is plain, that he must account that good works do follow it. Upon
which there is a dfficulty might be proposed to this Father, the spirit infuses
this grace: does faith then prhcede the spirit that infuses it, or not? If it
do, then must our faith be of our selves, when our good works are of his gift.
And this indeed was his judgment, while he wrote this book, though after he
recalled it in others. See particularly De gra. and lib. arb. c. 5. Where he is
proving that our conversion, and so faith it self is from God.

To go on, when the Apostle does oppose this faith and grace unto works, he is
put to it: for, when by grace he understands nothing but infused righteousness
for the fulfilling the law, how does that oppose works? For the making his
notion hold therefore, by works in opposition to grace and faith he understands
Opera sine adjutorio and dono Dei, works without the assistance and gift of
God. In short, our justification is not of works, which are done before we have
grace: but of works which proceed from it. Israel non pervenit ad justitiam,
quare? quia non ex fide sed tanquam ex operibus: id est, tanquam eam per semet
ipsos operantes, non in se credentes operari Deum. Israel attained not to
righteousness, why? because he sought it not of faith, but as it were of works:
that is, as working it out of themselves, and not believing in God to work it
in them. Ib. c. 19. So De gra. and lib. arb. c. 8. Quomodo non ex operibus ne
forte quis extollatur! audi and intellige, non ex operibus dictum tanquam tuis
ex te ipso tibi existentibus, sed tanquam his in quibus te Deus finxit. Ipsius
enim figmentum sumus creati in Christo Jesu in operibus bonis. How, not of
works that one may not boast? hear and understand, it is said not of works as
thy own done by thee of thy self: but of those as in which thou art created by
God, for we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Again,
Ignorantes Dei justitiam, id est, quae ex Deo est homini ut sit justus: and
suam volentes constituere, tanquam per eorum non adjutam divinitus arbitrium
lex possit impleri. Being ignorant of the righteousness of God, that is, which
comes from God to man, to make him righteous: and being willing to establish
their own, that is, as if by their own free will without the divine help, they
were able to perform the law. Contra duas Epistolas Pelagianorum. l. 3 c. 1.

In this doctrine of the Father, there are three things wherein he is out.

The first is in his conception of grace. When works and grace are opposed we
are not to apprehend with him, that grace is taken for any thing infused in the
Soul, which is inherent grace: for works and grace in this sense have no
opposition, the one being the fruits of the other. But by grace, we must
understand the grace of God without us, the grace which is in God, that is, his
favor or the condescension of God to us in this matter. And thus is the
opposition very plain. That which is of debt is one thing, and that which is of
favor another. Not of works, that is, not of debt, or of what would make the
reward to be due: but of grace, that is, when it is not due, but of favor. The
certain truth is this, God Almighty gave to man a law according to his nature,
which he repeated to the Jews, and if any man were able to keep this law
according to the Covenant of Nature, then should his justification be of right
and due, according to the law of his creation: but the Apostle does most
industriously prove, that neither Jew nor Gentile was able to produce these
works, and consequently if there be any, whether Jew or Gentile that are
justified, it must be by grace, because it cannot be of right, or what he may
challenge by the law upon that account. Grace then, and mark it well, is the
accepting of any man's person, or thing which is done, when one may choose, or
when in justice one were not bound to do it. Accordingly, when God justifies us
by grace, it is his accepting of us as righteous, or of what we do, for
righteousness, and rewarding it as such, when according to his law it would not
stand, but he might condemn us for it. Let any who have better words use them,
I regard only my sense. And here may we have an answer to a question of great
heat amongst our Divines. The Gospel requires Faith, Repentance, and new
Obedience, and how then are we justified and saved by grace, or how then is
grace free, when it is not vouchsafed but upon conditions? This difficulty has
made some run into that extreme, that the Covenant of grace is without
condition: but I say readily, the grace of God, or of the Gospel is free, in
that he accepts of the sinners faith and repentance, when he needs not, or when
according to the law, he is not tied to it, unless man's obedience were perfect.
That which our Divines do offer usually is this: It is free because it is not
of merit, man's belief and obedience cannot merit any thing at the hands of God,
and much less salvation, as well from the disproportion of our performances, or
momentary sufferings, to the eternal weight of glory, with other the like
reasons, as that we do herein but our duty, and he helps us also in the doing,
which are the chief reasons that are urged. This information does labor I
think with some defect of light. If man had performed the condition of the
Covenant of works, it might upon these reasons have been said, that life and
salvation, had been still of grace and free, as not merited, while these
considerations hinder merit: whereas the Apostle industriously opposing the
sinners being justified, or saved freely by Gods grace, to justification by
works, or the deeds of the law, does account, if man were justified by works,
it would be of debt. Could a man (I say) have performed the condition of the
Covenant of Nature, the Apostle accounts still in his reckoning that then had
the reward been of debt or merit, and if a man's own Conscience could not accuse
him of sin, he had no need of grace: but now says he, seeing both Jew and
Gentile fall short hereof, and all are become guilty before God, there is none
is, or can be justified, but it must be gratis, freely in opposition to that
performance. To lend more help against this difficulty we must distinguish of
merit. There is a debt or merit of commutative justice, or of governing
distributive justice. It is impossible that any should engage the Almighty in a
debt of the former sort. Of the latter fort, there is a debt or merit upon
compact, or upon strict retaliation. It is true, that there is nothing man
does, or could do in the state of innocence, had he continued perfect, can
merit, or could have merited any reward from God, upon the score of a strict
retaliation, or returning good for good, any more then upon commutative
justice, because there is nothing we can do to our Governor, who is infinite,
to benefit, or hurt him: and so these reasons before named of our Divines and
others, may come in if they please. Can a man be profitable to God, says
Eliphas to Job. And, who has given to the Lord that he should receive of him
says the Apostle. But the case is not so (under their favor) with a debt, or
merit upon equal: and upon terms unequal. In a compact upon terms that are
equal we are to know that the reward does become debt, or may be said to be of
merit, notwithstanding by way of strict retaliation, or upon an account of
equal benefit, the performance of the condition would require no such matter.
For instance, if I agree to give a man half a crown for his days work, I must
pay it him as debt, though the emolument to me by the work done, is not worth,
it, nay, though if I had not agreed, I should have thought much to give him
half the money: but in a compact upon terms unequal, as if I promise a poor man
a shilling for his leading my horse to the next style, though I am bound to
give it to him when he has done so, yet is the shilling an Alms, or the reward
of grace, (or favor) for all that* Now I account when God in the Covenant of
Nature, has made eternal life to be due upon exact obedience, it is a compact
upon terms but equal, he that does them, shall live in them. So long as man was
innocent, God in justice could not punish him: and so long as he continued but
in the same state he was created, he must be happy, and eternally so, which is
the same thing with salvation, only it could not be called by that name, till
man was first lost. Neither may Gods giving him ability, or his doing no more
then his duty, be any hindrance to him of meriting upon this compact, any more
then my letting the man I have hired, to work with my shovel or mattock, and
his doing only what he was bid, hinder him of his wages: the reason is, because
the compact supposes that if he does but his duty, with the strength that God
has given, or does give him, he shall be justified and blessed. If Adam then
had, or we could perform the condition of Nature, which is to live perfectly
without offending God at all, the reward no doubt (seeing the Apostle so
accounts of it) should be of merit or debt, for that was a Covenant upon terms
but equal, it being meet that God should deal benignly with us as his
Creatures, while we carry our selves toward him as our Marker, and that he
should not deprive us of any benefit, to which we were created, before we
forfeited it by our transgression. But now when he gives us the reward, which
is eternal life through his Son, upon an obedience which is imperfect (that is
by a new Covenant upon terms unequal) he gives it freely, seeing he gives it
without performance of the condition at first required to obtain the same. The
sum of this is, the rectoral justice of God is either under the strict law, or
under the law of grace. When our Divines then say that our works do not merit,
they say true, but they must be rightly understood: when they give us those
reasons for it, at first named, their reasons are good against all merit of
commutative justice, and of strict retaliation in distributive justice, and
against merit ex pacto under the strict law, or upon terms that are equal: but
as to a merit of compact under the law of grace, secundum regimen gratiae pate
number, they are not good. When by some of these reasons therefore, our works, if
they were perfect, should not yet be meritorious, which is a contradiction to
the Apostle, I must conclude that the reason why grace is said to be free by St
Paul, is not because our works do not merit upon their reasons, or do not merit
with a merit of strict retaliation, or, ex pacto, upon terms that are equal,
which their reasons only exclude: but because we do not come up to those (those
works), which notwithstanding their reasons, would merit if we did perform
them; that is, because they come short of that condition, which by Gods first
compact according to nature, should make the reward to be of debt, and yet God
accepts of them for Christ's sake, and rewards them no less then if they did.
That the grace of justification is purchased by Christ, it is apparent in the
words that are ordinarily joynd with it, Being justified freely by his grace
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. But if the notion of free did
lie in the conception, our DivInes ordinarily frame, then could it not be the
fruit of Christ's purchase, for how can that which is purchased, in their sense
be free? whereas it is this grace certainly, is the main fruit of Christ's
redemption, to wit, that the new Covenant should be established, so as the poor
sinner whose Conscience does condemn him of the breach of that law, which is
written in his heart, and according to which he should dye, has yet a refuge
to Gods mercy, which he is said, (I pray pardon me the repetition) to bestow
freely, because man has not the works which should make the reward due to him.
Lo then how the grace of God is said free indeed in the meaning of the Apostle.
Not upon the account, I say that man cannot merit at Gods hand, (though it be
true that our works do not merit) as our Divines ordinarily only inform us,
seeing both that God can be made debtor ex pacto, regimine gratiae paterno, and
Christ who became man did merit for us: but upon the account here mentioned;
which is a most direct answer to the doubt proposed, how the grace of God can
be free, which is not tendered and obtained but upon condition; and I declare
that Gods abatement of the terms, and requiring a new condition is that which
therefore makes it free, seeing it is tendered and obtained without performance
of the old. As also that the new being unequal, hinders not grace.

The second thing wherein St. Austin is out, is in his interpretation of Works.
It is manifest that Paul speaks of words in such a sense, as no man living can
perform them, and upon that account no man can be justified by them. But if the
interpretation of this Father, and the Papists after him were true, that by
works we must understand works only that are done before a man is regenerate,
or before he has the help of the spirit, then may a man who is regenerate, and
has its help, perform the works that the Apostle speaks of, and so be
justified by them. And then must his doctrine be false that comes to this
universal conclusion. Wherefore we conclude that by the works of the law shall
no flesh living be justified in his sight, for by the law is the knowledge of
sin. On the other side, when some Protestants conceive that the Apostle speaks
of our works in general, and accounts that we are not justified by them,
because it is by the righteousness of Christ that we are justified, I cannot
but think they are out likewise. For if when Paul says we are not justified by
works, his meaning were, not by our own works, but by the obedience of Christ
wrought for us: then when James says we are justified by works, his meaning
must be by the works Christ did for us, and he must not mean our own. But this
is absonant to any rational apprehension to construe St. James so. Nor do I
think such a meaning ever came into the heads of either of the Apostles. Our
Divines then should not say here of our works in general, but as to the sense
the Apostle speaks of them in general, we are not justified them. And what is
that sense then in which he speak of works? why he speaks of works in that
sense most manifestly as the law require them, that we may live in them. Let a
man then have the help of the spirit, or be without it, so long as he falls
short of what the law requires at his hands, be it never so little, he cannot
live by those works; the curse is due to him for the least breach, and that is
contrary to justification. There are some Divines of note therefore, seeing no
footing for this distinction, have chose an other. There are works of the Law
(say they:) and works of the Gospel. When St. Paul says we are not justified
by works, he speaks expressly of works of the Law: St. James is to be understood
of the works of the Gospel. This distinction may serve well, provided it be
clothed with the sense of the Apostles. When some have used these terms to
signify no more but that we are not justified by Jewish observations, but by
the righteousness of the Gospel, it falls too short in the first branch to do
any thing. But by the works of the law let them understand works which answer
the law, and that there are none justified by the works of the law, because
there is none perfectly fulfill it, and they have hit the business. For though
Paul speaks not only of works by the law of innocence, but directly and mostly
of the works of the Jewish law, which the Jews fancied, ex sufficientia and
praestantialegis, did as such, procure pardon and life, without looking to the
merits of the Mediator for it, and so erred: yet the law of Moses consisting
either in moral precepts that represented the law of Nature which no man can
come up to, and the most righteous of them did break: or in the remedying
commandments of sacrifices or attonements for sin, whose virtue alone did lie
in the blood of the Redeemer: the ground and bottom of their error which he
confuteth does indeed lie herein, that whatsoever it was they did, or
whatsoever they thought of it, it did fall short of the law of works, therefore
did not justify them before God. There are works then which if they be
performed do answer the law, the law we are to mean ultimately as given to
mankind in a Covenant by our creation: and works which if performed do not
answer the law, but answer the Gospel. If the distinction before-cited be
received with this meaning, it is true that Paul speaks of the works of the
law, and James of the works of the Gospel; and that there is no man justified
by the former, because there is no man does or can perform them, when we do
perform the latter and are justified by them. To give more light and weight to
this. There are works which if we be justified by them exclude grace: and there
are works which exclude not grace though we be justified by them. The works of
the law, take them in this sense, that answer the law if they be performed,
must make justification due so as it may be challenged according to the law;
the reward shall be of debt, and there be no need of grace but justice in the
case, for he that does them ought of right to live in them. And these are the
works undoubtedly that Paul disputes against, while he proves justification to
be of grace; which is also agreeable to the end and scope the holy Ghost seems
to have in it, to wit, he beating man down from all vain exaltation in himself,
and laying him at Gods feet for all he has. Wherein it were not yet enough that
what he has is received, seeing he would be even ready to boast of this, that
he has received what others have not: but that when he is enabled by God to
perform that which he does, even this which he has received, and is accepted,
is but such as God Almighty might choose whether he would accept it or not, and
if it were not for grace, for all he has done, he could not yet be justified
and saved. On the contrary hand therefore, the works of the Gospel, that is the
works which the Gospel requires of us as the condition of our justification and
salvation, such as faith, repentance, and new obedience, when they are
performed, and answer the Gospel, they do yet stand in need of grace, because
they do not answer the law, and God might choose whether he would accept them or
no, or make any promise to them. When we repent it includes the acknowledgment
of sin, and when we believe, it is a flying to Gods mercy for it, and though we
may walk sincerely before God, we do not, and cannot walk perfectly, and he
might condemn us is justice for the least failings, and much more for our
manifold transgressions. If God then shows mercy, and accepts of what we do, it
must be of his grace that he does it. It is true that these works do justify
us, but that is while we are judged at the bar of Gods grace, or according to
the new Covenant, which is therefore called a Covenant of grace, or the law of
grace, because that grace is no ways destroyed, but confirmed by these works.
From whence it may appear that the two Apostles shall be so far from
contradicting one another about this point, as that what St. Paul contends for,
shall be made good by that which is said by St. James. Paul says we are
justified by grace, and St. James proves it, while he shows us that our works
which are imperfect (even such as Rahabs as well as Abraham's) are accepted and
rewarded as if they were perfect, that is, are imputed to us for righteousness,
which they could never be but for grace, and that purchased through the
redemption which is in Christ Jesus.

The third thing wherein St. Augustine mistakes, is that which strewes the way
to the Papists doctrine or justification by works: and therefore it will be
necessary before I come to it, to advance here something out of this Father
which offers us I think some light toward the fixing our own doctrine of
justification by faith. Per legem cognitio peccati: per fidem impetratio
gratiae contra peccatum: per gratiam sanatio animi a vitio peccati: per animi
sanitatem libertas arbitrii: per liberum arbitrium justuia dilectio: per
justitiae d^lectionem legis impletio. De spir. and lit. c. 30. By the law we
have the knowledge of sin: by faith we impetrate Gods grace against sin: by
grace the soul is healed from corruption: by that healing we have liberty of
will: by this liberty we come to love righteousness: by the love of
righteousness we perform or fulfill the law, and so are justified. Faith th^^
does justify according to him, as exordium hujus ad salutem connexionis (so he
expresses it c. 31.), as the beginning work that brings on the rest which
follow in this connection, or as the foundation link in this chain of our
salvation. That we may be sure of his judgment herein this must not go without
some quotation, from one of his latter books also. Ex fide antem ideo dicit
justificari hominem, non ex operibus, quia ipsa prima datur, ex qua impetrentur
caetera, quae proprie opera nuncupantur, in quibus just vivitur. The Apostle
says a man is justified by faith and not by works, because it is faith that is
first given, from whence they follow, or by which the grace of God to lead a
holy life is obtained. De praedestinatione sanctorum. l. 1. c. 7. And unto this
will I add the suffrage yet of a greater Author, the Son of Sirach, Faith is
the beginning of cleaving to God.

There may be here therefore two questions, de fide. Qua justificat, and qua
justificat. What faith it is that justifies us? and, how faith justifies us?

For the former it is agreed easily. That faith which works by love, as St.
Paul speaks, or that faith which is made perfect by works as St. James speaks,
and no other is that which justifies us. There are some Divines make faith a
complex thing to comprehend repentance and obedience under it. Faith, say they,
is the receiving Christ both as Savior and Lord, or the receiving him upon the
terms of the Gospel: and it is no wonder if they say faith alone justifies us,
when his faith alone is no less with them then the whole condition which the
Gospel requires of us to our justification. Others do distinguish faith,
repentance, and obedience, and say, that it is not faith alone, but repentance
and new obedience also is required to justify us. And both these sorts of
Divines say but the same thing in effect, and agree in their meaning. When the
Scripture therefore says, If thou believe thou shall be saved, or if thou
repentest thou shall be saved, Bellarmine says such Texts must be understood
with the supposition si caetera adhibeantur, that is, if that which is required
also else where is supplied. Thou shall be saved if thou repentest, provided
thou also believe: and if thou believe thou shall be saved, provided also
thou repentest and walk sincerely before God. I mean, provided thou resolves
upon a changed upright life, and if thou art not prevented, bring this
resolution to practice, there being no doubt but if a man dye before
opportunity, his consent to the Covenant is to be reckoned for obedience, and
baptism always washes away sins with the Fathers. Non concluditur legitime
(says a judicious Protestant Divine) a positione unius disperati ad negationem
alterius: neque ab eo quod aliquot locis docetur, ad negationem little quae
alibi asseruntur. And this I take to be more after St. Austin and St. James,
who do both methinks make faith the initium and fundamentum (to use his words)
the foundation and entrance to obedience and good works, and so to justify us
as it is productive of them. We shall reconcile all I hope if we say only, that
faith indeed may be distinguished, when not divided from our obedience in our
justification. That is in short, faith, is one thing, and justifying faith is
another, and yet justifying faith retain the common nature still of faith.
Justifying faith, I take it, is such a believing of, or trusting to Gods mercy,
that he will pardon our sins if we repent and walk sincerely before him (which
are the terms obtained for us through Christ's redemption), as produces that
repentance and sincere walking. It is such an assent to what God reveals, as
carries the heart and life along with it. I believe his promises (to wit
effectually) when I so trust them, as to do the things he requires of me to
obtain them. I believe his precepts when I keep them. I believe his threats,
when I abstain from the evil he forbids, to avoid them. I believe the Gospel,
when I become Christ's Disciple. Credere is fidelis esse according to Salvian,
and to be faithful is to do our duty. Well done good and faithful servant.

For the latter, I do not apprehend seriously (if I may speak freely my
thoughts, to which very end do I write) but that there is a great deal more
stir and difference among Divines in this point of justification by faith then
needs in late times. If any man might merely by his believing Christ dyed for
him, and has carried away all sin, be justified and saved, let him live as he
list holding still but this persuasion, there were something in our contending
for justification by faith alone, and a man would not be bereaved of the
comfort of such a doctrine for the World. But when we all agree that whether
good works do justify or no, good works in the resolution, and practice if not
prevented, are necessary some way or other, so that no man living ever was or
can be justified that is destitute of them, I doubt me verily our contention in
this matter is rather curious then profitable, in showing how faith without
works, but not a faith, which is without works (at least in the will and
intention) does justify. I know our Divines against in the Papists contend that
faith justifies in sensu correlativo, or in regard of the object, so as to be
justified by Christ's blood, and by faith is all one, that is by faith in his
blood. The righteousness of Christ imputed is the formal say some, or as others
had rather say the material cause of our justification, and faith justifies as
an instrument. For my own part I will tell you therefore what I have sometimes
set down for truth in my contending belief, and what I think in my cold
practical conceit of the point.

As for my former thoughts I have some times pitched them thus. Justifying
faith is the receiving act of a working habit, as has the other act too to out
forth upon trial, or else it is but a dead faith. Now this faith I have counted
justifies as an instrument, not man's, who does not justify himself, but Gods
instrument though man's act. This I have made out to my self thus. Unto
justification there goes two things, the imputation of Christ's righteousness
for the discharge of sin, and accepting us unto life: and a valid donation of
it to the sinner. The last is the ground of the former; for man must be made
just, or God cannot reckon him so, and acquit him in judgment. The judgment
of God is according to truth. Now to this making a man just, as there is this
donation of God, there must be man's receiving, Christ is not ours though
tendered or given until we receive him. This receiving then (which is our act,
that is faith it self) God excites, and make use of to this end. He makes use
of it (I have accounted) as his instrument of making Christ ours, to this end
he has apppointed it for, that he may accordingly reckon his righteousness to
us, unto the remission of sin and everlasting salvation.

Having told you this first, I may make the bolder to tell you my more
indifferent thoughts of farther years. I do apprehend that the Apostles in
their doctrine, and the Primitive Christians, had more simple and less
intricate conceptions of things then we have; and that their dispute then
whether we are justified by faith or works, in the most simple understanding of
it, contains no more than to show us what is required of persons that they may
be justified, or what is that God has made the condition on our parts of our
justification. St. Augustine I have said, does teach us that faith does
justify us as the beginning and foundation unto grace and a good life, and the
Council of Trent with Bellarmine, and the Papists after that Council stand upon
this. Faith justifies only as initium justificationis, the beginning of
justification. But howsoever the Papists have made use of that Father, the
truth and light which he has offered, is not to be lost; I do take this to be
the most right and certain notion that faith does justify as initium and
fundamentum; I will not say justificationis, seeing I understand not
justification to be all one with sanctification as they do, but as fundamentum
conditionis. The condition of our full and final justification the Gospel
offers, is repentance and sincere obedience, and faith is the initium and
fundamentum of that condition. Was not Abraham our Father justified by works
when he had offered his Son Isaac, says St. James? The faith of Abraham or
his believing God, was the beginning and foundation of this excellent work, the
ready offering his Son, which showed his sincerity of life, the condition of
justification. And the Scripture was fulfilled which faith Abraham believed
God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Here believing and offering
Isaac are all one with S. James. The Offering Isaac proceeded from believing,
as the initium and fundament u^ of it, and so believing as the initium of
sincerity of life or sincere obedience does justify. Such a faith as produces
good works which are sincere though imperfect, or such good works as proceed
from faith, are but one and the same thing with the two Apostles, and made by
both the condition of our justification.

And here I should be willing to come off: but the uniform judgment of the
reformed Churches on the Article of Justification requires some regard. There
is therefore in the Schools, a Quatenus specificative, and reduplicative. I
suppose when I have said that faith does justify us as the foundation of the
condition (and so productive of the whole of it) I have said well with S.
Augustine as to the quatenus specificative, and if I said nothing else it might
be enough. Nevertheless, seeing it is but fit upon this account to speak yet a
little more curiously, I must needs say farther, that I apprehend there is
indeed something really in that which lies in the concurring thoughts of our
Divines, that faith has, and must have a hand in our justification someway, as
no other of our works of acts have. It is this. I believe that God will pardon
me if I repent, and therefore I repent, as my faith now makes me repent and
perform the condition, it justifies me, as to a quatenus specificative: but
when I have repented and performed the condition, the duties I have performed
are imperfect and sinful, and have need of mercy in point of law, and it is my
faith yet must go to God for his acceptance of them through Christ when I have
done. It is my faith, let my say, that must make up to me, out of the mercy or
grace of God for Christ's sake, what is wanting in that I have done, to make it
such as he may impute it to me for righteousness, which else he could not. And
as faith procures me this, or procures it thus, we have the quatenus also
reduplicative, in the great question how faith justifies. It is faith makes me
perform the condition, and then finds acceptance for it being done; and as it
does both, it does specificative, and reduplicative justify the sinner. By
this, it appears how faith has an eye still to pardon according to the
Protestant, while it is opposed to works in the point of justification, which
is not only as respecting the pardon of all our sins upon the performing the
condition: but as respecting that pardon more especially which goes into the
very accepting the condition performed; for when there is imperfection still in
our duty, and yet he accepts it, he must pardon also, what he accepts. And thus
it is that the just man is said to live by faith in the most subtle conception.
The works which the just man does are his righteousness most certainly, and
that which justifies him; but they are short, and he could not live in them,
but that faith supplies (as I speak) out of Gods pardon and grace, and
consequently out of the Covenant for Christ's sake, what is wanting otherwise
for acceptance unto life. I do not say faith supplies this out of Christ's
merits, as if his and our obedience were mingled, to make up that one
righteousness that justifies us: but that it is our works which we perform our
selves, is the condition, and through Christ's merits, both the imperfection is
pardoned, and they accepted, according to covenant, upon faith. It is of faith
says St. Paul, that it might be of grace. To be of works, is to need to grace:
but to be of faith, is to have such works as need to be pardoned, even when
they are accepted of God, for Christ's sake, unto everlasting salvation. When
Augustine does tell us so often that faith justifies, gratiam impetrando, let
us take grace in his, and also in our acception, and both together will
complete the notion. Faith goes to God for his grace, or help, whereby we
perform the condition, and so justifies us: Faith goes to God also for his
grace or favor, to pardon and accept what is done for Christ's sake, and so
justifies us. As it does impetrate grace, or obtain his spirit for our duty:
and then impetrates grace, or finds favor also for acceptance of it, taken
them both together, and we understand fully how we are justified by Faith. As
our trusting to a good man, does naturally draw out, win, or procure his
assistance which yet is free and not of debt: so does our trusting in God for
acceptance, when it has first been effectual upon us to the performing our
part to that end, procure the same from him to our justification. Let us take
heed of making faith a single act as it does specificative: and a complex act,
as it does reduplicative justify the believer. These are two extremes I think,
and to be thus composed. And so you have my poor thoughts at full upon this
vexed question.

I come then to the third thing wherein the Father is out, and that is in his
notion of justification it self, which is the making us just, by infusion. This
the Papists have so improved, as in effect to exclude pardon from it. For while
they place the work of justification in the abolishing of all sin in the
baptized and justified, so that there remains no longer any thing that is
peccatum, but fomes peccati only, they do, I must say in effect, put us to
dispute with them, whether there by any remission of sins at all, seeing the
wicked are not pardoned, and the justified have their sins so done away by this
infused grace, as to have none; and from hence does there spring their doctrine
of merit, and perfection, which the controversy of justification by works,
does carry along with it. Now I doubt not but the truth here (as it does every
where), is suffering between two theives. That there is no merit or perfection
I am convinced, and that our works do not merit because they are not perfect;
but that we are justified by works, as we are by faith, St. James his words
must go as well as St. Paul's, and both must stand good, because faith
justifies only as productive of works. Justification indeed is by works, but
not meritorious works: by works which make reward to be of debt, so the
Apostles are before reconciled. There are two questions then may adjust this
great matter between Us and the Papists, or unto which the issue of our
disputes on this point may be reduced. In the one they have the advantage of
us, in the other we have the better of them. The lover of truth must be humbly
hardened to follow its footsteps wheresoever he finds them, whither on the one
side or the other.

The first question is, whether the righteousness we perform our selves, or
that Christ performed for us, be the matter of our justification? and I say,
the faith, repentance, new obedience, which the Christian through divine aid
performs himself, is accepted with God for Christ's sake unto pardon of sin,
and eternal life. It is true, the obedience of Christ wrought for us, does
justify us suo genere, by meriting the pardoning, justifying Covenant, which
is the donative instrument of pardon and life: But if the question be asked,
whether we have performed that which this instrument requires as conditio
tituli, it must be our own faith and repentance here that is the matter of our
righteousness. A man may be just in respect to the law of innocence, which no
man but Christ ever was: or in respect to the law of grace, which all are, and
must be, that are saved. Again, a man may be just in respect to the perceptive
part of a law: or the retributive part. It is Christ's righteousness and
sacrifice alone that justifies Us in regard of the one, but not so in regard of
the other: yet is it that alone which is the meritorious cause both of the
acceptance of what we do, and freedom from the Laws condemnation. The second
question is, whether salvation then and justification is not according to our
merits? And I answer, as the Scripture is clear and full from one end to the
other for the affirmative in the former question: so is the Apostle Paul as
full and clear and positive as can be for the negative in the latter. What is
it indeed he beats upon but this altogether? that there are no works in the
earth (Christ's excepted) that do merit: and that justification and salvation
therefore are of grace. Not of works, but of grace. What is that in the sense
and meaning, but as much as if he should have said it in express terms, not of
merit, but of grace, or, not of works that are meritorious, and would make the
reward to be of debt: but of such works that though they be rewarded, it is of
grace, and more then in justice according to the law, God needed to have done.
For this is the meaning of the Apostle in excluding of merit. There is a
paternal government according to the law of grace wherein the denial of a
reward due to our works were to overthrow all religion: A good child by his
filial behavior merits love and benefits: We dispute not unless de nomine
only, against such a merit as this. But as to a merit in Gods strict
distributive justice according to the law of works or any other justice which
should make our works to be meritorious ex condigno, non solum ratione pacti
and acceptationis, sed ratione operis, as Bellarmine with the Papists does
speak, St. Paul is full in the deny*l. It is nothing else certainly but the
misapprehension of the word grace in St. Austin, received by the Church of Rome
from him, that could have blinded them so in this point. I have shown his
mistake in this term, and in those of works, and grace, and have and do here
give you the right sense of each according to the Apostle. The certain truth is
this, God gave a law to man according to his creation, and if he had performed
that, or any of us could perform that, then should he as Creator and Rector be
engaged to reward the performance according to this law, so that the reward
should be of right: but seeing man is fallen, and no Person on earth does or
can perform that law, there are no works on earth that do properly merit, or no
man on earth that can be justified, if he have only his desert by his works.
This is undoubtedly the very entendment of the Apostle. That all boasting and
merit may be excluded from the world, while it is proved that no mortal is
justified or saved but by grace. And what need further conviction in this
matter? we have the Papists own words, and general confessions, that they are
all sinners, and that it is through Christ's merits that they merit. If they are
sinners then have they not these works that are meritorious, but it must be of
mercy that they are not condemned; and if it be through Christ's merits that
they merit, then is the reward not for the work sake, but for his. And what is
it that Christ has merited, that they should merit? It must come to this, that
Christ by what he has done for us, has merited or procured this grace or
favor from God, that he should accept of our imperfect performances, which
could not else be accepted, to salvation. Of this grace he has made and
promulgated the promise. Upon the promise the reward becomes due. A reward upon
promise the condition being performed, becomes debt. And thus if the Papists
say their good works merit, the use of the word is common with the Ancients.
Well then, let me recount this back to them, their good works merit, that is
only, they make the reward due from God. They make it due from him, that is
only because of his promise. Debet sibi, non tibi, says the Father. This
promise is only of grace, or made freely out of favor procured by Christ. Our
good works then must have such a merit attributed to them, as makes the reward
due only of grace and for Christ's sake: and not such as makes it due of right
or justice, and for the works sake. And such a merit; what is it indeed but no
merit, or but a word only? It is such a merit as our perfect works which answer
the law would have if we did them, to make the reward to be so of debt, as not
to be of grace, that we dispute against, and the Apostle, in this doctrine of
justification.

To return to Augustines error. Justification I verily believe is to be taken
in the Protestants notion, who do no less truly and judiciously, then
industriously distinguish sanctification and justification: and when they place
the one in the work of the spirit renewing the whole man, and enabling us to
dye unto sin, and live unto God* do place the other in an act of Gods grace
whereby he pardons all our sins, and accepts us as righteous for Christ's
sake. As for what they add usually in the definition that Christ's righteousness
is imputed to us, and made ours by faith as an instrument, I must confess they
are notions, which as they never came into the head of St. Austine, nor were
received (I suppose) in the Church till within a century or two of years since:
so do I question whether a Century or two more may not wear them quite away
again. That the righteousness of Christ performed in the whole course of his
life and death was so pleasing, acceptable, and satisfactory ^o God, that the
whole World upon that account, or for the merit of it, stands reconciled to him
so far as that he has vouchsafed a universal conditional pardon, or law of
grace, to all mankind, according to the tenor of the Gospel, and consequently
that every Person who truly repents and believes, are made partakers thereof in
regard of this benefit, or in the effect, is a truth which we embrace: but when
this very phrase of the imputation of Christ's righteousness is not found in the
Scripture, and the terms are used constantly in such a sense as if we were to
be taken for perfectly righteous in Christ's obedience, and to have satisfied
the law in his sufferings all one as if our selves had performed the same, that
is, as if it were ours, in it self, and not only in the benefit, or as to the
end or intent Christ performs it for us, it is a conception of such another
extreme to that of St. Augustines, as requires also our equal rectification.

It is manifest through the Scripture, that good works, holy duties and
performances of men and women, are accepted of God, and so accepted, that they
are rewarded by him with eternal Salvation. If thou will have life, keep the
commandments. To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory,
eternal life. I have fought the good fight, therefore is laid up for me a Crown
of righteousness. Come ye blessed of my Father, for when I was a hungry ye fed
me. If then the keeping the Commandments, a patient continuance in well doing,
the fighting the good fight, and our works of charity be produced in judgment,
as that for which we are declared righteous, absolved and pronounced blessed,
It must be in some sounder then the ordinary sense, that our Divines bring in
the righteousness of Christ to be imputed to us for our justification; which if
it be more then absolution from sin, and acceptance of us to eternal life, let
it be weighed and judged.

In Ezekiel the Lord is speaking of the righteous man, and repenting sinner.
When the righteous turns from his righteousness and commits iniquity,
shall he live? his righteousness shall not be mentioned, but in his sin which
he has sinned, he shall dye. Again, If the Wicked turn from his sins and
does that which is right, all his transgressions which he has committed shall
not be mentioned; in his righteousness that he has done he shall live. It is
apparent from hence, that there is a righteousness which is a man's own, a
righteousness which he has done, wherein the righteous man that continues in
it, or the penitent sinner that turns to it, shall live. To live in a man's
righteousness beyond doubt, is all one to be justified by it. He that does them
faith the law shall live in them, that is shall be justified by them. If you
make a question, there is another Text must convince you. The just man shall
live by his faith. What is it to live by our faith? that you will not deny, is
to be justified by it; for the Apostle alleadges this Scripture to prove
justification by Faith. Well! There is no man of reason now can imagine that
the righteousness which is here spoken of, is Christ's righteousness, and yet
the righteousness which is here, is that, a man shall live in. It follows, that
it is not therefore the righteousness of Christ from without imputed, but the
righteousness which man himself does (through Christ indeed and his spirit
assisting) whereby he must be justified and saved. It is by his faith that he
shall live in one Prophet, and by his righteousness which he has done, in
another. Put them together, and they come to one, as they must do, and that
is, by the righteousness of faith; to wit, by that righteousness of life, or
holy working which faith produces in a godly man's conversation, and which God
requires every where as the condition of the forgiveness of his sins, and the
acceptance of him to life everlasting.

It is observed by Arminius that the Apostle does several times in one Chapter
(I forget the number,) tell us that faith is imputed for righteousness. That
Abraham's was, that ours shall, or is, again and again. But it is no where said
that Christ's righteousness is imputed to us for righteousness. Indeed the
phrase could not be so used. We might say properly enough (supposing it true in
the common construction) that Christ's righteousness were imputed: but not
imputed for righteousness. For to be imputed for righteousness is to stand one
in stead of perfect righteousness, which cannot be said of Christ's, seeing that
it self was most perfect. A thing cannot be accounted instead of that which it
is. This Argument now of Arminius is good. It is faith which is a man's own act
that is imputed for righteousness, therefore, not the righteousness, acts, or
obedience of another. But when this acute Divine would introduce a notion
hereupon, that the (...) credere, therefore must justify us, and not works, or
not the (...) operari, it is both an ill and weak conceit, which is neither of
use nor value. For as the Scripture speaks of faith being accounted for
righteousness, so does it tell us that Abraham's offering his Son, and Phineas
act were accounted to them for righteousness, and that Rahabs hiding the Spies
did justify her. That is, it is faith as productive of works, or works as
produced by faith that receives the reward of perfect righteousness, which is,
we are to remember also for Christ's sake, or through his merits; not imputed to
us as proprietors, but prevailing with the Father for such terms for sinners as
answers our redemption and grace of the Gospel.

I would fain know of any man who is most Orthodox in his complexion, whether
he does, or is able to think, that Enoch, Noah, Job, who were before the law,
Samuel, the Kings and Prophets, who were under the law, or any man or woman
whatsoever before the coming of Christ, did ever imagine that they were
righteous, and to be accepted with God for the obedience which the Messiah
should perform in their behalf when he came into the world, and that the
believing this was an instrument of making it to be theirs, and so to be
imputed to them which it could not be else: or whether they did not look on
themselves to be righteous by doing righteously, and to obtain Gods favor by
their upright walking with him, and no otherwise in the World? They judged not
their own righteousness the meritorious cause of pardon to answer the Curse of
the Law of Innocence, but they believed in Gods mercy, and so repented, obeyed,
and were saved through the Redeemer. And Enoch walked with God, and God took
him. Blessed is the man says David who walks in his ways, and to whom he
imputes no sin. In the acceptance then of a man's own upright walking, and in
the pardon of his sins, did our justification and blessedness lie in David's
time: and in the same no doubt does it lie still under the Gospel. I would yet
fain know whether any of the Disciples, James, John or Paul himself, whether
Clement Roman, or Alexandrine, Justin Martyr, Cyprian, Ambrose, Augustine, or
any of the Fathers, whether Councels, or Schoolmen, whether John Hus, or
Wickliffe, or any famous or holy Writer (without resting on some bare
incoherent scraps of sentences) did ever understand, or receive the full notion
of faiths instrumentality, and the imputation of a passive righteousness before
Luther? And if not, whether it be possible it should be of any such moment as
is made of it by most Protestants? It was an Article indeed that reigned in
Martins heart, and I do therefore give it my obeisance: but it is no Article I
take it, as the remission of sins is, in the Creed of the Apostles.

If the righteousness of Christ be imputed to us (as if it were ours in it
self) it must be the righteousness of his active, or passive obedience, or
both. If his active obedience be imputed to us, then must we be looked upon in
him as such who have committed no sin, nor omitted any duty, and then what need
will there be of Christ's death! how shall Christ dye for our sins if we be
looked on in Christ as having none at all? If Christ's passive obedience be
imputed, then must we be looked on as such who in Christ have suffered and
satisfied the law, and born the full curse of it; and then how shall there be
room for any pardon? The man who pays his full debt by himself or surety, can
in no sense be forgiven by his Creditour. Indeed the Argument of the Socinian
from pardon against Christ's satisfaction is not valid: but it is good against
the imputation of it to us as if we our selves had satisfied. Christ may have
wrought with the Father (or made him that satisfaction as) to procure new
terms, so that a man may be justified as a fulfiller of them, and yet need
pardon for nonperformance of the old. If Christ's active and passive obedience
both are imputed, then must God be made to deal with man according to the
Covenant of works in the business of his justification, when nothing is more
apparent in the Scripture than that by grace it is, that a man is justified,
and by grace saved. If nothing less then such a righteousness as does both
answer, and satisfy the law also, and that fully, will suffice for the sinners
plea to free him from condemnation, he is not judged by the law of grace, but
he is judged by the law of works, out of question. There were no need to bring
this notion of Christ's imputed righteousness into the Church, but that our
Protestants mistake themselves, and forget that we are justified and saved by
the Covenant of Grace, and not by the law of Moses, or Covenant of our
Creation. Christ came into the World to procure and tender a new law, and in
this regard is he said to be our Lawgiver: not that he has given any other
moral rules of, life to us (for we know his conmandement only is Love) than
what was contained in the Law before, wherein some do but boldly impose upon
themselves and others: but that he has given the same precepts with
indulgence. If God then shall not deal with man in his justification here, and
at judgment according to that indulgence, or according to the law now in
Christ's hands, that is according to the Covenant of Grace, the main business of
Christ coming and redemption were lost. You shall hear a Protestant in his
prayer appealing from the Tribunal of Gods justice, to the throne of his grace,
and yet in his Sermon be telling the people that it is nothing else but the
perfect obedience and satisfaction of Christ imputed to them that saves them;
which is to bring them back from the throne of his grace, to the bar of his
justice to be judged. Such appeals have been received I suppose from the
Fathers, as very significant of truth, and their meaning: but not agreeable to
this notion.

In the last place, there is a righteousness revealed in the Gospel, that God
went by in his dealing with all the holy men and women who were before Christ,
and which he goes by in his dealing with us now and all the World, whereby it
is that we are justified in opposition to the righteousness of works, the which
together with the grace of the Gospel in the true sense and import thereof, is
kept out of the Protestant understanding by this notion of the rigid imputation
of Christ's righteouness in it self, that being also but a late and forced
notion, and not tending to holiness of life, (though they have bin holy men
that have received it.) It is on the hearts I find of several Persons, and
sorts of Persons disagreeing otherwise in their way (the providence of the
Almighty who is the Author, being the Conductor of all truth to its proper use
and end,) to show themselves against it, and to advance this tenent (if I may
offer the determination) to the contrary. That the justification of a sinner is
not by the imputation of Christ's righteousness made his in it self by faith as
an instrument: but by the righteousness of faith, to wit, by Christ's
righteousness, as the meritorious cause, and his faith and resolution first,
and sincere obedience added after, as the condition of pardon and life through
him: or by our sincere obedience proceeding from faith, which being in it self
but imperfect as to the Law, is imputed for righteousness to the sinner for
Christ's merits sake, through the grace of the Gospel.

But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested, having witness
of the Law and the Prophets. Si ergo nunc manifestata est, etiam tunc erat sed
occulia. If it be now manifested, t must have bin before lying hid. Aug. de
peccato originali cont. Pel and Cel. c. 25. Et tunc ergo ista gratia mediatoris
erat in populo Dei, sed tanquam in vellere pluvia. And then was there this
grace of the Mediator among Gods people as the rain in the fleece, that is,
though unseen or not understood. Ib. I observe here that the righteousness of
God, and the grace of the Mediator, is rightly made by this Father to be one.
We are said to be justified by grace, and not by works: so by the righteousness
which is of God, and not of works. What then is that righteousness of God which
is the grace of Christ, and by which we are justified? By this grace and
righteousness, it is certain, that Austine understands inherent grace, which is
a quality infused by the Spirit in our hearts, enabling us to good works, and
that this way do the Papists go after him, according to what also is said
before. Istam quippe gratiam qua justificamur, id est, qua Charitas Dei
diffunditur in cordibus nostris -- De gratia Christi, c. 30. that is, grace
whereby we are justified, is no other but the love of God shed abroad in our
hearts, or the grace of Charity whereby faith is made perfect, and so justifies
as they and he agree. Now this grace is opposed to works, and called the
righteousness which is of God, and not of works according to them (which has
been said before likewise) because it is that which is given or infused of God,
and not wrought by our own strength, or procured by our deserts. Justitia ex
lege dicitur quae fit propter legis mandatum, justitia ex Deo dicitur quae
datur per gratiae beneficium. Ib. c. 12. That is said to be the righteousness
of the law or of works, which is done through the strength of our selves only
upon the command: that is the righteousness of God which we are helped to do by
the benefit of grace. Again, Non dicitur justitia nostra sed Dei, quia sic sit
nostrum ut nobis ex Deo. It is not said our righteousness, but the
righteousness of God because it is ours so as to be first given of God. In the
same Chapter and Book. The truth is, this Father being possessed with his own
dispute, as it is incidental to the mind to fashion all things according to the
impressions it has received, does frame such a meaning still in the words of
the Apostle, as if Paul as well as he, were purposely writing against Pelagius.
There are three things in the soul said that learned Person, Posse, Velle, and
Esse, Possibilitas, Voluntas and Actio, as Austine expresses it, the Power, the
Will, and the Deed. The grace of God he accounted was conversant only about the
Power, and not the Will, or the Action. Not that he placed all grace only in
the giving the power, for that must confound Grace and Nature indeed quite,
seeing all have the power: but allowing grace to lie in divine help the power
alone he held was aided by God, and the will left to its self. This aid now in
explaining himself he confined to Doctrine. God he said does reveal what he
would have done in his law, and in the gospel, and gives us besides Christ's
example, and then the will of it self (the power alone thus helped) embraces
that which is good. St. Augustine therefore sets himself to prove, that God
does not assist us only by his word, but by operating on the will, and giving
us hearts also to do it. And for as much we do nothing of our selves but by his
help, or by the operation of his spirit, it is by grace, says he, that we are
justified, and not by works. Quomodo est gratia si non gratis data? quomodo est
gratia si ex debito redditur? How is it grace if it be not of free gift? How is
it grace if it be rendered as debt? De gra. Chr. c. 23. Again, Non enim Dei
gratia erit ullo modo nisi gratuita fuerit omni mode. It cannot be the grace of
God at all, if it be not free altogether, De pec. or. c. 24. One would think
this Father in such speeches as these had imbibed the Protestant notion of
grace; but we are mistaken, for his thoughts still ran upon the Grace of God
infused in our hearts, that is, the inherent work of the spirit which he pleads
to be gratuitous, because it is not at first given for our merits. The works
which we do of our selves without grace he accounts merits nothing, but are
splendid sins: the works which we do from grace or by the spirit do justify
according to him, and merit eternal salvation. Quod si vocatus vocantem secutus
fuerit, quod est in libero arbitrio, merebitur and spiritum sanctum per quem
bona possit operari: in quo permanens quod niholominus est in libero arbitrio,
merebitur vitam aeternam quae nulla possit labi corrumpi. But if he that is
called shall follow his call, which is in our free will, he shall merit the
holy Ghost, by whose help good works may be performed: wherein if he
perseveres, which is no less in his power, he shall merit eternal life, which
is perfect and never fades away. In lib. ex pos. ad Romanos. The Protestant
meeting with this doctrine in the Papist are no ways satisfied with such an
interpretation. By the Righteousness of God therefore, as by the grace of God,
opposed to works, they will by all means conceive of a righteousness without
us, that is the righteousness of Christ, which is not ours by performance, but
by faith. But neither the Protestants after Luther, nor the Papist after
Austine have bit the mind of the Apostle. The righteousness of God and grace
opposed to works is really nothing else but the meritorious righteousness of
Christ, procuring the pardoning Covenant of grace, and our performing the
condition: that is, the righteousness of the Covenant of grace accepted by God
for Christ's sake, instead of the righteousness of the Covenant of works. Only
we are to know this righteousness may be understood either with respect to God
as it is all one I say with his grace: or with respect to Us, as it is all one
with that, upon which this grace is vouchsafed. Charitas Dei dicta est diffundi
in cordibus nostris, non qua nos ipse diligit, sed qua nos facit dilectores
suos: sicut justitia Dei, qua justi ejus munere efficimur. As it is called the
love of God whereby we are made to love him, so the righteousness of God
whereby we are made righteous through his gift. Aug. de spir. and lit. c. 32.
It is true that this righteousness is wrought in us by the spirit, and flows
not from our selves; it is true also that as we perform it by his aid, it is
our own work: yet is not the one the reason why it is called the righteousness
of God, nor the other any hindrance why it should not be so called: for the
reason lies altogether in the opposition of it merely to that of works. Let a
man do all that he can, whether by his own strength, or by Gods aid, he can
never come up to the law of works, or to a conformity to the terms of the
Covenant of nature, or law of Moses, as it was a representation of that
Covenant, so that by the deeds thereof he cannot be justified: and for as much
as it pleased God therefore to vouchsafe us a new law, the law of faith, or
grace, or the new Covenant having lower terms, that in the performance hereof,
or in a conformity only hereunto, the man who is a sinner in respect of the
law, may be righteous, and so God just in justifying him; this grace and
condescension of God being merely from his own good will, is called thus the
righteousness which is of him, in opposition to the other which is of nature:
and so were ours, or man's righteousness properly, if he could attain unto the
same. But when he cannot attain unto that which is so by nature, whatsoever he
attains, if it be less, must be a righteousness only through grace, which
notwithstanding our shortness, God mercifully condescends to accept, instead of
that which is perfect, through the merits of our Savior, and in regard of that
acceptance (N. B.) it is called his, or the righteousness which is of him (of
his own free tender and allowance), when in regard of performance it is ours,
though we do it by his help. Lo here the true key that opens the mind of the
Apostle, and consequently the door to that treasure which depends upon it.

That which is said I know by our Protestants most to the quick is this, that
pardon indeed is an act of mere grace, but justification is an act of justice
according to law, and therefore must Christ's is an act of justice according to
law, and therefore must Christ's righteousness which alone does answer the law
be brought in to justify the believer. But this is a mistake, for if
justification lies not altogether in pardon [ Even as David describes the
blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works,
saying, blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven] it is at least one part
of it, and the whole is expressly declared by the Apostle to be by grace, being
justified freely by his grace. True indeed it is an act of righteousness, even
a judicial or forensical act, that is according to law, but what law? not the
law of works, but according to the law of Faith. It is an act I say of that
righteousness of God, and no other which the Apostle sets forth in opposition
to the law and works, and makes all one with his grace. To reckon it then an
act of justice according to the Law, intending thereby the law of works, is to
correct the Apostle, and to tell him we know better how we are justified by
Christ then he. It is the understanding of this righteousness whereof we are
now speaking will set us all right. It is Christ's obedience and sufferings
alone no doubt which could make any compensation to God for our sins, that he
might without diminuition to his honor as Lawgiver, or Governor, recede from
his first law, but when Christ has by his satisfaction procured this that God
should now deal with us by a new law, the remedying law, or upon other terms,
the thing is manifest in itself, that the righteousness then which is pleaded
and accepted for this satisfaction sake of Christ, must be this righteousness
of the new law, or the righteousness of faith and not of works; which both
denominates the performer righteous, and God just in justifying him according
to it. For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believes. That is, as I construe it, Christ by his satisfaction has procured
that we should not be judged by the law of works, and consequently that
righteousness, or justification, be attained if we do but perform the terms of
the Gospel. To declare I say at this time his righteousness that he might be
just and a justifyer of him that belives in Jesus. Who is made unto us of God,
(that is a phrase I take it signifying no more then through whom (one way or
other) God would have us obtain all spiritual blessings) wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

After this there are no texts I count (such as the last purposely mentioned)
which are pressed by our Divines for their service before, that are able to
carry such a burden. He has made him sin for us (sin, as the expiatory
sacrifice under the law is called sin) who knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him. That is, he who was the imaculate Lamb was
made a sacrifice for our sins, that we may become righteous with the
righteousness of God, which he accepts through him. Christ as a Sacrifie
redeems us from the law of sin, and purchases for us a law of grace: according
to that law we have a righteousness which is accepted unto life through Christ.
I pray note it therefore, it is not said that his righteousness might be made
ours, nor that we might be made his righteousness: but that we might be made
the righteousness of God. And what is the righteousness of God I have shown
you just now, and what in him likewise is declared here together with it, in
these few words. Vt simus justitia Dei in ipso. Haec est illa justitia Dei, non
qua ipse justus est, sed qua nos ab eo facti. That we should become the
righteousness of God in him. This is that righteousness of God, not whereby he
is righteous, but whereby we are made so of him. Augustine again, in the last
cited place. It is true then there is a righteousness, of faith, and
righteousness of God (of faith as the root of the whole condition) which are
one, and by which in opposition to the righteousness of works we are justified:
but that this righteousness of God and of Faith, is only the obedience of
Christ's life and death which he performed for us, is assumed as much without
reason, as any consent of that Father. To this purpose, I take it, is God
styled in the Old Testament, The Lord our righteousness, that is, in his
condescension to accept us for Christ's sake as righteous by a law of grace,
when in strict justice he might condemn us for sinners. It is not appropriated
to the second Person, but to be understood of that Gospel goodness of God
whereby he imputes righteousness to us, when we have none according to the law
of our creation, that is imputing the righteousness of faith to us without the
works of that Covenant. All our merits O Lord (says the Father) are thy mercy.
This is the true and exellent import of that expression, signifying moreover
that God that found out the means to demonstrate his justice no less fully (and
his goodness more fully) to the World in saving us by this new law, through his
Sons mediation, then if we had kept our first innocence, or underwent his
eternal judgment for our transgressions.

Another text which is a fellow with this, I take it in sense and words, is
that to the Romans. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: so by
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous: I comment these words thus.
As through Adams sin we came into the state of the fall, and so do all sin, or
are sinners against the law, which none fulfill: so by Christ's obedience to his
Father whereby he procured the grace of a new law for us we are brought to such
a state, as that many become righteous, and are justified by the performance.
That all mankind is involved in Adams first sin, our Divines are agreed
against Pelagius. The most understand this to come through the Covenant or Will
of God: there are some apt to conceive only that Adam being the natural root of
mankind, human nature it self sinned in him, and so when we come to exist, his
guilt is derived upon our persons as virtually and seminally in him, no
otherwise then Levi is said to have paid tyths to Melchisedech in the loins of
Ahraham. I should incline to this explanation, but that I see not then why all
the sins of Adam besides, and of all our Progenitors, should not be ours also
upon the same account, as much as that first transgression. Distinguish we
therefore between the precept, thou shall not eat of the Tree, under this
Covenant: and the threatening upon breach of it. The Precept plainly belonged to
our first Parents only, and as none of us broke that precept which we had not,
so can we not be reputed to have that sin (in it self) which we never
committed: nevertheless the penalty being by the Will or Covenant of God to
extend to their progeny (which falls out ordinarily in man's laws also), that
sin of Adams which in it self could be his only, in the effects threatened upon
the commission does become ours also. God does so impute that act to us, that
we are all, as well as he, deprived of original righteousness, corrupted in our
nature, and sure to dye: In like manner (I take it) are we to conceive of the
imputation both of our sins to Christ, and of his righteousness to us. Our sins
are not laid upon him to make him a sinner: but to be a propitiation for our
sins. He was not made sin or accounted a sinner, quoad reatum culpae, as if he
were guilty of our facts, but he was dealt with as a sinner, quoad reatum
paenae, in regard to the obligation unto satisfaction, which as a Sponsor he
was to make in our behalf. The righteousness of Christ likewise which he
performed as Sponsor or Mediator, cannot be ours either really or
representatively in it self, because this righteousness as Mediator is proper
to his Person, and is not the very same required of any, or all of us in the
law it self: but his righteousness as Mediator, even his whole submission to
the law of his Mediatorship in life and death, is ours respectively as to what
it procured, or to what he intended it should procure, in as much as we are
partakers of the benefits that derive from it. Our sins were Christ's in the
causation of his sufferings: Christ's righteousness is ours in the effects of
pardon and life eternal.

A third text, and which carries our Divines I think more then any, is that to
the Phillipians. I count all things but loss that I may win Christ, and be
found in him not having mine own righteousness which is of the law, but that
which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
faith. In these words, our Protestants observe that the righteousness of God,
and of faith, is opposed to that righteousness which is our own, and therefore
it must be a righteousness without Us, received by faith. But they are
mistaken, for, besides that the righteousness of faith and of God, is not the
same with the righteousness of Christ, as has been before observed, they are
to know that this righteousness which Paul calls his own in this Text, is the
righteousness of the Jew, that is, the Jews own, or his own as a Jew and a
Pharisee; not our own, or his own as a Christian. This appears from the Verses
before. If any thinks that he has whereof he may trust in the flesh, I more,
circumcised the eighth day, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as touching the law a
Pharisee, as touching the righteousness which of the law blameless. This
appears farther from another text, which together with this alone is all that
has any such Antithesis in the Terms (...), from whence they fetch this
conjecture. I bear them record that they have a Zeal for God, but not according
to knowledge. For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God. It is certain now from these places both, that there is a
righteousness which was Paul's own and the Jews own which he excluds from
justification, and opposes to the righteousness of faith and of God: but this I
say is not the Christian righteousness. The Christians faith and new obedience
are his own acts out of doubt by Gods help, and his righteousness according to
the Gospel: and you shall never read St. Paul saying, I desire to be found in
Christ not having my own repentance, my own faith, love, and new obedience,
which are conditions of being found in him that we may be justified. Paul's own
righteousness as a Jew, or as a Pharisee I say is one thing, and Paul's faith
and obedience which is his righteousness as a Christian is another. And this
distinction our Savior himself has first offered. Except your righteousness,
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees -- The righteousness of
works is twofold. The righteousness of Mankind, according to the Covenant of
Nature: and the righteousness of the Jews, while they reckoned to be justified
by the external observation only of the rites of Moses. The one of these
exceeds the righteousness of faith, and we are not justified by it, because no
man can attain to it: the other falls short of the righteousness of faith, or
of a true Christian, according to these words of our Lord, and for that reason,
as for several others, the establishment of it was dangerous to their Salvation.

A last text they have, what the law could not do in that it was weak through
the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh: that the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. It is urged
here by a Perfectist, that if the Protestant doctrine were true, it should be
said that the righteousness of the law should be fulfilled in Christ, and not
in us. But these words I apprehend may be a phrase of the Apostles, as the
words attaining unto righteousness otherwhere: and so it will be all one as if
he had said, that we might be justified, who walk not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit. Nevertheless, there is this here must be known and noted,
that when a Christian obeys God according to the Gospel, that obedience of his
proceeding from faith, though imperfect, is accepted of God instead of the laws
perfect righteousness, or stands him in the stead as if the whole law were
fulfilled, which is the ground of such expressions. From whence in the way we
may have light for the understanding the Apostle, when he tells us the law is
established by faith, or uses the like words. The law is established only by
the fulfilling of it: and faith as it works by love fulfils the law. But how?
why in the sense (N. B.) as is now told you. Faith produces obedience which is
imperfect, yet answering the terms of the gospel, it is, through that grace and
condescension from God which Christ has purchased for us in the work of our
redemption, imputed to us for righteouaness, that is, accepted and rewarded so,
as it is made to stand us in the same stead as the full performance of the law
would have done, which is to justify us, and bring us life eternal.

When God made man he gave him a law suitable to his Creation. That law being
founded in the image of God, wherein he was created, is most holy, equal, and
unchangeable. God as Rector must deal with the World according to this law, so
that man transgressing, he is engaged to proceed against him by it, unless
there be some means found out that he may be no loser in his justice if he do
not. There is nothing can be offered to God but his justice and holiness must
be losers, if it be of consideration less valuable then that which the law it
self required, which is the obedience of all mankind, or their everlasting
suffering for its transgression. No Man or Creature but Christ alone could
offer any such satisfaction as this for us. And this he offered in the
obedience or righteousness of his whole life and death, as the price,
sacrifice, ransom, propitiation for our sins: which through the dignity of the
Person that offered it, being the Son of God as well as man, was of value which
is infinite. That which exceeds a thing or is more in value then it, cannot be
the very thing it self which in value it exceeds. The righteousness then of
Christ is really imputed to man, tendered in his behalf, and made ours in regard
of this effect (or in the end to which it was intended I will say, when it
cannot be ours in it self), to wit, that God being satisfied or made no loser
in his justice hereby, does deal with us otherwise then by that law unto which
at first we were created. If he deals not with us then according to that, it
must be by some other, which hereby also is purchased; and that is according to
his grace or righteousness revealed in the Gospel. This grace or righteousness
lies in his acceptance of faith and repentance instead of perfect obedience for
this righteousness sake of Christ thus imputed, and no otherwise then thus.
When our Divines now say that there are no works of ours can stand before God
in his district judgment, that they should be causa propter quam, the cause for
which, (that is for the merit sake, or worthiness whereof) he should justify
any person, they say well; and there meaning is, that our works coming not up
to the original law, God cannot for the performance of them, absolve us as no
sinners: but yet seeing they are such as answer the terms of the Gospel, he
does for Christ's sake, or his merits sake, both pardon their imperfection, and
impute them to us for righteousness, in the accepting them to life, or
rewarding them with everlasting salvation. In short Christ's righteousness is
imputed to us, but not for righteousness. It is for the righteousness sake, but
not formally though efficiently by the righteousness of another, we are
justified. It is not Christ, but our selves, that perform the new Covenant, and
by the new Covenant is it, or by grace, that we are righteous in Gods sight. It
is not consequently Christ's sufferings or obedience only, but our faith,
obedience, sincerity also, that is rewarded with salvation: yet is it not for
the merit of this obedience of ours, but for his merits, or the merits of his
righteousness. Behold! this is the critrical hindge upon which the whole
controversy does turn. We will stand for the imputation of Christ's
righteousness (N. B.) so far as ever we can with holding justification by the
Covenant of grace: but when some Protestants have stood for it so, as renders
our justification to be by the law, or the Covenant of works, and not by grace,
they have departed from the Apostle. And thus the dispute in the upshot will I
think end in this, that Christ's righteousness is the meritorious, indeed the
only meritorious, or meritoriously procuring efficient, but must not be made
the formal cause of man's justification.

And yet do I see there is need still of some more words, seeing here the heart
of all lies. A righteousness we must have if we be justified, and what is that
righteousness? There is a legal righteousness: and Evangelical. Christ's
righteousness our Divines account our Legal righteousness which must answer the
law for us: and our faith and repentance must be produced to answer the Gospel.
The latter of these I take to be plain: the former must be warily understood.
There is the Precept, and the Retribution of the law. We must take heed that we
conceive not Christ to be our legal righteousness in regard to the Preceptive
part of the law (in the more frequent sense) as if we were reputed by God to
have fulfilled the same, or satisfied it in him as representing our Persons,
which is the error before confuted, and especially by the reason last
mentioned, because this makes our justification to be by the law of works, (and
not of grace) which subverts the Gospel: but there is a righteousness in regard
to the retributive part of the law of works, consisting in our discharge from
its curse and penalty, which is a righteousness of pardon, and if any will call
this our legal righteousness (which is yet conferred by the Gospel,) and
account we have it in Christ, understanding nothing else by it, but that his
righteousness is the meritorious cause of it, I know not any will oppose him.
It is true, that pardon and righteousness without explication is a
contradiction, and therefore when we allow of a righteousness of pardon, there
is a strict and a large sense to be acknowledged of terms use in Scripture.
Blessed is the man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works. The
imputation of righteousness to a person is to account him righteous; and for a
man to be accounted righteous without works, that is without righteousness, is
explained in the next verse, viz. to be pardoned. By works, he understands
works of the law out of doubt, for without faith and repentance (or Gospel
works) God imputes righteousness to none. Now how a man may be righteous
according to the law of grace, and yet need pardon in reference to the law of
works, the matter is plain: but to make a man righteous (through this pardon)
in regard to the retribution, and guilty in regard to the precept of the same
law, is to speak I account Scripturali licentia, by leave of the Scripture. To
be acquitted from the condemnation of a law by being pronounced innocent, or to
be adjudged to the reward by being declared to have fulfilled it, is in the
strict sense to be justified: To be acquitted from the condemnation, and be
pronounced guilty, is to be delivered from the law, and not to be justified,
but in a large fence of justification. Justification from a law, and not by it,
is a catechrestical speech, and I do question whether we should not (using a
strict speaking) place the discharge of the sinner from condemnation, upon the
score of Christ's redemption, rather then on the work of our justification. That
God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself not imputing their
trespasses does import an universal conditional remission bestowed upon all, so
far as a delivery of the whole World over from the law of works to be judged by
the law of grace; and when we are at that bar, there is no inquest like to be
made about Christ's work whether he has done his part; but whether we have done
ours, that is performed our condition, and if we be found to have bin upright
to God in the main bent of our hearts and lives, notwithstanding our manifold
failings, he accepts of us for Christ's sake, and declares us righteous
according to this law: and so adjudges us to the reward or promise, which is to
have Christ and his benefits, whereof one is the application of his redemption,
and therein our discharge from the Laws condemnation. And thus methinks the
Apostle speaks with more acurateness, where justification and redemption are de
industria distinguished, and the one made the means or foundation to the other.
Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ
Jesus. Redemption is the delivery of the World in general from the law, and so
from its penalty on terms appointed by the Redeemer: Justification is the
pronouncing of particular persons accepted upon those terms, and so to have a
right to the purchased possession. In fine, there is but our own sincerity, and
a right to impunity and life, is all the righteousness that we have, or that
can go (in it self) to the justification of a sinner. The import of all is, we
are not to conceive a sinner to be brought before two bars that he should have
need of a righteousness of perfect obedience in Christ to plead against the
law, for Christ has redeemed us from coming before this bar, by the ransom
of his blood paid for all the World: but being to stand only at one bar, it is
but one righteousness is sought as the condition upon which the sentence must
pass, and as for that Righteousness we have through Christ besides, which is in
regard only to the retribution, not the work of the law, that is to say Pardon,
it comes to us by way of sentence, or as a part of the reward given upon the
condition performed, but is not part of the condition, or the whole condition
it self pleaded for our justification. Only the redemption of Christ, I count
is to be first supposed, with the whole righteousness of his Mediatorship, as
the foundation, through the merits whereof, this new covenant is purchased, and
so the reward given, for his sake, upon that condition. And if it be for
Christ's sake, for his merits, righteousness, mediation, redemption sake, we see
also how this righteousness of his, even his Mediatory righteousness which
cannot be ours possibly in it self, is yet imputed to us and made ours in the
effects, or in the end to which it was performed, for salvation to Believers.

I will conclude all with the agreement of the two Apostles, which has been
already, but lightly, before touched.

When Paul then contends, that a man is not justified by the works of the law.
By the works of the law, he means works as would justify him according to law
if he had them, and says no man is justified hereby, because no man has them,
as he proves at large in the first and second Chapters to the Romans, as the
very business and scope of both, to any that will consider of the matter, and
so pleads a necessity of their believing that they may be justified. But when
St. James says a man is justified by works, he means not works that answer the
law, or such as of themselves would justify the doer, which no man has,
neither Abraham himself, much less Rahab whom he also mentions, but such works
as suppose grace to their acceptance through faith in the Redeemer, for the
reconciling the Person, and covering his imperfections. And thus the two holy
Penmen disagree not: but while the one faith, I conclude a man is justified by
faith without the works of the law, and the other, You see then how that by
works a man is justified, and not by faith only, the sense of both is, that
though a man has not the works of the law (the works the law qua faedus
requires of him) which would justify the doer if he did them (as for certain
he does not, it being impossible for any to have these, so that if he be
justified at all, he must be justified without them): yet is he justified by
faith, provided that faith be accompanied with (or is the initium and
fundamentum of) good works of another size; to wit, that will not make the
reward to be of debt, but of grace, or that are unperfect and not able to
justify him by law, yet are required in sincerity of life, together with his
faith in the Redeemer (supposing him revealed, or else in the mercifulness of
Gods nature) unto final justification, and salvation.

And now Reader if thou art offended at this paper, I cannot help thy
prejudice, but I desire thee to hear reason. If thou art sensible of that
deadly advantage which is given to the Papists, by our ill treating this point,
by the doctrine I mean more particularly, of Christ's righteousness imputed in
the unsound sense, especially when those that expound it worse, do ordinarily
lay most stress upon it: If thou art sensible yet nearer home, what a stumbling
block hereby has been laid in the way of a late numerous Sect among us (whom
to name methinks is some rudeness to them), that really having our Ministers
here by the lock (that is the place where their only strength they have against
us does lie), do reject the whole Tribe, as False Teachers that harbor men in
their sins, and make Christ serve only to be a cover for them, as they bitterly
traduce us, with great indignation, and in very earnest on this account (which
I must confess has affected me so much in reading their books, as to set me to
write, and gives me yet a good conscience in what I do, though thou perhaps art
angry with me for it): If lastly thou art sensible of the evil and danger of
Libertinisme or Antinomianisme, which has been lately so rife, though now
allayed in this Land, what roots yet it has alive in this notion
mis-understood, thou will be advised with me, and others perhaps that see more
then I, that it is time, that it is fit, this Sluice be stopped. The Presbyterians
are my Friends, and the Independents my Friends, and Others my Friends, but
Truth is greatest, and must overcome.

Deo Gloria mihi condonatio. JOHN HUMFREY.

ERRATA.
PAge 9. l. 35. for justified them, r. justified by them. p. 10. l. 28. for
that, r. seeing that (N.B.) p. 19. l. 14. for perceptive, r. preceptive.

An Advertisement.
THere is a Book came out this Term, entitled, Two points of Moment
Discussed, by the same Author: sold by Mr. Million at the Bible in
Fleet Street.


