PACIFICATION Touching the Doctrinal Dissent Among our United Brethren in
LONDON. BEING An Answer to Mr. Williams and Mr. Lobb both, who have appealed in
one Point (collected for an Error) to this Author, for his Determination about
it. TOGETHER With some other more necessary Points falling in: As also that
Case of Non-resistance, which has always been a Case of that Grand Concern to
the State, and now more especially, in regard to our Loyalty to King William,
and Association for him, Resolved, on the Occasion.

By Mr. JOHN HUMFREY.

They were wont to speak in old time, saying, They will surely ask counsel at
Abel, and so they ended the matter,

2 Samuel 20.18. LONDON, Printed for T. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns
in Cheapside, 1696.

PACIFICATION.
PART I.
THERE having been so little Reason for the Interruption of that Union, which
was made between the Nonconformist Ministers in London, without distinguishing
Presbyterian and Independent, the Government of both over their particular
gathered Congregations being (as the case stands) coincident as to the main:
And our Expectations of some more general Meeting of both for Reconciliation,
suffering hitherto Disappointment; it does seem even necessary to me, for
stirring up the Brethren to this Work, that the Difference between them, which
is not healed but sleeps, should be awakened, and must be awakened, and brought
again to Agitation, till the matter be composed. Must I say, not in regard to
the setting a few righter in their Judgments whom I think out (which yet is
also intended,) but in regard to this more general end of composing the
Nonconformist Body. For which Composure then, there must be now either an
Agreement of All in the same Points, which can never be, for the Understanding
of diverse Men will be diverse as their Faces are diverse, and I cannot approve
of any Man's going about a weak and vain obtaining that: Or else an Agreement
only in Practice and Love, leaving every Brother Free to abound in his own
Sense, as to these Points wherein we differ, so long as they endanger not the
Foundation. This is that I count is to be done, to which end, Having printed
one Sheet with some Animadversions on certain Exceptions against Mr. Williams's
Books, Mr. W. thought good to answer these Exceptions himself in another Sheet
directed to me; and Mr. Lobb has answered his Sheet in four or five. There is
one Point (as appears there) collected for an Error, wherein they have both
appealed to me, and I have said something to it: But having not then by me Mr.
W's Books, I referred the Matter to the Brethren when they meet, and to his
Books with this Adjustment, That if that Error upon Examination was not found
in them, Mr. Lobb should ask his Pardon; if it was, then did Mr. W. deserve
rebuke (not because he erred as all do in some things, but because he denies
the Error to be there) and should very honestly confess it, that so all might
be made up. By this means one of them shall get Love in such an ingenuous
Acknowledgment, and the other Victory. I have since been accommodated with Mr.
W's Books, and have looked into them, and find it harder than I thought, to
tell unto whose share the Love and Ingenuity must fall.

In the Preface of Mr. W. to his Book of Gospel Truth, in the third Leaf are
these words, The Gospel has another Sanction to the Preceptive part of the Law
than the Covenant of Works had. This change of the Sanction supposes the Death
of Christ, and his honoring the Law by his perfect Obedience. Upon these words
Mr. Lobb collects that Mr. W. holds, that there is a Change of the Penal
Sanction of the Law, which we count an Error.

These are Mr. W's words, and lie together in the same Page, and as to the
Construction thereof, I being appealed unto do premise this. That the Gospel
has another Sanction than we Covenant of Works, is a Truth on Mr. W's side,
and Mr. Lobb will grant it: That there is no Change of the Penal Sanction of
the Law, is a Truth on Mr. Lobb's side, and Mr. W. will grant it. But whether
the Gospel has another Sanction to the Preceptive part of the Law, and, There
is a Change of the Penal Sanction of the Law, be the same, is the Question.

Unto the Decision hereof thus much I have said in Mr. Lobb's Sheets before I
examined Mr. W's Books, that a Change of the Sanction, and Another Sanction, is
all one. And so far I am right, because so much is intended by Mr. W. as
appears by the words conjoined and urged by Mr. Lobb: But whether a Change of
the Sanction, or Another Sanction (being all one) to the Preceptive part of the
Law, as taken into the Gospel in Mr. W's Sense, be a Change of the Penal
Sanction of the Law in Mr. Lobb's Sense, is still the Question.

Before I come to the passing Judgment, it will be most to Edification, in the
first place, to understand and state the Point it self. Some Worthy Divines
(says Mr. Baxter) say, All the Law of Innocence is ceased, Precept, Promise,
and Threatening. Cessante capacitate subjecti Lex cessat. Others say that all
are still in force: Himself says, the Precept and Threat is; but the Promise
only, through our Incapacity, does cease. Now let these Worthy Divines that
say, the whole ceases, explain their Tenent, and let us see what they draw from
it, and if there be nothing in the Matter explained, but what we can approve in
ours, let them, in God's name, enjoy their Scheme of Thoughts, and we our own.
God has abolished the Covenant of Works, by substituting a new one in room of
it, says Dr. Owen, as Mr. W. has quoted him, Def. Gosp. P. 44. Mr. Lobb does
not, must not say, that none but Socinians are of that Opinion. There is
something now here accordingly, that Mr. W. holds, and Mr. Lobb thinks to be an
Error: But what does Mr. W. say upon it? Is there any thing he deduces from
thence that is dangerous, or of evil Consequence, to be reproved? Is there any
thing delivered in his Explication but what Mr. Lobb approves, and does
himself, and his Brethren deliver, and preach, if he preach at all, or preach
the Gospel? If the Deductions he makes from his Truth, and the Deductions Mr.
W. makes from that Error, be the same Doctrine, and that which is sound and
necessary to Salvation, what reason is there for all such to be Chid, that
cannot bear one with another?

Mr. Lawson that Judicious Divine (of whom Mr. Baxter says somewhere, that he
learned more of him than any one living) does say, that They who hold that the
Law remains the same, and that God as Rector by Substitution transferring the
Punishment merited by Transgressions upon Christ, and in consideration of
Satisfaction made by him remits Sin, so that here is nothing but a Relaxation
or Interpretation of it, do Err. In another place he says likewise, To think
that the Promise, Threat and Obligation of the Law of Works continue under the
Gospel is an Error. He concludes, that the Law of Works, not Moral Law, is
abrogated. This Resolution I rest not upon, as something dark and too short,
for how solidly soever he speaks of the Obligation of the Law, yet has he not
fully ventured to determined this Point, and I think could not do it. Mr.
Baxter therefore tying not himself to Mr. Lawson's Opinion, is singular in his
own. The Precept and Threat (says he) is of force, but the Promise only ceases.
This is his brief State of the Point, and I think it rare so piercing a Man
should take up with it. Did Christ come from Heaven to Earth, to take on him
our Nature, and put himself under the Law, to obey it perfectly, and suffer the
Penalty to Redeem us from it; and is this all that Freedom, that Deliverance we
have from it, that the Promisa^y part ceases? What benefit is there in that? We
are incapable to perform the Condition of the Law (says he) and therefore the
Promise is void. But neither what this excellent Man says here is true, nor is
it the thing which should be said. It is not the Thing, because the delivery of
us from the Law (which the Scripture speaks of as the Purchase of Christ) is
the freeing us from the Curse and Condemnation of it. To be freed from the
Promise, what good (I say) is that? And it is not true, because the Lord Jesus,
a Man as we are, did perform the Condition, and made the Reward thereby due to
him of Debt, or Merit, and accordingly entered into Glory. The Man Christ (I
said in my Sheet) was obliged to an Obedience of the Moral Law, that he might
himself have Right, Jure and merito foederis operum, to Life Eternal.

Well then you may say, if I be not lead by neither of these, what is Mr.
Humfrey's own Opinion and State of the Point? I answer, The second Opinion
which Mr. Baxter counts Extreme, and Mr. Lawson says is an Error, I take to be
Truth, and own, that the Law of Nature, or Works, continues (wholly as to us)
in his Precepts, Promise, and Threat unabolished. Do we make void the Law
through Faith? God forbid; yea we establish it. I have formerly thus explained
and stated my Judgment. The Moral Law, or Law of Nature, is a Law, or Rule of
Life or Manners, in it self considered (I count) without the Sanction, that is
not Essential to it. The Duty which it requires (arising from God's Nature and
Ours) in owing to God, if he had made no Promise of Reward, or threatened no
Punishment, for the breach of it; and God's putting a Sanction to it, makes
that Law a Covenant. Now in a Covenant there are two Parties, and consequently
there is Our part, and God's part, in this Covenant. On our part the Law I
count, being the Law and Covenant of Nature, does and must continue
unchangeable, and Man not performing perfect Obedience, and yet bound to it, is
in the Hand of his Judge (otherwise above the Law) to dispose of him as he
pleases. Every Sin against it (though the least) makes Punishment due (the
Threat declares and constitutes a Debitam, though not Eventum,) that is,
deserves it: But as to God's part, the Case is altered. Here is the business.
We are by this Law or Covenant, through our Sin (we and all the World) in God's
hand, liable to Wrath and Condemnation, and God as Rector and Judge does stand
engaged to deal with us according to it: But upon a voluntary and allowed
Mediation of his Son, and Satisfaction given in our behalf, which he might
accept, to the fulfilling the Ends of the Law, better than by Man's Punishment,
he executes not the Law upon him.

There are two Reasons upon which (when they meet) a Lawgiver who is also
Rector, may forbear the Punishing a Criminal. One is, when the Case is
Pittiable, and requires Commiseration: And the other, when his Justice and
Honor can be saved also, though he spare the Person. Such is the Case here, If
God deal with Man according to this Law, all Mankind must Perish, which is
Pittiable indeed; and it pleased him in his Wisdom to find out, and in his
Goodness to permit and appoint, that the Lord Jesus his Son should interpose so
as by fulfilling the Law exactly for himself, and bearing the Punishment of it
also in our stead, here is no Dishonor can be cast on himself, or Law, by his
dealing otherwise on his part with us than the Covenant required. By this means
did God pay its due Respect to his Law, seeing, as he required at first the
Performance of it as the Condition of Life, and when it was broke would have
his Son re-honour it and fulfill it, so he would not pardon the Sinner in point
of Justice, without an Hostage and Satisfaction. But now amends being made him
amply by such a Mediator he dispenses with the Penalty, as to us, so that the
Law here becomes not Abrogated nor Ceased, but properly Relaxed. It is not an
Abrogation or Cessation, or an Interpretation (an (...)) but (whatever the
Skilful Mr. Lawson says otherwise) is a Relaxation or Dispensation, so as we
shall not be condemned by it. The separating between God's part and our part in
this Covenant, never came into Mr. Lawson's Mind to see this. We are not on our
part (I say) freed from the Law, that we should no longer obey it, or not be
liable to Punishment; but we are delivered from it by our Redeemer so as to
obtain the Mercy, that God will not deal with us, on his part, according to it.

How then (will you say) does or will he deal with us? I answer, by another
Law, which by the Merit of that Satisfaction he also purchased, a Remedying
Law, the Law of Grace, the Covenant of Forgiveness, the Law of Faith, in
opposition to the Law of Works. The Lord Jesus has redeeemed us, his Poor Lost
Creatures, from the Sentence of the Law, by which every Mortal else must have
perished, but he takes the Redeemed into his hands, and both the Remedying Law
and Law of Nature into his Law (the Law of Christ) so that they shall not be
Lawless for all that. They have the Law still as in the Redeemer's hands, to
live by, as well as they can, and as far as Humane Frailty will permit; but
they shall be dealt with, in regard to Acceptance, according to the Grace of
the Gospel. The Law then remains in the Precept and Threat as a Rule to Live
by, but not as the Rule we shall be Judged by; a Rule of Life, but not of
Judgment. It is by the Law of Liberty we shall be Judged, says St. James: and
St. Paul expressly, According to my Gospel. Blessed be God for this Truth.

What Mr. W. and Mr. Lobb will say of this Determination I may know if they
write again, but I am not sollicitous about that. I am methinks sorry for Mr.
Williams that he printed his Sheet (when mine alone as a Third Person, to let
the World know how little they had against him, how curious the Difference,
what need of bearing with one another, had been enough) because he must be
forced to agree with me, when he should have differed, and is put upon the
Defense of a Denial of that which I take to have been advantageous, and the
credit of his Books to have owned. It is objected against him, that he holds
the Penal Sanction of the Law of Works to be changed. What if he had owned this
for his Opinion, and said it is no Error, but stood to it? As Mr. Baxter has
his, and I my State of the Point, Mr. W. might have his, and we never fall out.
Suppose then the Point stated only with two Distinctions: 1. As to the Law,
between the Law it self, and its Sanction. 2. As to the Subjects of this Law,
between the Believer and Unbeliever.
Let him then say, the Law it self is unchangeable, but its Sanction is
changed, and that change to be understood as to Believers (for he every where
says, the Unbeliever is under Condemnation:) And let me see who he is will be
his Opponent? I say, let me see whether any of our Brethren, out of whose Books
Mr. Lobb does bring some opposite Sayings to Mr. W. (and thereby shifts himself
off from being Accuser or Opponent, so as it is not he, but they, are engaged
to make them good) that will undertake to Oppose, and Mr. W. be Respondent? I
suppose the Question to be, Whether the Sanction of the Law be changed, and
held affirmatively, being but thus stated. This I take to be the very
ordinarily preached Doctrine by our most Judicious Divines (for to be more
exact in Preaching may but amuse and hurt the People,) and Mr. Lobb does know,
and I think Mr. W. too, that trite Determination I mentioned in my Letter to
him, which is co-incident with what is here said. The Law is to be considered,
qua Foedas, and qua Regula. Qua Regula, it binds us to perfect Obedience: Qua
Foedus, it binds us to it as the Condition of Life. Qua Regula then it remains
Obligatory: Qua Foedus it does not, Christ has freed us from it.

Let us suppose this to be Mr. W's Opinion, and then bring Mr. Lobb's
Objection. There is a Change of the Penal Sanction of the Law of Works. Very
well, he grants it. The Gospel does not denounce Death for the same Sins, and
every Sin, as the Law does. Very true, the one follows undeniably from the
other. Let us bring then Mr. W's Explanation, Comment, or Confirmation of this
Opinion. Though nothing be abated in the Rule of Sin and Duty, yet Blessings
are promised to lower degrees of Duty, and a continuance in a State of Death
with a bar to the Blessing, are not threatened against every degree of Sin, as
the Covenant of Works did. Can any doubt this to be the Grace of the
Gospel-Promise? Does it promise Life to all Men, however Vile and Impenitent
they be? or, Does it threaten Damnation, or a continuance of it, on any True,
Penitent, Believing, Godly Man, because he is imperfect? This change of the
Sanction supposes the Death of Christ, and his honoring the Law by his
perfect Obedience; wherein God has provided for his own Glory, while he
promises Life by Forgiveness to imperfect Man, and yet insists on some degree
of Obedience, to which of his Grace he enableth us. What can be spoken more
appositely, more judiciously, more roundly to the purpose, and more
sufficiently, supposing Mr. W. had but held and stood to this Opinion? It is
all exactly true, according to the Point thus stated.

I cannot blame Mr. Lobb (though I had a mind to do it) to think that this was
indeed Mr. W's Opinion, because his Discourse loses its current upon a contrary
Supposition. Mr. Lobb shows himself a more piercing Man than I thought upon
that account. I will turn therefore to another place, Gospel Truth, p. 115. Dr.
Crisp often tells us, that the Sanction of the Law of Works is removed, and the
Curse gone, as to the Elect: This is true, if he mean that sinless Obedience is
not now the way of Life, and all bellow it shall not bind Death upon us, so as
to hinder our Relief by the Gospel. Here Mr. Lobb shows me in a Letter that Mr.
W. grants, expressly, that the Sanction of the Law is removed: It is true, that
is, he confesses it. Very good, all consonant to himself. It is true in this
meaning, which he sets forth just in the Sense (I say) the Point is stated. By
the way let Mr. Lobb note, that when Mr. W. says, It is true in (...) meaning,
it implies that if it be meant otherwise, It is (...) true, which answers the
Quotation.

By this it appears how well, thoroughly well all would have been, if he had
maintained, not denied the Charge of his Brethren. Hear therefore a little more
amply Mr. George Lawson (with whom neither Mr. W. Mr. Lobb, nor I, are to be
compared) for a Conclusion. There is one great Change in respect to the Law.
Perfect Obedience to it was first made the Condition of Life; but afterward
that Promise of Life upon those strict Terms, and that severe Commination of
Death upon Sin were abolished, and Faith was made the only Condition of Life:
So that it may be truly said, that the Law of Works is abrogated, but not the
Moral Law considered by it self.

I would have therefore Mr. W. methinks here ask the Brethren to give him his
hand in again, or if he thinks good he may take it: If not, let us come to the
Question waved hitherto. Is a Change of the Penal Sanction of the Moral Law,
the same as, The Gospel has another Sanction to the Preceptive part of the
Law? For answering which Question, by the Sanction of the Law, I understand the
Penalty under which the Duty is required, and so does Mr. Lobb, because when
Mr. W. says Sanction, he cites Penal Sanction, supposing, as here spoken,
nothing else by it but the Penalty. Now then when Mr. W. says, The Gospel has
another Sanction (or, a Change of the Sanction) to the Preceptive part of the
Law, Mr. Lobb accounts he must be understood to mean, That the Precepts of the
Law being taken into the Gospel, are not required under that Penalty as they
were in the Covenant of Works, and thereupon does collect this as his Error.
The Collection is Rational, but Mr. W. denies this to be his meaning. Every Sin
out of doubt does deserve Death, even in the Believer, and therefore the
perfect Duty of the Law, is required by the Gospel, under the same Penalty,
though that Penalty is remitted (being not remediless, as under the Law it was)
upon the other Terms of it. Christ's Law comprehends (I have said) the Law of
Nature, and the Remedying Law both. When the Law of Nature therefore remains,
it must make the Punishment due; but the Pardoning Law being conjunct with it,
makes the Impunity due also: In primo instanti, the Punishment; in secundo,
Impunity.

It is necessary therefore, I judge, for Mr. W. to explain his Term Sanction,
and try if he can make his words so intelligible, as one may say he gave no
occasion of Mis-construction: But seeing by this Phrase of his (as I call it in
Mr. Lobbs Sheets) and much more by that Mr. Lobb has added from another place
[The Gospel does not denounce Death for the same, and every Sin, as Adam 's Law
did] there is occasion given to Mr. Lobb to believe him herein in an Error (if
it be one, and the contrary be not,) and rationally to do so, I must, in my
Judgment on the case, so far excuse Mr. Lobb.

Let us consider again, The words of Mr. W. may be construed, either with
Application of his Readers Thoughts to the Law alone, or to the Gospel alone,
or to the Law and Gospel both together. If the Readers Thoughts be applied to
the Law alone, then Another Sanction being the same with a Change of the
Sanction, and that upon Christ's Satisfaction too, he must needs understand the
meaning to be, that the Penal Sanction of the Law is by the Gospel, or by
Christ's Death and Obedience, made void; for the same Law cannot have two
Sanctions, and if its own be changed, it is abolished. If the Readers Thoughts
be applied to the Gospel alone, they must recur, for there is no change of
Sanction questionable as to that. If his Reader construe him with Application
of his Thoughts to Law and Gospel both together, then may the meaning indeed be
understood, that the Gospel Sanction is changed from that which was the Law
Sanction, so as to be another and not the same, without making void one or the
other, which yet is a perplexed Conception. Now of these three Applications of a
Man's Thoughts to the words (if one did not know that the last was the Author's
meaning because he says so) the first Application I think likest to fall into
the Thoughts of another Man as well as Mr. Lobb's, rather than either of the
other. So far is he farther to be excused.

On the other side, when I come to look into Mr. W's Books, and see with my
Eyes what he has said, I may excuse Mr. Lobb in a mistake of Judgment (if he
do mistake,) but do not, till farther Scrutiny, clear him from wronging Mr. W.
I will turn to his last Book first, Man made Righteous, p. 100. There is hardly
a Truth more plain in the Word of God, than that the Wrath of God abides still
upon Unbelievers, notwithstanding Christ's Death. Mr. Lobb says, he holds the
Penal Sanction of the Law abrogated, and how does this place stare in Mr.
Lobb's Face? I will turn next to his middle Book, Defense of Gospel Truth, p.
2. That Men while they reject the Gospel, are not at all under the Curse of the
Law, I abhor. How any should be under the Curse of the Law, and the Penal
Sanction of it be not of Force, I never yet had one thought. Let us look then
last into his first Book from whence the Exception was gathered, Gospel Truth,
p. 5. That the Elect, while Dead in Sin and Unbelief, are Children of Wrath,
and condemned by the Law, I affirm. Again, p. 107. The Gospel denounces and
declares all condemned till they believe. It declares they are so, and
denounces they shall be so. John 3.36. He that believes not on the Son, shall
not see Life, but the Wrath of God abides on him. And v. 18. He that believes
not, is condemned already. Here is the case of all men by the Fall, they are
condemned and under Wrath: Here is the way of Relief, a Christ believed on, and
they that believe their Condemnation is reversed.

These places at the reading moved me much, and made me write to Mr. Lobb, but
I found him aware of such Passages, and not moved, answering that for all these
words, Mr. W. meant them only of the Gospel Denunciation. Mr. W's Opinion he
accounts was, that Christ by his Death has taken away the Curse of the Law;
and the Curse the Unbeliever is under, is only that of the Gospel, He that
believes not shall be Damned. To this purpose may be observed those picked
Terms of Governing Justice, and Governing Grace, which Mr. W. uses as
equivalent to the two Governments of Mr. Lawson (the Creator's Government, and
the Redeemer's Government) which must be supposed to have their two Laws, the
New vacating the Old. As also those Arguments Mr. W. offers to prove a new Law,
that do notable fit a Judgment so possessed: What kind of Government can we
assign to Christ (says he) if there be no Sanction to his Law? But if he hold
the Sanction of the Old Law (as taken into Christ's) to stand good, I pray why
such a Necessity of it to the New.

Nevertheless the words of Mr. W. as I have quoted them, are so express, for
all Men by the Fall to be under the Curse (which does imply the Law therefore
to be of force) that I cannot give Judgment upon any such bare Reasoning. Let
us therefore see another place Mr. Lobb points me to, Defense of Gospel Truth,
p. 23. Adam's Law must be altered by the Lawgiver to admit of Satisfaction.
Here, says Mr. Lobb, is plain proof of Mr. W's holding the Law changed: But
(though the word altered be unskilfully said, and he should say relaxed) that
which follows in three lines after, to wit, [ The Sentence that condemned Adam,
seizes on all Men as soon as they have being, there needs no other.] does again
turn the Scale for Mr. W.

The Truth is, the words I am to judge of between these two Brethren, are in
Mr. W's first Book, and it is that alone must show what was his mind then. The
Passages for him I have mentioned, are not so positively fixed in that Book, as
in the two other, after he was warned. And there are two places not mentioned
by Mr. Lobb, but observed by me in reading the Book afresh quite over, that do
put me to a stand. One is p. 221. where he has words to this sense, We are not
to preach the Sanction of the Law of Innocence, but may press the Gospel
Sanction. The other is in the express words, Is it the Grace of God to leave
his Precepts without any Sanction, when he removed the Curse of the Law? Here
is the Curse of the Law, that is, the Penal Sanction removed, that is, changed,
and another brought into its room, as being that (it is like he meant) which
lies on all till they believe. There is nothing goes before or after to
alieviate this sense, P. 242.

I must needs say here therefore, that I was sorry to see this place, because I
had come to a Judgment and finished my Sheets, and was brought to this pass
within my self. Mr. Lobb (I reasoned) does verily believe that Mr. W's Opinion
was as he notifies it to be: Mr. W. that knows what his own mind was, better
than any, complains that he mistakes, and wrongs him. On one side I accounted,
here is Confidence, but on the other Knowledge. I had passed therefore this
Judgment, that Mr. Lobb was to be Excused, but Mr. Acquitted. There is
Obscurity not Error I had thought in the words of Mr. W. there is Mistake not
Malice in the Collection of Mr. Lobb. But now I cannot (I must confess) in
Point of Conscience let this go. I cannot say there is Mistake herein, but
rather Sagacity in Mr. Lobb, and I cannot say there is no Error of Mr. W.
herein, but rather that he was one then not come to any Consistency about the
Point, and that it is best for him to be in Suspense still, seeing that which
we three suppose to be the Error, some others more weighty than we take to be
Truth. If the Moral Law (said such a one) should be in force as it was to Adam,
no Man upon one Act of Disobedience could be saved: Therefore that manner of
strict Obligation cease unto sinful Man for ever.

This being so, that, what Mr. W's Opinion was at his first Writing, I am not
sure; insomuch as I can bring in no Billa vera, but an Ignoramus in my last
Verdict to the Brethren, that are some time to meet about it: And that it is
like his Opinion was not then so digested as that himself can tell it: Nay,
that it is no matter, or very little matter, whether his Opinion was so or
otherwise, seeing the Opinion Pro or Con may be good enough, at least
inoffensive either of them, if but stated well: Nay yet, that it may be
peradventure in other Differences between our Brethren, no otherwise than so as
it is in this, I must come to that Conclusion at last, which I came to long
since, and stand to it, that it is not upon a Union in Opinion, or upon certain
Theses drawn up into such a Latitude of Words as all may subscribe, but upon a
Union in forbearing and bearing with one another in all things but what is of
necessity to Salvation, that our Concord must be re-established.

PART II.
I Have done here with the Arbitration which I count Mr. W. and Mr. Lobb
appointed me, that is, as to this particular matter, and as for any other
Points between them, they are not my Province: Only so far as the Middle
Doctrine of Justification, which I maintain is concerned, I cannot but take
notice how one word, and that (...), used but once in one place, is the ground
almost of all their Dissension. It is the word Surety, Heb. 7.22. This word
has been so strained, or rather grossly taken, not only by the Antinomian but
our Divines ordinarily, as if Christ were such a Surety for us in the Covenant
of Works, as bound with us in the same Bond (so coarse is their Speech,)
insomuch as when he performed the Duty, and suffered the Penalty in our behalf,
they reckon it done in our Persons, so that God looks on the Believer (in Law
sense) as having perfectly obeyed and suffered in his Surety, and consequently
that he receiving this Righteousness (or making it his) by Faith, does stand
justified in that Righteousness of Christ by the Law of Works. If Mr. Lobb, or
any Brother, (it is all alike who they be) has used words to this Sense, they
must be rectified. Mr. W. is not to come to them, but they to Mr. W. They do
heinously err (says Mr. Baxter) and subvert the Gospel, who says that Christ's
Righteousness is so imputed to us, as that God reputeth Christ to have been
perfectly Holy, and suffered, though not in our Natural yet in the Legal or
Civil Person of the Sinner, or Believer, as their strict and proper
Representer, and so to have our selves fulfilled all Righteousness in him, or
by him, and thereby be Justified. There are more words by way of Aggravation
which I fill up with [and thereby be Justified] because they tend only to show
what the allowing so much at the beginning does draw after it.

This Doctrine I have said is coarse, I add, and grounded on a Mistake, which I
have inculcated in my Book of Justification. Divines indeed ordinarily, Papists
and Protestants, supposing that it is by the Law, the Law of Works, that we
shall be Judged, do fall out, and must fall out one against, and one with
another: But let them reflect, and understand aright, that it is not the Law of
Works, but the Law of Grace, or Law of Faith, not the Law but the Gospel (Romans
1.16. James 2.12. before noted) is and shall be the Rule of Judgment (when the
Law is indeed the Rule of Living,) they must end the Quarrel between most of
them. Upon this Hence Contarenus, though a Papist and a Cardinal, who defines
also Justificari to be justum fieri, and propterea justum haberi, has yet
these words. Ego prorsus existimo pie and Christian dici, quod debeamus niti
justitia Christi nobis donata, non autem gratia nobis inhaerente. Haec enim
justitia nostra est inchoata and imperfecta, quae tueri nos non potest quin in
multis offendamus. Idcirco in conspectu Dei non possumus ob hanc justitiam
nostram haberi justi and boni: Sed justitia Christi nobis donata est perfecta
quae omnino placet oculis Dei. Haec ergo sola certa and stabili nitendum est,
and ob eam solam credere nos justificari coram Deo, id est justos haberi, and
dici justos. Cont. de Justificatione.
account, when the Protestant judges that we must have a Righteousness that
answers the Law (as his,) or else he cannot at all be justified, he does make
Christ such a Surety, and devise such a Commutation of Persons as suits to that
Conception: But he that is clear, as to the Rule by which we shall be judged,
will be contented with such a Suretiship and Commutation only, as the Scripture
(I was upon saying as Mr. W.) does allow him.

For Christ's Suretiship in the first place, I do not fancy so much to be made
of it even as Mr. W. does. That he was a Surety on God's part, and then on our
part -- and I know not what. The true and faithful God I hope has no need of
any Surety on his part to make His good, I count that but idle he says to
excuse it: And if Christ was a strict proper (in humane sense proper) Surety of
the new Covenant on our part to make Ours good, then must all of us be saved,
because the Gospel Covenant (I hold) is Universal, and not made with the Elect
only. That which I conceive then, as to Christ's Suretiship, is, that he was to
do, and did, all that was to be done for Satisfaction to God in our behalf, for
procuring the Gospel Covenant for the lost World. This I apprehend to be the
main of the business. There is one Mediator (which is the common Appellation of
the same import as Surety) between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a Ransom for all to be testified in due time. 2 Timothy 2.5, 6. Christ
was a Surety, but a Surety in the Scripture Sense, not in an Arbitrary Sense.
Christ was a Surety, not in an Antinomian Sense, but in a Sense which must be
agreeable to every thing else that is said of him in Scripture. This is safe,
and this is true, and here I will stand by Mr. W. But whether Christ's
Suretiship is to be made commensurate with his Priesthood, to make good his, or
any others Notion of it, I question. It is no where said we have a Surety
(though a High Priest and Intercessor) now in Heaven.

As for the Commutation in the next place then of Persons, I acknowledge such a
one accordingly, as is necessary to the Impetration of our Redemption, but I
understand none so as to go into the Application. Christ took on him our Flesh,
made Satisfaction in our stead, and procured an Act of Grace or Pardon for all:
But there is no Commutation I know as to particular Persons in the Point of
Justification. If Christ made an exchange of his Righteousness with Peter for
his Sins, any otherwise than as to the Impetration of Pardon on condition that
concerns all alike, then Christ's Righteousness must now be Peter's, and James
and John could never have it. In Christ's uniting himself to us, by his taking
our Nature, Obeying, Suffering, satisfying God's Justice, I acknowledge a
Commutation, even such, to wit, that our Sins were so imputed to him, as that
he died for them, and in our stead, (understanding the Phrases aright) and his
Righteousness so imputed, as to be the Cause that upon our believing we enjoy
the Benefit: But in Christ's uniting us to him, by giving his Spirit to work in
us that Condition whereby we have our Right to the Benefit, there is nothing
done by him in our stead, nothing by us in his, no new, no other, no father
Imputation. The Fruit of his Purchase (Pardon and Salvation by a Law of Grace)
cannot be formaliter his, and if that the communicates to us be not his, how is
there a Commutation? Of this Sacrifice and Righteousness it self we are
incapable: Of the Effect or Fruits Christ is incapable. What he has not, he
cannot communicate; what he has, we cannot receive. It is true, he has
receive potestatem conferendi, and in that respect, eminenter, may be said to
receive for us his own Benefits; but for us then must be only bono nostro, if
it were loco nostro, our selves could not have them. The Punishment we deserved
Christ bare loco nostro, therefore we are not to bear it: The Benefits Christ
purchased we have, therefore loco nostro he could not receive them. There is,
there can be, no Substitution of Person in our partaking the Benefits
purchased, as there was, there must be, in the purchasing them for us. There is
a Chapter on this Head in my Book, called, Peaceable Disquisitions, I refer
thither for farther Explication.

With Mr. W. I believe (speaking strictly) that Christ was no Surety of the
Covenant of Works, so as to enter into the same Bond before or after (it were
but trifling to make a Dispute of that) it was forfeited: And that his Reasons
for it are good, his fourth especially, as to the ill Consequences following
upon it. Against Mr. W. I apprehend Christ to be no Surety neither, of the
Covenant of Grace in a strict proper Sense (as I say also in my Sheet) because
the business of this Suretiship I said now, does lie mainly in obtaining for us
this Covenant (as Moses dealt in his Mediatorship,) and not in the undertaking
on God's part (which needs not) and on our part, that it should be kept. In
this sense do I understand the Prophet, when God says, he will give Christ for
a Covenant of the People, that is, to mediate this Covenant, to procure it. The
word Surety, I say again, must be taken in such a Sense (and not any other)
which agrees with every thing else said of Christ in the Scripture, or with the
whole Doctrine of the Gospel besides: And that Doctrine is false (I count)
which confines the Gospel Covenant to the Elect. Not that he undertook that all
he mediated for, should do all that is their Duty, says the thoroughly
Understanding Mr. Baxter, in his Paraphrase on the place.

As for Mr. W. I will take leave to say, he is to me a considerable Man,
especially as to his Talent, Elocution; which yet, unless his Judgment also be
Good, Staid and Unpassionate, as it appears, may prove to him a Temptation.
There is nothing I distrust him so much in, as in his Distinctions, which I
cannot but suspect sometimes (through his Facility of words,) to be made rather
in diverse Expressions, than in the reality of the things he would distinguish.
I am afraid least he should hereby come to yield more in our main Cause, than
we can again recover. This appears more particularly in these two Points,
wherein I am more particularly concerned, the Conditionality of the Covenant,
and the Business of Justification.

It is to be known and acknowledged, there are several places in the Old
Testament, which speak of God's Circumcising the Heart, giving a new one,
putting his Fear into it, so as they that have this Promise fulfilled to them,
shall enter into Covenant with God in Sincerity, and never again depart from
him: Upon which account it is called an Everlasting Covenant, and a second
Covenant in Opposition to the first that the Israelites brake, as it is in the
Epistle to the Hebrews. In these places then we have a Promise (for they are
all I suppose in the account of most one and the same Promise) which is an
Absolute Promise, that is, to give that which has no Condition required of us
for the obtaining it, the first Grace, the new Heart, Faith and Repentance, in
order to our Salvation. Now the Promise being Absolute, and called the
Covenant, [This is my Covenant I will make with the House of Israel after those
days, says the Lord: I will put my Laws into their Minds, and write them in
their Hearts: And I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People,]
the Antinomian does apprehend it to be the Covenant of Grace, and that the
Covenant of Grace therefore is not Conditional, for there is no Condition in
this Promise, and if that we call the Condition, is on God's part given, and
not required as a Condition to be performed on our parts, the Covenant is
without Condition.

Here now the Orthodox Calvinist, who is neither Arminian or Antinomian, are of
two sorts, one whose Genius carries them so much against Arminianism, that they
come as near as they can to the Antinomian: And the other whose Genius leads
them so far from Antinomianism, that they come as near as they can to the
Arminian; but either of them carefully avoiding the Danger of both Errors.
Under the first sort I must rank Mr. Cole and Mr. Mather, and such as will say
here (with Mr. Rutherford) that this Promise is part of the Covenant of Grace
(not the whole Covenant,) and that this Promise of Faith, or the first Grace,
being part of the Covenant-Blessings, and the Fruit of Christ's Purchase for
the Elect, the Covenant in this respect is without any Antecedent Condition:
But the first Grace being given in order to obtain farther Blessings, that
first Grace (I suppose in their account) is a Consequent Condition (in regard
to the Connection between them) to those Benefits, and so save they themselves
from Antinomianism. Under the Latter sort, I had thought I might have ranked
Mr. W. with my self, but I will name one more worthy than we, for his most
acute and strong parts, Mr. Woodbridge, who does deny this Promise to be part
of the Covenant of Grace made with Fallen Man: But that it is either an
indefinite Promise, which God will make good on whom he pleases in their use of
means, or a Promise in regard to the Elect, not made to them, but made to
Christ in the Covenant of Redemption (if we may frame such a thing in God's
Decrees) as it is distinguished from that made with Man, or Gospel Covenant,
which requires Faith and Repentance (wrought in us by God's first Grace) as the
Condition, and upon that Condition, and that as performed by us (though through
that Grace) does grant us Remission and Eternal Life. And this first Grace God
gives to this end, that his Elect may in their time enter this Covenant, and so
have the benefits of it.

I signified this to Mr. W. in my Sheet, but he (in his) is so full of himself,
as he will take his Friends by the halves. I never wrote (says he) that Faith
and Repentance are not Covenant-Blessings: But Mr. Lobb I perceive thought, and
so do I, that this is consonant to what he should write. No Man can have any
Benefit of the Covenant that is not in Covenant. That which is given of God to
his Elect, as pre-requisite to enter Covenant, is given them before they are in
Covenant, and therefore is not any of the Benefits of it. This is what I meant,
and I for my part therefore do say, that Faith and Repentance are the
Conditions and not the Benefits of the Gospel Covenant. For if they be granted
Blessings thereof, then is there no Condition to its Benefits, and so the
Covenant is not Conditional according to the sense of those that oppose us. The
Benefits of the Covenant are God's part to perform, and if Faith and Repentance
were part of those Benefits, it were well indeed for us, for then must all
within the Church be saved: The Minister does on God's part declare the
Covenant in his Preaching the Word, and Seals it in delivery of the Sacraments,
and that to every one: If every one therefore has not this Faith and
Repentance given him, either this Faith and Repentance is not indeed one of the
Benefits, or God is not Faithful in Covenant (this Universal Gospel Covenant)
which cannot be argued, but with a reverential Aversation.

He has one thing a little higher to the same effect. Sir, you omit one part
of the Objection, that I should say the Conditions are Legal. I never called
them so: I give five Instances of the difference between the Condition of the
Covenant of Works, and Grace. Here is our Cause yielding still, but I must beg
his Pardon, for he says in this he knows not what. The Instances he mentions
are nothing to the purpose: And as he said before, he never wrote that Faith
and Repentance are not Benefits of the Covenant, when he should have wrote so:
So he says here, he never called them Legal Conditions, when he needed not
scruple it. Mr. Lobb put in the word Legal in opposition only to Testamentary;
and when he grants a Testamentary Condition, he does, I count, under a more
soft word, ingenuously grant us our Point. It is in Mr. Lobb's Peaceable
Enquiry, which Mr. W. it seems knows not. To Mr. Lobb then I say, If I have an
Estate given me by Will or Testament upon a certain Condition, I must perform
that Condition, or else I cannot have that Estate though it be Gift: But the
Condition being performed, it gives me Right to that Estate by that Testament,
and the Law will make it good. It is so as to a Promise, and as to the
Covenant. The Performance gives us Right by (not its own Merit, but virtue of)
that Promise, that Covenant. This I affirm (says Mr. W. himself) the Promise
conveighs the Title as soon as the Terms of the Grant are answered, Gospel
Truth, p. 61. That thing which being performed gives Right to the Benefit, is a
true legal Condition in Mr. Lobb's sense. There is nothing else to be
understood by it. Legal is not opposed here to Evangelical but to Not rightful.
As I said therefore but now, that Faith and Repentance are not the Benefits,
but the Conditions of the Gospel Covenant: So say I they are Antecedent legal
(Evangelically legal, legal in the sense of Mr. Lobb's seeming denial thereof)
Conditions of those Benefits. And this I did not omit, as Mr. W. thinks, but
did de industria own it in my Sheet in these words. If we do not make Faith
such a Condition as Antecedes the Benefits, and that being performed gives
right to them, that we may not mince the matter (whereby I meant the aforesaid
distinction) it is but trifling to maintain that the Covenant has any
Conditions. If we confess our Sins, God is Just and Faithful to forgive them.
They have right to the Tree of Life that keep his Commandments.

To return then now to the new Heart, promised in the Prophets to the House of
Israel, when the days come that they may enter this Covenant so as to break it
no more, I have one thing to offer here to public consideration. Our Divines
interpret these Texts to belong to the Elect, to them only, all the Elect,
(with whom this Covenant is made from Eternity in Christ, say some, supposing
This, and the Covenant of Redemption to be one.) Now it is to me a question
whether they be not quite out, because it is manifest in all the places in the
Prophets, and that to the Hebrews, that this Promise and Covenant to be made,
is peculiar still to the Jews, and that confined to a certain time ( Behold the
days come, says the Lord) which is expressed over and over after their
scattering and recollection. Let us look the Scripture. The first Text that we
have, wherein this Absolute Promise is to be found, is in Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the
Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy Seed. Well, but
when will the Lord do this? They were almost all uncircumcised in Heart at
present, and continued so during their Judges, their Kings, and Prophets. Look
therefore to the Verses before, and Moses is Prophesying of their State
hereafter, that they would Sin and God would scatter them, and then gather them
after from all Nations, and bring them to the Land which their Fathers
possessed (speaking this before they came into Possession) and in that State it
is he promises this Circumcision of their Heart, so as they shall love him with
the whole of it, and live, and fall no more from him.

Let us come from Moses to the Prophets, see Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. I will give them
one heart, and put a new Spirit in them, and I will take away the stony heart
that they may walk in my Ordinances, and they shall be my People, and I will be
their God. Here is the Promise, but to whom? Why all the whole House of Israel
wholly are they, v. 15. Even the scattered afar off among the Countries, v. 16.
And when is it to be fulfilled? I will gather you from the People, and assemble
you out of the Countries where you have been scattered, and I will give you the
Land of Israel, v. 17. Likewise in Chap. 36. v. 22. to 28. Say to the House of
Israel, O House of Israel, I will take you from among the Heathen, and gather
you from all Countries, and will bring you to your own Land. Then will I
sprinkle clean water on you, and a new Spirit, and take away the heart of
stone, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall be my People, and I
will be your God. From Ezekiel let us go to Jeremiah, Jer. 32.37. I will gather
them, (the Children of Israel and Judah, v. 30.) out of all Countries wither I
have driven them in my Anger, and bring them again to this place; I will give
them one heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever. And I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, and they shall not depart from me. In Hos. 2.
And it shall be at that day thou shall call me Ishi, v. 16. And in that day I
will make a Covenant, v. 18. And I will betroth thee for ever, v. 19. And it
shall come to pass in that day I will hear, v. 21. Well! and when is that day?
Look Jer. 16.14, 15. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that it shall no
more be said, the Lord lives that brought up the Children of Israel out of
Egypt: But the Lord lives that brought up the Children of Israel from the Land
of the North, and from all Lands whether he had driven them: And I will bring
them again into their Land that I gave their Fathers. Thus much is apparent,
that whenever this new Heart and new Covenant is promised, it is peculiar to
the Jews upon a Restoration. Let us look lastly then into the Hebrews, which
cites another Text out of Jeremiah, Heb. 8 8. Finding fault with them (in
regard to the first Covenant) he says, Behold the days come, says the Lord,
when I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and the House of
Judah: Not according to that I made with their Fathers in the day that I lead
them out of Egypt, because they continued not in it, and I regarded them not.
And so goes on to what I have cited in the beginning, and more follows to the
end.

Here is a Covenant we see made with the Jews, which they brake, and God casts
them off; and here is another which he promises to be made with them, that they
shall keep, and he will cast them off no more; and this time it shall be made
with them, is when he shall gather them from all parts of the World where they
are scattered, and bring them to their Land again, as it is in all the places
here mentioned. At that time, In that day, he will give them this new Heart to
enter this new Covenant (this second Covenant, and with them, not the second
with Mankind, which was with us in Adam Fallen) after those days, says the
Lord. And when was that day? Is it past? Was it not immediately after the
Captivity out of Babylon? I judge not, for the Jews that returned then, were
those of Judah only, not the scattered of the whole House of Israel; and these
also in some time grew as bad as their Forefathers, filling up their measure,
as Christ speaks, insomuch as they came to Crucify the Lord of Life himself;
and there is no Season yet, wherein such a Heart has been given them, as in
these Texts is promised, that they should so Covenant, as to break it no more.
This is certain, that since their Sin in Crucifying Christ, they have been
driven from Jewry and dispersed the World over; and the Promise then of
gathering them out of all Nations, and giving them this new Heart, thus to
Covenant a new (or a second time) with the Lord, is in all likelihood not yet,
nor to be accomplished, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled, as Christ
tells, Luke 21.24. And St. Paul Comments it, Until the fullness of the Gentiles
be come, Romans 11.25.

That there is a time of Calling the Jews, is not only an ancient Opinion of
Justin Martyr, and many of those Fathers that were Millenaries, but of our
Orthodox Divines; and it was much upon the Hearts of those called Puritans in
their time, it being built on those two Texts now mentioned: And indeed there
are twenty and twenty places in the Prophets, that speak of a glorious State of
the Jews to come, that none can say have yet their Accomplishment. And if this
Opinion of a time to come of Calling the Jews be good, then may we well believe
that that will be the time when these Texts, and Promise stood upon, will be
fulfilled. When the Conversion of the Gentiles is brought in to the full of
what God has determined (to whom a thousand years is but as one day) then shall
be the gathering of the scattered. And as it is into the Jews Olive the
Gentiles are ingrafted, the Jews shall return to that Olive themselves, and
both become the Church of Christ: So that All Israel shall be saved, says the
Apostle, citing for it that of Isaiah, There shall come out of Sion a
Deliverer, and shall turn away Ungodliness from Jacob: For this is my Covenant
unto them, when I shall take away their sins, Romans 11.26. Note it, the
Covenant, called the new Covenant in the Hebrews, is to be made with Jacob,
that is, his Posterity, at this time when this Prophecy is accomplished, and
that is plainly at the calling of the Jews.

Now then from what is said I argue, and by virtue of all these Scriptures
forecited, I do deny that the first Grace, Faith and Repentance, or the new
Heart, is a Promise of the Covenant of Grace made with Mankind, or with the
Elect in Christ, because it is a Promise only to the Jews, and to come, and
that at such a time, when hereafter God shall gather them into his Church from
among the Nations.

It may be objected, That the very mentioning the Prophecy of Jeremiah by the
Author to the Hebrews, does prove it to be applied to his times (it does prove
it indeed not to be in any time before, and so not at their return from
Babylon) and that the mentioning that Covenant, does prove it to be meant of
the Gospel Covenant: But I deny it. The mentioning of a Promise made only to
the Jews, is no proof of it to be made to all the Elect; and the mention of a
Covenant to be made with them after those days, is no proof that it is meant of
a Covenant made with us at the present day. He does not say as Christ did, when
he opened the Book at a place prophesying of him, This day is this Scripture
fulfilled in your Ears, for the day is not yet come, the day of God's making
this second Covenant with the Jews (for I must inculcate that it is a second as
to them) only the Author cites the Prophecy in respect to his matter in hand,
which is, that the Jewish Dispensation, their Priesthood and Covenant, was
already ceased, the Promise of a new to come, showing its intended Abolishment.
Which arguing is good, and becoming Sacred Scripture, though the time be to
come. For there is nothing here argued but at present is true, notwithstanding
the peculiarity of this Prophecy is yet to be made good. The Covenant of Grace
in the Substance of it, is one and the same since Adam's Fall to this day, and
to this time yet to be accomplished: But the diverse Administrations of it were
to be at several Seasons. It was in the Promise only till Christ, and then he
ratified it by his Blood, and promulgated it by his Apostles, which all stands
good very consistently with another Administration (as to them) upon the Jews
Vocation.

I know now there are twenty Questions might be raised here by way of
Objection, or for the sake of Elucidation, which I was a little thinking upon,
but I will leave them every one to others Meditations. If what I have started
be good, there is an end of all Difficulty in regard to the Conditionality of
the Gospel Covenant, and what I or others have answered to those Texts may be
spared: For there is nothing considerable but from these Texts that is against
us. I conclude, If it be good, there is some body or other, at some time or
other, will make it good: If it be not good, I will be at my liberty to stand
where I do, and disbelieve it again as well as any other.

PART III
IN the Point of Justification Mr. W. made this grant, and presuming upon it in
this Paper, he tells me, I have truly represented his words, to wit, that
Besides the Effects being made ours, the very Righteousness of Christ is
imputed to Believers, though I told him, ( Mid. way of Just. p. 56.) that this
(as far as I can see) is to boggle, and yield our Cause to his Adversaries. It
is in vain really (if it be not sinful daubing to be bewailed in the
consequence of it) for Mr. W. to argue against Christ's Suretiship, and
Commutation of Persons in the ill sense, which he intends only to confute, when
that ill sense, and all that the Antinomian says besides depends on this
Supposition, that Christ's Righteousness is made ours more, or otherwise, than
in the Effects. For my part therefore, I do plainly here, as plainly before,
say, that if our Divines will have any other Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness than quoad fructus and effectus, they must for me have none at
all. For when the Phrase, of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, is not
once found in Scripture, it must be gratis allowed them; and if they will not
accept this, I can allow no more.

To open my self, The common Opinion of Protestants is, that we are Justified
by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and that this Righteousness is
imputed so, as God does reckon Christ's Righteousness for ours, that it may
answer the Law of Works, according to which they conceive we are to be
Justified. As the Scripture says Faith is imputed for Righteousness, so do they
think Christ's Righteousness is: For they understand Faith Objective in sensu
correlativo, for Christ's Righteousness received by Faith: When the Scripture
says no where that his Righteousness is imputed (as I noted but now,) and much
less that it is imputed for Righteousness, there being no good Sense thereof
which is like to hold.

Of these Divines, some and the most do understand by Christ's Righteousness,
the Righteousness of his Life and Death, his Active and Passive Obedience both.
God does reckon us (say they) to have suffered the Penalty of the Law in his
Death, and so we are free from Condemnation: And being Recti in curia, there is
required father a Righteousness of perfect Obedience to this Law for a Right to
Heaven, and so his Active Obedience is imputed also.

Others being convinced of a manifest Inconsistency here (seeing if the Active
Obedience of Christ be imputed to us, which is to reckon us, that we have
neither omitted any Duty, nor committed any Sin, there needs no Imputation of
his Sufferings,) they maintain that Christ's Active Obedience was Justitia
Personae, a Righteousness necessary to himself as a Man to fulfill: But his
Passive (seeing he was Sinless) was, and must be for us only, and in our stead,
and that is the Justitia meriti which is imputed to Sinners for their
Justification. It is the choicest of our Protestant Divines beyond Sea, next
Luther and Calvin, that go this way.

But there have been some more pondering Thoughts on this Doctrine of
Imputation, by such as apprehend, that as the Righteousness of Christ being an
Accident inhering in him as its proper Subject, and incapable to be in us also,
so neither can it be in se imputed to us, or reckoned so as ours, whether it be
the Righteousness of his Life or Death. To be accounted of God to be as
Righteous as Christ himself, is too hard of Digestion, and therefore they will
allow an Imputation, but understand it sensibly, that Christ's Righteousness is
indeed imputed to Believers, but not in se as ours in it self, but so as to be
ours only in the Fruits and Effects. Thus that masterfully learned Man Forbs in
his Modestae questiones, and some others: Which giving Mr. Baxter the Notion,
he has so cultivated it, delivering his Judgment that way, and that in so many
Books, and so largely, as it is hard for any to gainsay, or to say that he does
fully comprehend him.

He has prudently used Bradshaw as to the making up Christ's Satisfaction of
both Obediences Active and Passive, according to that Mediatorial Covenant (as
we speak of it) between his Father and him. For this was the Father's Pleasure
or Mediatorial Command (This Commandment I received of my Father) that he
should repair the Honor of his broken Law, and answer the ends of it, by a
perfect obeying of it, and suffering for Man's Sin against it, and thereby
Merit to all Mankind (it being done in their behalf) a Right to Pardon and
Salvation, or to Impunity and Life; which yet is to be given them upon such
Terms as should please him and the Redeemer; for so long as it was not the
Persons themselves that obeyed and suffered, but another in their stead, (and
that by way of Satisfaction not strict Payment,) the Benefit of that Obedience
and Suffering might be disposed at their Will. Now this Right to Impunity and
Life obtained, is given or granted in an Act of Grace, declared in the Gospel,
which runs thus, that whosoever he be that Believes, Repents, and lives
sincerely according to it, shall be pardoned and saved.

Even as in an Act of Pardon by Parliament, a Man has committed Treason or the
like, the Treason is still by the Law Death, but upon such an Act passing,
those Persons that are guilty are pardoned, if qualified according to the Act:
In like manner that Man who performs this Gospel-Condition, has this Right by
virtue of this Act, Law (or Covenant) of Grace, Grant, Deed of Gift, Will of
Christ, Testament, or Gospel. The Righteousness of Christ is the Meritorious
Cause of it, and this Act of Grace, the Instrument of Donation, or Law-title.

Here then we see is a Righteousness Evangelical that we have and must have,
and here is a Right to Impunity and Life (which you may if you will call a
Righteousness too) that we have also: But the Righteousness of Christ we have
here only in the Effect. As in the common instance, I have a Friend made Slave
in Algiers, I give a 100 l. for his Ransom, he never has, nor sees the 100 l.
but the Money is his in the Liberty he possesses.

Note, When the former sort of Divines mentioned say, that by the Imputation of
Christ's Death to us, we become recti in Curia, and there must be then a
Righteousness of his Life imputed farther, to entitle us to Heaven, they
understand still that it is by the Law of Works that we are to be tried and
judged: But let all understand aright (as before) that it is by the Law of
Grace, and supposing then we were thereby recti in curia, that Righteousness
required farther unto this Title, must be the Righteousness of that Law we are
judged by, to wit, our Evangelical Righteousness only, which is accepted unto
Life (or made the Condition) instead of that of the Law, upon the account of
this Righteousness of Christ Jesus.

We must distinguish here, to avoid Prejudice, (and least the tender be
offended.) There is the Duty, and the Condition of this Law, the Law of Grace,
the Law of Christ, or the Gospel, by which we are to be judged. God has
constituted the Duty, the Condition, the Reward, the Penalty of it. There are
few of our Ministers, and much less of our People, are sensible of the
Advantage this Doctrine brings us, and the Soundness of it. No Man we must know
does perform the Duty, but every Man must perform the Condition, or he cannot
be saved. This Condition (as obtained for the World) is the grand Benefit of
Christ's Purchase, or main Fruit of his Death, and is accepted when performed,
only through him. It is not for my Works or Merits, say thou, that my Person
is accepted, but for Christ's Righteousness, and in this alone is my Comfort.
And I say, it is not for the Works sake, or Merit of any thing, or all we do,
but for Christ's sake, that the Condition is accepted; and it is in this is my
Comfort: In this it is that we have, or can have, any grounded Sustentation. To
say thou art Justified by Christ's Righteousness, when yet thou must
acknowledge his Righteousness is none of thine, unless thou have performed the
Condition, What empty Comfort is that? But to say that through Christ's Merits
and Righteousness, this it self that I do, is the Condition; here is Comfort
indeed. That what we are enabled by his Grace (I say) to do, how little soever,
if sincerely done (if it be but the Grain of Mustard Seed in a hungring and
thirsting after Righteousness,) shall be accepted unto Life (that is, be that
Condition) upon account of what Christ has done for us, this I say is solid
Consolation. Thou say, when I look on my Works my Heart sinks, I am not sure
I am Sincere, but in the Righteousness of Christ I am safe. I say this is
certain, If thou art not Sincere, thou art not Safe: And when I doubt whether I
am or not, I can have no Support but in this, that I hope I am, I trust I am;
and that it is upon the Satisfaction and Merit of Christ, that Faith, that Hope
does depend. For, that there is any Condition at all, that the Condition is
such, that what I do shall be accepted as the Condition performed, it must all
be put upon the account of Christ's Performance, or Merit, in our behalf; and
his Merit is sufficient, however imperfect be our Duty, for its Acceptance with
God. When then upon a Sense of my Deficiency, instead of sinking, I grow bolder
in my reliance on Christ's Merits, and God's Mercy, I do not presume on my
self, but I magnify his Grace, and the higher I raise my Faith thereupon
(provided I live not willingly in any Conscience-wasting Sin) the more Glory
(am I humbly persuaded) do I give my gracious Savior, and good God. Thou Man,
have the Comfort to apply to thy self Christ's Merits, if thou have performed
the Condition: But I have the Comfort to apply Christ's Merits to the
Condition, which makes his Yoke easy and burden light, as to the Performance;
and my very Desires and weakest Endeavors to find Acceptance.

When I read such Prayers of David, that God would not enter into Judgment with
him, that he would not be extreme to mark what he had done amiss, for then he
could not abide it, and that yet he will have God to search him, and try his
Reins and Heart, and the like, I cannot but be convinced, that in the
Acceptance of such an imperfect Righteousness as he accounted his was, through
God's mere gracious Condescension, Mercy and Forgiveness to him, he placed his
That there is a Righteousness set forth in the Gospel, as another Righteousness
than that of the Law, by which we are to be justified, is signally affirmed,
Romans 1.17. Romans 3.21, 23. Now is the Righteousness of God revealed. The doing
what the Law requires, and nothing less, is Righteousness, the Righteousness of
Man I will call it. If any one did that, it would and must justify him. The
Doers of the Law before God are justified, Romans 2.13. The Apostle still so
accounts (which we must know) and tells us thereupon, that no Man, Jew or
Gentile, does it, but that all fall short thereof, in his three first Chapters
to the Romans, and consequently by their Works cannot be justified. Upon this
ground is it, that he opposes Grace and Works so often as he does in the
business of Justification. By Grace are ye saved, not of Works, Ephesians. 2.8, 9.
Who has saved us, not according to our Works, but his Grace, 1 Timothy 1.9. If by
Grace then not of Works, Romans 11.6. Not by Works of Righteousness which we have
done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, and yet by Regeneration (it
follows) and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. How is that? Are we saved by
(at least not without) Works wrought in us by the Spirit or Grace which
regenerates us, and yet, Not of Works? Again, Not of Works, least any Man
should boast (Ephesians. 2.9, 10.) yet it follows, we are created in Christ Jesus to
good Works. To answer this, St. Austine, and from him the Schools, distinguish
of Opera Naturae, and Opera Gratiae. We are not saved by Works, or according to
Works done in our own strength, but by Works done by Grace. But is this the
Apostles meaning? No, I have shown in my Book of Justification, that one thing
of three wherein Austine was out, and has mislead the Schools, is this Notion
of Grace. By grace he understands still this inherent Grace, or Operation of
God's Spirit in us, when Paul understands it of that without us, his Favor, or
Condescension to us. Not of Works but of Grace, is all one, as not of Desert
but of Favor only. Grace is Mercy without, or contrary to Merit. Now when the
Papist receives the Solution mentioned, the Protestant generally will have all
Works, though of the Regneerate, to be but Rags, and Christ's Righteousness
alone to save us. But they are both out, for Paul's meaning is plainer than
they think. Not by Works of Righteousness we have done. The Righteousness which
the Jew has done, is living according to the Law of Moses: The Righteousness
which the Gentile has done, is his living according to the Law of Nature.
There is neither one or the other that fulfill that Righteousness as answers
God's Law, so as it should be able to save him, and therefore it is of Grace or
Mercy, that any are saved. By this Key must that hard Text also be opened, Romans
9.16. So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of
God that shows Mercy. What? Is there any that find Mercy, or are saved, but
they that will and run? I answer No, but there is none of them that will and
run, do will and run so as would save them, if God did not pardon their
Failings, and accept their Endeavors through the Merits of Christ. The meaning
is, that seeing no Man has those Works the Law requires to Salvation, it is of
Grace or of Mercy, that we are accepted to Life on Another Condition. Well now,
it being of Grace that we are Saved or Justified in opposition to Work's, and
it being necessary that those Works be understood of such as the Law requires
to Justify us, that is, Perfect Works, Meritorious Works, which if we had, we
might boast, and expect the Reward as of Debt; and the reason why we are not
justified by Works, being because we have them not, it follows, that there is
another Righteousness which is to be had, short of that the Law requires to
Justification, not Perfect, not Meritorious, not such as would make the Reward
due of Justice, but such as needs Grace for the Acceptance, ( Therefore it is
of Faith that it might be of Grace,) and that I say which we must have; for God
cannot account a Man Righteous (which is to justify him) that is not
Righteous, his Judgment being according to Truth. And what Righteousness then
is that a Man must have, and be found in, but that we call our Evangelical
Righteousness, the Righteousness of Faith? The Just shall live by Faith. Note
it, he is Just, Righteous, that lives, or is Justified: But how Righteous? Not
according to the Law, but the Gospel. Hence is the Gospel called the
Ministration of Righteousness: Hence do we read of a Righteousness brought in
by the Messiah slain in Daniel: Hence that we are chosen in Christ to be Holy,
That he has redeemed us from Iniquity, That the end (or one end) of his Death
or Redemption is to make us Righteous, as our Divines still say, but I never
found any satisfactory account of it by them. The matter in short is (you may
see it fuller in my mentioned Book, p. 43.) that by Christ's Death a Law of
Grace is obtained, upon which our Faith and Repentance is accepted to Life, or
imputed for Righteousness, or we made Righteous so, when by the Law of Works
there is none, no not one Righteous, or ever could be, in the World. Hence is
this Righteousness called the Righteousness of God, as being ordained and
accepted by him, instead of (that I even now called) the Righteousness of Man:
And which is of God by Faith, instead of such Works which the Law required to
Justification. Hence lastly are we said to be Justified by Faith, the most
single and plain reason whereof is, because that Faith to a true Believer, is
imputed for Righteousness, (Romans 4.22, 23, 24.) And Faith is said to be imputed
to him for Righteousness, because God does account such a one Righteous, and
deals with him as such, in freeing him from Punishment, and accepting him to
Salvation, through the Death and Obedience of our Redeemer.


Justification; in which sense also he calls him the God of his Righteousness:
When as for any acceptance of him through the Righteousness of the Messiah to
come, a Righteousness without him made his by Faith, which could abide God's
district Justice, I find not the Footstep of one such Thought. To rely
therefore (I will say) on Christ's Righteousness as ours, without regard to any
thing within, or without regard to the Condition, is self-deceiving: But to
rely on God's Mercy, and on Christ's Merits, for acceptance of what we do, and
Pardon for the Failings, is Substantial Religion; and of Justification by Faith
in Christ's Blood, a good Exposition.

I have now something more to be farther pondered on this Point. The chief is,
That what I have said before about the Commutation of Persons, that it is to be
held in regard to the Impetration, not Application of our Redemption, I would
offer over again likewise, in regard to the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness. I have said, and say it over, that this Phrase is not found in
Scripture, but I will acknowledge the thing in the true sense of it, which is
this. Christ Jesus did really obey the Law, and suffer its Penalty for us,
which is, in our place or stead. To do a thing now in my stead, is for another
to do it, so as to save me the doing it. Christ's Suffering and Obeying, was to
save us that Suffering and Obeying. No, says Mr. W. somewhere, Christ suffered
indeed in our stead, that we might not suffer, but not obeyed that we might not
obey. But if Christ obeyed not that we might not obey, he obeyed not in our
stead. How is it then? Why Christ obeyed the Law, as the perfect Obedience
thereof required was the Condition of Life, and by his obeying it thus, he has
freed us from being under that Condition, that is, from so obeying it (as by
his Suffering we are freed from enduring the Curse:) Not by a Cessation of the
Duty, or Sanction (Premiant or Penal) of the Law of Works; but by the Accession
of the Law of Grace, because the Sanction of that Law is remedied by this, both
being in Christ's hands, neither abrogating the other. To be freed from the
Obligation of perfect Obedience, as the Condition of Life does import, or is
all one as, or with, to be freed from the Commination of Death upon the least
failing thereof; so that the Promisory part of that Law, and Comminatory part,
are alike concerned, and must be understood both alike to be of force, or
cease, as before shown. By Christ's Sufferings we are not freed from all
Sufferings, or Punishment for Sin, but from suffering the Curse in that
Punishment: So by his Obedience we are not freed from endeavoring and doing
what we can to become perfect, but we are freed from the Obligation of the
Performance, as necessary to Salvation.

This comes in by the way, but for the Imputation now of Christ's
Righteousness, Christ suffered and obeyed for us I say, which must be
understood aright. Not that God looks on us, as if we our selves had obeyed or
suffered either in his Person, or he to have done it strictly in ours; but that
he obeyed and suffered loco nostro, to free us from so Obeying and Suffering as
he himself did, which is the making his Death and Obedience ours only as to
this Benefit. Thus much being right, and the Righteousness of Christ consisting
in this Obedience, and suffering of this in our room, now what at last is the
Imputation of it? Why certainly the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, is
and must be nothing else, but God's accounting the matter to be thus as it is.
Here is the Point, That what Christ has done, is looked upon, is accepted as
done in our behalf, or the granting it to be so; that upon this Obeying and
Suffering of his in our place, as the Meritorious Cause, we shall be freed from
the same Obedience and Suffering our selves, as the Effect of it. This is the
only Fundamental Truth in the Phrase, and this Imputation then of Christ's
Righteousness (which Man has so phrased) going into this Grant on God's part,
or obtaining the Grant on Christ's part, which precedes the Application, it
cannot go into the Application it self (that follows after upon the Performance
of the Gospel-terms) so as to make Christ's Righteousness ours, any otherwise
than in this Benefit only.

Besides this, the fancying such Acts in God, as the imputing Christ's
Righteousness to every single Person upon his Believing, any otherwise than by
that one Act of Grace now promulgated in the Gospel, is not becoming the Divine
Being. There is, there can be no new Acts in God: He is Actus purus, his Will
one. I must not grow too Subtle here, only I must say there is his Will, and
the Effects of his Will, and in those Effects there is an Order. In that Order
the Righteousness of Christ precedes the Impetration of all the Benefits we
have by him, as the Meritorious Cause of them; and the Impetration precedes the
Application, and the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness going to the
Impetration, the Application cannot but be of the Effects thereof: Not of this
Righteousness (I say) it self (in se,) but of the Benefits themselves we have
by it.

To be more short, That Commutation of Persons, and Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, (which come both in earnest to this one same thing, Man's Benefit
for Christ's Satisfaction) how soever the Thoughts thereof have amused so many
good Men, when you have thoroughly considered them, and made as much of them as
ever you can, it must all of it, every drop of it you can make, go into that
Act of Grace ( Salvation upon Gospel-Conditions) which is already procured and
passed. Unto the Impetration then of our Redemption, Christ's Righteousness was
indeed imputed in it self: In the Application it can be imputed only in the
Effects.

I know there are some Texts, very high Texts, about this matter in Scripture,
such as these, He has made him Sin for us, that we may be made the
Righteousness of God in him. By the Obedience of one many shall be made
Righteous. Christ is the end of the Law to the Believer. What is the meaning of
such Texts? The meaning really I take to be but the same I have now opened.
They all come to this, That Christ by his Satisfaction and Obedience, has
procured us such a Freedom from the Law, that Faith without Works (that is,
Legal Works) may be imputed to us for Righteousness, which is all one as that
we may become Righteous upon performing only the Terms of the Gospel.

Christ is the end of the Law. How? I answer, If I say, by putting an end to
it, I speak what is plainest. This is to give (...) its own proper
Interpretation. But how has Christ done that? He has done it by satisfying
and obeying it (I have said) in our stead. He has by the Merit of his
Obedience procured our Deliverance from the Obligation to perfect Obedience as
the Condition of Life. This is such an end of the Law as will hold, and can
never be contradicted. I will confirm it with the words following, Christ is
the end of the Law, for Righteousness to him that believes. There are two
Questions here will go to the heart of this Text: What is the end of the Law,
and Why there is an end of it? For the What we see, The end of the Law is this
Fredom (as I say) from the Condition mentioned. For the Why, the Text says it
is for Righteousness to him that believes. Now what is the meaning of these
words? It is that by believing we make Christ's Righteousness ours, and thereby
are Justified? No, it is that by believing (true believing, which is also
obeying the Gospel) we may be ( made, as one of the Texts has it) Righteous,
and being so, be accounted so of God, and dealt with as so, not Legally, but
Evangelically so, and accepted in that Righteousness of God (See my Book of
Justif. p. 57, 58.) opposed to the Righteousness of Works, unto Eternal Life.
This St. John teaches, He that does Righteousness is Righteous, and Christ's
own mouth has confirmed, And the Righteous to Life Everlasting. As for that
Text which is like still to be laid in our way, the first of those that in the
words I have quoted, (to wit, 2 Cor. 5.21.) I will accumulate thus much, that,
In Christ's taking on him our Sins, to become a Sacrifice for them, and
fulfilling the Law, to procure those new terms, in performance whereof we are
accepted as Righteous through his Merits, does the Commutation we find there
consist; yea, as I have intimated a little before, even that whole Commutation
of Persons, with which our Brethren do so puzzle themselves, and vex Mr. W. I
would not have them offended with me as with him, though I speak out what he
does not, that, here in good earnest is the full of the matter, and (excepting
the Darkness of Prejudice, which in most is as dark as Pit) there is no more in
it.

This being so, I must not admit any such Interpretation of the place, that is
framed according to our common Doctrine, which teaches, that by Faith we
receive Christ's Righteousness, that this receiving makes it ours; and that God
then reckons us, as having performed the Condition of the Law in Christ, and so
justifies us by it. All which is quite contrary to the words of this Text, that
says, Christ is the end of the Law; and to this meaning, in regard to its
Condition, seeing this Doctrine makes the Law to have no end, but to stand to
the great day; and that by this Condition we are to be Justified, subverting
not only this Text, but the whole Gospel. This yet is most evident in the
Verses following, for the Apostle distinguishing the Righteousness of the Law,
and the Righteousness of Faith, makes this Righteousness to be the confessing
with the Mouth, and believing with the Heart, which are Acts of ours, and not
the Obedience of Christ without us imputed: So that if you shall give (...) any
other signification than this, the Scope yet and Purpose of the place must be
the same. I have staid so long on this Text, because I have omitted it, when I
paraphrased the others in my Book of Justification, where all I say here, and
more, is made out.

I know there are Divines, who make Justification to lie in Pardon altogether,
and say we are made Righteous in such Texts, only by being pardoned. The being
freed (say they) from the Guilt of all Sin, both of Omission and Commission,
does introduce Righteousness, as the expelling Darkness does Light, and for a
Sinner to be justified or made Righteous, must be by a Righteousness in regard
to the Sanction of the Law, when in regard to the Preceptive part, no Man is
Righteous in himself or in Christ, whose Suretiship does reach so far and no
farther. This do they indeed very cleverly say: Nevertheless I am convinced,
that the Apostle by Justification (when he discourses of it to be by Faith and
not Works) means not Pardon, which is an Effect thereof (I count) not the
formal reason. I have one Argument for this convinces me in my Book of
Justification (the late second Edition 48.) which yet another perhaps may frame
for me something better. I observe also that the Scripture denominates Men
Righteous still from their walking uprightly, not from Pardon, P. 22. I have
more elaborately evinced, that the Righteousness of God in opposition to Works
is this, that I stand upon P. 27, 40, 57, 58. And upon the same account (I have
added farther in a Note here) is the Gospel called the Ministration of
Righteousness. See what I there offer (P. 43.) if it does not evince it. By
such Notices as these (which aliunde too, I must say, I have not had) am I
confirmed in my own Opinion.

Another word still with Mr. W. That God does look upon us (or account) that we
Suffered and made Satisfaction legally in Christ's Person, or that Christ
Suffered and made Satisfaction strictly in our Persons (which I count to be all
one, or hitherto have,) and yet that Christ suffered in our place or stead, Mr.
W. and I both hold. Now both these I take to be consistent, because Christ's
Sufferings and Satisfaction is ours, or in our place, or stead, only in regard
to the Effects: But if he suffered and satisfied in our place or stead (or his
Satisfaction be ours) any more, or otherwise than as to the Effects, I perceive
than neither his Brethren on one side, nor I on the other, can see by what
distinction, unless by words only, without the thing that makes the difference
(when these Distinctions without a Difference do still quite spoil all) he can
evade us, but that he must come over quite to me, or them, let him choose
which. Believe it, Christ died in our stead, is by Interpretation only, the
Believer Unpunished.

What Mr. W. offers upon this account in his Man made Righteous, p. 76 to 83. I
have considered, and it is but an honest thing to give a Man his weight.
Christ's Righteousness is double he counts, either his Performance of the
Mediatorial Covenant; or his Right to the Reward being performed. The one is a
Righteousness in relation to the Precept, the other in relation to the Premiant
Sanction. The former Righteousness is imputed to the Believer (he says)
Mediately, which is, I think, but the same I say, it is imputed only in regard
to the Effects. This is the Simile he uses, and the Explication makes good. God
looks on what Christ did and suffered (he urges) as done for us, and therefore
what he did and suffered is ours as to the Benefits: But God does not look on
what Christ did and suffered as done by us, and therefore what he did and
suffered is ours no otherwise. The latter, Righteousness then he says is
imputed to Believers Immediately, which he explains thus. A part of that Reward
Christ has a Right to, is to have a Seed, that they shall believe and be
pardoned. Now Believers have this Right, which Christ has, that they shall be
pardoned, It is made theirs; They have not only the Benefits, but are invested
in Christ's Right to those Benefits; They have not only a Right to Pardon, but
have Christ's Right to that Pardon. This he says, but how can this be? Christ's
Right to his Reward is as properly his own Righteousness, and inherent in him,
as his Righteousness of Obedience. Both are Accidents in him as their Subject.
One of them, the Righteousness of his Obedience, cannot possibly be ours in it
self, because Accidents do not Migrare a subjecto in subjectum, and how can Mr.
W. say so of this? If he does not make this Right of Christ to be ours in se,
it is as good as to say nothing. And when the Obedience of Christ is not in se
ours but by Imputation, and that only in the Effects, how the Right to the
Reward, which is Christ's Right, can be so ours, without this Migration (which
is impossible,) I am yet to consider, and digest not. We cannot be made
inherently Righteous by his Righteousness, and how shall we be so enrighted by
his Right? But after this, If Christ's Right it self (or his Right in se) be
not the Believers, but only the virtue of it, then is there here a Cobweb spun
finely, when all comes but to an Imputation of this Right, as well as of his
Obedience, as to the Effects only. I conclude, either then there is nothing at
all in this, or if there be something, so as he may come off in his saying,
that Besides the Effects, the very Righteousness of Christ is imputed, it is a
coming off but with a Fallacy ( fallacia dictionis:) For he understands that
Righteousness of Christ, which is so called in relation to the Sanction; and we
speak altogether of his Righteousness in relation to the Precept of the Law of
Redemption.

I must yet add, If Mr. W. will stand to it, that the very Righteousness of
Christ (without equivocating) is imputed to us besides (or any more than in
regard to) the Effects, then let him say, that Christ obeyed and suffered not
only for us, or in our stead, but also in our Persons, taking it too in their
own sense, and so make a full end with his Brethren. But I argue, If Christ
obeyed and suffered so in our Persons, as well as for us, and in our stead;
Then should not we obey at all; Then should not we suffer at all; for he that
has perfectly obeyed, can be punished for nothing; Then should we need no
Forgiveness; Then would Christ's Sufferings for us having obeyed be needless;
Then must he be looked on by God as the Sinner; Then must the Culpa as well as
the Poena be imputed to him; Then could not Christ be our Mediator, because he
is the Offending Party, and a Mediator is a third Party between the Offender
and the Offended; in which Person he obeyed and suffered for us. Then lastly
should Impunity and Life be due to us immediately by a mere Resultancy from his
Obedience and Sufferings, and not be given by the Interposition of a new Law or
Covenant upon terms as they are according to the Gospel, which is subverted
therefore by that Opinion. Once more, If Christ suffered in our Persons, then
should he have borne the same Sufferings, and if they were the same, they could
not be instead of Ours.

You may say the Righteousness of Christ in it self is imputed to us, though it
be not Ours, only in the Effects: But Mr. W. must not come off so, for I say,
To be imputed in it self, is to be Ours by Imputation, that is, Judicially
Ours, which draws the same Consequences, as Ours in it self.

But I pray let us consider a little in good earnest, what is in this
Conception of Mr. W. that besides the Effects being made Ours, the very
Righteousness of Christ is imputed; Is there any thing in it, or nothing in it?
Is it of any or no Signification? Certainly if his meaning comes not to thus
much, that besides the Effects, Christ's Righteousness it self is ours also by
Imputation, it is an idle, impertinent, vile Trifling with us (which in regard
to Mr. Baxter, is not to be spoken without some Resentment) in so exquisite a
matter: If he will grant his meaning to be thus much, that though Christ's
Righteousness cannot be inherently Ours, yet it is indeed Ours by Imputation,
then is he come quite home to his Brethren, who never said, or intended any
other.

After this I argue, If Christ's Righteousness be imputed to us in it self,
Then were it pleadable by us, as if we our selves had done and suffered what
Christ did, which Mr. W. does in effect allow, or without Tergiversation must,
Gospel Truth, p. 39, 40. And also, Then must God have dealt with us, as if we
had; which he does more positively allow, P. 42. To impute to one (says he)
what is suffered by another, is to deal with him as if he himself had suffered.
But God has not dealt thus with us; and we cannot plead so with him, which
appear by the said Consequences. It is not all one as if we had done and
suffered in Christ, what he did and suffered for us, for Satisfaction is
another thing than this. It is not all one in other respects; it is as good for
us only in the obtained (when attained) Effects.

PART IV.
THERE remains now one thing, and a chief thing, yet to be done, which is, to
offer something that may serve to reconcile such Brethren at least as agree in
the main, though it cannot such as quite differ in the Point. I shall first
dilate a little more for lights sake, and so be lead thereto by the matter it
self. Christ in Scripture is said to dye for us, and to dye for our Sins.

For our Sins he may be said to dye or suffer in these two senses. For our
Sins, To expiate them, to deliver us from them, the Guilt and Condemnation due
to us for them: For our Sins, As the Meritorious Cause of his Death and
Sufferings, upon his voluntary undertaking that Expiation. Both these Senses
are good, and to be retained.

For us may have a double Sense also, Loco nostro; or Bono nostro. In our
stead; or in regard to our Benefit. The Socinians will have Christ to dye for
us only bono nostro, which they fetch about too, so as makes his dying for us
of no more concern than a Martyr's. Christ by his Death confirmed his Doctrine:
This makes us believe it: His Doctrine teaches a Holy Life: By a Holy Life we
leave Sin. Christ therefore dyed for our Sins. But we hold Christ dyed loco
nostro, in our stead, in our room.

Now, In our stead, or loco nostro, may have again a double Interpretation.

In our stead, As representing our Persons, so that God looks on us as having
done and suffered what Christ did and suffered for us. As what my Attorney or
Delegate does for me, I am accounted to have done. He is the Agent Naturally,
but Civilly or Legally it is I: In this Interpretation we are not to hold
Christ dyed in our stead, for that draws all those mentioned Consequences after
it, which must carefully be avoided.

There is another Interpretation then of Suffering in our stead. In our stead,
that is, To save us from Suffering our selves; and this is the Sense we are
first to know to be the right, and then stand by it. To do any thing or suffer
it in the room of another, I have said, is to do or suffer that thing that the
other may escape it, and in this right sense it is, that Grotius understands
Christ's dying for us, and speaks of a Commutation or Subrogation of Christ's
Person in the room of ours in his Sufferings for us, as the Beast was
subrogated in the place of him that Sacrificed it. If any stretch such words of
his farther than so, they abuse both their Understanding and him.

Now when this In our stead, in usual speaking, is Suffering or doing in our
Person, I am brought at last to a pause, as to the words we use, That Christ
suffered and obeyed in our Persons, is said by our Divines without scruple, and
Dr. Bates does but handsomely express what they speak ordinarily. Nay Mr. Baxter
does acknowledge that these words may be used, if we put a right Sense on them.
And what is that Sense? The Sense that must be put on them, if right, is indeed
to confound these two things, which I, and Mr. W. and Mr. Baxter too, do so
carefully distinguish otherwise, that is, Christ's Suffering in our stead, and
in our Persons. Let these two Expressions then be understood as one and the
same thing, and either of them may be used. If the saying Christ suffered in
our Persons, as Christ suffered in our stead, be taken in the first sense of In
our stead, so as to draw on these Consequences, I say we must deny that he
suffered in our Persons, or dyed in our stead, the Saying is Antinomian: But if
it be made to signify no more than Suffering in our stead, in the second
Interpretation of In our stead, that is, so as not to draw those Consequences,
the Saying is Orthodox, and we may allow it. Thus much is safe and sure, from
whence it appears, that some Distinction here in other words, the members
whereof ( Membra dividentia sunt contraria) being made such as all these said
Consequences may be attributed to one of them, and none of them to the other,
so that we could simply, only by granting the one Branch, and denying the
other, reconcile in this matter, might do better. Suppose then I should recall
those words, a little above where I count (or hitherto have) Christ's Suffering
and Obeying in our Persons, and our Obeying and Suffering in Christ's Person to
be all one; and instead of distinguishing between, in our Stead, and in our
Persons, make these to be two things, I say, make this the Distinction upon
which to set all right, by saying that Christ obeyed and suffered in our
Persons, understanding only in our stead in the right sense declared, but
denying that we suffered and obeyed in his Person, or that God does look on us
as legally to have obeyed and satisfied in him, because of those Consequences
(I say still) before mentioned, which if proposed by way of Argument against
it, none can answer. (Let Dr. Bates try, and if he cannot, Mr. Lobb must not in
Modesty think he can,) Would not this do our work?

I crave here Mr. W's Attention, because in a Discourse I had last with him, he
distinguished thus. He held he said a Commutation of Person, but not of
Persons. I asked him if he had read the Distinction in the Civil Law, and if he
had his Author I should like it well. We know the Scripture says, Christ dyed
for us, and obeyed for us, and that is we say in our room, in our stead. It no
where says, we sinned in his stead, our Sins were not for him, though he bare
them. He suffered and obeyed in our Person as in our stead, I have said, there
is a Commutation of Person; but we suffered not, and obeyed not in his Person
(seeing these Consequences aforesaid follow upon that,) so there is not of
Persons. And what if Mr. W. and I should have fallen here into the same
Conception? Nay, what if Dr. Bates, whose Book is cited against Mr. W. should
have been so profoundly careful of his words, that though he has so amply
owned the Sinner and Christ (as his Surety) to be one in Law, Judicially one,
as to the paying our Debts, or bearing our Punishment, or in doing and
suffering what we ought to have done and suffered, has yet never expressed
them One so, as that God accounts us to have obeyed and suffered in him? I
cannot say it, but if he has, then are we very lucky in this: And why may we
not agree thus (as I say) with that worthy and beloved Man? Christ was indeed
Our Substitute, but we not Christ's: He obeyed and suffered in our Person, but
not we in His; and if we did not obey and suffer in his Person, then must not
his Righteousness be Ours neither, but in the Effects. Let the Doctor choose
here whether he will cleave to his old Friend Mr. Baxter, or his new Mr. W. and
let Mr. W. consider himself who is likeliest to have seen deeper, he or Mr.
Baxter, into the Bowels of this Point. This I stand upon, God looks not on us
as the Performers of what Christ performed in our behalf; and in our behalf, in
our stead, or room, to suffer, I have said, and said, is to suffer that We
might not suffer. To say then that Christ's Suffering is Ours (or accounted
Ours) is to forget what Suffering in another room does mean. If Christ
suffered and obeyed (I press it) in our stead, place, room, that we might not
suffer and obey (in the sense in due place explained) then did not, then could
not he suffer and obey so, as that God should look on us as if we have suffered
and obeyed in him. This is a Contradiction, and he that says Christ's
Righteousness it self is imputed to us as ours, is involved in it.

Mr. Rutherford argues, If Christ paid the Law Debt of Satisfaction, which the
Elect in their Persons should have paid, and thereby freed them from the same,
he sustained the Person of the Elect (or our Persons) in his Sufferings, Co.
Op. 251. I answer, We will grant to him here the use of such words, Christ
sustained our Person, or suffered in our Persons in this sense quoted, that
through Satisfaction given by him to the Lawgiver, Elect Believers are freed
from satisfying the Law themselves (the Language thus pruned, for the Law was
not executed, or Law-Debt paid, but Satisfaction given to save its Execution on
the Debtor:) But when he confounds the Use with the other Sense also as one,
that in Christ's sustaining our Person, God does account us to have suffered
and satisfied in his, he is fallen into this Inconsistency, that neither
Rutherford nor Bates (I doubt,) nor Williams himself, has sufficiently
observed. What is done in our stead, or in our Person, in the one Sense, cannot
be so in the other. If God (I must say it again) will have Christ to sustain
our Persons in his Sufferings, that we might not Suffer, then must we not also
sustain His, as that God should account us to have suffered. This is the
Inconsistency, and the Reader must pardon me the forced Repetition.

Mr. W. (who I say is included here) does tell us, ( Man made Righteous, p. 62,
63.) That the Righteousness of Christ, as the performed Condition of the
Reward, was a Faederal Righteousness, above what was to be Man's Righteousness
by the Law of Works, which he exemplifies in several Instances. I argue against
him hereupon, Therefore the very Righteousness of Christ it self cannot be
imputed to us, but is imputed to us in the Effects. It was in our stead,
therefore not ours in it self: It was in our stead, and therefore ours in the
Benefit of it, and in the Benefit only.

Thus much for Mr. W. with whom I am concerned, because we being so near of
Opinion, I would have that Satisfaction from him, as to take these Matters
between us into his second Thoughts, and to consider what I offer, so as if
there be light, or right Notion in it, he may make it more clear by the fullness
of his Expression (when mine is barren,) and indeed tell what Dr. Bates should
mean, and what I do mean, better perhaps than my self. I do conjure him, so far
as he is convinced, not to be ashamed to own the Truth, however naked it be
here, and without Friends: Or else to give me sufficient reason for my return
to his Temper, which seems to me such, as to let his Opinion be that, or no
other but that, which he can so defend against his Adversaries, as to lose no
Repute with his Followers.

For Mr. Lobb I am not concerned, for whether I differ with him in all, or not
at all, we leave one another to our own Judgments. It is the words of others he
has quoted, and I apprehend himself free to his own Opinion, wherein I know he
has had, and may have, Candor and Latitude; which may be therefore the same
with mine, as theirs, if he will, and if he will not, he may choose. He is one
that for his Industry in reading Books, and good Temper upon it I do value; and
though there be some that are stumbled, at the Interest he had in King James's
Court, I judge, that seeing it was laid out mainly to get and maintain their
Liberty, the Brethren have little reason to censure, and much less to envy it.
Mr. Lobb (I must tell some) had no Gift from that King. King James indeed knew
how to toul Men into him by Liberty of Conscience, and make that a
Schooing-Horn to have drawn Popery upon the Nation, if he had not been
prevented: But any one may easily believe, he never had such a Heart to any
Nonconformist Protestant, as to build us a Synagogue. I had written about a
side upon this account, but blotting out the rest, I will let thus much stand,
that upon this Interest of Mr. Lobb, I had Admittance once into King James's
Presence, and having spoken what I came about, and something concerning his
Dispensing with the Law, I said thus to him, That if he would maintain that
Dispensing Power, which I counted he then exercised, he changed his Government,
and the People would fight with him, and their Cause be good. I spoke it in
such words, and some the same (as Mr. Lobb can witness) that are in the ensuing
Paper, which I printed lately by it self for serving the present Generation,
according to my Mite; but knowing how such single Papers are used, torn, burnt,
lost, and having at first wrote it in these Sheets, I did not intend but it
should also come out with them: In a Book it will be kept, and I Prognosticate
too, will remain, to that Age to come, wherein no Man will be found, that dare
write or say the same. That Doctrine was accounted good in Queen Elizabeth's
Time, which in King Charles and King James's was made Treason, and now in King
William's has been Justified.

Memoriae Sacrum.
WHereas there have been some that fear God, of all Ranks, the higher and
meaner Rank and Conditions, Clergy and Laity, that could not submit to the
Present Government, so as to take the Oath of Fidelity to the King, nay nor so
much as come to the Liturgy (whereof otherwise they were so fond) because of
the Prayers that are there said for him: And whereas there are now many more,
that though they have Sworn Allegiance to William as King de Facto, they cannot
come to an Acknowledgment of him as King de Jure, so as to Associate in a
Cordial Defense of him with others; All which Doubts depend upon the sole
Question about King James's Conscionable Exclusion; wherein it is not merely
out of Interest, (as most selfish Men will think) Humor, or Inclination, that
they are gravelled, but out of Conscience grounded on the Thirteenth to the
Romans: And forasmuch as I wrote a Book in the year 1680. printed for R.
Clavel, Entitled, A Peaceable Resolution of Conscience, touching our present
Impositions, wherein I have spoken for Loyalty against Resistance, not only as
much, (for it is a Political Book) but more in one Vertical Point than others,
and too much upon further Knowledge than is fit for our English Government: I
do think meet, for the rectifying my self, and an humble Tender for other
Satisfaction, (especially such devout Loyalists as have forsaken what they had,
rather than the Confession they once made in so solemn a Declaration and
Subscription, which was then enjoined all Conformists, That it is not Lawful to
take Arms against the King upon any Pretense whatsoever) to bear this Testimony
to that Text of the Apostle, and leave it on Record before I dye, being now 75
years Old, for the sake of Posterity. The words are these, Let every Soul be
subject unto the Higher Powers: For there is no Power but of God. The Powers
that be, ore Ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the Power,
resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation.

There are two Distinctions here necessary to be known; To offer more, were to
Confound, not Edify. One is, between Subjection and Obedience. It is Dr.
Field's Distinction in the Words, and in the Meaning none of those that are for
the Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience, but will so far agree
with us. We are not always to Obey the Higher Powers (Themselves must
acknowledge) but we are (they say) always to be in Subjection, and never
Resist, rise up, and deliver our selves from them. If God forbids what the
Magistrate commands, or if God commands what he forbids, God must be obeyed
rather than Man. This by their Word [Passive] they assent unto; but, as to the
Point of Subjection, it is in that, the Question and Difference lies between us.
The other Distinction then is, what They have not yet known, nor was it ever
yet used before by any that I know, unless perhaps my self. The Sense almost
all have, but not the Elucidation. Distinguish we then between these two
things, which certainly are different things, the Powers that are, and the
Powers that are There may be a Pretended Power, where there is None: Such as
was King James's Dispensing Power, and his Commissions now.
not. This is a plain Distinction, every one can understand it, and it is
undeniable. The Powers, the Higher Powers in the Text are (...), the Powers
that be. This is certain and express, the Powers that be, are the Powers in the
Text, the Powers that are of God, the Ordinance of God, and they that resist
shall receive to themselves Damnation. Let this be granted to these Devout Men;
but then must they grant to me again what cannot be denied by any, that as for
the Powers that are not, the Powers (I say) that are not the Powers that be,
they are not the Powers in the Text, not the Powers that are of God, not the
Ordinance of God, and they that resist them, (and not the Powers that be) shall
not receive to themselves Damnation. This is is plain and undeniable as before.

Now there is one Question to be asked, which alone will resolve the whole Case
at stake between us, and that is this: What is the true Meaning of the (...)?
What is really and in good earnest (so as the Conscience may rest upon it,)
That, which is meant by the Powers that be? I Answer, The Powers that be, are
certainly the Powers according to the present known Augustus brought in a New
Constitution into the Roman Government, the People consenting: And Nero was
Obeyed, and not to be Resisted, as supposedly Ruling thereby.
Constitution. There are Higher Powers (or Kings) whose Government is Absolute,
and so Absolute, as that Subjects have no Liberty of Person, or Propriety in
Goods by the Constitution: But it is not so with other Higher Powers (or Kings)
whose Government is according to a supposed Original Contract (appearing in the
Laws) which gives the People such Liberty and Rights, as the King such a
Prerogative, extending so far, and no farther than the Contract allows. There
is here therefore two things to be considered, the Potestas, and Forma
Regiminis; the Power and the Form in such Governments. The Form or Constitution
(which tells what sort of Government it shall be, what Persons shall Govern,
and how far they may go) is of Men, (of Men altoge^her, unless in the Jews
Commonwealth) and then the Power does flow from GOD to Rule so, and no
otherwise, but according to that Constitution. Potestas est a Deo, but Forma ab
Hominibus, says Bishop Andrews. If then the Higher Powers for the
Administration Rule not by that Form, or according to that Constitution, (but
designedly and resolvedly, and not by a slip and mere Inadvertency, depart from
it,) the Power a Deo, the Potestas, fails them; and they do Cadere de Jure,
fall from their Right to our Subjection. A Dispensing Power indefinitely
maintained, is a Power over the Laws. A Power over the Laws, subverts the
Government. A Change of Government Absolves the Subject from his Allegiance.
I have thought on this long, I was at Oxford when I composed that Book
forementioned, and had the Use of the Library, and I pitched on this as the
Texts Fundamental Exposition, That the Powers that be, are the Government in
every Country according to its own Constitution: And consequently, that the
Subjection (or Non-Resistance) which is required of God as due to the Higher
Powers, is a Subjection (or Non-Resistance) no other but according to the same.
Look you Sirs, the Scripture does not go to prescribe, alter, or meddle with
the Governments of the Nations, but it supposes a Government in every Kingdom
or Country, and commands Subjection to the Government that is. We overturn all
if we Preach otherwise than thus, Evangelium non abolet Politias. When Luther
had taught that the Magistrate should not be Resisted, and some Lawyers proved
to him, that the German Empire was not Absolute, but that the Laws thereof
permitted Resistance, he then held they might make a League to defend
themselves; Upon this Reason, Because (said he) the Gospel abolishes not the
Laws of any Commonwealth, Sleidan lib. 8. Note here in the way, That if William
be Lawful King, King by Law, then he must be Rightful King [King in Foro
Interiori, unto whom Subjection is due, not for Wrath, but Conscience Sake;
King in foro Dei Sive Conscientiae, and not in foro Exteriori Sive Humano
only:] Upon the same Reason, Because the Gospel, the Word or Laws of God does
supponere, not ponere any thing in this Matter, but according to the Law of the
Land.


Now then let us come to the Government of our Nation, and this Government we
all know (and none more like than these Men to stand by it) is (...), as Sir
Thomas Smith, the Secretary of State in two Reigns, has told us in his
Authentic Book, De Republica Anglicana: That is, A Government regulated by
Laws, a Government which is Kingly by the Statutes of the Realm, and not at the
Will of the Lord. Non est Rex ubi Voluntas imperat, non Lex, says Bracton; and
so say all our Great Lawyers. Well! Such being the Constitution of our
Government, Be it Known and Acknowledged, That if any King of England therefore
shall Rule so (or really go about it so, that if he be not hindered, he will
effect it) as to change the Government, or Manner of the Kingdom (as the
Scripture expresses it) from Legal to Arbitrary, from Regal to Despotical; and
it shall please God to give the People, who are Free Subjects, the Happy Means
of a Deliverance, they do not resist in this Case, or rise up against the
Powers that be, the Powers in the Text, the Powers that are of GOD, the
Ordinance of GOD: But the Powers not in the Text, the Powers that are not of
GOD, the Powers that are not the Ordinance of God, and it being indeed only a
Rising for the Government, and not against the Government, and no resisting the
Powers that be, they shall not receive to themselves Damnation. This is the
Case of the Revolution. As We know, (says Hooker in larger Words) That they are
Lords of such or such Lands, unto whom, in defect of Heirs, they fall by
Escheat: So does it rightly follow, seeing Dominion, when there is none to
inherit it, (or when it is forfeited) returns to the Body, that it does
fundamentally and radically reside in the Body, and that the Inheritors hold it
in dependency on them. This Saying of his, I confess in my Judgment, does
require that grain of Salt, which is above in the Paper (too much to be
explained and adapted to a Marginal Note:) But is so far true to me, as
undoubtedly to make the Application. Our Government therefore thus Escheating,
or become Forfeit to the People, and they by their Representatives in a
Convention, having settled it on William, here is the most certain, true,
indubitable Title that any Prince is capable of; and better than any other has
to his Government, for ought I know, in the Earth besides.


There are two Reasons now (besides the Conscience to my self in regard to the
Book forecited) for the Publication; which being apparent, I own. The One, That
all Honest Scrupulous Men, who have been hitherto Non-Jurors upon the Point of
Conscience (as to them) may be so satisfied to take the Oath of Fidelity to
King William (with us that have,) as to bless God for him, and to enter the
Association, as they see it good for them. The Other, That the King himself,
and those that succeed him in the Throne, may not be tempted by the Love of
their People, or Liberality of Parliaments, to make such Use of their Raised
Strength, as our Neighbor Kings have done, to go out of the Circle of our
English Constitution: Especially knowing, that the Spirit of the Nation, and
the Conscience of it also is hereby so resolved, that under King James we would
not be Papists; under those that succeed, We will not be Slaves. Having said
this for the People, I must say one thing also for the King out of the same
Principle. There is the Positive and Negative Power of Rulers. According to our
English Government it is true, and to be held, that the King can Positively do
nothing but according to Law: But it being true also, and to be considered,
that the Supreme Law in all Polities is the Common Good; if a Prince, in the
use of his Power only, which is Negative, should upon occasion do something
otherwise than Law, for the Benefit of the Subject (Bona fide) and not his
private Ends, I do believe, both Politically, and as a Divine, that he may have
a good Conscience in it; and when he has, that he is not to account he acts
then against the Law, but according to it, seeing he does Govern in such a Case
by the Supreme Law, unto which all others are Subordinate. Not long before King
Charles's Death, the Justices were sending Mr. Baxter to Prison for
Conventicling, but he hearing of it, and being told it might kill the ill good
Man, out of his kind Nature, sends word immediately he would have him forborne.
To have controlled the Law to a Man's hurt, it had been Tyranny; but when it
was only for Good, without detriment to any, who could open his Mouth against
it? It is to be supposed no Lawgivers can foresee all Cases that may happen,
and when Equity and a good Conscience is against the Letter of the Law, thus
much I think Justifiable by the Old Covenant Oath, where the King Swear to
execute the Laws, Cum Justitia and Miserecordia: If not it will be, by that
Power our Kings have of granting a Nolle Profequi in some cases to Offenders,
and much more by that of Pardoning All ad libitum, which a Majore ad Minus
cannot but warrant more than this. It is fit that Kings, before they Swear, do
understand their Oath to have this Construction, and to know that which is much
more to the purpose, that any Law which is against God or Nature, that is,
which is against the Law of Nature, or Word of God, or the Common Good, is
really in foro Conscientiae, No Law; so that in the Non-Prosecution thereof,
they are not to be condemned. Nay, if a Prince by Malversation, even Positive
or Privative, shall render himself Obnoxious to God, and the People, it is good
yet for the Subject to bear with him (as we do with Storms) so long as we can;
but if the Case comes to that once, as the Nation is in danger of Ruin by it,
the Doctrine of Non-resistance, any longer than we can help our selves, is
perfect Ignorance of our State, or raving Obstinacy. Salus Populi Suprema lex
esto.


Habetus Sententiam meam, in Causa hac gravissima. J. H.

The Postscript to the Reader.
THERE are several Pieces, that at several Times, upon several Subjects, I have
written, called, The Middle Way. One is the Middle Way of Justification, which
I printed in the year 71 or 72, and reprinted lately 95, upon the account of
our Brethrens Difference about that Point. In that second Edition I have
gathered up all Passages that concern that Subject, out of the rest of those
Papers to put them to it, and took advantage from certain Exceptions against
Mr. Williams, to add something that I thought wanting in a single Sheet, and
have here supplied what was yet in my Mind to say farther upon this Occasion.
Now if the Reader shall bid the Bookseller stitch these six Sheets, that one
Sheet (so called) and those eight or nine together, and then shall take time to
read them, and notice of what he reads (unless he thinks this Point of
Justification be such, as is not worthy his Time or Thoughts, which was an
Article of so great Concern to our first Reformers,) and does not meet with
something or other in them (and that as an Original) which may serve at least
Vice cotis to whet his own Understanding upon them, then is it not I my self
only, but two of our most eminent Brethren while alive (as appears by their
hands put to one of my Papers) are deceived. I will add, that if Mr. W.
therefore shall not now set himself to peruse them, and finding any such Matter
which he can improve, or make out better for me than I have done, if he does it
not, then am I farther disappointed in one End of this present Work, as also of
my believed Estimation of Mr. Williams. For according to what a Man's Mind is
most upon in such Disputes as these, the Investigation of Truth, or the Defense
of ones self, such is his value more or less.

Having yet room, the fear of the want whereof made me put those two Paragraphs
(p. 29.) into a Marginal Note, that should else have been part of the Book, I
will use it to supply one thing lacking in the single Sheet mentioned. The
Sacrifice and Righteousness of Christ's Death and Life, is that which has
procured Pardon and Salvation to every Believing Sinner, upon the account of
that Satisfaction God as Rector has received by it; so that being Legislator
also (and above Law) he might with Demonstration too of his Righteousness
(relax, and has relaxed or dispensed with) his Law of Works, requiring another
Condition to those Benefits in a new one, the Law of Grace, or the Gospel. This
Pardon now and Life (or Grant thereof) upon Condition, being the Grand Fruits
of our Redemption, it is a Question between Mr. W. and I, whether the Condition
it self also be a Fruit of Christ's Purchase, which if it be not, derives not
yet from our Free Will, but the Grace of Election. It is not agreeable to my
Genius to make Christ's Redemption, which I would have One thing and Universal,
to be differently insluxive on the Elect and others. I have opened this
Apprehension of mine in that single Sheet mentioned, and there are two
Considerations moreover offered against the received Opinion, which I desire
Mr. W. to weigh Honestly, and, if he can, to solve me the Difficulty; or if he
cannot, to come with me to this Composition. The Lord Christ; by Redeeming the
World and consequently by his Death, has obtained a Right of Dominion over it,
and by that Right does give that Condition to whom he will, Acts 5.31. But
though Faith therefore and Repentance, in this remote way about, may be said to
be obtained by Christ's Death (as he has obtained thereby a Power or Right of
giving it,) I deny it to be the immediate Purchase, or direct Fruit of it. I
deny that Faith is a Fruit of Christ's Death, in the same manner as Pardon and
Life is upon Condition of Faith. I deny that it proceeds from Satisfaction
given to God's Justice (which Christ's Death was) though it may from his Merit,
or Redundancy of it, as all other Good does, seeing in his Name it is, or
through his Merits, that we ask all things at the Hands of God, (as Health, and
Wealth, and the like Blessings) which we cannot say yet Christ died that we
should have. Again, Christ came and died to Save Man, by restoring him to
Righteousness, from whence he is fallen. Now the Righteousness of Nature, we
never can be in this Life restored to, and there is therefore a Righteousness
of Grace, which God has ordained in room of that to Save us, revealed in the
Gospel, and it is called the Righteousness of God, because of this his
Ordination. By the Obedience of Christ we are said to be made Righteous, and
the Righteousness of God in him, or by the Means of him, as one has it. But how
by the Means of him? Why, by his Death, but this way about still. Christ died
to procure for us a Covenant with another Condition than that of the Old, which
performing, we become Righteous that never could be so else; but mark it, when
the Condition is purchased, the Performance comes not from thence, but from the
Free Gift of God. In the mean time, this Mercy that God has ordained, and does
accept of such a Condition as we do, or can perform, must not pass without
Resentment. Blessed be the God of Heaven for some Sense and Knowledge of this
in these Sheets. Blessed be God that it is not a Righteousness of the Law
required of us, but a Righteousness of the Gospel. Blessed be God it is not by
a Righteousness of Works that we are Saved, but a Righteousness, the Failings
whereof are pardoned, and the little Done accepted through the alone Merits of
Christ Jesus. Which when they had read, they rejoiced for the Consolation.

Deo Gloria mihi Condonatio. J. H.

FINIS.

