THE AXE LAID to the ROOT OF Separation: OR, THE Churches Cause Against It.

By the Author who wrote in the late Times for Free Admission to the Lord's
Supper.

So those Servants went out into the Highways, and gathered together as many
as they found, both Good and Bad; and the Wedding was furnished with Guests,
Matthew. 22.10.

LONDON, Printed by John Leake, for the Author, MDCLXXXV.

TO THE MOST REVEREND, The Present ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRY.
May it please Your Grace,
I Do not Dedicate this Book to You for any Interest I have In You, or for any
Preferment I seek From You; who may say as the Woman, with whom the Prophet
sojourned; I have nothing to be spoken for to the King; I dwell among my own
People; being One that Conform Not as a Minister, but go to Church as a
Parishioner, and Study to be quiet: But I lay these Sheets at the Feet of the
Church, by Handing them to Your Grace, in regard to the Orb You are placed in,
and in respect to the Subject I have undertaken.

I do likewise Present it to Your Grace, as One (I understand) that do Love,
and will Find a Time to Read, notwithstanding the Multiplicity and Weight of
Your Affairs; being not Lifted up with Greatness, or Delighted so much in the
Sunshine even of the Court, as in Retiring to the Shade of Your Books at Home:
Who are One consequently, that is like to Read the Book, and make Your Own
Judgment of it; and if You find any thing in it serviceable to God, are in
Place to Move, and Promote it; as, if the Attempt be amiss, can, by Your proper
Instruction, appoint some sit Person, to Reprove and Answer it, that the
Public receive no Detriment by it.

I must confess, I am of the Opinion, That the Notion and Doctrine Of and
Concerning the Church, and Churches of Christ upon Earth, which is generally
received as Orthodox, is not consistent with our Public Practice, and the
Being of our Mixed Churches; and could not therefore, when Time was, Declare my
unfeigned Assent and Consent to all things in the Liturgy; because I must then
have both prevented this Book, and consented to Some Thing in Point of Doctrine
and Use (which will be named in its Place) as by a Consequence unavoidable to
me, does give up the Field to the Separatist. And when (if I may speak a
Consequential Truth) I am One, that have become herein a kind of Martyr, in my
loss of all Emolument within the Church, for my Resolution and Endeavor of
maintaining the Churches Cause; so that there does appear something Meritorious
in my Nonconformity, though nothing at all in My Self; what if I Revive a late
Motion made to Your Grace, That You will hearken to those Papers of mine,
Entitled, Three Steps in order to the obtaining my Liberty to Preach; which
being desired for Occasional Sermons only, without Benefice, Dignity, Living or
Lecture, I have, in my Third Step, brought the Matter to this Issue, That if
You will concede to me but what any Bishop may do by Law, and impune also by
the Canons, I may have Your License for the Use of my Ministry, and yet keep my
Own Conscience in the Case?

Your Grace's Humble Servant, The Author.

The PREFACE.
READER,
I Am sensible under what Prejudice I am like to write; and how much more would
be imputed to it, if some Other served the CAUSE I do. Truth and Interest went
both to One Service: Truth did his Master's Work in good earnest: Interest
labored only to please. The Master finding his Busin^ss done, and not
regarding by Whom, kept Interest, and turned Truth out of Door.

Were I Ambitious to conciliate to me the Favor of our present Masters of the
Age, I might set my self on the Magnifying the Church of England, in the
Excellency of her Constitution, of her Reformation, and Glory; or I might chase
some the like Task: But when the Advantage I seek, is not my Own, but That of
the Public, I shall leave such Work to Those that think to g^t any thing by
it. My Business, which is of other Use, is to make good our Churches, which
consist of whole Parishes, and Nations, that is, our Mixed Churches, to be
Churches for all that, as are warrantable from the Holy Scriptures; that the
Understanding, Sober Godly of our Brethren may be satisfied to join with, and
separate no longer from our Public Congregations upon that Account. To do
this, is a Matter of deeper Thoughts, than most are aware of; and till this
Work be done, as it ought, (unto which I can but contribute my Mite, and then
call in further Aid from others) it will but fare with us, in all our
Endeavors after the Peace and Prosperity of the Church of God in this Nation,
as with them that have raised a fair Structure, and sumptuous Building; and
then lose it, in point of Law, by mistaking the Ground upon which they set it.

That this is the Root of the Difference between Us, and Those that d^part from
the Public, there are none but must see, that have Eyes in their Head: And I,
for my part, must say moreover, That having had long occasion to reflect on the
Subject, I could never but apprehend, that the Notion which our Protestant
Divines generally entertain of the Church, is so narrow, that unless we can
lengthen our Cords, and strengthen our Stakes, we shall be driven out of our
Tents.

There are Two Foundations, upon which the Separatist that best understands his
own Cause, will lay it. The One regards the Minister of the Parish, the Other
the People, or Matter of the Church.

That which regards the Minister, is this. The Church of England consists of so
many Diocesses, and the Parishes are but Parts of the Diocese. The Bishop is
sole Pastor, and the Minister but the Curate of the Bishop. It follows, that
the Minister being no Pastor, and the Church no whole, or true Church, this is
the First Ground of Separation.

That which regards the People, is this. The Parish Churches consist of the
Regenerate and Unregenerate, ex Institutione Humana: The Church of Christ, ex
Intention Ordinantis, consists of the Regenerate only. Here are two
Ordinations inconsistent: The Matter of these Churches inconsistent. And this
is the Second Ground of Separation.

In short, Our Ministers (say they) are not true Pastors, nor our People true
Flocks, according to Christ's Institution; and therefore they must Separate
from our Congregations, and gather Others.

For Answer to the former Ground, let us know, that Diocesan Episcopacy may be
considered, as some hold it, to be of Divine, or, as others hold it, to be of
Human Institution.

Of those that hold it to be of Divine Right, there are some (and such as are
of our late Chief Men) that do indeed assert the Diocesan Bishop to be the only
Bishop, or Pastor of Christ's Appointment; to whom the Keys are committed, as
succeeding the Apostles; and consequently, that the Diocesan Churches are the
only Churches; which, though One Assembly at first, they were to increase into
Many, as they are now at this Day; making up that one Church Insimae Speciei,
which can admit of no other under it, but only several Congregations, as Parts
of it, that can themselves be no Political Societies upon that Account. These
Men, it must be confessed therefore, do destroy the Parish Pastor and Church;
and their Opinion is to be opposed by us all, Conformist and Nonconformist,
esp^cially when they take upon them to deliver the Judgment of the Church of
England; which in her Declaration of the Work or Office with which She Charges
the Minister at his Ordination, (as well as otherwise) does say enough for the
Confutation of these Men. There are others then, more temperate, who hold thus
only, That Christ having instituted a Superiority and Inferiority in the
Ministry, and the Apostles and Evangelists ceasing, in regard to the
Extraordinary Part of their Office, the sixed Bishop succ^eds in the Ordinary
Part of it: But as the Elders or Pastors, in Scripture-time, had a Power
conferred on them by their Ordination, which they continued over their
Congregations, notwithstanding the overruling Authority of the Apostles; and
did exercise it when they interposed not, or were pr^sent with them: So is the
Superintendency of the Bishops (their Successors) now but Cumulative, and not
Destructive of the Government, which the Minister has over his Parish by
virtue of Christ's Institution. And these Men, by such soft Words, do quite
turn the Edge of this Argument.

Of Those who hold Episcopacy to be only of Humane Right, there are some that
are ready to acknowledge, and approve of it as Prudent, and of Ecclesiastical
Institution, when they will in no wise endure it to be obtruded on us as
Apostolical, or of Divine Right; for this Reason more especially, because then
it can never be altered, whatsoever Occasion there be for it. There are Others,
that though they cannot but acknowledge the Antiquity of Bishops, as of
Ecclesiastical Right, yet are they not willing to receive them, if they could
help it; but only, being Established by the Supreme Power, they submit to them.
And the Truth is, so long as all Power, Ecclesiastical or Civil, which is but
Human, is subordinate to the Supreme Magistrate, it is the King's Authority
must be their chiefest Hold; who, if He please, may put into their Hands the
Executive Part of that Power, Circa Sacra, which belongs to Princes, making it
Coercive, (so far as He will) and no Body, I know, could deny Obedience to them
upon that Account; when if they challenge any from the Authority of Christ,
there are many will be apt to think they owe them none.

Now, to draw up to the Argument, or this First Ground of the Separatist. I
must say first, That true it is, there are some, by their Opinion, Quantum in
se, do destroy the Pastoral Office of the Parish Minister; but These are not to
be accounted the Church of England, or the Law, but Innovators whosoever they
be. I must say then next, That suppose we were mistaken, and the Church and Law
did, or does Establish such an Episcopacy as this, the Authority of Law in this
Case, and Church too, is, or were of no Force, because the Authority of Christ
must take place. A Pastor and People, Associated for carrying on the Worship of
God, and a Christian Life, is a Church of Christ's Institution. Such
Associations are our Parishes. Such Pastors also have Power, though the
Exercise be obstructed; and they may exert it if they will, and venture the
Issue. Such Churches, I say again, have nothing wanting in the Essentials of
true Churches; and to Separate from them therefore, without other Cause, is
Schism.

For Answer to the latter Ground, (which is the old stated Ground of Donatist
and Brownist) I have prepared this ensuing Discourse. That our Churches are
True Churches, in opposition to, or Answer of the first Ground, Argument, or
Objection, it has been (I must confess) but the fresh Work of another Person;
and in such a piece of Impartiality, and Self-denial, as is (in my Opinion)
very engaging to the Church of England, (if She could acknowledge it); for he
has removed all their just Offense, and the Substance of it, I think, I have
set down in this little. Only, I must add thus much more yet in his behalf,
That whereas the Dispute between him, and his chief Opposer, lies in this
Point, Whether it be lawful to Communicate with the Parish Assemblies, as by
Law required? I must say, That the Question thus proposed includes a Fallacy in
it, which is the Fallacy plurium Interrogationum, as we call it. The only
Enquiry should be, Whether we may go to Church, the Law requiring it? The word
As [As by Law required] includes (I say) another, or farther Interrogation,
which is not needful to be Answered; and therefore is Fallacious; which I put
in as a Suppletory to what that worthy good Man has omitted. The Law requires,
that we go to our Parish Church; whether as to a Part only of the Diocesan, or
as to a True Particular Church, agreeable to Christ's Appointment, is a Matter
of Contention, which is Needless, and may be Endless: It is enough, that it is
lawful for us to go to Church. There is this Difference between the Law of Man,
and God's, That when our Obedience to Him must not only be in the Matter, but
in the Manner of his Commands, to be acc^ptable to Him; If the thing, which the
Law of Man requires, be but in the Matter done, (and may be done) there is no
more comes into Examination. That our Churches are True Churches, in answer of,
or opposition to, the Second Ground, I do make the Work, de Industria, of these
Sheets; that is, I do make it My Work; because indeed, it can never be that
Worthier Man's, seeing the Way he has gone hitherto, (which because Common,
they call Orthodox) will never make any Work of it. For let us try: If we
Answer hereunto, That the Church of Christ does indeed consist only of the
Sound B^liever, or Regenerate Persons; but the Church as Visible, that is,
which appears the Church in Man's Account, consists of the Unregenerate also:
Or, Those that are Members really, and in the Sight of God, are only Regenerate
Believers; but those are Members in our Esteem, that profess themselves to be
such Christians as the Regenerate, though they be not; the Argument then will
come to this: The Church, as visible (to use here, for once, the common Term in
the common Sense) is a number of Prof^ssors. This Profession must be of a
Regenerate Saving Faith, and of no less, (that we may believe the Professor to
be such, as is sit Matter for Christ's Church) according to our Protestant
Divines. But in our Parish Churches there is no such Profession. Therefore,
They are no True Churches. This, I say, is the old and constant Foundation of
the Separatist; and who is there, that goes the common way, has indeed
Answered it to the Satisfaction of any the most Impartial among them? As for
Profession of Infants, what is that for Signification to us, whether the
Baptized be Regenerate, or not? And what Profession is there besides, (at
least, ordinarily) but coming together in the Public Congregation?

If the Churches of Christ's Ordination, (I must say it again) be a Number only
of such Persons as do profess their Faith, Repentance, Regeneration, so
credibly, or in some such manner, as the Minister and Church do receive them
thereupon, as Men endowed with the Grace supposed to be professed; and our Mixed
Churches be not, in good earnest, a Number of such Professors, then is there
here inconsistent Matter. Our Principle is One thing, our Practice is Another.
If you deny the Assumption, and will still affirm, Our Members are such
Professors; you will prevail with the Opponent no more, than One whom they
count will say any thing; which will but root them so much the deeper in their
Conviction. They will tell you, They stand on your Bottom, and make their
Practice comport with it; who admit none into their Society, but such as indeed
make a Profession, that is credibly Significant, of the thing professed; and
upon that, or such only, receive them to be Members. They make our Principle,
and their Practice accord; but we stand on the same Bottom, and our Universal
Practice is otherwise; and yet maintain our Mixed Churches. And what then must
we do, to make them Good? Why, As these Men, by keeping to our Principle do
forsake our Practice; so we, to avoid their Practice, must try our Principle,
Whether it may not be enlarged to that Practice, which is common, and cannot
but take place where Kingdoms become Christian; the Particular Congregations
whereof will be acknowledged for all that, by Others, if not by th^se Men, to
be Churches of Jesus Christ?

I know indeed, how mean and unfit a Person I am, to become a Master Builder;
especially when I am to lay another Foundation, than That which is laid by the
common Doctrine of our Protestants; and much more, when I am to lay it in
Opposition to One particularly, unto whom I do not think My Self worthy to be
as a Labourer, and carry his Bricks after him: From whom, nevertheless, I shall
expect a more sincere and candid Consideration of what is offered, than from
Others.

It is now about One or Two and Thirty Years, that I have had for Recollection;
for so long it is since I Printed Three Books about Free Admission to the
Sacrament. Upon coming out of the Third Piece, I received from Mr. Blake (a
grave Presbyterian) a Letter, signifying to me his Approbation of the Second
Section of that Book, with Exceptions to all the Rest: When, on the contrary, I
heard from the Reverend Mr. Baxter; who approved the rest, but excepted at that
Section. Mr. Blake having found it necessary, in regard to some Dispute,
wherein he was engaged, concerning Baptism, to enlarge the received Notion of
the Church, I had in that Section contributed what present Aid I could, toward
strengthening his Opinion. Mr. Baxter upon his first taking notice of the
Notion in Mr. Blake, did show a very good Will to it, in his Book of
Infant Baptism; using, as I remember, some such Words, That there was more
Worth in a Leaf or two of Mr. Blake, than in all Mr. Tombs's Works. By which
Words Mr. Blake being encouraged, advanced in his Notion. But Mr. Baxter,
having considered farther of it, and finding that it would not go, being
against the Stream, (which appeared to him more especially from the Learned
Gataker's Book, de Infantili Baptismo) comes out against him, in Answer to his
Books, and to That little of Mine, with such a Torrent of Argument and
Authority, that Mr. Blake, I believe, could never recover it. For my part, I
conceived Mr. Baxter too hard for me to Cope with; and Mr. Blake being dead,
there was none to take up his Cause.

The Truth is, Mr. Blake had much to say, and a great many Scriptures appeared
apt to militate for him: But he had not digested his Notion; and no Man shall
ever be able to Make Good any Point, which be cannot first State. He
maintained, That a Dogmatical Faith was sufficient to enter a Man in Covenant
with God, and so to Entitle him to the Ordinances: But being pressed with the
Authority of the Assembly, and the Fathers, That the Profession of a Justifying
Faith is required to Baptism, he grants it; and accounts that Nothing to him,
who never denied it. This Concession was an irrecoverable Contradiction. If a
Faith less than Saving, serves to give Title to a Man himself to be Baptized;
then a Profession of one less than Saving must suffice for his Admission. The
Church, or Pastor cannot require, that a Man should profess any more to their
Receiving him, than That which gives himself Title to be Baptized.

It fared the like with that Learned and most Ingenious Gentleman, Sir William
Morice; who appearing by the Title of his Book, in the First Edition, to defend
the same Point with Mr. Blake, was discoursed from One by Letter, with all the
Difficulties he could bring; to the end he should obviate them, and extricate
Us out of them: But he finding it indeed beyond his Ability, did wisely, by
interpreting the Term Dogmatical Faith, and making it to signify a Profession
of a Saving One, decline the Task; and so glided himself off into the Stream of
the Common Opinion.

There have been of late Two Persons, of sober Judgment, both Citizens; who
were of the Congregational way, but brought off from it upon this same
Conception, That the Church is to be laid Wider, than (they thought before,
and) is used. They wrote each of them upon the Subject, with Approbation of
some Persons of Note in the Church; and the latest Book is Entitled,
Catholicisme; which I name particularly, because there are many things
considerable in it, to the Asserting our Cause, and Answering some Objections I
have not touched: Nevertheless, it does fall out with this Author, as with
Those beforenamed; who having not completed his Thoughts, does at the very
Beginning, when he is about stating the Matter, destroy it: For making this
Query, What may That be, by which People are made Visible Members? and giving
the Resolution, That it is a Mutual Covenanting between God and Them; and
understanding by this Covenant the Covenant of Grance, or Covenant of Life,
without any Distinction, or Apprehensions about it, but as others have: It is
plain, that no Man can Covenant, on his Part, in the manner he expresses it,
but he is a Regenerate Man; and so shall not the Church consist of the
Regenerate and Unregenerate, as we would have it; but of the Regenerate only,
or of Those only who are Visibly such, which subverts our Opinion. When
accordingly, in his Eighth Query, he endeavors to disprove the Tenent of the
Independents, That Men are Members of the Church, as Visible, no otherwise than
as they are reputed Members of the Invisible, upon this Reason, (which is
therefore to be looked on as the Stating, and all the Stating he has of the
Point) because they become Members by their Voluntary Covenanting by Baptism.
It is a Contradiction: For their Voluntary Covenanting by Baptism, is in the
common Account, Professing themselves Members of the Church Invisible. I am
very sensible, that this Notion of a Visible Member, which he opposes as the
Independent Notion, is the Notion of our Protestants in general; and when he
has said so much to Confute it in the Independent, he must not go back upon
his Knowledge that the Presbyterian, and the Church of England, as well as the
Congregationalist, agree in the same. Nay, so long as he but uses the Term
Visible, and tells us, That the Unregenerate are Members of the Church only as
Visible, or only Visible Members, the Cause is given up; for to be a Visible
Member, and no more, is to be a. Member of Christ in the Account of Men, when
they are not so in the Sight of God; which is That, they who oppose us would
have, according to the received Opinion even of all sorts of Protestant
Divines, as I said but now.

As for this Author then, and Mr. Blake, I see no Footsteps leading them out
of this Difficulty, having had no Inckling of any Difference between God's
Government over all Mankind for Eternal Life, and that Kingdom which He set up
over the Jews, and committed to the Messiah, to be spread over all Nations by
the Gospel, as subservient to that End; and consequently, between the Condition
necessary to bring Men into a State of Salvation, according to the Covenant of
Grace, and That which serves to make Men Subjects to this Voluntary Government
or Kingdom, and capable of Entering the Covenant belonging thereunto, as Means
to the Other; and so to distinguish of a Saving Faith, and One Short of it
accordingly. I do much less remember in these Authors, any thing of Solidity
about the Measure or Stint of that Faith, which does Entitle to Baptism, and
not to Justisication. If a Faith less than Saving, do suffice to give this
Right, it must be known to what Degree that Faith must come, to have this
Virtue, and what That is which gives it: But I should never have found Light in
their Books about the General Grace of God, from whence that Virtue springs,
and whereupon it is certainly founded; Or of that Degree which specifies this
Faith, which is short of Saving, and yet gives Right (upon the Account thereof)
to Admission. I let thus much be yet but a Riddle, till the Book be read over,
and that all of it; for the Notion is not complete, till you come to the very
End. Whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely.

I do not forget, that all Men know but in part; and I am conscious, how little
I know, in respect of Others; and that there is like to be a great deal wanting
in my Papers; and, perhaps, something of Inconsistency too, as in these Worthy
Persons, (especially, in offering some Variety for Men to choose, where, if I
stuck to One thing, they could not have it): And I do therefore give the like
Liberty to Others, to open those Defects, with all my Heart, if it be to the
same End, of helping Them, and completing the Notion. It is but little a Man
can do with his single Strength. It is but little Light that any sow usually at
first, which must grow up by the blowing of Others. That which I sow, I know,
can but be a Seed, so small as the Mustard Seed; which yet, if it be looked to,
watered, and cultivated by other Hands, may spread into a Tree, for the Time to
come, to gather Fruit of it.

In the mean while I will give warning, That no Body make this Discourse a
Pretext for Impiety, in the neglect either of his Exhortation of Others, or of
his Care to his own Soul, in sitting themselves for Baptism, or the Supper, if
they come to them. That a Man repent of all his Sins, and dedicate himself unto
God in sincere Obedience, (or entire, measured by Grace) and particularly, (the
more solemnly) when he comes to these Sacraments, is his unquestionable Duty.
And for as much as this is the usual Theme of our Practical Books and Sermons,
I do declare, by these Presents, my Approbation of such Labors; and that there
is nothing in this Discourse to be understood to the contrary; but rather to
press the same thing upon all Persons, as ever they expect to have the
Remission of their Sins, and obtain Salvation. Nevertheless, in regard that it
is Sathan's Policy, to make Holiness and Peace oftentimes to become
Stumbling Blocks one to the Other; while some Men by secking the Purity of the
Church, do themselves take, and more often give occasion to others, to break
the Peace of It; it is the Endeavor of these Sheets to let Men understand,
That though such Lessons are well taught, and urged on all that come, yet is it
their Duty still to come; and of the Church, to receive those that come: And if
such be Admitted that come not as they ought, when yet they ought to come, it
is not for any, upon that Account, to Separate from Us. We are indeed to take
heed, we be not levened by any one's Sin; and to Admonish the Guilty, (if it be
not casting Pearl before Swine); and to tell the Church, if a Brother be
refractory: But our Communion with evil Men does not maculate any (says St.
Austin) by partaking of the Sacrament with them, unless we join in, or consent
to their Deeds. In the Threshing of the Wheat, the Corn parts from the Chaff;
but Both of them keep the same Floor. And however the Devil would be setting
Holiness and Peace at distance, it is our part to keep to both; not willingly
letting One entrench upon the Other: And such Doctrine is to be taught, and to
be so tempered, as most conduces to make them Meet.

I shall not therefore be concerned much at those Men, who will be apt to say,
That my Larger Way will bring in too many into the Church, and confound the
World with it: For besides that, this is a Mistake, so long as a Christian and
a Pagan are not confounded; and it is not the Ungodly, (but the more tender
Godly) that would stick at what they are put to profess (supposing them once
willing to come in) I am not sensible of any such great Hurt in this; when
according to the Prophecies of Scripture, it is the Glory of the Church, under
the Gospel, that the Kingdoms of the World do become the Kingdom of the Lord
Jesus.

Seek ye Me, (says God) and seek not Bethel. That Public Worship, which God
has Instituted for Himself, as the only True God, in opposition to Idols, and
False Worship, is a Means which we are to use, in order that we may Live; for
This has the Promise of Life annexed to it; Seek ye Me, and ye shall Live.
Amos 5.4, 5, 6.2 Chron. 15.2. Exodus 20.24. Matthew. 18.20. That the Ordinances
therefore in general, and one with another are appointed to be the Means of
Grace, I think a Man should believe, as his Creed: And why any good Men (that
will consider) should be moved at our Inviting All, and Letting in the Willing
(having first heard and received the Gospel) unto the Participation of these
External Appointments, so long as we press upon them the Necessity of the same
Faith and Repentance, that the most strictest Ministers do, for the obtaining
the Spiritual Benefits thereof; I apprehend no such Cause, as they: For here is
Holiness, and here is Peace joined together. Neither am I taken off with that
worn-out Arguing, That because the Sacraments are not Administered, (as the
Word) without the Church unto Heathens, to convert such to the Faith;
therefore, they cannot tend, within the Church, to any Vnregen rate Member's
Edification, Joh. 3.14, 15. Joh. 4.22.

It is a more Generous Spirit, methinks, St. Paul shows, when the Corinthians
seem to value themselves upon their External Christianity, without Care of a
Holy Life: I would not have you ignorant, (says he) that all our Fathers were
Baptized in the Cloud, and passed through the Sea, and eat of the same
Spiritual Meat, and drank of the same Spiritual Drink: But with many of them
God was not well pleased. The Apostle appears here to make but very little of
the admitting Men unto Baptism, and the Supper, when he makes no more of their
Coming to it, than the Israelites passing through the Sea, and eating of the
Mannah, and drinking of the Rock; which things yet he declares to be
Symbolical, or Types even of the Blood of Christ, as our Sacraments. He could
hardly have had a Heart to have spoken thus, if his Thoughts had been cast in
the Mould, as many of our good Men's now are. I will add, Had the Apostles been
so strict about admitting Persons to Baptism in their Days, as they were after,
when they kept Men so long upon Trial, as Catechumens, upon peculiar Reasons
then, and had looked on Baptism as so great and chief Work of the Ministry, and
Exercise of the Keys, wherein so singular Care was to be taken; I wonder, that
this Zealous Doctor of the Gentiles, should profess himself to be no more
concerned about it, when he tells us, how few (some Three or Four, or so) were
all that he ever Baptized; and that God sent him Not to Baptize, but to Preach
the Gospel.

Not but I fear God, and reverence his Institutions; and the Panting and
Breathings of the Hearts of good Men after more pure Communion even on Earth,
has been to me of deep Consideration: But we must not, for all that, make the
same Conditions unto Coming into the Church, as unto the Getting into Heaven.
In action Coenae Dominicae non debemus (says Cyprian) attendere quid aliqui
ante nos faciendum putaverint, sed quid ille qui ante omnes est prior fecerit,
and faciendum mandaverit. In these Actions of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper,
we are not to attend what some before us have thought fit to be dome; but what
He, who is before all, has Himself first done, and commanded us to do.

The Author.

THE Cause of our Mixed Churches AGAINST SEPARATION.
SECT. I.
IT is in vain to write Books for the Satisfaction of People, concerning the
Lawfulness of the Liturgy and Ceremonies, and coming to Church; To think of
Terms for Von and Concord; or to endeavor any the like good things; which many
Considerate Ministers about London have lately done; if the Churches, unto
which We Go, and would Bring Others, cannot be maintained to be True Churches,
or Churches agreeable to the Institution of Christ. It is This is the First
Stone to be Laid: It is This is the Cause must be made Good.

For the doing hereof, I shall offer some things (...), for the Stating or
Building it Up; some things (...), for the Confirming it; some things (...),
for the Refutation of Objections: And the Discourse shall contain Three
Sections.

To begin with the First, The Building Up our Cause, in This; and to fetch the
Matter from the Bottom, I must lay my Thoughts together, in these Theses and
Method following.

As God made all things, so is He universal. Governor of his Creatures.

The Government of God over his Creatures that are Reasonable, must be a Moral
Government, requiring Obedience from them upon Motives of Reward and Punishment.

The Insirument of this Government must be his Law.

The Law of God is, either the Law of Nature, or his Revealed and Positive Laws.

The Government of God is likewise double; Natural, or Conventional.

The Natural Government of God over Men and Women, which He has by Right of
Creation, is over all the World, as they are particular Persons; giving them
the Law of Nature to live by that they may please Him, and be saved.

This Law of Nature is either the Law of Innocent, or Lapsed Nature.

The Law of Innocent Nature, is that perfect Rule of Righteousness, that was
writ in Adam's Heart when created, requiring him to preserve his Innocence and
Integraty, upon Pain of Death; and it is called the Law of Works.

The Law of Lapsed Nature, is the same Law, with mitigation, requiring the same
Duty, but not as the Condition of Life: accepting of the imperfect Service of
Man, according to his present State, so long as it is performed in Sincerity of
Heart toward God: and this is called the Law of Grace.

As Man in Innocence had the Notices of the most Holy God, and his Duty writ in
his Heart, or could gather it from the Light of his Reason, being to live
perfectly in that State: So must the World, after Man's Fall, and the Loss of
his Innocence, have some the like Notices implanted there, or arising naturally
from the Exercise of his Faculties, That God is Good and Merciful, and will not
punish him if he Repent, but consider him according to his frail Condition; and
consequently, that he must now have no Government at all over him for Life and
Salvation; or else that he must be under another Law than that of Innocence, or
under other Conditions in obeying it; for else must every Man on the Earth
everlastingly perish.

Upon what Account, or upon what Ground or Foundation the Righteousness of God
could stand in dealing with Man, when fallen by another Law than that at first
implanted in him in Innocence, was a Mystery hidden from the Foundation of the
World; and not revealed, but darkly, till the Times of the Gospel: But the
Belief that God was Good, and would pardon the Sinner upon his Repentance,
though they could not tell how, or upon what ground it was, (the way of
Reconciliation through Christ, being beyond the Ken of all Human Understanding)
was general in the World; as does appear, in particular, by the Ninevites; as
also, by the Sacrifices for the Atonement of the Deity, which have been in use
in all Nations.

Not but all the World is under the same Law as Adam was, (the Law that was for
our Nature cannot be altered) but we are not under it on the same terms. We are
under it as a Rule of Life, but we are not under it as a Rule of Judgment. We
are under it so as we are bound to live according to it; but we are not under
it so, that if we do not, we shall be justified or condemned by it.

There is one Religion therefore, Law or Rule for all Mankind to obtain Life
by; which being the Law of our Lapsed Nature, or Remedying Law, containing
God's Grace administered to all the Earth, in a threefold State of such as were,
or are, without the Law, (or before it) and under the Law, and under the
Gospel; as this Administration is threefold, so has the Faith, which is the
Condition thereof, been diversified. But now is the Righteousness of God
revealed from Faith to Faith. The Righteousness of God is the Righteousness of
this Law, which has ever been afoot in the World: And though a Heathen has
not that Faith as is required of the Christian under the Third Edition of it,
or that which was required of the Jew under the Second; yet has he such a
Faith as belongs to the First, such as the Ancients before Abraham had; and so
long as that Faith he has does work by Love, or by Sincere Obedience to God
according to his Light, it will justify him as well as that which is now
further required of us under the Gospel.

It follows, that this Law (being that which is given for Life, and so the one
only true Measure of Religion to all the World) must belong to the Government
of God which is Universal; and that is the Natural Government of God.

The Government of God which is Conventional, is that Government which He has
taken over some certain Persons as they are gathered, or joined together into
Societies, unto which they are called out of the World, for the Glorifying his
Name in that Worship and Service of Him, which He has Instituted by his
Positive Law, Precepts or Ordinances, (I mean, such as He has any way revealed
to be his Will, whether they be such as belong to the Law of Nature also, or
such as do not) in order to the taking, owning and acknowledging Him for their
God in a peculiar manner; that is, in opposition to the Worship of any other
God or Idols, and the serving Him the true God in any other way but what He
has appointed; and their becoming thereby a peculiar People to Him; and so
being under his Favor and Blessing in regard to all the good things of this
Life, and that which is to come.

I do observe here, the Government of God which is Natural, is over all the
World; this Government, which is Conventional, is over some Persons only,
called out of the World into a peculiar Relation to God. That the One is over
All, but considered as Single Persons, taking in every Individual in the World;
the Other is over some, and so over Singulars also, but considered as
Incorporated for the Public Service of God. That the One Government is by the
Law of Nature, (I mean, both of Lapsed and Innocent Nature) the Other is by his
Positive or Revealed Laws. That these Laws and Ordinances of God therefore,
which He has revealed, as they are more, and as they are revealed otherwise,
or farther than by the Light of Nature, or Natural Reason only, are a high
Privilege to such as they are vouchsafed to. What Advantage th^n bath the Jew
above the Gentile? Much every way, chiefly because that unto them was committed
the Oracles of God, Romans 3.1, 2. That this giving to a People his Oracles, or
Positive Institutions, are advantageous upon this Account, that they are Means
for obtaining his blessing, or else there could be no such Advantage in them.
That this Blessing of God must not be looked on only to concern Temporal
Things, but Spiritual and Eternal: For seeing Man consists of a Body, and a
Soul, and that Soul is Immortal, he cannot be happy but in Both. That the great
and principal Advantage therefore, that we have by these Ordinances, or
Government of God which is Conventional, must and does lie in being Means for
the bringing Men up to the Performance of the Terms of that Law, which God by
his Government, which is Natural and Universal, has made to be the Rule of
Judgment to all Men, for Everlasting Life or Condemnation.

There are some Learned Men, that will not have Adam, nor any in the World, to
have been in Covenant with God before Abraham, (understanding it of a Covenant
of Life.) But so long as God had a Government in the World before Abraham, and
that Government must be by a Law, and that Law to Adam fallen, to Seth, Enoch,
Melchisedeck, must be a Law of Grace, or else no Man of them could have been
saved; it is but a Matter of Words whether they call this Law of Grace and
Life, a Covenant or not. This we must have a Care of, that we distinguish this
Law of Grace, or Law for Life and Salvation, which is contained in these Words,
[Walk before Me, and be Vpright] belonging out of question, to Adam, Seth,
Enoch, as much as to Abraham; and the Covenant which God made with Abraham
hereupon, being such an upright Person, in regard to himself and Posterity. I
will make my Covenant between Me and Thee, and I will multiply thee
exceedingly. I I will establish my Covenant between Me and Thee, and thy Seed
after thee in their Generations, to be a God to Thee, and thy Seed after Thee.
This is my Covenant, Every Man-child among you shall be Circumcised.

There is the Covenant of Life therefore, and Covenant of Advantage.

The Covenant of Life (I scruple not to call it Law or Covenant) was made with
fallen Adam, and in him with all the World, and is all one with the Law of Grace
(I say) that belongs to God's Natural Government, which is Universal; and
according to this Law (or Covenant) must every Man be judged at the last Day.
The Covenant of Advantage is the Covenant which God made with Abraham, and with
the Israelites for his sake, beginning it with him by Circumcision, unto which
were added other Rites and Ordinances by Moses, together with the Declaration
of the Moral Law; and in regard hereunto, that People are said to be a holy
People, a peculiar People, and preferred before all the Nations in the World.
Among all the Multitude of People, Thou have gotten Thee one People; and unto
this People whom Thou lovedst, Thou gave a Law that is approved of all, says
Esdras, 2 Esd. 5.27. Ye stand this Day all of you before the Lord, to enter
into Covenant with the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 29. Thou art a holy People unto the
Lord thy God; the Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special People unto
Himself, above all the People that are upon the Face of the Earth, Deuteronomy. 7.6.
So again, Chap. 14. Verse. 2. A Special People, a Peculiar People; from whence
this Covenant we speak of, is called by some the Covenant of Peculiarity; as by
me the Covenant of Advantage, from the Words before of the Apostle, What
Advantage then has the Jew? He has showed His Mind unto Jacob, his Statutes
and Judgments unto Israel; He has not dealt so with any other Nation, Psalm.
147.19, 20. To whom pertains the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants,
and the giving the Law, and the Service of God, and the Promises, Romans 19.4. By
the Adoption I understand that Sonship only which they had by their Admission
into this outward Relation of being God's peculiar People: By the Covenants I
understand nothing but this same Covenant of Advantage, given at first to
Abraham, and renewed after by Moses; and so called Two Covenants, the Covenant
of Circumcision, and the Covenant which God made with the Jews, when He took
them by the hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt, Act. 7.8. Heb. 8.9. By
the Promises likewise we must understand either those that were made only to
that People; or if the great Promise of Salvation by Christ be included also,
we must understand that they belonged to the Israelites, in regard to the
Revelation; that is, they only had the Revelation of them, but the Matter
revealed belonged alike to all the World.

It is true, that Abraham was the first Man with whom God entered Covenant,
understanding it of this Covenant of Advantage or Peculiarity; and he is the
first Elect therefore we read of in Scripture. Thou art the Lord the God, who
did choose Abraham, and broughtst him out of Vr of the Ch^ldees, Nehem. 9.7.
It is an Election into this peculiar State, or relation to God, in regard to
his Conventional Government we are speaking of; and as all the Israelites are
said to be his Chosen People. It is not to be understood of that Decree of
Election, which Divines dispute of from other Texts; but is equivalent with his
Call. Get thee out of thy Country, unto a Land that I will show thee, Genesis
12.1. God's choosing Abraham, and calling him into this peculiar Relation, is
but the same thing; but it is One thing to be Chosen in regard to that Election
which is unto Everlasting Life, and Another to be only Called. Many are called,
(says Christ) and few chosen. This is indeed here very certain, and to be
observed, that it was in Abraham, and his Family, God was pleased to lay the
First Foundation of any Corporation formed under distinguishing Laws or
Institutions for his Solemn Service or Worship, which is properly to be a
Church. A Church from the Word in the Greek, is a Number of the Called, that
is, called out of the World, as it is Idolatrous, or given to false Worship,
unto the owning the true God, and his Government, according to his own
Institutions, which was begun in the Commonwealth and Polity of Israel, (
Circumcision being preliminary to it) and is now, and shall be continued in the
Congregations of Christians to the end of the World.

This Covenant then, which God made with the Jews when He brought them out of
Egypt, appears to be no other than such a Covenant as passes between a Prince,
and his Subjects, that is, a Political Covenant, God undertaking to be their
Ruler, and they promising him Allegiance; so that the Commonwealth of Israel
was indeed a Theocracy: insomuch as when the People chose Saul for their
Prince, they are said to reject God; for the Lord their God was their King, 1 Samuel 12.12. Not but He continued this Conventional-Government of His for all
that, allowing of their Kings as his Vicegerents, having his House, or Temple,
to dwell amongst them; where he kept also his Servants, or Household, the
Priests and Levites, receiving their Offerings as Rents for maintaining his
Attendants. This Kingdom was not to cease until Christ, his Son, the Messiah
should come into the World; and then indeed he broke up House, and delivered up
the same to him. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his Feet, until Shiloh come; and to Him shall the gathering of the
People be, Genesis 49.10.

We read therefore, when Christ had finished the Work of Man's Redemption, and
Rose from the Dead, He takes upon Him the Administration of this Government.
All Power is given me in Heaven and Earth: Go ye into all the World, and preach
the Gospel, Matthew. 28.18. Mar. 16.15. What is that but, Go and gather all those
that will come in, and Incorporate as the People who are to be gathered to Me;
that is, that will embody as Christians, who then are to be Baptized, and so to
continue in Doctrine, in Fellowship, breaking Bread and Prayer, which are Laws
and Institutions of his Government. I have set my King upon my holy Hill of
Sion. Ask of Me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and
the utmost Parts of the Earth for thy Possession. That Kingdom which God had
over the ^ews, in regard to this voluntary Government, He has now given to his
Son, and all the World that will, are to be brought into it. Upon this account
is the State of the Church under the Gospel (that is, the Christian Church) so
often called the Kingdom of God. And Jesus began to Preach, Repent, for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. The Kingdom of God, and the Kingdom of Heaven, is
the Kingdom of the Messiah foretold in the Prophets; and the Terms were not
strange to the Jews. They thought indeed the Messiah would come, for the
Restoration of the Kingdom to Israel, by Conquering the Romans, and subjecting
all the Nations, and so reigning in outward Glory: but they were deceived, not
in the Matter it self, nor in the Greatness and Extent of his Dominions; but
they were deceived in the Manner of it, which was not to be of this World, that
is, not from it, or to be set up by Worldly Means, by Armies, or the Sword, but
by the Word; yet is it a Kingdom in the World; and, as other Kingdoms,
comprehends the Bodies (as well as Souls) of Men and Women, living under
Subjection to his Government in that External way of Worship and Discipline, as
by his own Officers and Ordinances He has appointed in the Gospel.

It is therefore a mistaken Notion, which our Divines have ordinarily taken up
of the Church, accounting it to be the Number only of the Regenerate and Elect;
which in the first Apprehension, is the Number of the Called, and the Called
are ex intention vocantis, more than the Chosen. It is true, that the Church,
in some Scriptures, speaking of it to other Purposes, is to be understood of
the Elect only. So we read of the Church of the Firstborn, which are enrolled
in Heaven, Heb. 12.23. the Church that is so washed in Christ's Blood, as to be
without Spot or Wrinkle, which none are but those that enter into Glory, Ephesians.
5.27. So we read of that Chain of the Apostle: Whom he did Predestinate, them
he also Called; and whom he Called, them he also Justified; and whom he
Justified, them he also Glorified, Romans 8.30. Nevertheless, when the Scripture
speaks of the Church to the Purpose which concerns us, which is, as it is that
Corporation of Christians, unto which the World is to be brought in by
Preaching of the Gospel, it must consist of Regenerate, and Unregenerate; that
is, of Multitudes, whereof the Elect are but few only. The whole Body of the
Israelites, brought out of Egypt, are expressly called the Church, The Church in
the Wilderness, Act. 7.38. The whole Body of them, Man, Woman and Child, enter
into that Covenant, which denominated them God's peculiar People, Deuteronomy. 29.10,
11, 12, 13. It is yet more significant with me, that it was the Outward Jew,
and not the Inward only, unto whom belonged that Advantage which the Jew is
accounted to have above the Gentile, Romans 3.1. that is, the Advantage of the
Oracles of God, and consequently those Ordinances, whereby that People were
distinguished, as by Tokens, from other People.

There is the Mystical Church then, and Congregate Church, or Church Political.
It is not the Regenerate and Elect, but the Congregate Church, which, according
to the Contexture of this Discourse, is, and must be the immediate Recipient of
the Outward Ordinances. It is in regard to his Voluntary Government, which I
call Conventional, that God did institute any, or give any Laws at all, but
what are of Nature: And those Persons who are the Subjects of that Government,
must be the Recipients of these Appointments. Neither is it a Man's being Born
again, but his Willingness to come under this Government, (that is, a
Willingness to come in, and join with the Church) that gives him title to the
Institutions thereof. This Privilege of the Congregate Church is One thing,
and the Privilege of the Regenerate, or the Church Mystical is Another. The
External Ordinances are the Privilege of all Christians, as they were of all
the Jews, the Outward Jew and Christian, as well as the Inward, unto whom they
belong, in opposition to the Gentile and Heathen: But the Privilege of the
Inward Christian, and Mystical Church, is not the Ordinances, (being common to
them with the Unregenerate) but the saving Benefits of the Ordinances; which (I
say) is another Matter; There is the General and Special Grace of the Gospel.
The Church of Christians, in the first Notion of it, should not be defined by
the Participation of the Special, but the General Grace of the Gospel: And it
is the Number of the Called into Christ's Kingdom, or under the Conventional
Government of God, to the Participation of those Ordinances which He has
appointed as Means of Grace, and Exercises of Piety, by way of Advantage above
others, as the Jew is said to have above the Gentile, in order to their
obtaining, or farthering their Eternal Salvation.

That there is the General Grace of God, and of the Gospel, as well as Special,
is received by Eminent Divines: But how this General Grace accordingly is also
to be defined, I find not many that can tell. That Christ died for All, as for
his Sheep, and that God would have All to be saved, as well as his Elect, is
express in Scripture. But is this General Grace? What if a Man Repent not, and
Believe not, will God have such to be saved? Not so, certainly: There is thus
much more therefore must come into the Definition, if they Repent, if they
Believe. Christ has died, and God would have Christ to die for All so, that if
they Believe and Repent, they shall be Saved. Well! Is this the Definition then
of General Grace? No, it is not; this is not yet enough. Dr. Twisse indeed, and
all Men grant This; but it is short by Two Steps. For, as God is said to will
all Men's Salvation; so is He said, that He would have all Men to Repent, and
come to the Knowledge of the Truth. This then is also to be taken in. But has
He given Christ to die for All, that they may Repent? By no means: This would
bring in Origen's Universal Grace; that All, at last, must be Saved. When God
then is said to Will that any should Repent, it must be understood, without
doubt, as to the Means which He offers them for Repentance. And thus does the
Lord expostulate with his People; What could I have done more for my Vineyard,
than I have done? There is one Mr. Cottier, a French Protestant, seems to have
studied this Point of General Grace more accurately than others; who thus
defines it. Gratia Vniversalis est nobis actus liberrimus, quo eligendo eos
quos praecognovit, simul alios respexit, uti Creaturas suas Sathanae
malignitate seductas, quousque fas and jura tulere, pari jure seu invitandos,
seu vocandos, ad Dei cultum, and consequentia cultus.

Here is One Step farther then toward the Definition of Universal Grace; That
God does not only Will the Salvation of All (in giving Christ to die for them)
upon condition; but that He does also vouchsafe the Means to All, so far as is
meet, for their Performance of that Condition.

The Other Step is, To lay down the Specifical Difference it self, wherein this
Universal Grace does consist, as it is distinguished from Special; for without
the Specifical Difference of any thing, there can be no exact Definition. I
will therefore humbly offer this full Definition. The Universal Grace of God,
is that free Act, Love or Favor of his, whereby, together with his El^cting
some to be infallibly saved by Him, He does respect all others as his
Creatures, with the Vouchsafement of the same Means of Salvation, so far as
Right and Equity requires; (Quousque fas and jura tulere, says that cautious
Divine; which I must therefore six and establish, as that alone which is
wanting to complete the Definition) and that is, so far as they will.

Behold! When there are no Means of Salvation, which God does vouchsafe his
Elect, but He vouchsafes the same to the Non-Elect, and so to All according to
the State they are in, if, or as, they will; who can deny this Grace to be
indeed Universal? If Christ has Died for all Men, if God would have all M^n
Return and Live, and if, according to the State they are in, they have their
Means of Return, and if any Know and Desire more, they are not Refused; who can
deny (I say) this Grace to be Universal? And when this Grace is adjusted
according to Men's Will, who does not see the true Difference between that
Grace which is Special, and This? Universal Grace is God's vouchsafing the same
Means to All, H^ct and Reproba^^ so far as they Will: Special Grace is his
vouchsafing that Operation with the Means, as makes some Willing, when else
they World not. This is what is agreeable to God's Goodness, what is Meet and
Equitable, (Quousque fas and jura rulere) according to his Nature; That He
should not withold those Means which are necessary to Salvation, from any;
That He should be beforehand with every Body; and so long as they are Willing,
He should never Refuse them any thing to save them: who waits to be Gracious,
and his loving Kindness endures for ever. But if they first Refuse Him, and
Will not, then it is meet indeed He be free, and that He should not Force them
to any thing, whether they will or no, or Proceed farther with them, unless He
please.

It is true, if He please, He may. He may do what He will with his own Free
Grace; and when He loves all Thus far, He may love some More. When He Wills
that All be saved, He may Will Some Men's Salvation yet Above others. What
hinders, but God may Majus and minus velle, and amare? When He Wills that All
should if they Will, He may Will that Some should though they Will not. But
when He Acts thus, it must be confessed to be not according to those Ways of
his, which are said in Scripture to be Equal; but out of a Benevolence, which
is Singular. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! How often (says our Lord) would I have
gathered you as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings; but ye would not?
He would have gathered them, if They would: He would have gathered them, but
they Would not. If any Means would save the Reprobate, which he would, but God
will not; then shall the fault lie on God, or on the want of his Grace, and not
upon Himself; which is direct contrary to the Scripture. O Israel, thou have
destroyed thy self; but in Me is thy Help. There are many Texts we have of this
Nature. God will have All to be Saved; He will have All to Repent; He has
given Christ to Die for All; He gives his Outward Ordinances; He gives his
Spirit in the Use of those Ordinances: There is no Means of Salvation, but He
offers them to the Elect and Non-Elect, without Exception: to every one so far
as they Will, even so far as no Man shall be able to complain on God's Part;
no, nor plead indeed a want of Power, but of Will only, if he be not Saved.

From what is said, it appears, that forasmuch as God, who Says not to the
Seed of Jacob, Seek ye my Face in vain, has appointed his Ordinances, whether
of Worship or Discipline, even in Societies which are Christian, to be the
External Means of Men's Repentance and Salvation; in the Use of which He has
also promised his Spirit: there are no Persons, who are by Him made Willing to
come in to partake of them, but they have a Warrant from the Universal Grace of
God for their Admission. If there be any Means of Man's Salvation withheld by
God from the Reprobate, that is vouchsafed to the Elect, which he would have,
so that Man would, and God will not, the General Grace of God is overthrown.

Not but when Christ Commissionated his Apostles to Preach the Gospel to the
World, for calling People into a Church State, which is his Kingdom, (and so to
the Means) He intended to Call them also to Virtue and Glory: Yet seeing the
next and immediate End of that Gospel-Commission was this, that is, The setting
up the Conventional Government of God, which was before Peculiar to the Jews,
but now Enlarged to take in all Nations, and so committed into Christ's Hands;
it is even manifest in the thing it self, that nothing but the Receiving the
Gospel Preached, so far as to be Willing to come under that Government, and
submit to the Institutions thereof, (which requires that first we be Baptized)
could be necessary to the giving a Man right to be Admitted to the same. The
Church, I must say over again, is the Number of the Called: From What now are
they called? They are called out of the World: But how Out of the World? The
whole World is under the Natural Government of God; and the Laws thereof are
the Rule we must live up to in Sincerity, in order to Life. We are not called
out of the World upon this Account; but out of the World, as it is Idolatrous,
and sets up its own Inventions and Institutions, without God, about Religion.
And unto what then are we Called, in opposition hereunto? Why? unto those
Institutions and Ordinances which God, by another Voluntary Government over
some Persons, superadded to that which is Natural, has Himself appointed for
Worshipping Him aright, and also (in the making them Means of his Grace) for
the Attaining the End of his Natural Government, in the Salvation of those
among them that are Elect. And if here then be the true Description of the
Church, we see also who do belong to it.

I perceive indeed where the Difficulty lies, when we speak of the State of
Christians and Jews, in opposition to the Heathen and Gentiles, and distinguish
God's Government into Natural and Conventional; and the Covenant into that of
Life, and that of Advantage: Our Divines do ordinarily confound them, as
likewise do the Scriptures. We are therefore to know, that this Covenant of
Advantage, and Conventional Government, may be taken Complexly, so as to
include God's Natural Government, and Covenant of Life together with Them; or
Precisely, with Contra-Distinction thereunto. If they be taken Complexly, there
is no Man, without doubt, can enter this Covenant, or give up himself to this
Government, but his Faith must be saving, and his Obedience universal,
(consisting in the Preference of God's Interest above the Flesh, and the World)
for upon this Account there can be no less required of the Persons that are
admitted into the Church, and unto the Sacraments, than is required unto their
Salvation. But if that Government and Covenant be taken Precisely, as when we
stand upon the Point they may be, we have concluded all along how such a Faith
as receives the Doctrine of Christ in opposition to all other Religions, and
subjection to the Ordinances, (as he that consents to the Terms of any sort of
Covenant, does enter it thereby, and has the Privileges of it) is all that is
of Necessity to a Man's Admission.

I distinguish therefore, Here, between what is required of Persons that Come
into the Church, or To the Sacraments; and what is required to their Coming, so
as else they may not come. No more is necessary to a Man's Coming, so as
without it he may not come, but what is necessary only to the Conventional
Government of God, and Covenant of Peculiarity, considered Precisely, in
Contra-Distinction to the Natural Government of God, and Covenant for
Salvation: Though that is necessary to the Persons that come, which is required
also in their Complex Consideration. And upon this account it appears, how no
Man can be put upon a Profession of such a Faith and Repentance as is saving,
in order to his Admittance to the Church or Sacraments; though he on his own
part be required to examine himself, and to see that his Grace be sound when he
comes to them. The Reason being, because if his Faith be but true so far as
makes him Willing to Come in, and Join with us, it gives him title to the
Ordinances; when, unless his Faith be so True also as to be Saving, he is like
to reap no other Fruit by it, but the Outward Enjoyment. And this is the very
Use we are to make of this Doctrine, That no Person be discouraged in his
attending on the Means, seeing Regenerate and Unregenerate may have Title: and
yet none be Secure, but Piously sollicitous how they Come; as knowing, that it
is One thing that gives a Man title to the Ordinances, and Another to the
Effectual Benefits, which can be attained by the Sincere only.

It may be asked by the way; But what then is That I count Necessary to the
Government and Covenant, which I press, taken Precisely? I mean, what is the
Terms or Conditions thereof? If the Covenant for Life, and This Covenant be
distinguished, the Terms of them must be diverse. Now the Terms of this
Covenant may be discovered, by knowing what That was chiefly, which God
accounted the Breach thereof: And this we find very frequent, both in regard to
the Single Jew, and the Whole Body. If there be found within thy Gates a Man or
Woman that has wrought Wickedness in the Sight of the Lord, in transgressing
his Covenant, and has gone and served other Gods; then let that Person be
stoned, Deuteronomy. 17.2. -- 7. You see what God calls Transgressing his Covenant. He
was their King, and the serving Another God was Crimen laesae Majestatis; and
therefore Capital. Let us look into 2 King. 17. and we shall find there the
whole Ten Tribes at once carried away, and given up of God for being any longer
his People: And what is the matter? They Rejected (it is said) his Statutes,
and his Covenant, and followed Vanity. What Vanity? Why, they Went after the
Heathen, concerning whom they were charged not to do like them; and they made
them molten Images, and worshipped Baal, etc. and therefore, God was angry with
them, and removed them out of his Sight, Verse. 10, 12, 15, 16, 18. They did
many other things which was Against their Covenant, and He bare with them; but
Idolatry and False-Worship was such Breaking of it as Whoredom, and caused
their Divorce, and his writing Loammi upon them. And this Event we find
Prophesied of, even so long before as Moses; who tells of the Nations asking,
why God dealt thus with his People? Then Men shall say, Because they have
forsaken the Covenant of the Lord, which he made with them when he brought them
out of Egypt. Here we have Our Covenant and Government: And what was the
Forsaking of it? Why, they Served other Gods, and worshipped them, Verse. 24,
25. So again, Chap. 31. Verse. 20. Jer. 22.19. with other Places. Well now, if
going after other Gods, and False-Worship, was (...), the Breaking this
Covenant, then must the Terms of this Covenant be mainly the Owning the True
God, and his Worship, in opposition to all False Gods, and False Religion, and
consequently a Subjection to the Ordinances of that Worship Himself has
appointed; unto which they were admitted under the Old Testament by
Circumcision, and Now by Baptism.

Upon what is already said, I know the Way I go is not the Road; when yet there
are Some that go the Road do seem to me to seek Mine, but Miss it. The Church
with them is the Company of the Faithful; and the understand by the Faithful,
such only whose Faith is Saving, that engrasis them in Christ; makes them his
Members, or Members of his Mystical Body: For Others whom they call Members of
the Church Visible, if they be Visible Members only, are Christians but in
Appearance, not Members of Christ indeed; and so no Church Members with them,
but in Show, or the Account of Men. And the Result of this Divinity, which goes
for the Orthodox, comes to This, That nothing less than such a Faith that is
Saving, gives a Man Right, as to his Own Part, to come; and the Profession of
no less than of a Faith and Repentance which is Such, gives a Man Right of
Reception, on the Part of the Admitter, into the Church, and unto Baptism. I
have several Arguments to add therefore, to what I have said already, against
this Opinion.

Only, I will yet say a little more to the Explaining my Own, before I give
them. The Church, according to the common Opinion, must be taken for a
Corporation of Regenerate Persons; that is, of such Believers only as are
already all Sincere Converts: But I would have it rather, in my Opinion, be
looked on as a School, wherein such Persons as are Wrought upon by the Gospel to
Believe so far only as to be Willing to Come into it, and be Baptized, may
There, by the Use of the Ordinances, as the Means of Grace, be brought up to
that Sincerity of Heart and Life which yet they have not, and which God has
made the Condition of their Salvation. There is a Conversion from Heathenisme
to Christianity, that brings Men into the Church, must be One thing; and a
Conversion unto the Life and Power of Grace, called Effectual Conversion, is
Another. That the Latter of these Conversions is wrought in the Church
ordinarily, though not Confined to it, is to be doubted of no Body. Let the
Commission of our Lord, (which ordinarily, I think, is overlookt) be consulted:
Go ye, and disciple all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you. I pray mark it: They are here to Call, by their Preaching, all them that
will Come in, and make them Disciples by Baptism; and then, after they are
Discipled, they are to be Instructed in the Things that Christ has Commanded;
that is, they are to Learn in his School, when they are there, their farther
Duty; which is, the walking up Fully to the Precepts of the Gospel. And in the
first sixth, sound Act of Resolution thereof, I mean, of doing so in Sincerity,
(whensover a Man is wrought up to it) does lie the Essence of that Work which
we call Effectual Conversion.

If the School of all Christ's Disciples, the Church of all Believers, the
Kingdom of all God's People were so narrow as to hold the Regenerate only, how
comes there to be a Proclamation for all the World to come into it, even all
that Will, (for it is not a Kingdom of such as are brought in by Force, but of
a Willing People, Psalm. 110.3. over whom the Word prevails) from one end of the
Earth to the other? If any Man will have Christ, this is certain, God offers
Him. Whosoever Will, May have Him. Whosoever Will be saved, May be saved. God
Wills it, and it is Man only Will not. And shall we think, that if any would
come in to these External Means, whereby his Grace is Communicated, that they
are to be Refused? It is a strange thing, that Divines should be able to see
how Christ, how the Spirit it self, (or its Help) can be the Fruit of Universal
Grace; and yet their Eyes be holden, as not to see the External Ordinances to
be so, while they make the Church to consist of the Regenerate only. I pray,
let us consider a little of other Societies. What is it makes a Man the Member
of any other Society, which he may be of if he will? Is it not his Consent only
to be of it, his Comingin it self, that which gives him his Right, and makes
him one of that Company? And, why is it otherwise with the Church, or Society
of Christians? It is the Will of a Man, upon his Hearing the Gospel Preached,
or his Receiving the Gospel Preached, so as to be Willing, is the Foundation,
(I should say Condition, to speak exactly) of his Right to be Received. If he
will be Baptized upon it, he may be Baptized without more terms. It is his
Consent to it, is the Ratio fundandi in This, as in other Voluntary Relations.

It is true, that the Nature of Christian Society is such as requires, that a
Man be one that has Received the Christian Doctrine, (that is, to be a
Believer) and that he lives not in any open, gross Sin, seeing that would
Excommunicate from it, if he were In: But supposing him such a one that
believes, that Christ is the Son of God, (I mean it, according to the Articles
of the Creed; for how shall he be Baptized in the Name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, if he Believe not the Trinity?) and stands not actually Guilty of
any such notorious Sin, as if the were in the Church, he must to be turned out
for it, there is nothing but his Willingness enjoined of God, nor ought to be
required of us to the Receiving Him.

There are some, says St. Austin, that Put on Christ so far as to come into the
Church, and be Baptized; Vsque ad Sacramentorum receptionem, in his Words; and
some that put Him on ad vitae Sanctificationem, unto that Sanctification of
Life as brings them to Heaven. I add so much, because there are Many Saints, or
Sanctified Men, (says Mr. Richard Baxter) that shall never come thither. There
are Saints by Separation from Paganism unto Fellowship with the Political Body
of Christians, which yet are not so by Separation from all Ungodliness into
Fellowship with the Mystical Body of Christ. The Door of the Church (says that
Learned and Pious Author) is incomparably wider than that of Heaven, and the
Gospel is a free Offer to All. If any Man will come quite over in Spirit to
Christ, they shall be welcome; if they will come but only to a Visible
Profession, He will not deny them Admittance there, because they intend to go
no farther; but will let them come as near as they will: and that they come no
farther, shall be their own fault. Saints Rest, Part 4. Sect. 3. Let me make
bold to set this right; and as I have put in before Political Body of
Christians, instead of his terms, Visible Church, and also left out the word
Visible; so instead of Visible Profession, let me say Participation of
Ordinances, as St. Austin but now has it; and I take it to be very happily
spoken.

As for the terms Visible and Invisible, which our Divines use ordinarily when
they distinguish the Congregate and Mystical Church, I do avoid them; they are
a Snare to us. The Sense of the term Visible can have no Place with God, who
Judges always according to Truth; and has no footing therefore neither in
Scripture. There is indeed the Outward Jew, and Inward Jew in Scripture; but
the Outward Jew was a Real Jew, or really a Jew in God's and Man's Account
alike, who had thereby ex intention Dei Ordinantis, a Right to be Circumcised,
and consequently to the Privilege of all the Ordinances of Israel. But a
Visible Christian, a Visible Member, according to our common Notion of Visible,
is one that is not a Christian or Member Indeed, but one only that Appears to
be a Christian or Member; and as None, has no Right therefore to the
Ordinances at all in God's Sight. A Visible Profession must be consequently an
Hypocritical Profession, that has nothing in it but a Lie and Falsehood
altogether. And can Mr. Baxter indeed say, That if any will come to Such a
Profession, he is welcome? No, no: God Almighty indeed is willing, that All
should come in to Him; and They may come as Far as they will; if but to be
Baptized, or Circumcised, they are Welcome. But I am against that Doctrine and
Practice, which depends upon this ensnaring Distinction.

I am for a Believing in Earnest the Gospel Preached, and a Man's Coming-in
thereupon, and being Willing to be Received, or to be Baptized; and then, I
say, whosoever Will, he May. Whosoever would be Circumcised, (or Take hold of
the Covenant, Isa. 56.4, 6.) he might. Whosoever will be Baptized under the
New Testament, he may. Whosoever will come in to Christ, so far as ever he Will
Come, this must be held for certain, He will in no wise cast him out. But no
Man must (nor be suffered to) say, He Believes, he Repent^, if he does Not, (at
least, in any Sense otherwise than he Does.) We must have none of this fame
Visible Profession, whatsoever comes of it. We must see our Way clear, how we
can admit the Unregenerate, as well as the Regenerate, into our Mixed Churcher,
without a Lie; or we must allow none but Gath^red ones, and turn all
Independents, unless we should Preach One thing, and P^actis^ Another; which no
honest Man, but must hate to do.

The People of Samaria are all said to believe Philip Preaching the things
concerning the Kingdom of God, and were Baptized; and Simon himself believed
also. Here we have none of this Visible Faith, or Visible Profession, but a
Real Belief of what was Preached; and that Belief prevailing upon the Will,
their Willingness to be Baptized is the Rat^o Baptizandi, the Ground of their
Baptism, and Fight to be Admitted. Simon Magus believed: What is that? Is it a
Profession that he Did, when he did Not? No such matter; his Faith, and That of
the City was Real, and shown by the Deed, in their being Baptized. A Man must
Believe Indeed, and his Faith be True, as True does signify Undissembled, or
else he cannot be Baptized: But his Faith may be far from True, (as Simon's
was) as True does signify Saving; and yet so far as he can come in with any
Truth, he has his Warrant from the Gospel.

SECT. II.
I Proceed now, (...), to my Arguments. If the common Opinion be received, and
a Profession of no less than True Grace, or a Regenerate Faith, be the Rule of
Admission to the Church and Sacraments; I do not see, in the First place, but
we must all give up the Cause of our Mixed Churches ( Parochial or National) to
the Separatist. They who require such a Profession in the Adult, as necessary
to give Right to Church Communion, and do indeed understand themselves, will
say, It must be a Profession de praesenti, Serious, Intelligent, Resolved, with
whatsoever else is needful to make it Credibly Significant of the Thing they
profess; so that the Person Professing must be indeed Regenerate, to be able to
Make it, and the Persons that Receive him must look on him as Regenerate, upon
his Making it: And what more can be imagined, for the yielding to the
Congregationalist his whole Foundation? It is true, that some will persist, and
say, The Independent does require yet more than this Profession; they require
also a Church Covenant: But this is, in good earnest, to Impose upon them. The
Judicious among them will avouch, That let but a Man make his Profession of the
Baptismal Covenant, and his Profession be only thus qualified, which Mr. Baxter
in his Books still insists upon; and there is nothing Besides, but what on
necessity does arise upon a Man's joining merely in Society, is, or can be
required of any. It is this Profession individuated into a Particular
Congregation, is all they do, and will stand upon; even so understood, so
qualified, so explained. But now, such a Profession as this, will they all say,
is incompatible with our Parochial, National Churches. There are none can make
a Profession of what they have not. There are but few, here and there, who are
Regenerate, and consent Indeed to the Covenant, in the Sense as the Baptismal
Covenant is understood. There are but Few that are Elect, in comparison of the
Multitude of others. And seeing there are none but these Few (as I say) are
able to make such a Profession, it is They who ought, and must be Gathered out
of the rest into their Select Congregations. And what can be offered with more
Reason, if this indeed were Christ's Rule of Communion? I must, for my part,
protest therefore, as one that loves to be plain, and single-hearted; I see
not, in good earnest, but either we must come Off from this Rule, or we must
come Over to their Gathered Congregations.

In the Second place: This Opinion does not only fundamentally Yield, but
Betray our Cause by a Defense that will stand us in no stead. It defends our
Parochial Churches, upon a Supposition of what it Would have, not upon a
Supposition of What is. It would have us B^ptize our Children upon Profession
of the Parents, as in Covenant, with them; and when they come of Age
themselves, to be Confirmed upon their Own; which should be th^n such a one.
But as this Use of Confirmation cannot be evidently proved in Scripture, nor
A^y at all perhaps, since the Extraord^nary Gifts of the Holy Ghost, by the
Laying on of Hands, are ceased: So is it more apparent, that our Infants are
Baptized in our Parish Churches, upon the Child's Own Profession, and not the
Parents. The Godfathers Make Profession in their Names. And how an Infant can
Make a Profession which is Understanding, Serious, and Credibly Significant,
that it Is, or Does, what it Professes; or how any other can make such a
Profession de praesenti, for Children in their Names, there are none, who will
Speak plain, but must say, they cannot apprehend. And who can yet say, That
such a Profession as is supposed, is required by the Bishops of the Confirmed;
or looked after as any such Test of Christianity, in our Days?

In the Third place: The Going this way has cast a vile Slander on the
Catholic, National, Parochial Churches; as if They were but a Company of
Hypocrites, mixed with a few of the Elect and Regenerate among them. It is their
Submission only to this Rule, makes the Unregenerate to be Hypocrites. A Man
were no Hypocrite to come to Church, and join with the Congregation for
Conversion: But if he must Profess, that he is Converted before his Coming, and
he be Not, then is he made a Liar, a Dissembl^r, and Hypocrite indeed. If it
were not ordinary in the Mouths of Divines, but the Language only of Two or
Three that speak thus, it would be a most hateful, opprobrious kind of
speaking, to call every Unregenerate Christian and Hypocrite. I will not be one
therefore that choose to Speak or Understand thus, that the Church consists of
the Regenerate and Hypocrites; but of the Converted, and those that are in the
Way to it.

In the Fourth place: This Rule, unless it be stated after the Congregational
manner, will not answer the End unto which it is designed. A Profession is not
required as a Duty for it Self, but for the Admitters; that supposing none may
be of the Church but the Regenerate, this Profession of Regeneration does make
the Party to be reputed to be Such, whether he be or not; and consequently, to
be Admitted. Now, it is not sufficient to this end, that a Profession be
Credible only, or Credibly Significant only of that which is Professed, unless
it be Credited. I cannot report a Story for True, let it be never so credible,
unless I my self do Credit it: It is but a Lie else. In like manner, although a
Man's Profession be never so Credible, yet if it be not more than Credible,
that is, unless it be also Credited, the Church cannot account or Repute the
Professor to be what he professes, because our Account and Repute of things
must be according to what we Think; or else our Account and Repute is a Lie In
us, as their Profession is In them that are Hypocrites. You will say, It is our
Duty, when they Profess, to Believe them, unless we can Disprove them. I
Answer, It is true; yet if the Church does not Believe them, they cannot
Account them Regenerate, and receive them for Such as they do not think them,
whether they ought, or no. And unto This there is nothing to be Answered
substantially, but by the Congregational Men; who will say, That they leave not
this Business on the Judgment of the Single Minister, but on the Whole Society;
and they require the Profession to be such as gives the Major Part
Satisfaction: So that it is upon a Profession Credited, and upon a Real Belief
of Man's being what he Professes, that he is Adm^tted. And this is to make
something of the Rule in earnest. For to what purpose should there be any
Pro^ession at all, if it be less than what is Satisfactory as to the End of it?
Especially, considering that upon Profession of the Party, it is not the Pastor
only, but the Whole Society is concerned to receive him as a B^other; and which
requires Offices from them in that Relation. Blame not this Pr^^eding then of
Tyranny. If this be the Rule, h^re is nothing that is too Strict, but Careful
and Prud^^t: If it be not, it is not their Proceeding; it is the Rule it self
is in s^^lt only. And truly, when we find in Scripture, that the Keys are given
by Christ to Peter, and the Ministers, but not to the People, the Rul^ and
their Practice must be as good as one anoth^r.

In the Fifth place: It is manifest, that Peter Baptized the Gentiles, in the
Tenth of the Acts, upon another Ground than This. If This were the Rule of
Admission appointed by Christ for his Church, St. Peter Would not, or Could not
have Baptized any upon Another Ground. But we read, upon the Falling of the
Holy Ghost upon those that were met in Cornelius's Horse, they were Baptized by
the Apostle, Where I must add, That it need not be told likewise, that the
Gi^ts of the Holy Ghost in those Days, which were speaking with Tongues, and
the like, were not Commensur^te with the R^generate only.

In the Sixth place: If this Rule be followed, which, if it were Christ's, it
ought to be, it must bring all People in our Mix^ Churches, and so in the whole
Nation, to this Profession. Which is a thing, that if it were required by a
Law, would prove (I take it) one of the most Abhorrent Impositions, and
Profanation of Religion, that could be in the Earth. It is not possible, I
think, that any that loves Sincerity, could endure such a Piece of Formality,
and a Lie. Nay, what Heart would not be ready to tremble, to have Religion made
to signify so little, and so many be hardened to Death by it? Let us suppose
such a Customary Usage taken up, who is there would refuse their Submission?
Not the Igno^ant or Profane, not the Secure and Presumptuous; or any of Those
who indeed make no Regard of Conscience or Religion at all. These will all make
no more question to say, That they take Christ to be their Lord, as well as
Savior, and the Spirit to be their Sanctifier, and that they unfeignedly
Repent of all their Sins; than they do to Answer to the Minister at their
Neighbor's Child's Baptism, That they forsake the Devil, the Flesh, and the
World; not knowing whether it be in their Own, or the Child's Name. It is only
the Serious, the Tender, the Humble and Examining Christian would make a Stand.
And not without Reason; for I cannot say, that it is given to the State of
God's Children in this Life, that they should have ordinarily such an Assured
Persuasion of their Sincerity and Grace, as such a Profession comes to; but
that they must depend upon God rather with Hope and Awe, as their Helper and
Judge. And what a goodly Rule would this be, when those that are most forward
to observe it, would be most fit to be Rejected; and those that are most
backward, the fittest for Admission? That is, when if it were practiced quite
contrary, the Conscience would have more Peace in it, and the End it self be
better Attai^ed.

In the Seventh place: If this indeed were a Rule of the Holy Ghost's
Appointment for the keeping the Church pure, and preserving Christ's Honor in
his Ordinances, as some will have it; I should have expected a Record of some
Signal Instances in several Places, at least in the Tim^s of the Apostles, of
certain Persons Struck Dead, as Ananias and Saphira was, at their daring to
offer themselves unto Baptism, or coming in to the Church while they were
Hypocrites: For a Man who lives in his known Sin, and resolves to go on in it,
to come and make a Profession, that he con^ents to the Baptismal Covenant,
which he ^nows in his Conscience is most Flase, and that in the Face of God,
and the Congrega^ion; if it were indeed the Rule too of the Holy Ghost, that no
Unregenerate Man, upon ^his Reason, should offer to come; what were ^t but a
Lie, as palpably and directly against ^he Holy Ghost; and more proper, in
regard ^f our more lasting Future Concern, for such (...) Judgment, than that
of those Persons re^aining Part of their Possession, when they ^rought in the
Other Part of it? But we ^ead of none made such Examples; no, nor ^f the least
Discouragement offered to any a^out their Coming-in to Christianity.

In the Eighth place: This is a Rule that ^^ts the Conscience so much on the
Rack, that ^od forbid, it should be His. If Truth of ^^ace be required as
necessary to the Ordi^ances themselves, as well as to the Receiving ^^e
Benefits, or to Salvation, then how shall ^^e Admitters act in Faith, that
cannot know ^hether any have the Truth of Grace, or no? (...) you say, He must
go by their Profession, I ^^st say again, But what if it be Short? that if he
Believes it not? And what shall ^e do mainly about the Baptizing Infants, when
the Child it self cannot, and the Paren^ does not Make that Profession? Here is
the Minister at a plain loss, and the People a^^ at a great deal worse; when
there is no^ Christian, upon this Account, who is in doubt of his Grace, can
come in Faith, according to the R^l^, nor without danger of a L^^ in such a
Profession. As for the terms of G^^^ Conventional Government, those he Knows
(...) Yi^lds to; and it is that indeed gives hi^ Right to the Ordinances, which
are the Institutions thereof: But when he is in qu^^^ about the term; of the
Covenant of Life, o^ his Right to the Saving Benefits, it is not s^ easy a
thing for every good Man to b^ persuaded in his Mind, as he ought, in th^^
Matter.

In the Ninth place: As for the Covenan^ which is so much stood upon, in regard
t^ the Profession thereof at Baptism, understanding by it on God's Part, his
Grant of Pa^don and Life upon our Faith and Repentan^ through the Mediation and
Merits of Christ Promulgated by the Gospel, and Sealed by t^^ Sacraments; and
on Our Part, an Accept^^^ on those Terms, (which, as always our Duty is
required at our Entrance in the Church, b^^ not made the Condition of our
Coming, as the Reader must see more both before and after) I distinguish: The
Covenant may be consider^^ in the Internal, and the External Administra^ion.
Consent to the Covenant puts a Man in ^ovenant, as the Consent of the Man and
Wo^an makes the Marriage. Consent to the Co^^nant in the Inward Administration
of the Spi^^t and Grace, gives Men Right, or puts Men ^^to Inward Fellowship
with Christ, and his church, in the Saving Benefits of the Covenant. ^onsent to
the Covenant in the External Ad^inistration, gives them Right to, or puts them
^^to, External Covenant Relation. This Con^^^t I define by the Acknowledgment
of the ^rue Religion, in opposition to all other, and ^illingness to come in to
the Church, and join (...) the Ordinances; to the end a Man may ^^tain Grace,
if he yet has it not, in the ^^se of God's Means, and purpose to walk as ^her
Christians, so as not to do any thing ^hereby he shall deserve to be cast out
again (...) their Society; and will submit to the Cen^^re of the Church, if he
do. This is the ^ll which is contained in that Consent, which ^^ts a Man into
External Covenant Relation, ^^d suffices to Church Communion.

In the Tenth place: There is one thing ^ore will go to the Root of the Matter.
It ^^d be granted, that He who consents to be (...) Christian upon the Term, of
the Covenant, must received into the Church. Now, there are ^wo Parts, the
Promissory, and Comminatory Part of the Covenant. No Man Consents with
Understanding to the Covenant, but he do^s and must Consent to Both Parts of
it. I assume then, that he that Consents but to the Covenant, so as to be dealt
with by God according to Either Part of it, as he shall, (...) shall not
perf^^m the Condition, is one the Consents to be a Christian upon the Terms the
Covenant. I add moreover: So long (...) it is not a Consenting Absolutely, but
a C^^senting thus in the Way of Covenant, or ^^on Terms, which is (I say) to be
dealt w^^ by God according to his Performance; th^^ needs no more Sweat to be
spent, in sh^^ing how the Vn^^generate, as well as the ^^generate, may Enter
Covenant, though it (...) One of them only that Keep Covenant wi^^ Him.

In the Eleventh place: I am a little s^^sible, how in these Two latter
Argument^ speak rather after Others, than my Own p^per Terms and Sentiments.
When Per^^^ come to Baptism, or to the Sacrament, (...) Divines do still press
upon them the Duty Entering or Renewing their Covenant with G^^ and though they
understand by it the C^^^nant of Life, which belongs to God's N^^^ral
Government, which is Universal; and the Duty consequently, which they press, is
(...) Peculiar therefore to the Church, or Sa^^^ments, but belongs to all the
World, to every Man, and to all Times, whether he ever Enter into any
Church-Society, or be Baptized, or not, (for upon this Act does depend the
Saving or Perishing of every Man's Soul for ever) and upon this Account, that
it is incumbent upon All, and at all Times, they do well to press it upon the
Baptized, and on the Communicant, they having at such times so apt an Occasion
for it: Yet if they press it so far, as if no Person but such as have actually
Performed that Duty, or do actually Perform it at present, and Testify it,
must be held Admittable into the Church, or to be Baptized, it is time for me
to mind them; that when a Person comes to Enter into the Church, or a
Church State, whether that of the Jew formerly, and now the Christian, he Did,
he Does not, come directly to give up himself to be a Subject unto God's
Natural Government, under which every Man in the Earth is Born, and ought to
devote himself to his Governor, from the Beginning of his Life to the End of
it: But to be a Subject of his Conventional Government, which he was not till
now; or a Subject of that Kingdom, which Christ has set up by the Gospel since
his Coming, over the whole World, being till He came, Peculiar to the Jews, as
I have described the same before. So that, to be consonant to my Premises, I
must say, If it were the Covenant of Life that Men were immediately Entered
into, by their Rec^ption into the Church, (understand me, if it were so ex
prima intention Instituti) Reason would, that they should bear with the
Minister, if he required of them a Saving Faith, a Sound Repentance, and the
Testimony of a Holy Life, to admit them to the intended Benefits: But when it
is into the Covenant of Peculiarity that he directly Enters them, or
Church State, in order to Life, when they come in, and are Baptized, the Matter
is oth^rwise; and the Difficulties, which others make about the Covenant, in
Their Sense which I obviate, do blow off without other Help. I know, till
Camero wrote de Triplici Foedere, our Divines usually speak only of a Twofold
Covenant; and, besides that of Works, acknowledge but One of Grace, and no
more, though Diversely Administered to Adam fallen, North, Abraham, the
Israelites, and Us under the Gospel. And if any shall choose to speak after
Them, they may; and yet not differ with Me in the Matter, so long as they
distinguish of the Internal and External Economy thereof, (which I have
purposely dropped before) for they may say the same things of the External
Economy of the Covenant of Grace, as I say of the Covenant of Advantage. Only
they must beware, that by External Covenanting, they understand not with some a
Covenanting by Profession; conceiving that a Man making the same Profession as
the Regenerate make, (or professing the same Faith, Repentance, as the
Regenerate have) he is from this Profession to be Reputed in Covenant, as the
Regenerate is; which b^ing not made from the Heart, but in Tongue, they call
External Covenanti^g; by which Sense they pervert the Diff^^^^^^, and deprive
us of the Use of it: Whereas by the External Administration, or Economy of the
Covenant, I mean the Ordinances wherein it is Administered; and I do suppose a
real Consent to it, so far as to come under that Economy, or that a Man Really
is Willing to come into the Church, and join Orderly in God's Public Worship,
though he be short otherwise in his Obedience to God. And this Consent to the
Covenant, in the External Economy, I have before defined, and must add This to
it; That if the Church or Minister should indeed require such a Declaration as
That, of every Man whom he admit^ to Church-Society, I think it were proper and
warrantable, provided it be not Imposed but only in the Matter, leaving Men
Free to their own Expressions. Not that when I signify this for Peace-sake, I
do any ways Desert the thing I am doing; that is, the Opening and
Distinguishing the Covenant and Government of God, which is so necessary to the
Clearing our Cause, and so evident in Scripture and Reason. For how shall that
Government of God which is Universal, (and Covenant appertaining to it) be the
Same with That which was Peculiar only to the Jews? It cannot be. How shall the
Covenant of Grace, in reference whereunto it is said, All shall know God, from
the least to the greatest, (as belonging to all Mankind) be made Another
Covenant from That which God struck with the Israelites, if they were both the
Same? How shall it be said, Not according to that Covenant, if they were but
One? And how shall all the Jews be said now to be Broken off from their
Covenant, or from their own Olive, which is their Church State, or God's
Peculiar Kingdom over them, if it were meant of that Covenant, or Kingdom of
God, which is Universal, or out of which Government none can be? Nay, how shall
we say, That any Israelite once in the Covenant of Life, can be again Broken
off? This cannot be said, I know, without Dispute: But how the Jews in their
Rejection, or Unbelief of Christ, were broken off That Kingdom, which God
before had over them as a Peculiar People, appears plain. For God having given
up this Kingdom to Christ, He expects that the Jews (as all other Men) should
come in, and give the same Faith and Allegiance to his Son, as they did by
their Covenant give before to Him. Ye believe in God, (says Christ) believe
also in Me. But these Jews, rejecting the Gospel, and refusing to be Baptized
in his Name, do, as it were, openly say, We will not have this Man rule over
us; and so are these Children of the Kingdom cast out, and the Gentiles that
receive Him, Grasted in. And so long as it is that Olive, Covenant, Kingdom or
Church State, wherein the Unregenerate (if Such as may be cast out) are, or may
be, let Men have but such a Faith as makes them Willing, and such a Life as is
free from Scandal, that would turn them Out of the Church again, if they were
In; or make a Confession of their Sin, (with professing their Repentance, if it
be notorious) this is sufficient to their Admittance upon the Account thereof:
For what is the Advantage, Privilege or Benefit of this Covenant, Olive, or
Church State, but the Enjoyment only of the Ordinances, which are the Means for
the Bringing People up to the Terms of the Covenant of Life, if they have not
Entered the same already, as well as to Confirm them in it, if they Have?

In the Twelfth place: This Rule is not agreeable to those many Glorious Texts,
and Prophecies of the Times of the Gospel, which we read in Scripture. When the
Heathen, the Gentiles, the Nations, the Isles, the Utmost Ends of the Earth,
Kindreds, People, from the Rising of the Sun to the Going down thereof, are to
be brought into the Church, or Christ's Kingdom; it is not to be imagined, that
it is Christ's Will and Appointment, that none but the Regenerate should Come
in, and none but such as Can make such a Profession should be Admitted. When
the Prophets tell us of Kings and Queens becoming Nursing-Fathers and
Nursing-Mothers, in regard, I count, of bringing their People ^^^o, and
upholding them In, the Christian Religion; How does the Selecting a few People
out of other Christians, to be here and there a Gathered Congregation, agree
with such Prophecies? I pray, turn to these Texts: Isa. 52.15. and 55.5. and
60.3. Isa. 42.4, 10. and 49.7, 23. Psalm. 2.8. and 22. ^7. Ae^h. 2.11. and 9.10.
Mal. 1.11. Matthew. 21.13. and 28.19. Romans 11.15. Revel. 11.15. and let the
Reader make his own farther Improvement. How is it for the Honor of our Lord,
to paucifie his Subjects, and narrow his Dominions? When to be a Christian, and
Profess it, was indeed certain Death and Martyrdom; it is no wonder, if the
Entrance was by a Renunciation of the World: But Profession now is not a thing
so dear, nor is it the Will of our Good Lord, to call us to so much Cost. And
This, I count, has been hid from the Independent, that he could never yet (so
wise as he is) Frame his Church, but according to the Times of the First
Calling of the (...), and not according to the Fullness of them Come in: That
is, according to the Times of Nero and Dioclesian, and not those of
Constantine; which makes him shrivel it up into its First Beginnings. I do yet
wonder, how These Men can read the Parable of the King, that makes a Marriage
for his Son; how Serious, and in Earnest he is to have his House to be Filled,
(so that not only the Streets and Lanes in the City are searched for the Poor,
the Halt, and the Blind, but the Hedges, and the High ways, for all they Can
get) and their Hearts not Relent at their own Practice? Is the Kingdom of
Heaven (which is the Church) to be likened to their Gleanings? O what a blessed
thing would it have been thought by Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, Origin,
Clemens, Tertullian, Cyprian, if they might have enjoyed the Times we do; when
the Chief Magistrate, and all the People can Unite, and Meet in the Service of
the Same God, and the True Religion! And is this the Fruit of our Thankfulness,
that the Largeness of God's Goodness, and Facility of our Assemblings, should
make us the more Scanty, and Willing to be reduced to the Model of those
Primitive Persecutions?

In the Thirteenth place: Let us suppose upon this, the Gospel Preached to a
Country, a Kingdom, a Nation; and the Prince thereof and many of his Nobles,
and Multitudes of the People, convinced of the Evil of their Idolatry, or
Falsness, Wickedness, and Delusion of the Religion they profess; who therefore
are Willing to become Christians, and Desire to be Baptized: Suppose the
Ministers that have Preached to them, should consider, that if they should
immediately press upon them the Great Duties of Christ's Disciples, Self-denial
and Mortification, (which would be putting New Wine into Old Bottles) and tell
them accordingly, That they must not only Forsake their False Religion, but
every Lust, Prosit or Pl^asure that is S^^^ul, or else they can neither be
Saved or Baptized: If they should proceed in Faithfulness, and rip up all their
Ill Customs and Practices, wherein they place the Delight of their Lives at
present; and let them know, that they must come to a Perfect Resolution never
to use them any more while they live, or else they will not Admit them to
Baptism: If they foresee, upon this, that the Prince, and the Great Ones will
never Consent to it, but Go off, and so Carry the People along with them; I
would fain know of any Man that is wise, and can be concerned about the Thought
of such a Case, what he would do in it? Whether he would not rather follow
Christ's Rule, which is to make them Disciples by Baptizing them; and then
Instruct them further, by little and little, as they could pear it, in what
Christ has commanded them. It is no Scruple to a good Man, in the Case where
we are all Christians, and Baptized in our Infancy, to suppose no Hurt in it to
stand here upon a Profession, as Strict as this, to be the Rule of Admission:
But if his Practice should answer his Disputation in such a Case, (or the like)
as now mentioned, and he thereby should be a Cause or Occasion of hindering
Christ, his Lord, of so many Subjects, nay, of the Apostasy of a whole Country
that were Coming-in to Him, and of the Loss of Salvation to their Posterity,
whereof they would have been under the Means, if their Parents had been
Baptized; I see little Reason for him to be Stiff in such an Opinion. For my
part, if any Person or Persons among us, whose Parents being Anabaptists, are
grown up, and not yet Baptized, should desire Baptism of me, I do think I
should be apt to tell him of his Duty; that he should first sit down, and cast
up his Accounts, what Christianity will cost him, and to Build wisely; nay, if
he seemed Remiss in Self-Examination, I should be like to Advise him to Forbear
a while yet, till he were better Fitted for his Baptism: But if I should find,
that by this means he were like to go Away, and mind his being Baptized no
more, and perhaps to fall in with some Sect that is against Water Baptism, or
to a Regardlesness of his Duty, of Walking with any in Christian Communion,
being not capable of it till This is done; nay, if I should but be Convinced,
that I should do him more Hurt than Good by Putting him off, I should beware of
Refusing him, (supposing he has a Competent Understanding of the Creed, and no
Scandal lies upon him) for want of Signs of Regeneration. I cannot but think
the Bringing Men into the Church, rather than their Abiding out, to be the
Means of Saving Conversion.

In the Last place: It does appear, that the Lord Jesus, since the Jews
Partition Wall is Broken down, and the Gentiles Called, has given his
Ordinances to the World, as God gave his Statutes to Israel. Go Preach the
Gospel to all Nations, to Every Creature, Baptizing them. Here is the Gospel
and Baptism, which are Two of his chief Ordinances, (and which, consequently,
draws on the rest) vouchsafed unto the whole Earth; and whosoever will Receive
them, the Apostles are commissionated to Administer them without any Exception;
their Actual Interest depending only upon That. Under the Old Testament we know
how God's Institutions were so much the Privilege and Peculiarity of the Jews,
that the Apostles were at first very doubtful, whether they might Preach to Any
but that Nation: But now is that Difference decided, the Gentiles Engrafted
into their Olive, and the Ordinances of the Kingdom made common by Christ's own
Charter. This is the Fruit of General Grace, bringing Salvation to every Man's
Door, and leaving it upon their own Will. It is true indeed, before a Man
Believes, he cannot be Willing; but a Willingness to Come in after the Gospel
Heard, supposes a Belief of it so far, at least, as That reaches; and if it
reaches no farther than to produce a Willingness to Be of the Church, and to
Join in the Ordinances, so Far as he Will, according to God's General Grace, he
must be Admitted. We do read accordingly of John the Baptist, when Jerusalem,
and all Judaea, and the Region round about Jordan, came to Him for Baptism, He
Baptizes all Comers. It is said indeed, They confessed their Sins; but I read
not of any He Refused, whatsoever Confession they Made: Nor do I read what
Confession it was that served. It may be, this Confession is recorded in regard
only of the Notoriety of some Sinners, that came in to Him. We read certainly,
that He Admonished them after Baptism, to Bring forth the Fruits of Repentance,
as the Use of that Ordinance, I conceive it: and consonantly, we read not, that
it is said, They Repented unto Baptism; but, They were Baptized unto
Repentance: And I do apprehend truly, that his Ministry is called, a Ministry
of Repentance, in this Sense; to wit, as intended to lead Men to Repentance,
and not to Gather the Penitent alone into a Corporation. I think the same of
the Apostles afterward, in their Discipling all Nations; who when they are
Discipled and Baptized, were to be taught to Do what Christ commanded, as I
before noted. And what are Those things, think we? I have thought sometimes,
that those Commands sure must be, or were, some peculiar Ordinances after
Baptism, belonging only to the Regenerate; but it was a narrow Apprehension.
The Commands of Christ, in this Text, are but the same (likely) with Those,
where He says, If you love Me, keep my Commandments; and those are the
Universal Precepts of God, which according to the Law of Nature, and Christ's
Law, are obligatory both to the Disciples, and all the World.

Let us look forward into the Acts, and we find Peter Preaching a Sermon, and
Exhorting them to Baptism; and Three thousand receive the Word gladly at one
Time, and are Baptized. I observe here, that it is this Glad Receiving the
Word, which so far as comes to Human Sight, can be only their being so Wrought
upon by it, as to be Willing to come in, was the Ground of their Admission. If
there were such a Profession necessary to Baptism, as the Congregationalists
stand upon, a solemn examined Profession, how could so many be Admitted into
the Church, in one Day, after Sermon? How could the Jailer, and his House be
Baptized in one and the Same Hour? We have yet an Instance in Philip, that
exceeds This; who Preaching to those in Samaria, it is said, They All, who had
gave heed before to Simon, that is, even the whole City, Believed, and were
Baptized, both Men and Women. And what was this Faith now of Simon, and his
Followers, as I have also before enquired? Why, it is expressed; They believed
Philip preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of the
Lord Jesus: That is, they believed Him, and These things so, as to be made
Willing to come in upon his Preaching; and this Willingness upon such a Belief
as Simon's was, or as this Whole City had at once, is that which gives them
Title to Baptism. As for the Words of the same Philip to the Eunuch, at the End
of the Chapter, If thou believe with all thy Heart; which is as much as to
say, If thou believe in Earnest, so as Indeed to be Willing to be Baptized,
Thou may: They must be conceived as spoken in reference to the Receiver, or
the Eunuch's own Part; unto whom the Belief of so much as he Declared, to wit,
That Christ was the Son of God, must indeed be necessary, seeing it is into His
Name we are Baptized: When as to the Part of the Admitter, or Philip himself,
it is the Eunuch's Willingness upon his Preaching Christ to him, (which would
suppose such a Belief as This, if he had not proposed the Question which came
to occasion that Profession) as it was before with them of Samaria, that would
warrant his Administering the Ordinance. Neither may the questioning of a
Person, in the Case of this Ethiopian, whether he be In Earnest, and Believes
Indeed; or of some Notorious Sinner, in the Case of such as came to the
Baptist, whether they do Repent, or no? be any Obstacle to this Conclusion; but
that, notwithstanding so much as This, the Willingness of a Person after Christ
is Preached to him, (which supposes his Belief of what is Preached, and that
the Minister knows not of any open Sin he lives in, which would cast him out of
the Church again if he were in) is to be maintained upon the Account of God's
General Grace at first defined, to be the ^round of Church-Admission.

Before I conclude these Arguments or Considerations of mine, which I bring
against the common Doctrine; choosing hitherto such mainly as have arose in my
Thoughts de Proprio, and aiming at making the Quomodo of what I A^gue, to
appear more than the Quod sit, which looked to me obvious, whereof several
therefore are but Topical Arguments; I must not omit yet what is insisted on by
Others; which, as for the Proof of That, is, I account, even Demonstration. If
the Church of God or Christ does, according to the Intention of the Institutor,
consist of the Regenerate and Unregenerate, then must that Doctrine, which
requires no less than a Saving Faith, or Regenerating Grace, and the Profession
thereof as necessary to Church Membership or Baptism, be untrue, and urged upon
us no longer; for it is a Contradiction. But now, that the Church, or Kingdom
of God and Christ does consist in the Intention of the Institutor of Such, let
us look over the whole Scriptures relating to the Church, both of the Old, and
of the New Testament, and all the particular Churches in the World ever since,
and the Evidence does prove even Ocular and Palpable. In Abraham, we know, the
Jews Church began; and it pleased God, for his extraordinary Faith, and upright
Life, to give him a Seed by way of a Blessing, and to multiply that Seed into a
Nation; and then to take them, for Abraham, Isaac and Jacob's sake, into his
Pr^^^i^^n, to do W^nders for them, and become a God to them in a Peculiar
manner, (as before I have been speaking) above all the Earth. Hereupon He gives
them his Oracles, and appoints them to enter Covenant with Him for Themselves,
and their Posterity; who, as being of the Seed of Abraham, were All to be
Circumcised, whether their next Parents were Unregenerate or Regenerate: And
this was God's Token, ( Genesis 17.11.) Badge or Mark upon them, as his People;
and so they continued from Generation to Generation: and all according to God's
own Appointment. Here is the Church of the Jews, every one of them being
Members of it by their Natural, not New Birth, through the whole Old Testament.
Turn we then to the New: The Lord Jesus sends forth his Apostles to Teach and
Baptize all Nations: When any Come in, they Baptize them, and their Families:
When Kingdoms come in, the Children of Nations are Baptized, and their
Childrens Children After them. Thus has it been in Our Kingdom: And as they
were of old Jews by Nature, Gal. 2.15. so are we now Born Christians. And do
not our Protestants generally own Infant Baptism, and their Church Membership,
as the Ground of it? Do they not own our Public Churches for True Churches,
and plead for them against those that Separate from us? Nay, do they not own
the Baptizing our Children to be according to Divine Appointment? Now, how they
should come then Not to see the Church of Christ under the Gospel, together
with the Church of the Jews under the Law, to be Constituted of the
Unregenerate, as well as the Regenerate, and that ex intention Ordinantis;
unless really, as our Proverb has it, they Cannot see Wood for Trees, I do
admire.

It is evident, that Saving Grace was no Birth-Priviledge among the Jews, Romans
9.8. Gal. 3.29. And we Christians have no other Charter for Baptizing Our
Children, than the Jews for Circumcising Theirs. The Right which Infants have,
must be founded in Covenant Relation to God, by virtue of their Parents; and
that not as Regenerate and Elect, it is plain, but only as of the Church, or
Kingdom of God; and so his People, Romans 2.25. and 3.9. Romans 11.26. Gal. 2.15. 1
Cor. 7.14. If Mystical Membership only gives them Right, then besides what is
signified but now, That no Children but those of Godly Parents might be
Circumcised and Baptized, which is quite contrary to the Course of Scripture
and Example; the Children of Godly Parents, who have the Right, must be born in
a State of Grace, and not (as Others) in a State of Nature: And how then can
the Apostle say of all, that We are by Nature the Children of Wrath, even as
others, Ephesians. 2.3?

Look again. Under the Old Testament the Body of Israel are God's Church, Act.
7.37, the Congregation of the Lord, Number. 31.16. All of them Holy, Number. 16.3. A
Holy People, a Special People, Deuteronomy. 7.6. A Chosen, a Loved People, Verse. 7, 8.
and 14.2, 21. A Congregation of Saints, Psalm. 149.1. God's Inheritance, Deuteronomy.
9.26. Joel 2.17. He was the Lord their God, Exodus 20.2. They his Own, John
1.11. God's People, (...), Exodus 33.13. His Servants, Lev. 25.42. Deuteronomy. 32.36.
His Sons, Verse. 19. Hos. 11.1. His Portion, Deuteronomy. 32.8, 9. His Peculiar
Treasure, Psalm. 135.4. Nevertheless, let us now but see what these People of
God and Church indeed were, and we shall find the Generality visibly wicked,
Act. 7.39. Not Knowing their Owner, when He fed them, Isa. 1.3. Disobedient,
while He Stretches his Hand out to them, Romans 10.21. Stiff-necked, Exodus 32.9.
Murmurers, Number. 14.27. Rebels, Number. 20.10. Isa. 1.2. Idolatrous, Adulterous,
Men of Blood, Profaners of God's Sanctuary and Sabbaths; when yet, in regard to
their Church State, their Children are said to be Born to God, Ezekiel. 23.37, 38,
39. Sacrificers to Devils, and Provoking the Lord to Jealousy, when He owns
them for Sons and Daughters, Deuteronomy. 32. Verse. 29. with 16.17. A Seed of
Evildoers, corrupted all over, Isa. 1.6. Who Forsook God, Verse. 4. Waxed fat,
and kicked, Deuteronomy. 32.15. And therefore, for their manifold and continual
Iniquities, were Destroyed, 1 Cor. 10.10. Number. 14.32. 2 Chronicles. 36.14, 15, 16.
To trace these Jews yet farther, would be endless: I will content. my self with
this one Text only more; where it is said, That All the House of Israel were
Uncircumcised in Heart, (as other Nations in the Flesh) and that is,
questionless, all one with Unregenerate Persons, Jer. 9.26. Now, if the
Generality of the Jews were Such, their have we proved, (unless you will answer
something as absurd, I say, as to deny, that Trees are Wood) That the Members
of God's Church, under the Law, were not the Regenerate only. Under the Gospel
we have the same Characters of the Church or Churches of Christians, as of That
of the Jews. Called to be Saints, A Chosen Generation, a Holy Nation, a
Peculiar People, 1 Cor. 1.2. 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. which is of the Old Style, to name
no more: And shall we not find These also much alike, as to their Lives? In
Christ's Time we find an Iscariot among the Twelve, Matthew. 10.4. Many
Disciples, and I think the most, Backsliders, Joh. 13.42, 43. and 6.66. In the
Gospel-Churches we find some Members ignorant, and Shamefully so, 1 Cor. 15.24.
Some Disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. Some Contentious, 1 Cor. 1.11. Schisimatical,
Verse. 10. Such as Served not the Lord Jesus, but their own Belly, Romans 16.18.
Some that denied the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.12. Some that Obeyed not the
Truth, Gal. 3.1. Some that were Enemies to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18.
Some Superstitious, Col. 2.20. Some Unworthy Drunken Prophaners of Christ's
Holy Table, 1 Cor. 11.21. Some not come quite off from their Idolatry, 1 Cor.
10.20. Some that had a Name to Live, but were Dead, Rev. 3.1. Some that had
Defiled their Garments, Verse. 4. Some Lukewarm, and so to be Spewed out of
God's Mouth, Verse. 16. Some that Minded earthly things, Phil. 3.19. Some
Carnal, 1 Cor. 3.4. One that was Incestuous, 1 Cor. 5.1. Many (if the Apostle's
Fear was not vain) who had Sinned, and not Repented of their Uncleanness,
Fornication and Lasciviousness which they had committed, 2 Cor. 12.31. Such
finally, whose God was their Belly, and whose End was Destruction, Phil. 3.19.
And if This be the Complexion of the Primitive Christian Churches, who does not
see, but this Matter is Mixed Matter; these Churches, even under the Gospel,
Mixed Churches? Who is there, I say, unless he cannot see Wood for Trees, but
must see it? It is true, when the Scripture styles them Elect, Sanctified,
Justified, and the like, that which is Divinitus dictum, must be So, and some
of them must be Such: But when the same Scripture says these things of them
likewise, both must be true, and some of them must also be otherwise. The
Church of Christ, while it is on Earth, is, must, and will be Mixed; and the
Objection shall be Answered farther in its place.

And again, yet look. I pray, where do we find any such thing, as imports
Regeneration to be required of God, to the Admittance of Persons unto
Membership, in the Old Testament; so that, for want of that Qualification, they
were not Admitted? Nay, where do we find any one Man put off on that Account,
in the New? It Is true, that Repentance and Faith, and such as is Sound, is
required of those that come, and that as necessary to Remission of their Sins,
by Baptism: But is it of Necessity to Baptism? If it be, then must the Baptism
of those Persons, whose Faith and Repentance is unsound, be invalid, null, and
no Baptism. If a due Subject be not of the Essence of Baptism, what is? But is
there any of our Divines think such Baptism void? Is there any will re-Baptize
such; if they come after to be Savingly Converted? And if there be none, then
let no Man, I say, until he can prove, that Wood is more than Trees, or Trees
are less than Wood, go to impose upon me That which they have Devised; but
acknowledge, that what Christ only has Appointed, must be the Rule of
Church-Admission.

The Truth is, That the Matter of Christ's Church or Kingdom upon Earth, is
made up of Good and Bad, is so open in the Scripture, so even under Sight, and
pronounced to be so by the Blessed Mouth of our Lord, in several Parallels on
purpose; that I should not need to write a Book to tell any This, but only for
the Difficulties that attend it. And they are either in respect to the Nature
of the Church, as called out of the World to a Peculiarity in God, which has
caused my chief Labor therefore in the Stating and Explication of our CAUSE in
the First Section: Or in respect to the Darkness, and Sophisticated Notions
that are on our Understandings about the same, which I have endeavored to
Obviate and Heal in the Second Section, now Finished: Or in respect to the many
Scruples and Objections that are raised and agitated concerning it, which are
to be Answered and Satisfied; and that brings me to the Last Part of my Work,
which remains now on my Hands in the Section ensuing.

SECT. III.
THUS much (...), and (...); for the Stating our CAUSE, and Confirming it: I
descend now (...), to the Answering Objections.

But how can an Unregenerate Man be Admitted Into the Church, that is not Of it?
How can he that is not In Christ, be Received as a Member, or into his Body?
How can he that is Out of Covenant, be Admitted to Enter Covenant? How can a
Sealed Pardon be delivered to him whose Faith is not sound, and Repentance
sincere? How can one be a Christian, that has no Grace? These Objections, and
the like, which are multiplied, do receive their Solution by the Preceding
Thread of this Discourse. If the Government and Covenant we have been speaking
of, be understood aright, and that the Church is the Number of those directly
that be brought under That Government, and into That Covenant; we see all the
way, how the Unregenerate, as well as the Regenerate, may be of it; and that
they who say, That Such are only In the Church, and not Of it, do but
mistakingly allude to St. John's Words, in this Case. We see, how the
Unregenerate may be In Christ, as they are of his Political Body; and as Christ
himself says expressly, That there are Branches in Him that bring forth no
Fruit. We see, how the Unregenerate may Enter into the Covenant of Peculiarity,
when yet he has not brought his Soul to a Full Decree and Purpose of Constant
and Entire Obedience; which is required of him also in the Covenant of Life. We
see, how he may Enter it in the Precise, though he does not (as he ought to do
also) in the Complex Consideration thereof. We may understand also, how that
Universal Conditional Pardon, which God has passed in the Gospel, may be
Delivered or Sealed to a Man, though a Simon, or a Judas, as well as to a
Philip himself, or to a John. We see likewise, how that a Man, who has not one
Spark of that Grace that is Saving, may have his Share in the General Grace of
God, or of the Gospel, as well as others. The Acute and Profound Mr. Baxter, in
one of his Books, has these Words. You must first believe that Common Grace
and Love, mentioned Joh. 3.16. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20, 14, 15. 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9.
And you must believe your Interest in this; that is, that God has by Christ
made to All, and to You, an Act of Oblivion, and free Deed of Gift, that you
shall have Christ, and Pardon, and Eternal Life, if you will believingly accept
the Gift, and not finally ^^ject it. And the Belief of This, even of this
Common Love and Grace, must first persuade your Hearts accordingly to accept
the Offer; and then you have a Special Interest. Life of Faith, page 152. Mark
here: There is the General Grace of God, and a Particular Interest in that
General Grace; the Belief whereof is the orderly way to a Special Interest;
that is, to the putting a Man upon the Performance of the Condition, that he
may have Interest in the Benefit. Let me ask then, Whether the Confirming, and
stirring up this Belief of a Man's Particular Interest in God's General Grace,
is not to be endeavored in order to this End, the getting the Special
Interest? And if it be, how shall the Word, Baptism, and the Lord's Supper,
which are Ordinances that do indeed directly and immediately nothing else,
(howsoever People may mistake) but Declare, Seal, and Confirm the Particular
Interest of every Man in this General Grace of the New Testament, (and so are
delivered to all alike, that have an External Right to them) be Denied to any
one, (the fuller Definition of General Grace before laid down, duly also
considered) who, upon an Assent to the Truth of the Gospel, does desire
Admission upon this Account, or to this End? If there be any Reason for their
Refusal otherwise, well and good; but it must be left to themselves, to make
further Application, as to their Special Interest, only by way of Consequence
and Deduction, according to their Evidence of having, or not having, performed
the Condition required to the Benefits, of Remission and Salvation.

It is Objected in the Cure of Church-Divisions. 1. This Doctrine confounds the
Catechumens with the Christians. Answ. It is true, that the Primitive Church,
after the Apostles, in the Times of the Ten Persecutions, were very strict in
their Admitting Members; and so had their Catechumeni, which continued upon the
good Use of that Custom, for a long Season: And Albaspinaeus (as I remember)
does tell us a good Reason they had for it, in regard of the Danger they then
were in, in case of any False Brother, (upon which Account we find the
Disciples, at first, so shy of Paul, Act. 9.26.) who might, at that time,
betray the whole Church, and her Sacred Mysteries, to the Persecutor: Besides
the horrid Scandal to those both Within and Without, in the Case of the Lapsi.
This Reason being now ceased, God be blessed, and the Command of Christ, with
the First Times of the Gospel, and Acts of the Apostles, being the Rule and
Examples which we are to follow in our Practice; this Objection, I must say, is
for the Times before Constantine; but is now out of date. The Practice of the
Apostles we find otherwise; the Practice of the Church now we know otherwise.
There was Reason after the Apostle's Time for this Strictness; but the Rule was
not so at first. What? Would you like, that the People of our Mixed Churches
should be held but as Catechumens; and when any are grown to be Sound
Christians, the Independent should Gather them into Their Congregations? Our
Times continue no such Custom. Infant Baptism alone confounds this Objection.
2. This Doctrine makes the Church consist of such as are no Christians; Of such
as take Christ for their Teacher, and not their King. Answ. Of Such, or most
Such, as are no Regenerate Christians. It was the Belief of their Creeds, among
the Ancients, made them Christians; and there is none of us believe Christ to
be a Teacher, but he believes Him also a Priest, and a King. I understand not
this dividing Christ's Offices. He that comes in but to the Conventional
Government of Christ, and submits to the Institutions of it, takes Him for his
King: Nay, he that takes Christ for his Teacher, takes Him Therein also to be
his Ruler; that is, to be led by Him. And, I say, the Unregenerate takes Christ
to be his Ruler so far as to join in his Ordinances; and so far as he takes
Him, the Minister cannot Refuse him. If he takes Him so far as to Obey Him
farther, it is his Duty; and his Salvation depends upon it: But if no farther,
so far as any will take Him, or come in to Him, it is the General Grace of God
and Christ, that must, and that will warrant his Admission against all that
gainsay it. 3. They therefore that hold this, (the dividing Christ's Offices)
introduce a New Christianity. Answ. And they that savor it not, retain but the
Old. 4. And a New sort of Baptism. Answ. No, good Sir, but another Profession
than That, which, by an unavoidable Consequence, must else bring us all to
Separation. It is true, that the Tradition of Baptism is Sacred; and it is a
Benefit, not to be lost, that it has delivered down what Christianity is, by
our Christening. But Infant Baptism is a part of that Tradition, if the Fathers
be not out: And I hope that we may know what Christianity is, by engaging our
Children to it, as well as by our making them de praesenti, to Profess it. If
the Child be made to answer Polliceor, and that in the Sense which respects
both Parts of the Covenant, as has been intimated, it will be all one with an
Abrenuncio, as for that. The Church her self, which, for the Ancient Forms
sake, retains the Words in her Baptism, does recall them in effect, by rendering
this Interpretation in her Catechism. 5. This large Doctrine destroys the
Special Love of Christ's Members. Answ. By no means. We are to Receive all that
are Willing: We know not how Far they are Willing. If they be Willing to come
in thus Far, they may be Such, for ought we know, as are willing Altogether:
And as Charity Hops all things, as well as Believes all things, we are to
judge the best of them, and behave our selves to them accordingly. Besides, it
is too narrow a thing for Brotherly Love, to sit down in the Comforts only of
my Brethren's Mutual Faith, and not be at the Pains for their Conversion. 6.
Hence it will follow, that the Church must be constituted of Two sorts of
Professors, and so be Two Churches. Answ. There is one thing I must remember,
while I think of it, which else may work a great deal of Prejudice to my CAUSE.
It must be acknowledged, that our Divines generally do make Profession to be
That which gives Right, Coram Ecclesia, to the Ordinances and Membership; and
Truth of Grace (say the most) Coram Deo. Now, whilst I seem to lay another
Ground, which is Willingness or Consent upon Belief of the Gospel, upon the
Account of General Grace, both Coram Deo and Ecclesia, I must declare, that
This is, or shall be accounted by me to be Profession. I say, That when a Man
comes, and offers himself to join, or joins with the Church in her Service,
this is Profession. If any will not let me call This Profession, then I must
say, It is Not Profession, but This Consent or Willingness upon Receiving the
Word, that is the Rule of Admission: If they will, then I say, It is My
Profession is the Rule, and not Theirs, which is a Profession of no less than
Regeneration. Not but that a Man who believes the Gospel, and comes in, may
make what Profession of Grace he Can, and Will, as he has occasion, without
Making or Marring the Constitution of the Church. The Church is Constituted of
the Willing, of those that Offer Themselves. These are Regenerate and
Unregenerate, according to Christ's Intendment in several of his Parables. This
Church moreover, I must say, is Catholic, One, and Entire after Cyprian, de
Vnitate Ecclesiae, and after Augustine. The Objection then of Two Churches,
upon the Diversity of Professions, that being not our Rule, is built upon the
Sand, though the Church Political and Mystical, be not indeed the same.

There are more Objections, with greater Variety, in the Book called, Right to
Sacraments. And the Sum of most of them, I take it, comes to This. The whole
Church have the Denomination of Saints, Sanctified, Believers, Justified; and
multitude of things are attributed to It, which none but the Regenerate really
are capable of: And Therefore, it must be upon a Profession which amounts to
that Importance, Wherefore the Unregenerate are so Reckoned, and Received. This
Objection is multiplied, and Scriptures abundantly Urged and Improved
accordingly. I will Answer therefore very plainly: The whole Church is thus
Denominated (or such things are attributed to It) from the Better Part, or from
the Regenerate Part only, (which our Divines do commonly say) who are Such;
where I need not stand (I think, after them) to show, how the Scriptures abound
with frequent Passages, where Something is attributed to All, that belongs
properly to a Part only of Those, to Whom, or of Whom it is spoken: but assume
straight, That forasmuch as it is for the sake of Those to whom the
Unregenerate Christian is Joined, that such Titles or Things are attributed to
him; it does appear, that it is his Coming in to the Church, or Willingness to
be one of their Society, that gives him that Advantage; and not his telling a
Lie in an Hypocritical Profession. Yes sure, you will say, it must be a Man's
Professing himself to be Thus, makes the Church Repute him thus: But I say, No;
for it is not We only Repute him Thus, but the Scripture: The Holy Ghost calls
all the Members such; and the Holy Ghost and Scripture cannot Repute them So,
but upon a Ground of Truth, and not upon the Foundation of a Lie, or what is
Visible only. Now, that Truth is this, that Some are indeed Such, and the Rest
are of their Society; which, in the Whole, is so denominated on their Account.
I will yet say That, which does yield my self most Satisfaction. The
Unregenerate Christian, who comes in to the Church, is under the Means, and in
the Way, to attain That himself, which yet he is Reputed to Be for the sake of
Them with whom he is Joined. As we are said to be Justified by Faith, according
to Austin, when Faith in its self, distinct from Repentance and Good Works, is
the Initium only, or Entrance of a Christian toward it, (there being a
particular Interest in the General Grace of God, upon Belief of That only,
which is First, and in the Way to a Special Interest, as One before has told
us) and as the Apostle intimates, when he says, We have Believed, (as a first
thing) that we might be Justified: So do I judge, that an Unregenerate Man may
be said to be a Disciple, Saint, Sanctified, Justified, Saved, as this Coming
into the Church is his beginning the Course to obtain it. The Children of the
Koathites are said From a Month old to keep the Charge of the Sanctuary, ( Number.
3.27, 28.) because they were so designed, or devoted thereunto. Neither is this
unusual in our common Speech: For let a Man go out of London but Yesterday
toward Cornwall, we say, He is gone to Cornwall, when it will be many Days
before he reaches Thither. As we say then, This Man is Gone to Cornwall; so is
the Unregenerate Member Sanctified, Justified; that is, he is In the Way to get
to it. I will clear this farther. The Apostle, speaking of the Person whom he
would have Excommunicated, bids us yet, Not to count him as an Enemy, but
admonish him as a Brother, 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. It may be demanded, How this can be,
when he is cast out from the Society, and so is actually a Brother no longer? I
Answer, That forasmuch as he is Cast out to this End only, that he may Return,
and so be a Brother again, he is still to be Had, and in this respect to be
Dealt with as a Brother. If then a Person shall be held a Brother in respect to
his Repentance and Return, as being under the Means (the Churches Censure and
Admonition) to bring him to it, we see how the Unregenerate may have the like
Denominations as This, on that Account; which is indeed the Same only.

But what if a Man shall say, I Believe the Articles of the Creed, but I will
not leave my Sins: I would have Christ to save me, but I Renounce his
Government: Shall such a Man be Admitted? I Answer, These are Tragical kinds of
Exaggerations of the same Objection, which stands on a mistaken Supposition. If
it be proved, that it is Christ's Will, that every Man must come with such a
Profession, as to tell what he Is before he is Baptized; it were but Reason he
should tell all, and say the Worst as well as the Best of himself; and I know
not what then you would do with him: But if it be a Man's Offering Himself only
is his Profession, there is no footing for any Words of this Nature. I say,
moreover, As you will receive the Hypocrite under the Name of a Professor; so
will I receive the Willing under the Notion of a Comer, to get Grace, or more
Grace, in the Use of the Ordinances, as the Means thereof, by God's Appointment.

Baptism is for Remission of Sins, and so is the Lord's Supper; and how shall
any Man, whose Faith and Repentance is not Sound, be Baptized, or Communicate,
seeing his Sins be not Forgiven? I Answer, Baptism, and the Supper are for
Remission; and they are for something Else too. They are For the Owning and
Acknowledging God and Christ, according to his Institutions. Jesus Christ was
Baptized, and Partook of his own Supper; but He had no Sins to be Remitted. He
did it, He tells us, for Fulfilling of Righteousness. These Acts in the
Unregenerate, are Acts of External Righteousness; and so far as he can Do it,
his Duty must be Done. When there are More Ends than One of an Ordinance, or of
an Action, and some Other of those Ends may be Attained, the Ordinance or
Action must not be omitted, because That One Cannot. Neither indeed is it the
Advantage of Man, but the Will and Glory of God, that is the Ground of our
Duty. Neque enim quia bonum est idcirco auscultare debemus, sed quia Deus
praecepit. Prior est Authoritas imperantis quam utilitas servientis. Tertul. de
Poen. Lib. But I have Answered this Objection before also, Otherwise; and
because it may be urged with as much Strength and Importunity, as Any else
whatsoever, I will repeat that Answer, and Enlarge it. That God has granted
Pardon and Life upon our Faith and Repentance, is the Substance of the Gospel.
That this Grant is ordinarily called The Covenant by Divines, is not to be
denied. That this Covenant is Conditional and Universal, appears in the
Proposal; and consequently, that All Persons, and Every Person in the World,
has a Share in it; so that, if he Repents and Believes, he shall be Pardoned
and Saved. Every Person that comes into the Church, and is Baptized, does take
Possession, I must say, of that Share or Interest which he has in this
Universal Conditional Remission and Salvation, whatsoever else he does farther.
This Possession, and Understanding of it, is a Matter of greater moment than
most do think of; being Worthy of all Acceptance, according to the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.15. Those Persons that hear the Gospel, and Refuse to come in, and be
Baptized, do leave their Share, Part, Portion or Interest in this General
Grace; and thereby do Refuse or Forsake their own Mercy: at least, they do not
Take their Share, and Apply it to their Souls, as those do (or should do) that
Receive the Gospel. This Application of a Man's Interest in the General Grace
of God, is the Means to bring him to a Special Interest, as we have been
instructed before by a sound Divine, as well as moving Preacher; and his
Meaning (as I take it) is, That a Man appropriating the Doctrine of General
Grace to himself, (to wit, that if he, for his own part, does Repent, Christ
has died for him, having Died for All, and he shall be Pardoned and Saved as
well as any) is that ordinary way which the Spirit of God takes to the working
the Soul up to a Resolution of Repentance, and Trust in his Mercy; which is
necessary to that End. Well! The Covenant then, which the Gospel declares, and
the Sacraments Seal, being the Conditional Covenant, that Remission and
Salvation which they Confer ( Pronounce or Exhibit, Signify or Seal) to any
Body, is Conditional only, and can be no other. Whatsoever is common to the
Regenerate, and the Hypocrite, (which the Sacraments must needs be) can Exhibit
no Remission, or any thing else, but such as belongs both to Regenerate and
Unregenerate, and that is Conditional Remission. It is the particular Share,
Part, or Interest, that every Man has in this Universal Conditional Remission,
that the Minister does deliver to the Baptized, and the Communicant, when he
delivers them their Pardon sealed by these Ordinances. If the Person that
receives them has performed the Condition, though he receives from the
Minister the Seal only of the Conditional Universal Pardon belonging to Him,
and all the Rest alike; yet is this Pardon, upon that Account, made Absolute to
him; and he is accordingly to apply the Consolation with Thanksgiving and
Blessing, with Joy and Peace in Believing: If he has not performed it, yet
has he his Share in the General Grace of God delivered to him, (so that there
is no Sealing to a Blank) and he is, at least, to Take it, and Carry it home
with him, to Lay it to his Heart with that Christian Consideration that is
meet: And in so doing, who knows but God may give him his Grace, that by this
Means (if by any in the World) he may be stirred up to the Performance, and so
come Also to be Absolutely Pardoned and Saved.

Baptism is the putting off the Filth of the Flesh, the Old Man, a Burial with
Christ to our Sins, a Signified Taking God and Christ as offered, a Consent to
our Part of the Covenant, the Answer of a good Conscience, a Putting on Christ,
and the like. Ergo; No Unregenerate Man can be Baptized. Answ. This is the same
Objection with That which precedes the Two Last; and I give the same Solution.
Baptisin is so to the Regenerate; and in regard to Such it is so Denominated.
The Regenerate when they are Baptized Do Thus; they put off Sin, put on Christ,
Consent, and so forth: The Unregenerate are brought under the Means to do it.
Baptism to them is the Ark, which Saves them only, as they are got into the Way
to be saved. But do not these Mediums prove, that the Profession we make at
Baptism, must be of no less than a Saving Faith, which alone does operate thus?
Answ. I acknowledge the Puissance of that Author; and gainsay it not, upon his
Supposition, that Profession is the Rule of Admission: But I deny that Rule; I
apprehend the Supposition to be the (...), and would not have been taken up by
so searching a Judgment, but upon deep Authority; and so presumed generally
without Precept from Christ, and without Example from the Apostles. I must then
say farther, His Arguments prove powerfully, that the Baptized should Have a
Saving Faith; but they prove not (methinks scarce at all) that he must Profess
it: They prove, that the Person should come With it; but they prove not, that
Without it he must not come. Yes, you may reply, A Signal Profession of Doing
That which a Man really Does not, is a Lie, Ergo; Without the Thing signified,
it is Unlawful for him to come. Answ. A Man's Coming is indeed such a Signum
Mentis as This, in the Regenerate that means it; but it is not such in Others.
It is in the Unregenerate a Signification of his Willingness to Join with the
Church, or to be One of their Society; and so long as he is indeed Willing to
that, it is sufficient for the Act to be done in Truth, and for him to Come;
because it is this Consent of his, or Will, in good earnest, is the very Rule
of Admission. God has given Man the Faculty of Speech, to express his Mind by
it; and He commands him to Speak as he Thinks, and not Otherwise. A Profession
therefore in Words that agrees not with the Mind, is Sin in Its Self, or in its
Own Nature; and such Words may not be spoken: But in Things and Actions the Lie
is not in the Nature of those Things and Acts, but in the Interpretation of
Others; and so is a Lie only by Accident; and the Thing or Act being Good in it
self, it must be done. As Evil must not be committed, because Good may come of
it; so that which is Good, or Duty, must not be omitted, because Evil May.

How will you prove, that any Unregenerate Man has Right to Baptism? Answ.
Very well. By Right we understand any Good due to us upon a Grant of him that
has Authority; which Grant (or Gift) is the Foundation of Right, called Title.
When the Condition then is performed, upon which such a Grant is made, here the
Good is Due; and that is Right. This is the most proper of Rights, and which
concerns us; and I will wave all Rights otherwise. Now, when Christ took
Possession (as has been expressed) of the Government, that God before had over
the Jews, (which being a Voluntary Government, and not his Natural One, he
could part with) he sets up Baptism, and commissionates the Apostles to Go and
Preach to all Nations, and to Baptize them, as the Badge, Sign or Token of
their being his Subjects; enlarging thereby that Kingdom of God (and now His)
over the World. In this Commission then, or in the Gospel, there is a Grant
included of Baptism, together with the Consequential Ordinances, (which are the
Positive Laws or Institutions of this Government) as Privileges belonging to
these Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, as God's Statutes were of old peculiar to
the Jews: And we must ask, To whom they are Granted, and upon what Condition?
It is plain now, and undeniable, that the Whole Earth are the Persons; and the
Condition (as plain to me) is, if they Come in, if they Accept them. If they
will hear, let them hear; if they will be Baptized, Baptize them. Where the
Gospel and Baptism are offered unto any, and they made Willing, here is the
Condition on their Part extant, and the Grant takes place. If God Will have All
to be Saved, He must be Willing that they have the Means. The Coming in to the
Church, and Partaking of the Ordinances, is God's way of Salvation: Salvation
is of the Jews, Joh. 4.22. The Affording the Means is the Fruit of General
Grace. General Grace belongs to the Unregenerate, as well as the Regenerate.
God Wills still, if Man Will. If any Man then will come to the Means, and God
Wills that he Should, if he Will, who art thou that Refusest to Admit them?
Take heed, if you go on with this Rule, lest you destroy General Grace, and
subvert the Gospel. You may, if you please indeed, say still, Baptism is only
for the Regenerate; and you may look on all you Baptize to be Regenerate, and
give the Sacrament, and Administer the other Ordinances as Means only for the
Edification of such; and you must maintain consequently, that ex intention
Instituentis, there is no Conversion within the Church, to be expected by any,
(when no Member Unregenerate can be Edified, unless Converted): And I shall
then humbly tell you, That if your Preaching and Practice did not indeed
contradict your Doctrine, you should destroy the most of Souls in our ordinary
Congregations.

But what shall we think of the Man, that comes into the Feast without the
Wedding Garment? To come in to the Church, is to come in to the Feast; and what
a dangerous thing must that be unto such? I Answer, And what shall we say to
the Man, that comes to hear the Word, and to Pray, without a Saving Faith, or
True Grace? The Case is the same in all the Ordinances; and there is no doubt,
but he sins in all: nevertheless he must Come. He should sin more, if with the
Pharisee, he shall Reject the Counsel of God, and refuse to be Baptized. It is
true, the Man in the Parable, that was without the Wedding Garment, is
condemned; but this is to be understood at Judgment: Neither is it for his
Coming, but for his Unworthiness being There. The Servants brought him In, and
did but what they were bid. Besides, if he had staid Out, when Called, he had
been more certainly destroyed. It was his Fault, he had no Wedding Garment; it
would have been Double, if he had also refused the Call. For the One he is
bound hand and foot, and thrown into Darkness; for the Other he must have been
brought before the Lord's Face, and slain.

To come in an Unregenerate State, is to be Unworthy; and he that Eats and
Drinks unworthily, Eats and Drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning the
Lord's Body. Answ. This Text has need to be a little opened, for the
moderating that Dread which is ordinarily too excessive on Tender Minds; or
else I might spare the Objection. For the understanding then the Meaning: That
which is first solidly to be thought on, is the Rule of Exposition; and the
Rule of Exposition is the Institution; for that only is laid down in the Place.
In general therefore, by the word Unworthily, (...), there is nothing else is,
or can be accordingly understood, but Vnmeetly, Vnsutably, or not Answerably to
the Nature of the Ordinance, and the Ends of it. Thus St. Ambrose: Is indigne
sumit qui aliter accipit quam Christus instituit. See his Comment upon the
Place. On the contrary, Digne manducare, To Eat worthily, (says Chemnitius) est
Eucharistia uti eo modo, and in eum finem sicut ex ipso Filio Dei instituta
est, is to use the Eucharist after that Manner, and to that End as Christ has
Instituted it. See his Examen. Conc. Trid. de Coena Domini. Nothing can be more
plain, or said with better Judgment. This is also most fully confirmed by the
other Phrase, Not discerning the Lord's Body; which is brought in manifestly,
as exegetical of the former. The Argument of the Chapter, (which is the
Corinth's Sin of Disorder, and the Reproof thereof; who mingling their
Love Feasts with the Sacrament, came without any Reverence to the Holiness of
the Institution, insomuch as they were ready even to be Drunken at it) does
explain it to perfect Satisfaction; and it does, and must signify therefore
nothing else, in the First Sense, but the not putting a Difference between this
Sacred, and a Common Table. Paulus dicit Corinthios non dijudicare Corpus
Domini, quia illud in Coena Dominica non majori reverentia tractabant quam
vidgares Concoenationes, says the same Examiner of the Council of Trent, in the
same Place. And this is the true, and certain Interpretation. I will yet
Establish it with the Authority of the Great and Devout St. Augustine. Indigne
dicit acceptam ab cis, qui non discernebant a caeteris cibis veneratione
singulariter debita. Continuo quippe cum dixisset, Judicium sibi manducat and
bibit, addidit ut diceret, Non dijudicans Corpus Domini, quod satis toto ipso
loco si diligenter attendatur, apparet. Aug. Ad Inquisitiones Januarii, Lib. 1.
Cap. 3. If the Meaning of either of the Phrases were to come in Unregeneration,
then must those Corinths that fell asleep under the Guilt, be not only
Chastened of the Lord, but Condemned with the World; which were to give the Lie
to the Text.

Our Divines generally distinguish the Church into Visible and Invisible, and
make that a Distribution of a Subject into its Adjuncts; and consequently, when
the Church Invisible is the Number of the Regenerate and Elect, and the Subject
is One, the Visible must be nothing but Those, who by Profession are Such; that
is, Appear so, and are Not; and the Unregenerate are excluded. Answ. I confess,
this is the Common Judgment of our chief Protestant Divines; and it has
confounded us. I must therefore, for my own part, declare Against it. I dislike
the Terms, (which I suppose not Cyprian's or Augustine's, but Late Ones) and
being forced therefore to some Description of the Church, and to Distinguish
about it, (for else we should not know of What we speak) I use Others. I
distinguish the Church into Political and Mystical; and I speak of It under the
former Conception. Now, this Distinction (understanding, by the way, the word
Political in a Generical, not Specifical Notion) I take not to be Distributio
Rei, into its diverse Accidents, or Parts Essential or Integral; but Nominis,
into its diverse Significations: That is, I take it not for a Distribution of a
Genus into its Species, which are its Essential Parts, or a Totum into its
Integrals, or of a Subject into its Adjuncts, or Accidents; but I tell what I
mean by the Church, when I use the word, through the Means of that Distinction.
I do not (I say) distribute One Thing into its Two Parts or Adjuncts; but I
distribute One Word, or Homonymous Term into Two Things, signified by it. To be
United to Christ by his Spirit, so as to Have Him a Head of Influences to me,
for Spiritual Life and Salvation, is One Thing; and to be of the number of
Those who are brought under his Positive Institutions, and Subject themselves
to his Officers for the proper End, and so Have Him as a Political Head only
for External Government, (though it be in order to bring them on to Saving
Grace, and into the Mystical Church also) is Another. If I speak of the Seed of
Abraham; To be his Seed by Birth is One Thing, and to be his Seed by Faith is
Another. It is One Thing to be an Outward Jew, or a Jew by Nature, and
Circumcision in the Flesh; and it is Another to be an Inward Jew, by
Circumcision in the Spirit, by Grace, and Keeping the Commandments of God. And
what a Distribution then is this? Why? It is Distributio Homonymi sive
Equivocantis in Equivocata: And the Distribution of a Genus into its Species,
of a Whole into its Parts, of a Subject into its Adjuncts, being (as I count)
Distributiones Vnivoci, This can be none of those Three. Here is Idem Nomen,
the same Word or Term, [CHVRCH] but Nominis Ratio Diversa, the Reason of the
Denomination, the Conceptus Objectivus, not the Same. When there is One Name
then, there are Two Things. The Things are diverse and disparate; but not Two
Species of One Genus, or Two Parts of One Integrum, or Two Accidents of One
Subject; there is no need of That. The Political Body is One Society, and the
Mystical Body is One Society; Both are headed by One Christ, Both are
Catholic, and Both are One; and One Person may be a Member of Both, but Both
are not the Same. It is not a Distribution of an Integrum into its diverse
Sorts of Members, (as I have been formerly apt to think) because the Coetus
then must be One; when That Coetus which consists of the Regenerate and
Unregenerate, and That which consists of the Regenerate Only, cannot be One and
the Same Coetus, but Two: Especially, when there may be Some, who are Members
of the Church Mystical, (as being already in a State of Salvation) and not yet
Admitted into the Congregate, or Political Body, (either Universal or
Particular; for so I use these Terms) Act. 10.4, 22, 35. Romans 2.26, 27. as well
as Many, who are Members of a Christian Congregation, but Foreigners to the
Assembly of Heaven. It is not a Distribution of a Subject into its Adjuncts,
for the same Reason; which yet our Divines intend, by their Terms, Visible and
Invisible, already noted. The Church, which is Christ's Church, is that One
Mystical Body of the Elect and Regenerate only, according to them,
distinguished into a double Respect, or Consideration thereof, as Invisibly or
Visibly such; that is, as Men be Indeed, or in Appearance Members of it. A
goodly Distribution! As if we should divide Man in Specie into its Singulars;
Plato Socrates, Paul John, and the Pictures of Men; when the Picture of a Man
is No Man, and a Visible Member No Member; that is, a dividing a Churchmember,
or Church, into one that is One, and into one that is None. Besides, that this
is a Conception, (as before intimated) that makes the Apostle understand by the
Outward Jew (when he distinguishes them, Romans 2.) to be the Inward One
according to Appearance; one that appears to be an Inward One, or a Jew only
Putative and secundum apparentiam, as they speak; when nothing is more contrary
to his Mind; who means undoubtedly, a Jew by Nature, (as Gal. 2.) one of
Abraham's Seed according to the Flesh; Born a Jew, and thereby having a Right
to Circumcision, and the Consequences of it. The Formal Reason giving Being and
Relation to One Church, is distinct and different quite from That which
Constituteth, and gives Relation to the Other. I am nevertheless afraid to say
likewise, That it is a Distribution of a Genus into its Species, because the
making Two Churches specifically distinct under One Vnivocum Vnivocans, will be
Absonant, I doubt, to the General Ear; though if any will make the Coetus
Vocatorum the Number of the Called in Genere, to be divided into the Number of
the Called Effectually, and of the Externally Called, and then divide these, as
the Species, into their Singulars; Peter Paul Regenerate, Judas Simon
Unregenerate, I shall be far from falling out with them; who must rather
declare, That if they can make it good, they have won our CAUSE. For my part, I
am only pretty sure methinks of This, that the term CHVRCH is Homonymous; and
so long as I go no farther than I do, I seem to my self the more safe. For thus
much appears, The Inward Jew has another Relation to God than the Outward; in
regard to which, the Outward Jew is said to be No Jew; that is, None as so
meant; when in regard to that Relation which is common to Both, he was a Jew,
(the true proper Jew, and the Other but Metaphorically so) having the same
Privileges thereof equal with the Other. It is One thing to have One of these
Relations, and to have the Other is Another; and the Societies to which they
relate therefore, are not the Same. To be Called is One thing, to be Elected
Another. The Mystical Church is the Number of the Spiritual Seed, Inward Jew or
Christian, or of the Elect: The Political Church is the Number of the Called.
To speak yet more exactly: There is the Kingdom of Christ, and there are Some
Persons among them, whom He Chooses, to give his Special Grace and Spirit unto;
and thereby to make them One with Himself in another (or stricter) manner than
the rest. These Select or Elect Persons are sometimes called the Church; and
sometimes this whole Kingdom is called the Church. This Kingdom is Universal or
Catholic, because it is over the World. These Elect are Catholic, because
scattered here and there, every where in it. This Kingdom is One, because they
are All under One Head and Government, (and have One Faith, and One Baptism,
Ephesians. 4.5.) These Elect are One, because united into a Mystical Body, even so
as to be said One Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. If Divines had used to distinguish
these Two Things by Two Words, and called the One Christ's Kingdom, and the
Other the Church, the Matter would have been more easy: But when they are Both
called the Church, I am forced to distinguish the word Church, and tell, That I
understand by it, Christ's Kingdom, (that which is called the Kingdom of God,
the Kingdom of Heaven, in the Gospel, Matthew. 13.44. Mar. 4.26. Act. 20.25.) And
if it appear, that Unregenerate Men are of This Kingdom, (Matthew. 8.12:) it is
all one to me, as to say, They are of the Church. Unto Christ's Kingdom
certainly do Christ's Institutions, Christ's Positive Laws and Officers belong;
and consequently, the Ordinances of Baptism, which is appointed to Admit Men
into the Same. That Door now, which admits Hypocrites as well as Sound
Believers, cannot Admit Men into the Mystical Church; for there are no
Hypocrites There. But Hypocrites, as well as Sound Believers, are Baptized; and
it cannot be otherwise. The Mystical Body then is One thing, and the Political
Body (which alone concerns our Dispute) is Another. They are Two Things, though
called by One Name. The Objection consequently, being founded on the contrary
Supposition, does fall.

There is One Thing yet, puts me most to it. It is the Form of Baptism in the
Liturgy, (which I suppose very Ancient by Tertullian) where the Covenant is
Entered by every one that is Baptized, in the way of Question and Response: And
when That Question is asked, Do thou Renounce the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh, in the Words as there expressed; and no less an Answer is required,
than, I Renounce them all; it appears, that the Church of England receives none
for her Members, but Such as She supposes Regenerate Persons. If none but Such
as make that Profession, which none but the Regenerate can Make, are Admitted
to Membership and Baptism; it is evident what is the Churches Judgment. To this
purpose are Thanks given for every Child upon its Baptism, That God has
pleased to Regenerate it by his Holy Spirit, (not only by Water.) When these
Children come of Age, they must be Confirmed; and All, as supposed in a State
of Grace, are to come to the Communion. When any Die, they are likewise, as
being in the Church, supposed to go all to Heaven: Neither ought the Words in
the Burial give Offense to any, being spoken according to a Church-Judgment of
Charity, of every Body, upon that Supposition.

In the First place therefore, for Answer: I acknowledge my self a
Nonconformist: And as All, who are Such, have some particular Reasons above
others, why they Assent and Consent not to all, and every thing contained in,
and prescribed by the Book of Liturgy; I am content that this be alleged for
My Reason, though it be not my only Reason: I Assent, and Consent not, that
this Abrenuncio be imposed in Baptism: And not only because no Child can make
that Profession, but because I cannot find in my Heart to receive such a
Tenent, by Consequence, from the Liturgy, for Conforming to the Church; which
must lead me, if I be true to it, to Separate from Her. Not but really, if any
Body can make this Profession, it is well; but to impose it on every one as
necessary to Baptism, (without Liberty of a Man's own Words) and to suppose it
of every one that is Baptized, This is the Point. We intend our Mixed Churches
to be of the Regenerate and Unregenerate: This Profession intends them to be of
the Regenerate only. These are inconsistent things; and This is no little
matter therefore, for which I Dissent; and She may the better bear with me. We
can never maintain our Parochial, our National, our Mixed Churches, against the
Congregational Party, in my Judgment, if we give them This Ground, That the
Churches of Christ's Institution do consist ex intention Instituentis, of the
Regenerate only.

In the Next place, I must say this: Though the Church, by requiring such a
Profession of the Baptized, must indeed, by Consequence, be interpreted to be
of the common Opinion; which I oppose, for the great Reason mentioned: Yet does
She, by allowing this Profession to be made by Infants, vere again from it. An
Infant can make no Profession de praesenti: And as the Abrenuncio therefore is
well interpreted by a Polliceor in her Catechism, I could wish accordingly, if
ever there be another Emendation of the Common Prayer Book, that these Words in
the Baptism, of the Adult, as of the Infant, were changed; and instead of, I
Renounce them all, some such words were put in, I engage to it, God being my
Helper. If they were, you may say, How would this mend the Matter? No Man can
say, I engage to do a thing Hereafter; but he must resolve upon it Now, or he
lies. If the Baptized resolve Now to Repent, or to live Holy for the Time to
come, he must be Regenerate, all one as if he professed He did already. I
Answer, There is no doubt, but a Man may really Intend, or Purpose to Repent
Hereafter, or sometimes Before his Death, (as he may Desire, Wish, and Hope it,
lest he be Damned) who, at the Present, is for Enjoying yet the Pleasures of
the World for a Season: And whether such an Engagement, de futuro, will save
the Adult Person, as well as the Infant, from a Lie, (when it will not save him
from Sin, and Desert of Wrath, if he makes any Delay, Heb. 3.7, 8.) I leave to
Others to judge, that will: I must Offer yet farther. The Baptized is supposed
to be Entering Covenant in these Responses; and there is Difference between an
Absolute, and a Covenant-Engagement. A Man cannot engage Absolutely to do any
thing, but he must, at Present, be Resolved, or he Lies: But a Man may make a
Conditional-Engagement without a Lie, before he be Resolved upon the
Performance. A Covenant-Engagement is no more, but I Engage to perform my Part
of the Covenant, as ever I expect God should perform His, or as ever I expect
the Benefit of it; or, if I do not (that is, if I Never do) Perform the
Condition, I consent to go without what is Promised. The Lord Jesus will be
sure, for his Part, to perform his Promise; wherefore this Infant must also,
for its Part, promise by You, to Renounce the Devil, to Believe, to Obey, says
the Priest to the Godfathers, in Words more at large: And if the whole Form
were so molded, as to make the Engagement of this Baptismal Vow to be
Conditional, that the Unregenerate, as well as the Regenerate, might make these
Responses, and the Thing be Justified; there is nothing, I judge, could be done
Better; and nothing, I think, ought to be done Less, for maintaining our Mixed
Churches Against, or saving them F^^m, Separation.

If This satisfy not, I have yet Something more laid in. In the Covenant,
there are the Precepts, the Promises, and the Threats. As the Person
Covenanting engages himself to the Precepts, as ever he hopes to enjoy the
Blessings: So he consents to Undergo the Penalty, in case of Nonperformance.
There is no question now, but a Man may Engage to Do a Thing, or Bear the
Penalty, when he is not yet Resolved either To Do, or Not to do it. No
question, but he may Engage himself to the Loss and Punishment, without the
Resolution of Doing that which is the Condition of avoiding of it. At
University, when we were Matriculated, we swear to Keep the Statutes: No one
that Understands them, does think of always Keeping them; and yet they tell us,
We are not to Scruple the Oath, because it is a Penal Oath: And so long as we
Submit to the Penalty, in case of Breach, we sin not, though we Swear without
Resolution to Perform the Matter Sworn. To this Purpose above all, we must not
forget, that the Israelites had the Curses proposed to them, as well as the
Promises, in their Covenanting; and every Man was to say Amen to the Curses.
Dent. 27.26, And they entered into a Curse, and an Oath, to walk in God's Law,
which was given by Moses, Nehem. 10.29. God, on his Part, is Engaged to be
Israel's God, and to Bless them, if they do their Duty; and to Punish them, if
they Neglect it. The People, on their Part, do accordingly Engage themselves to
the Performance, or Submit to his Judgments, as Righteous. It is a
Covenant-Engagement as to Both Parts; and so long as the People (whether
Regenerate or Unregenerate) do believe God will be Gracious to them if they be
Obedient, and are ready to acknowledge Him for Righteous if He punishes their
Disobedience; there is nothing hinders, but that the whole Body may say, We
engage to it. The Truth is, the Command of God for all the People to say Amen
to the Curses, may be a Key for Opening the Nature of the Jew's Covenanting, as
intended by God. If their Engagement to do all things that God had commanded
was Absolute, then must their Engagement, when they say, in effect, If we do
not, let us be accursed, be Absolute also. But far be it from God, to require
the whole Congregation to Engage themselves to Continue in all the Words of the
Law, to do them, (which Strictly none of them Did, or Could) or else be
Absolutely accursed. As many as are of the Works of the Law, (says St. Paul)
are under the Curse, Gal. 3.10. But were they Absolutely under it? God forbid!
How then should any of them be delivered from the Law and Curse? How then
should Salvation be through Jesus Christ, even to Paul himself the Apostle? In
one Place it is said, Go thou near, and speak thou to us all that God shall
speak to thee; and we will do it, Deuteronomy. 5.27. They know not what some of these
Commands will be, yet Engage to do Them. I ask, How can this be Absolute?
Ignorantis non est Consensus. If any one then says, He understands not my
Distinction before, between an Absolute, and Covenant-Engagement, let him bring
his Mind to some good Conceptions about this Saying Amen to the Curses, (which
our Church uses also in Lent) and, I suppose, he may then understand something
of it. It may be objected, An Unregenerate Man cannot Consent to the Sanction,
any more than to the Preceptive Part of the Covenant. I Answer: But he can, and
does Assent to it; and for the Entering the Covenant in regard to the
Comminatory Part of it, that Assent is enough. He cannot help his Belief,
though he would never so fain; and so long as he knows he is within the
Sanction whether he will or no, so that according to his Performance or
Nonperformance of the Condition he must be Saved or Damned, though he cannot
be Willing to be Damned, yet does his Conscience bind him over to it. Which
also will tell him, That he might yet, if he would, Forbear those things, in
the Doing whereof he is said, by an unavoidable Consequence, to Will, ( Ezekiel.
18.31.) to Choose, ( Deuteronomy. 30.19.) to Love Death, ( Prove. 8.26.) It is true,
that the Israelite, who had not Performed the Condition, could never say Amen
to the Curse with a Good Will; but he Must say it. For when a Man's Consent to
the Condition is requisite to have his Part in the Promise of the Covenant, he
shall and must have his Part in the Threat, whether he will or not. This is
Christ's Law, (says the Sagacious Mr. Baxter) He that Believes, and is
Baptized, shall be Saved; and he that Believes not, shall be Damned. He that
professes to be Governed by Christ, professes to be Governed by this very
Law; and therefore professes his Consent to be Damned, if he Believe not.
Christ told you, You must Consent to both Parts, or to neither. The Curses of
the Covenant (Deuteronomy. 29.21.) were to be repeated to the People of Israel; and
they were expressly to say Amen to each of them. For Life and Death were set
before them, Blessings and Cursings, (Deuteronomy. 30.1, 19.) and not Life and
Blessings alone. And so the Gospel, which we are to Believe, contains though
principally and eminently the Promises, yet secondarily the Threatenings of Hell
to Impenitent Believers; and our Consent does speak our Approbation. Life of
Faith, page 303. Neither is this to be looked on as any thing Singular;
Promissio non minus iram incredulis minatur, quam gratiam fidelibus offert,
says Calvin, Mar. 16.16. Unto which I will add this, The Application of that
Part of the Covenant to a Man's own Soul, which belongs to him upon a due
Examination of his State, is a Duty surely of Great Concern to every Body; and
the Applying the Curse to himself, if he be under it, is as direct, proper, and
convincing a Means to his Repentance, and Saving Conversion, as the Application
of the Promises to the truly Faithful is for their Establishment in the Grace
of God. I will add again thus much. As Adam, when he was in Innocence, could
Enter Covenant with God, in regard to the Comminatory Part, that if he fell He
should die, when he was at present only Under Life; so can an Unregenerate
fallen Sinner enter Covenant with God, in regard to the Promissory Part, that
if he Repent he shall Live, while he is yet actually Under Death and
Condemnation. When the whole Body of Israel promiscuously, without any
Discrimination, say, All that God has said we will do, it must be understood
(as to an All above their owning God, and his Worship, in opposition to other
Gods, which they then Absolutely did) of such an Engagement, which I call a
Covenant-Engagement. I will yet add moreover, That time may come, when such Men
who let nothing almost escape their Sight, but can speak things so true, so
clear and full as Above, may see their own selves how to walk in the Light and
Consequence of what they have spoken.

In the Third place: I must offer from hence by way of Quaere; Whether an
Engaging to the Covenant be not a Duty of that Nature as other Duties, where
the Matter of the Duty must not be omitted for any Impotency of ours, or Defect
in the Manner of the Performance? When a thing is Evil in it self, it must be
avoided; but when a thing is commanded, and has Evil cast on it Externally by
the Agent that does it, the Doer must be reformed, but the Duty must be done.
God commands all Israel (which we are here yet upon) to enter Covenant with
Him: The most Part of them are incapable of Sincere Performance; and yet they
all Engage, and God and Moses seem to approve it. In like manner, God calls all
Nations, as He did Israel, to come in to the Christian Church, and to enter
Covenant with Father, Son and Holy Ghost. If the Gospel be Preached, and they
Believe that these Three Persons are the only true God, they are to be Baptized
into their Name. They are to Come, and to come So as to be Sincere Converts.
They are to Engage, and to engage So as to resolve upon the Performing the
whole Condition on their Parts, that they may be Saved. If they fail in the
Manner, and do not Engage so as they ought, or do not resolve upon the
Performance, (supposing it a Conditional Engagement) or rather resolve not
Entirely, but in Part, (or so far as to take God for their God and King, in
opposition to other Gods, which is the main thing of that Covenant, as the
Israelites, for the most of them, at this Time we may be sure, Did) so that
there is a Partial, but not Total Hypocrisy, (to make it Evil in it self) in
their Engagement; I Quaere, Whether the Matter is not yet still what they are
called to? And if it be, they Must, and, for ought I see, they May engage, as
Israel did. Where they fail then in regard to the Manner, they are to be
Reformed; but what Their Duty is, must be done. If they Resolve not as they
ought, they sin, I suppose, in the Manner of their Engagement: But I must ask,
Whether they shall not sin more, if they Engage not at all; if they quite turn
their Back upon God, and the Gospel, and leave both the Manner and Matter
undone. You may object: But can we think that the People could say, They Would
do all God commanded, and God approve of it, as Well said of them, (Deuteronomy.
5.27.) or that they should make a Covenant, by Sacrifice passing between the
Parts thereof, ( Jer. 34.18.) and Enter into a Curse and Oath to walk in God's
Law, (Nehem. 10.29.) and yet intend nothing but a Conditional, Dis-junctive
Obligation to Do it, or be subject to the Penalty? Answ. I say not so. They did
all take God to be the True God, and their God, in opposition to all false
Gods: And as for these Words here, which they Said, and God Approved, I must
first premise This; That to engage a Man's self under the Curse of God, to Do
any thing, must be laying the greatest Obligation on his Soul that can be, to
the Performance; and if it were God's Will, that the whole Body of Israel
should engage to their Part of the Covenant, so as to say Amen to the Curses,
(which, I think, is not to be denied) it does appear, that this Obligation by
Covenant must be their Duty, even the Duty of the Whole Body; and consequently,
their Doing it, and God's Command of them to do it, must be Justified: Which
being premised, I say, that when these Words, [All that God has said we will
do] are attributed to the Whole Body, they were all under great Commotion (that
we know for certain) at the Terrible Appearance of God, as ever was; and some
of them (I doubt not) said So, with a present Resolution of Sincere Obedience,
and did Perform it; as Zachary and Elizabeth walked in all the Ordinances of
the Lord blameless: Others of them (I believe) said So, out of that present
Fear only, and Awe of God upon them; as the Seed that fell on the Stony Ground,
sprung up Presently, but, for want of Root, Withered: The Generality (it is
like) had the Idea of a General, Implicit Obedience in their Thoughts, which
they did also endeavor (I suppose) in their Lives; but it was External
altogether, thinking That sufficient to their Justification before God: And
such an Obedience the Unregenerate Man (we know) can Engage to, and Perform,
all alike with the Regenerate; there being no Duty in the Outward Matter, or
Outward Act, but he can do as well as the other; he can Hear, Read, Pray, give
Alms, as well as the other; when yet he cannot do it out of that Principle, to
that End, and after that Manner, as the other; which is the Doing it so as to
be acceptable to Salvation. Now, if I should rest here, and say, That these
Words [All that God commands we will do] are to be understood of such an
Engagement, and that such an Obedience which is External only, and Insincere,
is yet in the Matter, or in Its self good, and Man's Duty, so that,
notwithstanding the Failure in the Manner, it must be Engaged to and Done; I do
apprehend the Cause were carried: But because my chiefest Cause ought to be
Truth, I must yet add, That a great many of this Multitude (I believe) did say
I for Company; that is, they consented with others in the General Terror,
without any formed Consideration of what they promised, or Resolution to
perform it: nay, their Hearts bring wicked, they could have no mind to do it,
whatsoever Fear might constrain from them. And when we see well, how the First
sort could say these Words with the Acceptance of God, and how the Second
might say the Same without any present Lie; yea, how the Third also might
engage so Far, and God in Tantum approve it; I would fain know, in respect to
the Fourth sort of them, how God and Moses could require of the Whole Body any
Engagement to the keeping all God's Precepts, but upon the Account I have
offered; that is, upon this Account, That it was a Covenant-Engagement? which
being of Validity for obtaining the Blessings to all those that Perform it, was
not in Vain as to those (whom He deals withal still as Men) that perform it
Not; because they were thereby (even according to Agreement) yet obliged to the
Penalty; and God was Righteous, as their Lord and King, to make every one of
them Subscribe to it. I will add a Simile, that will come a little more near
the Matter, than some One we have had before. In an Oath of Allegiance to a
Prince, a Man cannot swear to the King's Government, but it includes Subjection
to his Laws; which Laws perhaps he knows not; or if he do, he knows he Breaks
many: and yet so long as the Substance of that Oath lies in the Owning his
Authority against all Foreign Jurisdiction, and being True to the Crown, which
one that is no Popeling does heartily consent to, he makes no Scruple to take
it, notwithstanding those Laws; for he makes this Account, that if he submit to
the Penalty in case of Transgression, or can escape without Resistance, that is
consistent with his Allegiance: So in the Covenant of the Jews, which was a
Covenant of Fealty to God, as their King, so long as they could freely and
absolutely Consent to take God for their Lord, and to serve Him alone in his
Appointed Worship, in opposition to ull other Gods, their Submission to the
rest of God's Precepts we may conceive to be under such Political Terms, as in
this Instance is signified. See, I have set before thee Life and Good, Death
and Evil; therefore choose Life, Deuteronomy. 30.15, 19. One cannot imagine, how these
People should be left to choose what they would do, but that their Engagement
must have this Construction; As ever we expect to escape the Curse, or reap the
Blessing, we will do it. And forasmuch as that which they Could and Did, was
the main thing to be Done, and they were called to it, it was not for any to
leave undone So much, because More was also required; Unto Which the most of
them could Engage only under God's terms, leaving themselves to Mercy; and
Which accordingly they neither Absolutely intended, nor Did. I will add: So
long as a Jew cleaved to God, in opposition to Idols, and lived in general as
other Jews, here was the Essentials of That Covenant; and the Breach of other
Precepts was failing in the Integrals: But the Essence of the Covenant of Life
consists in Integrity, (Integrity measured by Grace, accepting of what is Done,
and forgiving what is Undone, through the Righteousness and Satisfaction of
Jesus Christ) which none but the Regenerate have, must be confessed.

In the Fourth place: I must say upon this, It having pleased God to set up a
Kingdom over this People, and as a King to give them his Statutes and
Judgments, and they as his Subjects declaring they will obey them; ( In the
Division of the Nations, He set a Ruler over them; but Israel is the Lord's
Portion, says Ecclesiasticus) I must take leave to ask, How these Words [All
that the Lord has said, we will do] can prove, That no Person therefore, that
says not the same Words, may be Baptized; or that because the Israelites said
so, therefore the Baptized must say Abrenuncio and Spond^o? Especially when
they were not prescribed by God, but Words of their own; and if they had spoken
them Examiningly, and with more Caution, and said but as we do in the
Common Prayer, Lord have Mercy upon us, and incline our Hearts to keep all
these thy Laws; I am persuaded, it had been better. It is manifest, that every
Jew was to Circumcise his Children, and Joshua all the Congregation in the
Wilderness; but I find not, that every Father, or every One there, was to make
such a Profession, a Profession in such large Words, in the Doing. I find not
such a Profession neither required of any of the Baptized, in the New
Testament. The Eunuch says, He believed Christ was the Son of God; and those
that came to John's Baptism, confessed their Sins, (both which I have provided
against) and that is all I find There. Nay, though Israel indeed used these
Words when God gave the Law at first, I find not in Deuteronomy. 29. when Moses called
them to Covenant Again, or to Another Covenant, ( v. 1.) about Forty Years
after that, ( v. 5.) that they used the same Words. This is certain, Man, Woman
and Child enter Covenant, ( v. 12.) but what Words passed, or whether they
Consented by Silence, or otherwise, we read not. Suppose then these Questions
in the Churches Form to be retained, and the Baptized Persons left to use what
Words they Could, and Would, in their Responses; I pray, were not the Baptism
good? Suppose, instead of saying [All this I steadfastly believe,] a Man should
say, I believe it with all my Heart, or, I Really and in Truth believe it, as
the Eunuch forementioned; or should be only able to say, I believe it; Lord,
help my Unbelief, with the Man in the Gospel: Should such a one be turned away
for That? I am pleased to see, how in the Third Question, [Wilt thou obediently
keep God's Holy Will?] when the Child, who Answers by his Sureties, and is
Innocent, is made to answer, [I will,] the Adult Person, who Answers for
himself, and must think of Performing it, does say with all Tenderness and
Caution, [I will endeavor so to do, God being my Helper]: And when the Church
her self does vary the Response, if the Baptized, who is yet more Tender,
(being fearful lest he is defective in that Endeavor) should be able to say
only, I do acknowledge this Renunciation of Flesh, World and Devil; I own this
Walking in God's Commandments all the Days of my Life, to be my Duty; Pray God
give me his Grace to do it; I desire I may; I can say no more: I would be very
willing to know, whether such a Man might not be Baptized? For my part, I
should judge such a one sitter to be Received, than the most of Confident
Believers, that make no Bones at all of the Matter. I would have no Man here so
high for the Church, as not to consider the Foundation. I do acknowledge, that
every Man who was Circumcised, became a Debtor thereby to the whole Law; and
every one that is Baptized, is a Debtor to the Practice of all Christianity:
But I am apprehensive also, that the Unregenerate Man cannot actually, in
Words, say, I Renounce the Devil, World, and the Elesh, so as Not to be led by
them; when yet he may be obliged to it, as well as the Regenerate, by
Covenant-Engagement, at least in the Sign of it. I am willing to have a Man's
Duty pressed on him, in regard to the Obligation, as much as any: But as for
the Profession he makes in Words, I cannot but be Tender of it for my Life. I
am Conscious, how one Excellent good Man is still for to have some Law
Established, (in case, at least, of any Accommodation) that every Man who
offers his Child to Baptism, or Himself to the Eucharist, should make his
Profession, that he Takes God for his Chief Good, Christ for his Lord and
Savior, the Holy Ghost for his Sanctifier; and unfeignedly Repenting of all
his Sins, he does resolve upon a Sincere Obedience, through the Course of his
Life, for the Time to come; or the like Words: Which, I must confess, is so
grievous a thing to my Mind, in regard to that Formality, and Authorized Lying,
which the Most should be put Upon; and that Scruple and Perplexity, which the
Best, most Serious, and most Tender, should be Put To thereby, that I cannot,
in my Heart, but rather be glad, (though simply I approve not the thing) that
the Church has imposed this Profession upon the Incapable Infant, and the
Sureties in their Names. Neither is there any thing, I know, in the Scripture,
for such strict Injunctions, unless these Words of the Israelites ( Words of
their Own, not Imposed) be any thing; which has made me therefore speak thus
much the more about it. It is said, for mollifying the Matter, If a Man can
say, I am willing to be a Christian upon the Terms of the Covenant, it is
enough; but this is the Thing (if you understand by it the Covenant of Life)
that a Man doubts. Neither is it less, but only in Words, than what is said
before. A Person is afraid, that he is indeed Unwilling to Submit to something
or other, that is in the Terms, when he has strictly examined his whole Life,
and is in Good Earnest with his Soul. It is not so easy a thing with every
Good Man, (as with So good a One) to assume to himself so much as but amounts
to All that is necessary to make a Man a Christian, when he speaks but as he
thinks, upon faithful Endeavors to avoid Deceit. There may be Thousands of the
Temper of Holy Mr. Bradford; who, the more tender they are of their Duty, the
more sensible they are of their Defects, and more fearful of Hypocrisy: And
God forbid, but many of them, whose Consciences do condemn them, should yet be
acquitted by Him, who is Greater than their Consciences; and who Does, and Will
do it, while they are secretly yet borne up in their Desponding Dependence on
his Goodness and Mercy. It was more fairly said once to me, by a Chief Pastor
of the Anabaptists, That the Way they went was not Thus; but the Person that
offers himself to their Church, (said he) was only to declare what Work of God
there is on his Heart; and the Church are to make Judgment of it: So that
though the Man himself should profess, he did Not believe his own Sincerity,
and yet the Church Did, they could Receive him. This, I told him, I liked well;
but it was to depart so much from the received Rule of Profession, and to verge
toward Mine; that is, toward an Admission of the Willing, who are to come (as
I cannot choose but think) to the Use of the Means for Grace, if they have it
Not; as well as for farther Edification, if they Have.

In the Last place, to come home: I have, in my foregoing Discourse, delivered
my Thoughts about the Church and Covenant. And though it be true, that no Man
can Enter, or be in Covenant with God, in that Sense, which signifies the
Performing the Condition, but he must be Regenerate, and a Member of Christ's
Mystical Body, or Church, taking the Covenant (whether Abstractly or Complexly)
for the Covenant of Life: Yet as for Admitting Men and Women into the Society
of Christians, which is the Congregate Church, or Christ's Political Body, and
Entering them into the Covenant of Peculiarity, whereby they obtain only the
Advantage of the Ordinances, as Means for the bringing them up to the Terms of
Salvation, if they are not Effectually Converted already, (whereof I have all
the way before been speaking) I apprehend the Scene is, as it were, quite
changed; and I must stand still upon this, That if any one Receives the Gospel,
and Believes it but so far, (Let not any one then say foolishly, That when I
let those That Will come into the Church, I let in Turks, Jews, Infidels; for
by Receiving the Gospel, i. e. the Doctrine, or Creed of it, I do suppose them
turned Christians) as to be Willing to come in, and be Baptized, whether he
makes any other Profession or not; This is sufficient hereunto, and there is
nothing Else I find required of him; unless we doubt, whether a Man be In
Earnest, and a Christian in his Heart, when he comes; and then are we to Put
the Question to him, and he is to own the Faith: Or unless he be a Profligate,
Scandalous Sinner; who then must make his open Confession, and declare his
Repentance, or be kept out. I see not, but the Owning the True God, in
opposition to all false Religions, and other Gods, was the main Intendment of
the Jews Covenant; and that a Common Faith, (left the word Dogmatical be too
short) which is less than Saving, did suffice to the Entering it, or Taking hold
of it; and that the Unregenerate consequently, as well as the Regenerate, were
in the Intention of God, to be Members of that Church: And I do think, that the
same Latitude ought to be maintained, in regard to the same Kingdom, as it is
now Enlarged over the Nations, and put into Christ's Hands, which belonged to
it before when a Theocracy of the Jews. Indeed, it must be confessed, (lest I
seem Deficient, in waving That before, though once touched upon, which was
needless till Now) That besides their taking God to Worship Him only, there was
a Consent in the Generality likewise to all that Political, Ceremonial, Moral,
External Obedience, which was required in that Covenant, according to those
Words of theirs, All things that the Lord has commanded, we will do: Only,
this must be known withal, that these All Things which they were to do, as the
Matter of that Covenant, in Observing all the Commandments thereof, was short
of the Righteousness of a Regenerate Man, or of that Righteousness that
justifies a Christian. This appears expressly by St. Paul, who was a Pharisee of
the chiefest Sect of the Jews, and Touching the Righteousness of the Law (he
says) blameless; but yet, in point of Justification, he tells us, He Counted it
but Loss, desiring to be Found in Christ, not having his own Righteousness, but
the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. The Apostle by his Own
Righteousness, understands the Righteousness which he had as a Jew; the
Righteousness of Moses's Covenant, described by him thus: And it shall be our
Righteousness, if we observe to do all these Commandments, Deuteronomy. 6.25. and
24.13. It shall be Our Righteousness, that is so, as the Law has nothing
against Such, but that they shall live in the Land, and be Blessed; or that
God, as Rector, shall Reward them with the Temporal Blessings, promised in that
Covenant: But it was never intended, by God, for such a Righteousness, as
should Justify a Man to Life Everlasting; for how then should Enoch, Job,
Melchisedeck, and those Good Men that lived before the Law, have been
Justified? Were they Justified any other ways than we? If Righteousness come by
the Law, then is Christ dead in vain. The Jews indeed generally (that were not
Saducees) thought to obtain Salvation by their Works, according to this
Covenant, which proved so deadly to them. For they being ignorant of God's
Righteousness, and going about to Establish their own Righteousness, did not
submit to the Righteousness of God. This Righteousness of Theirs, and Paul's
Own, (which he calls so, I say, as a Jew; for his Own, as a Christian, he must
have, and be Judged according to it) is that Righteousness whereof Christ
speaks, when He tells his Disciples, that were Jews, Unless your Righteousness
exceeds the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you cannot be saved.
There is a Conformity to the Law, or Covenant of Moses, which is the
Righteousness of the Jew, and so of the Scribes and Pharisees: And there is a
Conformity to the Law, or Covenant of Grace; and This is the Christian
Righteousness, that exceeds the Other. The One consists in External Obedience,
in the Political, Ceremonial, Moral, External Obedience (I say) of That
Covenant: The Other in Sincerity of Heart and Life, accepted through Christ;
which is That, which exceeds the Former. As Abraham's Walking Uprightly before
God, exceeded his being Circumcised. This Righteousness is called the
Righteousness of God, as of his Inventing, Appointing, Accepting, instead of
that Righteousness of Innocent Nature, from whence we are fallen; and it is
called also, the Righteousness of Faith, whereby we are Justified, in
opposition to the Works of the Law; that is, both of the Law of Nature, because
no Man has those Works, and therefore cannot be Justified by them; and of the
Law of Moses, because if a Man had them, he could not be Justified thereby, as
has been now said: So that, here being a Righteousness of One Covenant, which
is Justifying, (for Jesus Christ, by his Merits, procured this Covenant, that
we might be Justified by it; but He died not for the Redemption of Israel out
of Egypt, or the Procuring Moses's Covenant) and the Righteous of Another,
that is Not Justifying; it does appear, that these Covenants must be
Distinguished; and that So, as a Faith, Short of Saving, must be made to
suffice for a Man to enter One, when a Saving One is necessary to the Other;
and consequently, that the Unregenerate, as well as the Regenerate, may be
brought in to be Members of the Charch, or Subjects of God's and Christ's
Kingdom, by being capable of Entering this Covenant belonging thereunto, (a
Covenant of Allegiance); when none can be Members of Christ's Myspical Body, by
Entering the Covenant of Life, but the Regenerate only. If our Church then,
instead of the Three Questions at Baptism, letting the First stand, (supposing
a Dogmatical Faith sufficient for Answer to That) should for the other Two ask,
Do You renounce the Heathenism, Idolatry, Mahometism, or This or That False
Religion, which you Separate from, when you Join with us? And do you intend to
live such a Christian Life in your whole Conversation, as not to Leven the
Society by your Being of it? I must confess, the Answer to these Questions
(supposing we doubt of the Persons, when else there is no necessity of any) in
the Affirmative, were a Qualification plainly necessary to a Man's being
Admitted, and proper to a Covenant of this Nature, which is made for Receiving
Men into such a Society: But when these Covenants are confounded, and the
Baptismal Covenant advanced into the Covenant of Life, so that there are no
less Conditions required of a Person unto his Coming into the Church, and being
Baptized, than unto his Entrance into Everlasting Blessedness; What shall we
say to these things? but that for a through Satisfaction to the whole
Objection, these Interrogatories therefore, and Responses of the Church, (which
have been brought into Baptism by Men, I will suppose for good Reason, at the
time, but not by Christ's Commandment) are to be looked on by none, I hope, as
Essential, or Necessary to the Institution, but may be Omitted, Altered or
Relaxed at her Will; at least, when better Reason appears for it: And they were
Omitted, we know of late, at Home, under the Directory; and are, I suppose, in
most of the Reformed Churches Abroad. Nevertheless, if the Church, when She can
require no more of a Person, but what is necessary to the Conventional
Government of God, and Covenant of Peculiarity, (I mean, can require of him to
do no more, than Consent to the Terms Thereof) so as to Refuse his Admittance
Without It, shall, in regard to the Complex Consideration of God's Government
and Covenant, require an Engagement further unto the Terms that are necessary,
even to Life and Salvation also; so long as it be not made by a Profession, de
praesenti, which must draw Regeneration along with it; but by a
Covenant-Engagement understood aright, and Authenticated by an Interpretation
of the Church, I shall humbly give way Thereunto, both out of Reverence to what
She has hitherto prescribed, as also (and rather) for the Good Use, which Is
(especially in our Catechistical Divinity) and May still be made of it. Only,
as for the Abrenuncio in the Liturgy, I must lodge my Opinion, That either the
Engagement should be declared to be Conditional, or the Question only be
imposed, and the Baptized left to make his own Answer.

If after This you be not satisfied, as judging that no Person Unregenerate can
say, I Engage, (into which, I confess, I would have the word changed) but it is
a Lie, as much as if he said Abrenuncio; Let the Church make her
Interpretation, with the Change of the Word, and I am not of your Mind:
Nevertheless, I will Answer you also otherwise. If the Church were willing to
turn her Abrenuncio to a Polliceor, and That Will Not serve; then may She turn it
into some other Words, [God grant I may] as Will serve: And I doubt not, but if
the Person, that is tender of the Form imposed, makes his Answer in such Words
as he can, with a good Conscience, and without Doubting, it were better than in
those Prescribed; seeing it is not Words, nor Works, but a Man's Will, (as I
humbly understand) or a Man's Consent, a Believing Consent, or a Consent upon
Believing; that is, Believing the Gospel Preached, and Consent to come in, and
be Baptized, (that no Body may mistake my Meaning) upon the Account of General
Grace, is the Gospel's, Christ's, and his Apostle's Rule of Admission. Suffer
them to come unto Me, and forbid them not.

In the Going Off, I cannot but take notice, how the Want of a more Timely, or
more Through Consideration of what I have Insisted upon; to wit, this
Distinction of the Covenants and Government of God; and the Necessity thereof,
has led some Eminent Divines into the Particular Opinion, That Children are to
be held in the Same State with their Parents, in regard to Salvation, as well
as in regard to their Outward Privileges, as they were Jews or Christians: But
I will humbly offer it to their Consideration, whether there be any Places in
Scripture, that speak of the Parents entering Covenant for their Children, or of
the Covenant being made With them, or To them, and their Children after them;
but it is to be understood of the Covenant of Peculiarity, and not of the
Covenant for Salvation. The Covenant God Establishes between Him and Abraham,
and his Seed after him, is manifestly the Covenant of Circumcision, Genesis 17. v.
7. with v. 10. And that Covenant He Enters with the Jews for Posterity, ( Deuteronomy.
29.9. -- 15.) is but the same Covenant enlarged, and expressly Distinguished
from the New Covenant, (which is the Covenant of Grace, or Covenant for Life)
in Heb. 8. v. 9, 10. When therefore a Right to the Privileges of that Covenant
is soundly argued for Children, from their Parents being in it; and the
Baptizing our Children as Christians, as the Jews Circumcised theirs, stands
firm on the same Bottom, because the Covenant of Peculiarity takes in the
Children with the Parent, by God's Ordination, [I will Establish my Covenant
between Me and Thee, and thy Seed after thee]; it follows not, that we may
argue the same thing, as to the Covenant for Life. In Ezekiel. 18. All Souls are
Mine, (says God) as the Soul of the Father, so the Soul of the Son. The Son
shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father. The Soul that sins, it shall die.
In Romans 9. it is said of Jacob and Esau, That while they were Yet unborn, God
said, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated; which though it be spoken (I
believe) of their Posterity, and in regard to their Temporal Inheritance; yet
does it carry, methinks, a Figure in it of something farther; to wit, That the
Eternal State of Children (while Infants) depends not on the Condition of the
Parents, (which was here the Same to Both) but on God's Free Election. Above
all, if the Salvation of Children depends on the Faith and State of the Parent;
as this is comfortable Doctrine to the Sound Believer, whose Infants therefore
must be Saved: so must it follow, That all the Children of the Unregenerate,
though their Parents be Christians, and bring them to Baptism, must be
inevitably damned: Which is a Consequence too hard upon the Church, and harder
in it self than can be borne. Let the Case here of Adam alone be set by.

I must note farther, How through want of the same Distinction insisted on, and
Application of the Light of it to our CAUSE, some Worthy Men, who have gone
before me, have Faltered in it. It is not for any one to tell us of a Faith,
short of Saving, (called by them Dogmatical) that suffices to Enter Covenant
with God, while they think of no other Covenant, but That which gives Pardon
and Life upon a Faith that is Saving, and None else: Whereas, let the
Government of God, and Covenants thereof, be distinguished, and then shall the
Distinguishing of Faith also suit with it. For when there is no Faith, less
than Saving, sufficient for a Man to Enter into the Covenant of Life, (it being
a Contradiction, to think we should Live by a Faith, that is less than Saving);
yet did a Faith, (call it Dogmatical, or what you will) which consists in the
Owning of the only true God, and his Worship, in opposition to all false Gods,
and false Worship, (which Faith may be separate from Sincere Obedience) suffice
to the General Body of Israel, for their Entering that Covenant, (for This was
the Main of it) which God made with them, When He took them by the Hand, to
lead them out of the Lard of Egypt. Let any prove, That the Faith of the Whole
Body of Israel, could come to any More. Besides This, that Faith alone, and
That only which lies in an Assent, could say Amen to the Curses; which making a
Man obnoxious to the Minatory Part of the Covenant, must put him in Covenant
Conditionally, in regard also to the Promissory Part with it. And the Truth is,
a Faith of Assent, a Belief of a God, and that his Word is True, does lay an
Obligation on the Conscience, which none can have that Believe not: And though
a Resolution of doing what may escape the Threat, be Another thing (called
Consent) than that bare Obligation; yet so long as the Obligation it self is
laid thereby, whether a Dogmatical Faith goes not farther into the Covenanting
Act, than some Men are aware, I commit to their farther Consideration. And as
for the Covenant whereof I am speaking, which I have said, was a Political
Covenant between God and Them, as King and Subject, Lord and People, and such
an Owning Him as a Dogmatical Faith suffices to, was the main Substance and
Intendment of it, as their departing to Idolatry was the Chief (if not Only)
Breach of it, as I have also noted, I do take it to be that Covenant, which was
repeated often by their good Rulers. In the Time of Asa, a great Confluence of
Persons are summoned together, and it is said, They Covenanted to seek the Lord
with all their Heart, 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 15. If by this Covenanting we understand
a Resolution of Universal Obedience, according to the Covenant for Salvation; I
cannot see well, how this could be said of such a Mixed Multitude: But if it be
understood of a Refreshing the Covenant mentioned, and a Seeking the Lord, in
opposition mainly to Idolatry, (as indeed it must be so understood, comparing
Verse. 8.16.) then may we apprehend likewise, how These Men (the most of Them)
might have a Faith less than Saving; and yet (secundum quid) do This from their
Hearts. And Jehoiada made a Covenant between the Lord, and the King and People,
That they should be the Lord's People; and between the King, and the People, 2
King. 11.17. What was the Covenant between King and People, but a kind of Oath
of Allegiance to him, in opposition to Athaliah's Faction? And what was the
Covenant between the Lord and Them, but the like higher Allegiance to Him, as
their Supreme Lord, in opposition to Baal, as appears in the next Verse? Here
is a Covenant, we see, unto Which nothing but the want of a Dogmatical Faith
could be a Bar; and nothing requisite to Enter it, but the believing that God
was the only True God. And as for that Qualification, it is most certain, that
the Israelites had it in the Whole Body of them, when they first Covenanted
this Covenant with God, as their King, in the Time of Moses; who were under
such a Conviction at the Appearing of God himself to them, as never had any the
like under the whole Cope of Heaven; so that, neither Man, nor Woman, nor
Child, that were capable of Seeing and Believing, could be under Unbelief: Yet
can I not think, that many of them had Saving Faith, whose Carcasses all of
them, save Two or Three, fell afterward in the Wilderness. Let me come now
then from this Church in the Wilderness, to the Christian Church under the
Gospel, into Which Men are Entered by Baptism. And what is here the Covenant of
Christianity? The Words of Christ's Institution are these only: Go, Baptize in
the Name of the Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost: Which Words, undoubtedly, do
import thus much; to wit, An Owning the Blessed Trinity to be that Only True
God, whom the Jews owned in their Covenant before. And what Else, but the
Consequences of it, who can say? Unto This now, such a Faith, which is
Dogmatical, does appear absolutely necessary; and was therefore required of the
Eunuch. I believe Christ to be the Son of God. But if the Church, by her
Additions to Baptism, has made more Qualification necessary to them, than
Christ to his Institution, so that no Adult Person, whose Faith is less than
Saving, can, without a Lie, make these Responses; what shall I say, but that
She may Diminish what She has Added, and has Power over her own Additions to
Change them, or Interpret them; and delare, That She understands them in a
Covenant Construction.

The last Objection, as to this Doctrine in hand, is the innumerable
Testimonies of Modern and Ancient Divines, that Are, and May be cited for the
received Opinion, against What I have proposed: Unto Which I have also some
Little to say. I remember well, that Austine has one Book, which especially
touches the Point. It is de Fide and Operibus. The Case was This: There were
Persons, who, while they were Heathens, had put Away their Wives, and Married
Others; and some had Concubines. They are Loath to part with this Custom; and
yet Willing to be Baptized. Augustine gives his Judgment, That if they Would
not, they are not to be Admitted: Concluding in the Main, That it is not enough
for a Man's Admission to the Church, to Own the True Faith, if his Life be not
suitable to God's Commandments. I remember likewise, that Eminent Passage of
Justin Martyr, in his Second Apology; who having told of the Christian
Assemblies, and what they did There, as to their whole Exercises, he adds, That
they did Admit none to this Fellowship with them, (more particularly, in the
Eucharist) but such as Lived, as they ought to do, like Christians: (...).
There is a Life therefore, or such Sins, which are not consistent with a State
of Grace, or not consistent with the State of Membership, or the State of that
Society into which we Enter. I will suppose, with these Fathers, that such a
Life, or such Sins, that will not consist with the State of Membership, or the
Common Good of the Society, when it will Leven and Destroy it, may keep a
Person from Admission: but not such a Life, or Sins only, which are not
consistent with Regeneration. The Truth is, the Church looks not into the
Heart, or to Effectual Grace, which is known only to God, that tries it; and
consequently, is not to require such a Profession as is requisite to a
Judgment Thereof; which the Congregationalists yet therefore do: But the
Church is to look indeed, that her Society be kept Pure from Scandal; or that
That be Purged out, which would Defame and Leven it, so far as stands most to
her Preservation. This I take to be sufficient, as to the Mind of these
Fathers, St. Augustine especially; who is One, we know every where, that is
open for Tolerating the Evil, rather than Disturb the Churches Peace; as, in
good earnest, for the Casting them Out, when it will do the Church good.

The Church, even the Catholic Church, as One, is with him still, as I
remember, the Field in the Gospel, which does consist of Tares and Wheat; even
such Tares as are Discerned among the Wheat, and yet are to stand unto
Judgment. And there is one Argument I must not let pass, before I have done,
but produce out of him, in respect to our Congregational Brethren; for I know
no kind of thing almost more Unanswerable and Convincing. It is the express
Command of our Lord to his Servants, That they Pull not the Tares up, when it
will Endanger the Wheat to be Rooted up with them: From whence that Judicious
and most Temperate Father, lays down this Rule, which will serve for deciding
many Difficulties and Scruples. That when we can Root out any Tare without hurt
to the Wheat, we are to be careful of Discipline; and all those Texts, which
speak of keeping no Company with Such, and the like, are to be pressed: But
when we cannot Pull up the Tares without Endangering the Corn, we must, for the
Churches Advantage and Peace, be content to Suffer them; and be satisfied with
such Texts as these, which say, Let them alone till the Harvest. Now, there are
none of the Moderate, Pious and Learned of any of our Sects, who Do, who Dare
deny, but that there are some true Christians, and Members of Christ, in our
Mixed Churches. But to Vn-Church a whole Nation, and all our Parishes at once,
by this Congregational Practice and Opinion, is certainly to Eradicate the
Wheat with the Tares, beyond all Possibility of Answer. If the Servant may not
Pluck up the Tares, if it will but Endanger any of the Single Wheat, how shall
he dare to Root up the Whole Wheat, on purpose for the Tares sake? When the
Lord does say, Let it stand, who art thou, my Independent Brother, that go
to meddle with it? There is indeed a Separate Church, as a Mixed Church: But the
Mixed Church remains in This Life; and the Separate Church is not be expected
till a Future State The Church is the House, wherein are Vessels of Silver, and
Vessels of Wood: Those of Wood are for use, as those of Silver; and the Master
intends both shall be There. The Church is the Net, that takes the Fish, little
and great; and it is intended all should be Taken, which are within its reach.
The Church is the Feast, unto Which all are Called; and the Lord of it intends,
that Whosoever Will, should come to it. The Church is the Field, whereof I am
speaking: And it is objected, The Field is said to be the World, and the Enemy
is said to Sow the Tares; therefore, it was not God's Intention, they should be
In it. I Answer; Here are Two Objections, and One confounds the Other. If the
Field be the World, you cannot object, God would not have the Tares There; for
God will have Good and Bad in the World, out of question. The Field therefore
must be the Church, as the Feast is; and it is God's Will, that All should be
Called to come In to it. It is his Will, that they should Come also, as they
ought to Come. This is the Intention of their Call; and Both are his Will. It
is true now, Of Those that Come, some are Tares; and it is of the Devil, that
they are Tares: Some have not the Wedding Garment; and it is of the Devil, they
Come without it: But if they Come for all that, they must be Let in. The Rule
is this, Whosoever will, let him come; and though Tares, they must Stand.
Parables (our Divines say well) are like Knives, whereof the Edge, and not the
Back, is for use; and the Main Scope (take the Parables together) appears
plainly to be this, That the Church in This World, (for That is the Meaning of
Christ's saying, The Field is the World) is Mixed; and the Separation is not to
be (as I said even now) till the Life to come. Thus do the Fathers speak
against the Donatists: And whereas in the Discipling of Nations, the Refusing
one Person, or some few Persons, as Tares, might hinder the Coming in of a
Country, I perceive, in such a Case, according to the Judgment of this
Discreet Father, it were but a Shallow Conceit to think, that when they Are In,
they may Stand; but may not be Admitted upon the same Terms as they are let
Stand: Though in the common Case of others, I have provided against the main
Objection upon my Hands, in the Stating my Mat^er; who say, That when a Man
believes the Gospel, and is Willing to Come in, if he live in any open
notorious Sin, as would Excommunicate one that Is a Member, he may be required
to declare his Repentance, or be Refused upon the same Account. It is but one
Exercise of the Keys, to Keep a Man Out, as to Turn him Out, when there is the
same Reason. And this must ordinarily needs be for the Good of the Wheat. But
when there is a Willingness upon the Gospel Preached, and there be no such
Reason to hinder, I am for gainsaying no Bodies Admission. Whatsoever Passages
there be then in the Fathers, or Other Men, that run in an higher Strain than
This comes to, they are to be Reduced (I will account) to this Model, or to be
seasoned with the same Interpretation.

I will Conclude yet with One Authority, which seems to me to incline to my
Cause, with Declination from the common Opinion. Our British Divines, in the
Synod of Dort, upon the Fifth Article, De Perseverantia Sanctorum, have these
Theses. Quihusdam non Electis conceditur quaedam Illuminatio Supernaturalis,
cujus virtute intelligunt ea quae in Verbo Dei annunciantur essa vera,
iisdemque assensum praebent minime simulatum. To some Persons, not Elect, God
does afford a certain Supernatural Illumination, by virtue whereof they
understand those things which are declared in the Word of God to be true; and
do give an Assent to them not counterfeit. In iisdem ex hac Cognitione and Fide
oritur affectuum quaedam mutatio, and morum aliqualis emendatio. Out of such a
Knowledge and Faith as this, in the same Persons, does there arise some kind of
Change in their Affections, and Amendment of their Lives. Ex his initialibus,
etiam per externa Obedientiae opera testatis sumuntur, and Charitatis judicio
sumi debent pro Credentibus, Justificatis, Sanctificatis. From these Initials,
or this beginning Work upon such, are they, and ought they to be held for
Believers, Justified, Sanctified, who never come up to a State of Saving Grace;
that from the Falling-away of such, the Perseverance of the truly Godly should
be impugned: as they proceed in their next Theses, which concern not this
Argument.

From these Positions now I note, That when the common Opinion of the
Protestants is, That no less than a Saving Faith and Repentance, or
Regeneration, is necessary to Membership and Baptism, here appears, in these
Divines, something that is Singular; who do make a Work of Common Grace upon
People, that is less than Saving, to be the Ground of our Holding them to be
Such as Those are, who are the most Qualified Members. The Common Opinion will
have Persons make a Profession of a Saving Faith, or Regenerating Grace; and it
must be of no less than Such: and then we are to reckon them, in the Judgment
of Charity, to Be what they Profess, unless we have Proof to the contrary. This
is our ordinary Judgment of Charity; and so Men are Visible Members (as they
speak) upon a Lie, or upon a Ground that is False: But these Judicious Divines
will have us reckon Men Believers, Saints, Justified, Sanctified, upon an
Initial Work of Grace, that is Short of Saving; and This is a Judgment of
Charity, upon a Ground that is True. The Call of the Gospel is Universal: Those
Persons that will Come in, so Far as they Will, are to be Received: The End why
they are Called, is, That they should all come in Fully, as the Elect do. The
Whole Number, for That Part sake as come in So, have these Denominations, as
being in the way to obtain the same End. This is that Judgment of Charity these
Divines would Establish; and it is not upon a Falsehood, as the Other is.

There are Two or Three things nevertheless, that are lacking in their
Judgment. One is, When an Initial Faith, Repentance or Grace, short of Saving,
is made by them a Ground sufficient in Charity to Receive Men Into the Church,
and To Baptism, so long as it suffices to Denominate Men so, as qualifies them
for Members: They should hold the same Grace a Ground Sufficient also for their
Own Coming. Another is, Whereas they make an Initial Work of Faith and
Repentance to be Sufficient for their Reception in the Judgment of Charity;
They should hold it to be So in the Judgment of Verity, upon the Universal
Grace of the Gospel. The Third and Chief thing wanting, is to tell, If a Work
of Grace on the Soul, short of Saving, be able indeed to give a Man Right to
Membership, and the Sacraments; unto what Degree then it must come. If it be
Initial only, and yet not Saving, how much Grace is it, how much Faith, how
much Repentance is it, that will serve? Are we able to set any Stint, until we
come to Saving? I Answer, Yes. We have Pitched the Measure, we have Fixed the
Point. Such a Work of Initial Grace, or of Faith, such an Initial Faith, or so
much Faith as brings the Man up to be Willing, is it: This is the Measure, this
is the Degree. It is the Answer to the Question, Will thou be Baptized in this
Faith? I say, These words of Answer, I Will, gives a Man Right both to Come,
and to be Admitted. Let me say it over in other words. It is a Faith receiving
the Doctrine of the Gospel, and Advancing to the Degree, as makes a Man Willing
to come Into the Society of Christians, and so own Christ our King; (for there
are some may Believe, and yet not be Willing to Own Christianity, Joh. 12.42,
43. as some may Believe, and be Willing to Come in, and yet their Faith be
Short of Saving, Jam. 2.18, 26.) that is, Fides Dogmatica, I may say, Consensu
Formata, upon the Account of General Grace, as the Fundamentum Juris, does give
Title to Church Communion. Neither do I think, but that These so much
acknowledged Excelling Divines, would themselves have also proceeded Thus Far,
if they had understood This Bottom, and that their Matter led them to it.

I know, they that lay Another Rule, do honestly intend the Purity of the
Church: But either This Rule shall be Backed by a Law; and then it will be a
Strainer in Show; but instead of Keeping the Church pure, it will but Strain
the Tender and Scrupulous; the Careless and Vnconcern'd will Prosess any thing
that is Imposed, as I have observed before, in its Place: Or it shall have no
Power, but that of the Word and Conscience, as in the Primitive Times; and I
must then suggest this, That where One went to Heaven when the Church was Pure,
there are Twenty, a Thousand since it was Enlarged and Corrupt. England might
have been a Pagan Kingdom to this Day, if they that Planted in it the Christian
Religion, had stood in good earnest upon these Terms, and pressed them as the
Congregationalists do. And were the Rule indeed Christ's, what a horrible deal
of Guilt must there lie on the Ministers, since Constantine's Time, unto whom
Christ committed the Keys of his House, to Let In none but Subjects qualified
according to That Rule; and they Let in whole Parishes, Kingdoms, Countries
into it? Alas, that none but those of the Novatian, Donatist, Brownist Sects
should have delivered their own Souls! You complain, that the Bad Come In; but
I would fain know, whether you think any were ever the Better, that have Kept
Out?

And now, what remains, but that The Spirit says Come, and the Bride says Come;
and whosoever will, let him Come? If Men will come Quite Home to a Saving
Faith, Sound Repentance, and the Love of God above All, it is That which they
should Do; and in so Doing, they shall be Partakers of the Saving Benefits of
the Gospel, Church and Covenant: If they will come no Farther, than to Submit
to the External Administration of the Ordinances, they are yet to be Received
so Far as they Will come; and, in the Use of the Means, we are to expect they
should be brought Farther, even to Effectual Conversion and Salvation.

Deo Gloria, mihi Condonatio. J. H.

Reader,
THere happening this Leaf to remain vacant, I will fill it up with a Letter,
which I had but just now from a Private Christian, to whom I Communicated
several of these Sheets, before the Last was wrought off at the Press; he being
a Man who has considered these Things, and of known Integrity to the Church;
whose Letter also will have its Use: Or else, I confess, I should have chose
rather to have left it for the Bookseller to have filled with a Catalogue of
Books.

The Author.

SIR,
YOU were not mistaken in thinking, as You told me, That this Book would agree
with my Sentiments, touching the Latitude of the Church. It seems to me to have
much in it, not to be found elsewhere, and that Matter momentous, striking at
the Root of our Divisions about Church Communion.

You have well observed, That God is never behind hand with Men, in a
Willingness to any thing that tends to their Salvation; and therefore, the
Church must not be so. And indeed, there is so great Advantage by Coming into
the Church, given to Men Thereunto, that I wonder any should oppose it. The
Word is nigh them, in their Mouth, and in their Heart. There is no Part of the
Christian Church, where every Member, that comes to the Use of Reason, does not
learn the chief Doctrines of Christianity, contained in the Creed, without
Book; which have a mighty force to bring Men to Repentance, and an Holy Life.
And as this is so great Advantage to Them, so it is no Means to corrupt the
Church, so long as the Discipline of Christ is observed, which you take care of.

I know no other Book, that has given me so clear an Understanding of the
Church, and Kingdom of God and Christ, together with the Covenant of Allegiance
proper to it. That has proposed the Rule (which you have particularly recited,
p. 75. and 140.) for Admitting his Subjects into the same. That has laid this
Rule on its right Foundation, which is the General Grace of the Gospel, so
exactly defined to the End, (p. 16. to 21.) That has carried the Cause through
all its Difficulties, at you have done. This is the Opinion of

Your Engaged Friend, Thomas Seymor.


