THE Righteousness of God Revealed in the GOSPEL.

OR, An IMPARTIAL ENQUIRY into the Genuine Doctrine of St. PAVL, In the Great,
but much Controverted ARTICLE of JUSTIFICATION.

By Mr. JOHN HUMFREY.

Of making Books there is no End; and much Study is a Weariness to the Flesh.
Let us hear the Conclusion of the Matter, Fear God and keep his Commandments
for this is the whole of Man,

Ec. 12.13, 14. LONDON, Printed for T. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns
in Cheapside, 1697.

TO THE READER.
HAVING seriously read this Treatise concerning the Justification of a Sinner,
I sound so clear and distinct an Account given of it, that, as it gave me no
small Satisfaction, so I could not but think it worthy to be perused by others.
For though the Learned Author departs, in some things, from the common Opinion,
yet he does it so modestly, that candid Persons, though contrary minded, will
not blame him for it: And his Reasons are such, that it is possible they may be
convinced by them, and persuaded to embrace his Explication of this weighty
Doctrine.

However, his Drift and Intention is so evidently Holy, [ viz. to prevent Men's
falling into the most dangerous Errors] that he may hope for their Pardon, who
think him not to be altogether in the Right himself. For as to the main
Business, no Man more strenuously asserts the Doctrine of our Church, of
Justification by Faith only; accorto the Explication which is made of it in our
Homilies (in the Second Part of the Sermon of Salvation) in these Words.

This Saying, That we be justified by Faith only, freely and without Works, is
spoken for to take away clearly all Merit of our Works; as being unable to
deserve our Justification at God's Hands: And thereby most plainly to express
the Weakness of Man, and the Goodness of God; the great Infirmity of our selves
and the Might and Power of God; the Imperfectness of our own Works, and the
most abundant Grace of our Savior Christ; and therefore wholly to ascribe the
Merit and deserving of our Justification, unto Christ only, and his most
precious Bloodshedding.

But although this Doctrine be never so true (as it there follows) that we be
justified freely, without all Merit of our own Good Works (as St. Paul does
express it) and freely by this lively and perfect Faith in Christ only (as the
ancient Authors use to speak it) yet this true Doctrine must be also truly
understood, and most plainly declared; lest carnal Men should take unjustly
occasion thereby to live carnally, after the appetite and will of the World,
the Flesh and the Devil.

Now this being the very Scope of this Author, to declare the right
Understanding of this Doctrine, so plainly that no Man may thereby take any
Occasion of Carnal Liberty; he hopes his Endeavor will be acceptable to all
those that love the Lord Jesus in Sincerity. Amen.

Nov. 24. 1696. SY. ELIENS.

Worcester, Apr. 7. 1697. SIR,
THE Papers you were pleased to send me I have carefully perused; and I am not
without Hopes, that through the Blessing of God, they may allay those
unreasonable Heats, which have made so great a Noise, about the Point of
Justification: and yet we are told, that they all agree in the Doctrine of
Christ's Satisfaction, and the Covenant of Grace, as founded upon it. But we
find by too common Experience, that it is possible for Men upon their own
Mistakes to grow as warm in this Matter, as if they were disputing with the
Jews, as St. Paul did in his Epistle to the Romans. But if such Persons would
lay aside Prejudices, and Impartially consider the State of the Case at that
Time, they would far better understand this Controversy, and not think so
hardly of their Brethren.

For, nothing can be plainer to me, than that St. Paul opposes that which he
calls, The Righteousness of God by Faith, Romans 1.17.3.21.10.3.
to their own Righteousness, which was by the Law: And which made the Reward
not of Grace, but of Debt. And Faith is taken by him as a Term opposite to the
Law, and importing the Grace of the Gospel; Therefore it is of Faith that it
might be of Grace. Phil. 3.5.
So that Justification by Faith is in other Words, being justified by the Grace
of the Gospel, Romans 3.27, 28.4.15.
manifested by the Doctrine of Christ, and procured by his Sufferings: which
are granted, both by them and us, to be the only meritorious Cause of our
Justification. The remaining Dispute then, can only be concerning those Terms
on which we may be made Partakers of this Grace of the Gospel, which is
communicated to Mankind, as the Effect of Christ's Satisfaction. Which is very
different from that which St. Paul managed, against all such as set up their
own Works (whether according to the Law of Nature, or of Moses) against the
Gospel of Christ, and thought there was no necessity of any such Propitiation
by Christ, as St. Paul asserted, in order to the Remission of Sins and the
Favor of God. For, the Jews believed, that the Righteousness of the Law, as it
was performed by them, was sufficient in order to their Acceptance with God;
and that there was such a Proportion between their Works and the Favor of God,
as made it a Debt of Justice. Which Opinion remains among them to this Day, as
appears by this Saying of Manasseh Ben-Israel, Hinc meritis Gratiam Dei acquiri
non est Dubitandam. By which it seems, that the Jews have not altered their
Opinions since the Apostles Days; but all that understand Christianity aright,
do agree, that there is no other meritorious Cause of our Acceptance with God,
but the Propitiation which Christ has made. Colos. 1.14.
In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins.
Titus 3.5, 6.
And not by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his
Mercy he saved us; that being justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs
according to the Hope of Eternal Life.

But here comes the material Question to be resolved; How we come to receive
the Benefits of Christ's Sufferings?

To answer this Distinctly, we must consider them Two Ways:

1. As they respect Mankind, or those in General for whom Christ died. 2. As
they belong to Particular Persons.
The former are those Benefits which result from God's Acceptance of Christ's
Sacrifice on behalf of Mankind; which the Apostle calls, God's being in Christ,
2 (...). 5.19.
reconciling the World to himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them: If
this be meant of actual Pardon, then all the Sins of the World are not imputed
upon Christ's Death, without any Act on their Parts; and so the Ministry of
Reconciliation would be to no purpose; which the Apostle immediately adds, was
committed to them. To what End, if the Sins of the World were already forgiven?
But the Apostle says, v. 20. That it was to persuade Men to be reconciled to
God: i. e. to believe and repent and obey the Gospel. For what Reason? If not,
that thereby they might actually partake of these general Benefits which arise
from that Reconciliation Christ has made by his Death? Which can suppose no
Conditions in us, being the immediate Effects of Christ's Propitiation, and
must be distinguished from what follows, Reconciliation on our Parts.

But as to the Particular Effects, belonging to some Persons, as distinguished
from others, the Question arises, Whether God out of his infinite Goodness, do
bestow them on those whom he designs for Happiness without regard to any Act of
theirs? Or whether by the Gospel, be has limited the Conveyance of them to the
Performance of certain Conditions? There is no Question, but that if nothing
but Freeness of Grace be to be looked at, that is much freer, which requires no
Conditions, nor expects any: But if they be expected, whether out of Gratitude,
or otherwise, they are real Conditions as to the End. But we are to look not
only to the Freeness of God's Grace, (which no doubt was the Foundation of the
Covenant of Grace) but to the Author, and to the Terms of it.

The Author of it is God himself, who out of his Infinite Goodness has sent
his Son to be a Propitiation for our Sins; and we cannot suppose any Covenant
made by him to be repugnant to the Perfections of the Divine Nature. Now,
Holiness and Righteousness are essential Attributes of God; and any such
Covenant, which in the Consequence of it, overthrows the Rules of Righteousness
and Holiness, must be look's on, as contrary to the Pure and Holy Nature of
God. But such a Covenant as consists only in absolute Promises (if it can be
called a Covenant) must supersede any Obligation on Man's Part to any Duty, as
a Condition of enjoying the Benefit of those Promises; and consequently
overthrow the Rules of Righteousness. Psalm. 11.7.
But the Righteous Lord loves Righteousness. And he that does Righteousness is
Righteous, 1 John 3.7.
even as he is Righteous. How is it then possible to conceive, that God should
make such a Covenant of Grace with Mankind, as should have no regard to the
Practice of real Righteousness? And this Supposition must lessen our esteem of
the Divine Nature and Perfections, overthrow the Design of Religion, and make
God a Respecter of Persons, by taking no Notice of their inward Qualities and
Dispositions.

Which are things of such dangerous Consequence, that I can hardly believe that
any who pretend to love the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity should entertain
such Principles, from whence they do too naturally follow. For, if any Person
should make it his Business to render Christianity suspected, as a Design to
Promote Libertinism, under a Pretense of advancing Free Grace, he could not
make use of any Hypothesis more effectual than this; That God requires no
Conditions in order to the Benefit of his Promises. But to suppose that God is
so Gracious, as to forgive the Sins of truly humble and penitent Sinners, who
resolve by the Grace of God to depart from Iniquity, and to live as becomes the
Gospel, is so far from any Incongruity to the Divine Nature, that it tends more
to advance our Apprehensions of God's Goodness joined with his Wisdom and
Holiness; and so brings Mankind to a due Love of God, and a Hatred of Sin.

As to the Terms of this Covenant, I think it not possible for any unprejudiced
Person to read the New Testament, and not to see, that it still supposes
Conditions on our parts, to make us Partakers of the Benefit of Christ's
Sufferings. But it is possible for Men to be so fond of a particular Opinion,
which they have before taken up, that they may accommodate all places to that
darling Notion; I mean as to the absolute freeness of God's Grace. Which, if it
be pursued, must everthrow as well the Satisfaction of Christ, as the
Conditions on our Part.

But here lies the great Difficulty; How can we be justified without a perfect
righteousness? And our own Performances at the best make but an imperfect
Righteousness; and therefore the perfect Righteousness of Christ must be
imputed to us: And if a perfect Righteousness to be joined for our
Justification?

This is the Force of all the Reasoning I have met with about this Matter, to
which I shall give a plain and dictinct Answer:

1. I am far from disowning the Righteousness of Christ to have been a perfect
Righteousness; or that it is the only meritorious Cause of our Justification.
Or, to speak plainer, I do freely own the Satisfaction of Christ to be the
Foundation of the Covenant of Grace, by Virtue whereof we are justified.

2. That to be justified is to be put into a State of Grace and Favor with
God. I do not mean, that we are justified by Inherent Righteousness; i. e. that
God justifies when he gives Grace; but that upon our sincere performance of the
Conditions on our part, God receives us into a State of Favor or Grace. And so
deals with us as with righteous Persons; and not merely declares us to be such.
For although the Word Justifying be often used as a Forensick Word, or a Law
Term, and so is opposed to Condemning; yet that Use is not to be pressed too
far: because it will enclose us in many Difficulties about the Tribunal, the
Law, the Plea, the judicial Act, and the several Causes, Material and Formal,
etc. all which, I think, tend more to darken than to clear this Point of
Justification, which ought to be kept out of School Terms and Logical Niceties,
as much as possible; since St. Paul did not speak according to them in this
Matter. For so Adoption is Originally a Law Term used likewise by St. Paul, and
it would be hard straining to bring Adoption to all the Formalities of the
Roman Law.

If we look into the Design of St. Paul, we shall find it was to state the true
Ground of our Acceptance with God; which he shows could not be from any thing
Mankind were able of themselves to perform in obedience to the Law, because
they were under guilt, and could never clear themselves from it. But God has
set forth his Son to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, Romans 325, 26.
to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins, etc. To declare at
this time his Righteousness, that he might be Just and the Justifier of him
that believes in Jesus.

So that here we have the Foundation or Meritorious Cause, the Propitiation of
Christ; the Goodness of God in accepting this Propitiation in order to
Remission and Justification; and the way we come to partake of it by Faith in
Christ; as it embraces these Offers, and carries along with it those sincere
Endeavors obeying the Gospel, which God accepts as our Evangelical
Righteousness. But to be Justified in St. Paul's Sense, is to be admitted into
the Grace and Favor of God on those Terms; and so it does not lie barely in
Remission of Sins, which is rather the Consequence of this Acceptance with God.
Romans 3.28.
Therefore we conclude, that a Man is justified by Faith, without the Deeds of
the Law; i. e. A man is received into the Favor of God, not by his own Works,
but according to the Grace of the Gospel, and the Terms contained therein. And
this I take to be St. Paul's meaning.

3. The Righteousness of Christ may be said to be imputed two ways.

1. So as it becomes our Personal Righteousness, which is called Formal
Imputation. 2. So as the Benefit of Christ's Righteousness and Satisfaction,
redounds to our Advantage.
If the former Sense be allowed, these Consequences follow:

1. That we must be as Righteous as Christ was; for, if Personal Righteousness
can be transferred, the Person on whom it is transferred, must have that very
Righteousness which was in Christ himself; and so must be as Holy and Innocent
as he was; which I hardly think any will pretend to. 2. That there can be no
Remission of Sin, as to such who have this perfect Righteousness, no more than
there could be to Christ himself; Imputation for Remission of Sin, and of
Personal Righteousness are inconsistent: For the one must suppose Guilt, and
the other cannot; when the Personal Righteousness is actually imputed. There
may be antecedent Guilt before the Imputation; but where there is perfect
Righteousness actually imputed, there can be no personal Guilt; for if there
be, it can be no perfect Righteousness as to him. 3. That there can be no
Conditions required, where a perfect Righteousness is imputed. For a Condition
is in order to something to be obtained; but here the full Benefit is already
received by the Imputation of a perfect Righteousness; and it is absurd to
suppose Conditions for the obtaining of what is past. It cannot then be denied,
that those speak consonantly enough to this Hypothesis, who exclude all
Conditions from the new Covenant; but very dangerously as to the Design of
Charity; since our Savior himself bids us to pray to God to forgive our
Trespasses, as we forgive others; which I think supposes a Condition on our
Parts in order to Remission. But if no more be meant by Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, but that the Sufferings of Christ were in our stead, and for our
Advantage as to Remission and Justification, I do most heartily and freely own
it. 4. The Apostles Argument against Merit and Boasting, do by no means hold
against such an Evangelical Righteousness as comes from the Grace of God, and
tends wholly to the Honor of it: which is so clear that I need not to prove
it.
This is a short Account of my Thoughts in this Matter; and I think we do not
differ in the Substance, however we may in the manner of Explication. I am

Your Friend and Servant, ED. WIGORN.

Mr. Humfrey, Chester, Apr. 12. 1997.
I Received by Piecemeal, as it came from the Press all your Book entitled,
Of the Righteousness of God in the Matter of Justification (except the Title
Page and the Epistle) which I read over, as it came to my Hands, with Pleasure
and Profit. The great Doctrine of Justification, is by you stated more
agreeably to the Scriptures, than I have met with it, in any other Author. You
do, I confess, in some Places express your Sense obscurely, so that it may
perhaps be mistaken by unwary Readers: but if in those Places I rightly
apprehend your Meaning, I do not at present remember any thing I have to object
against it. However, I intend the next Week to read over the whole together,
and if any Objections shall then occur to my Thoughts, you shall hear further
from me. It will, I doubt not, be a good Antidote against the Antinomian
Doctrines, which some Persons who decry, do implicitly and by necessary
Consequence assert, by the false Notion they have entertained of Christ's
imputed Righteousness. I am SIR,

Your Affectionate Brother, N. CESTRIENS.

An ADVERTISEMENT from the Author.
READER,
TO make a stay to camulate more Testimony to this Book, though of the like
Right Reverend Persons, to no other end but to signify their Consent or
Approbation of it, might give thee Occasion to censure me for a seeker of vain
Glory (which does little become such a one as I) rather than thy Edification. I
will use this spare Leaf therefore to another Purpose.

When I reprinted my Middle way of Justification which I printed at first about
25 Years ago, I thought of writing no more on that Point: But afer a while,
there being something I conceived needful for Finishing my Work, I took
occasion from the Difference among our United Brethren, in a single Sheet,
called, my [One Sheet] to draw up a Conclusion of the whole Matter, so thoroughly
(as I could) to my own Mind, intending it for my last, that I cannot think fit
this Book, being now later, and like to be canvased more than the other, should
come abroad without it, as the Substance of this, as well as that Book before,
and that I have wrote between, or any else I can write on this Subject. Having
therefore this little room to fill, I cannot consult my Own Content and Thy
Profit better than to do it with this Citation from thence, as follows:

To understand aright St. Paul's Justification by Faith, we must consider with
whom it is he contends. The Jews (as the best skilled in Rabbinical Learning,
does tell us) did generally maintain the Doctrine of Freewill, not doubting but
every one could do as God commanded if he would himself This is the meaning of
that Jewish saying, All things are in the Power and disposal of Heaven, except
the Fear of God; for that they believed was in their own.
they having no Notion (as Pelagius at first) of Grace [All that God has
spoken we will do]: And having received the Law from God's Mouth, (the
Excellency whereof was their Glory) they supposed in the observation of the
Outside, that they kept it, accounting the Reward promised therein due to them
thereupon from God, as what in Justice they merited for their Deeds: Insomuch
that some thought themselves so righteous as not to sin at all, or need Pardon
[Touching the Law, blameless. All these have I kept from my youth up]; and
others that sinned, being licked whole by Sacrifice, they thought all well,
boasting themselves as the Only People, the Only Righteous in the Earth. Not to
mention what we all know out of the Acts, that some of them were Converts to
Christianity did yet remain of the Opinion, that their Law was to be kept. The
Apostle now sets himself against Not that this great I (...) was for (...) of
the Jew^ that is a (...) and un^^thy (...) the Life and ^^^^tion of, Man(...)
that Justification by Faith in Opposition to the Law must not be understood as
to that of Moses only, but to the whole Law of Works.
these Jews, and lets them know that no Man, neither Jew nor Gentile is
righteous in God's sight (whatsoever they were in their own) but that all have
sinned, and need that Messiah they expected, to make Reconciliation for their
Sins; that our Lord Jesus Christ being that true Messiah, by his Death
answering their Legal Sacrifices, has born the Curse of the Law, and so
redeemed us from it. That, God's undeserved Goodness here, in accepting of
Sinners, through this meritorious Sacrifice of his, to Pardon and Life, upon
Condition, which he gives the Grace also to perform, presupposed, and by me
acknowledged, it is another Righteousness, and not that of the Jews (Not that
Paul calls his own, as a Jew), or not a Righteousness of Works [Perfect Works],
but a Righteousness of Faith, which makes the Reward only of Grace [Of Faith,
that it may be of Grace]; a Righteousness of Faith, but a true Faith working by
Love, (which is an Internal Righteousness though imperfect, and not as the
External Works of the Jews was) is that Righteousness of God in opposition to
the Terms of the Law, whereby we are justified and saved.

The Apostle (I observe) in one place speaking of Faith, calls it the Obedience
of Faith; the same Word, if you compare that Text [Rom. 11.30, 31.] with the
Margin, signifying both to Believe and Obey. And the People believed God and
his Servant Moses. I will conclude hereupon, that Christ's Redemption in the
immediate fruit thereof, which is the Grant of a General Pardon through his
Satisfaction to all the World on Condition, being laid as a foundation, To be
justified by Faith is to be justified by performing that Condition. To be
justified by Faith (Believe me at parting) is in St. Paul's Mind to be
justified by the Obedience of Faith, in opposition to the task of the Law; that
is (in St. Paul's Mind I say, opposing the Jew) by embracing the Christian
Religion, and living according to it.

Reader, In p. 14. l. 34. correct the Word [its] and make it [it] with a Full
Point after. Other Errataes you may find at the end of the Book, or mend your
self.

OF THE Righteousness of GOD In the Matter of JUSTIFICATION.
The First PART.
BEcause upon the right Understanding of what the Apostle means, by the
Righteousness of God without the Law, revealed now in the Gospel, (which indeed
is dark, and hardly understood (I think) by Papist, or Protestant, in their
Disputes, and much less by our Brethren in their present Differences) does
depend the Elucidation of the Great Article of Justification; whereof I wrote
some Sheets formerly, called, The Middle Way; and more lately, six Sheets,
called, Pacification; I have thought good yet to write a few more, upon some
further increase of my own Knowledge about this Subject: And under this Title.
I beseech God for his Light and Truth, and for Integrity of Heart, and Pardon
of my Weakness and Failings for my self; and for the removal of Prejudice from,
and the establishing the Judgment of, others, who shall read what is written.

The Search after Truth is indeed hard Work, it is digging in a Mine: It was so
to me, in writing on this Point at first, and it is still. What I dig up, is
but rude, it is the Ore, as it comes naturally; and that is best to edify
those that would improve it. I am one whose Genius is averse from any Notion
imposed, and receives none, without distrust, that does not arise first out of
my own Mind, or that I see something new to cultivate it. I do not only bear
with others, but do like them often better that they differ from me, because I
know I differ from the most. Where the Mine though is Gold, (as the Scripture
is) there is no Dust of it but must be saved. The least Dust of Gold is Gold;
and if any other, who has better Words and Parts, will be at the pains to sift
and order what I have dug, I doubt not, but they may make Gold of that,
which I have brought to be but the Dust of Gold. When a Book is so Methodized,
as it does exhaust its Subject, there is no coming after it: But when there is
only some Ore turned up, something of Notion for others to refine, a riper Wit
will be encouraged to an Endeavor of bringing that Something to more
perfection. It is so with my Middle-Way Books, I am content to be but the
Digger, I expect some others should be the Refiners of what I have dug.

The Trent Doctrine, (which is the perfect papists) I must confess, is lead
them b^ St. Austine. They say, Justification is the making a Man just (Ex impio
Christianum) by Infusion of Grace inherent, or Charity: Being justified freely
by his Grace. Augustine being immersed in his Dispute with Pelagius, could
think of Grace in no Sense but this; and by Freely, Gratis, justified, he
understood only, that Works preparatory did not merit this infusion, which the
Trent-Doctors also say after him. The Efficient Cause (quae efficit) is the
Spirit; the Instrumental Cause (qua efficitur) Baptism; the Meritorious Cause
(propter quam) Christ's Death; the Formal Cause (per quam) of Justification, is
this Grace infused; Gratia Habitualis, Habitual Righteousness, making the Man
before ungodly, now righteous in God's sight. This habitual Righteousness then
being infused by Baptism, (they say) does abolish Sin, so that there remains in
the Baptized, after the Opus Operatum, nothing that is Peccatum, (but Fomes
Peccati only) and upon that Account is perfect, so by the Law justifies, and
the Works proceeding from it, meritorious of Salvation. This is their Opinion,
and they fall foul on us for holding Justification by Pardon only, or by Christ
without inherent Grace, as if Good Works were laid aside by us altogether.

Our Protestants therefore renouncing this Charge, do grant an habitual
Righteousness, or Grace infused, as necessary in the justified Person, but deny
this Righteousness to be that which justifies him, they deny Justification to
be Regeneration, and distinguish these as two things. It is not this inherent
Righteousness, (say they) that can be opposed between the Wrath of God, and our
Conscience of Sin, to be the Cause, Propter quam, we are not condemned. No,
there is a Righteousness (they add) without us, that is the Righteousness of
Christ performed for us, and by our Faith made ours, that we rely upon to do
this for us. Our inherent Grace is inchoate, imperfect, and cannot standing in
Judgment before God.

This being now partly well on both sides, there is a Middle Way appears, which
we must take between them. It is true against the Papists, that there is no
such Righteousness inherent, though infused by the Holy Spirit, as does abolish
Sin, and make us so just that we can oppose it to Gods Wrath, so as to render
him appeased with the Sinner, or that the Conscience can rest on it, as that
Proper quod, he is forgiven or saved: It is true likewise, against the common
Protestant that there is not any Righteousness without us, that can be made
ours, so as we should be accounted righteous in another's Righteousness, and to
be that thing, Per quod, we are justified. There is no such Matter in reality,
but in notion only. When one Man is justified, and not another, something there
must be in the one, that is not in the other. This Righteousness now,
whatsoever it be, as imperfect as it is (confessedly yet, wrought by the Spirit
of God) is that, and must be that, which is the Form, per quam, he is accepted,
or justified, when the Satisfaction, and the Righteousness of Christ, we all
(at least Protestants) do grant to be the Ground, or Reason of that
Acceptance; that is, the Meritorious Cause, propter quam, we are pardoned and
saved.

It is not therefore the Papists infused perfect Righteousness, (for there is
no such;) nor the Protestants imputed Righteousness (for that is not ours) both
of which answer the Law, if we could plead them, and would make the Reward of
Debt: But it is a Third Thing, The Righteousness of God without the Law, as the
Apostle calls it, a Righteousness now revealed in the Gospel, in opposition to
Works (that is meritorious, perfect Works) which we have and must have, and yet
answer not the Law, but makes our Justification therefore of Mercy, or Grace,
which is the Righteousness (as yet quite out of sight of the most) we must
advance (Paulo Duce) in the Doctrine of Justification.

In one Verse of David's Psalms, we have him praying thus: Hear my Prayer, O
Lord, answer me in thy Righteousness. Where we see a Righteousness of God,
according to which he is accepted: And yet in the next Verse do these Words
follow: And enter not into Judgment with thy Servant: for in thy sight shall no
Man living be justified. Where we see a Righteousness, according to which no
Man can be heard, no Man can be accepted, no Man can stand in his sight, Psalm
143.1, 2. Thus much then is plain, that here is a Righteousness, and a
Righteousness. A Righteousness (I may say) of strict Justice, or a
Righteousness of gracious Acceptance. A Righteousness which is Severe Justice,
or Paternal Justice. The Righteousness of a condescending Father, or of a rigid
Judge: David does, as it were, appeal from the one to the other. Any one may
express themselves in other Terms, as please them best: But such a Distinction
then is to be made in reality, according to the Scriptures. I will therefore
offer yet these other words: There is a Righteousness, (as to us) (...), or
(...): A Righteousness (to be most plain and full) according to the Law, or
Covenant of Works, whereby God might deal with us if he would, and so no Man
could Live: Or a Righteousness according to the Covenant of Grace, which is
this Righteousness the Apostle means now revealed, (as that by which he does
deal with us) in the Gospel. God is not unrighteous (says one Apostle) to
forget your Labor of Love, Heb. 11.10. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful
and just (says another) to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from our
Unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. It is a righteous thing with God, to render to you
rest, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed, 2 These. 1.7. I have fought a good
Fight, and kept the Faith, henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the righteous Judge shall give me, and all that love his
appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8. He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable to
him, for he will render to Man his Righteousness, Job 33.26. Judge me, Lord,
according to my Righteousness, and according to my Integrity, Psalm. 7.8. The
Lord rewarded me according to my Righteousness: for I have kept the ways of the
Lord, Psalm. 18.20, 21. Remember me, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect Heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight, Isa. 38.3. Remember me, O God, concerning this, and wipe not
out my good Deeds I have done for the House of my God, and the Offices thereof,
Neh. 13.14. Remember me, O God, for good, chapter ult. v. ult. By these and the
like places, the Righteousness of God, (this Righteousness the Apostle speaks
of) may be taken Subjective, or Terminative, in regard to himself, or in regard
to us; Or to wave School-Terms, and speak surer, on His part, or on Our part.
On God's part, this Righteousness is his Grace, or Condescension toward us, in
pardoning the Failings, and accepting the Endeavors of all penitent believing
Men and Women (so long as they be sincere, notwithstanding those Failings) unto
Life, according to the New Covenant: And on Our part, it is these Endeavors
thus accepted, or that which we do (our believing, or repenting) how frail
soever (if sincere), being the Condition required of us in that Covenant, to
our Justification and Salvation.

Now the Righteousness of God without the Law (without the performance thereof)
is manifest, says the Apostle. It was always in the World, but occult (as
Austine, I have said in my first Sheets, does speak) 'till the Preaching of the
Gospel. How is that? Why, in regard to the Foundation (I count) on which it
stands. For other Foundation can no Man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. This Righteousness of God, which is, I say, on God's part,
his Grace, or Condescension toward us, in passing by our Failings, and
accepting our sincere Endeavor unto Life, notwithstanding all our
Imperfections, is procured for, and vouchsafed to us, upon the Account of
Christ's Satisfaction and Righteousness, the meritorious Cause of the
Acceptance and Salvation of all that were saved under the Old Testament, as
well as of us now; but that this Grace stood, and was vouchsafed then upon this
Account (upon Christ's Account) was dark to them, and they saw it not as we now
do, and therefore is this Righteousness of God said to be revealed now, though
always afoot, so as they had the benefit then, or else none before now could
have been saved.

I am not ashamed of the Gospel, for therein (the Apostle goes on) is the
Righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith. From Faith to Faith: And
what means that? Why this is the meaning, There is one Religion, Law, or Rule
for all Mankind to obtain Life by, which being the Law of our Lapsed Nature, or
Remedying Law, containing God's Grace administered to all the Earth, in a
Threefold State, of such as were, or are without the Law, (or before it) and
under the Law, and under the Gospel: As this Administration is Threefold, so
has the Faith, which is the Condition thereof, been diversified: But now is
the Righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith. The Righteousness of
God, is the Righteousness of this Law, which has ever been afoot in the World,
and though a Heathen has not that Faith, as is required of the Christian in the
Third Edition of it, or that which was required of the Jew in the Second; yet
has he such a Faith as belongs to the first, such as the Ancients before
Abraham had, and so long as that Faith he has does work by Love, or by sincere
Obedience to God, according to his Light, it will justify him as well as that
which is now farther required of us under the Gospel. So my Book called, The
Axe laid to the Root of Separation, p. 4.
From Faith, or Trust in God' Goodness, Grace, or Mercy, which any in every
Nation that feared God, and wrought Righteousness had, thus to be accepted and
pardoned, before they knew this Ground or Foundation, upon which the
Righteousness thereof does stand, to that Faith we have now who do know it.
From that Faith they had in God to save them of his Free Grace, before the
knowledge (or our clearer knowledge) of Christ, and our Redemption by him, to
that Faith we have now to save us, by the same Free Grace, through the
Redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Ye believe in God (says Christ) believe
also in me: where is a Faith, and a Faith. Consequently from Faith, that is, a
believing in God, to a Faith which is a believing in him, through Christ, (the
Foundation of our Faith) upon the Revelation of the Gospel.

Even the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ; to wit,
since he is revealed. Upon these words Mr. Rutherford supposing the
Righteousness of Christ to be the formal Righteousness that justifies us, thus
opposes: If our Righteousness and inherent Obedience may be of Grace esteemed
formal Righteousness before God, by a free Evangelick Paction, and an Act of
God's Free Will, there is no need of Christ's Satisfaction. Cou. Op. p. 172,
173. I answer: This Learned Man has, I account, here, understandingly expressed
the very thing as it is; and that he gives for the Reason of his denial, is the
very Ground upon which this Righteousness, as I have explained it, is made
good. If it were not for this Satisfaction of Christ, there could be no such
Righteousness on God's part, or on Ours. God should deal with us in his strict
Justice, and no Man be found righteous (accounted or dealt with as so) in the
Earth: But seeing upon this Satisfaction of Christ God may be righteous, and
abate the Terms, as they were in one Covenant, and impute them however for
Righteousness by another, we see how our Evangelick Obedience is indeed the
Formal, when Christ's Righteousness is the Meritorious Cause of our
Justification. Our Justification, I must say, passively taken; that is, the
Formal Cause, or Formal Reason, or Form itself of that Righteousness whereby we
are justified. That which we do our selves, through Grace, or the Spirit acting
us, is this our Formal Righteousness, and that is the Condition of our
Justification actively taken, and so of the Impunity and Life, that follow as
the Fruits of it.

That we may not stray here, but keep our Middle-Way, between the Extremes of
Papist and Protestant, we must distinguish Remission and Justification. The
Papists say, Justification is Remission and Regeneration; the Protestants say,
it is Remission, and the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. When both then
make Remission to be but part of Justification, and Totum and Pars may be
distinguished, these may. But I go farther: That which goes before, and that
which comes after Justification, must be distinguished from it: but such is
Remission. Remission therefore is Twofold, Universal and Conditional (the
one): Particular and Absolute (the other). Universal Conditional Remission goes
before Justification, Particular Absolute, follows as its Effect, and so
Neither must be made the Formal Reason of it. He has given us the World of
Reconciliation, to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the World to
himself, not imputing their Trespasses. -- And we are his Ambassadors,
beseeching you in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor 5.18, 19, 20.
Here we see a Reconciliation of God to us, obtained for the World; so that a
Non-imputation of Trespasses belongs to all, which yet precedes our being
Reconciled to him, and consequently our actual Believing and Justification. The
Reconciliation of the World to God by the Non-imputation of Sin in this Text,
is indeed no other but what the Apostle otherwhere calls Redemption: In whom we
have Redemption through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins, Ephesians. 1.7. Col.
1.14. Now that Redemption does precede Justification, both in the Nature of the
Thing, and Intent of the Apostle, is manifest, Romans 3.24. Being justified
freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Redemption
is the Ground (we see) of our Justification, and the Ground is necessarily
first to be supposed, before that which is built upon it. And what is
Redemption? Redemption is Christ's procuring (or purchase) of Man's delivery
from Wrath due to us, according to the Law for Sin, (or of our discharge from
the Penalty, called sometimes Freedom from the Law, sometimes Forgiveness of
Sins) by the Price of his Blood, or Satisfaction in our behalf, but to be given
out to us no otherwise than as God and Christ please; and that is upon the
Terms of the Gospel. Of this Remission, which preceding Justification must be
Universal (for where it is Particular, the Man is justified) and Conditional
(for if it were Absolute, all must be saved) no Man must conceive me to imagine
our Righteousness the Formal Cause, or any Cause, nay, or Condition:
Nevertheless, this General Remission being given out (I say) to particular
Persons, by a new Law or Covenant, which requires of us to the participating
thereof, that we believe, repent, and walk sincerely before God, this
Evangelical Righteousness, upon that Account, is the Thing that Formally
justifies us. Upon our Faith God does account us Believers, or Performers of
this Law or Covenant, that is righteous by the Righteousness of Faith (the
Forma per quam, we are made so), and then this Remission before Conditional,
becomes Absolute, (or Actual Remission, so commonly called) as the Effect
(together with a Right to Heaven) of this Justification. Now when the
Protestants ordinarily, that distinguish not Remission from Justification, are
vehement here, (in reference to Grace and Works) and say, that no Man does, or
can do any thing in order to the Remission of his Sin: That there is nothing,
and can be nothing in the whole World interposed between our Sins and God's
Wrath, to stave that off us, but Christ's Satisfaction, which was made by him,
and accepted of God for us, while we are Sinners, Enemies, and have no other
Qualification, so that therefore our Righteousness is so far from being any
Cause (Efficient, Material, or Formal) that it is not so much as a Condition of
it, I say, it is all true, it is all granted. The Absolute Free Grace of God,
and our Redeemer, is to be received with the utmost Humility of our Hearts, and
Thankfulness. Only one thing is necessary, which is, that it be understood
aright. It must be understood of the Remission which precedes Justification: It
must be understood of this Universal Conditional Remission, Reconciliation,
Redemption, when that Remission which comes after Justification as its Effect;
that is, Particular Absolute, or Actual Remission, is made so, or obtained
only, upon the Terms of the Gospel.

As in our Laws, when a Law that is good, proves inconvenient, we make a New
one, that does not Repeal that Law, but brings a Remedy against that
Inconvenience: So is it here. The Law of Innocence, or Nature, is good, and
such as stands, and must stand, in all respects Unrepealed for ever; but upon
Man's Fall there being this Inconvenience, that no Man being able to perform it
perfectly we must all perish, a New Law is obtained by Christ, and granted by
God, or an Act of Grace passed, by way of Remedy, (a Remedying Law) which
Enacts thus: That though a Man does not fulfill this Law of Works, as all ought,
yet if he Believes and Repents only, he shall be pardoned and saved. Every Man
that does not, is condemned already; but if he does, as soon as he does, he is
justified by this New Law from that Condemnation.

When I see Men denominated Righteous, through the Old and New Testament, only
from their upright Walking with God, and yet the most Upright to have their
Failings, and to place their Comfort and Hopes in God's Mercy and Grace, to
pardon their Failings, and accept their Endeavors to please him,
notwithstanding their Imperfections, as we may observe more especially in the
Psalms: When those Christians that have gone before us, holy Men, and Fathers,
have signified the like Temper in such like Expressions [Tota justitia mea
Domine, est tui indulgentia. Vae hominum vitae quantumvis laudabili si remota
misericordia judicetur. Inhaerens justitia sanctorum in hac Vita magis
remissione p^ccatorum constat quam perfectione Virtutum. Ego fidenter quod ex
me mihi deest usurpo mihi ex visceribus Domini, quoniam miserecordia affluunt,
nec desunt foramina per quae effluunt. Omnia facta deputantur cum quod non fit
ignoscitur]: And when in their Prayers after Confession of Sin, they have been
wont, as they used to express themselves, to fly from God's Tribunal of
Justice, to his Throne of Grace, from his Severity to his Mercy through Christ,
Which through Christ must be for his Merits sake, not through his imputed
Righteousness; for then they should stay at the Bar of his Justice still, and
by the Law be justified: When, I say, I let these Reflections enter my Soul, I
cannot but be persuaded, that the Righteousness of God, whereof I am speaking,
and the Gospel has Revealed to be that Righteousness whereby we are justified
in opposition to Works, must receive between Protestant and Papist, a Middle
Exposition.

And what now is said hitherto, may be confirmed by the Light it brings, for
the understanding several Scriptures, which are otherwise very hard of
Interpretation. I will begin with that in Romans the First, where we find a
Free Gift mentioned in several places, which, by the Righteousness of One, came
upon All Men (the Apostle speaks) unto Justification. What is that Free Gift?
In one Verse we are told, it is the Gift of Righteousness. But what
Righteousness? Is it the Righteousness of Christ? Our Protestants (even the
judicious Davenant) against the Papists, say so; but it cannot be: For that
which comes by the Righteousness of One, cannot be that Righteousness of One
itsself, nor Justification itself that follows it. What is it then? Why, very
probably, this Righteousness of God we are speaking of, that runs so much in
the Apostle's Mind; which is on God's part the Grace of the Gospel, that gives
Pardon and Life, upon Condition of Faith (and so brings Salvation to all Men)
procured by this Righteousness of One, and that as the Medium to Man's
Justification. By this Key, let him that will, and has a better Faculty of
Words than I, open for me the rest of the Chapter.

I proceed to another Text, Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the Law by Faith!
God forbid: Yea, we establish the Law. How is that? The Law is established, I
remember Austin tells us, Implendo, and Faith does establish it by fetching
Grace from God to fulfill it. So he. I add, by fetching, not only this Grace
which is Inherent and Operative, but that Grace which is Favor and Mercy, in
pardoning all that is defective, and accepting what is done (how weak soever,
if sincere, notwithstanding those Failings) unto Life, through the Merits of
Christ Jesus. Or thus: It is done by Faith; because Faith, which is sound and
works by Love, is this very Righteousness of God (on our part) we speak of,
which he accepts of unto Life, instead of that of the Law, upon Christ's
Account. And here are there certain Words I meet with in Melancthon and
Chemnitius, which (though not in their perfect Sense) may be used and approved.
Faith establishes the Law (say they) Dupliciter, by Inchoation, and by
Imputation. By Inchoation in the New Obedience, whereof Faith is the Principle,
or Faith receives the Spirit (as they speak) to work in us that Obedience: And
then by Imputation, in that our inchoate Obedience being imperfect, and not
answering the Law, Faith does apply the Satisfaction and Merits of Christ
(already intimated) for the pardoning all its Defects, and rendering it
acceptable to God for his sake. This I take to be agreeable to the Father
before quoted, Tunc tota lex impletur, quando id quod non fit ignoscitur: Only
I must add, Et quando id quod fit imputatur ad justitiam propter Christum. I
know these worthy Followers of Luther, and also, most of Calvin's Followers, do
understand by their Imputation more than thus; even, no less, than that
Christ's Righteousness is made ours by Faith; so as God does reckon the
Believer to have satisfied, and obeyed the Law in him: Upon supposition of
which Notion, here were so easy a Construction to be made of these Texts, and
others that are chiefly stood upon, that no wonder, if after one or two such
Leaders, there were so many embraced it. If Christ's Righteousness (which is
perfect) be in a Law-sence the Believer's, then in a Law-sence the Believer
performs it; and so the Law is established according to this place. In a
Law-sence he is made Righteous by the Obedience of One (and so becomes as
Righteous as that One) according to another Text, Romans 5.19. He is made the
Righteousness of God in him (Endued with the Righteousness of him, who is God)
according to 2 Cor. 5.21. But the words Of and In, Of God, and In Him, do
plainly show, that God and Him are two; and consequently, that serious Man, Mr.
Mather, (with such other Divines) must be out, when they understand by the
Righteousness of God, the Righteousness of Christ, who is God; seeing this
Construction makes them one. Justitia Dei est finis sive effectum ex co quod
Christus peccatum pro nobis factus est. Hoc autem ipsum est Christi Obedientia.
Ergo Justitia Dei non est Christi Obedientia. Wotton.
Besides, That we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, is expressed
by the Apostle, as the End, or Effect, of his being made Sin for us. He was
made Sin for us, not Formaliter, but Effective, in suffering for our Sins. His
Sufferings was his Obedience, and that, his Righteousness. By the Righteousness
of God therefore, we must not understand the Righteousness of Christ, because
that which is the End, or Effect of a Thing, cannot be the very same Thing, but
another differing from it. There is yet that Text more, which will receive the
like easy Interpretation on that Supposition, Christ is the End of the Law for
Righteousness, to him that believes, the Believer being righteous In and With
(and not only meritory By) his Righteousness, according to Romans 10.4. But the
Supposition really is too gross, the Notion too hard to be digested, as well as
dangerous, in regard to the Antinomian Consequences of it. If in a Law-sence we
are righteous, and have fulfilled the Law in Christ, then in a Law-sence God
sees no Sin in us, we need no Pardon, God cannot in Justice punish for any
thing we do, with the Lerna of the like Doctrines which follow upon it. If in a
Law-sence Christ's Righteousness is ours, and we have fulfilled the Law in him,
then are we in a Law-sence justified by Works, when by the Works of the Law
(the Scripture says) no Flesh living shall be justified. It the Notion of Faith
being imputed for Righteousness (which is Scripture) must be so framed, as by
Faith we must understand its Object, Christ's Righteousness so imputed, but
first received by Faith, or made ours by Faith, as the Instrument of that
Reception, How then shall those many Fathers, and Holy Men before Luther, who
never had any such Notion in their Minds, Nay, how shall the Patriarchs, and
all the Holy People from Adam to Christ, have been justified (as we), which is
to be Righteous with this Righteousness, when they never had the Instrument to
receive it? An Instrument is that the Efficient works by; And when there is not
the working Cause, how can there be the Effect? It is not credible to me, that
ever any one before Christ, or any of his Disciples before his Death, did, or
could believe themselves Righteous, by the Satisfaction and Obedience of the
Messiah, in this sense, that his Righteousness should, or could be their Formal
Righteousness, when, As St. John tells us, He that does Righteousness is
righteous, so is this Righteousness done, the Formal Righteousness, and
Christ's Obedience and Satisfaction, the Meritorious Cause (and the Account we
give) of its acceptance, in the Sinners Justification.

A Third Text, and parallel Place, we have in Romans 8.3, 4. What the Law could
not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, etc. That is, I suppose, when
through the Fall, no Man could perform the Condition of the Law of Works, God
sent his Son, as it follows, to be a Sacrifice for Sin, to procure a Law of
Grace, That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. How is that? when none can fulfill the
Law through the Weakness of the Flesh, do we fulfill it? Yes: It is not said
fulfilled in Christ, but in Us, and it is fulfilled by this Righteousness of
God; which being on our part all one with the Obedience of Faith, God upon
Christ's Account, imputes that to us for Righteousness, or reckons it, instead
of fulfilling it, making it as good to us, and rewarding us alike, as if we had
perfectly performed it. It is an Obedience or Righteousness indeed, not (...),
(as I have it before) according to the Rigor of the Law, but (...), according
to the Equity of the Gospel. It is not in its own Nature a Righousness (falling
short of the Law) that would justify us, but it does it by Divine Institution,
and therefore called the Righteousness of God. It is an Ordination of Grace,
through Jesus Christ, and therefore is God righteous in what he does: But on
our part it is called the Righteousness of Faith. I do observe therefore, how
that Religiously Learned Gentleman, Sir Charles Wolesley, having wrote his Book
of Justification after I had wrote, and he had read my Sheets on the same
Subject, has these Words upon that forementioned Critical Place, 2 Cor. 5.21.
The meaning is this, says he, Christ that was without all Sin, was ordained of
God to be a Sacrifice for Sin, that we might thereby be made righteous with the
Gospel Righteousness, for that is the general meaning every where of the
Righteousness of God, Sir C. W. p. 64. This, I know, I delivered as my Judgment
in those Sheets; and his saying the same after, is as much as if he had said, I
have considered what you say, and am convinced, that this is the meaning of
that Text, and that you are right in your Sense, of the Righteousness of God.
It is a walking after the Spirit, not after the Flesh, though not perfectly up
to our Duty: And the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, (after which we
walk in our measure) does set us free from the Law of Sin and Death.

I will proceed to some Consequences, like to be good or ill, as they follow,
upon a right or mistaken understanding of this Righteousness. If by it, the
Righteousness of Christ imputed be understood, By the exercise of Faith, in
apprehending the same to be made ours, so as to bring it before the Tribunal of
God's Justice for our Justification thereby, according to the Law of Works, the
very Life of that Faith, or Comfort of that Life, which consists in trusting,
resting, relying, on God's Mercy and Goodness, for pardoning all the Failings
of our Performances, and accepting them (even our very Desires, and weakest
Endeavors) through the Merits of Christ, unto Life, so as by that Faith we
have access to the Throne of Grace, and are justified according to the Gospel,
is stopped, perverted, if not quite contradicted, and lost. Nay, if the End of
Christ's Obeying and Satisfying the Law was that his Satisfaction and Obedience
should be made ours upon Condition, (for our Divines here, are cautious, and do
generally take heed to put in that) to wit, upon Performance of the Terms the
Gospel requires of us, in order to it, and not otherwise, then cannot the
Merits of Christ be (so rationally, I think) applied thus as I speak, to the
Performance of the Condition. Our Divines indeed do say, that Christ has not
only procured this Imputation on Condition, but Grace also for the Performance
of the Condition (some say, General Grace for all that will, some Special that
makes some to will), but this Condition must be performed (by our Free Will, or
Grace) so as the full Tale be brought in, or no Righteousness of Christ
imputed, no Merits of Christ otherwise to be applied: Whereas, if the End of
Christ's doing and suffering what he did in our behalf, was that what we do our
selves (by his Spirits preventing and assisting Grace) shall be imputed to us
for Righteousness, which is the very Truth, seeing the Scripture says it, that
it is our Faith (to wit, a sound Faith working by Love) is, and shall be so
imputed (that is, our Faith, Repentance, New Obedience, is accepted, in regard
to the Reward, instead of that Righteousness the Law required to our
Justification), then we see what Line we have given us, for the actuating our
Faith, and reliance on God's Grace, Goodness, Mercy, and Christ's Merits for
Pardoning our Failings (as I am saying), and taking what is done in such good
part, as to reward it with Life, seeing it is for Christ's sake altogether, for
his Merits sake only (not for its value), that it finds acceptance; which is
the greatest Encouragement to our Endeavors, and consequently to a Holy Life,
that can be in the World. I will add, that God our Judge, who is gracious and
wise, does consider the diverse Natures, Tempers, Natural Infirmities,
Temptations of Men and Women, and has his Grains of Allowance for all,
according to these Circumstances, so as that shall be accepted for the
Condition performed in one, that falls exceeding short of what is done by
another. Alas! there are such diverse Sizes of God's Children, so vast a
disproportion (I mean) as to the Degrees of their Grace, that one would hardly
think them the Children of the same Father. What a Difference is there between
a Seth and a Sampson, Rahab and Elizabeth; Who would think that one Heaven
should hold them both? He knows our Frame, and remembers we are but Dust:
Upon which Account we read so often, of his Compassions toward the Weak and
Fainting, which gives us this Ground for our trust in him, to bear with our
Frailty, in mollifying to some the Condition (Not but all must be Sincere, but
that this Sincerity is of diverse Degrees, in the Sense I speak), in regard to
God's Acceptance, and Grace, which has no Bounds to be set by any.

And now, if any pious Brother, shall go to take away this Doctrine from us,
and the Fruit of it, I will wish him to take heed to his own, and consider
whither it leads. If Christ has died for the Sinner, so that God looks on the
Sinner to have satisfied the Law in Christ, then should he preach this Gospel.
He should declare to all, and every of his Hearers, that God is in Christ
reconciled to him, and that he is to believe it is Christ has died for Sinners,
thou art a Sinner; All are Sinners, Christ has died for all, and thou art to
believe thy Sins forgiven. Thou art not to believe only, that there is
Forgiveness of Sins, and Everlasting Life, but that these Articles through
Christ are thy Possession. Who loved Me, and gave himself for Me. In Christ's
Obedience and S^fferings thou have obeyed the Law, and satisfied the Penalty,
and therefore art justified, and in a State of Salvation. As for Good Works,
they are indeed to be done out of Gratitude afterward. God commands them, and
they please him, and they do good to Men, and therefore thou must do them, but
nothing is to be done for thy self, but believe only, in order to thy
Justification and Salvation. Let a Man but believe once in good earnest that it
is so, he cannot choose but love God and Jesus Christ, and that Love will
constrain him to Obedience. If you hold the Doctrine of Election, he must not
stick at that, but he must believe also he is Elect; and indeed, that none but
the Elect can believe; that is, thus believe: Or that there can be this Fiducia
specialis misericordiae in none ever but the Elect only, and therefore is it
called, The Faith of God's Elect. And what says any of my sober Brethren, to
this Doctrine? Can he find in his Heart to preach it, when Christ, when John,
when Peter ( Acts 2.38.), when they began to preach, did preach, Repent, for
the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand? I confess, that Luther (as I apprehend) did
at first preach at this rate; which was the way to fetch in so many by the
Shoals, as he did from Popery, when the World was groaning under the Burden of
their Priests Impositions, their Penances, Satisfactions, Fastings, Scourgings,
praying to Saints, worshipping Images, Pilgrimages, Indulgences, besides the
Vows of Chastity, Poverty, and Monastical Obedience, as to the more Religious,
whereby they were made to believe they merited Salvation for themselves, and
others. It was glad Tidings now, and a welcome Gospel to the World at this
time, to tell them, that it is Faith alone, in opposition to these Works, that
justifies and saves Men. Nevertheless, when that excellent Man saw the Effect
of his own Doctrine, that such as he had turned from Popery, began to run as
fast to Antinomianism, and Libertinism, he saw occasion to change his
Preaching, to press the Law, and Repentance, as much as others. Nor was the
Doctrine of Preparatory Works (Man's lying at the Pool) Refused, but Sated, and
Approved by his Followers. A Convinced Sinner is the only Subjectum capax
Justificationis, even with Dr. Owen. Of Just. p. 133.

The Second PART.
I Know that several of our chiefest Divines, have been so far from imbibing
the Sense of this Righteousness, which is my Theme, The Righteousness of God
revealed in the Gospel, that their Doctrine, in opposition to the Papists, is
extreme, in the thwarting (without being truly aware,) of it: When those
Prudential Catholics, who understand, that Qualitas Gratiae infusa non Natura
sua, sed ex Dei acceptatione and ordinatione habet ut Hominem Deo gratum
reddat, are to be heard rather than them. Nay, the deep and acute Mr. Baxter
(so far as I remember any thing he has) never came to lay this Righteousness of
God enough to his Thoughts, when nothing almost else escapes him, as it appears
by his frequent approbation (or mention) of the Learned, Sober, Logically
Judicious Mr. Anthony Wotton, and sometimes Mr. Hotchkis his Follower. I will
examine therefore a little into Mr. Wotton's Opinion. Justification by him is
thus defined: It is, Reconciliationis pars, qua Deus in Christum credentibus
fidem reputans ad justitiam, omnia illis peccata condonat. Reconciliation is
God's Return into Grace and Favor with Sinners (as he says) whom Sin had made
his Enemies, through Satisfaction given him by Christ. God is said to be angry
with Sin and Sinners, and upon Christ's Satisfaction and their Repentance, to
be appeased, or reconciled; Not that Man's Repentance, or Christ's Satisfaction
works any change in God, but Ex Connotatione Objecti, God is denominated. Man's
Repentance changes himself, and Christ's Satisfaction makes a change in the
Order of Things; but God is unchangeable, while yet the Scripture speaks,
Lingua Filiorum hominum, as the Jews say, Or as the Schools, Secundum nostrum
concipiendi modum, in many Matters incomprehensible. To leave Mr. Wotton's
Genus Definitionis therefore to himself, without farther concern, he has
defined Justification by Remission of Sin, in opposition to those that define
it by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness; and he has elaborately proved
this to be the Sense of the Church of England, and Calvin's, with many others.
I do now agree with Mr. Wotton herein, in excluding the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness (in his Sense intended, that is as our Formal Righteousness) out
of the Definition, because there is no such thing as the Imputation thereof, In
se, though the Merit of it be imputed to Believers, as to the Effects. But I do
not agree with him, in making Remission of Sin to be (that he wont let the
other be) the Form, or Formal Reason of our Justification: Because I hold, with
Mr. Bradshaw, our Actual Pardon to be the Effect, or Benefit of it. The
Righteousness of God, which is not yet thoroughly understood by Protestant or
Papist, and I have made the Subject of this Dissertation, is indeed that Formal
Righteousness we are seeking; and I do not think, that any Man in his first
natural reading Paul's Epistle to the Romans, who brought not his Understanding
from without to the place, did ever apprehend by that Righteousness of God now
Revealed (when Remission of Sin was a thing never Hid) that Pardon only is to
be understood. I will advise every Judicious Man therefore, when any material
Point is concerned in a Text, to ponder it in the Original several times, 'till
he come to some Resolution about it in his own Mind, because when he has
sucked in the Sense of another, his own Judgment is worth nothing. Mr. Wotton
has said enough to turn a Man to his Opinion, he is so rational a Man; but
having been myself otherwise inclined, as to the Sense of this Righteousness,
and finding the Scripture calling no Man righteous, but upon the Account of
doing righteously, I cannot comply with Mr. Wotton in his Notion, nor with the
contrary in such, as the hitherto prevailing Dr. Owen, in theirs. The Ministry
of the Gospel, is called the Ministration of Righteousness, upon the Account of
this Righteousness, as also the Ministration of the Spirit, in regard of the
Grace the Spirit brings to perform it; which Austine (I remember) in his Book,
De Spiritu and Littera, has told us: It can by no means be called the
Ministration Thereof, in regard to Remission of Sins. There are many the like
Arguments, I think, I could find out against Mr. Wotton's Opinion, but that my
Discourse is rather to be Demonstrative, than Elenctical; and therefore I must
not omit that place in Daniel, where it is prophesied, that Christ shall bring
in Righteousness; that is, a Righteousness procured by his Death and Merits,
and called an Everlasting Righteousness, being that by which they that ever
were, are, or shall be so, are justified, and saved; and it is said, brought
in, and at such a time, when the Messiah shall be slain, as it is said Now
Manifested, or Revealed by the Gospel, which is (I said but now) the
Ministration of it. To which purpose it is to be understood and observed
farther, that Righteousness as well as Reconciliation, and the making an End of
Sins, is one End of our Redemption; which I have explained more That the End of
Christ's coming in the World, of our Redemption, and the Covenant of Grace,
was, that we should be holy and righteous, is said ordinarily by Divines,
according to the Scriptures; but the right and plain Understanding, or Reason,
of what they say, is not said by them. He has chosen us in Christ, that we
should be Holy. He has redeemed us from Iniquity, that we should be a peculiar
People. We are his Workmanship, created unto Good Works, in (or through) Christ
Jesus. Well! when God made Man at first, and gave him a Law, was it not that he
should live holy? And when Righteousness, then was the End of his Creation, and
the Law thereof; how is this said to be the End of his Redemption? I answer
therefore, Righteousness (or Holiness, as they are one) we must know, does lie
in a Conformity to the Law which God gives us. There is nothing less than this
(the full Performance of a Law given) that is Righteousness. Upon this Account,
as soon as Man once fell, and broke the Law of his Creation, it is impossible
he should be righteous any more, unless there were a New Law brought in, in the
Performance whereof he might attain to that again which he had lost. Now to
this End was it, that Christ came and died; This was the very main Business (I
count) of his Redemption, (as to free us from Condemnation by the Old, so) even
the procuring this New Law, or another Law, with lower Terms, which some Men
performing, they do thereby become righteous, and so have Righteousness,
according to that Law, imputed to them, for Remission, and Life Eternal. Here
you see what that Righteousness indeed is, which Christ is said to bring in,
and in what Sense he has brought it in, or how such Texts (as these before)
does attribute our Holiness to him. It is called an Everlasting Righteousness,
as the Gospel is called the Everlasting Gospel, because it is the
Righteousness, in opposition to that of the Law, or of Works, that all Men from
the Beginning of the World, to the End of it, do obtain Everlasting Salvation.
Mid. Way of Justif. p. 43.
other-where. Daniel 9.24. Titus 2.14.

Well! you will say then, if the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness be not
the Form of our Justification, nor Remission of Sins, when some Protestants say
the one, and some the other, and some both, what then is the Form of it? I
answer, Mr. Wotton has told us truly, in the rest of his Words: It is God's
imputing to a Man his Faith for Righteousness. This is Scripture express, and
the Righteousness of God I am treating of, is otherwhere called the
Righteousness of God by Faith, and the Righteousness of Faith; for that is
express Scripture also. Justification supposes a Man just. Justificationis
formam justitia constare certum est. God cannot account a Man righteous,
without a Righteousness. The Papists therefore, are hot here with Calvin, that
will have a Man be justified only by Remission of Sins, without an inherent
Righteousness; and the Protestants as hot with the Papists, that will have any
inherent Grace, or Righteousness of ours, to be such as answers the Law, that
it should justify us; for by Righteousness both understand a Conformity to the
Law of Works. Both therefore are out. There is no such inherent Grace, as
answers the Law, nor any Grace from without either Remission of Sins or
Christ's Righteousness imputed, that is, or can be our Formal Righteousness;
but it is Faith which is Grace and Righteousness inherent, that justifies us in
opposition to both. There is a Righteousness of God, I say, that is neither of
these, unknown to the Disputants on both sides, that is the Formal
Righteousness for which they strive. St. Austin (I remember) does often tell
us, that by this Righteousness of God, we must not understand that whereby
himself is righteous, but that whereby we are so: As the Love of God is taken
sometimes, not for that whereby he loves us, but that whereby we love him.
Justitia Dei, non qua justus est, sed qua justos nos facit. I cannot forget
these words, because I find them used by the Council of Trent in their defining
Justification. Austin believed a Righteousness infused, a Righteousness that
makes a Man, Ex impio justum, and to be that which justifies him. He believed
not this Righteousness to be Remission of Sins, because he still speaks of it
as Grace inherent, and sometimes calls it Charity: But he seemed not to speak
of it as any such perfect Righteousness that a Man may bring to the Bar to
justify him, seeing you will ever and anon have such sensible Expressions,
that the best of Righteousness that Man has, does consist rather in God's being
merciful to his Unrighteousness, than in the Perfection of his Virtues. The
truth is, I found not in Reading Austine, that he did fully understand himself,
or made me to understand, what this Righteousness of God does mean, when the
Apostle speaks of something Mysterious in it (he counts) but now Revealed. That
there should be a Righteousness, and not answer the Law, a Righteousness
without a Conformity thereunto, this is something mysterious, when there is no
such indeed in Nature: Or that Faith without Works should yet be made or
constituted such a Righteousness as Formally to justify us, this is the Matter
Revealed, and called the Righteousness of God, because of this Ordination.

That we may not mistake the word Formally, A Man may be Formaliter just two
ways (says Mr. Wotton) Qualitate and Lege. Qualitate, no Man is formally just
(he counts) but he that is perfectly conformable to the Law, which no Man is:
But Lege, a Man is just (he says) Formaliter, by Pardon, Cum omnis imputatio
culpae sublata est. Let me give this a Turn. Qualitate Faith is not
Righteousness (to wit, Tali qualitate, and such a Righteousness), but Lege,
Lege Evangelii, Faith is. It is not Ex rei Natura, but Ex Dei Constitutione,
that Faith is made the Righteousness that justifies. The Foundation-mistake of
Protestant and Papist lies in this, that they dispute as if it were by the Law
we are to measure this Righteousness, and be judged: When it is to be measured,
and God will judge us according to the Gospel. A Conformity to the Law of
Works, Fac hoc and Vives, is the Righteousness these Disputants still thought
on, but it is a Conformity to the New Law, the Law of Grace, Creed and
saluaberis, that St. Paul means by the Righteousness of God that justifies
Sinners. Our Divines here, since Mr. Baxter wrote, understand the Point better.
Justification (says Mr. Williams) is a Judicial Act of God, by a Gospel. Rule,
supposing Christ's Satisfaction, Gos. Truth, p. 108. There is more of Light in
one such Line now, than heretofore in a Volume of Disputation. Fides est
conditio (says Mr. Wotton) and quidem talis condition ad Justificationem per
Christum in foedere gratuito, qualis erant Opera ad Justificationem ex operibus
Legis. Hence I argue. But Works were the Formal Righteousness of Justification
by the Law. Ergo, Faith is the Formal Righteousness of our Justification by the
Gospel.

To come more home (than I have already from the same Notion before in
Melancthon, and Chemnitius) to the Conscience (especially the Tender one) of
every Christian, here are two things that go into this Formal Righteousness,
Faith, and the Imputation of it for Righteousness. Here is Faith which is our
Gospel-Righteousness, and this being short, it is through Christ's Merits that
it is imputed to us in the stead of one that is perfect. Faith indeed (says
Luther, upon Gal. 3, v. 6.) is a Formal Righteousness, and yet this
Righteousness is not enough, for after Faith there remains certain Remnants of
Sin in our Flesh, wherefore the other part of Righteousness must be added to
finish the same in us, that is to say, God's Imputation. Here Luther
acknowledges Faith is a Formal Righteousness, which I note to remove Prejudice,
but in regard to its Imperfection, there must be God's Imputation, or it would
never justify us. I say thus likewise, our Faith and Duty being imperfect, it
is through Christ's Merits, and his Merits only, that God does accept it, or
impute it for Righteousness. Christian Righteousness (says Luther again)
consists in two things, Faith in the Heart, and God's Imputation. It is
lively true as to my meaning. The holiest Men have Concupiscence, Passions,
remains of Infidelity, but such Faults (says he) are not laid to their Charge,
because of their Faith in Christ. That is, because of Christ's Merits, our
Faith relying or trusting on those Merits, God forgives the Failings, and
accepts of it forgiven. Deus imputat istam imperfectam fidem ad justitiam
perfectam propter Christum. This is full indeed to my purpose, as nothing can
be fuller. But the Lutheran Imputation and Mine, I confess, are not the same.
Theirs is an Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in itself, which cannot be
ours but in Imagination: Mine is of the Merit only of his Righteousness, which
is made ours indeed in the Effects. Theirs is an Imputation of that
Righteousness In se, to the Person, which cannot be: Mine, is an Imputation of
this Merit to our Performances, which does verily render them acceptable, for
all their Imperfection, to Life Eternal. There is the Duty, and the Condition
(I am saying there) of the Law of Grace, or the Gospel. No Man we must know,
does perform the Duty, but every Man must perform the Condition (our Divines
will say), or he cannot be saved. This Condition (as obtained for the World) is
the Grand Benefit of Christ's Purchase, or Main Fruit of his Death, and is
accepted when performed only through him. It is not for my Works, or Merit,
say thou, that my Person is accepted, but for Christ's Righteousness, and in
this alone is thy Comfort. And I say, it is not for the Works sake, or Merit of
any thing, or all we do, but for Christ's sake, that the Condition is accepted,
and in this is my Comfort. In this it is (I account) that we have, or can have,
any grounded Sustentation. To say thou art justified by Christ's Righteousness,
when yet thou must acknowledge his Righteousness is none of thine, unless thou
have performed the Condition, what empty Comfort is that? But to say that
through Christ's Merits and Righteousness, this itself, which I do, is the
Condition, here is Comfort indeed. That, what we are enabled by his Grace (I
say) to do, how little soever, if sincerely done (if it be but the Grain of
Mustard Seed, in a hungring and thirsting after Righteousness) shall be
accepted unto Life (that is, be that Condition) upon the Account of what Christ
has done for us, this, I say, is solid Consolation. Thou say, when I look
on my Works my Heart sinks, I am not sure I am sincere, but in the
Righteousness of Christ I am safe. I say, this is certain, if thou art not
sincere, thou art not safe: And when I doubt whether I am or not, I can have no
Support but in this, that I hope I am, I trust I am; and that it is upon the
Satisfaction and Merit of Christ, that Faith, that Hope does depend. For that
there is any Condition at all, that the Condition is such, that what I do shall
be accepted as the Condition performed, it must be all put upon Christ's
Performance and Merit in our behalf; and his Merit is sufficient however
imperfect be our Duty, for its acceptance with God. When then upon a Sense of
my Deficiency, instead of sinking I grow bolder in my reliance on Christ's
Merits, and God's Mercy, I do not presume on myself, but I magnify his Grace,
and the higher I raise my Faith thereupon (provided I live not willingly in any
Conscience-wasting Sin) the more Glory (am I humbly persuaded) do I give my
gracious Savior, and good God. Thou Man, have the Comfort to apply to thy self
Christ's Merits, if thou have performed the Condition: But I have the Comfort
to apply Christ's Merits to the Condition, which makes his Yoke easy, and his
Burden light, as to the Performance, and my Desires and weakest Endeavors to
find Acceptance. When I read such Prayers of David, That God would not enter
into Judgment with him, that he would not be extreme to mark what he had done
amiss, for then he could not abide it, and that yet he will have God to search
him, and try his Reins and Heart, and the like, I cannot but be convinced, that
in the Acceptance of such an imperfect Righteousness, as he accounted his was,
through God's mere gracious Condescension, Mercy, and Forgiveness to him he
placed his Justification; in which Sense also he calls him the God of his
Righteousness: When as for any Acceptance of him through the Righteousness of
the Messiah to come, a Righteousness without him made his by Faith, which could
abide God's district Justice, I find not the Footstep of one such Thought. To
rely therefore (I will say) on Christ's Righteousness as ours, without regard
to any thing within, or without regard to the Condition, is Self-deceiving: But
to rely on God's Mercy, and on Christ's Merits for Acceptance of what we do,
and Pardon for the Failings, is substantial Religion; and of Justification by
Faith in Christ's Blood, a good Exposition.


I will fetch here one Leaf out of my late Book, Pacification, and put it into
the Margin, for the Use and Comfort of this Explication.

I return to Mr. Wotton, who indeed does sweat with stir to prove that
Remission of Sin is Righteousness, for wiping off that blame the Papists lay on
his Opinion, that a Man is justified without a Righteousness, if it be by
Pardon only. But this I stick upon, that though pardon in some Sense is, or may
be called Righteousness, yet is it not this Righteousness, it is not the
Righteousness of God I am concerned about that the Apostle means, and which is
(by Mr. Wotton's own acknowledgment) that which justifies the Believer. It did
(I must needs say) at first, and still does move me, that I find not one
Scripture from Genesis to the Revelation, that denominates any one to be a just
or righteous Person from Pardon, but from his righteous living [He that does
Righteousness is righteous]: Yet that which does convince me is, that by Mr.
Wotton's leave, it is not Remission of Sin, in opposition to Works, but this
Righteousness of God in opposition to Works (and that is our Evangelical
Righteousness) which the Apostle means, while he contends that it is by Faith,
and not Works, that we are justified, or that is Faith and not Works is our
Formal Righteousness in Justification. See a peculiar Argument I offer in my
Mid. Way of Just. p. 48. I am (I say) convinced that the Notion the Apostle had
of Justification could not be Pardon, because in his Dispute whether it be by
Faith or Works we are justified, he does suppose, that if a Man had Works, they
would justify him, and make the Reward of Debt, but that Abraham, and none
had, or have them: And consequently while he supposes that if a Man could keep
the Law (as if Adam in Innoceny had kept it) he should be justified, it is
plain he cannot understand Pardon by Justification, seeing where such Works
are, that is perfect Works (which he certainly means) there were no Sin, to
Pardon. This Argument may be more pungently framed than it is here or there,
but the Medium of Probation arose to me in my Mind as perfect Conviction. I
will now define Justification.

Justification is an Act of Free Grace, whereby God imputes to every Sound
Believer his Faith for Righteousness, upon the Account of Christ's Satisfaction
and Merits, giving him Pardon and Life as the Benefits of it. I need say
nothing of the Genus Definiti, [an Act of Free Grace] it is the Assemblies. By
a Sound Believer I mean one, whose Faith works by Love, including Repentance
and New Obedience, which together makes our Evangelical Righteousness: And this
Sound Faith is imputed for Righteousness, I account, in this Sense, that God
does accept it in the room of a perfect Righteousness, not accounting it as
perfect, but accepting it (I say) in the room of that Perfection required unto
Life by the Law, and consequently rewarding it for Christ's Merit sake, as
much, if not more, than if it were that. I add then, giving Pardon and Life, as
the Effects or Benefits, distinguished from the Form of Justification. A Right
to Impunity and Life Christ has purchased, and gives by his Covenant; they
that are justified by this Covenant, are adjudged to these Benefits, so that
Pardon and Salvation flow to us (I say) as the Benefits, and are not the Form
of Justification. One of them is never accounted to be the Form, and by the
same Reason neither may be the other. The Gospel-Law, or Covenant, does both
make and declare all Believers righteous (as having a Right to the Benefits of
it, by Performance of the Condition): But as for this or that particular Person
that is a Believer, or Performer, it is God must be Judge. This Judgment is to
be supposed preceding, and the Benefits to be actually conferred by it. When I
say this Righteousness (or Faith) is the Form, I understand it in that Sense as
these Divines do, who say, Christ's Righteousness is the Form, or Remission is
the Form (the Word therefore is not to be scrupled), not the Form of that
Imputation, but of Justification passively taken. I add at last, upon the
Account of Christ's Merits, or through Christ, or for Christ's sake, because
this Faith of ours, or Evangelick Righteousness, has so many Defects in the
best of Christians, that if through the Sacrifice of Christ they were not
pardoned, and through his Merits that imperfect Duty which is done accepted, it
could not be imputed to us for Righteousness. And I do more especially signify
thereby, that Christ's Righteousness, which cannot be imputed to us as the
Formal Cause of our Justification, is, and must be very carefully brought to
our Account (and granted to be imputed) as the Meritorious Cause of that
Acceptance. And in making it the Meritorious, I have learned of Mr. Baxter, to
allow it to be the Material also (which he says is nothing else but to be the
Matter of that Merit) because I make our Faith the Formal, in our
Justification. After this I distinguish between this pardoning, and bearing
with the Defects of our Faith, Repentance, New Obedience, which are the
Conditions of the Gospel Covenant, and so our Gospel. Righteousness, or that
which is imputed for Righteousness; and that General or Total Pardon which the
Covenant promises, and becomes Absolute upon performing the Condition. The one
of these is that very Grace, or Act of Grace itself, as goes into that Act of
Imputation, or Act, that imputes our Faith for Righteousness, when the other I
say still, is the Effect or Benefit following Justification.

Justification being thus defined by God's imputing a Man's Faith to him for
Righteousness, it may be understood what Mr. Baxter still tell us, that
Justification is the making us righteous, as well as the accounting us
righteous, and dealing with us as righteous. I have been shy hitherto of
admitting the first of these, because of the Papists, but I will now
distinguish. There is a making a Man just or righteous by Infusion, or by
Imputation. Gods making a Man just by Infusion is Regeneration, which the
Papists hold, and we distinguish from Justification. I suppose Mr. Baxter once
intended no other. Those that will have Justification nothing but Forgiveness
do readily grant this, that Justification makes one just, for when Sin is
forgiven, so that there is not the Guilt of any Omission or Commission imputed
to a Person, he is made Righteous by Non-imputation. But I am for neither of
these. Justification is not making a Man righteous by Infusion, nor by Non
imputation, but by Imputation, God imputing our Faith to us for Righteousness.
Per formalem Justificationis causam justi constituimur. Our Faith and
Evangelick Obedience is imperfect and sinful, and we are unrighteous in the Eye
of the Law for all that, but God in his judging us according to the Law of
Grace, does allow of that for Christ's sake, instead of all which the Law
requires to our Justification. By this may that Expression of the Apostle, that
God justifies the Ungodly, be rightly understood. Not in the Sense or either of
the former, that take it only in Sensu diviso, so that he who before his
Justification was ungodly, is no longer so after, but In sensu composito. Our
Faith, I say, or Evangelical Obedience, in regard to the Law, or in regard to
those Works that are required by the Law to our Justification, are no
Righteousness, no Righteousness which in its own Nature would justify us, but
God constitutes it such by the Law of the Gospel, and according to that Law
imputes it to us for Righteousness. A Man believes; Let us suppose that Sound
Faith; The Spirit must have been given to work it in him; Where the Spirit is
given to work inherent Grace in a Person, he is Regenerate; But this
Regeneration is not Justification. For suppose a Regenerate Man should live all
his Life as righteously as he is able, yet if God should deal with him
according to the Law of Works, he is still ungodly in that regard, and he could
not be justified, and God's dealing with him otherwise according to his Law of
Grace, and accounting or adjudging him righteous by that Law, notwithstanding
all his Failings for Christ's sake, is this imputing Faith to him for
Righteousness, which is the Formal Reason of Justification.

I must take leave to rake this again a little over, for I see some need, and I
must confess Mr. Baxter has perplexed me often as to this particular. In some
of his Books he speaks of Justification, making us just by Pardon, which
freeing us from the Guilt of all Sin, Omission, and Commission, does make us
(he accounts) righteous as we can be made. In others he seems to understand
with Augustine, that Justification makes us just by Grace inherent. A Man must
believe and repent before he is justified; He cannot do that without God's
Grace; God does therefore first make him righteous by this inherent Grace,
before he accounts him just, or deals with him as such. Mr. Baxter was induced
to this (I think) by the Judicious Le Blanc, who apprehends that there are
three or four places (for which he quotes some of our chief Protestants) that
make Justification the same with Sanctification. Unto which Texts I should
choose rather to give Answer according to others, than to consent to this,
because it comes so near the Papists, as to leave us almost no difference from
them. I will therefore advance here a Distinction to the same purpose as but
now, which among the many Mr. Baxter has, he yet has not, and it is this.
There is a threefold making a Man just. By Conversion, or Regeneration, and
this is Austine's, and the Papists Justification. By Pardon, and this is Mr.
Wotton's Justification. Or by the Righteousness of God, which I made the
Subject of these Sheets, as something between Protestant and Papist, and this
is God's imputing our Faith for Righteousness, which is my Justification, and I
will call it mine, because I take it to be the Scriptures, where it is expressly
delivered, as cannot be gainsaid. The Papists Opinion (to make things clear) is
that the Grace of God infused is the Formal Righteousness that justifies us, or
makes us just in God's sight, according to the Law of Works. Justitia
Habitualis a Deo infusa satis est ut homo illa indutus possit in Divino judicio
sisti and vere justus haberi. In this Sense the Protestants lay down this
contrary Position, that a Sinner is justified, not by any Formal Righteousness
in himself, but by the Mercy of God, through the Satisfaction of Christ. The
Protestants I own here against the Papist, according to the Papists Sense. Our
Faith, or Evangelick Righteousness, or inherent Grace (I must say this over) is
imperfect, and cannot be our Formal Righteousness according to the Law, it is
no Conformity to the Law of Works, and they of Trent thought of no other: but
our imperfect Faith, Repentance, New Obedience, is a Conformity to that which
God has made the Condition of Life by his Law of Grace, or the Gospel, and is
our Formal Righteousness according to that Law, being made so by that Act of
Imputation, which may be attributed to God, or his Law, when he imputes it to
us for Righteousness, as I have had it already. By the Evangelical Law this is
our Righteousness, we are made righteous, that is, not guilty of the
Nonperformance of the Condition, according to Mr. Baxter. To this purpose
aforesaid I will note, that when in that remarkable Text ( Romans 3.30.)
Predestination, Calling, Justification, and Glorification, are linked without
mentioning Sanctification, we must suppose that intended, either in Calling, or
Justification, and I have always received it under Calling, that is Effectual
Calling, or Conversion. Now a Man is converted, and he believes, and repents;
but this being no Righteousness according to the Law, there comes after
Calling, Justification, and it is that makes this imperfect Believing,
Repenting, New Obedience, to become our Righteousness by Imputation. God's
imputing it to us for Righteousness, making it by that Act, Et Juris and
Judicis, to serve us in the room of such a Righteousness as is perfect,
rewarding it for Christ's sake, as he would the other. The having Faith,
Repentance, New Obedience, is one thing, the having it accepted for
Righteousness is another. The one is Regeneration, or Sanctification, the other
Justification, and without the one, there cannot be the other. Fides inquiunt
justitia nostra formalis esse non potest: Concedo (upon his Opinion he must say
so, not I, though in the Popish Sense I say Concedo too), At potest a Deo
justitiae loco haberi, ut preater ipsam nihil amplius a nobis flagitet ad
justitiam consequendum, says Mr. Wotton.

As for this Righteousness of God now in his imputing to the Believer his
Faith, or the Performance of the Evangelick Condition for Righteousness, we
must not conceive as Dr. Owen objects, that here is an Imputation only of that
which is ours, so that accounting it an imperfect Righteousness, God cannot
deal with us, but only according to an imperfect one: When he does certainly
deal with us according to a perfect one, and we understand so by this
Imputation. Dr. Owen (who never gave the Matter its due Consideration, not
perhaps Mr. Baxter neither) Philosophizes thus. There is an Imputation to us of
a thing that is Ours, and that is judging it Ours, and dealing with us
accordingly: Or of a thing which is not Ours, and that is by a Donation of it
on some just Ground, and dealing with us according to it made Ours. Of this he
makes the Application, that our Righteousness cannot, but Christ's must, be
that which is imputed to our Justification. But I will Philosophize otherwise,
and so may any that When ever we read of Imputing or Accounting to a Man a
thing that is good, it is an Act of Grace, and Law-acceptilation, and signifies
something which is not. Truman's Endeavor, p. 222.
please. As there is therefore an imputing to a Person that which is His, or
that which is not His: So is there an imputing also to a Person that which is
partly His, and partly not His, but that which in the Effect may become His too
by the Imputation. Such is the Case here, but never sunk in the Doctor's Mind.
There are two things in the matter I have said before from Luther, Our Faith,
and God's Imputation. Our Faith, or the Evangelick Condition performed which is
Ours, and God's Imputation which brings with it (in the Effect I say) that
which was not Ours, that is the Satisfaction and Merits of Christ (his
Satisfaction for Pardoning the Failings, and his Merit for accepting that which
is done though imperfect) to the accounting us righteous, and dealing with us
no otherwise than if we were perfect. A Man that has not a legal sinless
Perfection (for that is meant by the Ungodly, Romans 4.5.) his Faith is accounted
for Righteousness, that is, his Faith shall avail him as much to all intents,
and stand him in as much stead as a perfect sinless Righteousness would do,
says Sir Charles Wolesley in his Book of Evangelical Justification. This is
most certain, that there is no Grace vouchsafed to a Sinner from God, in order
to Life, but upon the Account of Christ's Satisfaction and Merit, against the
Socinian: When this exceeding Grace and Favor therefore that an imperfect
Righteousness is accepted in the room of a perfect one (as is intended in this
express Scripture, that says, Our Faith is imputed for Righteousness), the
Satisfaction and Merits of Christ must be supposed as its Foundation: And
consequently they are imputed to our Faith for its Acceptance, as we say they
are imputed to us for Ours. That Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us, we
assume without Scripture, but this is express that Righteousness is imputed,
and that our Faith is imputed for Righteousness; and it will be strange if any
shall question an Imputation of Christ's Merit to our Duty when it is accepted,
and accepted only through him. Our Dissenting Brethren in their Printed
Agreement (Dec. 1692.) have these Words. God looking on the Good Works of
Believers in his Son, is pleased to accept and reward that which is sincere,
though accompanied with many Weaknesses and Imperfections. I quote these Words
not as rare, but as the common Judgment, to show, that an Imputation of
Christ's Merit to our Duty, is undeniable. Here are the Believers Works, and
that is our imperfect inchoate Obedience, and this accepted, and it is accepted
in Christ, that must be through his Satisfaction and Merit, and is rewarded too
upon his Account. What is there more in the accepting our Persons in
Justification? Our maimed Righteousness is accepted to Salvation as if it were
perfect (says one Dr. Owen cites) for that it should be so, Christ has merited
by his most perfect Righteousness. When this unnamed Author says, As if it were
perfect, he accounts it, it is not so Legally, or In se, but Evangelically, or
quoad Effectum; that is, it stands us in the stead of a perfect one, through
the Merits of Christ. And unto this saying of his (whosoever he be) does that
Elder in the Revelations well accord, who tells St. John, that the Robes of the
Saints, which are their inherent Grace, their Good Works or Holy Life, are made
white (that is rewardable with Glory) by their washing them in the Blood of the
Lamb. We are accepted in the Beloved, that is, in Christ. We are accepted in
Christ no otherwise than our Duty is accepted, that is, as the Meritorious
Cause of that Acceptance. The Satisfaction and Merit of Christ, is that upon
the Account whereof God does justify us: But if Christ's Righteousness it self
be imputed to us, it is not Meritorie upon the Account thereof, but Formaliter,
that we are justified by it.

Before I yet quite leave Mr. Wotton, there are two Texts most commonly urged
by those that define Justification only by Remission, which I must speak to,
not stopping at Human Argument unbacked with Authority of Scripture.

The one is, Acts 13.38. Be it known unto you Men and Brethren, that through
this Man is preached to you Forgiveness of Sins. And by him all that believe
are justified from all things from which ye could not be justified by the Law
of Moses. For this Text I have forelaid a Distinction with some Reference in my
Mind to it. There is a double Remission I have said, a Remission that precedes
Justification, and a Remission that comes after it. That which goes before
Justification belongs to All but upon Condition, and that is this Remission,
which in the former Verse of the two is Preached by the Apostle, A Universal
Conditional Remission, and all one with Redemption. This now being Preached to
all, some believe, and perform the Condition, and as it follows in the other
Verse, are accordingly justified, and then this General Conditional Pardon
before Preached becomes Absolute, or Actual to such Particular Persons, and
they are thereby free from the Guilt and Punishment of all their Sins
whatsoever, even such as there was no Atonement allowed to be made by the Law
of Moses. The Law, or Covenant of the Gospel promises Pardon and Life upon
Condition. He that performs the Condition has Right to the one and the other,
but a Man must be Justified before he is Glorified, and therefore before
pardoned also. There is a Pardon procured by Christ, granted and passed by God
(we must suppose as an Act of Grace passing in Parliament). This Pardon is
given out orderly. The Condition must be performed, the Judge find it, and then
the Man has the Benefit. This aforesaid Distinction therefore is exemplified
in this Text, and seeing there is no Particular Actual Pardon, 'till Man's
Believing, and God's Justification (which is his accounting or declaring him a
Believer) do orderly intervene, as to the Course of the Nature of the Thing, it
is plain, that Remission (this Remission as well as the other) is not
Justification itself, but a Benefit of the Covenant, that as Conditional goes
before, but as Actual, or Absolute (which is that a Particular Man enjoys) does
follow Justification (I must say still) as the Effect of it.

The other Text is in Romans 4. where Paul showing that it is not by Works, but
by Faith that we are justified after Abraham's Example, he lays down this
Position, That not to him that works, but believes, his Faith is accounted
for Righteousness: And then in the next Verse coming to bring Proof from David,
he ushers it in these Words, Even as David also described the Blessedness of
that Man unto whom God imputes Righteousness without Works, whereby it is
plain indeed, that he intends the same thing by God's counting to a Man his
Faith for Righteousness, and imputing to him Righteousness without Works (that
is, such Works, Meritorious Works, Perfect Works, which Paul in the Verses
before undoubtedly intends): But it is not so in the Quotation itself, which
thus follows, Blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven, and Sins covered.
Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord will not impute Sin. It is a mistake here
in those many, who think this Non-imputation of Sin in this Verse, is the same
with the imputing Righteousness without Works, and Faith for Righteousness in
the former. St. Paul does intend indeed those two before for one, but this he
intends only for a Probation. He proves that God imputes Righteousness to a Man
without Works, or Faith for Righteousness, by this Medium that they are blessed
who are forgiven. Now however these Words are construed, this is no Definition
of Justification by Faith without Works, but I say a Probation. The Man is
blessed whose Sin is pardoned; The Man therefore has Sin to be forgiven; He
that has Sin, has not Works (such as Paul speaks of) to justify him; If the
blessed Man then be a justified Man, it is evident thereupon, that it is not by
Works one is justified. However, from a Probation, this Identity cannot be
argued. They are blessed, in one Verse, to whom Righteousness is imputed
without Works. They are blessed, in another, to whom God imputes not Sin.
Ergo, Non-imputation of Sin, and imputing Righteousness without Works are the
same. I deny the Argument. Blessed are they that hear the Word, and keep it.
Blessed are they whose Sins are forgiven. Ergo, Hearing and obeying the Word is
Forgiveness of Sin. But leaving such Pushpin of Pro and Con, I will take up
with this. That which is made a Medium, or the Medius Terminus, to prove
another thing, cannot be that thing (or intended for the same thing) that it
proves: And seeing the Quotation out of the Psalmist [ The Man is blessed whose
Sins are forgiven] is brought by the Disputant for a Probation of his Point in
hand that a Man is justified by Faith, and not by Works, I am sufficiently
persuaded, that Non-imputation of Sin, or Pardon is not intended by him to be
the same thing with Justification. If any require more Consideration in regard
to these two Texts, let him read a Book called, The Christian Justification
stated. I need say no more but thus much, which is not said there, or thoroughly
comprehended by that Author.

I know indeed, and will not pass it, that Mr. Truman, a Man of a bright
Judgment, defines Justification as Mr. Wotton, by Pardon only, and says that
Justification is no more, or has no more in it than Pardon, and therefore is
all one with it. This, in regard to the common Opinion, which says it is more
(defining it by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, as well as
Forgiveness of Sin) is to the purpose. But what if I say Pardon is more than
Justification, then is it nothing to me. For whether Justification be more than
Pardon, or Pardon more than Justification, if one be more than the other, they
are not the same. Now Pardon is a Fruit or Benefit of Justification, and a
Thing alone is not so much as the Thing and its Benefit. Pardon and Life makes
up Salvation, for Salvation from Wrath is Pardon, and to Glory is Life, but
Salvation coming after, is a farther Blessing, and more indeed than
Justification only. Pardon, Mr. Truman says farther (of all Sins, he means,
both of Omission and Commission) puts a Man in that State as if he had offended
the Law in nothing, and that is all one with a State as if he had performed the
Law in every thing, and therefore Pardon and Justification are the same. Our
Divines he opposes deny these States to be one. Though they be consequentially
one, they are in their Nature different. Pardon is of the Guilty: Justification
of him that pleads Not Guilty. But I will suppose Mr. Truman in the right, and
that Pardon puts a Man in a State as if he had trespassed in nothing (which
Quoad rearum poenae is true), and consequently as if he had obeyed in all
things, And therefore do I deny Justification to be Pardon, because the Formal
Righteousness of our Justification, which is the Righteousness of Faith only
imputed to us for Righteousness, is not a Righteousness that has offended in
nothing, and obeyed in every thing, as Mr. Truman describes Pardon, but is an
inchoate imperfect Righteousness, that has Failings covered with Christ's
Satisfaction, and its Work done (I may say still) accepted only through his
Merit, so that the more acute this Man is, and the further he does go, the more
he is out, and must be, so long as he has not once the Sense upon his Mind
(through his whole Book called, The Great Propitiation, nor in his other two)
of the Righteousness of God, which the Apostle himself gives us as the Handle,
and the only Handle to understand his Doctrine of Justification by.

This one thing yet is to be noted, that these worthy Men that define
Justification by Pardon only, and say it is impossible that a Sinner can be
justified, or made, and accounted righteous, any otherwise, do yet plead for a
Personal Evangelical Righteousness as necessary to Justification, as much, or
more than others. Witness Sir Charles Wolesley. This now to me is a
Contradiction, unless it be understood a part post only. For, if Pardon only
can make a Sinner righteous, how can there be any Personal Righteousness
preceding it? The Matter is thus. Before a Man believes and repents, he is not
pardoned or made righteous by Pardon, that is certain. When a Man performs the
Evangelick Condition, it is the Evangelick Law, (or God by it as his
Instrument) makes him, or constitutes him righteous, and being thereby so made,
God must account him so, which is all one with imputing that Condition
performed for Righteousness, or justifying him. This Constitutive Justification
then proceeding in Order of Nature, though not in Time, Pardon, and Life do
follow as the Fruit or Benefits of it. Note here, that when the Evangelick Law
does constitute the Performer of the Condition righteous, it is righteous quoad
hoc only, for he is ungodly, that is, Not righteous still (as I say before) in
regard to the Law, but righteous as not guilty of the Accusation of his
Nonperformance of the Condition of the Gospel: So that after this
Righteousness Quoad hoc, a Universal Righteousness of Not Guilty of any
Omission, or Commission that brings a Man into a State as if he had offended in
nothing, and fulfilled the Law in every thing, as Mr. Truman describes Pardon,
does manifestly appear to be a farther Benefit or Blessing than Justification
strictly taken. What may be understood by it largely taken, may be considered
hereafter before I have done.

The Third PART.
BEfore I come to any Close of my Discourse, there is a matter of Four Things
to be proposed (whether by way of Question, or Objection, it is indifferent),
as necessary for the Satisfaction of such as have the Reason, Candor, and
Christian Humility to seek it.

The First is this. The Scripture, and those therefore that duly preach it,
does call upon all Men to believe and repent, in order to their Justification
and Salvation, and when Faith and Repentance are required as Conditions of
being justified, how can that which is pre-requisite as a Condition, be made,
or become the Form, Formal Cause, or Formal Reason of Justification? This I put
first, because I believe here, that nothing almost that a Scholar (who has got
Aristotelian Terms in his Head, putting his Physical Constructions on Divinity
Points) is like to be more gravelled at than at this. But it is nothing (let
Terms or Words be once looked through), for it is this is the very thing I
affirm and stand upon, that what God has made the Condition of his Covenant,
and the Blessings thereof, and so of our Justification, before it is performed,
when performed does become the Formal Righteousness that justifies us. God does
by that Act of Imputation (Instrumentally done by his Word) make our Faith
which is not in itself a Righteousness, to become our Righteousness, and as it
becomes a Righteousness, it is made the Formal Reason of our Justification.
There is the Carpenter's Work, the Bricklayer's Work, the Smith's Work, goes to
the Building a House: There must be therefore Timber, Bricks, and Iron
prepared, and the preparing these are Conditions of the Building, or Materials,
before, but when the House is built, they all put together are the House it
self, and as a House, the Formal Cause, Formal Reason, or Form of it.

A Second Thing to be proposed is this. Our Divines we know, do ordinarily
bring together Remission of Sin, and the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
into the Matter of our justification, and when the Assembly have given us a
Definition comprizing the same Things I do in mine, why should I offer another?
Unto this I will make that Answer as ought to content any honest Man, that
would have but such a one as he would be allowed himself to give, and I say,
that I do readily give my Suffrage to the Assembly's Catechism to be learned
and used above any I know, and am not concerned though a Learner of it be not
so accurate in his Understanding as to see any Difference between my Definition
and theirs, when what is in mine, is in theirs, and what in theirs, is in mine.
I am persuaded that a believed grosser Knowledge of the Principles of Religion,
is better for ordinary People, than that which is more exact, and I receive all
that is in their Definition, only with liberty of Explication. In Justification
I acknowledge a Forgiveness, and an Imputation of Christ's Obedience, but I do
not acknowledge either as our Formal Righteousness. I say, Forgiveness is a
Benefit we receive by it, but it is not the Formal Reason of it: and I
acknowledge Christ's Righteousness imputed, Sub genere causae efficientis per
modum meriti, and so received by Faith not in itself, but in the Merit of it
only. And I give Notice that he who thinking more does say, that Christ's
Righteousness In fe, is made ours Legally (though Physically and Morally he
disowns it) that Man must make it to justify us, Sub ratione causae formalis,
when perhaps he does not know it, which is an unadvised Position, I look upon,
as that (...), of our former great Divines which gave the Rise to Antimonianism.

A Third Thing to be proposed is. Our Protestants have their Mouths full of
Christ's Righteousness imputed, when the Scripture has no such Expression, and
what has not Authority from Scripture, may be again refused, Eadem facilitate
(says Hierom) as it has been received. It is sit therefore this be a little
examined into, and there may be two Questions asked. The one, What is there in
the thing at bottom, as to the reality and truth of it? The other, And what
then shall we say to it? For the First, That which is in reality in this
Matter, The Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, is, that Christ by the
Appointment of his Father, and his own Good Will, did undertake in our behalf
to do and suffer what was required of us to suffer by the Law, so far, that the
Honor of God, in regard to his Law, being saved, and the Ends thereof secured,
we that were liable to Damnation, might be delivered from it, in the Way or
Manner the Father and Son designed, which is by that Act of Grace promulgated
in the Gospel, that upon our believing and repenting we shall be justified, and
so pardoned, and have Life Everlasting. And what then shall we say thereupon,
but that the very Righteousness of Christ In se, did go into, or may be said
imputed unto the Impetration of this great Benefit for us, but the Benefit
only, and not his Righteousness can be ours in the Application. That we should
be justified by Faith, was obtained by Christ's Righteousness or Performance,
but it is our Faith, not Christ's Performance, is imputed to us for
Righteousness in our Justification. Christ's Righteousness is that for which,
not by which, Causa propter quam, not Per quam, we have this Benefit, that upon
on believing we are justified. The Application is our Work, the Impetration
Christ's; the Imputation of what he did to us God's; And there is no such thing
can be, as the making that formally ours by the Application. As for the
Commutation of Persons (which while some Divines, as Dr. Owen, do found in the
Mystical Union, instead of the Hypostatical, between Christ and Believers, they
make I know not what of it) I acknowledge such a one, as is necessary to the
Impetration of our Redemption, but I understand none so as to go into the
Applicacation. Christ took on him our Flesh, made Satisfaction in our stead,
and procured an Act of Grace, or Pardon for all: But there is no Commutation I
know, as to Particular Persons in the Point of Justification. If Christ made an
Exchange of his Righteousness with Peter for his Sins, any otherwise than as to
the Impetration of Pardon on Condition that concerns all alike, then Christ's
Righteousness must now be Peter's, and James, and John could never have it. In
Christ's uniting himself to us, by his taking our Nature, obeying, suffering,
satisfying God's Justice, I acknowledge a Commutation, even such, to wit, that
our Sins were so imputed to him, as that he died for them, and in our stead,
(understanding the Phrases aright) and his Righteousness so imputed as to be
the Cause, that upon our believing we enjoy the Benefit: But in Christ's
uniting us to him, by giving his Spirit to work in us that Condition, whereby
we have our Right to the Benefit, there is nothing done by him in Our stead,
nothing by us in His, no new, no other, no farther Imputation. The Fruit of his
Purchase (Pardon and Salvation by a Law of Grace) cannot be His, and if that
that he communicates to us be not his, how is there a Commutation? Of this
Sacrifice and Righteousness itself we are incapable: Of the Effects and Fruits
(as Pardon of Sin) he is incapable. What he has not, he cannot communicate:
What he has, we cannot receive. There is, there can be no substitution of
Person, in our partaking the Benefits purchased, as there was, there must be,
in the purchasing them for us. Pacif. p. 16. Then Pacif. p. 30, 31, 32. What I
have said before about the Commutation of Persons, that it is to be held in
regard to the Impetration, not Application of our Redemption, I would offer
over again likewise, in regard to the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. I
have said, and said it over, that this Phrase is not found in Scripture, but I
will acknowledge the thing in the true Sense of it, which is this. Christ Jesus
did really obey the Law, and suffer its Penalty for us in the Sense of, in our
place of stead. To do a thing now in my stead, is for another to do it so, as
to save me the doing it. Christ's suffering and obeying was to save us that
suffering and obeying. In what respect I show there -- And in the next Page I
go on. God looks not on us, as if we our selves had obeyed or suffered, either
in his Person, or he to have done it strictly in Ours, but that he obeyed and
suffered Loco nostro, to free us from so Obeying (there shown) and suffering as
he himself did, which is the making his Death and Obedience Ours only as to
this Benefit. Thus much being right, and the Righteousness of, Christ
consisting in this Obedience, and suffering thus in our room, what now at last
is the Imputation of it? Why certainly the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
is, and must be nothing else, but God's accounting the Matter to be thus as it
is. Here is the Point, that what Christ has done, is looked upon, is accepted
as done in our behalf, or the granting it to be so; that, upon this obeying and
suffering of his in our place, as the Meritorious Cause, we shall be freed from
the same, as the Effect of it. This is the only Fundamental Truth in the
Phrase, and this Imputation then of Christ's Righteousness (which Man has so
phrased) going into this Grant on God's part, or Obtaining the Grant on
Christ's part, which precedes the Application, it cannot go into the
Application itself (that follows after upon Performance of the Gospel-Terms) so
as to make Christ's Righteousness Ours, any otherwise than in this Benefit
only. Besides this, the fancying such Acts in God, as the imputing Christ's
Righteousness to every single Person upon his believing, any otherwise than by
that one Act of Grace now promulgated in the Gospel, is not becoming the Divine
Being. There is, there can be no new Act in God. He is Actus purus, his Will
one. I must not grow too subtle here, only I must say, there is his Will, and
the Effects of his Will, and in those Effects there is an Order. In that Order
the Righteousness of Christ precedes the Impetration of all the Benefits we
have by him, as the Meritorious Cause of them. The Impetration precedes the
Application, and the Application can be therefore but of the Effects thereof.
Not of this Righteousness (I say) itself (In se) but of the Benefits themselves
we have by it. To be more short. That Commutation of Persons, and Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness (which comes both in earnest to this one thing, Man's
Benefit upon the Account of Christ's Satisfaction) howsoever the Thoughts
thereof have amused so many Good Men, when you have thoroughly considered them,
and made as much of them as ever you can, it must all of it, every Drop of it
you can make, go into that Act of Grace (Salvation upon Gospel-Conditions)
which is already procured and passed. Unto the Impetration then of our
Redemption Christ's Righteousness was indeed imputed In se: In the Application
it can be imputed only in the Effect.
I have delivered my Conceptions more fully in my late Book, ( Pacif. p. 30,
31, 32.), not without Care, but without Reservation. There are none as yet have
wrote upon it, but when Mr. Williams, or some other shall, those that attend
this Dispute, shall be the better able to judge of it. For my part, I have put
no Life or Vigor into my Notion by my Words, which are there very poor, but
the plain dull Sense I am persuaded does carry that Truth in it, as when it
comes into a more Authoritative Pen may be received. This is a common thing by
Experience, that let a Notion be offered by an ordinary Body, it is like to
lie, but if some Person of Credit takes it up, it goes current. I never read in
any before myself said it in my first Impression (about 25 Years since) of my
Mid. Way of Just (though many perhaps I know not, might have said it, it being
now ordinary in Pulpit and Press) that Paul by the Righteousness of his Own,
which he renounces ( Romans 10.2. Phil. 3.9.) must be understood of his
Righteousness as a Jew, and not of his Christian Righteousness (that is His
own, not Another's own,) which if he be not found in, he could not be saved:
But after Sir Charles Wolesley in his Book, said the same, I cannot but note,
how that grave, learned, holy, humble, worthy, and the more worthy because
humble, Mr. Samuel Cradock, in his Supplement to Knowledge and Practice, upon a
deeper Reflection on the Point than he seems to have had in his former most
Industrious, Thanks-deserving Books (his Harmony of the Evangelists, his
Apostolic History, and his History of the Old Testament, all Methodized) falls
in with Sir Charles, and acquiescently receives the same Notion from him, which
if he had read in me (from whom I know Sir Charles took it) it is ten to one,
but he had passed it unregarded. There was Mr. Hotchkis, since that Paper of
mine, and others that I could name, with Mr. Williams, have consented to that
Apprehension, but there is that Book before-named, The Christian Justification
stated, Printed 1678, has so exceeding well improved it (a sober Writer, but
no University-Man) that he has, I think, carried the Bell in it. But Mr.
Cradock I have named more purposely, because if any shall be willing to write
against my Books, I would have him read those three Pages, ( p. 184, 185, 186.)
of his Book mentioned, and when he shall be first seasoned with the gracious
Spirit, and modest Judgment of that Orthodox Author, and then find there the
Doctrine of Imputation so thoroughly corrected, and an Interpretation of these
Texts (2 Cor. 5.21. Phil. 3.9. Romans 5.19.) so perfectly concordant with what I
have wrote, it may be enough to calm him if furious, if but contrary minded to
satisfy him. And nevertheless Mr. Cradock is out as to one thing by following
Sir Charles, which is in his making Justification to be all one with Remission
of Sin, as Mr. Hotchkis, after Mr. Wotton has done, who made it (I have shown)
the Formal Righteousness of our Justification. Mr. Bradshaw, who wrote after
Mr. Wotton, and saw what he had wrote (as I believe by his Epistle to his
excellent little Treatise) tells us on the contrary, that Pardon and
Justification are two things, and so diverse in their Nature, that he who has
committed a Fault, if he be pardoned without making amends, he cannot be
justified.

I have therefore a Last Thing to be proposed, which will take up more room,
and it is this. Our Divines, myself, and all agree against the Socinian about
Christ's Satisfaction, that it is upon Acc^^^t thereof we are justified, and
how then can it be by our Faith, and the Imputation thereof for Righteousness,
as I have defined Justification? Here the Business I have now left me to do, is
to show the concurrence of Faith, which is our Evangelical Righteousness, and
Christ's Satisfaction which was his (but not our) Legal Righteousness, without
any inconsistency as to both in our Justification. And this I must say is no
hard Matter to do, seeing the true Conception lies in the Thoughts of most
considerate Men, only for want of a more fixed and resolved Judgment the
Vacillation remains. To proceed in it, I must return to Mr. Bradshaw where I
left. He has told us, That if a Fault be charged on a Person, that Man cannot
be justified but by the Plea, either that the thing was not done by him, or if
done, it was no fault, which is pleading Not Guilty, as David was justified by
Saul; or by pleading that Amends is made for the Fault. Now Amends may be made
either by one's self, or by another: And by another, either as one whom he has
got to do it, or one that does it of his own accord: Where Satisfaction is made
by a Man's Self, or by one he has got to do it (which we must conceive done to
the same End as himself would have done it) a Man is to be accounted to be
restored into the same State, in regard to the Party offended, as he was before
the Fault was committed, that is, to be immediately justified, made righteous,
or clear of the Fault: But it is not so, where Satisfaction is neither made by
a Man's self, nor by any means of his Procurement (only another out of Pity and
Compassion to him, has agreed with the offended Party, and by a valuable
Consideration for the Fault has satisfied him), for here the Person for whom
Satisfaction is made, is not justifiable any otherwise, but as the Person that
made the Satisfaction for him did intend, together with the offended Party, who
might have refused that Satisfaction, so that they may agree both upon Terms to
be imposed on the Party offending for reaping the benefit of that Satisfaction.
This is the Case between God, Christ, and Us. We finned, Our selves could make
no Amends, nor did any thing to procure Christ to do it. Christ has done it
voluntarily, but with the Intent, and by his Father's Agreement, that we shall
repent and believe, and be judged true penitent Believers (which is justifying
us) before we are Partakers of the Benefit intended. We are not to conceive of
this Matter any otherwise, for this is the Tenor of the New Covenant procured
by our Redeemer hereby. On our part, Faith, Repentance, is required as the
Condition: On God's part the Benefits of Christ's Satisfaction are promised:
Upon our sincere believing God judges us Performers: That Performance he
imputes to us for Righteousness: Upon the Account of Christ's Merits it is
done, and the Benefits are conferred, which are freedom from Punishment, and
Eternal Salvation.

As for the Imputation now of Christ's Satisfaction to the Believer, which must
be allowed so far as our being justifiable thereupon does import, we are to
understand farther, that it is not necessary that what is imputed to the
Justification of another, should be reputed as done by him that is justified,
though what is imputed is accepted for that he should have done, that is accepted
in the room or place of it, which I have been careful to keep to, in my last
Sheets; Nay, though I say farther, that when the Satisfaction of another is
imputed to the Justification of a Man, the Trespasses of that other, after a
sort must be said imputed to him, and yet neither is that Satisfaction
Formaliter made his that is justified, nor that Trespass Formaliter made his
that makes the Satisfaction, but Effective or Meritorie only, in the one's
bearing the Punishment, and the other obtaining the Benefit of it. This being
understood, when our Divines do account that we are justified by Christ's
Satisfaction so as to be made just by it, and accordingly to be made righteous
by the Righteousness of another, which is being made just by Imputation: Such
Words (I count) ought to be a little changed, and the Sense verified. It should
not be said by, but through Christ's Satisfaction, through his Righteousness,
through the Imputation of it, and then that Truth which is in it is this, that
through Christ's Satisfaction or Righteousness, or Imputation of it as the
Meritorious Cause (which we know is an external Cause moving the Efficient to
act) we are indeed justified, but by no means must we understand them so, as
that it is the Formal Cause of our Justification.

But the truth is here, that our former Polemical Divines (even the chief) in
opposition to a Man's being justified by any Works, Merits, or Righteousness of
his own, maintained against the Papists, that it is by Christ's Righteousness,
Sub genere causae formalis, that we are justified, or that Christ's
Righteousness is so made ours by Faith, as to be the Formal Reason of our
Justification. Our excellent Dr. Davenant undertook this Task (whosoever in
those times did not), but where the Scripture is for us, we are to trust no
Mortal against it. The Question as he proposes it is, Quae and qualis illa
justitia sit quae coram Deo hominem justificat, hoc est, cujus intuitu ipse
Deus hominem a peccato and poena peccati liberum pronunciet, atque favore suo
and vita aeterna dignum reputet. Let us define the Thing by its Form, and speak
this Hoc est in short, Cujus intuitu hominem credentem justum reputat. Now
Cujus intuitu, all know is all one with Id propter quod, that is the
Meritorious Cause only, when he would maintain that Christ's Righteousness is
the Causa formalis, that is Causa per quam, we are justified. He therefore
being put to it is forced to affirm thus, In Justificatione talis formalis
causa ponenda est quae simul and meritoria esse possit. His Reason for it is
out of the same Quiver, that is, more Words for the bearing out an absurd
Affirmation, by putting some Face upon it. I am sufficiently assured he has
shot beyond the Mark, and I will not go after his Arrow. By the way, there are
two places I remember, where we are said to be justified by Christ's Blood, but
it is (...), and should be translated, through his Blood, and must be
interpreted no otherwise than Cujus intuitu, that is, as the Meritorious Cause,
I say, not as by Faith in his Blood, which is the Formal Cause of our
Justification. When we speak therefore and allow our Divines to speak of the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness as they ordinarily do, we must understand
them so as never to make our selves the Proprietors of that righteousness (
Legally, or any way else impossible), or that Faith so makes it ours as to be
our Formal Righteousness (which when we see such great Divines have held, no
wonder if the lesser Fry do swallow), but that it is the Cause for which (as I
have said before) not the Cause by which we are justified. And here I will give
Mr. Williams Notice, that this is the Reason why the very Righteousness of
Christ cannot be imputed to us but in the Effects, because I say that if it
were imputed to us In se, it must (according to our opposite Brethren) be then
our Formal Righteousness, which he and I are to deny. I must confess, I think
Mr. Williams might not have so fully digested this before, (as likewise myself)
as he may now, and that the Expression of his which I have exagitated in my
Book, with that which follows in his, that Christ's Righteousness is pleadable
by the Believer, as if himself had done and suffered what Christ did; as also,
To impute to one what is suffered by another, is to esteem the one undertaken
for in the Sufferings of the other, and to deal with him as if himself had
suffered, are shot too high. For if a Man had made Satisfaction himself, or God
did impute Christ's Satisfaction to him, so as if himself had made it, then
were this his Formal Righteousness, and there were no need of that of Faith,
this alone being that which must immediately justify him. If therefore there
be such a thing to be expected ever from Mr. Williams, as any Vestigia
retrorsum, I will be ready to look for the Prints thereof made in the Words I
have quoted, as well as his Brethren may in any others.

But the Difficulty concerning the Point of the Concurrence of Christ's
Righteousness and Ours in the matter of Justification is not yet off our hands:
For there is a Sermon of Mr. Gibbons, that Mr. Baxter often commended, which I
think fit to mention. This Gentleman has treated the Doctrine of Justification
as I. Righteousness (says he) is a Conformity to the Law: A Man is actually
justified, when he is constituted righteous. The New Law runs thus, He that
believes shall not perish: The Believer keeps or fulfils this Law: Faith
therefore is imputed to him for Righteousness: The Lawgiver by his very making
the Law constitutes him righteous, and the Judge must pronounce him so. The
Gospel then justifies Qua lex Lata, Faith justifies Vi Legis latae: As the
King's Stamp gives the Value to the Money. I set this together, and quote it
for the clearness of it, and my approbation to it. Nevertheless he tells us
also, That it is Christ's Satisfaction in respect to the Law of Works that is
our proper Legal Righteousness, and I call it (says he) Our Righteousness,
because it becomes imputed to us upon believing. These are Words that in
appearance are Ambidextrous, holding with the Hound, and running with the Hare,
as the Proverb is, unless we put an Understanding upon them, which I am not
sure that very ingenuous (but young) Man did. As likewise such Words (or Sense)
as Mr. Williams has somewhere concerning this double Righteousness, Christ's
and Ours, accounting the one the Principal, and the other Subordinate to it.
Now, if Mr. Gibbons, or Mr. Williams, hitherto should have conceived our
Righteousness we call Evangelical, to be Subordinate to Christ's, which was His
(but not Our) Legal Righteousness, Sub ratione ejusdem causae, they are Mired:
But when thus much is forelaid, that Christ's Righteousness does concur to our
Justification only, Sub genere, sub ratione, or Per modum causae efficientis
Meritoriae, and not Per modam causae formalis, it is but understanding that the
Meritorious Cause in our Justification it preferred before, or valued above the
Formal (which without the Virtue of that were none) by such Expressions, and if
any be in the Mire, they may come out. Mr. Gibbons for explaining himself;
supposes us as if we stood at a double Bar, the Bar of the Law, and the Bar of
the Gospel. At the one it is Ratione Objecti, that Faith justifies: At the
other it justifies Formaliter. As to the one Faith, (says he) lays hold on
Christ's Satisfaction, which is our Legal Righteousness: As to the other, Faith
itself is keeping Covenant (understand Quoad faederis Conditionem) or
fulfilling the Gospel. Very fine, I must profess all, if Faith indeed made
Christ's Legal Righteousness to be Formaliter Ours (as it is Formaliter, our
Evangelical itself) which formerly our great Divines apprehended, but were
exceedingly out, and wounded our Cause. It cannot be that this Righteousness
should any otherwise be ours than Per modum Meriti, that is only in the
Effects. And in this Sense (Non formaliter, but Effective) must that Expression
be understood, The Lord our Righteousness, if by the Lord, Christ personally be
intended: If not, Hominis Justitia est Dei indulgentia, does give the true and
full Sense of it.

I must confess I am at a stand about this Gentleman's two Bars. That all Men
who hear the Gospel shall be judged by it, I hold for certain, upon the Account
(if we had no more for it) that Christ sent out his Apostles to declare to the
World in his Name, That He that believes shall be saved, and He that believes
not shall be damned. The Believer is one freed from the Law, and cannot be
brought therefore to its Bar. He that believes shall not come into Judgment. If
we walk after the Spirit, we are not under the Law. There is no Condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus. We are not under the Law, but under Grace. These
are plain Texts as to the Believer, and as for the Unbeliever we know he is
condemned already, and there needs no bringing him afresh to the same Bar. One
Bar will serve both, where the Grand Inquest will be this only, whether or no
we have performed the Condition of the Gospel. They that have, are acquitted:
they that have not, are left under that Condemnation. To wave this therefore
any farther than it is of Concern, let me recur to the Legal Righteonsness Mr.
Gibbons speaks of (and Mr. Williams accordingly) which he counts we must have
together with our Evangelical to justify us, and therefore I will show, that
if he mean it in the common Sense, and Sense of others, that he is out, and
that he is in a mistake. I will show that those that speak thus according to
the common Apprehensions of the Protestants, that they are first out, and then
I will show their Mistake, and set them right.

That they are out I show first. By this Legal Righteousness what they
understand we sufficiently know, that is the Righteousness of Christ made
theirs in a Legal Sense, to wit, though the Righteousness of one cannot become
another's Naturally, or Morally, yet Legally the common Opinion is, that
Christ's Righteousness is every true Believers. Here then let us distinguish of
this Legal Righteousness, in respect to the Preceptive or Retributive part of
the Law. As to the Preceptive part of it, I do avouch with Mr. Baxter, that no
Man or Woman is, or ever has (except Christ himself) been justified by the
Performance thereof, either by himself, or by another in his Civil Person, as
fully representing him. For if we are reputed such (says Mr. Baxter) as have
fulfilled the Law, there is no room for Christ's Sufferings, for Repentance,
for Faith in his Blood, for Pardon, or Prayer for it, or for any Duty which
supposes Sin, as Sacraments, and other Ordinances, and so the Gospel is
subverted, as he still tells us. And as for the Retributive part of the Law I
must say no less, that if we are reputed in Christ to have born the Penalty, or
his bearing it be indeed our Legal Righteousness, then must our Evangelical be
made needless, for when we are free from all Guilt, both of Omission and
Commission; so that we are as righteous as we can be made already, there is no
more to be imposed, or can be, in order to our being justified or saved, and so
the Gospel is subverted also. Not that Mr. Baxter, or I, deny the Righteousness
of Christ, as to the Retributive part of the Law to be imputed, no, nor that of
his as to the Perceptive part (seeing his Satisfaction consists in both) but
that neither are otherways imputed than as I say before, Per modum meriti, as
to the Effects, and to give it in Mr. Baxter's own Words, Imputed so as that we
have it in the relation of a Meritorious Cause, to the End, or Use which God
accepts it for, and has assigned in the Gospel.

That they mistake, and how they mistake (to make it out, and make it up) I
must show next. That Christ obeyed the Law and suffered the Penalty for us, so
as what he did and suffered was in our behalf, in our stead, room, or place, is
by us all acknowledged. What is done or suffered in another's stead (we are
then to understand) is done or suffered to free the other from doing or
suffering the same, which else he should, as I have stood upon it in my other
Sheets. Thus the Beast died, instead of the Sacrificer of it. Whereas then this
Legal Righteousness which the common Opinion supposes, must be Ours to justify
us, was performed by Christ in our room or stead, that we might not our selves
perform it, how manifestly are they of that Opinion mistaken, in that
Supposition? Christ did perfectly fulfill the Precept of the Law, that such a
perfect fulfilling of it might not be required of us as the Condition of Life,
as by the Law it was: Christ did undergo the Penalty that we might not our
selves suffer it, and be damned. The Satisfaction then of Christ (which
contains both) cannot In se be imputed to us, or reputed as Our Satisfaction,
because then it must not be in our room, or place, that he satisfied, nor God
accounted that he did. God does impute to us his Sufferings that we might not
suffer, and therefore does not look on us as having suffered: He does impute to
us his fulfilling the Law that we might not be put to it to fulfill it our
selves (and yet have the Reward as much as if we had, where is Imputation still
we see only Quoad fructus and effectus), and therefore looks not on us as if we
had performed it. Here is the Mercy of God, and happy Mistake of these Men. A
Legal Righteousness is imposed on his Son, that an Evangelical only, may be
accepted from Man. A perfect one offered for us to God, that our inchoate and
imperfect one may be imputed to us for Righteousness through him; and that is
to make it serve the turn, as that a perfect one would have done, if we could
have performed it. Faith is really (says Mr. Baxter) the Condition of the
Covenant of Grace, which who so performs, he is righteous against the Charge
of Nonperformance of that Condition: And supposing Christ's Merits, and our
Redemption by him, this Gospel Righteousness is all that is required of us on
our parts, instead of all that perfect Obedience which the Law of Innocence
required. Let Mr. Williams therefore be here persuaded that there is no making
Christ's Righteousness Ours, any otherwise than in the Effects: Yet let him
believe too, that Christ's Righteousness is made Ours in the Effects (for the
Effects are Ours): And this is one Effect wherein it is made Ours, that our
Faith is imputed to us for Righteousness; and also, that consequently there
needs no perfect one In se, to be imputed, because this imperfect one is
instead of one, or as good to us as one, by that Imputation. But if Christ's
Righteousness was Legally Ours, or imputed to us otherwise than in the Effects
then could not our Faith be imputed to us for Righteousness, that is instead of
a perfect one, because a perfect one were imputed to us already in Christ.

That there are two Righteousnesses concur in our Justification I am satisfied
with Mr. Baxter, but when he speaks of one to be subordinate to the other, or
subservient, I cannot but hear Dr. Owen objecting, That upon this Supposition
Christ's Righteousness is made to serve Ours (which else could not be imputed
for Righteousness), and therefore Ours is not subservient to That. It is
necessary therefore for us to keep in our Minds, that our Righteousness, and
Christ's, concur in our Justification, but not on the same Account, not under
the reason of the same, but diverse Causes, and therefore if they be held
Coordinate, I see no hurt, so long as they are not Coequal, the one being of
infinite Value, and giving Virtue to the other. If as there are two
Righteousnesses, we conceive with Mr. Gibbons, two Bars, two Justifications,
that is, that Christ's Righteousness is our Legal Righteousness, and the Formal
Cause of our Legal Justification, and our Faith, or Evangelick Righteousness,
the Formal Cause of our Evangelical Justification, there were no question in
making one Righteousness and Justification subordinate, or subservient to the
other Righteousness and Justification: But if Mr. Williams when he says, The
very Righteousness of Christ is imputed to a Believer besides the Effects; and
Mr. Gibbons apprehended the Matter so, we are to know Mr. Baxter must not
apprehend with them; who teaches, that the Righteousness of Christ is not
imputed In se, and consequently is never to be allowed our Formal Righteousness
in regard to the Law, or Gospel. It is something hard therefore for me to set
this right, only thus much we know and say with Mr. Baxter, that Christ by his
Obedience and Sufferings has obtained a Grant of Impunity and Life for
Sinners, which he gives upon Terms; we performing those Terms, have a Right to
those Benefits; And so a Righteousness by that Right; Hereof Christ's
Righteousness being the meritorious procuring Cause, his Righteousness is said
to be Ours, in regard to that Effect: But there being other Effects of Christ's
Righteousness besides these, and this one more especially, that Our Faith, or
the Evangelick Condition, is upon that Account imputed for Righteousness, which
else were none, how is it, that our Evangelical Personal Righteousness can be
said subordinate, subservient to, or required in order for the obtaining of the
Righteousness of Christ, when we have it already as to that Effect, or in that
Imputation? It appears to me therefore not unfit to say here, that the
Righteousness of Christ, and the Performance of the Evangelick Condition, do
concur to our Justification as to the Form of is, which is the imputing to us
that Evangelick Condition performed for Righteousness, in a Co-ordination of
diverse Causes as to that Effect, but in a Subordination as to the Effects or
Benefits, both of Christ's Righteousness and Justification, that follow.

The Fourth PART.
I Know in this Discourse of the Righteousness of God, I do assert that which
our Protestants hitherto have denied (but scarce taken into their. Thoughts to
examine, with the Bereans, whether it be so or no) to wit, that Faith (which is
a living working Faith) is our Formal Righteousness, the reason of their denial
having been much, because they have confounded the Causa per quam, and Propter
quam, and spoken of them as one, as appears by Davenant before quoted, and
others, their meaning in the Main being only, that it is not our Righteousness
but Christ's, which is Id propter quod, or Cujus merito, we are justified, unto
which we all agree. But it is time if they have understood otherwise to set the
Matter right now. By Faith, says the Scripture again and again, we are
justified. By is, Id per quod, the Causa formalis, and I avert accordingly,
that it is Formaliter, or Per modum Causae formalis; that by Faith we are
justified. And why should I not stick to that the Scripture does so expressly
warrant? Davenant that here is quite opposite, and holds, that it is Christ's
Righteousness which does Formaliter, justify us, does yet acknowledge that we
are in Scripture still denominated, or accounted righteous by God, in regard to
our Evangelical Righteousness, and never in regard to Christ's. Now Justificari
is Justum esse censeri. Justi autem censemur (according to him) a justitia
inchoata, and yet Ab inchoata justitia non justificamur, but a justitia Christi
imputata. Justi censemur (says he) a justitia inchoata: Justificati dicimur a
justitia perfectissima Christi imputata. What is this, but Apparent Conviction,
and Authoritative Tergiversasation? There are two Reasons I find move our
Protestants. One is, they are startled by a Word, the Word Cause, they will not
have our Works, nor Faith, as a Work, to justify, because that makes it a
Cause of our Justification, which to Avoid they will call it a Condition only.
Now a Condition being Cause sine qua non does make our Evangelick Righteousness
as necessary (so as we cannot be justified without it) as the making it a Cause
does; And I find it no regret in my Mind to call it a Cause, as well as a
Condition, for it is both, only we must consider what Cause we make it. If we
made our Works, or Faith, as a Work, to justify us, Sub genere, Causae
Efficientis, it must be that which is Procatarctick, and so the Meritorious
Cause thereof, which were to bring our Works* or Faith, into the Office of
Christ's Righteousness, and to derogate from Grace, a thing we utterly
disclaim: But when we make it the Formal Cause only (of our Passive
Justification), we do nothing thereby, but advance God's Grace, and Christ's
Merits, as having obtained for us, not only than God should require of us no
other Condition but our Faith, or this inchoate Righteousness unto Life, but
also that he should constitute by his Now Law this Condition performed to be
our Righteousness, in the room of that perfect one required by the Old; So
that, as Adam, if he had perfectly obeyed, his Obedience had been his Formal
Righteousness, in regard to the Law, so is this, Ours, in regard to the Gospel.
The other Reason then of their denial, is the Supposition that both Protestants
and Papists have gone upon, to wit, that the Law is the Rule of that
Righteousness, which they on both sides contend for as the Formal Reason of
their Justification. And upon this Account they both of them are out, for the
Papist on one side speaks up for inherent Grace, and his Works done by it, so
as he would have them Meritorious and Perfect (for the Papist pleads for Merit
and Perfection), but he can never bring them up to answer the Law, seeing he
must still pray, Enter not into Judgment, and forgive us our Trespasses, and
therefore the Protestant denies, that our Faith, or Works, are any Formal
Righteousness that can justify us, and I say the same in the Sense they
understand one another, for our inchoate Obedience cannot be so, when the Law
is made the Rule of it: On the other side, the Protestant pleads therefore for
Christ's Righteousness, which is a Righteousness indeed that answers the Rule
(they both make so), but this Righteousness being without us, though it be upon
the Account thereof, Id propter quod, or Cujus merito, we are justified, the
Papist says stiffly it can never be made Formally Ours, so as to be Id per
quod, we are justified, and I must say the same, for Truth is Truth, and
Absurdity is Absurd, whether on one side or the other. The Supposition then,
the Ground on which they go, being a Mistake, it must be rectified. Let us
understand therefore here, that there is a double Rule, a Rule of Life, and a
Rule of Judgment, there is Norma Officii, and Norma Judicii, as I have it in my
Pacification, and although the Law of Works be the Rule of Life or Duty, and
being the Law of Nature it must abide so for ever, yet Jesus Christ having
perfectly obeyed it in our stead, for the fleeing us from it (in regard to its
Condition), it is relaxed (as I show there) through Grace, and the Gospel made
the Rule of Judgment, and consequently of that Righteousness which is the
Formal Cause of our Justification. Christ's Obedience was perfect according to
Law, but it is not by the Law that God pronounces the Believer righteous. The
Law is not of Faith, and Righteousness comes not by the Law. If it be by the
Gospel then, not by the Law God pronounces a Man righteous, it is not by the
Righteousness of Christ imputed, which is a Righteousness according to the Law,
but by the Evangelick Condition performed, which is a Righteousness accordingly
(accepted through the Merit and Satisfaction of Christ) that the Believer is
justified. Inter Protestants certum est fidem etiam vivam non esse justitiam
illam per quam coram severo Dei Judicio stamus, says Le Blanc. This is true, I
have just now acknowledged, but I wonder that this very considerate Man should
never come to understand that, that severe Judgmen of God he speaks of, is the
Judgment of God according to the Law, and that we stand not at that Judgment. I
acknowledge again, that at that Judgment our inchoate inherent Grace is not any
Formal Righteousness, or the Justitia per quam, we can stand there: But there
is a Paternal Judgment of God according to the Gospel, and at this Judgment our
Faith is the Righteousness, Per quam, or Formal Righteousness by which we are
justified. If here you will conceive of two Bars, you must not conceive of them
as before, so as if after you are justified upon a Personal Righteousness, you
must come to another to be justified by Christ, but you must conceive of the
Bar of the Law as erected first. There was but two Persons ever brought to that
Bar, and they were Adam and Christ, where the one was condemned, and the other
justified. They were both Public Persons, and as we all were condemned in
Adam, so are we all freed from that Condemnation by Christ, but upon the Terms
of the Gospel. We are then, as it were, already passed the Bar of the Law, in
Christ's answering there in our Persons for us, and God will never call him to
any move Account, so that what Charge or Accusation soever may be raised
thence, they are all Terrors only, as those or Children going in the dark, when
the Charge, alone we are concerned in, is the Charge of Nonperformance of the
Gospel Condition. I know our Divines are still ready to state the Question
between us and the Papists thus. What is that when the Conscience is ^said
under the Sense of Sin, that we can oppose against the Wrath of God, and rest
upon for our Peace? It is our own Righteousness, Works, or Merits, or is it the
Satisfaction of Christ? But this is partial and wide, there is no Man but will
answer straight to the Question, and say Christ's Satisfaction. It is that (we
all know) that did, or could appease God's Justice. And this we all know too,
that we are so far from doing this our selves by our Works or Merits, that
Christ has done it without our doing any thing at all toward it. It was
wholly of Free Grace, and there can be no doubt or fear upon the Conscience in
regard to that. This is therefore not the Question, but the Satisfaction of
Christ and our Redemption by it presupposed, and so a General Pardon proceeding
Justification already obtained, which being Conditional, the Question only is,
whether it be not by performing the Condition that we are justified, to make
that Pardon absolutely Ours, or to have Christ's Righteousness, or Satisfaction
made so, as to that Effect, which can be ours no otherwise, but Quoad fructus
out effectus only. This indeed is the Question between some of Ours and the
Papists, the more is the pity, but the Question as to the terrified Christian
himself, can be only whether the Condition be performed. If that be so, the
Danger is all over. If you will ask further, What we must rest upon, and trust
to here in this Case? I say, to the Satisfaction and Merits of Christ upon the
Performance. Though we trust not our Duty, we must trust on God in Duty, and I
have no apprehensive fear about resting in Duty, but this, least we sit down
short of Sincerity. It is by the Performance through Christ's Satisfaction the
Believer is justified. There is yet this Comfort here, though none else in the
World, for this alone is worth a World, that we may, must, ought to trust,
lean, cast our selves upon the Satisfaction and Merit of Christ, for pardoning
all our Failings, and accepting our poor Mite, and if the Soul remains in
doubt, it must quiet itself upon him. If with the Pharisee I justify myself,
God may condemn me: If I condemn myself with the Publican he may acquit me. And
what must I do in this Case? Behold, O Lord I am at thy Bar and I commit my
Cause unto my Judge. Thy Bar is a Bar, or Throne of Grace: I cast myself on thy
Grace. And the Lord send me a good Deliverance at the Great Day. As for Actual
Pardon and Life that follows Justification the Merit is to be attributed to
that which procured Justification on that Condition. There is nothing of Merit
but Christ's throughout. It is Christ's Satisfaction runs through all (I must
still say) as the Meritorious Cause, when Performance of the Condition becomes
thereby the Formal Cause of our Justification.

I know how hardly this is like to be received by many, when Dr. Owen will
allow nothing of any Personal Righteousness, or) any Works Legal or
Evangelical, but excludes them all from our Justification, supposing that if it
be of Works any way, it is not of Grace at all, when it is therefore of Faith
(or upon the Evangelick Condition) that it may be of Grace. Dr. Owen is a
Person whose Name I honor for his Worth Learning, Comprehensive Parts, and one
in whom was more of a Gentleman, as to his Deportment, than in any Divine I
knew ever among us: Yet is he more Authorative sometimes in his Book than he
needs, which being liable to hurt the humbly Inquisitive, I will speak the more
positively in this matter, that the Doctor is out, as I believe, and never came
to the plain true knowledge of what Paul means by the Works he opposes to Faith
in this Point of Justification: Which Works are such as would justify a Man in
the Apostles Account if he had them, but that no Man is justified by Works,
because he has them not. This I am past doubt is Paul's meaning, and in this
particular the Learned and Honored Sir Charles Wolesley, before quoted, is
rather to be attended. A Man (says Sir Charles) that has not a Legal Sinless
Perfection, is that Paul means by the Ungodly, Romans 4.5. In my first Papers I
wrote, I had this Sense of the place, and I have it before, and in my
Pacification I say the like of that Text For solving this Matter, Austin, and
from him the Schools distinguish of Opera Naturae, and Opera Gratiae. We are
not saved by Works, or according to Works done in our own Strength, but by
Works done by Grace. But is this the Apostle's meaning? No, I have shown in my
Book of Just. that One Thing of Three wherein Austin was out, and has misled
the Schools, is this Notion of Grace. By Grace he understands still this
inherent Grace, or Operation of God's Spirit in us, when Paul understands it of
that without, his Favor, or Condescension to us. Not of Works, but of Grace,
is all one, as not of Desert, but of Favor only. Grace is Mercy without, or
contrary to Merit. Now when the Papist receives the Solution mentioned, the
Protestants generally will have all Works, tho of the Regenerate, to be but
Rags, and Christ's Righteousness alone to save us. But they are both out, for
Paul's meaning it plainer than they think. Not by Works of Righteousness we
have done. The Righteousness which the Jew has done, is living according to
the Law of Moses: The Righteousness which the Gentile has done, is his living
according to the Law of Nature. There is neither one or the other that fulfill
that Righteousness which answers God's Law, so as it should be able to save
him, and therefore it is of Grace or Mercy that Any are saved. Pacif. p. 29.
Not by the Works of Righteousness we have done, but according to his Mercy he
saved us: Which Words have put so many to the inventing Distinctions, when the
right understanding is to make none, the meaning being only, Not by the Works
of Righteousness we have done, because we have not done them, and it must be of
Mercy therefore, and in another way, we are saved, or not at all. See the
Quotation above. The Works then I have said there and here, and must still say,
which Paul means, are such as would justify us, such as would make the Reward
of Debt if we had them, that is perfect Works, Such (says the Judicious Le
Blanc) as the Law requires to Justification: And as for that the Doctor has in
answer to this, that it is a wild Imagination that the perfect Works of the Law
will not justify us, but imperfect Works which answer not the Law will do so,
it does confirm what I judge of the Doctor's Conceptions, that certainly he
never understood the Apostle as to this Matter, who (I say) excludes not Works
of the Law from Justification, as if they would not justify us if we had them,
but because none have them to be justified by them. It is therefore the
Righteousness of God, the Righteousness of the Evangelick Condition that he in
his Mercy through Christ's Merits has instituted in the room of Works, to
justify the Christian. And as for the Doctor's quoting Socinus saying this, to
prejudice the Reader against it, I must needs say, I like this excellent
Doctor's Judgment the meaner, and seeing I took the Notion from Scripture, and
am sure I am no Socinian myself, Socinus was a Man of Reason, and it is to be
liked the better for that.

It is a thing (whether so proposed or not) more worth the Thoughts of a
serious Man, how the Doctrine of Justification as formerly it has been taught,
and is maintained by the Doctor, can be made to lodge with the Doctrine of
Sanctification, or Regeneration in the same Scripture, or be preached together
in the same Gospel. The Papists are so careful to have these agree, that they
make them one: The Protestants are so careful to keep them asunder that they
will not have any Works of ours, not Faith itself as a Work, or the Fruits of
it Repentance and a Good Life, to be brought into our Justification, least by
going to establish our own Righteousness we submit not to the Righteousness of
God, and perish. Let the Works be wrought in us (says the Doctor. Of Just. p.
524.) if they be also wrought by us, I fear their Introduction into our
Justification does include beasting. This (he adds) is a dangerous Point, even
like to make us lose all the Benefit we might otherwise expect by the Grace of
God. I cannot but remember since I was young, holy Mr. Shepherd's Book, The
Sincere Convert, and do reflect sometimes on that Terror the Reading that, and
the like Books, has wrought in many for fear on one hand least they live short
of that universal unreserved Obedience, which is the most general Mark given of
Sincerity, and on the other hand, when they have come to be satisfied a little
as to that, least they split on the Book of trusting to themselves, or resting
in Duty, instead of the Righteousness of Christ received by Faith only. All
things that are comprised any way in following after Righteousness, such as are
all our Duties and Works are excluded from any Influence in our Justification,
says the Doctor, p. 490. And in p. 493, he says, When the Apostle James
affirms, that a Man is justified by Works, and not by Faith only, he cannot
intend our Justification before God, where it is impossible they should both
concur. I have no doubt but St. James, and St. Paul both, understood by the
Justification they speak of, our Justification before God, I have proved it,
Mid. Way of Just. p. 51, 52. The Justification of Abraham before, and at his
Offering his Son, argues nothing but that Justification is a continued Act (as
a Pardon at Law), and seeing his Faith and Works had Influence in it against
the Doctor, I conceive that Faith and Works may be made to concur in
Justification more kindly, than Justification and Sanctification can, in their
Preaching of the Gospel. The most of the Objections the Doctor tells us, that
are raised against his Doctrine, do arise (he says) for want of a due
Comprehension of the Order of the Work of Grace, and our Compliance therewithal
in a Way of Duty. I must say the same of him, and as to all that is raised by
any against the Doctrine of the Righteousness of God, which I am endeavoring
to establish against that which is the Doctor's, and the common Protestants
Own, instead of Paul's, Revealed in the Gospel. The Gospel calls for Repentance
out of Question, as well as Faith, and the Doctor, and others, could never
exclude all Works from Justification against St. James, but for want of a due
Comprehending the Way and Method of becoming Righteous, which God of his Grace
and abundant Mercy, (when we were lost and liable to Damnation, through the
need of an irrecoverable Innocence) has instituted through Christ's
Redemption, and the Evangelick Condition, accepted by him instead of the
Righteousness of Works, from whence we are fallen. This is the Righteousness of
God, in a short Explanation. Well! Let us consult what is that Righteousness of
God St. Paul speaks of, Romans 1.17. Romans 3.21, 22, 26. Romans 10.3. 2 Cor. 5.21.
Phil. 3.9. which he calls so, God's Righteousness, the Righteousness of Faith,
that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by
Faith, in opposition to Works, in the Point of Justification? Is it the
Righteousness of Christ, who is God? I am persuaded this is a First Thought, so
shallow, that it must be short. What then indeed is it? This Righteousness of
God is that Way and Method of becoming Righteous, which is of God's
Institution, as Another has expressed it. That is, not the Righteousness of
Christ, but that Righteousness through Christ, which is Ordained of God, and
promulgated in the Gospel, to be accepted (I say, through him) unto
Justification and Salvation. But what Way and Method is that? When God made
Man, we must conceive he had in his Prospect what to do with him, and that was
to glorify himself in Saving him. There was two Ways to do this, Either by the
Way of Works, or Grace. Man was Created with an Original Righteousness, and
what was Original must be Natural, and if he had stood, he must according to
Nature have been Righteous, and all his Posterity, and the Reward then (as it
is reckoned by the Apostle) would have been of Debt, or Merit, and not of
Grace. God hereby should have glorified his Justice and Goodness in Saving Man,
but he should have shown no Mercy, nor Man have any need of it: No, nor any
need of a Savior, or Redemption, or the Holy Spirit's Operation: That is, of
that Grace which is Medicinal, or Habitual Grace, for I say, if he had an
Original Righteousness, he had no need of the Infusion of a New, to heal
Original Corruption. He would have been saved by Works proceeding from Nature,
Ex Regula, and viribus Naturae, and not from Grace or the Spirit, and have
needed none of that Grace neither which is Favor, but only God's Justice to
have dealt with him according to that Law of Innocence, which he had performed.
God therefore did not choose this Way, that Man should be saved by a
Righteousness of his own, according to Nature, but by Way of Grace, and Works
proceeding from Grace, or the Holy Spirit, and not of himself, and that is by a
Righteousness which is of God by Faith. For by Grace are ye saved through
Faith, and not of your selves, least any Man should boast: That is, not a
Righteousness of your effecting, but of God's own Contrivance, who has chosen
this way rather than that of Works, that none may ascribe that to themselves,
which is due only to God. Not by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but
according to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of Water, and renewing of
the Holy Ghost. Note, here is the Righteousness we have done, and the Renewing
of the Holy Ghost so opposed, as that we are saved by that Righteousness which
is of God, and of God's Spirit, and not by that which is our Own. How is that?
Why, They being ignorant of God's Righteousness, and going about to establish
their own, have not submitted to that which should have saved them. The
Performance of the Law of Moses, was the Jews Righteousness (for God says, This
shall be your Righteousness), and the Performance of the Law of Nature, or
Covenant of Works, is all Mankind's Righteousness; and when neither Jew could
perform the One, nor any Mortal the Other, there are none can be saved by the
Righteousness of their Own, but it must be by Another Righteousness, called by
the Apostle the Righteousness of God. But now the Righteousness of God without
the Law is manifest, being witnessed by the Law and Prophets, even the
Righteousness of God, which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ. Here is a
Righteousness that was ever on foot in the World (or none else could have been
saved) but now revealed by the Gospel, which is the Righteousness that save us,
in opposition to the Righteousness of the Law, or of Works, even the
Righteousness of Faith, that is a Righteousness according to the Law or
Covenant of Grace, which Christ has procured by his Blood. Hence do we read it
is said of Christ in Daniel, that as he should make Reconciliation for
Iniquity, so he should bring in an Everlasting Righteousness, that is, by his
Death he should procure a Covenant or Law of Grace, by our Performance whereof
(without the Law) we are righteous, and must be justified and saved. It Is that
is this Righteousness. If Christ had not procured for us this New Law, there
could have been no Righteousness in the Earth, for the Law of Innocence no Man
can perform, and therefore has he by procuring this New Covenant, brought in a
Righteousness in the World, and that which is the abiding Righteousness, the
Righteousness of this Covenant, whereby all are saved, that have, or ever shall
be saved. Now when we have here a Righteousness which lies in the Performance
of the Law of Grace, purchased for us by Christ, and wrought in us by the
Spirit of Grace (for the spirit we must know is not given to perform the Law of
Works, but this Law) we do see what does belong to this Way of Grace, which God
has chosen to save Man by. This Way of Grace does contain in it the giving of
Christ, the Redemption we have by him, our Reconciliation with God, Pardon of
Sin, the Covenant itself, and the Dispensation of the Spirit, or his Grace for
performing the Condition of it. All this, and more, hang together, so that when
we say it is not by Works but by Grace, that we are saved, it is all one as to
say, it is not by Perfect Works, but by an Evangelical Righteousness, by Mercy,
by Pardon, by Christ. See what this Righteousness of God comes to in its right
and full Definition. Mid. Way of Just. p. 57, 58.
I have two Pages to set it out more fuller in my Mid. Way of Just. p. 57, 58;
and I have two Pages in my Pacif. p. 27, 28, 29, 30. which should be read,
rather than here abridged. The Design of God to save Man was to magnify his
Grace, and therefore of two Ways to do it, God chose this of Grace, and not the
Way of Works, unto which yet was Man created, and by which he should have lived
if he had stood, and it is such Works (which Dr. Owen never came to consider)
unto which Grace is opposed by the Apostle. To this End the Fall is permitted,
Redemption by Christ appointed. This Redemption is double, from Sin, and from
Condemnation. Christ redeems us from Death by the Sacrifice of himself, upon
which an Act of Grace passes, that gives Pardon and Life upon Condition, and
the Condition is Repentance toward God, and Faith toward Jesus Christ.
Redemption from Sin is by the Grace of God's Spirit working in us this
Repentance and Faith in order to our Justification, and is called by our
Divines Effectual Vocation. It is so far therefore from Truth to exclude
Evangelical Works from any Interest in our Justification, that they are
ordained of God in order to it. God has linked his Golden Chain, so that
Election does enter our Calling, for Effectual Calling is Actual Election; and
our Effectual Calling does enter our Justification, for the Works of it, Faith,
Repentance, New Obedience, are imputed to us for that Righteousness that
justifies us; and our Justification, and inchoate Righteousness does enter and
is the Infancy of Glory.

From hence the Justification of a Sinner by the Righteousness of God may come
under a double Consideration. It may be considered Precisely in itself, or
Complexly with its Antecedents, and Consequents. That which is Antecedent to it
is Redemption, and that from Damnation as that from Sin, both being wrought
without our doing any thing (not so much, says Ruiz, as to give an Active
Occasion) toward it, but wholly of Grace. It is like, that in regard to the
Antecedents, the Apostle speaks of the Freeness of our Justification, so as he
does Romans 3.24. and the like places when otherwise he lets us know, that
without Conversion, or a Call of Turning from Sin unto God, no Man can be
justified and saved. Unto whom I send thee to turn them from Darkness to Light,
from the Power of Satan unto God, that they may receive Forgiveness of Sins,
Acts 27.18. There is therefore the Antecedents, the Constituents, and
Subsequents of this Righteousness of God, and our Justification by it.
Redemption and Calling are Antecedents: The Work of that Calling, which is the
Performance of the Condition, and the Imputation of it for Righteousness (the
one being as it were the Matter, and the other giving the Form to it) are the
Constituents: Actual or Absolute Pardon and Life the Subsequents, or Benefits
of it. This Distinction I would not omit before I go; off, because I would have
none so stiff in theri own Opinions (much less froward), but that they may
yield to others also something in theirs. If Austin will place Justification in
the Infusion of Grace, I will grant it him as Antecedent to it. If Mr. Wotton
will place it in Pardon, I will grant it him as Consequent to it, or as the
Special Benefit of it. If the Assembly will place it in Pardon, and the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, if they mean it, Per modum Meriti, and
not In se, I will grant it. If Mr. Baxter will place it in a Personal
Righteousness subservient to the Righteousness of Christ, not formally made
Ours, but in the Effects (that is as much as to say, required in order to our
having Impunity and Life as Comprehensive of all its Effects or Benefits) I
will grant it him, as Constituent of it. If Dr. Owen will be content, though
others differ from him, so long as Remission of Sin, Acceptance with God, Right
to Life, are acknowledged all to be owing to the Righteousness of Christ, and
not the Merit of our Works, I kiss Dr. Owen's Hand also. Let this Righteousness
of God for Justification of Life, be taken in its Complex Consideration, and we
may all join in some Agreement in it, though where it is Precisely taken, every
own will stand for his own Opinion. I was long before I could come to this. God
accounting a Man righteous by the Law of Grace, as having performed the
Condition I always thought to be Justification; and this Mr. Baxter granted me.
Pardon then I counted the Effect of this, and therefore different from it,
besides that the Word methoughts would not allow them to be the same. Pardon of
Sin is not signified by the Word Justification in any place of Scritpure, says
Dr. Owen, p. 173. The Word is never found so used, either in the Hebrew or
Greek Writers, Sacred or Profane, nor in our common Speech, says Gattaker (on
Isa. 5.23), who was in this yet a more competent Judge. How these two Things
being different, as the Cause and Effect, should enter the same Definition, and
be made one, I could not devise or admit, 'till I was taught by one Word in a
Letter I received from Mr. Baxter. Pardon (says he) is not that Justifications.
The Word [That] instructed me, that Justification being a Forensical Term
opposed to Accusation, According to the Accusation, such he counted
Justification. There are now two Charges (as most say) against the Sinner, a
Charge of the Law, and a Charge of the Gospel. The Charge of the Law is, that
we have broke it, and are liable to the Curse, Gal. 3.10. Our Justification
against this Charge, is by an Acknowledgment of the Indictment, but we plead a
Stature made in the Year of our Lord Christ's Death, when and where it is
Enacted, That whosoever believes and repents, shall be freed from that
Condemnation. That is, Our Plea in short is, a Pardon upon Christ's
Satisfaction. But this Pardon being General and Conditional, there arises the
Charge of the Gospel. This Charge is that we have not performed the Condition,
And our Justification against this Charge, is by pleading Not Guilty, for the
Performance of the Evangelick Condition (accepted through Mercy and Christ's
Merits, is our Righteousness, as Not Guilty (which is shown before) of this
Charge of Nonperformance. Here De Re, I agree with Mr. Baxter, but De Nomine,
I am not satisfied yet, to allow any other than one Justification. Our
Justification at Judgment, Come ye blessed, for when I was hungry ye fed me, is
plainly the Evangelick Condition performed, and that is the Righteousness
according to which the Sentence passes, and as is the Justification of the
Judge, such must be that of the present Law, whereby he judges, and that is
therefore our Evangelical Justification. As for the Charge of the Law, I count
it can have no place at the Judgment of God, for the Satisfaction of Christ,
and the Pardon upon it cannot there be brought in question. If a Charge may be
supposed, the Satisfaction of Christ, which is our Plea against it, is not
Ours, or imputed to us for Ours, not imputed In se (I and Mr. Baxter hold) and
so cannot be here our Formal Righteousness, without which a Legal Justification
thereby arises not. Besides this, the Pardon granted upon Christ's
Satisfaction, is that Universal Conditional Remission which precedes
Justification, and when it comes to be Absolute or Actual to any one, it is the
Consequent of his Justification, and must not be Justification itself, as some
make it. I am not willing therefore to apprehend, that because here are two
Righteousnesses, there are two Justifications, for Christ's Righteousness, as
the Meritorious Cause of it goes into that Evangelical one, and makes not
Another: But I would have one only Justification, yet set forth in Scripture,
and spoken of by Divines under a double Consideration, as Strictly and Largely
taken. Under a Strict and Precise Consideration, I suppose nothing but what
goes into the Form of it, may be said of it: Under a Large and Complex
Consideration, I allow the thing and benefit, though Cause and Effect (which was
my heretofore Scruple) may be comprised in our speaking of one and the same
Justification. I will press this Difficulty no further, nor move any other, but
will break off with that Resolution I take up from Chemnicius, and he, by the
Style, I suppose, from Luther. Quae dialectica subtilitate dissolvi non
possunt, piscatoria simplicitate praecidantur. And as to these aforesaid
Charges or Accusations, I say this only, that let as many be raised, as any can
raise, they need not every one a Particular, but are all discharged by one
Universal Evangelical Justification.

FINIS.
COROLLARIVM.
IN the Year 1684, I wrote four or five Sheets entitled, Two Steps toward
obtaining my Liberty of Preaching, and a Third Step after, but both at that
time without effect. I will suppose a Man Episcopally Ordained, and one that
holds Communion with the Church. Such a Man yet cannot have a Living, or a
Lecture (we know) without his Declaration of Assent and Consent, and his
Subscription according to the Canons, with Conforming in all Things beside: But
there is nothing to hinder him the Preaching an Occasional Sermon (Prayers
being duly read) in any Church, only the want of a License to Preach. Unto such
a License in the Act of Uniformity, is required his Reading the Thirty Nine
Articles, and Assent to them, before the Bishop, and nothing else. A Canon need
not be urged, it were unmerciful, when an Act connives. The Act indeed, as well
as Canons, requires more to the Preaching as a Lecturer, or Beneficed Man; but
no more to a License to Preach. The Uniformity Act requiring this, is bound up
with the Common Prayer, and is made part of that Book. In the Preface hereof,
there is a Clause to this Sense, That if any Doubts shall arise about the
Understanding any Matter contained in the Book, the Person shall resort to the
Bishop, or Archbishop, and he shall resolve the same. That the Articles are of
various and doubtful Interpretation, it is apparent by the Ministers of diverse
Judgments, some Arminians, some Calvinists, subscribing them, and that with
Allowance of the Church. If then such a Man (as before qualified) shall make,
or set down, his own Construction of every such Article as he scruples, and
then in his reading the Article, read also his Sense of it, and it be such as
the Bishop allows to be Orthodox, a License upon this Account, Salva
Conscientia, may be had. I cannot give an unfeigned Assent to these Articles,
all, without a Liberty of Explication, but with one, I may: And upon that
Supposition there is the Eleventh Article, Entitled, Of the Justification of
Man, which concerns me, in regard to this present Book.

We are accounted righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, by Faith, and not for our own Works or Deservings:
Wherefore that we are justified by Faith only, is a wholesome Doctrine, and
very full of Comfort, as is more largely expressed in the Homily of
Justification. Art. 11.

By the Words [Faith only] I understand what Paul means by [Faith without
Works], that is, Faith in opposition to Works, that would make the Reward to be
of Debt, and not of Grace; or to the Works of the Law, Works which the Law
requires to Justification (which none have, and if any be justified at all, it
must be therefore without them), not in opposition to Repentance and
Evangelical Obedience: And though it be for Christ's sake, or his Merits, not
Ours, that he accounts us righteous, yet is our Faith, Repentance, and sincere
Obedience, the Condition upon which he does it, or rather the Righteousness
itself, which upon the Account of Christ's Deservings he accepts unto Life
everlasting. So I have it in these mentioned Sheets.

J. H.

ERRATA.
PAge 9. l. 28. for First, r. Fifth. p. 11.21. for Meritory, r. Meritorie. p.
14. l. 34. for its, r. it, with a Full-point. p. 15. l. 32. for Sated, r.
Stated. p. 18. l. 26. in the Margin for that, r. by which. p. 31. l. 32. for
rearum r. reatum. p. 27. l. 2. for Cause, r. Cause.

An ADVERTISEMENT from the Bookseller.
THere are several Papers of Four or Five Sheets apiece, written formerly by
this Author, called, The Middle Way, of Election, of Redemption, of
Justification, of the Covenants, Law and Gospel, of Perfection: As also
Peaceable Disquisitions, which Treat, Of the Natural, and Spiritual Man, of
Praying by the Spirit, of Preaching by Demonstration of it, of Assurance, of
the Arminian Grace, of the Possibility of Heathens Salvation, of the
Reconciliation of Paul and James, of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness,
with other Incidental Matters: One of which Middle Papers, that of
Justification, was Reprinted two Years since, with the Quotation of what
concerns that Subject, out of the other, and since that One Sheet (so called),
and his Six Sheets last Year, called, Pacification, All which may be bound up
together with this present Discourse, for any that desires them.

In that Book called Pacification, there is the Case of Non-Resistance and
Passive-Obedience Stated and Resolved, the Doctrine whereof Abjured in the two
former Reigns, is here in this King's Reign Recorded for a Memoriae Sacrum, to
those which are to come.

Whosoever has those Six Sheets, they are desired in Page 35. Line 20. to put
in the word [not], which the Printer has left out, to the contradicting the
Scope of the Book.

T. P.


