Half a Sheet of Mr Humfrey's, in Pursuance of PACIFICATION.
THERE is a Book of Mr Williams's, called, Gospel Truth stated, from whence
Occasion has been taken for Division. It is a good Book, a useful Book,
especially for young Ministers, and such of the People, who being a little
Learned, or Bookish, turn Disputative, to save them from Error. I do therefore
thank him for it, and especially for what he has said on Phil. 3. and that he
has abided by it. It is what I said in my Sheet of Justification in the first
Edition, so many Years ago, and Sir Charles Wolesley after me. I have read his
Book over and over, and considering the multitude of matters, with common
Allowance to Human Frailty, I can find few Faults in comparison, and should
have found none had I not already, unless this be one. That he has got so many
Hands to it; or, which is worse, that when his Book was sufficient for its own
defense, he should, upon the writing of one against it, go to vindicate it. If
he had not wrote again, he had then overcome; but is overcome now if he don't.
In this Book there are two Expressions which the Brethren would have him
retract: One is, There is not a Change of Person between Christ and the Elect.
The other is, The Father was never displeased with Christ. I will humbly motion
here a drawn Battle, or mutual Condescension; that is, for Mr Williams to
withdraw one of these Passages they except against; and, for the Brethren to
withdraw the other Exception.

As for the first Passage, whatsoever is to be understood by Commutation of
Persons, the Brethren understand thus much, That Christ put on the Person of
Sinners, for these are their Words. Now Mr Williams, I suppose, denies this,
and they would have him retract his Denial. By Person therefore we are to
consider, that two things may be signified, the Person of the Sinner himself,
Suppositum rationale; or the Quality or Condition of a Sinner, as, when a Man
acts a Drunkard on the Stage, he personates Drunkenness, if a King, he
personates Majesty. Christ, GOD-Man, stood in the room of us Sinners, in what
he did and suffered for us, quatenus He and we are Supposita rationalia, and in
this first sense of the word Mr Williams allows a Commutation of Persons, so as
when the Suffering was Christ's, the Benefit was Ours, which is that Grotius
intends only against the Socinians. But Mr Williams denies that Christ took
upon him the Quality or Condition of Sinners; that is, in the second sense of
the word, he denies what they affirm, to wit, That He put on the Person of
Sinners. Christ did not represent or act the part of Sinners, nor was looked on
by God as a Sinner, when our Surety: A commutatio Hominum there was, no
commutatio Actionum. He represented Us that are Sinners, he represented not the
Sinner. A Sinner is one that breaks the Law of God, and Christ did not so, he
acted no such Part, and God never accounted that he did; and there is therefore
no change of The distinction of these terms is not made ordinarily by Divines.
(which excuses the Brethrens Citation of one for the other) but I use it as
peculiar for explaining Mr Williams's Sense: if any shall still choose to
confound them, and express our Sense otherwise, it is all one to me, and may be
to him.
Person, though a change of Persons, according to Mr. Williams. When in this
sense therefore of the word Person he is in the right, let us consider further
as to the other sense of it, (as it signifies our Human Nature, not our Sinful
Nature, or Sinful Qualities) that though Christ did sustain our Persons (giving
the Brethren liberty of such words) as to what he did and suffered in our
stead, yet is there nothing wherein we reciprocally sustain his Person, as he
did ours; nothing that we are to be said or accounted to have done what he did;
and therefore do I in my late Book, Pacification, say, That here is only a
change of Person, but not of Persons. A strange thing really, that when the
same sense is intended by me and Mr Williams, the same Distinction used, and
both say true, yet the Terms of that Distinction are contrarily applied by us.
I must desire Mr Williams therefore to consider, whether his use of the word
Person be not As they speak of Christ's judicially sustaining our Person, for
in this second sense of the word Person, (or Mr Williams's sense) Christ acted
no Person but the Person of a Mediator.
Foreign to our Divines, and it were not better to put what he means in such
Terms as are easier of reception, and that may be only by distinguishing of
Christ's taking on him our Persons, or bearing our Sins, in regard to the
Fault, or the Punishment; and to say, he sustained not our Persons, or took on
him our Sins quoad reatum culpae (in these known words) so as to be accounted
of God a Sinner; but quoad reatum poenae propter culpam nostram, so only as
voluntarily obliged to our Punishment. Here is the same thing in sense, and if
so good an end as Reunion might be obtained by it, he may (understanding with
me) retract the words in his Book [There is not a change of Person] and grant a
change of Person, so long as he maintains still with me no change of Persons,
for his business is done thereby as well as by his sticking to a Word. The Lord
Jesus, in what he did and suffered for us, sustained our Persons, (I give way
to such Phrases for Peace) insomuch as we still say, That what he did and
suffered for us was accounted by God as done and suffered in our room, that we
might have the benefit of it; but not accounted by him as if we had done and
suffered in Christ's Person what he did and suffered for us; and so, in that
respect, is there a change of Person, but not of Persons; whereby I mean
plainly, not such a change as to make Christ's Righteousness Legally or in
Law-sence Ours (or to be imputed in se, for that, let Mr Williams know, is all
one), which whoever affirms (without Shifts), let him be as great in our esteem
as he will, I say, he speaks it in Ignorance hitherto of what this draws after
it, To wit, that (besides the Consequences I show, Pacif. p. 36.) he makes us
to be justified by Christ's Righteousness, per modum causae formalis, which is
an unadvised, absurd, and dangerous Position, as that (...) of our former great
Divines, which gave the rise to Antinomianism. Be it known therefore to the
deservedly-beloved Dr. Bates, and the deservedly envied Mr. Williams, (for
there must be something overtopping others in the man, which is envied), and
the worthy Brethren the drew, or signed this Paper, that here is the Point
which (I believe) they have not bent the Minds to search into, so far as to be
willing to speak out, and tell me if I ask, When Fait^ which is our Evangelical
Personal Righteousness, does concur some way with the Right^ousness of Christ
to our Justification, and Christ's Righteousness (we know) does concu^^ sub
genere causae Efficientis procatar^ticae (and Materialis also with Mr Baxter)
per modum M^^riti, and no otherwise: What is then, let any one of them tell me,
That wherein the form^^ Cause or Reason of Justification is to be placed, or
can Justification be, or constare, without Justificationis formam justitia
constare certum est: A Middle W^^ therefore here* between Pr^testant and
Papist, desi^e^^tur.
An^

For this Advice now, which, according to my Natural Genius, I should have
given Mr Williams, (See 1 Pet. iii. 15.) I apprehended not prejudicial to
Gospel Truth, if his sen^^ is upheld, that is the Truth of his Book, while the
Quarrel about a Word be compos'^^ It is plain, that Mr. Williams, and I, and
They, hold the same thing; for he is no Socinia^^ but holds, Christ died for us
in the Sense of in our stead; That he was our (...), impo^^ing a Surrogation of
Christ's Person in our room, when he became a Sacrifice for us, which is as
much (I say again) as Grotius, to whom they appeal, did intend. It is nothing
therefore, in my esteem, for Mr. Williams to withdraw an Expression in that
sense which offends, seeing in the Antinomian sense, wherein he denies a change
of Person, the Brethren agree (...) the Negative with him; and in the Orthodox
sense, which they own, Mr. Williams agrees (...) the Affirmative with them. It
is not base here, but generous, and to be Victor to give way^ it being enough
that they both have declared themselves. Besides, if the Brethren be (...)
earnest to search into the matter, and would order their words so as we might
come to Concord both in Words and Sense, I have chalked out here, from my late
Book, this Accommodation: I will allow them a change of Person in the Orthodox
sense of the word, so as (...) grant Christ did sustain our Person in what he
did and suffered; And they shall allow to m^^ that there is not a change of
Persons, so, as God did look on us to have done in Christ's Pers^^ what he did,
though he did it in our behalf; and they shall henceforth frame their Words
a^cordingly. And that our Brethren may bend to some Reconciliation in this
proposal, I (...) find, since I wrote my Pacification, the same Conception in
Dr Owen. We do not say, th^^ God judges or esteems that we did and suffered
in our Persons what Christ did and suffered; b^^ only that he did it and
suffered it in our stead. Of Justif. p. 295.

As for the latter Passage, That the Father was never displeased with Christ;
thus much mu^^ be premised and understood from what is said on the former; That
in the sense he sustain^^ our Persons he was made Sin for us, as the Apostle
speaks, though he knew no Sin, that is to be understood Effective. He was not
made Sin or a Sinner formaliter, but I say effective, in regard to the Effect
of Sin, that is the bearing our Punishment, as before. Our Savior therefore
may be considered as bearing our Persons (according to these Brethren) and so
our Sin^^ or in his own Person. God could not be displeased with him in the
one, no, nor in the oth^^ Consideration, because it was of his own appointment.
God, in the Punishment on his Son (not of his Son) was displeased with the Sin
and Sinners whose Person he bare, but he was never displeased with the Person
of his Son, and much less now, when he was fulfilling the Command of his
Father, in giving himself for us an Offering and Sacrifice of a sweet-smellin^
Savor unto him. He must have a witty Invention, I think, that can find any
thing to ma^^ himself differ from Mr. Williams in this Point. And what, when
they and he agree in Senc^^ would our Brethren have Mr. Williams retract these
Words? Nay, it is They must withdraw here, Or they may bid him next go
contradict the Voice of God from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased.

There is one thing yet I cannot but take notice of, that in their late written
Paper, unto which I have alluded all this while, as likewise in their printed
Agreement (1692) our Brethren do declare their Approbation of the Doctrinal
Articles of the Church of England, the Assembly's Confession of Faith, and that
at the Savoy, as the Rule of their Preaching, so as to be liable to Rebuke if
they preach otherwise; which whether they understand disjunctively or
conjunctively, (as in the Paper, or in that Agreement) it being more than any
Authority called them to, I would have them lay it to Heart, and think, Whether
if this Imposition which they have imposed on themselves were imposed on them
by the Bishops, they would not some of them stick at it? For my part, I
declare, that a Subscription to the 36 Doctrinal Articles, without liberty of
Explication, is the hardest part of Conformity; and if there should be a
Comprehension with this Injunction, I should repent I had sought it. But as for
our selves, why any one that can choose, should bind himself up to any Rule of
his Preaching but the Bible, I see no reason, and must propose rather to our
Brethren on both sides, That seeing their Union is broken at present, they
begin a new one, not in drawing certain Theses in such a Latitude of Words,
which All may subscribe, this being no Union when the Tongue is only One, and
the Mind cloven, (as I have formerly expressed myself) but in forbearing and
bearing with one-another as to all things but what is of necessity to
Salvation. In necessariis Vnitas, in non necessariis Libertas. This I shall
inculcate while I am

John Humfrey.
This Half-sheet is taken out of half a dozen Sheets I have writ since my Book
of Pacification, wherein I have something more to say, in regard to my Middle
Way, than I had. A Book will not be bought nor read, when a Paper will. At this
Conjuncture this Paper I think more needful; It may set some Thoughts to work
in the Peaceable, and shall have such Effect as God gives it. In my
Pacification I pray the Reader that has it, to mend a Fault of the Printer,
and to insert the word [Not] p. 35. l. 20.



LONDON, Printed for the Author, Sep. 1st. 1696.


