A PLEA FOR THE NON-CONFORMISTS; TENDING To Justify them against the Clamorous
Charge of SCHISM.

By a Dr. of Divinity.

With two Sheets on the same Subject by another Hand and Judgment.

Vexatio dat intellectum. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1674.

A PLEA for the Nonconformists; tending to justify them against the Clamourous
Charge of Schism.
. 1. IT was doubtless one of the greatest infelicities which ever befell the
whole body of people in these three Nations (considering them as universally
professing the Doctrine of Christ), that in the year 1662. the Settlement of
the affairs of Religion, with relation to Worship and Government, was made to
no more universal satisfaction, but that some thousands of Ministers, many of
whom (their greatest Adversaries being judges) were men of no inconsiderable
worth and usefulness, took themselves obliged rather to lay down the public
exercise of their Ministry, then to do what was by Law required of them, if
they would preserve it; and that such a rigid interpretation was at that time
in practice, put upon the Act of Uniformity, as they were not only
incapacitated to hold, or take Livings, but also to Preach occasionally in the
public Temples. Whether the Act will necessitate any such sense, may deserve
the second thoughts of our Superiors.

. 2. Whether this was Originated in the anger resting in the bosom of some
Churchmen at that time, who had been Sufferers: Or in their zeal to continue
some Bishops the repute of Martyrs, who had suffered for the rigorous enforcing
of some of the things now enjoined, or in the desire of some of that filthy
lucre, which arises from pluralities of Livings, Dignities, sine curare; or in
their desire to propagate some Doctrines, to which they knew the persons who
would be ejected, would be no more friends, then are the Articles of the Church
of England (as interpreted by King James, former all Professors of Divinity in
our Universities, very many eminent Bishops, and once and again by the whole
Parliament of England), or from one, or all of these causes is uncertain to be
determined; a better Original is hard to fancy, while the things required, are
by our most knowing Eccles. Superiors granted not necessary, antecedaneously
to the Superiors command.

. 3. Nor could they ever have been made necessary (as is now said) by the King
and Parliament of England, had they not been suggested to them as things that
in themselves might lawfully be done: Nor (probably) would that suggestion have
prevailed with our civil Superiors, (who in things merely lawful, know
sufficiently that they are to govern themselves in their commands by Prudence,
had they not been also told that the Numbers both of Ministers and People that
would refuse, were very inconsiderable. Their persons and circumstances very
invaluable; that if once the things were enjoined, the Generality would do
them, notwithstanding all their pretenses of Conscience, etc.

. 4. How true these suggestions were, quickly appeared to our Prudent
Statesmen, which made the then Lord Chancellor (a sufficient friend to
Conformity and a Prudent Person) before ever the Act took place, send for some
very valuable persons, and propound a Medium to them that they might yet abide
in their stations (foreseeing the gap would be made) the Parishes only
providing some who might read the Liturgy; but this was too late, and the Act
would not, when it came out, admit any such thing.

. 5. With that rigor the Act was pressed, is sufficiently known, and how soon
after fortified with another Act against private Meetings; and with another
(when that but a probationer for a few years was expired) more severe than the
former; nor did there want those in all parts of the Nation, that executed all
the Acts with severity so far beyond what those Acts Authorized, that they saw
need of Indemnity for their actions by further Acts of Grace and Favor. How
many Godly Ministers and People, were, during these years, not only publicly
reviled in Pamphlets and Pulpits, but Imprisoned (and how many dyed in their
imprisonments) spoiled of their Livelihoods, driven from their Habitations and
Trades, is but an unpleasant story to reflect upon, and with how little success
as to the bringing them to conform is abundantly known.

. 6. In the mean time it pleased his most Excellent Majesty (as a tender Father
of his People, and he who considered his interest lay not in the Division and
Ruin of his People, but in their Peace and Freedom to attend their several
Trades, Professions and Callings (the King himself, as Solomon says, being
nourished from the Field) to inspect the state of Ecclesiastical affairs; and
hearing so many Cries from his People, with the Advice of his Counsel to direct
means for his or their better information, about the numbers of Ministers and
People dissenting; for which purpose Letters were directed in the ordinary
course from the Archbishop to the Bishops, who by their Registers were to
inform themselves, and then his most Sacred Majesty of the Number of dissenting
Ministers, etc.

. 7. How imperfect the information must be in this method is obvious enough to
every one; the Return could only be made of those, who being possessed of
Livings, Aug. 24. 1662. left them for not Subscribing, into which number came
not a 5th. part of Ministers dissenting. 1. None came, which 1661 were turned
out to give room to others, who had a praevious Title to their Livings, and
were not possessed so soon of any other, which were very many. 2. No
Congregational Ministers, who had no Legal Titles to Churches. 3. None that
foreseeing they could not conform (the Act being out) did choose rather to
resign their Livings than abide a turning out. 4. No young men, not possessed of
Livings, though ready for them: To say nothing of Anabapt. etc.
To advantage this imperfect account, the Author of the Ecclesiastical Polity
tells the World of but an hundred Ministers, that hindered all Uniformity.

. 8. But our Wise and Prudent Statesmen quickly saw through these Fallacies,
and from their more perfect information of his most Sacred Majesty, and the
meltings of his own bowels toward the distresses of his People; the sound of
which, came almost from every Court of Judicature, and corner of the Nation,
his most Excellent Majesty and his Privy Counsel took a fuller estimate of the
Number both of Ministers and private Christians dissenting from the public
modes of worship.

. 9. Upon this, it was that his Majesty (conceiving himself empowred thereto by
his Prerogative, and a liberty reserved to him by the last Act against
Conventicles,) was pleased to issue out his Gracious Declaration for
Indulgence, date, Mar. 17.

. 10. What Power his Majesty had, or what was reserved by that Act, to him, we
are no Judges to determine. It is enough for us, That as his most Sacred
Majesty has asserted to himself such a power, so the denial of it to him, has
been by no public Act made known to us, much less his Majesty's recession from
it, Disputes betwixt Kings and Parliaments, we think, are not to be determined
by private Persons without the doors of the Palace and Parliament House, nor
meddled with by the Subject, till the matters in difference (if any be) be
agreed by themselves, and by some public action notified to the People. We
know for the King of England in civil things, to suspend the execution of an
Act which he has found inconveniently practicable till the Parliaments
meeting, and further agreeing in it, is no more than has been done even during
this Parliament, and possibly to all may not appear unreasonable.

. 11. Upon this foundation we stand, and practice, Preaching to our People in
places distinct from the Parochial Churches. What can we do less? May we,
having this liberty, sit still, and live without the public worship of God?
Thus indeed a very great number of the People of England (possibly not
inferior to the N. Con.) yet we have rarely heard of one of them Endited,
Presented, or Prosecuted, when our Brethren were in their fullest career
against the new Recusants, at least, not comparably to those of their Brethren,
who they knew were every Sabbath day (if not with them, yet somewhere strictly
worshipping God, and either Preaching Christ, or hearing him Preached. Surely
our eager Men should rather have bent their Bows, and made their Arrows ready
against these Atheistical livers, than against the Servants of the Living God,
though of a little different Livery; different too, not in the Cloth, but in
the insignificant Fringes and Laces of forms and ceremonies. What though they
could say (which we know in truth they cannot) that Christ (amongst the
Nonconformists) was Preached of envy and strife, yet had they been of St.
Paul's Spirit (from whom they pretend to derive, though indeed Christ, amongst
the Noncon. had been Preached of Contention, and not of Sincerity. (Yet a
little charity would have commanded them to judge as Paul, Some out of good
will Preached him.) But however they being (as St. Paul says, Phil. 1.16, 17,
18. Set for the defense of the Gospel, should have said after him, What then?
Notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense, or in truth Christ is Preached,
and I therein do rejoice, and will rejoice: We shall only say, had they been of
St. Paul's Spirit, they would have said so.

. 12. We take it to be a confessed Principle; That every individual Member of
the Church-Catholick Visible, is bound in duty both to God and his own Soul, to
join himself to some particular Society of Christians, with which he may enjoy
all the Ordinances of God, so as may be for his Souls advantage. What shall
therefore these indulged Ministers and People do? How shall they live up to
this piece of the Divine Will? Shall they join with the Parochial Societies in
their Temples? They have professed to the World, that the business is so stated
by the Act of Uniformity, that they cannot do this without doing what they
judge sinful. If they could, neither would the Ministers 1662. have parted,
together with that public exercise of their Ministry, with the livelihoods
also of themselves, their Wives and Children; or exposed themselves to
Excommunications, Imprisonments, Fines, Banishments, and all manner of Reproach
and Obloquy, or their Families to the Charitable Baskets of Christians. Neither
would more private Christians have suffered so much in most of these kinds, as
they have suffered in vain.

. 13. It must therefore be in Congregations, locally separate from the
parochial meetings. Accordingly, having first obtained his Majesty's Licenses
they practice. Presently they hear a great Outcry of Schism, and sinful
separation from true Churches, Gathering Churches out of Churches, and we know
not what, nor do we believe they do, that clamor at this rate.

. 14. But the truth of this clamor must be a little examined; for the
Non-conformists have got very little by his Majesty's favor, by escaping the
hands of men, to fall into the hands of the living God. We remember when David
was in his great strait, 2 Samuel 24.14. he acquiessed in this. Let me fall into
the hands of the living God, for his mercies are great, and let me not fall
into the hands of men. We think we may (in this case) say the same thing, and
that with some advantage (which David had not, for his heart smote him for a
known sin, our hearts as yet do not condemn us for any such black thing as a
sinful separation; and we do believe those that thus clamor do not well
understand what they say. Let men rather call us Schismatics, sinful
Separatists, so we may worship God as his Word, and our own Consciences tells
us he should be Worshipped purely, and in Spirit and Truth, rather than we not
Worship God at all, or so as our Consciences shall continually fly in our
faces.

. 15. But certainly God's Word has laid us under no necessity of sining; let
us therefore challenge our confident Accusers to the Law and to the Testimony.
It Is worth the while to examine whether this great cry be not Vox et praeterea
nihil; A clamorous scandal and nothing else, which we are the more advantaged
to hope that it will prove by a noted passage in a great Churchman, Mr. Hales
his discourse of Schism. It is this, Schism is one of those Theological
Scare-Crowes, with which, they who use to uphold a party in Religion, use to
fright away such as make any inquiry into it, and are ready to relinquish or
oppose it, if it appears to them either erroneous or suspicious.

Not that Schism, truly so called, is of no graver importance, but that which
generally by Schoolmen and Casuists, and very many (and some of those Learned)
Divines (though like Elias, men subject to like passions with other men) is no
more, is as evident as the shining of the Sun at Noonday, to any one who
knows any thing of Books, or of the World.

. 16. The Greeks, say those of the Latin Church, are Schismatics, and they
(because they are the most ancient Church) seem to have best right; but the
whole Latin Church requites them with the same-name of Obloquy. The Papist so
call the Protestants, but they requite them with the like term, saying, They
that gave the cause of the separation, are the true Schismatics. Amongst the
Protestants, the Lutherans so revile the Calvinists; nor are the Calvinists
behind them, Amongst the Calvinists. The Episcopal men so call the
Presbyterians; the Presbyterians so call the Independents and
Antipaedebaptists. Thus we have called one another Schismatics round. Let us
therefore leave these pitiful, uncharitable, Boyish Revenges, especially
seeing in vulgar use lately, the term has had no further significancy than to
speak persons not of our mind, and for a name to brand such of our Brethren
with, who are a little more inquisitive than others into the things of God, and
is of the same import amongst Protestants; that the word Heretic is amongst
Papists, that is not one of their mind; and leaving terms of reviling to the
Women at Billings-gate, we will fairly state the Case, and argue it as coolely.

. 17. The Question is this, Whether the Nonconforming Ministers, and people
meeting ordinarily together for the Worship of God, in Assemblies and places
locally distinct and separate from the meetings of the Parochial Congregations,
because the said Ministers may not Preach there, nor the said people enjoy
there all the Ordinances of God without the doing of some things which their
Consciences upon Arguments which they judge highly probable, do judge sinful,
be what the Scripture calls Schism, or be in any right Reason A sinful
Separation; these persons in the mean time not condemning all Parochial
Societies as no true Churches, nor in other things behaving themselves
uncharitably toward them, We must profess our selves to believe the Negative
of this Question, in which are two folded together. We affirm then 1. This
practice is not what The Scripture calls Schism. 2. Nor what right Reason,
concluding from any Scriptural principles can call A sinful Separation.


We do grant there may be a sinful Separation of Christians from a Church,
which the Scripture does not call Schism, that makes us distinguish these two
things, nor shall we discourse the former. 1. Because it is a plain Dispute
about a Term. 2. Because the eminently Learned Dr. Owen has made it good, that
a Separation from a Church (though it may be sinful) yet is not that which the
Scripture calls Schism; and we observe, that his very Learned Adversary, upon
the point, grants him this, and pleads for no more than an Analogical
application of the term Schism, to express the sin of unnecessary separation
from a Church, which we will not contend about.


. 18. We say therefore, let it be so, or so, it is of no great consequence; all
grant there may be a sinful separation from a Church, and if the separation be
not sinful, we are sure they Nickname it that call it Schism. If it be sinful,
whether it should be called Schism, or by some other name, we think signifies
very little to the Consciences of any intelligent Christians.

. 19. Mr. Hales still keeping the dialect of the Schools, calls this sinful
separation, Schism, and gives us this description of it.

Schism, is an unnecessary separation from that part of the Visible Church, of
which we once were Members.

Like a wise man he speaks, Multa paucis, remembering the Canon about
Definitions. So then according to him to make a Schism.

1. There must be a separation, and that not from the whole Visible Church,
(that is Heresy or Apostasy) but from some part of it, of which we were once
Members.

2. Secondly: It must be an Unnecessary separation that is where the Union
might have been kept, without sinning against God, we desire no further
advantage than this Description will give us, let our case stand or fall, as it
will abide, or not abide this test.

. 20. Hence we argue, Where there never was an Union, or there is no
separation; or if there be a separation, it is necessary, because the Union
could not be kept without sin. There is no Schism but in the cases of the
Ministers and People. Either there is no separation, or there was no Union
(which indeed supposed there could be no separation) or no more than a
necessary separation; Ergo, No Schism, no sinful separation.

. 21. To make good which, Separation being a term of motion, before we can
strictly speak to the parts of the Argument, we must enquire for the Term, from
which this Motion, or Separation is pretended to be. The Author of The Doctrine
of Schism, p. 40. tells us this roundly.

It Is a great and dangerous Schism, both against the Church of England and
particular Churches.

We will not quarrel with the Zealous Author for the propriety of that English,
-- a Schism against the Church -- because in the close of the same page,
though he does not at all mend the matter (as to the poor Nonconformist, whom
he was wont to own as Brethren) yet he amendeth his English, telling us:

If you consider the Church of England as a particular Organized Church, it is a
Schism from but as part of the Universal Visible Church only as the N. Con. use
to term it, is a Schism in it; and not only so, but p. 57. It is a Schism
from particular Parochial Congregations: For Mr. Candry (he says) has
observed There was and is another Church State in our particular Congregations.

. 22. Here now is a double term, from which this motion is pretended to be. 1.
The Church of England. 2. The Parochial Churches in England.
To let our Author know what we hold, we do believe a Catholic Visible Church,
which we take to be well described in the 19th. of the 39 Articles of our
Church.

The Congregation [or whole Body] of faithful men, in the which the pure Word
of God is Preached, and the Sacraments are duly administered according to
Christ's Ordinance in all those things that are of necessity requisite to the
same.

Of this the Church of England is a part doubtless, and from the Church of
England in this sense we do not know that any have separated, but such as have
renounced Christ and the Gospel, or the Word and Ordinances necessary to
Salvation, which would be plain and desperate Apostasy, with which, we hope our
Brethren will be more modest than to charge us. From this our Plea is, we make
no Separation, and therefore cannot be charged with a sinful Separation. But
says our Author, You make a sinful separation in it. We are not troubled at
words that signify nothing, what is the meaning of this? Do we not Own Christ,
his Gospel, the same points of Faith, the same acts of Worship; where is the
Separation then? Can all meet in the same place? It may be we do not pray by
the same forms, nor ware the same habits, nor use some of those rites some
others of our Brethren use. Do our Brethren then always when they pray, use the
same forms of words? Do not they take a liberty in the Pulpit? why may not we?
Do other parts of the Catholic Church use the same forms? why else are not
they Schismatics? (for as yet we are only considering the National Church of
England as a part of the Church Catholic Visible:) Is there any form, any
habit, any rite or ceremony commanded by Christ, and omitted by us: if there be
not, where is the Schism? It seems the term Schismatic, is their privilege
to use that can first get it out of their mouths; if we divide in no command of
Christ, why may not the Non-Con. call their Brethren Schismatics, as well as
they call their Brethren? Does an humane Law create a difference? Let it be
queried whether that can give a rule to Schism or no. What is the business
then, how do we then make a Schism in the Church of England, considered as a
part of the Church Catholic Visible? Do we break Charity with our Brethren? do
we Revile them, or Reproach their Persons or Societies. Let them bear the blame
who do it, we plead not for them; in the mean time, let not all other Non-Con.
be called Schismatics for their sake. We know very many of the Non Con. have
been uncharitably enough dealt with by those three famous Authors of the
Friendly debate, Ecclesiastical Polity, and of Knowledge of and Communion with
Christ, have they rendered reviling for reviling, though the Masters of Morality
have so treated their Brethren, as if Veracity, Comity, and Urbanity were not
in the Catalogue of their Moral Virtues. When the Author opens himself a little
plainer, and tells us what he means by a Schism in the Church of England,
considered as a part of the Church. Catholic Visible, we shall better
understand him.

. 23. But he says, we sinfully separate from the Organical National Church of
England; and indeed this he must mean or nothing, by what he said before; for
it is not possible to separate sinfully from a National Church considered only,
as a large part of the Church-Catholick Visibles, while they keep in the
profession of Christ and his Gospel, and in the practice of the same Acts of
worship with them, and in the same Doctrines of Faith, unless they fail in
love, refusing all kind of occasional Communion with their Brethren, condemning
them as no parts of the Church of Christ. The worshipping of God by different
phrases and forms of Prayers, in different habits of Vestment, by different
rites and ceremonies, and c. will not do it, for these are things which belong
not to any National Church as a part of the Church Catholic Visible; Christ
left no Liturgy to his Catholic Church, nor any such rites and ceremonies, and
habits; nor was ever the Catholic Visible Church uniform in them; our Brethren
themselves confess these mutable things, wherein several parts of the Catholic
Church differ each from other: These things proceed from the Church, considered
as Organical, not as a part of the Catholic Visible Church; for then the major
part of all particular Christians must consent to the imposition of them.

. 24. Now truly for this Particular Organical National Church, it is possible
we may have separated from it, for we never knew there was any such Creature;
and at last our Author does confess that Mr. Caudry has told him that the
Presbyterians do generally agree, That the Disciplinary part or form of
Government is not essential to a National Church; he should therefore first
have proved that there is such a thing under the Gospel as A Stated, National,
Organical Church; and we should then have tried whether the same Arguments
would not have served the Papists to have proved a Catholic organical Church,
and that something better than they serve our Author, because they have found
out a single head for it, which we find our Author, p. 43. at great loss to
find for his particular National Organical Church.

. 95. He knows not whether he should fix it upon the King, for he is to be
considered as a mixed person: Or The Archbishop of Canterbury, because he is
Primate of all England, or all the Bishops and Pastors. That the King is the
Supreme Political Head and Governor of the National Church of England, is our
of doubt to all Protestants, but such a one as will not claim Authority to any
one strictly called Ecclesiastical act, neither to Preach, nor administer a
Sacrament, nor Ordain Ministers. Are we discoursing of such a head think we?
The Archbishop of Canterbury indeed may do all these; but may he execute any
acts of Discipline in the Province of York? must the Archbishop of York be
taken in. Then we have one National Church Organical with two heads; yet that
is better than 26. for so many must be, if all the Bishops make the head; and
that yet is better than 9000 heads as must be, if the Pastors of all Parishes
be the Head. In short, none of these can by an act of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction influence the whole body; and what kind of head is that? The King
indeed (as Political Head of the Church) may influence the whole with his
commands, relating to Ecclesiastical affairs; but surely we have no
Archbishop, Bishop, or Pastor, can Excommunicate from Dan to Beershaba. Our
Author not being able to fix his thoughts in this point, at last tells us, It
is not material, for it is a certain Vanity to say, 43.
Because I cannot find the the Head, I will deny the Body. Is it so? can there
then be a living Organical Body without an Head? It is not the body we are
discoursing of, but an Organical Body: We may know our Mother (as our Author
says) though we do not know our Father; but we must know we had a Father, and
that Father is, or was a visible Creature, or else he could not be known.

. 26. Well, but what is this same National Organical Church of England. He p.
42. gives us this Description of it:

It is a community consisting of professed Christians united in the same
Doctrine, Government and Worship, according to the 39. Articles, and Homilies,
her Liturgy, and Canons, and Laws, and divided into Parochial Assemblies, for
the more convenient Worship of God.

And p. 45 Schism from the Church of England is a sinful dividing from, or
dissolving our Union or Communion with her in her Governors, Worship, Members,
or Assemblies.

We can neither allow his descriptis on of the National Church of England, nor
yet of his description of Schism, or sinful separation from it, and we would
gladly hear by what Scripture or reason, either of them can be made good.

. 27. It will be no wonder if denying the thing of a National Governing Church,
we deny the description of it, for Non eus, non potest definiri; Now we do
believe that under the Gospel there never was, nor can be a stated National
governing Church, unless what is indeed sometimes, though far from the sense we
are now speaking to, and perhaps not so properly called a Church, according to
the dialect of Scripture made up of all the Messengers of all the particular
Churches in a Nation, in an Assembly for deliberations, advice, and
determinations in some weighty emergent cases, to obviate which, we put in the
term stated, for this is only an Occasional National Church, or Synod, which
has but a temporary being pro renata, and meets and acts at the pleasure of
the Prince, the Supreme Political Head.

. 28. When we speak of a Church, we understand Church as a Scriptural term in
the Religious usage of it, applicable to no body of people, but such a one as
the Scripture calls so. So that if there be any such body as may be called a
National Governing Organical Church, we must either find it in the New
Testament, or at least find some directions there for the constitution and
ordering of it, some Commissions given for a succession of National Officers,
but we find none of this; we find indeed a general commission to Ministers to
go and Preach and Baptize; but this referred as well to the Heathens, as to
professed Christians. If any will say that the Apostles were General Officers,
and from thence will argue for a succession of them, it will better serve the
Papists to prove an Universal Organical Church, than it will serve any to prove
a National Organical Church; and we think that is what our Brethren will not be
very free of granting. If any urge the Example of the Jewish National Church,
which was Organical, they will be also obliged to find our Saviors directions
for the Hereditary descent of an High Priest, or the Election of one into his
place. We always thought the Jewish H. Priest was a type, and Christ the
Antitype, whose coming abolished the type, besides that that also will prove an
Universal Organical Church, for the Jewish High Priest governed the whole
Visible Church, which God in his days had upon the Earth; besides we must have
found some rules and laws left us by Christ for this High Priest. Finally, who
so will erect a stated National governing or Organical Church in England, must
find us an Officer clothed with Authority to Excommunicate from Michaels Mount
in Cornwall to Carlisle and Berwick. Such a one we suppose there neither is, nor
ever was in England since the reformation.

. 29. But if we could allow such a Creature of God as a National governing
Church in England, we should have put Governors (being certainly one of the
Essential parts of such a Church) into the description of it, as well as into
the Notion of Schism from it. Nor should we have so straightened the Notion of
it, as to necessitate all the members of it to be united in Doctrine, Worship,
and Government, without saying how far they must in these things be united.
Whether in every point of Doctrine delivered in the 39. Articles and Homilies,
so far as to approve and embrace all. And in every point of Government,
according to the Canons; or in every mode, rite, or ceremony according to the
Liturgy; or if not, in what, and how far they must be thus united? And for the
Laws (as distinguished from the Canons,) we should have left them quite out,
being but civil constitutions, about the affairs of the Church, not properly
Laws of the Church, or in the more intrinsic matters of it; but Impetus cuncta
male ministrat, this is the unlucky effect of long Definitions, and too great
eagerness to prove all Nonconformists Schismatics. The Author should have done
well to have considered what he, as well as we long since learned at the
University. 1. Definitiones debent esse breves. It is the length of this
description that spoils it, and makes it by no art defensible. 2. Debet
constare ex attributis preoribus and notioribus simpliciter, had this been
thought of the 39 Articles, Homilies, Liturgy, Canons, Laws, had been quite
left out; nor certainly did our Author consider what would follow upon this
description.


. 30. Let us but a little show what inferences follow his Description of the
National Governing Church of England. 1. All Arminians without bail or
mainprise must be Heretics. They are none of the Community of professed
Christians in England, united in the Doctrine of the 39 Articles; will they
tell us they are? Let us ask King James, once the very learned Head of this
Church. He tell us.

That Arminians was an Enemy to God, Reg. Jacobi Dec. contra Vorstium, p. 12.
14.
that his Disciples are Pests, Heretics, Arrogant persons, Sectaries,
Atheists.

That the very Title of Bertius his Book, concerning the Apostasy of the
Saints, required the fire. Shall we be judged by the Parliament (they make the
Laws put into the description of this Church) they confirmed the Articles: We
find them Anno 1628. crying aloud, We Claim, Protest, and avow for Truth, the
sense of the Articles of Religion, which were established by Parliament, Mr.
Rushworths Collections, p. 650.
130. Eliz. which (say they) by the Public Act of the Church of England, and
by the general and current exposition of the Writers of our Church, have been
delivered to us; and we reject the sense of the Jesuits and Arminians, and all
others wherein they differ from us.

Shall we ask the Professors of Divinity forty years since and upward in either
University: They jointly agreed these points contrary to the 39 Articles (one
Dr. Baro only excepted), and we know who was the first Doctor of that Divinity,
knowingly created at Oxford, and the Professors course complement to him at his
Creation, after he had defended one of them. Hujus te Theologiae creo Doctorem,
meaning the Arminian Divinity, whence ever after to his Death, possibly, he
took the liberty to Profess it as the Doctrine of our Church; yea, and they
must be Schismatics too, though not from, yet in the National Church, and
that is the worst sort of Schism, because that which the Scripture chiefly, if
not only, takes notice of.

2. Those who will sing no Psalms, must be Schismatics too; for surely, that is
an act of Worship in the Church of England, and owned by her; yea, and those
that do not ordinarily conform to all Rites and Ceremonies, and Forms in the
Liturgy, do they approve of them? The worse, they still (according to this
description) make a Shisme in the Church. Quaery: Whether none of the
Conformists do this? I could tell him of some, nay One (and he no mean One
neither) that openly told the People, singing of Psalms was one of the Idols of
the Church of England; there were three Preaching, and keeping the Sabbath were
the two other.

. 40. Now if the Author could have been content to have described the National
Church of England, the number of professed Christians in it united in the same
Doctrines necessary to Salvation, and in the same Acts of Worship; the
Definition had been shorter, many of these had been included, and we had all
been agreed. But to be sure to make all the Nonconformists Shismatick, he first
Describes a thing not in being, and which never was since Christ came, and then
describes it in such a manner as if he could create it, would do very many of
his own friends far more hurt than us.

. 41. In the mean time, we must freely yield him such a National Church as we
before described, and the King the Supreme Head of it, not in a capacity to
Preach or administer the Sacrament, or exercise any act in it strictly an
Ecclesiastical by Divine institutions, but to Protect it, to enjoin the
fulfilling in it what God has commanded; to do as much (in it) in short, as
any King of Israel and Judah (as a King) might do, and to make rules and
constitutions about it. But we deny that our Meetings are any more Schisms,
in, or from this Church, then the Meeting of Christians to worship God at
Westminster in the same acts of worship, is a Schism from that part of this
Church, which meet for that end in London.

. 42. Nor is he helped at all by saying Our Churches are not of the same
constitution, Doctrine of Schism, 55.
which he says was Mr. Cawdrys answer to Dr. Owen; let Mr. Cawdry, or who will
say so, Dolus versatur in Generatibus. What is the difference, did Christ
constitute theirs? We trust he has constituted ours, that is, by the Rules
given in his Word. Were theirs constituted by Parliament? (that will be hard to
prove as to the first constitution; Parishes in England were first made by a
Popish Archbishop, the Parliament afterward, or Custom rather might confirm
them). Does it then make a Schismatic to depart to a Church not established by
humane Law or Custom? How else are we of another constitution? Is not the same
Doctrine Preached, the same Sacraments administered? the same acts of Worship
performed? Where Is the difference? In the Modes, Rites, and Ceremonies only;
And these all of humane institution. This is that which the Church of God never
before called Schism, and which the Apostles never thought of. Do not we agree
in the same Government? That concerns us not yet, while we are clearing our
selves only from a Church, which the Author must show us capable of any such
Government as Christ has appointed intrinsecal to his Church. In the mean
time, as to the National Church of England, we deny that we are guilty of any
Schism, either in it, or from it; so that the whole charge must rest upon
particular Churches, and our (pretended) separation from them.

. 43. This is that other Church State mentioned by Mr. Caudry, and quoted by
our Author, chapter 9. p. 57. these he calls Parochial Congregations: We are (he
says) guilty of Schism from them; we all agree that these are capable of the
name of Churches.

1. As they are lesser parts of the Catholic Church, and so capable of the
name of the whole; thus we were indeed united to them, as we were united to the
Catholic Church, and united still to them as unto that; owning the Lord Jesus
Christ, his Word and Ordinances, and professing a subjection to them: But this
is not the other state he speaks of, by which he can mean nothing but a
governing state.

2. Secondly therefore; These Parochial Societies may be considered as
perfectly, or more imperfectly Organized, furnished with all Church Officers
requisite and walking in Gospel order, or not so furnished, or so walking. The
Author tells his Reader in a latter Book, called Advice to the Conformists and
Nonconformists: That the sum of what the Author of the short Reflections
offered, lay in two things; the latter of which he delivered thus. Our
Parochial Churches are no true Churches, Advice to Conformists, etc. p. 72.
or at lest they are so faulty as they may be lawfully separated from.

We have read over the Book; and good Reader, at thy leisure, do but read over
that Pamplet, the second chapt. particularly the 13, 14, 15. pages, and see
whether this Author has, or no, dealt ingeniously with him, p. 14. He speaks
of these Societies, as parts of the Catholic Churches, and says, Short
Reflections, p. 14.
In this Notion we cannot deny that every Parish, yea, Family of Christians, is
a true Church: But he indeed concludes, that out of such particular Churches,
it must be lawful to gather a Church, for all particular Churches in the world,
are gathered out of the Catholic Visible Church; even Heathens, when
converted, must be of the Catholic Visible Church, before they can form a
particular Church: In this state, and no other, must all Parochial Societies be
that have no Minister, unless we will have Organical Governing Churches without
any Governors, which we think is a contradiction.

P. 15. He takes notice of another Notion of them, as Ministerial, by which (he
says) he underst ands a competent number of Christians, who have either first
chosen, or after submitted to A. B. as their Pastor, he might indeed have
spared this Notion; I do not remember I have met with it in any Author, but Mr.
Rutherford; and the truth is, if it be a single Minister, I do not understand
how he Preaches otherwise to them, than as he is (so far) an Officer of the
Catholic Church, and they a part of that vast body. He considers these people

Either as living in the use of all Gospel Ordinances, or as at present living
without some Ordinances, or having them so unduly administered, as may offer
just cause of doubt to some Christians, whether they may lawfully communicate
with them or no: -- He adds, we do believe that from such a Church as is
furnished with a duly sent, able, painful Minister, regularly administering the
Ordinances of Christ, so as people may communicate with them without sin, and
pressing forward to that perfection in order, which in all things they have not
attained Christians as before united to them, may not separate without sin. He
did not indeed say, but I dare say for him, he believed there were many such
Parochial Societies in England, and he hints it, when he says, This was that
indeed which some Presbyterians reflected upon our Brethren of the
Congregational persuasion, and these were those Parochial Churches which they
contended for as true Churches. Was this to say Parochial Societies were no
true Churches? Reader, judge in his 15. page, He tells us; There is yet a more
perfect Notion of a particular Church as perfectly Organical, and furnished
with all its affairs, and walking in all points of Gospel Order. -- He adds,
such particular Churches were in many Parochial Societies in England; and there
is no doubt but such Parochial Churches were True Churches, from which
causeless, and unnecessary separation is sinful. Indeed, he says, How far other
Parochial Churches were true Churches, avowed so by Presbyterians, he was yet
to learn.

And his Answer is, for any thing I see in his Remarques, yet to teach him, and
I believe will so continue. For his guesses at what the Author meant by
Perfection of Order. He I am sure will tell him he means no more, Than a
capacity to administer all the Ordinances of Christ proper to a particular
Church. The Word, Sacraments, and Censures of Jundical Admonition, Suspension,
and Excommunication, which they cannot do till they have Officers. I believe it
must be a case of Extraordinary necessity must justify a single Minister in
Suspending, or Excommunicating, but that those that help him must needs be
persons not ordained to the Ministry. I do not think he believes, but that
there may be more Ministers (if the Parochial Society has more than one) or
others chosen by that Church. And if any will contend that the body of the
people must join with him in those acts (though he reserves his private
judgment in the case) yet he will not contend especially as to Excommunication,
because he understands not to what purpose Officers should cast any out of the
fellowship of their Church, who are yet resolved to have fellowship with him:
He thinks he has read some rule of the ancient Church, that none ought to be
Excommunicated sine plebis consensu, without the consent of the body of the
Church. But was this to say, Our Parochial Churches are no true Churches?

1. The Author said they were all true parts of the Catholic Churches, and so
true Churches.

2. The Author believes There are many Parochial Societies that are true
Churches in the second sense.

3. He plainly says there were many so in the third and most perfect sense.

What pitiful disingenuity was this in this Writer of the Doctrine of Schism,
thus to represent his Adversary? Indeed from the Authors discourse it plainly
appears, That he did not believe.

1. That Parishes that had no proper Minister, or faithful Minister, were true
Organical Churches; but only true parts of the Catholic Church he grants them.

2. That no Parochial Societies as such, were true Organical Churches.

3. Though some Parishes had able and painful Ministers, yet if they never
chose them as their Pastors, nor submitted to them as such, They were not true
Organical Churches; or those who had not so submitted, were not true Members
ever united to them.

. 44. 4. That if persons living in those Societies, had chosen and submitted to
a Minister as their Pastor, believing him able and faithful, and professing to
press after a perfection in order, and they afterward found the contrary, that
he proved negligent in his work, lewd in his Life, corrupt in his Doctrine,
unfaithful in his Administrations; and there were no visible hope of a
Reformation, that in this case they might peaceably and charitably withdraw
from that communion, and join with a better. These seem to be that Authors
principles, which amount to this, that all Parochial Societies, either are no
true Governing Churches, or the parties concerned were never united to them; or
if they were once united to them, yet their secession from them was just and
necessary, and therefore could not be a sinful separation.

. 45. Now what says the Author to this? Will he say that Parochial Societies
are all, True Governing Churches. Surely he will not say so, if he own
Episcopacy; for men of that persuasion must maintain That the Bishop is the
sole Pastor of the Diocese; that Government belongs only to him, that
Parish-Ministers are but his Curates, according to this Model; surely every
Parochial Society is not a Governing Church; do they say so? we say so too. So
we are agreed, and not chargeable with gathering Churches out of true Churches.
Will he say that Parochial Societies having no peculiar Pastor, or none that
resides with his Flock, are true Ministerial Churches. Surely this in the first
part is a contradiction, to talk of a Ministerial Church without a Minister.
And the second part, contrary to our Authors judgment (if consistent to it
self,) for if the cohabitation of Members be necessary, Doctrine of Schism, p.
85.
and that as he tells us, by the Law of Nature, and so Divine, the cohabitation
of the head with those Members, must be necessary too by the same Law.

. 46. No, but he will say, They were united to them, those of them that were
true Ministerial Churches: And 2. Being united, they have no just and necessary
cause of separation. These are the two things to be tried; for the trial of
this issue we must enquire.

Quest. What is a sufficient Union of a person to a true Ministerial Church.

The Author seems not to think mere cohabitation does it, though he thinks it
of the Law of Nature and Divine (which I do not understand) that the Members of
a Church should cohabitate. I think it very expedient and necessary that they
should live so near together, that ordinarily they may meet for worship
together in one place, and be able mutually to perform the dutys of exhortation
and admonition one to another; yet the Author will not say this makes their
Union in a Church Organical; besides many questions would arise, as How near
they must live? Whither none may live betwixt them? What if a Jew, Turk, or
Pagan hires an House betwixt them, etc? What the Author does say, I will
heartily transscribe, as I find it in his Doctrine of Schism, chapter 13. p. 89.
They were Baptized unto these particular Churches, Doctrine of Schism. chap.
13.89.
as well as into the Universal, and the known Laws both of Church and State,
oblige their Consciences to communion with them, -- Their ordinary attending
upon the public Worship as they generally do, or have done, concludes them by
their own consent, etc.

Here now are three things brought to prove the Union, 1. Baptism, 2. The Laws
of men. 3. Their own consent implicitly, by their ordinary attendance upon the
Worship in Parochial Temples.
Let us heartily examine whether any of these will do it.

. 47. That men are Baptized into a particular Church, and by it made complete
Members of it, is what I cannot yield. Baptism indeed admitts into the
Universal Church. If any Presbyterian Brethren have judged more, I must
understand their Reasons before I subscribe their Opinions; besides that,
hardly one of twenty Christians were Baptized in that Parochial Society wherein
they live; when at years of discretion, Baptism indeed gives a Christian a
claim to a Membership in some particular Church, but makes no Union with it.

2. As to the second, it can have no truth in it, till he has proved That it
is the will of Christ, that Christians should be Members of that particular
Organized Church, where their Superiors in Church or State will command. As
this is no civil thing, but Spiritual, and such wherein the Souls of
Christians, as to their Eternal concerns, are highly concerned. So neither is
it a thing indifferent; but let the Author prove what I say he must prove in
this case, and we will say more. We think, though God has expressly no where
told Christians in his Word (which had been almost impossible) what particular
Church they should be of; yet he has obliged them to attend what in their
Consciences they judge, and upon experience they find the most propable and
effectual means for their Instruction, Holiness, and Eternal Salvation; not
expecting he should work miracles for them. God has no where told every Man,
what Woman he should Marry; yet surely he has not left Magistrates a power to
determine all their Subjects to Wives. Yet we think this concern of Souls is
much higher, and that there is as much difference in Ministers as in Wives.

3. The last therefore is all, for which there can be any pretense, consent
indeed will do it. And we will grant, that this consent may be either Explicit
or Implicit. Explicit when Christians have either first chosen, or upon
recommendation accepted a truly sent, able, faithful Minister to be their
Pastor, to administer the Ordinances of God to them: Or more Implicit, when
though they have not first called him, nor so explicitly declared their consent
to him; yet they have ordinarily and statedly walked with him in the fellowship
of all Ordinances. But here must be considered

1. That there is a great deal of difference betwixt desiring, consenting to,
and accepting of one as a Minister of the Gospel to Preach to the Parochial
Society, where a Christan lives, as it is a part of the Catholic Church; and
consenting to such a one to be his or their Pastor, in order to a Church
Organical, It must be a consent of the latter Nature. I may consent and desire
one to Preach to the people in the precinct where I live, and yet have no
thoughts of consenting to him as my Pastor.

2. That there is a great deal of difference betwixt an occasional hearing, and
it may be receiving the Sacrament with a Minister, and a slated ordinary fixed
doing of it. If a Christian, that is of a particular Church at London, goes
down to York, and be to stay there 6 or 9 months, and ordinarily hears and
receives the Sacrament there, while he is there; this will indeed prove his
owning the Church of York as a true Church, and having communion with it, but
not that he is a Member of it. Suppose many Christians, who were formerly
stated Members of Churches, but for 10 or 12 years last past, have not been
able to walk with their Pastors and Brethren in all Ordinances, meeting in the
same place to worship God, have in the time ordinarily, or often heard a
Parochial Minister; nay, sometimes received the Lords Supper. This indeed
proves their Charity, that they looked upon that Society as a true Church; but
it does not prove them Members of it, nor their consent to such a Membership;
no, not to such a Minister as their Pastor, though it may be, they consented to
him for the good of the place where they lived, as a Preacher of the Gospel to
them. If indeed they were of no other stated particular Church before, and did
ordinarily join in Sacramental Communion with such a Minister, it goes far to
prove an Union by implicit consent, and we think such cannot plead, They were
not United.

. 48. It is true, these Notions about particular Churches, Worship and
Government, especially the first and last, were very dark, and little
understood by many good men, Anno, 1641. and no wonder if it be considered. 1.
How very few Books were then wrote of them, on the Presbyterian side. 2. And
how poenal it was made to have, or read them, and how little hope before that
time appeared of reducing any thing had been said to practice.
Some of our Congregational Brethren having had more rest and freedom, and
opportunity of exercise in N. England and Holland were better studied in them.
As also our Brethren of Scotland. This for a few years occasioned great
animosities. Yet I could never read, nor hear quoted that even then any
judicious Presbyterians ever granted: 1. That all Parochial Societies were true
Organized Churches. 2. Nor that living in a Parish did more than give the
Christian a liberty to claim admission into that Society.


But some few years passing, and men's heats abating, and peaceable converse
each with other, better advantaging them to understand one another, than at
first they did, they began to be far more clear and unanimous in their Notions,
and more charitable in their practices.

. 40. I cannot speak for all, but I can speak for a very competent number so
many (as in one County) would be persuaded to meet in 1657. and 58. They agreed
in the following Character of a person fit for Church Fellowship in all
Ordinances and Privileges.

I have by me, also the Scriptures affixed to prove this.
1. One that is endued with some competent knowledge in the principles of
Religion. 2. Whose life and conversation is free from all gross and scandalous
evils, both of Omission and Commission. 3. Who makes such a profession of
Faith and Holiness as may give unto the Church a probable hope in the judgment
of true Christian Charity, that there are some seeds of some spiritual work of
God in his soul. 4. Who professes a willing subjection to the Gospel, and all
the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, and so gives up himself to the Lord, and his
Church, to walk in all duties of Obedience and Love, according to the Will of
God.
To which they added, and then subscribed.

We acknowledge such Churches to be true Churches, as consist of such persons
coming together as are here described, and such to be true Ministers as are
called by, and unto such a people. And we further acknowledge such to be
Churches, and their Ministers to be true Ministers, though some bad with the
good agreed to the call of those Ministers, or to own and embrace them; and
although there were some disorder, and failing in the Ordination, and coming in
of such Ministers.

By this, these Presbyterians judgments easily appeared, what Parochial
Societies they judged, True Churches; and also what they judged necessary to
make up the Union of a Member with a particular Organical Church.

. 50. I think I can from a Friend also, assure the Author that the person whom
this Author does somewhere declare not only a Presbyterian, but one of great
judgment and Worth (as indeed he was) I mean Mr. Brinsley of Yarmouth, was the
man drew up this Writing, recommended it to his Brethen; himself agreed in it,
and they also, and made it a great foundation for an Agreement betwixt them and
their Congregational Brethren. For my own part, I am much of his mind: We say
many of the Ministers and people he reflects upon as Schismatics, neither were
actually thus united to Parochial Societies, nor we in capacity so to be,
because formally Pasters and Members elsewhere.

. 51. But the Author thinks the Law forbidding Ministers to Preach in the
Parochial Temples, has dissolved this Relation. In this we differ from him,
and desire a better proof of it, both de facto, then he has given us, and de
jure, Then Solomon's putting Abiathur from the Priests Office, who had deserved
to dye (as Solomon tells him first;) but more of that by and by. I do not
profess strictly to Answer the Authors Book about Schism: It is directed
against an Author able enough to speak for himself; but something I must say to
this and some other passages, only as they come athwart me in maintaining the
Negative part of my Question, and justifying my self and others from the
clamor of Schism. Therefore in Doctrine of Schism, p. 75. I find these words,

What if a man has a mind to be Friends with him, (that we desire, for we are
for peace, etc.) and should grant that those Ministers were not degraded
[discommissioned he should have said, or unordained as to] their Ministry
within the Church of England; and that those Churches were not dissolved by
having new Pastors, [he forgets the Bishop, Curates he should have said] no
more then the Kingdom, when the King dies; and yet certainly the King and
People are as much constitutive parts of a Kingdom, as Pastor and People of a
Church; who will say, that considers what he says, that a particular Church is
dissolved by the death or removal of the Pastor. Afterward he tell us the
Opinion of Dr. Gouge, then of Mr. Baxter, as to the removing of Abiather; and
lastly, p. 77. That he has thought hitherto, that the distinction of the
Office, and of the exercise of the Office had gone uncontrouled amongst
Presbyterians; and though the Ministers of Christ depend not (not upon the
Christian Magistrate for their Office) and he cannot degrade them, yet quoad
Exercitium, as to the Exercise of it in his Dominions he might, and that he had
power to silence such as are judged unmeet to Preach; and in this Mr. Baxter
confirms him, etc.

. 52. He will at least (ex abundanti) grant that man has no power to say to
those, Do not preach, to whom Christ and his Church has said, Go and Preach;
it is some relief yet, that he will in any thing suffer us to acknowledge
Imperatorem coeli. The Ministers were not put out of Office, 1662. then; Only
forbidden to exercise that Office within the Kingdom of England; but where was
this prohibition? The Law only says, in public Churches and Chapels. But the
Churches he says were not dissolved any more by having new Pastors, than the
Kingdom is dissolved when the King dies [he should have said by having a new
King.] The Question is, whether the Churches were not dissolved by the removal
of their Pastor. We think not: so he says, Are we not agreed? the Governors
were in being; the Governed in being; only the Governors were in Prison, and
for a time could not exercise their Office in their Churches. But if the
Governors were discommissioned, unordained, surely the Governing Church was
dissolved as the Governing Kingdom; (so far as the Governors act by
commission) is by his leave dissolved at the death of a King, as we all know.

. 53. He asks who will say That a particular Church is dissolved upon the Death
or Removal of the Fastor. I answer any one that understands sense, if there
were no other Governor, and he be not in being, surely the particular
organical Governing Church is dissolved, the body is not necessitated to part,
but at liberty, whether they will agree to the next Pastor, yea or no; his
Friend Mr. Candry has said so.

Mr. Hooker had said, If the Church be not a Church without Officers, Cawdrys
Answer to Mr. Hookers Survey, chap. 8. page 133.
then as often as the Officers dye, the Church dies also. That is an
Authoritative Governing Church; and indeed, for any to say a Church is a
Ministerial Church, without a Minister, or a Governing Church without a
Governor, is a piece of sense I cannot understand.

. 54. But to return to the Case of Abiathar, which is brought to prove the
power of Magistrates, to put Ministers as well out of their Office, as out of
their Preferments, Possessions, and public Temples (all which is granted and
excluded the Question.) I have nothing to do with any man's Opinion in the case.
Let us fairly debate and understand the case, and see whether it will conclude
for the Author, yea or no. Aaron was Gods undoubted High Priest, immediately
constituted so by himself. His Sons were also ordained by God to succeed him.
Aaron had four Sons, 1 Chronicles. 6.4. Nanab and Abihu, (these Lev. 10. dyed before
their Father) Eleazar and Ithamor. By Gods special order Eleazar was made the
High Priest instead of Aaron, Numb. 20.26, 28. Eleazer died, Josh. 24.33.
Phinehas his Son succeeded him, Jud. 20.28. Here the Scripture leaves us. The
next High Priest we read of, was Eli, for his neglect to correct his scandalous
Sons, God threatens that he would cut off his Posterity from his Altar, 1 Samuel
2.33, 35. and raise up unto himself a saithful Priest: This was the known will
of God, declared to Eli by two Prophets; his Sons Hophni and Phinehas died
before him. Ahilub is by Divines concluded to have succeeded him; he is called
Ichabods Bother, 1 Samuel 14.3. That is Elies Grandchild. Ahiah succeeded Ahilub,
as is plain from 1 Samuel 14.3. Ahimelech succeeded him, as is plain, 1 Samuel
22.11. Here God's Vengeance on Elies Family began to appear. Saul slays him and
all his Fathers House, 1 Samuel 22.16. only v. 20. Abiathar escapes and flees
unto David, and was with him in all his troubles by Saul; but in the mean time
it would be enquired who was High Priest for Saul at Jerusalem? and this the
Scripture says not, (possibly he little regarded the Ecclesiastical Order
instituted by God.) But it is a greater difficulty how the H. Priesthood came
out of the line of Eleazer, Aarons Eldest Son, into the line of Ithamar the
Younger Son of Aaron? Nor does the Scripture resolve us, nor Josephus, who
assures us, Eli was of the Family of Ithamar, and the first of it, but says
only, He took the Priesthood, of whose Family Abiathar was the last. Josephus,
v. 62.12.
This Abiathar was one of those, who during David's life, and contrary to his
Will, proclaimed Adonijah King, 1 Samuel 1.25. which was no less than High
Treason. Solomon calling him to account for it, spares his life for the
kindness he had showed to his Father, telling him he was worthy of death, but
confineth him to Anathoth, (where he could not execute the Priests Office) 1
King. 2.26, 27. So says the Text, He thrust out Abiathar from being Priest
unto the Lord; and it is added, That he might fulfill the Word of the Lord,
which he spoke concerning the House of Eli in Shiloh: yet 1 King. 4.3. In the
rool of the Officers we find Zadock and Abiathar were the Priests; so that it
seems he was a Priest still, Whatever is to be understood by, He put him out of
the Priests Office: it is certain, 1 King. 2.35. he made Zadoc in his room, who
was of the Sons of Eleazar, 1 Chronicles. 24.3. We cannot understand from Scripture,
but that the High Priesthood ought to have been in the Family of Eleazer; and
it is like the disorderly times of the Judges altered it. Solomon restores it,
and in doing it, fulfilled what he knew was the will of God about Elies Family.
It is not improbable but David had done it before, but for Abiathars peculiar
Service to him in his troubles. Now we have the case,

1. Solomon knew that Abiathar was of the younger House from Aaron, whereas the
High Priesthood truly belonged to the Elder.

2. He knew also God had declared his Will to root out the House of Eli.

3. This Abiathar had committed the highest crime; Solomon might have put him
to death, but for his kindness to his Father as to life he spares him, but
thinks fit to send him far enough from the Court, and the place where the
Highpriests Office was to be Executed at Jerusalem, and to confine him to
Anathoth, where he could not execute the Office of the High Priest; and so he
was in effect turned from the Highpriests Office.

4. And Zadoc, to whom that Office was due, is invested with it: But Abiathar
remains a Priest still, and is so called after, and joined next to Zadoc; but
the High Priesthood could not truly belong to him, but to the Elder House from
Aaron; and besides, God had declared his Will, that this should be done; he is
said to have done it, that he might fulfill the Word of the Lord, and he that
did it was a man inspired by God, and a Penman of Holy Writ. What will follow
from hence think we? therefore Kings and Magistrates may remove

1. The chiefest Priests from their Preferments, Dignities, and their own
Courts.

2. That in case they have deserved death, and the Magistrate thinks fit to
show mercy, but yet to punish them with Banishment to remote places where their
flock cannot come; he may thus in effect turn them out from their Pastoral
Relation.

3. That in case he finds them no true Ministers of Christ, he may forbid them
to Minister.

4. That if God from Heaven by a revelation, or by any plain Scripture commands
them to turn true Ministers out of Office, they may do it. I can see nothing
more, let the Author make his best of this.

. 55. But he had thought the distinction of the Office, and the exercise of it,
had been uncontrouled by the Presbyterians; and that they had granted, that
though the Magistrate could not degrade them, yet as to the exercise of their
Office he might, and that he had power to silence such as he judged unmeet to
Preach. Presbyterians can (without the help of this Authors Logic) distinguish
betwixt the Office and the exercise of the Office, and make one distinction
more between the exercise of the Office in public places, (undoubtedly in the
Magistrates disposal,) and in their own private Houses, or in the private
Houses of others. They do believe it in the power of the Magistrate, though not
to take away their Office, or Relation to their Flock. Yet to hinder the
exercise of it, and that they ought to obey him, commanding them to forbear the
exercise of it in public places belonging to the Magistrates; and accordingly
have generally been so obedient, though the Law so far, be not so plain, that
any are prohibited to Preach, except such as are disabled, which is the case of
very few. They know Paul Preached in his hired House at Rome, Act. 28. and in
the School of Tirannus, when the Jewish Rulers forbad them the Synagogues; the
Office not taken away, nor to be taken away, they conclude the Relation
attending the Office abiding. But hitherto we have only justified our first
Plea. It is no separation, because there never was an Union, nor could be of
very many of us to a Parochial Ministerial Governing Church. And considering it
only as a part of the Catholic Church, we are in all points one with it.

. 56. But we will suppose that this is not the case of all our Brethren; but
some have been United to the Parochial Societies, wherein they lived, and
implicitly consented to be one body with them, by not only hearing the
Ministers there, but receiving the Communion with them. What shall be said for
them? We say they are not sinfully separated.

1. Are they separated? They now indeed meet for worship in other places, and
that statedly; but do they condemn the Ministers or Churches, from which they
are come? do they not own them as true Ministers, and such Churches as true
Churches? Do they not pay to the Ministers, and love the Brethren? where is the
Schism then? For when men have said all they can, Schism is a sin against the
command of Love to our Neighbor. It is no command of God, you shall be of this
Congregation or another, other then it falls under general precepts, commanding
us to use the best means for our Souls. Now cannot I love my Neighbor, except
I dwell in his Family, or choose her for my Wife, or him for my Husband:
Besides, it is most certain, I am bound to love my own Soul in the first place;
and as an Evidence to that, I am tied to use the best means I can (not
contradicted by God's Word) according to my own Conscience (which certainly
must judge for me in my highest concern) for the Salvation of it.

. 57. I am a-ware of what this Author has said, That a man may not depart from
a Congregation to which he was United, either to enjoy the Ordinances of God
more powerfully, or purely, or perfectly administered in another, convenient
enough for me to join with. This is the substance of what he has said and
quoted from others as their Opinion. But this will never enter into my
thoughts. Let them speak plainly to this. Is it not the duty of every Christian
to use what appears to his Conscience the best and most probable means for his
Salvation? The light of Nature as well as Scripture will evince this. Now I
would fain know of any person what it is under Heaven, (except the bare Word
and Sacraments) that God has appointed as means for the Instruction,
Edification, and Salvation of my Soul, but the gifts of his Ministers or
People, (with which, in order to these ends) his holy Spirit works not
miraculously, but in a national orderly way secundum quae nactus est, Organa.
There is nothing more evident than that in Ministers, there is a great
diversity of Gifts, and as much a diversity of Wills, Humors, and Fancies; and
also a great variety of peoples Capacities. There Is nothing more evident than
that our Ministers parts, method of Preaching, etc. is really more fitted to
the Instruction and Edification of some people, than the Gifts and Methods of
others are; as we say every good Man makes not a good Husband for every good
Woman; so it is demonstrably true, that every able and good Minister is not a
fit and good Instructor for every good Christian; they possibly understand not
his language, nor cannot learn his method (possibly it is Cryptick, and requires
a Scholar to understand it. Shall these people be perpetually staked down in
the case, that let their Souls be never so much concerned, they must not
ordinarily join with another Minister, and hear him, though their habitations
be convenient enough for it? or must these persons (possibly to the loss of
their Trade and Livelihood, which in Towns lies much upon their habitation) be
forced to remove into that other Parish; where has God required any such thing?

. 58. Besides that, I understand not much those of my Brethren that are so
Zealous in this point. In my little dealings in the World, I use always to be
afraid of that Tradesman, whom I perceive using arts to tie me to his Shop;
and upon that Workman that I see endeavoring to oblige me to none but
himself. I fear always, they have no good meaning toward me; and I should fear
my self, that I meant not to deal well with Souls if I went about to stake them
to my Ministry. I should suspect my self of Pride, or Self-interest, or some
other scurvy Lust or Passion. If I think none so able as my self, it is Pride;
if I would have them to fill my Congregation, it is Self-interest. If I would
save their Souls, so may another, and possibly be a better instrument for it,
at least he is more likely, if sound in the Faith, able, and painful, because
they have a more fancy to him. In short, I have for some good time been an
unworthy Minister of the Gosel; I thank God, I can say, that as I never denied
any Christian desirous to leave me, my License to do it; so I never had an ill
thought of any that did it; but said with my self, The fewer Souls I have will
be under my charge, the lesser my account will be: And that which much
confirmed me in this, was my reading Chrysostom's expressing a fear that but a
few Ministers would be saved, because their work and charge was so great; which
if well considered, would abate our trouble for the diminution of our Auditory,
and rather make us rejoice. I have a number not inconsiderable under my charge
now, and I can say, I dearly love them; and should think I did not, if I should
not declare my free leave for them to leave my Ministry, and join with any
other of sound faith and holy life, under whom they should think they could
profit more than by me; and I do think this the duty of every Minister. I do
not think this is any sinful separation which Schism does import.

. 59. But lastly: Supposing such a departing from a Church, to which we are
united, be to be called Separation; yet it is not sinful (in the judgment of
all Divines) if it be necessary, or if it be not causeless; now possibly this
may be the case of many. I remember in the case of Marriage, Divines
distinguish between Repudiation and Divorce; Divorce, they say, can only be for
Adultery; but Repudiation may be lawful and necessary in several other cases;
in short, in all cases where it appears; there ought to have been no Union, had
it been known; as suppose, 1. One had Married another (through deceit) of his
or her own Sex. 2. His very near Relation, as Mother, Sister, etc. 3. or 3dly.
One appearing evidently unfit for the chief ends of Marriage, etc. I think the
same is to be said in this case. Let us try a little: Suppose Christians by an
error, had chosen a man to be their Pastor, and ordinarily heard him, and
communicated in the Lords Supper with him, whom at last they found to be no
Minister. And when they discover it should leave him: This I hope were no
sinful separation. If any shall say it is, he should complain and have him
orderly removed. We will suppose the case so, that it could not be obtained: Of
this the late times gave us some instances. 2. Secondly: Suppose Christians, by
an error, and through ignorance, had done the like to one, whom after they
discover to be corrupt in matter of Doctrine, suppose some points of Popery,
Arminianisme, Socinianisme, which they in their Consciences judge false, and
makes a trade of this. Is it a sin for them to go to another Minister, not
being able to get this removed? It Is plain, they ought not to have chosen him
as their Pastor. 3. Suppose Christians by an error, have so chosen and joined
with one whom they then judged of a very sober life, but they find him a
notorious Drunkard, Swearer, etc. Such a one ought not to have been chosen, but
does factum valet here; must they not leave him? If any say they may have him
removed, I desire to know by what Law of England? if he be neither Jew nor
Schismatic. I am mistaken if I have not read or heard the Law allows no other
cases (or very few) of Deprivation. 4. Suppose Christians by the like Error,
to have chosen one, who they thought would have been faithful watching his
Flock, and to that end cohabiting with them, the thing of the Law of Nature
(says our Author) and that is Divine for Members of the same Church; but they
find, he rarely comes near them, or rarely Preaches to them if amongst them,
possibly once a month, hardly more, seldom or never administering other
Ordinances. In this case may Christians depart to another, yea, or no? will any
say No still? then he is bound to live without God's Ordinances all his life
time for ought I know.

. 60. But lastly: Must it appear demonstratively, or is it enough for it to
appear to the Christian probably, (that is so far as his Conscience can discern
or judge) sinful to Communicate with a Church, before he separates from it. If
any say Demonstratively, let him prove it: will any say it is enough, as to his
practice? if it propably appears so; then why are we so boldly called
Schismatics before our probable Arguments be made appear to us, to have no
probability to? But They are the people, and have said Wisdom shall dye with
them. We must be Schismatics and sinful Separatists, and for no other reason,
but because they say so.

. 61. Once more. If it be Schismatical for the Members of a Chuch to separate
from the Minister and Congregation to which they are united: Then it is
Schismatical for Ministers also to separate from the Congregations to which
they were once so united, unless at least commanded by the Governors of the
Church, for the public good: If any say No, he will, I hope, give us a Reason;
is not the Minister United? Does not he break the Union, yea destroy the
Organical Church by removing, which private Christians do not? I am afraid the
Author will rather quit us from Schism, from Parochial Societies, than grant
us the consequence, to the prejudice of, if not himself, yet of so many of his
Friends, One of them he must do, if I understand sense. Will our Author think
to excuse this, by saying, It is no Schism in them, because they but remove to
Churches of the same Communion (which he said before, for peoples removing from
one Parish to another)? It lies upon him to prove that persons agreeing in the
same Doctrine, and in the same acts of Worship, though they differ in the words
and syllables, and forms (of mere humane constitution) be of a different
communion from their Brethren, otherwise the Presbyterians do not separate, and
are but Sister-Churches of the same Communion with their Brethren, not
separated from them.

. 62. The Author of the Reflections had told the Author, That themselves with
us had separated from Rome, which yet they, or some of them acknowledge a True
Church: Therefore we might separate from a True Church. The sum of his Answer
is 1. That the Presbyterians do not acknowledge it so, to whom he spoke. 2. This
was a current Argument of the Presbyterians against the Independents. 3. He
meant such true Churches as our Parochial Congregations. 4. They prove the
Communion of Rome is corrupt; we only say theirs is. 5. Many do hold the Church
of Rome truly a Church, not a true Church; true as to the Essence, but not
Morally true as to her Doctrine and Worship. 6. We did not separate from Rome,
for we really were never of them; we reformed our selves without separating
from Rome.


Notwithstanding all these Answers (except the last) which I shall show weak
enough. Thus much we have gained.

That it is Lawful in some cases to separate from a body that is Metaphysically
a true Church, that is truly a Church, which is all was intended to be gained.
That the general Notion of the Truth of a Church, should be no more a Medium to
prove us Schismatics, now let us examine his particular Answers.

. 62. The Presbyterians do not acknowledge Rome a true Church, and therefore he
argued ad homines. Indeed I find Mr. Caudry, to his Adversary granting
something of the Truth of a Church to Rome, crying Viderit ipse, but he is not
the mouth of all Presbyterians; did ever any know a Presbyterian, Ordaining a
Minister the second time, because he was the first time Ordained by the Church
of Rome? yet he was there ordained to offer Sacrifice, but also to Preach the
Gospel, which makes them afraid of it; or Baptizing any that turned Protestants
from Papists. Till he had known this, he should have forborne this Answer, it
may be that many of them will grant she has something of the Metaphysical
Verity of a Church. A rotten House, and falling, but yet an House still, and we
think Christians from such a Church may withdraw.

. 63. But this was an Argument against the Independents. Produce a place where
they ever said, It was unlawful for Christians to depart from a Church that had
the least of truth in it. But he says he meant such as our Parochial
Congregations, this is a general: what does he mean by such? 4. They prove the
Communion of the Church of Rome corrupt; we only say it of theirs. And he only
says that we only say it. We think that many have proved that we cannot
Communicate or Minister in it under some present circumstances, without what we
judge sin. Who shall determine betwixt us as to our practice? Has this Author
made, or can he show us a strict Answer to Calderwood, Gillespy, and Dr. Ames?
and yet much more is to be said in our case, then they could speak.

. 64. Many do say that the Church of Rome is Vere, but not Vera Ecclesia, (that
will not do) we can show him vera, that is true as well as, Vere Truly; but his
meaning is, True in Essence, not Morally True; what is the meaning of that? Not
true in her Doctrine and Worship. This kind of truth admitts many degrees. We
would fain know of our Author to what degree of moral truth that Church must be
arrived, from which he judges it sinful to separate; for we shall find that
diverse of his Brethren and Fathers have acknowledged a great degree of moral
truth in the Church of Rome, from which yet they separated, and we believe died
in their separation from it. Died they as Fools dyed? Let me show this a
little: Was not the Church of Rome morally true, because an
Antichristian-Church, and the Seat of the Antichrist? So indeed Bishop Downame,
Bishop Abbot, and many Bishops were wont to say; but since that time Bishop
Mountagne has called their Arguments Apocaliptycal phrenzies. Dow says it is
doubtful. Dr. Heylin says it cannot be, for Antichrist must be a single man, a
Jew that must kill Enoch and Elias. Star Chamber Speech; p. 32.
Bishop Laud confesses therefore he has raced out of the Liturgy, the
scandalous term Antichristian Sect.

. 65. Is the fault in the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; it may be some of us
think there is fault enough there; I trust our Author himself thinks so, but
neither all former Conformists, nor present Conformists believe that she
differs from us in any Fundamentals. I my self have been told so within few
years; the Author could not but know that Bishop Laud, Dr. Heylin, Bishop
Potter, and many others have thus far asserted her Moral truth again and again,
as to Doctrine. Now may not that be put for a Problem amongst those who are so
Zealous in this point.

Whither it be not Schismatical to separate from a Church upon the account of
Doctrine which errs in no fundamentals.

Yet those great men confessed the latter, and did the former. If we loose this
stand, I know not where we shall find a boundary to stop us from separation,
from a true Church, for any one false Proposition of Doctrine maintained in it.
But what Doctrine is there, as to which we cannot show them that some or other
our conforming Fathers or Brethren have not either acknowledged true in their
terms, or so far true, as would make separation for it dangerous; yet all these
separated from it, and died many of them in that black Schism (if it were so.)
Let the Author instance, and he shall hear what we can say to it; he will I
hope, spare the Arminian points. The Doctrine of Faith as an assent only to the
Proposition, Justification by Works, etc. but let him instance.

. 66. But it may be the business is, they have acknowledged and proved her
Communion unlawful as to Worship; we indeed do so think it sufficiently sinful.
But have all those Conformists separated from her thought so? we think so,
because we judge her idolatrous in her Adoration of the Eucharist, The Saints
departed, Relics, Images, Altars, etc. and we know that many of our
conforming Brethren are of the same mind with us, Dr. Brewynt, Dr.
Stillingfleet, and many others have sufficiently told us so; but the question
is, whether all our conforming Brethren, who have separated thus, judged her
thus morally not a true Church. What meant Dr. Heylins four bowings at his
taking up and setting down the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist. Heylins
moderate Answer, p. 137.
What says the Author of Weights and Measures, as to the point of Veneration
of Images? What says Bishop Mountague, Antig. p. 318. and in his Antid. p. 30.
and in his Orig. p. 40. he says the Ancient Church did Venerate Relics,
Antid. p. 44. but I will enlarge no further till I have particular instances
given.

. 67. We see it was the judgment of these men, (and they were learned men) that
we may separate from a Church that has a great degree of moral truth. But it
may be they thought they did not separate because they and their Forefathers
were really never of them, but reformed themselves. But were not our
Forefathers Baptized into that Church? Did not the Laws of England once tie us
to them? Were we not United to the Governors Worship, Members, and Assemblies
of that Church. Did not our Forefathers show their consent by ordinary
attendance upon their Devotions, etc. This is all our Author says for our
Union to the National and Parochial Church, or Churches of England.

. 68. Again, they have proved it, he says, that Communion in that Church is
corrupt. How? Because we cannot communicate with it without sin. How have they
proved it? Demonstratively; so as the Adversaries cannot deny it? Nothing less,
they do deny it, and yet dispute it, but so as we probably judge it sinful. We
grant this is proved, and so we think we have proved it too, though it may be
more sinful to communicate with the Romish Church. But we know Magis and minus
non variant speciem. But we think we ought not to do the least sin.

. 69. But we do not say it is sinful to communicate with them in all
Ordinances. Why do we not communicate with them so far as we can without sin?
Presbyterians indeed do generally acknowledge so much. But Communion is either
stated and fixed, or Occasional. They conceive themselves obliged, statedly and
fixedly, if they can, to communicate to their proper Congregations where they
can enjoy all the Ordinances of God. For occasional Communion, they neither
have denied it, nor shall deny it to their Brethren in such actions wherein
their Consciences will allow them so to communicate without sin, as occasion
offers it self; they acknowledge many of their Ministers, and of their Churches,
true Churches, true Ministerial Churches; they many of them hear them Preach
and Pray, and bring their Children to them to be Baptized ( especially if any
of them will abate what in that administration none judges by Divine precept
Originally necessary, and they judge sinful?) what would the Author have more,
unless a perfect communion?

. 70. As to which (though I do not much value Arguments from Authority of men,
because they never touch the Conscience, nor ad homines; because they are
single Bullets, and hit but one person; yet once let me use one. Because our
Author in his Doctrine of Schism, p. 28. assures us he is much of Mr. Fulwoods
mind. I know not that Reverend Person; but I take him to be the same Mr.
Fulwood that was sometimes Minister at Staple Fitzpane in Somersetshire, and
anno, 1652. published a Book called, The Churches and Ministry of England true
Churches, and a true Ministry (if he be not the man intended, I beg his pardon
if it be he, he says thus of the Church of England.

For matters of Government, indeed of late we were under Episcopacy, all whose
appurtenances savoured of Antichrist -- and in the same page a little after --
our Episcopal Courts, Service, Tyranny, etc. were very gross.

This was Mr. Fulwoods judgment. I think we may easily argue according to his
principles. It is Mr. Fulwoods assertion, not ours.

From a Church, all whose appurtenances, as to Government, savor of
Antichrist, Fulwoods Churches and Ministry of England true, etc. p. 12.
and whose service is very gross. Christians may, and ought to separate, so far
as to that Government, all whose appurtenances so savor, and whose service is
gross. But says Mr. Fulwood, and. -- Ergo. When the Reverend Author has found
out an answer for his Friend Mr. Fulwood, we will further examine it. But there
is no end of these things.

71. In the mean time I must mind the Author of too little candor, as to his
Adversary who wrote the Reflections, in saying the sum of what he offered, was
reducible to these two propositions. 1. That the Conformists held the Church of
Rome to be a true Church, yet did separate. 2. That our Parochial Churches are
no true Churches, when as he never said the latter at all, but the clean
contrary, and had acknowledged, 1. All of them true Churches, that is, true
parts of the Catholic Church. 2. Many of them true Ministerial Churches. 3.
Some of them true Organical Churches.

Besides this, He that reads the Authors chap. 1. will see these two things
were not the sum of what he said, and that how little soever Reason was in
those Reflections, there was yet more then this Author in his Remarques was
pleased to take notice of, for that Author had then insisted on their not being
united to Parochial Churches.

. 72. To shut up this discourse, I from my Soul wish, all the Lords, Ministers,
and People of England were of one heart and mind. I am not of Gravity or
Learning sufficient to Advise either Conformists or Non-conformists, but shall
only propose my own thoughts, and not mine alone. The Reverend and Learned Dr.
Hornbeck, (...) in his Dissertations de Episcopatu, has these passages which I
shall translate. The learned may read them in the Printed Copies.

If men were every where as sollicitous for forming and reforming men, and
fitting them for the sacred Ministry, to which they profess to give up
themselves, the disputation about the form of Sacred Order and Government would
be more easy, and less evil need be feared from that which we judge not so
good. -- Here, says he, We must begin that men may be made worthy for the
work, and Parag. 4. -- Here we must lay on our help -- We see the Apostles in
their Writings, were more sollicitous about the Virtues than the degrees of
Ministers, -- Parag. 9. Before (says he) we divide into parties about other
things, we should jointly agree about these things. A confession of common
Doctrine according to truth and piety, should be either set forth or confirmed,
then exact Canons should be made about the whole life and manners of Ministers,
and then a disputation about the form of Church Government should follow --
Thus far he.

. 73. I shall conclude with delivering my Opinion, That if 1. All the ancient
Canons of Councils were executed, which concern Ministers Lives and Office. And
the Doctrine of the 39 Articles as expounded by King James and the Parliament
of England were avowed, and those men might have nothing to do in the debate.
Who are dead in Law, according to those Canons; that is, such as ought to be
Excommunicated, or deprived, and who had declared, or should declare themselves
contrary to the Doctrine so expound^d and declared. The remaining part would
quickly so well agree with other things, as we should be no more troubled with
clamours of Schism and Separation; and tell something of that Nature be, I see
no medium, but either Dissenters must be indulged, and Schism clamoured and
never proved, or suffering for Conscience Sake must be imposed and patiently
endured.

Fiat Voluntas Dei. ERRATA.
PAge 2. l. 23. f. curare, r. curaes, p. 32. l. 14. f. Arminians, r. Arminius,
p. 33. l. 4. f. 130. r. 13th. p. 36. l. 12. f. generatibus, r. Generalibus, p.
42. l. 12. f. Jundical, r. Juridical, p. 70. l. 2. r. one Ministers parts, p.
74. l. 9. r. he Preach some, p. 75. l. ult, r. probably.

ERRATA, in the Two last Sheets.

PAge. 10. l. 14. after the word Apology, I pray add this, That which is of
Divine, is undeniably greater than that which is of Humane Institution, p. 4.
l. 10. f. act, r. acts, p. 27. l. 19. f. page 4. l. 34. r. B. 4. c. 34. p. 29.
l. 22. f. Affirmations, r. Affirmatives.

AN Account of the Non-Conformists Meetings for Divine Worship, by, Mr. H.
according to his Middle-Way, against Dean F's charge of Schism; and of the
freedom of Conscience, from unusefull Laws, and the power of constraint
against his Exceptions.
HAving written four Papers which being bound together I call Mediocria, and
finding in the end of one of them an Advertisement about a Book Entitled Two
Points of great Moment, (which was the Obligation of humane Laws, and the
Authority of the Magistrate in the matters of Religion,) by me discussed: I
think it but civil to take an opportunity (while it is in my mind) of
returning my acknowledgments to the Reverend and worthy Dr. and Dean, the
Author of Tolleration not to be abused for his respectful Animadversions, in
referrence (I count) to both these Points, in his Advice to Conformists and
Non-Conformists. I confess my self obliged to him for it, and to requite the
obligation, I will present him with two things: my answer to what he has put
in against me, and an Apology, according to my Middle Temper, for the
Nonconformist in the matter above named.

I will begin with the Last first, both because it is of most present import
and it is also fit I should prefer that of the Public, before my Private
Vindication. There are diverse sorts of the Non-Conformists, and they have
their Meetings we know, not all on the same Reasons. There are some who have
been and are for our Parochial Churches, who are satisfied with their
Constitution, and, if they might have freedom, would still choose them: And
there are others that are in their inclinations for the Congregationall way
only. For my part I profess my Self of the former Sort, and do here declare in
the behalf of my Self and many others of my Brethren, that we do not go from
our Parish Church or Minister, in opposition to them, as if such Congregations
were not Churches; No, we are sensible when our Lord has commanded that the
Tares should not be plucked up for fear of endangering even but Some of the
Wheat, what a grievous displeasure it may like to be to him, if we should go to
Root up all the Wheat for fear of the Tares, which to Unchurch whole Parishes
were to do: Nor is it out of Pride, Vanity, Ostentation, Faction, or
Self-advantage that we do it: We could not answer a lesser Man*s, then a Dean's
charge against us, if we did so. Two things therefore I will acknowledge, That
our Parish-Churches are true Churches: And that it is our Duty consequently to
desire and endeavor their Union and Prosperity. And what would any Conformist
have of me more, unless it be also to join with them there in the Participation
of the Ordinances, which I refuse not neither upon convenient occasion? Well!
Upon what ground then shall I offer my Apology for the Cause I have here
undertaken? Why I will give it very impartially. As I grant these two things to
be our duty, so must I assume that which will not, and cannot be denied me,
that it is the duty likewise of those who are set apart to the office of the
Ministry (supposing them in every respect fit for the Work, to have a call to
it, and prudent Sincerity does not at present otherwise direct) to preach the
Gospel, by way of discharge of that office. We have the Apostles express
authority and example for this, who when they where Threatened and Commanded by
the Magistrates to Speak no more in Christ's name, they have left us their
answer on record, Whether it be meet to obe^ Go^ or You, judg^ ^e. Now I must
lay down this rule, that when two duties come together so that we cannot
perform the one, but we must omit the other, the greater duty must take Place
of the less. The rule appears in it is own light, and also from Scripture. I
will have Mercy (says God) and not Sacrifice. What is the meaning but that
when act of Righteousness and Mercy fall in, such duties as that of Sacrifice
which are less must give way. Here then is our case plainly, which of these is
the greater duty? We are to seek Unity, and to Preach the Gospel. If we keep
our Parish Churches, we must not Preach the Gospel: If we Preach the Gospel, we
must go to these Private Meetings. Which of these is indeed of greatest
concernment to the glory of God, and the Peoples Salvation? In General which is
the greatest Matter that the Gospel of Christ Jesus be Preached: Or the Union
of our Parish-Churches be promoted? In Particular, whether shall I, or any
other Nonconformist who have a call upon occasion to Preach at such a time,
place, or Company, do more Service unto God by going and doing it: or by
refusing and going to my Parish Church, for the sake of Unity, for which I have
still other Seasons? And which is the greater Evil to have a people of a Parish
divided into several places to hear the Ministers of both Persuasions Preach to
them (when this too shall not hinder them being parts still, or Members of the
same Church): Or that all the Preachers or Ministers in the Nation but those
only who Conform should have their Mouths stopped or their Talents buried? How!
when there is so many of them! So many of them truly serious and painful
Laborers! So many of them that actually do so much good, and the ever-lasting
welfare of thousands of men's Souls depend upon it? What is Parochial Union in
comparison! I will appeal to the Conscience of every upright equal man, whether
Conformist or Nonconformist, that fears God, to give Judgment. For the charge
then of this Dean which he seems to have managed so strenuously, I answer.
Schism is a Causless Breach of the Churches Union, or a causless separation
from her Communion, the Communion of a Church whereof we are Members, or should
be. Let this learned man, or any other that has read any thing about Schism
tell me, if I do not define it right by a Separation that is Causless, for if
there be a cause, the Separation will be justified, as it is between us and the
Church of Rome. Now when the case between the Conformist and us is so open and
in the face of the Sun, that unless we Countenance or allow of those Meetings
which are Locally Distinct from our Parish-Congregations, the whole generation
of the Nonconformist Ministers must be laid by, from the exercise of their
office for ought I see as long as these men do hold, whatsoever becomes in the
mean time of the Souls of so many multitudes: what apology, defense, or Account
do we need more but this only? Is there not a cause? They are the words of
David to his surly Elder Brethren, that are offended only for his being about
the business he was sent. And David said, what have I done? Is there not a
Cause?

I am very sensible that there is much more may be said, or that there are
other Pleas which may be made by the Nonconformist for their Meetings then
this I offer. I have ( I know) proposed my self a little in another Paper,
toward some Catholic Healing of us, even under our stated Separations, if
they cannot be helped. If they can, or if this be enough, it is this Plea I
choose, as the most indifferent between the Conformist and us, the most fair
and conducive to our Uniting again, if God give that Grace to the Nation. And
this (under pardon) I will be so bold, as to name my Plea, Mr. H's, Plea, Of
Greater Duty.

The Church is a number of such as own, or believe in the Lord Jesus, and join
in Society for the glorifying his Name in submission to his Ordinances. These
Societies are either Particular, or that which consists of them all, the Church
Universal. Of the Church as Universal Christ is the Head, from whom we have
these Ordinances: and, when the Congregations which are Parochial, and others
that meet separately from them, do both consent or unite in his Ordinances,
that is, in the same Doctrine (so far as is necessary to Salvation,) and in the
same Worship, required in the Word, who can deny them to be both Parts of the
Universal Church Visible, and so true Churches? As for going to diverse places,
if there be no breach of the great Commandment which is Charity, in other
respects, it is a matter of indifferency, and can be no ground to charge
Schism upon one more then the other. There must be some other consideration
than of the Church found out if they will accuse us of Schism: And that is not
as it is Universal or Particular, but as it is National and Parochial. As it is
Universal and Particular it is ex praecepto, of Divine: as it is National and
Parochial it is ex providentia, of Humane and prudential institution. There are
some things required to the Church ad esse, and some things ad been esse. That
which is required ad esse, is named (a due administration of the Word,
Sacrament and Prayer), and we divide not in it. That which is required ad been
esse is either necessary to that been (or melius) esse, being of Divine
Authority, and that is some Discipline in general, though for the Sort, I will
not say which is such, or that which is accidental and accumulative from man,
as to have the Supreme Magistrate Christian, and a Nursing Father to it, with
his People generally of that Religion. The one of these (I say) is of God's
Praeceptive (we speak it not simpliciter, but in regard to the Constitution of
the Church of Christ): the other of his Providential will only. In this
accidental regard as the Church is National do we acknowledge that the King is
head of it, and has his Ordinances in respect thereunto to be obeyed, as
Christ has in regard to the Universal. That the Magistrate has Authority to
Protect the Church of Christ, by seeing that Christ's Ordinances be observed in
every Congregation according to their way, and in looking to the whole that
they do nothing but what shall make to the Peace of the Nation, is out of
question. The King here governs by his Laws, and the Laws of this Land have
appointed the constitution of particular Churches to be of Parishes as most
convenient to that purpose. If we consent not to these Laws we break the Union
which is of Humane institution, though we preserve that which is Divine.
Disobedience to the wholesome commands of our Superiors is sin, and when that
separation therefore, which is a thing indifferent otherwise does become sinful
through that disodedience, unless we have something to justify the disobedience,
such separation, by Analogy, is Schism. And here do I verily think must the
bottom of all that can be charged upon us about Schism be placed. If the
Parliament should Legitimate these separate Meetings by an Act, they would
immediately become parts of the National Church no less then our Parishes, and
that would put an end to the Schism; the Evil chargeable upon us any
otherwise, being like to be found the Fault of the Persons, not of our
meetings, or of the Thing: But so long as they are against Law, it is the
Obligation of humane Laws I perceive, and the Authority of the Magistrate about
Religion are the points must come into Plea. These have been treated and put
together in a Book entitled, Two points of great Moment Discussed. The
substance whereof as to my present purpose will resolve into this Distinction.

Laws which are Wholesome Laws, that is, for the Common Good in Civil's, and
for Edification in Spiritualls, do bind us under Pain of Sin. Such is the law I
count for Parochial Union, but there are two Cases wherein we are exempted from
such Laws, and which justify the Non-Obedience. One is, when that which is
commanded is against a man's Conscience. The other is, when that which is
commanded cannot be done, but some other Duty which is of greater Concern must
be thrust out, and in this Case (I say) the omitting that which is the lesser
Duty, is no sin. In this Point, ye see before, I have placed our Apology. I
must add, that forasmuch as it is no Sin to omit a lesser Duty for doing a
greater, when both cannot be done, but to omit the greater Duty consequently
must be sin: it follows, that supposing it to be Schism to refuse Communion,
when we may come to Church without sin, it must be no Schism to wave it, or
not to come, when if we come we should sin, as we must, when we shall omit a
greater Duty by coming. Schism is a Voluntary Departure without cause given
from that Christian Church, whereof he was a Member; or a Breach of that
Communion wherein a man might have continued without Sin, says that late
Author of a Serious and Compassionate Enquiry, into the causes of men's
contempt of the Church and the remedies. A Book two fine I count to bear a
Dispute, or uphold so large a design he undertakes. I would fain know (says
another) by what Authority this separating practice can be justified from the
guilt of the most Horrible Schism that ever was heard of in the Christian
World. A sober Answer to the new Separatists. Pa. 156. again ( Pa. 157.)
Distinguishing of a Voluntary desertion of ones Ministry, and choosing silence
in case of Nonconformity. The second (says he) is the Illustration of four
Cardinal Virtues, Humility, Meekness, Selfe-denial, Obedience. I cannot but
quote these Passages as pleasant to my Humor, nor can I forbear Laughter at the
Reading of them. Not because that worthy honest Citizen has not read Ethics,
in calling these Cardinal Vritues, whereof we know indeed there are Four, but
neither of these is One of them: But for the Spirit, or present Assurance
wherewith he Writes, I could never be so Confident when I wrote against
Separation. Nor can I look on this Separation only from the Churches of the
Nation, not from Christ's Church or Churches, that is a Schism of man's
Denomination (our Parishes being of Humane Contrivance out of Question,) to be
such a Horrible Creature as he makes it. The great Bear has been led so long
about the streets that the very Children are no longer afraid of it. Neither
can I think it any such Virtue for a man to give over Preaching. I am mightily
Flattered methinks in this Passage, who, if this good man be in the right,
should be one of the most Virtuous Non-Conformists among all our Brethren. I
pray God to for-give me that Virtue with my Manifold Aberations. I declare my
Self with the Old Nonconformist a Conformist Parishioner, though a
Nonconforming Minister, and refuse not to join in the Ordinances of Doctrine,
Breaking Bread; and Prayers, in our Parochial Congregations.

Laws which are not Wholesome Laws, that is, not for the Spiritual or Temporal
good of the Community (such as our Ceremonies and the like things I count be)
may, I Presume, entangle the Mind and Oblige the outward Man to suffering, or
to doing rather then Suffer, if they be not Sinful to us, as well as
Unprofitable, but they do not (I have maintained, and must desend still what I
have determined as of necessary import to tender Christians) oblige the
Conscience of the Subject. And so I descend to my Proper Concernment.

J. H. s^ith, that unless the matter of the Princes Command be antecedently
necessary in Judgment of the Subject, it obliges not the Conscience. Sir! This
is a mistake, I say not so. I say indeed, that unless a Law be for the common
Good, it binds not in point of Conscience, and I give these two reasons for it.
The one, because the Magistrate has no Authority from God but for our Weal,
nor the Bishop but for our Edification. The other because we are to suppose the
Superiors will, or intention, is measured by his Authority: And when the thing
commanded is not for our Good or Edification, as it is destitute of God's
Authority, it must be supposed void also of his Ministers intention. See my
Obligation of humane Laws, Pa. 139. with pa. 25. But that I should be made upon
this to hold therefore (and that for a Principle) that the Conscience is only
Obliged from the Matter of the thing Commanded, and not from the Command of the
Magistrate, is such an abuse and weakness, as the modesty of those Words [You
seem to Say] will not excuse. There are a Thousand things good for the Public,
which, being not commanded, are not necessary, nor Oblige any Body. The
controversy between Conformist and Nonconformist is supposed to be about
things indifferent, in which the Conscience is Free, and not Bound, till our
Superiors Command comes. It is by the Authority then of our Superior (I say)
derived from God, that the Conscience is obliged: Insomuch as that before the
Command there is no Obligation: and when he commands, the matter of the command
must be such as he has Power to Command in, or it is void. It is Authoritas
imperantis agnita ( I have noted it some-where) is the Objectum formale
obedientiae, and answers the question, Quare obedis? But I am not aware
(says the kind Dean) That obedience to man in things indifferent is commanded
of God in Scripture. Yes! I am aware that Things indifferent (by which we mean
whatsoever is neither commanded nor for-bidden in the Word,) are either for the
Common good, and so the subject matter of the Superiors Authority, and
Obedience to men in such things is commanded by God in Scripture: Or they are
not for the common Good, but against it, and in such matters, neither has the
Superior Authority ( I say) from God to command them, nor can such commands
for that reason be obligatory to the Conscience. But Obedience to them is also
required in the Law of Nature for the common Good. How? Is Obedience required
by the law of Nature for the common Good, to things which I suppose not for the
common Good? Why, It is for the security of the Public peace, and God's own
Vicegerency on Earth. I answer, The Honor of the Magistrate, and security of
the Government is preserved (and the common good thereby concerned) in our
obedience, when the Laws are wholesome Laws; in our suffering, when they are
sinful Laws; in our avoiding contempt and scandal, when they are unprofitable
Laws; in our subjection to the Authority residing in the Person under all Laws
so that when he will, he can enforce them. Upon this account, there is a
difference ordinarily between the Command of a Master or Parent, and the Laws
of a Nation. A Command to a Child or Servant, does suppose, a do it, or I Will
make you. If the Magistrate sets himself to have a Law obeyed by a particular
person, the case is the same; and seeing the honor of the Governor and the
Government it self is still (I count) concerned in this, that he should be able
to make his Subjects obey, if he put his power out, and the thing be no Sin,
Obedience being for the common good, in such a case, a man is obliged to it in
Conscience: but if he do not, a Law supposes only the common good mainly to be
intended, prudence to be used, no contempt offered, and the will of the
Magistrate is done. When our Obedience then (I say) does indeed serve those
ends he mentions (and greater be not served, or the same otherwise better
served) we are obliged: But what if it serves them not? What if my impertinent
Obedience shall but disturb the Peace (or the peaceable) and reflect dishonor
on the Lawgiver? what if it should do more hurt than good, taking one thing
with another? when it is not for the common good, I say, and then only, that we
are not obliged in Conscience.

There are a few more words here needful, because we are at the bottom. How far
the Laws of man do bind the Conscience, was the question, That the Conscience
is not bound at all by humane Constitutions, has been the opinion of no few
Doctors, nor mean persons: for in the Act for the Wednesday fast, it seems to
have been the received judgment at that time of the whole Nation. I say these
fasts (or the like appointments) are to be observed, yet shall not the breaking
them, make a man to do deadly sin, except in his mind be some other malicious
affection therewith annexed, as rashness of mind, despite, or such like; for so
much as no positive Law of man made without foundation of Scripture, may bind
any person, so that in breaking such he shall therefore sin deadly. John
Lambert the Martyr. So Luther, and the Protestants I suppose ordinarily after
Gerson. See Downam, see Field. They do impiously Vsurp and assume to
themselves, that which is proper to God; who will have their Laws bind the
Conscience, and threaten Damnation to the Offenders, says that learned Dr for
our Current Doctrine; who does therefore quote also two Papists. Human Laws
binds the Conscience not, Ex voluntate Legislatoris, sed ex ipsa legum
utilitate and ratione. Stapleton Cont. 5. De pot. Ec circa leges Mor. Quaest.
7. Art. 2. Quamvis peccet quis transgrediendo leges humanas, non tamen ligant
conscientiam: patet per simile de praeceptis medicorum, quae despicere quis non
potest sine peccato, and tamen non ligant conscientiam. Gerson De vita spir.
anim. Lect. 4. If you think this too large, that the Laws of Man, however,
should not be made to oblige the Conscience in equality with the Laws of God,
is but most reasonable; That they do oblige therefore only so far, as to the
avoiding contempt and scandal, has been our most constant determination (I
think) against the Papists. Now I would willingly know here, upon what bottom
such a Determination is laid; and that which offers it self, is this. That
whereas all Laws do oblige only, but according to the will of the Lawgiver,
it is supposed that he entends we should be obliged so far only. But I pray why
do we set these limits to his will? why may we not suppose as well, that he
entends his obligation with other limits, to wit, that his Laws shall bind us
so far, as stands with our convenience; or so far as the hurt or damage to us,
does not exceed the good we shall do the Community by our Obedience? If our
Superior entends not to bind us so far, as God does by his Laws, but so far
as, the supreme Law of Charity requires (See Davinants Determinations, Quaest.
20. p. 100.) why may we not suppose other limits (I say) as well as these
mentioned? The truth is, there is no bottom in the business, till we come to
that I have laid, which is this, that forasmuch as God has entrusted no
Authority with any to give Laws, but for the Peoples welfare, and this is the
end therefore of all Laws, there are no Men in capacity of Lawgivers
(especially a Parliament that represent the Community) but are to be supposed
to entend this altogether: and consequently if a Law prove otherwise, or is
against the common good, it must be supposed also, that such a Law is devoid of
their intention, or is not according to their will, and so does not bind the
Conscience, even upon this double ground; both because it is destitute of the
Authority it should have from God, and its Authority from the will of Man also,
upon the account declared. That the will of the Lawgiver should be measured by
his Authority, is but meet (I hope) to be supposed: and this last ground,
therefore having been but once touched in my Book before quoted, I do imprint
it now more sensibly in this Paper.

I must confess I have heard it said to me, by One or Two, sometimes thus, When
a thing is indeed destructive to the public good, we will grant you what you
say; but not so, when a thing is only against it, or not for it. I reply, Sirs!
I pray let us come to a bottom, This is not to go to the bottom. Why shall
not a command destructive to the common good bind the Conscience? If it be sin
to disobey, we must not sin to avoid mischief, we must say therefore it is not
sin. And why is it not sin, but because such a Command has none of God's
Authority? I must assume, so has no Command that is not for the common good;
for the Authority that any Man has from God, is only for our Good, for our
Edification. Here is the bottom, if it be firm, it must hold throughout; if
not, it must not hold at all. He is the Minister of God for our good. According
to the power given to us of God for Edification.

To the Dean's Texts, I have answered, Subjection is to be owned always out of
Conscience. Obedience is supposed to be required in Scripture, in matters
wherein the Superior has Authority, that is, a right from God to Command.
Such matters being only what is for the public good, those Laws or Commands
which are besides that end, are no Laws or Commands God bids us obey, that is,
are in sensu univoco no Laws: and when (...) obey in all others, but in those
which are Laws only secundum nomen, I do obey him (I count) in all things;
because those I disobey, are none secundum nominis rationem.

It may be perhaps thought upon this, that I should have made a quicker
dispatch of my Work then I do, to say that all Laws do indeed bind the
Conscience (it is properer to say do bind in Conscience), but such Laws as are
not for the common good are no Laws. To which purpose may Cicero and Suarez be
consulted. Omnium commune axioma est de ratione and substantia legis esse, ut
pro communi bono feratur. Suarez, De legibus l. 1. c. 7. You may find
Authorities enough there quoted to read at your leisure. I will transcribe thus
much out of Cicero my self. Principem legem mentem esse dicebant omnia ratione
aut cogentis aut vetantis dei: ex qua illa lex quam dij humano generi dederunt,
recte est laudata. Est enim ratio mensque sapientis ad inbendum and ad
deterrendum idonea. -- Constat profecto ad salutem civium civitatumque
incolumitatem vitamque omnium quietam and beatam conditas esse leges: eosque
qui primum ejusmodi scita sanxerunt, populis ostendisse ea se scripturos atque
laturos, quibus illi ad scriptis susceptisque honest beateque viverent:
quaeque ita composita sanctaque essent, eas leges videlicet nominarunt. Ex quo
intelligi par est, eos qui perniciosa and injusta populis jussa descripserint,
cum contra fecerint quam polliciti professique sint, quidvis potius tulisse
quam leges. The sum of both comes to this. The chief Law is the Divine reason;
The Laws of Men must be agreeable to that; God's Commands are to make Men
happy, by living virtuously; Men's Laws accordingly, that are not for the
Peoples welfare, are nothing less than what they are called. To these I will
join Augustine, Istas leges, injustas vel potius nullas dicemus? Nam mihi lex
esse non videtur quae justa non fuerit. August. de lib. arb. l. 1. c. 5. If you
ask me then, why I did not go this way, I will tell you, that besides it looks
not safe, fit, or civil to say, that any thing which is once passed into an Act
of Parliament is no Law, there is a necessity you may perceive here, that we
must come to some distinction at last: and I did choose to distinguish of the
Obligation, and to show in what sense we are not obliged, rather then of the
Law, and to say in what sense, it is no Law. Let Law be defined outright
according to these, and, Law is the Declaration of the will of the Lawgiver,
what the Subject is to do for the public good. If a Law now be not for the
public utility, it is no Law according to this definition; it has not that in
it which is de ratione legis, as the Schools speak. It is a Law therefore in
sensu aequivoco which agrees in the name, but not in sensu univoco, which
participates of the nature or the definition. To avoid the using these terms
therefore, and in regard such an Act is Law still in some sense, in the common
sense and Vote of the Nation, and in some respect more than aequivocally so,
because proceeding from a rightful Authority, it does in part agree in the
definition, as well as in the name, and consequently in part must be
Obligatory, it does appear how the distinction does as it were naturally
devolve upon the Obligation: and so spares this upon the Law; seeing if we will
truly explicate what we mean, when we deny such a Law to be law, this we must
say in good earnest, and nothing else is our meaning, that it is a Law so far
as to be obeyed for fear of the penalty (for never to resist I count in my Book
is still pre-required), but not so far, as that every omission of it is sin, or
that we are obliged to it in Conscience. And thus by going the farther way
about, we are but brought the nearer home to the true decision we entend. Only
one thing I find wanting yet in the explanation of the terms of this
distinction I use between the Outward Man and the Conscience. I have been at a
good deal of pains to make those received terms current (Compare my Obligation
of human Laws p. 24. with my Authority of the Magistrate p. 50.) and all I see
will not serve till I distinguish also of Conscience it self, which is taken
Physically or Theologically. Conscience Naturally taken is any knowledge of my
self or my concernments: Conscience taken Theologically is the knowledge of
what I have to do with Reference to the will and judgment of God, Judicium de
semet ipso prout subjicitur judicio dei. When Divines in this point therefore
do distinguish the Outward Man and the Conscience, by the Conscience we must
understand Conscience in the Theological sense only. That is, we Separate not
^he Reason, Will, Understanding, or Na^ural Conscience it Self from the Outward
Man, but Conscience only Theologically taken. And the Meaning is plainly, that
though a Man in Reason understands, and is Conscious in regard to his own
concernement, that such a Law is to be Observed, if he will avoid this or that
Penalty or Inconvenience: Yet so long as he Believes God does not Command him
to do it, and that he shall incurr no Displeasure from him though he omits it,
this is to be Obliged in the Outward Man only, and not in Conscience; or ^n the
Conscience taken Naturally, not Theologically in Conscience.

After I had wrote this and all the rest, (only something I hereupon inserted
before), I had Dr. Field on the Church accidentaly brought me. It was many
years since I read him, and I had forgot every thing in him on this Subject but
only his Distinction between Subjection and Obedience which I like, and ever
retained. I am well pleased to find my genius agreeing so much as it does with
one of so great Note and Learning; especially seeing that Tenet which Dean F.
opposes as mine is that alone in effect wherein our Sentiments meet not. You
say (says Dean F.) when a thing is Commanded of God, or we think it tends to
the Public good, then only Conscience is Obliged: But this Obligation is only
from the necessity of the thing Commanded, and because you approve it to be a
Duty before, and consequently in Obedience to your own Reason, and not at all
out of Conscience of the Command, or in Obedience to the King. Well! Let us
then hear Dr. Field, a greater Dean, deliver his judgment: Which I will set
down in his words at large for the Readers Edification.

The question should not be proposed, whether Humane Laws bind the Conscience
(This he takes up in the Negative as not to be questioned): but whether binding
the outward Man to the performance of outward things by force and fear of
outward Punishment to be inflicted by men, the not performance of such things,
(or the not p^rformance of them with such affections as were fit) be not a Sin
against God of which the Conscience will accuse us, he having Commanded us to
Obey the Magistrates and Rulers he has set over us! For answer hereunto, there
are three sorts of things (says he) Commanded by Magistrates. First, Evil and
against God. Secondly Injurious in respect of them to whom they are Prescribed,
or at least Unprofitable to the Commonwealth in which they are Prescribed.
Thirdly, such as are Profitable and Beneficial to the Society of Men to whom
they are Prescribed. Touching the First Sort of things, We must not Obey.
Touching the second Sort of things, all that God requires of us is that we
show no contempt of Sacred Authority though not rightly used, that we
Scandalize not others, and that we he Subject to such Penaltyes, as they that
Command such things do lay upon us. In the Third Sort of things, it is only
that God requires our Willing and ready Obedience. The Breach and Violation of
this kind of Laws is Sin, not for that humane Laws have Power to Bind the
Conscience, or that it is simply and absolutely sinful to break them, but
because the things they Command are of that Nature that not to perform them, is
contrary to Justice, Charity, and the desire we should have to procure the
Common-Good of them with whom we Live. We are bound then sometimes to the
Performance of things prescribed by Humane Laws in such Sort that the not
Performance of them is Sin; not ex sola Legislatoris voluntate, sed ex ipsa
legum utilitate, as Stapleton Rightly observed. But some Man will say, what do
the Laws then effect seeing it is the Law of Justice, and Charity that does
bind us, and not the Particularity of Laws newly Made! To this we answer that
many things are God and Profitable, if they be generally Observed, which
without such general Observation will do no Good. The Law procures a general
Observation. Bellarmine objects, Be subject for Conscience Sake. To this we
answer. First. That it is a matter of Conscience to be Subject in all things,
for Subjection is required Generally and Absolutely where Obedience is Not.
Secondly. We say that it is a matter of Conscience to Seek and Procure the Good
of the Commonwealth, and that therefore it is a matter of Conscience to obey
Good and Profitable Laws, so far as we are persuaded our Obedience is
profitable. Moreover, General and Long continued Disuse is, and Justly may be
thought an Abolishing, and Abrogating of Humane Laws. For seeing Lex
institutitur cum promulgatur, vigorem habet cum moribus utentium approbatur. On
the Church Page 4. l. 34.

I must remember my Antogonist to take Notice that What he goes to oppose in me
as some singular Opinion of mine, which yet is not mine, but he mistakes me in
it, is Presented by this Great Dr. of the Church as the received Doctrine of
Protestants: As also, that the Doctrine which in deed is mine, and this Dr
agrees so much with me, does require his better Consideration.

J. H's. Second Principle is that Human Powers may not lawfully Command or
Enforce any thing against the Conscience, even in Civil Concerns. He should
have said in things that are materially Civil, yet under some Consideration
unto some Religious. What the Magistrate cannot Command (I say indeed) he
cannot Enforce. The Magistrate cannot Command what God forbids. God forbids
every Man to do any thing against his Conscience. And what has any Mortal to
oppose against this? Why, he has one Argument only, which he takes from my
Concession, in the stating my Matter. I Distinguish between a Man's doing
according to his Conscience, and his doing against It; and of Restraint and
Constraint accordingly in the Magistrate. I grant that the Magistrate may
Restrain a man from doing according to his Conscience when he is doing hurt to
Church or State through his error, and may Punish him for the Evil he does: He
argues from hence that he may Constrain him to do that which is Good for the
Church or State, though it be against his Conscience, upon the same account.
But I say, not. There is a Difference. I give my Reason. Because in the one,
the Man does what God would not have him: In the other, he does what God would
have. God would not have him to do Evil, because of his erroneous Conscience,
but that he should lay down his Error and do Good: But God will have every Man
so to regard his Conscience though Eerroneous, that he must not do any thing
against it, for any Fear, or Advantage in (...) Eaerth. Author. of the Mag.
Page 12^. And what answer makes he to this Reason! Why not a word. So overly a^
men ordinarily to speak at the first sight against that, which others have
thought long upon. The substance of the Distinction, and so of my Detemination,
I cited out of Augustine, and confirmed it with Grotius his Approbation. I
might add to them the Learned Rutherford, who are Judicious mighty Men all
three, but this Gentle Dean has not Pondred the Matter. For thus he proceeds.
The Law of God is the Rule of Concience. This Law is Negative as well as
Affirmative, and binds the Conscience equally in both respects. So far we are
Agreed. Hold Sir! A mistake again. He forgets the known Rule in the Schools,
that Affirmations bind Semper, not ad Semper, not to all times, or in all
Cases: but Negatives do bind Semper and ad Semper, always, and against all
Exceptions. He remembers not himself therefore, when he says they Bind
equally, and so thinks not how the Decision of the Point must resolve into this
Issue. In the affirmative Case I say it is true, that God requires the Man to
lay down his Error, and not to do the thing, and therefore the Magistrate may
Restrain, or Punish him: In the Negative case he urges likewise, God commands
him the Same as to laying down his Error, and to do the thing, and therefore
he may Constrain or make him. But I reply no still, the difference remains.
Though in the Negative case (that is, when the Conscience which is Erroneous
says they must not do such a thing) God requires this Jointly, to lay down his
Erroneous Conscience (or be other-wise informed), and to do the thing, yet does
not he require this Separately, that while he is so informed, he should do it:
When in the affirmative Case (that is when the Conscience which is erroneous,
says thou must do such or such a thing) God requires he should lay down his
Error and not do the thing both Jointly and Separately; so that even while he
is Persuaded in his Conscience that it is his Duty, God's Negative Command is
Obligatory against that Persuasion. The reason is from what is Said, because
Affirmatives do not bind ad Semper, or in all Cases, but Negatives do. This is
one of those Cases. Thou shall not do against thy Conscience, is a Negative
Indispensable: Thou shall do according to it, holds not in this Case, when the
Conscience is in an Error.

I will conclude with the History of this little I have written. There is a
Book called the Friendly Debate, which when it came out was received every
where with diversity of acceptance, and censure. There are many things in it I
am persuaded in my heart fit to be spoken: yet do I not know, nor the Author
himself perhaps know from what manner of Spirit they are spoken. It is in
appearance a Spirit elated, contemptuous, engaged (if not imbitterd) against a
party, and so far un-Catholick, which does through the sides of that party
oftentimes make Religion her self feel, entrenching upon it almost all the way,
in regard to those weaknesses and follies which Human reason is ever ready to
impute to it. But God has chosen the foolish things of the World to confound
the Wise: and the things that are despised has he chosen. Among other matters
against the Non-Conformists, that Author brings this, that they observe not
the Laws, the Oxford Act, and others, and that therefore they cannot be good
Subjects, nor good Christians, nor Ministers of Christ. A heavy charge, and a
necessary case of Conscience! Upon this occasion I presented to the public a
sheet called the Case under this Title. Whether a Nonconformist who has not
taken the Oxford Oath, might come to live at London,, or any Corporate Town, or
within Five miles of it, and yet be a good Christian? To this Sheet the Author
was pleased to give me an Answer. That Answer drew me forth to write my Book by
way of reply, of the Obligation of human Laws. To this reply the learned
Debater answered no more. After the Debate, another piece comes forth of
Ecclesiastical Polity, exceeding the former both in Pomp and Design, in Luster
and the Attempt; that was for asserting an Authority in the Magistrate over the
Conscience to end all Disputes, which being a thing not to be endured, though
but in the matter of Conformity, as the Author I think only meant, I wrote
also my other Book, of the Authority of the Magistrate about Religion. Unto
this Book I had no answer from that Author neither: Only having caused those
few Copies which were left of the Obligation in Quires to be Bound up with
this, and Printing so many on purpose of the Sheet called The Case over again,
to fit and join to both, and then Entitled it, Two points of great moment
Discussed, I do observe that it has pleased this Reverend Dean to step in with
these Two exceptions of his, which I have answered: and one thing more in the
close must not pass unregarded, which he brings in under the head of the former
of the Two.

This Obligation (of I. H.) is only from necessity of the thing commanded. But
in all other cases you need not obey only for wraths sake, that is, no farther
then you are forced; and therefore when you are got above fears you will not,
or need not, regard Authority. This principle will hardly prove the
Non-Conformists the only Loyalists. Besides the mistake before noted. It is
nothing but want of the present knowledge, in this Dr as it was in the Debater,
of the distinction I offered them out of Dr Field, between Subjection and
Obedience, or the sense of it, that made them fall into so slender sort of
reasoning, as this is. Though there be many cases, wherein we are not bound in
Conscience to Obey: yet are we always bound in Conscience to be Subject, or
never to Resist, and upon that ground is our Loyalty maintained. This I have
said, I know most effectually in my first Book of the Two Points, unto which,
therefore, when that which is brought to its Assistance in the Second, and this
little in these Two Sheets now more is added (which I would by no means have
those, who have the other be without), there is nothing besides, as I can find
in my mind (unless to tell the Reader, least he be at a loss, that there are a
few of these Two Points so bound up, yet to be had, at the Golden Lion in
Paul's- Churchyard) that is lacking to my full satisfaction on those Subjects,

Vale Lector and fruere Deo gloria. I. H.


