To the Two Most Honorable Houses, The Lords and Commons in Parliament
Assembled, An Humble Representation of the Sad and Distressed Case of many
Thousands of Their Most Gracious Majesty's Loyal Seamen, or their Widows, Aged
Parents, or other Friends or Relations, and an Humble Supplication in behalf of
all the said Distressed, and all other the Seamen of England and Scotland,
Humbly Shows,
THAT whereas by the Blessing of God on Their Majesty's and these Nations, the
Seamen of England and Scotland have been entirely in the Interest of Their
Majesty's, and Defense of these Nations: But in their said Service have many
Thousands lost their Lives by the Sword or Sickness: And whereas it has been
the Custom for Two Years last past, at pay of the Fleet in the Spring, to pay
only such as appeared in Person on Board their several Ships, so that those who
lost their Lives against the French, under the Valiant and Loyal Commander
Admiral Russel, and all those who are discharged, Dead, or Sick, or Lame, or
otherwise, or turned over from Ship to Ship, and could not appear on Board in
Person were ordered themselves, or their Wives, Widows, Aged Parents, or other
Relations, to Attend at Broad-street for the Ships to be Re-call'd for Payment,
and in order to Pay the said Distressed Widows and others, there was a List put
up in October 1692, of about 166 Ships to be paid; But after the waiting of
Thousands from Week to Week, and Month to Month, there was not one quarter part
of the said Ships paid all that Year after, and so there was Twelve or Fifteen
Thousand Men unpaid, as by the said Ships Books may appear. And to add to the
Misery of many after long waiting of Thousands, some Books were like to be made
up before they were paid: But on an Humble Petition to Her Most Gracious
Majesty in Counsel, there was an order to relieve the said Distressed, by the
paying them their Wages earned with the loss of some Thousands of their Lives,
and a List put up in Broadstreet of near Two Hundred Ships, and about Thirty
Thousand Men to be paid, as by the List at the Navy Office, and the Books of
the several Ships will appear, it being put up in September last, and not one
quarter of the said Distressed paid to this Day, whereby many distressed Widows
and Families are under very sore Affliction, as by these particulars following
may appear:

First, There are many Ships that have above Four Years Pay due already, and
Six dead or Discharged to, and that came home, and were paid, those Ships are
put up, some after a Hundred, and some after a Hundred and Sixty Ships, so that
if there be but Forty or Fifty Ships paid in a Year, it will be above Two Years
more before the said Distressed Widows and others will be paid for that Money
that was Earned above Four Years past, as by the List a Copy of which ready to
be presented may appear more at large.

Secondly, Some Ships are put up Twice or Thrice to be paid some Months one
time, and some Months another time, and at so great a distance, that some is
like to be paid one Year, and some another, which might have been paid
altogether, and been a great Ease to the Honorable Commissioners and
Pay-Masters, and Relieved the sad Afflicted and Distressed from waiting Year
after Year as they have done already, many of them.

Thirdly, Many of these Distressed Families live in the North and West of
England, and many Widows in Scotland, It may prove a more Miserable Charge or
Loss to some to wait for their Pay at such an Uncertainty, than to loose it
quite.

Fourthly, Many Seamen being turned over into Two or Three Ships, and have Pay
due in every one of them; and they being many times sent out to Sea, and they
cannot appear in their Persons sometimes at the Pay of the Fleet, whereby many
of them have neither Money to buy their Families Bread, or themselves Clothes
for Their Majesty's Service without Credit.

Fifthly, And indeed several of the said Seamen, or their Distressed Families
having nothing but Credit to live upon year after year, and some that have
trusted them for Rent, Clothes, Victuals, and other Necessaries; these not
being paid, are some of them almost Ruined also, and others that have to
encourage Their Majesty's Service and Their Seamen taken the Pay of some of the
said Seamen at the full Value, and others given them within Three or Four
Shillings in the Pound ready Money for the same, and neither they nor the
Seamen, neither the Tradesmen and others being paid, the Seamen and their
Families are now brought into so grear distress for the want of Money or Credit
as formerly they had.

Sixthly, That the Seamen or their Wives are forced to go from place to place
to any Extortioner that will buy their Tickets, and pay at Ten Shillings in the
Pound loss, as several have done, and sometimes more than half loss.

Seventhly, And the said Seamen are forced to give Bond to those that buy the
same at half loss, that if Their Majesty's do not pay it in a prefixed time,
then the said Seamen must make it good, whereby the Seamen are several of them
in Bonds for time to come, to the great discouragement of Their Majesty's
Seamen; and many of them have this last Year deserted Their Majesty's Service,
as by the several Ships Books will appear.

Eighthly, The Seamen or their Families must live on Credit, or be Relieved by
Charity, until they are paid; or if not, some of their Families must perish.
And if that Sickness or Death of Seamen, or the being turned over from Ship to
Ship should hinder the being paid: Or if the Extortioners be suffered to buy
their Pay at half loss, that they cannot pay their Debts, it cannot then be
safe, for Landlords, Tradesmen or Chandlers to trust to Seamen for time to come.

Ninthly, But it may be presumed by all good Men, that neither Their Most
Excellent and Gracious Majesty's, neither the Just, Honorable and Loyal
English Nobility, and Knights and Gentry being now Assembled in Parliament,
have ever been rightly informed of the distressed Case of the said deplorable
Seamen or their Families, and there is not any Cause to doubt, but on an Humble
Information of the Case aforesaid, they will be more ready abundantly to
Relieve the same, than any can be to inform them of the sadness of the Case,
which cannot be expressed in a few words.

Tenthly, And if the Honorable House of Commons, who have Voted so Loyally and
Heartily, as Faithful to Their Majesty's and these Nations for Money for the
Seamen, would Appropriate Four or Five Thousand Pound the Week to be constantly
paid for the Relief of the Distressed, they Might be all paid by Michaelmas
next, and in that time it may be supposed there will be Fifteen Thousand more
to pay at Broad-street: If as it may be supposed that Time and Money will not
admit of paying any this Spring at the Nore or Portsmouth, because of sending
out the Fleet Early, and if so there having been Two or Three Thousand dead in
the West India Fleet this Year, and many Thousands dead or discharged by
Sickness or Lameness, or otherwise, or turned over in the Grand Fleet, so that
Their Majesty's will have a continual use of Credit; And your Honors now you
are informed of the State of the Case, may order Relief, as your Honors in
great Wisdom shall think fit; And I would in behalf of Their Majesty's Seamen
humbly entreat your Honors, That,

First, It might be so ordered, That the Ships that have been unpaid above Four
Years may be paid first, and so every Ship that has Pay longest due might be
paid next.

Secondly, And that a new List might be put up of all the Ships unpaid in the
Order aforesaid for the Relief of the said Distressed.

Thirdly, That there might be Public Notice given in the Gazete how many Ships
are put up, and when to begin the same, and so every Month to give notice how
far they have gone.

Fourthly, And by this means all the Seamens Widows in England and Scotland
might give a near guess when to expect their Money.

Fifthly, And I would in behalf of the said Widows entreat your Honors that
those Ships that have Money due at Two or Three Payments, that is, that have
been paid Three times on Board before they are cleared on the Shore, may be put
up to be paid all the Pay due in each Ship for the said Three Divisions to be
paid all at once; and in so doing, you would save the Miserable Distressed from
waiting Year after Year two or three times for One Sum of Money.

Sixthly, If this Method were taken, it would be the way to put New Life into
the Seamen, and if that it were once known, that so soon as Their Majesty's and
the Two Honorable Houses were informed of their Misery, that they had Relief
Ordered, and Public Notice given in the Gazette that they were all ordered to
be paid in reasonable time, it would be the way to encourage the Wives, and
Parents, and Masters of the Seamen in every Sea-Port-Town in England, to let
their Husbands or Children, or Servants go freely into Their Majesty's Service,
as finding that it was only a Misfortune not informed of that caused so many
Widows or Aged Parents to be unpaid, but that now come Life, come Death, or
come turning over from Ship to Ship, still Their Majesty's Pay is the most safe
and certain Pay in England, and none to be esteemed of like Excellence for
certainty.

Seventhly, And I would humbly inform the Honorable Houses, That if there were
a Committee Appointed to hear the Grievances of the Seamen or their Families
that might order Public Notice at the Pay-Office and Navy-Office, and also in
the Gazette, That if any Seamen have been either Cheated of their Tickets by
any Clerks of their Ships, or have had their Pay Received wrongfully, or their
Tickets Detained wrongfully, or been Trick't out of them for a small Value,
that in those Cases they should be heard freely, and have Justice done them, it
would perhaps be a great Relief to many, and also be encouragement to all the
Seamens Families in England, for to serve Their Majesty's, as finding that they
cannot be wronged, without it be their own fault: and if they will manifest
their wrong, they shall have what Releif can be expected; and in doing this,
your Honors will also save a great deal of Trouble to Their Majesty's
Honorable Commissioners of the Navy, that they might not be interrupted with
such a multitude of Petitions now they are concerned in so much business of a
great Nature in other Affairs of the Navy.

Eighthly, I would in behalf of the said Seamen humbly beg, That if it could be
prevented, they might not be indeed simply Cowardly, or otherwise, Delivered up
to the French, as the Jersey, Diamond, or some other Ships have been; and also
that there might be care taken not to allow any Officer to hide or steal Powder
enough to blow them up, as the Exeter was, and if not, also the Breda; and that
there might not be so many Ships knocked on the head in good Weather, as the
Windsor-Castle was, and several more, and some drowned, whereby in all these
Cases the Seamen suffer loss of Clothes, if not of Life and Liberty; and
perhaps Their Majesty's have lost 30 or 40 Ships, to the Value of a Million of
Money, and in so little time, as no Age can parallel, and except the Anne and
the Portsmouth, and perhaps Ten or Twelve more, most of the rest were made away
so strangely, without fair Valiant Fighting, as Brave Old English Men used to
do, that some of them have looked like Ships Murdered I do not know how; And if
your Honors would but inquire into it, perhaps I may give you most of the
Ships Names so lost; but perhaps it will be hard to find the reason how some
were lost: But if you should ask me if it were from Heaven or of Men, it may be
I might with submission say, If it were from Men, then if they are found faulty
they should be punished; and if from Heaven, then Humiliation, Supplication and
Reformation were the way to prevent it for time to come, and so it would be
well if the Reverend the Bishops would send a Sound Pious Minister of the
Church of England into every Man of War, to be a Man of Sobriety and good
Conversation, and also a Man of Courage to Reprove every Vice he has
opportunity conveniently to do, and to Rebuke and Exhort, and that he might
read the Prayers of the Church twice every Day, and also Read Two Homilies
every Sunday out of that most Excellent Book of Homilies, worth its weight in
Gold, and worthy to be kept in every English Man's House, which was set forth in
King Edward the Sixths days, and in Queen Elizabeth's, and Three Kings Reigns
since, and Established by the Church of England in the Thirty Nine Articles,
and therein the Seamen might hear that Swearing and Cursing, and other
Enormities, are things that the Church abhors, and that Sobriety, Virtue,
Repentance, and Holiness are not Novelty nor Phanatical, but the real
Fundamental Doctrine of the Church of England, and such, as all that own the
Church, ought to stand by, unless they pretend one thing, and do another; And
indeed it is most dreadful to think, that any called Christians should Night
and Day be Calling on God to Damn them, and the Devil to Damn them, as if they
thought they could not have it time enough without engaging God to send it, and
the Devil to Execute it, and I suppose all the Histories of the Heathens and
Indians cannot parallel such abominable a Practice; But to endeavor to Reform,
this must be left to your Honors Great Wisdom and Judgment; and I would
entreat your Honors Pardon for my mentioning this: But however, as the Church
takes Care to pray daily for a Blessing on the War, so if any thing could be
prevented that called for a Curse, it would be a great Mercy to these Nations:
And as there is and must be a Continual Necessity of Seamen in Peace and War,
so long as the World endure, so it were to be wished, that there could be some
ways found out for their encouragement in the Service, and for the better
Regulating their Conversation; and they for the most part not being used to
take Care to lay up for their Families beforehand, it is a very great misery as
to their Families to be kept out of Money Four or Five Years; and if your
Honors would consider whether it be for their Majesty's Interest for Ships to
stay Abroad Three or Four Years, and Bury or Discharge Sick, or otherwise Six
times as many as they bring home; whereas if they went and came every Year as
the Merchant-Ships do, they would Increase Seamen, and Encourage their Families
also; and if there could be a Method found out that there might not any be
suffered to Administer, as their Wives, who are not, or to Receive their Pay
without a Lawful Power, it might peradventure save the Seamen their Pay more
secure, and save a great deal of Trouble and Difficulty to Their Majesty's
Commissioners in Payment, and also peradventure save some Thousands of Pounds
to Their Majesty's for time to come in some Nature, which perhaps Their
Majesty's, and neither your Honors know not of; for it falls out sometimes
that there are many Dead or gone out of Ships, that none of their Friends knew
where they were; and I suppose Their Majesty's deserve the Money before
Strangers; And I wish there were also some way found out to encourage Seamen
for Their Majesty's Service, to look out on the Top of the Mast sometimes for
the French, that they that see them first, might have a Reward, since it is so
strange a thing, that the Sea should be so full of French, a Merchant-Man can
hardly go without Convoy, but he is taken; and yet that the Sea should be so
clear of French, that our Men of War can seldom see them; I suppose the French
have good Eyes, and as Cats, have liberty to run all over the House to Catch a
Mouse, and are not Chained up as Mastiffs that can hurt none, except they come
in the length of their Chain: And if your Honors would send for some of the
Seamen to give an Account to some Committee what Encouragement they have when
they do happen to take a Ship, whether they have any more than they can hide,
or is not worth taking from them; And indeed, as Their Majesty's do Reward
those who loose Lives and Limbs, so it were to be wished they that live had
some more Encouragement also; and it were to be wished that the Merchants would
give some Encouragement to those who do lose their Lives in Their Service or
their Limbs, and would not suffer them to Pay so much to Surgeons for their
Cure; neither that any of them should be forced to go to Law for their Wages
after they have gotten their Ships home clear from the Enemies, that so they
might be more encouraged also; and that if any Men were almost half starved, at
any time, either coming from the Indies, or otherwhere, they might be allowed,
to their Pocket, the Value of what is pinched out of their Bellies. This Their
Majesty's do for all Men of War, if there be occasion, and it is pity that the
Merchant Ships do not so also. But I must most Humbly entreat Your Honors
Gracious Pardon, and that the poor distressed may not suffer for the
unworthiness of my Requesting their Case; and may their Prayer, and the
Blessings of the Eternal JEHOVAH, the Blessed and Glorious Trinity in Unity,
and Unity in Trinity, Rest on the Heads and Hearts of Their Most Gracious
Majesty's, and all your Honors, and these Nations, and on your Honors Humble
Servant, and his Family to Command,

Hermitage, June 19th. 1693. William Hodges.


