THE QUESTION OF Reordination, Whether, and how, a Minister Ordained by the
Presbytery, may take Ordination also by the Bishop?

By John Humfrey, Minist.

Published for the sake of the many concerned, and perplexed about it at this
Season, without strife, for the promotion only of the holy Gospel, and Peace.

Romans 15.2. (...)

London, Printed for Tho. Williams at the Bible in Little Britain without
Aldersgate, 1661.

Ad Lectorem.
THis Discourse was written at first in six or seven Letters, or more, to an
intimate friend, according to the date, scattered with other matters. Those
Papers were since returned to the Author to peruse, set together, and amplisie
upon further deliberation. You have them therefore in this form, the
Superscription changed from one to many, and the Letters from many as it were
to one, and divided into so many Sections. If the former lead on to the latter,
and the latter (taking more line) bring perspicuity and fullness to the former,
and the whole tend to let satisfaction upon the mind, as it is like best to
take it in, I am bid to tell you, the Author is not farther sollicitous of the
method, which is intended not be Polemical for dispute; but Medicinal for the
conscience.

Typographus.

To my Reverend, Pious, and Worthy Brethren in the Ministry, who have been
Ordained in these Times only by the Presbytery; Grace, Truth and Peace from God
the Father and from our Lord Jesus Christ, with the freedom of the Gospel. Feb.
1660.
WHereas it seems to me a thing reasonable, for a man to give an account of his
actions, which may be else an occasion of stumbling to others: I have thought
good to write some lines about that Business, which has a various acceptance,
among the concerned at this season; to wit, the legal Establishment (so I will
call it) according to the Book of Orders, of my former Ministry and Ordination
long since had, by the Presbytery.

Before I go further, I must confess I have not known, or noted yet, any Book
Pro or Con about this Subject (nor would I, till I had scanned over my own
thoughts) to make use of, so much as to give me either reason for it, objection
against it, or notion about it, unless obiter on other matters; so that the
path is to me quite untrod: Only, I must needs say, since I have done this
thing, I find it has pleased God, to exercise my spirit with many perplexities
about it; so that I am even forced to find out such a course as this, to rid my
mind, and give vent to them. Truly, me thinks, from the beginning, I have been
apt to look upon the matter it self as nothing; yet has it driven me many
times upon my knees, with thoughts in the reflection, If it be so, why am I
thus? And I do not see, what is the end the Lord has with me therein, unless
it be, that these throws as it were of mine, are only for the delivery of
something, for one or other of my Brethrens satisfaction.

As for the repeating, or doubling Ordination it self, I do thus judge of it.
There are some things, which Divines do condemn indefinitely as evil, when
being barely considered, they sway more this way, and have a likelihood rather
thereof then good, yet in their nature, are indifferent, (that is,
indifferentia ad unum, not ad utrum libet, as they speak) so that, right
circumstances being put, they may be done. I take this matter in hand to be
such, which though it be odd and uncouth in its first and naked consideration,
yet, as the case complexedly now stands, I put it in the number of such things,
as Magna utilitas (to wit, publica) facit honestum; that is, the necessity of
convenience renders tolerable for the time.

To take liberty as to the ingenuous, This Reordination may be considered,
methinks, Notionally, or Morally: There is Moral, and Notional good, if I may
so speak: Moral good, is, a conformity to the rule of life, which God has
given us in his Word, or planted in our hearts: Notional good, is a conformity
in things to their being, (or nature) as we apprehend them (or in men's
apprehensions.) So you must give me leave to express it. Reordination now,
Notionally, I suspect is not good; Morally, I judge it, as I have sa^^ (...)
indifferent ((...)) good, ^or bad, though unequally, as it is used. Suppose a
thing born with redundant parts; Here is an odd thing in Nature, Naturae
erratum: yet as it is God's creature, and ordered by Providence; it is good,
and allowed of her in the world: Reordination, let me say, is, Ordination
redundant, (an Erratum perhaps as to its common notion, or a mis-shape in our
apprehension) yer if it comes to be ordered by man, to Moral advantage, and the
Honor of God (as to the peace and freedom of the Gospel) the thing is not to be
made away, but to be allowed in the Church, as Nature does of such things as
these, when yet she likes them not. Notional good, as natural, must give place
to Moral good, without question.

Indeed to dead truly herein, I must distinguish (I think) between the part of
those that require this, and those that submit to it. I dare not justify our
Church-Rulers in their imposing hereof, notwithstanding its near concernment to
them ( Quid enim facit, excepta ordinatione, Episcopus, quod Presbyter non
facit? says Jerome, and some others) because it is manifestly scandalous to
the Reformed Churches abroad, and it is supposed they might remedy it if they
would. They know best their own justifications, Let the fault (if there be
any), on Gods name, lie where it is: But as for the part of the Submitter, who
for the sake of his Ministry, and present service of the Church, does only
yield himself to obedience and quiet, I do humbly hope the matter is not such,
as that he should charge himself with any great hurt in it. Although in
immediate positive acts of Divine Worship, nothing be warrantable without
command, yet in matters only of Order, it is enough to make things lawful (as I
suppose) that they are required of our Superiors, and no where prohibited in
the Word of God. Quod neque contra fidem, neque contra bonos mores injungitur,
indifferenter est habendum, and, pro little inter quos vivitur, societate,
servandum est. Aug. ad Jan. Ep. 118.

When Paul circumcised Timothy, and purified himself with the Jews in the
Temple, these were things I count indefinitely unlawful, yet commendable in
that case. I do choose to stand on this ground; yet may we draw nearer on
probability. It may be conjectured, and cannot be denied as certain, (for very
good Divines say it) but that Paul was confirmed in his calling to the Ministry
by Ananias, (Act. 9. with Act. 22.) which is Ordination; and likewise Barnabas
by the Church at Jerusalem, that sent him to Antioch, ( Act. 11.22.) when yet
they are both separated after ( Act. 13.) by the Holy Ghost, and laying on of
hands, unto that farther work they are called to in Sel^u^ia, and Cyprus. How
is it like that so famous a Minister as Barnabas, should be wholly without
Ordination before, unless Ordination be not so necessary a thing to the
Ministry, as we make it? And for the other instance of Paul, there is more in
it: I will not draw out the strength of it, till I come to the chief knot. By
the way only, It is a conceit (I must confess) is got in me from this Text,
that if a Minister have a call (with a good conscience) to a new place, or new
work, though it be not necessary, it is lawful for him to have a particular
Ordination to the same; and I think that the hands of a grave Bishop, and good
men, laid on him afresh, with their Fasting and Solemn Prayers for Gods
blessing upon him in it, were like to do him no harm.

But to come to the bottom, To judge aright of Reordination, we must first
consider what is Ordination. Ordinatio (say Protestant Divines) is vocationis
confirmatio. The Leyden Divines, drop this definition. Ordinandi potestas, seu
in Ministerio confirmandi, etc. Disp. 42. These. 37. Ordinatio (says Amesius)
nihil aliud est quam solennis declaratio, ut coronatio Regis, aut inauguratio
Magistratus. De consc. l. 4. c. 25. Some of our eminent Divines being
consulted, do say, (I am told) Ordination is nothing but Approbation, a public
approving a man as fit to be a Minister; I would express it thus, A solemn
allowance of his Call. I take these apprehensions in effect to be the same; If
they differ, I rather choose the first, both as most comprehensive of the
other, and also as most received; insomuch as Wollebius going about to define
Ordination, gives it no other name: Confirmatio (says he) est personae electae
introductio, in qua, publicis precibus praemissis, Ecclesiae comendatur, eique
vocatio, impositis manibus confirmatur. From which hint I will recall that
place which is to be more then once made use of, as the clearest Text we have
about this solemnity, to wit, the instance of Paul and Barnabas, who being at
Antioch, and called by the Holy Ghost to their work, St. Luke tells us, Certain
Teachers who were there, prayed and fasted, and laid their hands on them (that
is, ordained them) and sent them away; and then in the two next Chapters going
on, and declaring their journeys and acts, when they had done thus (says he)
they returned to Antioch, from whence they had been recommended to the grace of
God, for the work which they fulfilled, in which words he does plainly seem to
describe that matter, in the former narration. Ordination then is, out of
doubt, (whatsoever it be besides) a solemn recommending (the word is, (...),
traditi) or committing of a person to the grace of God, for the work unto which
he is called. Unto this, let me yet add the forecited Doctor Ames again more
at large. Vocationis essentia est in electione Ecclesiae and acceptatione
electi. Adjunctum consequens and consummans est Ordinatio, quae nihil aliud est
quam solennis quaedam introductio Ministri jam electi in ipsius functionis
liberam functionem. Medul. Theol. l. 1. c. 39. One thing only I must not let
pass, as some light in the way here, and to our business; that when such
Divines as these, do say, that Ordination is nothing else, but a Declaration,
Approbation, or Confirmation of our Calling: Do you understand, it not directly
of our call by man, (where lies alone, I think, the shortness of their sight)
but of our call by God, and then it is exceeding well. You will, somewhere,
when I shall speak of this farther after, see the clearness and consequence
hereof. Now those men who have imbibed such a notion only of Ordination, as
thus defined, will I suppose soon conclude that a double Approbation,
Declaration, or Confirmation of the same Ministry is no such matter but the
lawfulness of it may be resolved when but once the Expedience is clear.

I deny not but there is more in Ordination then this, which creates the
difficulty, to wit, that it it gives the ministerial function; yet will I not
concede it, but suppose it, and go on (though we have a clear instance flat
against it, (in Paul) when again we come to it,) upon that supposition; It
suffices us if in reordination there be no more, and so much; for it is about
that, our question lies. And I know, it is the general sentiments of men's
spirits must taste the thing at last, and determine it for us, whether good or
bad (which will therefore be proper for a Convocation) some receiving it in
their first conceptions as a second baptism, others only, as another marrying
when the first is good before in the sight of God, but questionable in Law, and
made sure. And so I remember a worthy Doctor I spoke with occasionally about
it, did express it by Usury, which in the common opinion is evil as to those
that require it, but not unlawful, as to those that upon their necessity do
give it. In adiaphoris (says Gerson) superioris judicio maxim credendum,
quoniam ille vice Dei tibi dicet, quid expedit et quid decet. De. Relig. perf.
part, 3.

SECT. II.
HAving in my first paper made these scattered efforts already, I shall now
more roundly and freely lay you down my opinion, with a larger compass upon
the whole matter in five or six propositions. For the doing whereof [waving in
the way that touchy objection of the Covenant, which for my oaths sake at my
Degrees in the university I never took, and if it were to do again could not
take] I need not any elaborate disquisition, which neither the nature of a
letter, or my time, or my present stock can allow; but I shall set my thoughts
down faithfully as they fall into my pen, travailing only with words, (as
already I have done) to deliver my mind, and not with the licking of the
expression.

1. I doubt not of Presbyterial ordination, but that those men who have been
ordained without a Bishop, have done, and do well, but according to their
office and duty, in administering the word and sacraments as ministers of Christ
and stewards of the mysteries of God. I can as well doubt, whether my people
before me are men or living creatures, and not wheels or some things moved only
by weights and engines; as I can doubt of this. The judgment of Bishop Usher,
Downam, Carleton, Archdeacon Mason, Field of the Church. Lib. 3. c. 39. and the
practice of the Reformed Churches, is known in the case.

2. It appears in the time of the Apostles, that a Presbyter and a Bishop was
all one by these Texts. Tit. 1.5. with 7. Acts 20.17. with 28. Phil. 1.1. 1
Pet. 5.1, 2. This, Doctor Hammond thought safest to own. The Bishops succeeded
the Apostles, and consequently while there was Apostles there was no Bishops. I
speak here but after the excellent judgment of our late King. The Churches then
had recourse unto them (as might be prooved by their sending still to Paul
about their affairs, in many places) which makes, and answers I think for
Episcopacy; They had then no Bishops indeed, because the Apostles and
Evangelists filled up the use of them. Whether the ministers at first were all
Presbyters, and for avoiding of schism and faction, they chose out one to be
Bishop (as Jerome:) Or whether at first they were all Bishops and as their
Territories increased, and the people came in, they ordained Presbyters under
them, I leave to the several palates of the judicious. This I take to be
certain: while the work was not divided, they must needs be both but the same
office, unto which either name was common; but when the work was divided, then
they distinguished the names and kept them up accordingly. See the Right
Honorable Sir William Morice his most candid, clear, and impartial judgment
upon the whole matter of Presbytery and Episcopacy, and both compared, in his
excellently learned book the second Edition in Folio from p. 146 to 169.

3. Whenever the distinction arose, I believe, that a Bishop and a Presbyter
are not different orders of the Ministry, as a Priest and a Deacon is; but only
the one is the same office with the other in a different degree of eminency.
See the 42 quest. in Bishop Davenants determinations. The Apostle in his first
Epistle says, Timothy was ordained with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery: In the second, by the laying on of his hands; You may gather from
hence that Paul must needs be then one of the Presbytery, and ordained as one
of them (the agent must act qua tale to the production of the effect; I speak
this ad hominem) and consequently that Presbyterial ordination and Episcopal is
the same; So that the old rule alone Magis and minus non variant speciem does
satisfy me here; though I forget not (if I could believe the Apostle indeed to
be so critical) an acute annotation of my own grave and learned Bishop (in his
discourse with me) upon the two Prepositions, that (...) in the one place
imports authority, and (...) assistance only in the other. And yet, what if
there be here it self some double kind of Ordination, which for ought any one
can be sure of, was so: though you and I put not our belief to it.

4. Whereas a most Reverend, late, and moderate Prelate is noted to have stated
the matter thus, that Presbyterial Ordination is valid, but Schismatical: Let
it be understood only, where the Episcopal government is in force; If a man
should, now Episcopacy is up, go to be ordained only by Presbyters; no doubt
but this, in every true Episcopal Judgment, is Schism: but, when the Bishops
were down here, and in the reformed Churches, where there are no Bishops, it is
rather questionable, to my thinking, whether it were not tumultuousnesse of
spirit, not to be contented with the Ordination which is going, and present
necessity puts upon him. Si Orthodoxi Presbyteri, ne pereat Ecclesia, alios
Presbyteros cogantur Ordinare; Ego non ausim hujusmodi Ordinationes pronunciare
irritas, says Davenant, before quoted. See the second part of Jus Divinum
Ministerii Evangelici, where Ordination by Presbyters is justified at large,
and more large than I need here mention.

5. I will distinguish then between what Ordination is required to the setting
a part a man to the Office of a Minister in the sight of God, and what is
requisite to the making him received as a Minister among men, and give him
authority (or full repute) to execute that Office in the Church or place where
he shall be called: I believe (as before) that Ordination by the Presbytery
only (sufficing but a little while ago to both) suffices still to the former,
(supposing Ordination goes so far). But we all begin to know also, that
Ordination now by a Bishop, is necessary to the latter; and, consequently,
though I have been ordained before by the Presbytery, this hinders not, but I
may be ordained again by the Bishop, because I seek not to be ordained by him
to make me a Minister again, which I am in foro Dei already, but to have
Authority (as to men) to use my Ministry, and be received as such (which I
cannot else) in foro Ecclesiae Anglicanae. And this, me thinks, I am a little
justified in, that when I was ordained by the Presbytery, the very words used
at the point, (to my best memory) were, Whom by the laying on of hands, we set
a part for the Office of the Ministry, and in the Ordination by the Bishop,
they are, Take authority to Preach the Word and Minister the Sacraments in the
Congregation where thou shall be appointed, that is, in thy place. Not, but
those words do confer both of these (supposing what is supposed) to the
unordained before; yet does not that hinder, but rather argue, If they do
confer both to others, they may doubtless (and actually do) confer one (and can
but the one only) to such as are in my case: In short, there is my Ministry,
and the use of my Ministry in the English Church: My first Ordination (as we
suppose) has given me the one, yet is the latter, not superfluous, because it
conduces (and that legally or regularly) to the other. I mean clearly, as to
authority, freedom at least, and reception in the same.

6. Whereas the Scripture is clear about subjection to Superiors, Civil and
Ecclesiastical; Obey those that are over you in the Lord. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man for conscience sake: I do question, whether every man
that yields to Episcopacy in his judgment (if but only as not repugnant to the
Word of God, and humane Institution) is not obliged hereunto, if it may be had
on this account, without reclaiming, or prejudice to his former Ministry. I say
not barely, that it appears a thing lawful, while we see how it may done, but
being stood upon, a due, to be done; and if any thing be amiss, it is in them
that exact it, and not in us that cannot help it. For what is Reordination in
this case, but a submission to the order of that Church-Polity, which is again
set over us? And what evil is there more in it, then a second marrying (as
before) or confirming (with a new) my former title to my living? If it be
required of me, Why may I not be ordained twice as well as once, and thrice as
well as twice, if there be still reason sufficient for it? May not the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy be repeated, and yet Gods Name not be taken in vain by
it? Is it enough to make our Liturgy unlawful, because we have, in one Service,
the Lords Prayer twice over? I confess, I read indeed of one Baptism in
Scripture, and a stress is laid upon it, but I read not so of one Ordination.
Where there is no law to the contrary; where I pray lies the transgression? It
is true, there may be found in some ancient Canons something against this
perhaps, where they had not the like reason. Si quis Episcopus, aut Presbyter,
aut Diaconus secundam ab aliquo Ordinationem susceperit, deponitor, tam ipse
quam qui ipsum ordinavit, say the Apocryphal Canons of the Apostles. Can. 67.
Where this very distinction thus made of the Clergy, does witness them (this
one of them, at least) to be of aftertimes, and so forged, as Rivet notes it.
I know also the Trent Doctors, out of the Schoolmen, do tell me (with an
Anathema) that there is an indelible character imprinted by three of their
Sacraments (whereof this is one) for which cause, they cannot be iterated: but
I know not, that any of them can tell, what this character is, or where, or how
it is impressed, or show it me in the Bible, or in the Fathers, or that the
Protestants do make any thing at all of it. Synops. pur. Theol. Disp, 43. These.
36. Let my fear, O Lord, be taught me by thy Precepts, and neither by man's mere
notions, nor Tradition. Quod Baptismus non sit iterandus (says Chemnitius in
his Examen de Charactere) de re magna agitur. Pactum gratiae in illo Deus
nobiscune iniit. -- Illud vero (says he, blaming the Trent determination) quod
Baptismi proprium est, ut scilicet non iteretur, ad suos Ordines transtulerunt.
You may see easily through this little cranny, the true light of this Great
Man's free thoughts. Will you be pleased therefore to hear an honest, learned
and impartial Doctor, speaking his mind out full for him. Dr. Baldwin,
Professor of Wittenberg. De casibus conscientiae, putting this very case,
Whether a man ordained by the Papists, may be ordained again by us, and
maintaining, that there is no necessity of it, does yet clearly deliver here,
his thoughts in this matter. Quod si quis existimat se tranquillius suo in
nostris Ecclesiis Officio, perfungi posse, si etiam nostris ritibus ad
Sacrosanctum Ministerium utatur, nihil obstat, quin Ordinationem a nostris
accipere possit: non enim eadem est ratio Ordinationis, quae Baptismi, qui
iterari non potest; Hoc enim Sacramentum est Ecclesiae, illa autem externus
tantum ritus. Lib. 4. c. 6. cas. 6.

SECT. III.
I Have done now with my Essay as to the Question. I come to the Scruples and
Objections that have run into my Soul like water. I shall endeavor through
Divine Assistance, to lave them out as well as I can, by Confession, or
Solution.

For the first, it has been this: The Apostle limiting the use of our
Christian liberty in indifferent things to the rule of charity, instances in
meats offered to Idols. The weak Brethren thought in their consciences it
unlawful, to eat of such meats; the stronger Christian hereupon is bound to
forbear, because they seeing him who had knowledge sit at meat, their
consciences would be emboldned to eat likewise, who having not that knowledge,
should sin. Apply the case here. Many of my Brethren do think it unlawful (it
is likely) to be ordained again; Now they seeing me, though the meanest among
them, yet whom they think may have some knowledge, to be re-ordained: Shall
they not be emboldned to do so likewise, which if they do, whilst they believe
(or doubt) it to be unlawful, they perish. But when you sin against the
Brethren, and wound their weak consciences, you sin against Christ. I confess,
I do the rather propose this, for the seeking satisfaction, if it can be given
me, in regard of the vast range the Case has, and takes in more especially all
Ceremony; I cannot wear a Surplice, nor read Common Prayer, (at this interim)
or stand up at the Creed: Nay, I cannot wear my hair long, and a hundred more,
certainly, indifferent things; but some do think these in their consciences
unlawful; and so, while I embolden them by my pattern to do the same, I
occasion their ruin, and incur the hazard of such Texts, Romans 14, 15, 21. 1
Cor. 10.28. 1 Cor. 8.11, 12. Mat. 18.6, 7.

I must profess, if this Proposition will arise from any one, or from all these
Texts, that a man who is satisfied of a thing as indifferent and lawful, must
yet forbear upon the account, that by his example, others may be emboldned to
the same, who having not that knowledge, do judge it unlawful, and so sin if
they do it; then is the way of poor Christians (the Lord knows) very straight:
Nevertheless (besides the learned Hammonds interpretation of that Chapter, 1
Cor. 8. bearing away quite the edge of that place) I am though, through grace,
something enlightened to judge, that a man may sometimes do much good in leading
an example to the doubtful, when a thing is becoming necessary, as he may do
much amiss in things more certainly lawful, that are better spared. As for the
Schools definition of Scandal; I say, an indifferent commanded, becomes rectum,
which was minus rectum before; and Scandalum with them is, Dictum vel factum
minus rectum praebens alteri occasionem ruinae. I will take up with that here
of Mr. Calvin, treating about indifferent things in this case, and mentioning
Paul's circumcising Timothy, and yet not Titus, as to the point. Nihil jam
(says he) hac regula expeditius, quam Utendum liberate nostra si in proximi
nostri aedificationem cedat; sin ita proximo non expediat, ea tunc abstinendum.
Inst. lib. 3. c. 19.. 12.

SECT. IV.
THE grand Objection in the second place and chief that I can think of; and
which, I am persuaded, if I can satisfy thoroughly, I have done my work; I
will lay down as clear as possibly I can frame it: for it has come in often,
and laid long with the dint of it in my thoughts. Ordination is that which
according to Divines does give a man the office of the Ministry (they mean,
they say, as to the Essence of the outward Call, Jus Divin. Evan. chapter 11.) This
is the end they account hereof: Now when a man is a Minister already, there is
not this end; If there be not it is end, it is to no purpose, an ordinance, or
Gods name, taken in vain which is against the Third Commandment.

To this I answer, as clearly, I hope, directly, and fully; and shall enlarge
upon it after. There are more ends then one in Ordination, as in Baptism and
other Institutions; It is not necessary to the taking or using an ordinance
that a man be capable of all it is ends (I might add, if need were, nor the
grand end) so long as there is some right and sufficient end of the same.
Ordination (it is said) does not install a man in his office, but gives a man
his commission and authority, that is, it must be meant, does not only do
this; for it necessarily does the first, whether it does the last or not. I
will suppose then, it does no less. It makes a man a Minister (I say I suppose
this, not grant it) and also signifies him to be such before men. It gives the
office and also it makes a man to be received as such in the Church where he is
sent, which is a matter of great weight and open importance, as I shall say
more about it. Now I am fixed here; Though we that are Ministers already,
cannot be ordained to the one end, which is supposed the most common (our case
being peculiar); yet are we, may we, and, for any thing I know (if required)
ought we to be ordained again for the other. The common and general end of
Baptism was for remission of sins, yet was Jesus Christ baptized, who was not
capable of that end (but some others). The common end of Ordination is for the
office (as is supposed); yet if the Bishop shall say here, Why come thou to
be ordained? Thou have no need that art a Minister already. I will answer him
humbly in my Saviors words, Suffer it so to be now for it becomes us to
fulfill all righteousness, It becomes us to conform to the peace unity and
government of the Church, as well as State (so far as we can) in the Nation.

St Paul is made a Minister by Christ himself; Mark the words well, for they
are beyond dispute, I have appeared to thee for this purpose to make thee a
Minister. And now I send thee to the Gentiles to open their blind eyes, etc.
Act. 26.16, 17, 18. And yet is he ordained after by the hands of men, Act.
13.3. Will any man say that the imposition of hands did make him a Minister, or
confer his office? That were not only against that text, but such a manifest
wrong he will never put up, who in express terms stands upon it, that he was
an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Christ Gal. 1.1. which is the
truth. It Is plain then, that a man who is a Minister already, may be ordained;
or that it is not necessary to be ordained only to this end, to have the office
conferred on him. And now then my Friend that art in my case, do thou tell the
Bishop, thou art a Minister already; Be sure thou do not renounce thy former
ordination, and consequently (as much as in thee lies) all thy ministerial
acts past (together with thy consent to the Reformed Churches) for any thing;
If he shall thereupon ask thee, wherefore then will thou be ordained? Say, To
this end, this very end, St. Paul here was ordained, let it be what it will, it
is that alone I come for; which indeed in effect is nothing else but the
canonical stamp of allowance, or Establishment of thy former vocation; and as
for the bare Ceremonies it self twice using, which alone is left to be excepted
at, value it not. Who does not know that imposition of hands with prayer is
used for Confirmation, as well as Ordination?

I will advance here on further; The reason of a precept is to be looked on as
the precept; To perform a precept against the reason of it, is to break it; To
do according to the reason, though not according to the precept, is to keep it;
We have no precept in Scripture for Reordination; but we have here, in this
instance, the reason of it. Let any one tell me the reason of this imposition
of hands upon Paul by Lucius and Niger, who could not be made a Minister by man
seeing Christ had appeared to him (as is said) for that purpose before; and I
will presume to give the same or the like, for our reordination by the Bishop.
If you say, Here was a command of the Holy Ghost. It is true: but that takes
not away the reason of the rite; the thing must have it is due end, and reason,
but the rather, for that.

What then is the reason indeed hereof? Is it for to give the ministerial
office and nothing else? Surely if it does that at all (which one may think God
alone does by the warrant of his word upon his enabling gift, and the man's
Consent); Yet is not this the reason altogether for certain, because here is an
instance to the contrary, let any man cavil at it what he can. What is the
reason then? Why, really, I think it is this. This solemn rite does give the
current repute, or valuation, to a man of a Minister; so that he who was truly
called of God before, is now received as such, by all, as to the exercise of
his function with freedom and acceptance; And this is that authority alone I
count the Bishop gives (at least as to us) in those words, Take thou authority
etc. To wit an authority of esteem in regard of men, who many will not, and
many perhaps out of conscience mislead, cannot, hold me for a true, or legal
Minister otherwise? And hereupon you see, upon what ground it is we go in
Reordination) and that is no other, then the very reason it self of Ordination;
which, believe it, is not a little matter, even no less then that of the
Apostle, (...), namely, the very course and glorifying of our Gospel, which
ought to be, I think, one of the greatest Concernments to us in the world.

To be short then, for we are now at the bottom; Forasmuch as our former
ordination by the Presbytery though it be good according to God, and
consequently such as ought to give us this reputation (or outward authority) as
Ministers (which is the reason of ordaining) yet does not do it and reach it is
end, in our Church, by reason of the times (and perhaps according to the
ancient Laws) as they are now changed, and like to stand: I argue, where the
reason of the precept is repeated, who can deny, nay who dare refuse, the
repetition of the duty?

And here the prime knot of the whole difficulty is also loosed, which is this.
We on one hand dare not but own out former Ordination as valid for our
ministerial acts past: On the other hand, if we own the first as valid, what
room can there be for a second? There must be some sense therefore, wherein it
is to be conceived not valid, null, or rather (as the case truly is) nullified
(as to some considerable intents) or else a second ordination does nothing but
what is done, which is absurd. I answer therefore directly. The validity of our
former Ordination accipitur dupliciter. This is what is clear, and so may seem
easy to you, found; but cost me many thoughts to frame and find. This validity
I say, is to be taken either in regard of what it ought to do; or in regard of
what it does do, as I have said; It would be fuller, if I could say, In regard
of what it ought to do according to the Law of God; and in regard of what it
does do, according to the law of our Church or Land: wherein I am not so
well-skill'd, as to speak surely. In the first regard, (to wit, of what it
ought to do) we stand upon it, to be valid or good; we profess that, that alone
is such, according to Scripture, as ought to give us the repute and full
reception as Ministers, by all persons, and to all intents and purposes
whatsoever: But in the second regard, (to wit, of what it does do) we yield it
is not valid, we acknowledge it indeed, hereby (not to be so); It does not do
this, it is true; it is that we perceive, and know, and complain of: what
through error in some, and wilfulness and injury in others, they render it to
us as null (both as to the main, and special effects) so that it will not any
longer serve the turn, or end (through the stream of the times, how happy
soever otherwise) to give our Ministry its free course (the marrow of all); and
upon that account, are we ordained again. Which being, I say, the reason (or
one main reason, at least) of this rite it self, it is substantially
satisfactory (and I suspect, also obligatory) for our yielding to the same. And
thus do I avoid both the sin on one hand, of disowning our first Orders; and
the Soloecism on the other, of doing only what is done in our last. When yet I
should have thought this matter might have passed pretty well at first, if it
had been but so determined, as to be (if men would) some kind of Soloecism, but
no sin.

You have the body of this main Objection; I shall now proceed to the limbs of
some farther scruples.

Ordination is our entrance into the Ministry; How can a man have a double
entrance into the same state?

Common Prayer? And why not upon this very reason? Because, there is nothing
else in it, but only, that that Form which is compiled in the Book, for the
entering, or (what is the truth) signifying the entrance of two persons into
wedlock, is now used, to signify these to be entered, or confirming them
legally in that estate, which it will do as well, as enter them at first? Who
will say, it is a sin, or transgression, to use it so? A great piece of matter,
and mis-usage, is it not? Apply the same here, and if any will condemn us for
the like use of the form of ordering Priests, let them include the multitudes,
that have been so married in these times, and take heed, they can answer it
before the Lord. Who art thou that judge thy Brother? Romans 14.10. Indignum
est (says the Father) ut propter ea qua nos Deo, neque digniores neque
indigniores possunt facere, alii alios vel condemnemus, vel judicemus.

Ordination is not a naked sign, only to declare a man a Minister before men;
but there is grace implored; we are recommended to Gods grace, and we are to
suppose grace accompanying of it; Now, Is not the being twice ordained, a kind
of offering an indignity to the grace of God?

Cor. 15.10. we have footing for a distinction of Grace; I labored, yet not I,
but the grace of God which was with me. There is therefore the grace of God in
us; or, with us; That grace which is implored, unto which we are committed, and
may expect from this solemnity, is, I take it, the grace of God with us, the
assistance and blessing of God upon us for our work; which being what we may
always pray for, or what is continually vouchsafed; I hope there is no more
evil here, then the bidding several times, God speed, or, blessing our friends
in the Name of the Lord more then once. It was no ways derogatory to the
divinity of Pharaohs first Dream, that it was seconded by another; For that the
dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice, it is, because the thing is established
by God. By the way, A second Ordination then, by various persons and rites,
destroys not the first, but is an Establishment; the title by which I have
chosen to call it.

But there is a gift given by Ordination, which is in us. Neglect not the gift
that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. with 2 Timothy 1.6. And that gift, it is
likely, can be received but once.

Timothy. Because; 1. It was given him by this ceremony (as is thought)
according to the miraculous gifts, of those times. 2. He was an extraordinary
Officer, an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4.5. or at least, a singular person. 3. It is
given him by Oracle. 4. There is no mention of such a gift, in the Ordination
of any other. If so, this objection is quite taken off from us: If not, but the
Gift is ordinary, it will concern us; And what then is it (let us search) that
is conferred by this Rite?

It is not the grace of God (gratum faciens) or saving grace; for that is not
tied to this means. Nor is it the Original talent, Endowment, Parts, or
Abilities for the Ministry; for those are tried, and to be found first in the
party to be ordained, and therefore not given hereby. Nor should it be the
Office it self (one may judge) because 1. What need is there, the word Gift
should be taken Metonymically, when it may be taken properly? 2. How can the
Office be said, to be stirred up ( Stir up the gift that is in thee, says the
second Text) which is proper of the grace to discharge it? 3. That which is yet
harsher, How can it be said of the Office, The Gift that is in thee? It is
proper to say, a man is in his Office; but to say, a man; Office is in him,
seems strange. 4. If it be thought, the office must necessarily be conferred by
this rite, it is false; in our instance of Paul for certain, and Barnabas
likely. Haec manu^m impositto non eo spectabat ut Episcopalem gratiam cis
largiretur; sed (docente Scriptura) ut segregarentur in opus, and
commendarentur gratiae Dei, Mason. de Min. Ang. p. 46. If it be thought, it may
and does confer it, where it is not before, that shall be still supposed by me,
though not granted, nor conceived.

Suppose it then, seeing it is the most current sense, that by this gift is
meant Docendi Officium, as our London Divines, with Anselm, Thomas, Cajetane,
Gerson, Bucer; or, what is all one, Authority, Power, and Commission for this
Office and work, as our Book of Orders, Take thou authority to Preach the Word,
and Minister the Sacraments. Ordo, est Sacrum quoddam, quo spiritualis potestas
traditur Ordinato and Officium, says Lombard. Now then, the question will be
this only, at the highest, Whether an Authority or Commission to an Office or
work, in the nature of the thing, may be renewed and refreshed? And there is
one instance alone to this point, may I think, pluck the superstitious doubt up
by the root from the heart. It is this; The Apostles beyond question, had
Mission, and Commission, and so this gift, (whatsoever it is) from Christ, when
he made their Ministers in his life: and yet we find them Commission, or
Authority ministerial renewed expressly again after Christ's Resurrection. Joh.
20.21, 22, 23. Which herein has the more support in it, (modo liceat) that it
is the same form which is used to us, without repetition. Mr. Calvin, upon the
forecited Text, understands by this Gift only, that, through the Prayers of the
Church, Grace (to wit, gratis data) is impetrated on the ordained: and speaking
of Timothy, Certum est, and doctrina (says he) and aliis dotibus priu eum
excelluisse. And so, I hope, there is no scruple, how more talents, and a
blessing still from God may be repeated and fresh sought. I will lean upon the
instance mentioned, and suppose you can hardly raise an Objection, intrinsecal
to the thing, but that may be turned artificially to it.

It may be said, The Apostles were sent only before to the Jews; now they are
sent to the Gentiles, and so there is need of a new Commission (for a new, it
seems to be by the word (...), Mat. 16.19. in the future tense, pointing to the
time in John). I return then, There is the office of the Apostleship, and the
use of that Office in a farther place, (even unto all Nations). Though they had
Commission already belike for the one, this does not hinder, but they may have
a new (or renewed) for the other. So state I the Re-ordaineds case: They are
Ministers already; but for the use of their Ministry, as to the place, or
farther service, whereunto they shall be called, Who shall forbid the like to
them? If you scruple here, I have no new work, or new place: Yet you may
re-mind our instance of Paul before, who was sent by Christ at first to the
Gentiles at large, and yet is ordained again after, and sent to the same.

Let this dilemma, at least serve thy turn; If thou keep thy place, and thy
conscience here is weak, the Act for Confirmation of Ministers, secures thee
upon thy Ordination thou have: If thou art turned out, or have a safe Call by
Providence to a new place, thou may have a peculiar Ordination to that work.
See besides the former instance, Act. 11. with Act. 13.2. and assure thy self,
it is light when the Sun is up. This were an account upon which the re-ordained
happily, and re-ordained both, might be justified. And then, if, besides an
Ordination in general, to set apart a man for his Office, there may be a
particular, to recommend him to the grace of God for his work in another place,
Why may not this be distinguished upon need, as to the same place also? Thou
must have, me thinks, but narrow thoughts of the Scripture, and the Author of
it, if thou think, that the continuance of thy Ministry, or the Parrhesia
only, or full liberty thereof for the Lord, will not bear thee out for such a
matter. I choose for our selves the largest Foundation.

Before I pass hence, though, I cannot here but put a difference between the
authority which Christ gave his Disciples, whose Prerogative it is, to make his
own Officers, and the authority man gives; As when it is said, The Saints shall
judge the world; Divines say, that is, by approving (as Assessors) Christ's
sentence: So I take it, do men make Ministers, by approving Christ's call. There
is then the spiritual inward power and commission for my office toward God.
Ordination, I suppose, gives not this character; but it lies plainly, I judge,
in these three things, Institution, Ability, and Consent: to wit, Christ has
appointed such an Office to be; furnishes a man with endowments for that
Office; and gives him a will, so that he dedicates himself thereupon to that
work. Here is Christ's call. And what then does man, but upon trial, finding
this so, he approves, and declares him a Minister, by the solemnity of
Ordination, and so adds to him, an authority toward man, he had not before.
Let us know then, (and not be in the dark any longer); It is Christ still gives
us our Office (thou must hold thy Office from him certainly, if thou art
Christ's Minister) and Man gives us repute. Believe it, the Essence of this
outward authority, or call, which is all at last, that dare be assumed and
ascribed to Orders indeed (if men know once what it is) lies there: Ordination,
for certain, is in its nature, a recommending us to the grace of God for our
work, Act. 13.2. with chap. 14.26. And why might not any few good Ministers, or
private Congregation (which were absurd and insolent) do this; but that this
repute or valuation, to all intents, as Ministers, is to be attained by that
solemnity?

And after this, I do begin to be persuaded, That this gift in Timothy, (though
there be something else yet hangs in my mind) is indeed, to be understood of
his Office, (especially seeing this is the sense, you may think, most opposite
to me) which will appear mainly by that Text, 1 Timothy 1.18. This charge I commit
to thee son Timothy, according to the prophesies which went before on thee,
that thou by them might war a good warfare. This warfare (compare it with 2 Timothy 2.4.) is his Ministry. Hence I argue, (I cannot say surely) what was given
Timothy by Prophecy, was his Ministry. But this gift, is that, which was given
him by Prophecy. Therefore, this gift is his Ministry. Well now, upon this
supposition, you see, how Timothy's Ministry, or Office is given him: The
objected Text says expressly, by Prophecy. What that means, the other Text
does illustrate, to wit, by Revelation; no otherwise, then when the Holy Ghost
bid, Separate me Paul and Barnabas, in the Acts. If God, then by express call,
gives him his Office, when it is added, With the hands of the Presbytery, it
can be only as in the parallel instance, by the way of a declarative assent,
allowance, or confirmation.

And now, I hope, the vizard of this uncouth thing, Reordination, does fall
off: For is it indeed so against reason, and all example? Is it such a Goblin,
to be re-ordained, think you truly? What if I muster upon you, now at last? The
Apostles were re-ordained, Paul re-ordained, Barnabas re-ordained, and perhaps
Timothy also. Let not your eyes, I pray, be holden, if it be so in good
earnest. Those Divines (say the Provincial Assembly) define Ordination very
well, that define it to be, Missio potestativa. You see, I speak not at the
lowest. Well then, The Apostles have one Authorative Mission, Mat. 10.7. and
they have another also, Matthew. 28.19. Joh. 20.21. They are doubly ordained
then, and both Ordinations extraordinary. Paul has Mission Potestative, from
Christ, Act. 26. And yet has an open Ordination also by men, Act. 13. He is
re-ordained, and one Ordination is extraordinary, and the other, ordinary.
Barnabas has Mission from the Church of Jerusalem, Act. 11.22. (and
authoritative, no doubt) and another also with Paul, by them at Antioch. Here
is double Ordination, and both ordinary by men. I may stop here, for I have
enough. Who will not be ready to say, Give me but one instance of this thing in
Scripture, and I am satisfied? Lo here, is two or three for you: Nihil est tam
certum, quam quod ex dubio certum est. And yet, what if I add? The Bishop has
no new order, or office from a Priest, and yet has he a new Consecration
without scruple. I will fold up this paper then with St. Cyprian. Non debemus
attendere quid aliquis ante nos faciendum putaverit; sed quid, qui ante omnes
est, Christus prius fecerit: neque enim hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet,
sed Dei veritatem. Lib. 2. Caecil. Epist. 3.

SECT. V.
A Third Objection, is this, To be reordained, does seem, virtually to renounce
our former Ordination: and for any to do so, (at least, for me; after twelve
years Ministeral acts) were, I think, not only a light thing, but a heavy sin:
Besides, it seems to be a kind of departure from our station, and leaving the
Presbytery, which makes a man look like one of the Lapsi, to some folks
thinking.

For answer to this; I do not know, what others may judge in their consciences;
but as for my self, I am humbly persuaded, That so long as a man does clearly,
and unfainedly, both before and after (unto the concerned) as he has occasion,
declare himself to the contrary, this will not by the Lord, and ought not by
Man, to be laid to his charge; and that upon this evident reason: Because,
Expression in this case, does give Construction to the Action. The denomination
must be a fortiori; and there can be no doubt to the unbyassed; Whether a
manifest declaration by mouth, or a dumb show, or act, is the clearer (and so
the stronger) signification: You may take one full instance, in the matter of
the Reubenites, when they erected an Altar, Josh. 22. The body of Israel
presently rise up, and look upon this as a renunciation of their Religion:
Hereupon, they do but make direct profession, That they had not built this
Altar for Sacrifice, but for a witness, and you see presently all are pacified;
the Altar stands, and there is no more said against it. Besides, there is this
here takes out the coar, that the thing is generally conceived (as if already
they knew your mind) to be Necessity, Form, and Establishment only, and no such
matter in the least, as Renunciation, intended by it.

Doubt. What if my Bishop is of opinion, That my former Ordination is null, and
Ordains me in his mind only on that account; Will not that opinion of his,
render me incapable to be re-ordained by him?



Quest. But what shall I declare? That I come not for a new Ordination, but a
legal confirmation of my former?

Pharaoh, is not said, to be confirmed by a second; but the thing signified,
was established by both. For, to be a little accurate here; Though as to
others, in sensu vulgari, (and to speak only as a Divine) my former Ordination,
may be said hereby, to be confirmed, yet in sensu peculiari, as to the Bishop
himself, this opinion of his, makes it not properly a confirmation (Confirmare
est rem firmam facere; there must be res, before it be made firm, which he
holds null) but his Act (as Lawyers speak) works by way of Estoppel; so that he
(nor any of his judgment) shall be able to implead my Ministry for the
future:which is all one for the doing, and notrendring the thing vain, as if it
were a confirmation in the most proper, and formal sense in the world.

Nevertheless, as for my Call, or Ministry it self; in the very nature of the
thing, it is hereby confirmed, so that, I have thereupon, the free use thereof
in our Church, for which I come. Care not thou therefore for words, but declare
thy mind plainly, That Presbyterial Ordination is good in the sight of God, as
thou believe; that thou have not acted basely without Orders hitherto; and
yet, in regard the times require it, thou submittest for the Gospel sake to
these other also, that will pass. This is enough: and then, I must tell thee,
that the thing it self is Confirmation. Ordination (I count) is a Confirmation
of a man's call from Christ to the Ministry, (which is, his Commission coram
Deo) by the solemn God-speed, allowance, or approbation of such who are of
authority, to give a man the reputation of a Minister (where lies potestas
coram hominibus) to its due intents, in the Church where he is sent. That I
think, were a true, and almost full definition. And forasmuch then, in regard
of the full current of the times, you see wherein you may look upon your first
Orders, though true, to be null in certain respects, without ever the less
esteem of them indeed, or injury to them, and with the Presbyterians leave too,
I trow; you have clear room and ground for submission to Reordination, as in
the Paper before.

And indeed, while thy Bishop, and perhaps many other good men, and, it may be,
some of the chief of thy own Parish are of this mind, That while thou have no
other hands laid on thee, then such of thy own degree, thou art not a Minister
at all, or such a one as thou ought to be; and so perhaps they sorrowfully,
but silently get others to do some Ministerial acts for them, and there grows
strangeness toward thee, and they greive for it; besides the like and worse
effects: Who does not see here, That this thing is a matter of more
consequence, then thou could at first think of: and if thereupon, thou
yieldest to the remedy, thou do not go beyond (nor so far as) the Apostles
own pattern, who became all things to all men, (as especially in the case of
Timothy) even to these ends only, the magnifying his Ministry, and that he
might gain some; and who has also left us a clear precept with his example,
Romans 15.2. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his edification. And
here I may propose ex abundanti this farther, Whether an irrefragable argument,
may not be drawn from the Apostles use of Circumcision upon any, after the
Resurrection of Christ, to prove that an Ordinance may be used, without breach
of the third Commandment, or other sin, even then, when it cannot be directed
to its principal, no, not its proper end; so long as it will but attain one
higher then all, to wit, The promotion of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus?

I will therefore now call the Reubenites instance again to mind, craving leave
to make so much use thereof in the cloze, as humbly likewise (after this) to
declare our case. There are many of us, who have been some years fellow
Soldiers with our Brethren; we cannot find it in our hearts, to be lawful, to
give our selves a discharge in this war, which were so pleasing to the flesh,
upon a pretense that will not hold with the Lord; and hereupon we have been
content to be farther engaged, and submit in this thing. Now the Lord God, the
Lord God of Gods knows, we have not done this to erect an Altar against an
Altar, one Ordination against another; we have not done it in rebellion, or
renuntiation thereunto; but rather for fear of this thing, that in time to come
(or that now is) they should say, What have you to do with the Lord God of
Israel, or with his Ministry, that are not ordained according to the fashion of
the Land? and so they shall make us cease from our service of him; Therefore
said we, that it shall be when they should say so to us, that we may say again,
Behold the pattern, of your own orders for a witness between us and you, that
we have our part also in the Lord, and how much we desire accommodation. And
now, I hope, that Phineas himself, the High Priest, and all our pious and
tender Brethren, when they have heard these words, will be pleased, and let us
pass with that blessing; This day, we perceive, that God is among us, because
you have not committed this trespass against the Lord.

For the second part of the Objection. It has pleased God, by his Providence,
to call us universally to change, and it is not the interest now of good men to
be stiff, and dividing, but to be finding out the most conscionable grounds of
compliance, as far as ever they can, with one another. It would have been
ingenuous, I think, (for the case of Bancroft, and the Scotch Presbyters is
known) if Episcopacy, would by some general act of Confirmation, have waved
Ordination past; but, if she deal, me thinks, (against her nature)
Pedantically, not generously, not Catholiquely herein, it will become us yet,
(who are the parties thus ordained, and properly concerned) to be fair. We know
what is her chief flower; something must be yielded to her, if we would have
her part with any thing again; and so long as we may declare our own sense, and
escape the sin, we are to comprimize the matter for our selves, by bringing our
conscience toward God, and submission to her, unto composition. If a second
Ordination, did necessarily, in the fact, imply a renunciation of the first;
what a heinous thing had it been for Paul to be ordained after by men, that was
made a Minister immediately by Christ? Assure your self therefore, most firmly
from the former Paper, about that matter.

For my part, I will confess, although I am one that cannot be looked on, as
engaged to the Presbytery, any more then to have been ordained by them; yet am
I so held under the conviction of the power and life of godliness in some of
that sort of men, above many others; that I cannot let Naomi go easily, and
much less, part with her with any indignity. When these good men (or party)
were high, I could not fall in with them: Now they are down, my spirit, like
Ruth, is more ready to cleave to them. Nevertheless, as for their way, and
particular government, I cannot choose but retain my freedom, and be apt to
understand with those, that give us the greatest latitude unto agreement and
concord in the Nation, To which end, that tenent of Whitgift, (Def. Ad. p. 78,
83, 98.) to my thinking, does conduce. It is true, that nothing ought to be
tolerated in the Church as necessary to Salvation, or as an Article of Faith,
except it be contained in the Word of God. It is true also, That nothing in
Ceremonies, Order, Discipline, or Government in the Church, is to be suffered,
being against the Word. But that no Ceremony, Order, Discipline, or kind of
Government, may be in the Church, except the same be expressed in the Word of
God, is an absurdity, and breeds many inconveniences. For we know, (says
Calvin) that every Church has liberty to ordain, and appoint such a Form of
Government as is apt and profitable for it, because the Lord has therein
preseribed no certainty: upon 1 Cor. 11.2. as he quotes him.

To proceed on this subject, I have in my second Paper, and second Proposition,
set down certain Texts, which according to St. Jerome, at large on the first of
Titus, do plead the identity of a Presbyter and a Bishop, and from him made use
of by others. Now I will take a Note or two thereon, which will come in fitly
here, as the farthest way perhaps about, but the nearest way home of saying
something to purpose in this business.

The one Note is this; that, As those places on one hand do shake Episcopacy,
if pressed strictly, Jure Divino: So do they on the other hand go farther, and
take the Lay-Elder clean away; which while some have pressed as strictly in
Presbytery, it would not pass. A Presbyter (or Elder) is all one with a Bishop
in Scripture: But there was never heard of a Lay-Bishop, (a Lay-Pastor) and
consequently, no Lay-Elder; I mean, as to ruling Ecclesiastically in
Ecclesiastical affairs; for if there were any, as to deciding of quarrels, to
prevent the Brethrens going to Law, (according to 1 Cor. 6.) that, I suspect,
was all. When there are no qualifications laid down by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.
where he directs about the making Church officers, but only of the Bishops and
Deacons, as it cuts off the Bishop from being a distinct Order from the
Presbyter, so does it quite cut away the Lay-Elder.

For that controverted place therefore, 1 Timothy 5.17. (which as it is urged, in
the Divine right of Church government, did hold me under conviction, until this
light, of the Presbyter being one with the Bishop, was clearer than it). I will
give you my interpretation; And the rather, because neither of the many, which
Erastus, Field, Bilson, Downam, Mead, Sutliffe, or others, have invented, to
wave that Text against Presbytery, could satisfy me; as perhaps this of mine
may not likewise satisfy others. Such as it is however, you shall have it. The
Bishop and Elder, I have said, are one office, the one name only signifying
Industriam curae pastoralis, the other Sapientiae maturitatem, as Henderson out
of Bid: This office is to rule, and preach; Ruling and preaching are the
inseparable parts of the same, 1 These. 5.12, 13. Heb. 13.7. I speak quoad
(...), whatsoever it be sometimes quoad exercitium. Now there are some, more
able for one part of their office, and some more able for the other. Those that
are eminent in either, the Apostle would have to be encouraged, or rewarded
accordingly. Let them have double honor, that is, Not, as some do fondly gloss
it, two things, Reverence, and Maintenance; for the next verse to this, tells
us what honor he certainly means; such as when otherwhere, he says, Honor
widows; that is, Maintenance, or provision for them; and double honor, is, more
maintenance then others.

The Emphasis then for the Interpretation, does lie on the word (...), which is
not to be construed barely been but pulchre, egregie, eminenter, (that is the
genuine signification of the word, as (...)). And this being put in the
beginning emphatically, to the first branch, will appear easily to him, that
ponders the Greek Text, that it must be understood again in the latter, to wit,
(...) scilicet (...) also. Here then plainly is the meaning. Those Ministers
that are more eminent then others, are to have more encouragement, honor or
maintenance above others, that is, double honor: whether they are eminent in
one part of their Office, or in the other, in ruling, or in preaching, but
especially, if they are eminent in preaching.

The other note I must add in the behalf of Episcopacy: for if I know any thing
by my own heart, it does love integrity, which is the speaking, as nothing but
what I find in it, so the whole I find there. When I have said above, that, the
identity of a Bishop and a Presbyter in Scripture does shake Episcopacy, if it
be held Jure divino, strictly; I must confess also, if it be held so only at
large, there does some impressions, ever since my deliberate reading of the
Conference at the Isle of Wight, remain upon me for it, By a Jus divinum I
understand vulgarly, justum and jussum in the Word of God. It is true, there is
no superiority of the Bishop above the Presbyter in Scripture, because they
were all one then, two words for the same thing; but yet there is a superiority
and inferiority in the Scripture among the Ministers in the Church. The Bishops
superiority is not jure divine; but I say, Superiority is jure divino. The
twelve Apostles were above the Seventy. God has set some in his Church, first,
secondarily, thirdly, etc. 1 Cor. 10.28. Now while the Church had her
extraordinary Officers, it did suffice, that this superiority and inferiority
was terminated, or lodged in those diverse orders; but when that which was
extraordinary, was done away, and there remained only one Order (the Pastor and
Teacher) of the four ( Ephesians. 4.11.) there was in the Church before; then must
the superiority and inferiority of the preaching Ministry, or Priest, quite
fall: or else the Authority of the Church must interpose, and make a difference
of degree in identity of order; and so the names of Bishop and Presbyter being
sit for the turn, were prudently distinguished by pious antiquity, and mad use
of for it. For man to create a new officer, or another order in his Lords
house, which himself has not set there, (1 Cor. 12.28.) cannot, I doubt, be
taken well by him. But to put a difference only of degree, or to double the
dignity as well as maintenance, (1 Timothy 5.17.) to some above others in the same
office, is not like to be at all against his will.

Now then, if you ask me, Is Episcopacy jure divino, or no? I answer, If you
take this largely, it is; because superiority, and inferiority in the Preaching
Ministry of the Church, is of Christ, and the Scripture. If you take it
strictly, it is not; because the distinction of a Bishop and Presbyter is not
of Scripture; but this disparity of degree in the same order, is assumed by
man, as consonant to the will of God, in general, and necessary to government.
To be more short; Inequality for orders sake in the Ministry, is of divine; the
mode, or fashion thereof in Episcopacy, is of Ecclesiastical, institution.

It appears in the Epistles to Timothy, and Titus, that Paul writes to them
after such a rate, that does signify very plainly, an authority in them over
the Elders and Deacons in their Churches. How does he tell Timothy of his
abiding at Ephesus, to charge some, that they teach no other doctrine? Why does
he lay down qualifications of the Pastor and Deacon, what they ought to be, and
do? What are the duties of other men to him, but upon this account? Wherefore
does he bid him, Rebuke an Elder: And how shall he receive an accusation
against him by witness, if he had not an inspection, and power of Jurisdiction,
over them? And these things I write, (says he) that thou might know how thou
ought to behave thy self in the Church of God. Again, Do nothing by
partiality. Who does not see here, Episcopus pastorum as well as gregis? Who
will not confess a pre-eminence of Authority in Timothy at Ephesus, and Titus
in Crete, over the Ministers there, that is not compatible with every common
Presbyter? You may believe it the rather, because our Divines at the Conference
mentioned, never denied it. That which is answered, is this; That Timothy and
Titus were Evangelists: But in the mean time, the thing it self, and matter
contended for, is found in Scripture, and granted to be practiced by these two
men. And what if they had lived and dyed where Paul left them, in the exercise
of this Authority? Had the continuance thereof, changed the nature, and made it
evil? Was it lawful for them to exercise such a power and jurisdiction for a
year? and had it been unlawful, if they had exercised it ten, or for their
lives? If it had not, there is the whole thing which is disputed for, in a
fixed Bishop. Here then, I take up, and distinguish; There is the matter it
self of Episcopacy, and the form or mode of it. The matter appears to have its
warrant in Gods Word: The form, which is the breaking a single order (to wit,
the order of the Pastor) into two degrees in that order, and, upon the ceasing
of the Evangelist, an higher order, the placing his work so far as it is
ordinary, and continues necessary to the Churches welfare, upon the superior
degree of the Pastor so divided, is indeed of man's authority and contrivance.
Let then the Bishop remember, that as he is Pastor, the Ministers also are
Pastors by God, whose office as to their own flock, is to rule and to teach, as
well as his. Let him beware for his life, he does not un-pastor the lower
degree; but think rather, how good is help like to be unto burden and work; And
then, forasmuch as the timber of Episcopacy is cut out of Scripture, though the
structure it self, and whole rearing of it up be of man, and that varyed
according to places and times; I see no reason, but the Presbyterian himself
may yield to it, with good satisfaction. Will you hear the Learned Fathers own
arbitration? Sicut Presbyteri sciunt se ex Ecclesiae consuetudine, ei qui sibi
praepositus fuerit, esse subjectos: ita Episcopi noverint, se magis
consuetudine quam dispositionis Deminicae veritate, Presbyteris esse majores;
and in communi debere Ecclesiam regere, imitantes Mosen, qui cum haberet in
potestate solus praeesse populo Israel, Septuaginta elegit cum quibus populum
judicaret.

SECT. VI.
I Have not digressed, as I may seem, in the preceding Paper; yet shall I
return more directly on the point, to that which remains, that is, the fourth
and last Objection. I did not think at first of writing half thus much; but lo
here, how my ink, like the waters, rise upon me, that there are some few
Scruples not yet passed over. And after this, especially my fourth Paper, What
is there more in the ransack of my soul, that all the superstition which is
there, can rake up farther against this thing? Truly, I find there is something
yet methinks sticks, about that gift mentioned with laying on of hands in
Timothy, with a passage (put them together) I have met with lately out of St.
Gregory. Sicut baptizatus semel, iterum baptizari non debet; ita qui
consecratus est semel, in eodem iterum ordine, non debet consecrari. Here is
argumentum a Simili. Let my misgiving thoughts for a while work upon it.

Baptism is a Sacrament of initiation into Christianity: So, happily, Ordination
into the Ministry. In Baptism, there is the spiritual grace and outward rite:
In Ordination, there is an outward rite, and likely this spiritual gift. To
every function, there is a gift apt for the discharge of it, annexed to it, and
given (when God please) with it. Why is not Imposition of hands a sign and seal
of this gift in the Ministry, as washing with water of grace in baptism?
Ceremonia hac est primum (says Calvin) ex Scripturis sumpta, deinde quam non
esse inanem nec supervacuam, sed fidele spiritualis gratiae symbolum, testatur
Paulus. Inst. l. 4. c. 19.. 28. And what if Ordination hereupon be a very
perfect Sacrament, as Baptism is? (...), says Chrysostom of Baptism on Heb.
6.6. Adverte quam illud tremendum sit, and quantum valiant Pontificum impositae
manus? says Theophylact of Ordination, on 1 Timothy 4.14. In the Council of Nice,
the 19th Canon, where I read of Reordination, it is in such a case only, that
required also rebaptization; and in Concilio Capuano, ui rebaptizationes, ita
re-ordinationes sunt prohibitae, Baron. an. 389. n. 74. quoted by Mason de Min.
Ang. p. 170. In short, a man cannot be born twice, or twice regenerate, no more
can he be twice baptized, and consequently neither twice ordained. Here is the
Herculean pillars, and I guess, the non ultra of my doubts.

For answer whereunto, I shall premise one thing, that the Conscience is solely
Gods Prerogative; and, as it cannot, so we ought not to suffer it, to be bound
by the authority of man (I mean, so far as to make any matter in it self sin)
where it is left free by his Word. Let that of St. Jerome, to this purpose, be
heeded, Quod de Scripturis authoritatem non habet, eadem facilitate contemnitur
qua probatur. This premised, the Solution here, does lie in the rejecting such
apprehensions as these, which are too high strained, and not consonant to the
received Doctrine of the Protestants, who admit only two Sacraments upon grand
reason, and that there cannot therefore be a parity of Ordination with Baptism,
as I have framed. To unravel the same then, let me take a little scope. There
are three things (say our Divines) must go to a Sacrament; Symbolum externum,
divina institutio, and promissio gratiae. For the first, it is manifest in
Ordination. For the second, an authentic Divine has these words: Licet nullum
extet certum praeceptum (which yet in 1 Timothy 5.22. is employed, says Walaeus) de
manuum impositione; quia tamen fuisse in perpetuo usu Apostolis videmus, illa
tam accurata eorum observatio praecepti vice nobis esse debet. Call. Inst. l. 4.
c. 3.. 16. For the last, promissio gratiae; we must know there is a double
grace. The grace of the Covenant (as I may say) and Ministerial grace, that is,
endowment for our office to profit others: When Divines tell us of a promise of
grace, which must go with the Precept, to make a Sacrament; we are to take
Grace still, in the first sense, the grace of the Gospel: and so, No Ceremony,
Rite, or Institution (Apostolical, or otherwise) which is not to be received of
Christians pro sigillo justitiae fidei, Romans 4.11. or pro signo gratiae
justificantis, that is, which does not signify, consign, and confer to us
remission of sins, and salvation upon our believeing, can be no Sacrament, in
the strict and right notion of it with us.

For the gift then given to Timothy, which has come in play before, upon
supposition, his office was thereby meant, (for so the Scripture, Romans 12.6,
7.) calls Ministry, Teaching, gifts) and waved in the sense, that it must now
come in again to be considered here, namely, as it may be taken for grace
(gratis data) or a faculty to discharge his office, and so lies still upon our
hands: Let us note, that it is said manifestly to be given by Prophecy. By
Prophecy no doubt (compared with 1 Timothy 1.18.) is meant divine revelation; If
by this gift then, were meant his office, (as the more judicious still hold) it
denotes, that Paul was directed by revelation (as we read the like, Act. 13.1,
2.) to ordain Timothy a Minister. Spiritus Sanctus oraculo Timotheum
destinaverat ut in ordinem Pastorum co-optaretur, says Calvin in locum. If by
the Gift, is meant Grace, Ministerial Grace, or a special talent for his
office, then must it import, that Paul was informed by the Spirit of Prophecy
(whether in himself, or others) that such a gift, talent, or doubling his
talents, would be bestowed on Timothy from God upon this Ceremony, whereupon he
lays his hands on him; And then it does appear, that this Text (or Texts)
cannot (no more then that, where Christ breathes on his Disciples) afford us a
solid ground, to conclude any promise of grace, or gift (such gift) to be
annexed to this rite for any others beside him. I say, if Paul does expect this
gift, to be given to Timothy upon this action, from revelation, then cannot we
ground upon this, any connection of this gift to the rite, without the like
Prophecy going before on us; or some other Scripture, that holds forth the
promise thereof to us in the use of the said Ceremony; which seeing we have
not, not can be pretended otherwhere, there is left us the pure institution,
without any thing at all in it Sacramental, to scare or terrify us in this
matter. Similitudo solvitur (says the School) ostensa dissimilitudine.

You may say; In the Sacraments, Grace is supposed, and then the outward rite
is the sign and seal of it. When Circumcision is said to be the Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith to Abraham, it is said, Which he had before while
uncircumcised. So must this Gift be supposed in the person to be ordained,
insomuch, that it is to be tried first, and found in him: and understanding it
of the talent it self first given, and not of the improvement, This Imposition
of hands is tessera minime fallax ejus gratiae, and cannot be iterated, because
Baptism cannot (which is the argument at first) or for the reason only
(whatsoever that is) thereof.

by Schoolmen and Fathers, will be found to lie in an opinion flat contrary
hereunto; to wit, that the Sacraments confer grace; and consequently initiating
grace (or regenerating grace) which is conferred by Baptism, being not possibly
to be conferred any more then once, Baptism can be but once: Whereas those
Divines, that after Calvin taking the Sacraments only for Confirmations of our
Faith, do make Baptism only to sign, signify, and seal the grace which we
have, and not confer it, the absurdity is vanished from hence (and must be
found out elsewhere): for there is no absurdity at all, to testify, seal, or
signify the same grace more then once. The Lords Supper does signify, seal,
and represent the very same benefits of the Covenant (sealed and signified by
Baptism) to the believer twenty times over. Those that were circumcised and
baptized in John's and Christ's days, had the same initiatory grace sealed and
signified to them twice. If this Imposition then of hands, be only symbolum, or
tessera, to signify, testify, or declare such a gift, or faculty in a person
(already received), there is no absurdity to declare it, and signify it as
often as there is good occasion.

If indeed, the first talent it self, or original gift adapting us for the
office, could be tied to this Rite, as the certain means of conferring it (as
they thought of Baptismal Regeneration, that it was still conferred by Baptism,
and never without it); then were there that absurdity in Reordination, as the
Schools conceive in Re-baptization. But seeing, 1. There is no such promise as
annexes this gift to the rite. 2. It were miraculous, if so given. 3. It is
against universal experience. 4. This gift it to be found in the ordained, or
else they are not to be admitted. 5. Timothy no doubt was endowed with ability
(and that excellent) before, being trained up from a child to the Scripture. 6.
The grace that is obtained hereby (to wit, precibus Ecclesiae, non virtute
Signi) is Gods grace with us, or blessing upon our studies and work, and
increase of talents (if you will) thereupon, and no otherwise.
In short, seeing this is disproved otherwhere, and from the first reason
above, which is more especially of force; I do perceive that, that which has
troubled me as an objection, will turn to advantage, and serve but the fuller
to lay open the nature of Ordination, which is further needful.

The truth is, with much beating hereupon, I do see plainly, This solemnity
does both these things; It signifies this gift, and impetrates a blessing. When
a man comes to be ordained, he is to be examined; This Examination (if we know
what it is), is, whether he has this Gift, which is his call from God: When
this is found, if you will say this solemnity, is a Sacrament hereof, in a
large sense, as a visible public sign or token attesting, signifying and
declaring this inward invisible Ministerial grace in the person to the Church,
for its proper end; Mentem teneas (with Austin) linguam corrigas, it is but the
same our Divines say, Ordination is the confirmation of his Call, or may help
us well to understand it.

There is then a double call. A call from men, and the call of God. A man's call
from men, lies in their choice of him for their Minister, or his title to a
place. Whilst most have bin poring upon this outward call by men, the true
notion of Ordination has been out of sight. Hence Dr. Ames (with others
commonly) Episcopalis Ordinatio Ministri sine titulo, est aeque ridicula, ac si
quis maritus singeretur esse, absque uxore. But it is a specious mistake. A man
may be ordained, I think, to the work, as to a place. Heads, and Fellows of
Colleges, cannot but be supposed to be ordained without absurdity. There are
Teachers as well as Pastors in the Church. The bottom of the mis-apprehension
then, lies here: when these Divines have said well, That Ordination is this
declaration only, or confirmation of a man's call, they dream of this outward
call only, this call by men, and so are out. The call of God then, in the next
place, does lie no doubt in this Gift, apt to discharge the function; Romans
12.6, 7. Ephesians. 4.7, 8, 11. 1 Cor. 12.4, 7. Romans 15.15. Act. 20.28. Jer. 23.21.)
a fitness for the Ministry; when God gives a man endowments, with a heart for
this service. This is his Call and Commission from Christ, which, it is his
Prerogative too only to give. This now, is tried by the Ordainers, The rule is,
Lay hands on no man suddenly. That meddles not, I think, (unless occasionally)
with the man's title to his Living, but his qualifications, fitness, abilities,
whether he has this inward call, the commission and talent from our Lord, that
we may own him as a fellow servant in this work. When this is found, What is
Ordination then really, (as has been before mentioned), but the declaring or
approving of the person accordingly, as indeed so called, endowed, and fit,
(or, as indeed, commissioned, from the Master himself) by this solemnity? and
so has he not spiritualem potestatem, his Ministerial power and office (which
is derived upon him immediately by virtue of Christ's will declared in his Word,
that such as are so qualified, should be Officers to him; or rather, least we
be too nice, by virtue of the full call of the Institution, gift, and his
consent together) bestowed on him by the hands of man, (for he is the
Ambassador alone of Christ and God, and not of men) but confirmed to him
hereby: which it does, 1. In recommending him to God for his grace, wherein we
believe it, not to be profanus ritus, or inutile signum, but expect accordingly
his blessing both upon our studies and our work. 2. In conciliating to him an
authority in regard of men, that his Ministry is received thereupon by all in
the Church; wherein (let me say) the essence, or quintessence, of all that
which dare be arrogated by mortal man, as what he indeed contributes, or does,
to the making of a man Christ's Minister, when it is thoroughly weighed, will be
found to lie at last. And thus has silver the Tower-stamp, and Dignities are
made current by their proper ceremonies and customs, wherein all concerned may
take notice of them.

I suppose now, this being the whole of Ordination, our scruples may end (and
that best) in the nature of the thing only; For who is so dull, that he cannot
apply this? Nevertheless, in regard that the comparison with Baptism, is that
which has stuck with the most (and may still perhaps) at the bottom, I shall
add one thing more, which will fetch that thorn too, quite out; provided you
will pardon me, if the Needle be thrust something nearer then I would else, to
the quick, for to do it. Let us turn then to the 19. of the Acts, and we shall
find there certain Disciples at Ephesus, who were baptized unto John's Baptism:
It is like, that Apollos living there, a diligent Teacher (and knowing only the
baptism of John, Act. 18.24, 25.) had baptized them. Now we are to know, that
this baptism having the same Author, Mat. 21.25. Matter, Joh. 1.26. Form, Joh.
1.32, 33.34. Ends, Luke 3.3. And consigning the same Gospel, Mar. 1.3, 4. was
but one with Christ's baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. Paul therefore catechizing them herein,
thus instructs them; John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance,
saying, unto the people, that they should believe on him, which should come
after him, that is, (says he) on Christ Jesus. It follows, when they heard
this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. Now the question arises
here, who are meant by they in the Text? The people unto whom John spoke, or
the persons (the twelve men) to whom Paul speaks? not the first certainly,
because then must these words [that is, on Christ Jesus] be John's
interpretation, when it is plain, he did not know Christ by his name, when he
baptized, until Christ himself came to him, Ioh. 1.30, 31. Who are they then?
Why, the last, no doubt. For John, and his Disciples did baptize into one which
should come (as it is said here): but it was the Apostles and Christ's
Disciples, that baptized expressly, in the name of Christ Jesus.

To wave this, some learned men (as Dr. Whitgift) do accept Calvin's
interpretation, who by baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, would have
meant, Baptized with the Holy Ghost. The learned Annotations of the Assembly,
seeing this quite incredible, would have invented this other way; but I will
set you down Mr. Diodates very faithful Annotation. After Paul had largely
instructed them, touching the correspondence of John with Christ, they formally
were baptized in the name of Christ; for there was no inconvenience to confirm
John's extraordinary baptism, with the ordinary and more express baptism of
Christ, seeing God would have them who had received the old seal of the
Covenant, namely, Circumcision, to receive the new one of Baptism.

From this place then, I shall advance this truth, that quite rids the whole
doubt, at least as to the hainousness (in hand) of our conceit, in this matter;
that, Notwithstanding the universal judgment and current practice of the
Church for single baptism, be not impeached, but stands good in thesi: yet is
there, or rather has there been (for I will speak sure) some particular reason
in hypothesi, that even this very Sacrament it self of baptism (from whence all
our dread arises) might be twice received, in some case, by the same persons
without sin; and that when their first too remains valid, and not to be
renounced, or held null, but only some farther end and confirmation, is
obtained by the repetition. I shall not need to make application to our case,
but I will conclude; If this most solid and judicious Interpreter last quoted,
accounts it no inconvenience, to confirm John's baptism by baptizing these men
again formally (as he speaks) in the Name of Christ: I hope then, there is no
sting left us a pari, but we may resolve more freely (whose case at this time
is particular) that there is no inconvenience neither (unless perhaps less) for
us to confirm our Ordination by Presbytery (or rather, former Ministry) by
being formally (as he has it) or Episcopally ordained again to that purpose: So
that, as we are vere, recte, secundum Scripturas, quoad substautiam already, we
may also become legaliter, rite, secundum Canones, and quoad circumstantias and
accidentia, (to wit, secundum consuetudinem nostram and ritus Ecclesiae;
Ordained Ministers of our Church in this Nation. In short, if you will, we had
before Ordinationem legitimam, and so there needs no other to be required; but
having it not legitime, (or Canonice,) I think, without laying stress though,
on these terms, both for the comparisons sake, as our grounds before) if
another be required, a man may without sin submit to it.

For those worthy Episcopal Divines, that will say, Presbyterial Ordination is
vera, but not legalis, non tamen iteranda (as Bishop Carlton) I will understand
them, that they account as I do, where there is this, it suffices by the Word
of God so as there is no need of other, if men would: But if any will take them
so, that in no case there may be no other; Let them take heed, them do not make
more sin and law then God has made.

When a thing is good in its self, the repetition can be evil only in being
superfluous, or more than needs; Now I say, though as to the part of our
Rulers, who might take the opinion, that Presbyterial Ordination is valid as
former Bishops have done, Reordination indeed, is more then needs; (Let them
take heed that impose it): Yet, as for our part, when it is plainly stood upon,
as it is, it ceases to us, to be more then needs; and then Obedience to Rulers,
in things not forbidden by God, is a ground of action. You will say, things
indifferent, become prohibited in case of scandal. I answer, there is scandalum
datum we know, and scandalum acceptum; Though there be here really (I fear) as
to the part of the Requirer, Offense given; yet as to the part of the Submitter
(I hope in mercy) it is Offense only taken. I may add more assuredly, we shall
indeed give offense, if many of us do otherwise. Cum Romam venio, jejuno
Sabbatho; cum hic sum, non jejuno. Sic etiam tu (says St. Ambrose;) ad quam
forte Ecclesiam veneris, ejus morem serva, si cuiquam non vis esse scandalo,
nec quenquam tibi.

SECT. VII.
I Have done, and I hope, you will not think any of these things to be tedious,
or out of necessary order; If you do, I remember the Comaedian, that there is a
negligence sometime to be imitated, rather then an obscure diligence. I must
confess, I am tired for once, in digging the metal; whatsoever of it, shall
pass the fire when it is tried, may be put into a new mould with less labor,
to him that shall have use of it.

There is one thing only I would propose now at last, as hugely convenient, in
my slender opinion, at this season, in regard of the multitudes involved in our
case, as also for such as may come over at any time to us from other Churches,
that for the removing of offense and scruple altogether, unto the forms of
ordering of Deacons and Priests, there were a new added, for the Confirmation
by the Bishop, of such of them, who have yet been ordained by Presbyters only,
which should be made to run in such a strain; that we may say of it, as Suarez
does of the Ordination of Paul and Barnabas. Haec manuum Impositio nobis tantum
deprecatoria, non etiam consecratoria videtur.

Let all things (says the Apostle) be done in decency and order; Now it seems
a thing not agreeable to order, that he which is a Priest already, should be
forced back and made a Deacon. You may say, If this be a breach of order, how
could I submit to it? I answer, if I asked how it can be required, it were more
to the purpose. Non oportet ut qui majores ordines susceperunt, minores prius
habuerint; quanquam sic ordinate ordines conferri statuerit Ecclesia, ut prius
minores deinde majores suscipiantur. Aq. Sup. q. 35.50. It is no question, but
a Priest may be a Deacon, because our Church of a Deacon makes a Priest; and I
was not ordained a Deacon before. But that which I have to speak hereto, and
that satisfiedly, is: Matters of order (I hope) must give place to matters of
greater moment; If the Church does stand upon it, it is pro forma only, and I
do but observe order, in breaking it. As for us, let our Rulers look to this,
we do but vail our heads to Obedience, to Uniformity, to Peace, to Necessity.
What if my Ordinary be of the judgment, that I am no Minister, if ordained
only by the Presbytery (as has been intimated before) which, by the way, if he
is, I am convinced, do what I can for all that, it is an error; for, it is one
thing, to hold Ordination ought to be by a Bishop, and another, that no
Ordination, is good and valid otherwise. Quod fieri non debet it self, factum
valet. Yet does sober Davenant quote Athanasius, telling us, that when some in
his time were ordained only by Presbyters they judged them in Laicos redire,
when yet he has his Ego non ausim (before) in the same determination. And what
if accordingly, many of my people will not own me, but clamor; They will not
receive the Sacraments from me; I am no Minister, and ought not to preach? Nay,
what if my self do question whether I am a Minister of England, though a
Minister of Christ, or rather, though vere a Minister, whether I am yet
legaliter so, according to our Church? And what then, if they will make me
Churchwarden or Constable? Yea, to speak more gravely, What if they do thus
(as before mentioned) some out of Conscience, and others pretend it? Who does
not see here, that the stopping the mouths of gainsayers, the cutting off
occasion from those that seek it, the satisfying the sober, and letting my
Ministry have its free course, is a matter of more consequence then this whole
business, that we should scruple so much at it? The Lord still keep in me a
tender frame, and serious spirit; but deliver me from a scanty soul, and too
scrupulously-superstitious conscience.

And here, methinks, my heart is enlarged toward many of my pious Brethren,
that need relief; and who, I am persuaded, If they did know, (as Christ's
speaks) but what that means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, would not
happily condemn the guiltless, that is themselves, that for the continuance, or
the establishing their Ministry, do submit to this thing, Reordination.
Provided still, they may crave remedy, if it be clogged with any circumstance
against their conscience; which at present may be attained, I presume,
according to his Majesty's Declaration. Then Mattathias and his friends said
one to another, If we shall all do as our Brethren, have done, and not defend
our selves upon the Sabbath, then will they come upon us, and take our place;
then shall others possess the Sanctuary, and incontinently upon our scruple,
rid us from the same.

Deo Gloria, mihi Condonatio. Feb. 1660. Your unworthy Fellow Servants in the
Ministry, J. H.

Neh. 13.21. Remember me, O my God, concerning this also, and spare me
according to the greatness of thy mercy.


FINIS.

