THE HONORS OF THE Lords Spiritual Asserted: And THEIR PRIVILEGES To VOTE in
CAPITAL CASES IN PARLIAMENT Maintained by Reason and Precedents.

Collected out of the RECORDS of the TOWER And the Journals of the HOUSE of
LORDS.

Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee, Peace be
within thy Walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces. Psalm. 122. ver. 6, 7.
LONDON, Printed by Tho. Braddyll, and are to be Sold by Robert Clavel at the
Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1679.

TO THE READER.
IT IS not unknown to any in our English Israel, that there are yet here amongst
us some Remainders of the Men of 42. and that the Disease it self sticks as
close to Them, and particularly to some eminent Parts of the Nation where they
skul, and for the present where they make their Refuge (for in the Countries
they are more easily discovered) as the Leprosy did under the Law to the very
Walls of the House; and it seems to be as hardly removed as that Levitical
Distemper, which some Naturalists and Physicians say cannot be done but only by
Blood, and that is the thing which their fingers itch to be at again, Witness
their late Rebellious Commotions in Scotland, which had they taken effect,
there would not have been wanting these who would have justified them: Nay, I
speak what I know, and have heard, did excuse them, as a poor People Oppressed;
and You know Oppression makes a Wise man Mad, especially at this time of the
year, the Season being a little Hot. I must confess I am no stranger to the Men
or their ways, having been for many Years last past, a strict Observer of them,
though I thank God I have always, and do still from my Heart, Abhor and Detest
any Confarreation with them, or any the least Approbation of their Actings or
Principles; for I have discovered so much of ill Nature, Censoriousness,
Covetuousness, Self-seeking, and want of Charity in this sort of Men, that it
did always give me a great suspicion that their Cause was Evil; especially
reflecting upon the Means which they made use of to carry on their pretended
Reformation, (viz.) The throwing down of Episcopacy, a Government of Gods
Church, as Ancient in this Nation as Christianity it self; the taking away,
and Abolishing the best of Liturgies either Ancient or Modern, a justified
taking up of Arms against their Native Sovereign, the Lords Anointed, to whom,
and to whose Ancestors they and their Forefathers had Sworn Allegiance: the
Plundering and Devesting of the Kings most faithful Subjects of their Goods,
Estates and for their dutiful adherence to the best of Kings who ever reigned
in this our Isle. And lastly the embrewing their Violent, Rebellious, and
Wicked hands in His most Sacred Blood; a course which the Moral Heathen would
Blash to take, to save his Country ready to be Lost and Ruined, and yet these
men in a Bad Cause to pretend Conscience and Religion, which hereto fore
Conquered the Heathen World, not by resisting though they were able and wanted
not Numbers to do it, but by their Sufferings; for these Men I say to pretend
Conscience and Religion, Clament Melicerta Perisse Frontem de rebus. These are
the Men I Confess against whom the following Discourse is aimed: For I very
well know that it lies not in the Power or Wit of these, though they gladly
would and do flatter themselves perhaps in this their Folly that they may be
able to Cajole any Persons of Loyal Hearts or Principles, to take part with, or
appear against the Bishops in the present Controversy: No, Gentlemen believe
it, you smell too strong, and you are too well known, and I can never believe
the contrary, till I see you persuade them to carry in once more their Plate to
Guild Hall, for the Carrying on Your Unholy Cause; or to shut up their Shops,
as you know who did heretofore and go with you to Relieve Gloucester. Atqui
parvas spes habet Troja si tales habet.

And so I Refer the Reader to the Perusal of the Book.

THE HONORS AND RIGHTS OF THE CLERGY ASSERTED: And PRIVILEGES of the BISHOPS
To VOTE in Capital CASES in Parliament VINDICATED, etc.
CHAP. I.
The Honor of the Priesthood asserted by the Law of Nature and Levitical Law;
the Immumunities thereof under Primitive Christianity. The returns of Gratitude
to God for the Blessings and Labors of the Ministers thereof in the
Reformation of the Church, in the last and present Age wherein we Live;
together with some close Reflections thereupon.

REligion a thing so Excellent, (that to be careless in it, or neglectful of
it, is accounted a great disreputation and shame to any Party or Person) has
ever had since there were Professors of it, and that is so long as there have
been men in the World, a select number of Persons, who have been the Ministers
of it. These men dureing the first times, and the Administration of the Law of
Nature, were the First Born, and they both Princes and Priests too; so that the
Administration of Justice, and the Performance of Religious Worship we find
then to have been linked together in one and the same Person, Adam, Seth,
Enoch, and Noah, and other the Antediluvian Patriarchs were in their Order and
Succession both Kings and Priests also; as any person may be satisfied, if he
will peruse those Writers of the Jewish Antiquities Philo and Josephus:
Afterward, when the Law was given by positive Precepts to the Sons of men, one
of the Twelve Tribes (viz.) that of Levi had the Priesthood annexed to it,
together with other great Immunities, Honors and Privileges, and in the
division of the Land of Canaan (if Mr. Seldens Authority may sway any, Rev.
Hist. Tithes, c. 2.) they of Levi had near three times the Annual Revenue of
the largest among them, they had their Places and Voices in their Sanhedrims
and Councils: yea and Cognizance of Capital Causes also, as we may find largely
proved by the Learned Spelman in his History of Sacrilege; What sense the very
Heathens themselves had of the Honors of their Priesthood, it would be very
tedious to relate. The Priesthood was not esteemed any shame to him that bore
the Scepter and wore the Crown. In Egypt as Sr. John Marsham in his Cronic.
Canon, Ad. Sec. 1.
well observes those Ancient Kings after the Flood Thoth, or Mercurius,
Tosorthrus, or Aesculapius, Suphis the Builder of the greatest of the Pyramids
were Kings and Divines too. See him at large, c. ad Sec. 4. (...). Nay in the
first Ages of the World, the Legislative and Executive Power went along with
the Priesthood, Melchizedeck, Abraham, and Jacob after the Flood, as well as
the Antediluvian Patriarchs were as well Executors as makers of Laws. Let us
peruse the Holy Records, and we find David a King and a Prophet, his Son
Solomon the wisest of mortal men, stileing himself by the name of the Preacher
and valuing himself more upon that name, then upon the score of his other Royal
Titles; and in the fullness of time Jesus Christ himself the King of Kings, the
Eternal Son of God and Original of all Power thought it not below him telling
us expressly Luke 4. 18. That he was sent into the World on no other end than to
Preach the Gospel. True it is, his Kingdom was not of this World, and he never
went about to dipossess either the Roman or Jewish Governors in Judaea;
neither did his Disciples ever go about to do any thing like it; yet when the
Empire became Christians, the Prudent Piety of the first and most Christian
Emperors for the better Encouragement of Religion and Learning, conferred large
Immunities and Exemptions upon Churchmen, freeing them from Subsidies,
Impositions, and sundry services wherewith other of their Subjects were
burdened Eusebius. Ecc. Hist. 10. c. 7. Zom. l. 1. c. 9.
Eusebius and Zozomen, record several Privileges granted by Constantine, That
those who Minister in Holy Religion be wholly free and exempt from all public
Burdens: And some have very well observed, that during the continuance of the
gift of Tongues, extraordinary Learning, and other Miraculous effusions of Gods
Holy Spirit upon the Primitive Church, there were no need of the Piety and
Charity which subsequent Christian Emperors bestowed upon the Church, the
Apostles had no need to study for their Preaching, and therefore had leisure
enough to fish and make Tents for a livelihood, whereas ours are forced to pore
upon Books, to Meditate, Write, and all hardly sufficient to search out the
deep Mysteries which cost Them no Pains, the Spirit supplying the place of all.
Therefore to make amends for all these extraordinary qualifications, and
abundant measure of Spiritual Graces wherewith they were furnished above us, it
has pleased the Lord of the Harvest in these latter days to raise up Christian
Magistrates to assist and encourage his Laborers, and appoint them a more
settled and plentiful allowance; yea and honor also, and power together with
it, for that Wisdom without these is commonly contemned. Who ever was chosen a
Magistrate in our Neighbor State of Holland, or here at home? who had not
Riches, and therefore Honor to support them, Wisdom in the esteem of the
Vulgar is always thought to be accompanied with Riches and Power: So that the
pretenses of those men who for a Cloak to their Innovations and Sacriledges,
vainly vaunt that all things should be brought back to the Primitive Purity,
and the Clergy also to the Apostles Poverty, seem to argue thus much that they
are no farther true Gospel Ministers, and the Successors of the Apostles than
they are able to work Miracles, and that they though not enabled to it by any
Education may be required to work in any of those Callings of which the
Apostles were, whose Successors they pretend to be. We read in Lud. Vives in
his Commentary upon St. Aust. de Civitate Dei, That the Priests of Ceres [no
other than the Mendicants amongst them of Rome] were to renounce the World and
Riches and Honor too; and therefore that on the day of their Initiation they
were to put on a Coat which they never left off till such time as it was so
ragged that it would no longer hang to their backs; certainly if Spiritual
Persons were left to some men's allowance, this would be their Portion from them
to be clad with Poverty, Contempt, and Rags, and their Callings as well as
their Necessities would constrain them to Fast and Pray. I know some men
(particularly Luther) amongst our Reformers have slighted Honors, and that
Portion due to their Callings, out of sincere Principles and a good meaning,
who have yet lived to Repent their Error, though not able to redress it, when
they have seen how much the Church has thereby suffered, and Religion been
damnified, Witness Luther Epist. p. 131. Ego per meo stipendio annuo tantum
novem antiquas Sexagenas habeo, praeter has ne obolus quidem mihi; aut
fratribus e Civitate accedit. A great and noble reward for such matchless
deserts, and if so happy an Instrument of Europes Reformation, so valiant a
Champion, who singly opposed the United Power of Rome and Hell, What may the
Clergy of our days expect? viz. To be divested of their Revenues, Honors and
Immunities, because they are the Successors of their Forefathers the Bishops
and Reformers in Queen Marys days, some of the Principal whereof were publicly
Burnt as Martyrs for that Religion which (God be thanked) maugre the Monstrous
ingratitude of some, we yet through the Blessing of God enjoy, by the Pains and
Labors of their Worthy Successors. Who are the Persons who have to the Eternal
Shame and Infamy of Rome laid open the Vileness, Wickedness, and Immorality as
well as the false Doctrines, Idolatries and Superstitions of that Church? Who
are they who have been the Watchmen upon the Wall, that have ever since the
Reformation Beaten and Foiled them in their Assaults upon our Church? Was not
the Walls thereof Watered, and as it were Cemented with the Blood of Cranmer,
Latimer, Ridley, Hooper, and others; the Supestructure raised by Jewel,
Reynolds and others, Sed me reprimo. And yet now those days through Mercy are
over, Must their Successors still be wounded by the hands of their pretended
Friends, and receive such hard measure from their Pretended Well-wishers? This
strikes to the very Heart.

Scilicet,

Hoc Ithacus velit and magno Mercentur Atridae.

CHAP. II.
The Clergy under the Law and Gospel also, have engaged in Secular Causes, and
the State very happy in this their Administration in the Primitive times of the
Gospel proved from the Examples of St. Ambrose, St. Austine, etc.

WE all know it was a Political Maxim mentioned by Josephus as derived from
Moses, (...). Philo. in vit. Mos. The King must ever take the advice of the
Priest, Moses himself was a Priest as well as a Ruler; and he appointed Priests
dureing the Levitical Administration to be Overseers of all things, Judges of
Controversies, and Punishment of Malefactors, Joseph. lib. 2. cont. App. who
saw the precept reduced to practice, tells us the thing in fact was so. Who
has not heard that Ely and Samuel the Lords Priests were at the same time
Civil Judges in Israel. Chytraeus makes three Consistories amongst the Jews, of
all which the Priests were the Principal and Essential Members: (1.) A
Triumvirat in every City wherein many matters and lighter Trespasses was
decided; these Grotius calls Pedaneos Judices. (2) The little Sanhedrim
Consisting of 23, wherein Capital Causes were determined in the Gate of every
City. (3.) The Council of State or grand Senate of 70 Elders, which some make
to consist of 71, taking in Moses; others in 72. Six out of each Tribe, the
High Priest being commonly of the Number. Now that the Priests and Levites were
part of this great Sanhedrim, Exerc. 13. c. 5.
Causabon will bear me out; who makes it appear out of their best Authors, quod
hujus Concilii ea fuit institutio ut si fieri possit e Solis Levitis and
Sacerdotibus constaret, That as near as might be, the endeavor was it might
consist only of Priests and Levites; whence Josephus and Philo oftentimes under
the Title of Priests understand the Sanhedrim. Come we down to David whose
Government was a Pattern to all his Successors, his Reign was peaceable and
flowrishing; nor did he want Statesmen of the most raised abilities for his
employments: Yet did not this Wise, this Holy Prince think it inconsistent with
the Sacred Function (which yet St. Austin tells us in some respects Operosius
Ministerium than that of the Gospel) to engage Levites in his weightiest
secular Charges. For we find Hathaliah and his Brethren appointed Officers on
this side Jordan, not only in the business of the Lord, but in the Service of
the King: And Jerijah another in Holy Orders is made Plenipotentiary or Ruler
over the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manassah in every
matter pertaining to God, and in the affairs of the King likewise, 1 Chronicles. 26.
30. 32. Nor was he singular in it, but was Imitated by good Jehosaphat who made
the Priests and the Levites Judges of all the Controversies in Israel, not
excluding matters of Blood, 2 Chronicles. 19. 8, 10. Now run over the Catalogue of
all the Kings of Israel and were any to be paralled with these? I am sure that
none went beyond these, none whose Government did more prosper with
Righteousness, Justice, and Tranquillity. And though under the rest of the Kings
we have no express mention of the same practice; yet all things considered, we
have more reason to conclude it held than the contrary, for we find Jehoiada
the Priest chief Counselor to Joash, 2 King. 11. And if we look into after
times at the Babylonian Captivity, the Priests command all and possess the
Scepter for some Hundred of years, for the Assamonaean, Race continued absolute
Princes till Pompeys Conquest, Joseph. l. 13. c. 9. We may further add that
many Civil Causes are by name reserved to the Levical Cognizance, as the
Inquisition for Murder, false Witness, etc. Deuteronomy. 21. And yet after all, the
Preachers of the Gospel do not hence draw arguments that they are chiefly and
solely to be instructed with these great and Important Ministeries, but I do on
their behalf averr, and will be ready to prove and maintain, That a fit
allowance being made to the difference of Times and Persons; the model
prescribed by God himself under this Levitical Administration may safely be
followed now in some things, and those no Circumstantials also.

But leaving Moses, let us come to Christ, and see how matters stood under the
Gospel, here though we have no instances of Honors conferred by our Savior
upon his Apostles, yet have we Prophesies, that after the publication thereof
Kings should become the Nursing Fathers of it, and that the feet of those that
brought the glad tidings of Peace should be Beautiful upon the Mountains, which
Mr. Calvin applies to the Bounty and Munificence of Princes to the Church,
Isa. 49. But for the first 300 years, What could rationally be expected from
the professed Enemies of Christianity? no other honors than cruel Persecutions
whilst the persecuting fury lasted, whilst they were burnt in usum nocturni
luminis, as Tacit. the Historian has it. The ordinary sentence was,

Toeda lucebis in illa
Qua stantes ardent and fixo gutture fumant, Juven.
But no sooner was Gentilism abolished, but we have a new and smiling face of
Affairs under the happy Reign of Constantine the Churches great Patron, as well
as the Clergies Friend. And henceforth the Primitive Piety was not wanting, who
thought no Honors or Powers misplaced upon their Spiritual Fathers, for whom
they judged nothing too dear. All Histories ring of Constantines kindness to
his Clergy, by whom the most weighty Affairs of his Empire dureing his time was
most happily transacted, and that most of his Successors wrote after his Copy
will appear by what follows; for it were very easy to muster a little Army of
Fathers engaged in Secular Employments. We read Zozomen l. 6. c. 32. that
Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus, a Person of singular virtue, prudence, and piety,
(...), a man busied in Political matters, Theodoret reports l. 2. c. 30. that
one Jacobus Bishop of Nisibis or the Mygdonian Antioch was (...), Bishop,
Governor, and Captain of the same City. In Baronius, A. 610. I find that John
Patriarch of Alexandria was accustomed to sit twice a Week and Judge between
those that were at variance, and to reconcile them, and once when none came to
him, he departed weeping, That all that day he had done no good, but Sophronius
replied, That he had more cause of rejoicing than of Weeping; for having
brought the City to such good Order, and to so great Peace, that they were more
like Angels than men, having no differences left, but were all in friendship
and amity. A rare Example to the Immortal Fame of an Exclesiastical Judge. We
all remember that Sir Thomas Moore commanded it to be scored up as a wonder,
That he had once been able to clear the High Court of Chancery from Suites, and
not one cause to remain unheard: But here we have a Populous City (hardly short
of any in our Nation) by the pains of a good Bishop, without any charge to the
Litigants, reduced to a perfect unity within it self.

But we will pass over such obscure Names, whom it were endless to reckon up
and Select only a few, whose eminent Labors have Eternized them to posterity,
and begin with St. Ambrose, who flourished A. C. 378. and to his Conduct and
Government was the great City of Milan entrusted, so that St. Austin. Conf. l.
6. c. 7. Complains that he was a long time kept from access to him
Secludentibus me ab ejus aure atque ore Catervis negotiorum hominum quorum
infirmit atibus serviebat; He had whole troops of Suitors about him to dispatch
their worldly business. The next shall be that great Affrican Light St. Austin,
who Ep. 147. has this passage, Homines quidem suas saeculares causas apud nos
finire capientes, dum iis necessarii fuerimus, sit nos Sanctos and Dei Servos
appellant, ut negotia terra suae peragant aliquando agamus negotia and salutis
eorum non de auro, non de argento non de fundis and pecoribus pro quibus rebus
quotide submisso capite salutamur ut dissentiones hominum terminemus. He says
he was every day solicited to make up some breaches about Gold, Silver, Land,
Cattle, etc. And yet where have we found a more Faithful and Assiduous
Preacher and Pastor than this good father? Were any more engaged in contests
with Heretics, or any that left a larger Legacy of his Learned Labors to the
Church? I dare challenge any before or since the Churches Reformation, who have
done the like, and who will say that the good Father had misspent his time, that
had better been laid out in painful Preaching to his flock? Whereas we all
know that Preaching is but a very small part of the Ministers Calling, yet of
late times it has been made by some to swallow up the rest of the Ministers
Duties as necessary and Essential to his Callings as that can be; and have
observed also, that some Ministers themselves, otherwise good men, have been a
wanting to themselves and the Church, in complying too much with a sort of men
amongst us, whose interest it is to draw all Causes into their own Courts for
the support of their own Grandeur and Faculty; whereas otherwise those Suites
and Causes might perhaps with little or no charge have been more speedily, yea
and satisfactorily determined. Our last instance shall be in Gregory the Great,
de Cur. Past, (with who some close the good Popes) whom we find complaining
that Sub color Episcopatus ad seculum retractus sum in quo tantis terrae curis
inserrio quantis me in vita laic a nequaquam deseruisse reminiscor. He was
never in all his Life time so encumbred with Worldly business, as after he came
to be a Bishop; but he afterward adds that, Et si cogamur terrenis negotiis
intendere, men's tamen nostra saeculari varietate non delectatur, sed tota in
unum currit, atque confluit finem. Though he was forced to do this for the good
of his People, yet he took no Pleasure in it, and his mind was taken up with
better things, for all agree that these must not be undertaken out of love to
them, but Christian Charity and Compassion to the oppressed, Aug. de Civ. Dei
l. 19. c. 19. Now these Employments were conferred upon those Fathers not as
Bishops but as Subjects more Eminently qualified than others, both by their
Prudence, Experience, and Integrity, as well as Humane Learning. But Three
there are (in which they did Principally engage) and which may seem most
agreeable to their Coat: First, To be in the Commission of Peace; and to speak
Impartially, Who fitter for such a Work than they, whose business and Calling
it is to reconcile those that are at variance: And this was the design of the
Ancients, though at first it began in a way of Charity; yet being found
profitable, it was upon mature Deliberation by the Christian Emperors
confirmed, particularly by Constantine, Zozom. lib. 1. c. 9. who leaves it free
to any, (...). Valens and Valentinian enlarged it and entrusted them with the
Rates of Commodities Sold in the Market, Cod. l. 1. de And. Ep. tit. 7. Their
Jurisdiction I confess has been in several ages various, sometimes more
sometimes less as the Emperors were more or less favorable to the Church,
whoever kept the Sovereignty in their own hands, Constantine was the first that
passed the Royal Grant in favor of the Clergy, permitting the Cognizance of
all Civil matters, even between Laymen to the Episcopal Tribunal if either
party did require it, though the other denied his consent, and their appeal was
to be obeyed by the Magistrates whenever made, though the action was already
commenced in another Court. Arcadius and Honorius did a little retrench this
unlimitted power, yet still allowing it by the joint consent of both parties,
and making the Bishops as it were Referees, l. si quis ex consensu. de And.
Episcop. and their decision to be binding and final without appeal. This Law
was after ratified by Theodosius and Justinian l. Episc. c. eod. Nay this
latter Emperor Justinian reposed so much confidence in them, that he made them
Overseers of the Secular Judges, Novel. Constable. 56. This then has been the
practice of that pure and Primitive Age, and the greatest Enemies the Church
had, could never deny but that the Bishops have had their Tribunals for above
these 1300 years Erected by Constantine, confirmed by Arcadius and Honorius,
Theodosius and Valentinian, etc. Only some Curiously mince the matter, and
allow them power to hear Causes, and to become Referees and Umpires by the
consent of both Parties, but yet they will not hear talk of any Coercive
Jurisdiction, though as eminent Civil Lawyers as any are, Attribute it to them,
and particularly Accursius interprets Audientia Episcopalis, a term frequent in
the Code by Jurisdictio; and Constantine forbad expressly the greatest Prince in
the Empire to revoke what once the Bishops had Decreed, Eusebius, Vit. Constable. l.
4. c. 27. In process of time the Magistrates having encroached upon, and almost
outed the Clergy, Charlemaine revives that good old Law of Constantine,
confirming the same Jurisdiction to all Bishops, repeating the Charter word for
word, Car. Mag. in Capit. l. 6. c. 28. What the practice was in our own Country
of England shall God willing be made out in what follows, wherein I doubt not
but to give abundant satisfaction of the Factum that the Clergy were employed
as much as the Laity in the Decision of Secular Causes, so far as we have good
Authority and Record in the times of the Saxons, and so downwards till our late
and unhappy Divisions 1640, etc. which God grant may be ever buried in
Oblivion, and that we may never live to see the same again. Secondly, To be of
the Privy Council, where frequently Cases of Consciences relating to
State-matters may arise: As suppose there be a Consultation about a War or
Marriage, the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness thereof, must be judged in foro
Conscientiae, and so is the proper Subject of a Divine or Clergyman; and
perhaps the thing will not bear so much delay, as to Summons Prelates together
for Advice nor Reason of State to be so much published, for want of such
Knowing and Religious Counselors, Princes may often be entangled in unjust
Massacres, and rash Wars, and Innocent Blood be spilt, which otherwise might
have been prevented: And for prevention whereof the Godly Prudent Princes both
of our own and other Nations have ever admitted some spiritual Persons to their
Counsel Tables, and Closet Debates. To the good advice of Bishop Fox of
Winchester we owe the Union of the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland; for
the other Privy Counselors advising King Henry the 7th to Marry the Eldest of
his Daughters to France, the more Noble and Rich Kingdom: the old and wise
Bishop advises his Majesty the contrary, at which the King seeming somewhat
surpised, the Bishop gave him this as the reason of his Opinion, that by
Marrying the Elder to Scotland, that Kingdom would be brought to England, and
old Enmities reconciled and for ever buried: Whereas on the contrary England
being under France, we should have here been ruled by a French Liuetenant of
Deputy, which the English he doubted would hardly brook, and perhaps our
Government and Laws by reason of their unagreeableness to the French, might
have been attempted to have been changed into those of France, which the
English man (his Opinion was) would hardly bear: Whereas those of Scotland were
not so much differing from the Laws and Customs of England, and it was to be
hoped the two Nations would better accord together than the English and French
would. The good event of which Counsel we have seen with our own Eyes, and may
it long continue. It is recorded of Constantine that he would not in any wise
dispense with the absence of his Bishops from him, who had he lived in our
Profane age, the Churches Enemies would have said that the good Emperor had
been Priest ridden, a well-meaning man but not overwise: But the good Emperors
joy it was to see His Court to be as it were a Church. Nay so much use of these
Holy men he made, that he made them follow him in his journeys and warlike
Expeditions, Eusebius. de vit. ejus l. 1. c. 35. Idem l. 4. c. 56. So that we read
in Peter Blesensis Ep. 84. ad Alex. 3. how he proves at large there, That it is
not only lawful but very expedient for Prelates to be in the Courts and
Counsels of Princes upon such like important reasons as those are, and therein
excuses the Bishops of Winchester, Ely, and Norwich.

Thirdly, To be employed in Treaties and Negotiations of Peace and Commerce,
and this both the Ancient and Modern practice will justify, that none have
been more frequently or more successfully used and employed in such Messages
than the Ambassadors of Christ: Solemn Embassies cannot be expected before the
Magistrate embraced the Gospel. But in the very beginning of the 4th Century we
have Maruthas Bishop of Mosopotamia sent Ambassador from the Emperor of Rome to
the King of Persia, Socrat. l. 7. c. 8. Presently after Theodorick dispatched
Epiphanius Bishop of Ticinum or Pavia to Gunebald King of the Burgundians,
Eunoch. Tisin, vit. Epiphan. who at his request released great numbers of poor
Christian Captives. Then we have St. Ambrose sent by Valentinian to Maximus
that commanded the British Armies, to desire Peace, which he happily effected to
the great contentment of his Master, Ambros. Ep. 27. l. 5. where he mentions an
other Embassy wherein he was employed. I might add St. Chrysostom employed to
treat with Gainas as Baronius informs us. John Bishop of Rome commissioned by
Theodorick to Justine the Emperor, Niseph. with multitudes of others in latter
times, whereof if I should give instance some perhaps would reply upon me that
those were times of Popery and Ignorance; yet perhaps of more candid simplicity
and honesty than the times wherein we live; and for the Moderns the time would
fail me to speak of our own and Neighbor Nations; for this continued the
Universal practice of Christendom till Sincerity gave place to Hypocrisy, and
that new Definition of an Ambassador came up, that he was, Vir peregre missus
ad spetiose mentiendum Reipub. causa. A good man sent abroad to tell specious
lies for his Countries service. Then indeed it was high time for these Holy men
to resign up these Employements to others whose Education and course of Life
better became them.

Thus we have seen both Ancient and Modern Usage on the Clergys side, the
uninterrupted practice of the World for above 5000 years before and under the
Law in the purest times since the Gospel all sorts of men both Pagan, Jewish
and Christian, allowing it in their practice, and none ever questioning it,
save some late, and those few Innovators, who though they have disclaimed the
infallibility of the Church of Rome, seem to stick a little to close to that of
Geneva or Scotland, we have heard the most eminent amongst the Fathers engaged
by their Princes in Secular Employments, and if yet still this must be an
Error, sit Anima mea cum patribus, I dare cast my Lot on that side. It Is
confessed it is pity that any should be misled by Authority, but it is most
miserable not to be moved by Authority.

This then being the Factum or usance as is Evident, let us a little in the
next place examine the Jus of it, and for any Fanatic to except against it, is
a self-contradiction, since their avowed Principles and daily Practice allow
their Teachers to follow any other Calling, either of Camp, Country or City
without control. But it is the rigid Disciplinarian who takes the most Offense
at it, and therefore to him we shall address our selves, and for once suppose
him to be of the little Commonwealth of Geneva, and to have the best parts, and
to be Master of the best headpiece amongst them. If the Senate or Syndi^
should commission him to decide a difference between his quarrelling.
Neighbors, or send to him to advise with him about a War with their great
Enemy the Duke of Savoy, or engage him to Solicit at the Court of France, or
at the Suisse Cantons as a Public Agent, there being none more likely to
prevail in such an Embasie than himself; and the little Commonwealth otherwise
would be in danger to be lost. In this case should he be heard pleading the
inconsistency of his Holy Profession with such an employment, and thereupon
return a denial; if so, then the Magistrate will be an ill condition, who must
be obeyed in nothing more than the others Calling enjoins him whether commanded
or no, and his being a spiritual Person will make the Civil Magistrate loose
the service and use of his Subject: A thing yet which the most eminent amongst
them have not declined; for that neither Mr. Calvin formerly in the one, nor
Mr. Henderson of later times in the other, have not scrupled greater matters.

But let matters be made never so clear, it may be feared that the Vulgar have
taken up such prejudices from the inexcuseable business of some late Preachers
here amongst us interesting their very Pulpits in State matters dureing our
late Troubles (a practice never sufficiently to be condemned) that all perhaps
may be bound to their good Behavior for a while for the Miscarriages of these
men, who have been so notoriously guilty of the supposed crime, they have been
guilty of in their Preaching against it, and chargeing it upon other men, who
never (as they did) engaged in any thing of that nature, but when they were
commanded to it by the Magistrate: Though it is hoped that all learned and
judicious Persons will be more considerate, and distinguish between the
frantic madness of a few giddy Pates, and the sober actings of Eminent
Prelates commissioned by lawful Authority, and not take an advantage from the
miscarriages of this other sort of men to bring an irreparable injury on
Posterity by debarring others more sober than they. It is a true saying and
confirmed by the experience of many hundred of years. Laici sunt semper inimici
Clero. When the World was Pagan, the Devil taught the multitude to cry out if
any public Calamity hapens, that the Christians were in the fault, and they
must to the Lions: but now the cunning Sophister has changed his note, and if
any thing be amiss either in Church or State, presently the blame must be cast
upon the Clergy; They must be Sacrificed to appease the many-headed Multitude,
their Lands Sequestered or Sold, and all places of Honor and Trust interdicted
them; certain we are, the qualifications of a Bishops Calling do not in the
least incapacitate him such employments as we have been speaking of: For (1.)
it is required that he be Vitae Probatissimae, of an upright unblameable
Conversation. (2.) Nullius Criminis reus. (3.) Aetate gravis, well stricken in
years. (4.) Doctrina praestans, excelling in Learning, with many other of the
like nature. Now if these are not kept, they have the more to answer for whom
it concerns, if they be observed, will not any one who reads this, conclude no
Persons more fit than they for the most weighty Affairs? For all Politicians
make Integrity, Prudence, and Learning the Principal ingredients of an
accomplished Magistrate; so that if Aptitude be respected, we may safely affirm
there are none better qualified for Counsel than the Clergy, whose Education
and Institution has enabled them to look into all the Idaeas and Models of
Government; to search the Depths and Mysteries of Empires, most of which are
locked up in strange Languages, and it is not every capacity that can gain the
Key. Then for true Politics (the late Florentine's Reaches let other men learn
and admire) there is as much to be found in the Historical part of the
Scripture, as in any Books in the World, so that Divines may in all probability
make good Statists. And is it not pity then that their Countries should be
deprived of such hopeful and eminent abilities? doubtless those of the
contrary Opinion do not thoroughly weigh the consequences of their Assertion,
clearly leading to disjoin the Church from being a part of the Commonwealth,
which for 1300 years and better have been happily united; if the Bishops and
other Spiritual Persons who yet by their Revenue are so considerable in the
Commonwealth, must no longer be looked upon as Citizens, or parts of it, and eo
ipso be debarred from Employments, but incontinently forfeit all their
Privileges as such, the consequence I presume would not be very good.

CHAP. III.
Some Authorities from Scriptures, and the Canons of the Ancient Church
seemingly contradicting the former position explained.

AND yet for all this we confess we find many good men are strongly persuaded
that Ecclesiastics ought wholly to be excluded from Civil matters: An Opinion
indeed much pretending to Humility and self-denial, and receiving some
countenance and color from Scriptures, the practice of three first Centuries,
and some Canons of Counsel which must be the Subject of our next consideration.

The Text that is most insisted upon is, 2 Timothy 2. 4. which being mistranslated
by the Vulgar Latin Militans Deo begat greater prejudice in the minds of many.

First, Then we may take notice that the Sentence is general, and belongs to
every calling and sort of men, though in a more peculiar manner it is referred
to the Preachers of the Gospel, yet none can plead exemption, but others are
willing to slip their necks out of the Collar,, and the Clergy only must be
tied to it, whom for the present we will grant to be principally concerned. The
stress of all lies upon the words (...) which Theophylact expounds by (...) the
tumults and confusions of this Life, Corn. a Lapide says (...) are such
employments as concern food and raiment, and instance in these agricultur;
mercatura and arts mechanicae. Now who does not readily approve of this, and
judge it very improper that a Preacher should be a Merchant, a Plowman or a
Mechanic, do not both Common and Cannon Laws forbid the same? Estius has much
to the like purpose, (...), etc. Quae quis exercet ut habeat unde vivat, and
therefore quotes to this purpose a saying of Ambrose, Indecorunt est homines
(...) qui militant Deo, this then rather flies in the face of them that permit
their Preachers to put on Blew Aprons, and make them such sordid allowances,
that they must either work with their hands or starve, seeing it is not comely
that the Lords Warriors should busy themselves about inferior matters that
tend to get a livelihood, and so Valla render it, not negotiis but
negotiationibus, when our Savior employed Fishermen to Preach his Gospel, weak
instruments to confound the powers of this World, though he furnished them with
suitable abilities that they needed not to study, yet he made them leave their
nets, and not use them as their ordinary Profession. But lastly, and most
satisfactorily, the Apostle here makes a comparison between Profane and
Spiritual Warfare, and therefore the better to understand the genuine sense we
must consider what Military Discipline did require, Veg. l. 2. says that by the
Laws of War he must not have any private affairs committed to him, nor mind his
own gain. Hence we read in Florus of the Romans severely proceeding against
Posthumous for employing his Soldiers to till the ground, Vid. Leg. Arcad. and
Honorii Tit. Miles. And Leo the Emperor says expressly, those that are armed and
maintained by the Commonwealth must only mind public affairs, and not till the
ground, keep Cattle, or Traffic, L. Mil. C. de re Militari l. 12. All
avocations were inhibited, and such matters as tended only to the public good
enjoined them, and why then should not the same Analogy hold here, and such
affairs be permitted to the Clergy, as tend to the good of the Church, and the
Glory of their great Commander.

Next we are urged by the Apostles practice who were so tender of any
interruption that they denied to attend upon tables, and make provision for the
Poor. It Is true, in the infancy of the Church, when the Gospel was to be
published all the World over, the Work great, and the Laborers exceeding few,
the least diversion at such a time would prove a considerable hindrance and
destraction to them. But now when the Lord of the Harvest has encreast the
number, and plentifully furnished his peaceable settled Church, every Village
being now supplied, and if the complaints of some be true, the Nation so
overstock'd, that there is hardly employment, much less maintenance for the
Multitude. In this case to make no difference of times, when the merciful
Providence of God has made so vast a distinction seems little agreeable to
reason. But if from this, occasion must be taken presently to forbid every
petty interruption and disturbance; how came St. Paul to contradict himself,
and to follow his Tent making, laboring with his hands for a livelihood, which
must needs take up a good part of his time, and hinder his Praying and
Preaching. Add to this, that the seven Deacons appointed by the Apostles to
succeed them in the care of the Collections, were according to Epiphanius of
the number of the 70 Disciples, and yet for the public benefit, their constant
Preaching was now and then dispensed with to attend on Tables.

Thirdly, They argue from the Canons of the Primitive Church, prohibiting
Clergy men to judge and intermeddle in Civil Matters, or any Causes Secular;
the Prohibitions of this sort are many and various, they may be seen in
Balsamon, Zonarus, Binias, etc. It would be an infinite task to give particular
answers to each Canon, and therefore I shall lay down some general Rules, which
may the better conduce to the understanding of them all, which if well applied
will make an abundant solution to that so complicated an Objection.

And here I cannot but admire the Modesty of the Primitive Church, and the
Charity of the People the earnestness of Princes in Commissioning of Spiritual
Persons to compose all emergent differences, and the forwardness of the
oppressed in flying to the Tribunals for Justice, whereupon the Holy Fathers in
process of time to take off their Clergy from those Affairs made sundry and
severe Canons in diverse Counsels, and therefore (1.) It Is clear, the great
design was to forbid ambitious seeking after, and voluntary engageing in
Secular matters for Sordid ends, and out of Covetous Principles, and this may
probably be collected, because we find a dispensation given when imposed by the
supreme Magistrate. In the Counsel of Sardis it is granted upon the motion of
Osius, Si religiosi imparatoris literis vel invitati vel vocati fuerint, and
undertaken in obedience as causes of Piety and Charity, overseeing Widows and
Orphans, provided it extended not to the notorious neglect of their Religious
Callings. And thus Justin Martyr calls the Bishop the great Steward of all the
poor, Apol. 2. the Contributions of the Faithful being laid down at his feet,
and by him distributed. And Ignatius Ep. ad Polycarp. calls the Bishop the
great Trustee of the Widows. (2) It Is not a total prohibition, but only a
prudent restraint, least animosities and jealousies should arise in the Laity,
by too much encroaching upon their Courts, and therefore the wisdom of sundry
Counsels confined the Clergy to such matters as were properly of Ecclesiastical
Cognizance.

But (3.) The ground and reason of these interdictions was not the unfitness
and incapacity of spiritual Persons, but out of respect to their eminent
Callings, least they should be disparaged by mean and vile employments, and
express mention is made of sordid Offices about Princes and Noble men, as of
Stewards, Bailiffs, etc. But when by the favor of Princes their employments
were honorable, and their temporary diversions did bring abundant recompense
to the Church; we find those that had the principal hadn in enacting these
Canons themselves engageing. Now can it be supposed, if this had been the
meaning, they would have been guilty of so great a contradiction, and no future
Counsel reprove it. St. Cyprian much confirms me in this Opinion, l. de Lapsis,
is persuaded that God sent the great Persecution under Decius only to awaken
the Christians, who were growing exceeding corrupt, especially the Clergy; for
he there complains that the Bishops themselves abandoned their holy Functions,
and dealt in matters of the World, haunting Marts and Fairs for filthy lucre
sake. And much to same purpose we find in Writers of our own Country, as
Gildas, Bid, etc. But to make peace between quarrelling Nations, to compound
differences amongst Christians, and such like, tending to the honor of God and
the Glory of the Gospel, which may be often practiced without detriment to
their Spiritual charges, I never find these expressly forbidden, or such as
engaged in them, as Cyprian, Austin, Chrysostom, Gregory, Bernard, etc.
Condemned; for St. Paul became all things to all men to gain a Soul: Will not
the example bear his Successors out, if they go to the utmost verge of their
Christian Liberty, still keeping on this side sin, to preserve Kingdoms, the
Churches Peace, and to prevent the effusion of Christian Blood, their absence
some days from their private charges will be abundantly recompensed by such
happy consequences.

CHAP. IV.
The Ancient Estate of the Clergy and Priests in this and other Kingdoms.

WE have before intimated that the Prudent Piety of the first Christian
Emperors, for the better Encouragement of Religion and Learning did confer
many and great Privileges and exemptions upon their Clergy in those Primitive
times. Come we now to manifest that the Franchise, of our British Church, were
neither short for number or extent, and that they a real confirmed by Magna
Charta without restraint, the words are we have granted to God; and by this our
present Charter confirmed and for our Heirs for ever, that the Church of
England shall be free, and have all her whole Rights and Liberties invitolable,
all the Nation being content to stand accursed if this grant were at any time
infringed. You may see in Ancient Authors the manner of its Publication (viz.)
The King, Prelates, and Peers, etc. came with burning Tapers in their hands,
throwing them down on the ground, and saying, so let his light be extinguished
in the other World, which shall go about to break this Charter and Agreement,
yea more if any thing should be done against it and contrary to it, it was ipso
facto declared void, 26. Edw. 1. c. 2. And must Magna Charta be violated only
when the Clergys Privileges are invaded, Why shall it not stand firm and good
for them, and on their behalfs, as for the Laity? Did not the Clergy labor as
much as any for the Procurement of it? Nay were they not they who procured it
from the several and respective Kings? Let us desire the Enemies of the Clergy
to see their own Cronicles, and they shall receive satisfaction. Now what the
Liberties of the Church were, to set them down would ask a Volume; the Lord
Chief Justice Cook says expressly, they had more and greater than other of the
Kings Subjects, some few he recites, as that they were discharged from
Purveyances, Tolls, Customs, Distresses by the Sheriff in the old inheritance
of the Church, with others of the like nature. It might fetch tears from some
to look back upon the Piety and Charity of our Saxon Ancestors who in their
greatest impositions ever held their Ecclesiastics excused, no part of that
insupportable Tax of Danegelt, under which the Kingdom so much groaned, being
ever paid by them, Vid. Spelm. Gloss. in Danegelt. and it may be made appear
that till after the Conquest (the tenure of their Lands being at that time
Frank Almoigne) they were ever privileged. For King Ethelwolf in a full
Convention of his States at Winchester, Ann. Dom. 858. Enacted that Tithes and
Church Lands throughout all his Dominions should be free from Civil Burdens and
Exactions, as much as Royal Tributes great and small, Vid. Spelm. Council. ad
Annum dictum. But dureing our late intestine Wars, How unequal were Quarterings
and Contributions? What heavy Burdens did the poor Clergy bear, no redress
being found to their bitterest complaints from the Lay Judges, who in some
places made sport at their Miseries and Oppressions, as if nothing had been too
hard or insupportable for their shoulders; now those days through Mercy are
over, and must be forgotten, to receive almost in all places the same hard
measure from their pretended well-wishers, This strikes to the very heart. When
no regard is had of all their past sufferings; First Fruits, Tenths, (no small
standing revenue of the Crown, amounting as some compute to near 40000 l. per
annum) which they joyfully discharge, but they must still be left to the
arbitrary disproportionate Impositions of every Domineering insolent Officer:
The consideration hereof has convinced many (formerly of a different
persuasion) that it is not only useful but expedient, yea necessary for the
Church, to have some of his own Ordering Power to protect them, and to hear and
redress their just grievances. But what further concerns the Clergys
Privileges and just Rights, being so learnedly handled by the Immortal
Spelman; and the general ones so fully Collected by Rebuffus de Stud. Priv. and
others, I shall not here any further enlarge upon them. The grand concern at
present, and which we principally design is, how far they were Privileged as
to public Assemblies and State Consultations. And that the Holy Constantine,
and many other famous Kings and Emperors have made use of their advice both at
Home and Abroad, employed them in Embassies and other important Transactions
has been already demonstrated. And here in the first place, if such an
argument could hope to sway with us Christians, it would soon be proved that
those who attended the Worship of the Heathen gods were admitted in Greece, the
then most knowing and civilized part of the World, into their Pan-Aetolium and
Amphyctionian Counsels. Amongst the Athenian Areopagites and Roman Senators,
and that the Old Gauls divided their states in Druidas (who had omnium rerum
immunitatem) Equites, Plebem, as the Egyptians before did into Priests,
Soldiers and Tradesmen. But leaving Gentilisme we will hasten to Christendom:
And here once for all, desire our Reader to consider, that by the fundamental
Constitutions of the most and best settled Nations in Europe, there are three
States generally settled whereof the Clergy is ever one: Now to make this good,
though we might produce variety of instances, yet we shall content our selves
with the single Testimony of Calvin alone, knowing that it will go farther with
some, than a Jury of others, This we find expressly asserted in his
Institutions, l. 4. c. 20. Sect. 31. In singulis regnis tres sunt ordines, etc.
which how to make up without the Spiritualty will be hard and beyond my skill.
In our Neighbor Nation of France the practice is notoriously known, the
ancient style of the Royal Edicts always running, as it is Recorded of Pepin,
Ann. 744. Per Consilium Sacerdotum and Optimatum ordinavimus, Per Consilium
Sacerdotum and optimatum ordinavit Carolamanus, Thuanus passim. It might
farther be noted that six Prelates are here Pairee of that great and famous
Kingdom, three of them being styled Dukes, and three Counts, See Seldens Titles
of Honors, and yet the whole number of the Pairee exceeds not Twelve. As
likewise the Arch Bishop of Paris has a peculiar indulgence in being present
in every Court of that Royal City without exception Chappinus. Look we into
Hungary where Thwroczius informs us that by the Fundamental Constitutions of
King Stephen, the Bishops in Concilio Regis primi adsistunt. Poland comes
behind none in its Reverence and Respect for their Clergy, where the Arch
Bishop of Gnesna is Primas Regni and Princeps primus, Stanis. Kristanowick in
discrip. Polon. whose jurisdiction is not limited to the Spirituality alone,
but has the chief place in the Rank of the Senators assigned him, and is of
the greatest Authority in all public Consultations: And when at any time there
happens an Interregnum (as it frequently does in those Elective Kingdoms) it
belongs to him to summon a Diet to give Audience to Foreign Ambassadors, and
to appoint a time and place for the Election of a New King. Our Author farther
enlarges this to have proceeded from the Piety of the Popish Kings toward the
Church, that the Sons of it should for ever hold the highest places in their
Conventions, with many other Privileges which to this day they enjoy in his
own words, [and he no Clergyman neither, but a Lawyer] Maxim illius Regni
commodo, emolumento, adjumento, addo and ornamento. Cromerus another Historian
of that Country adds, that there is ever a Royal standing Council assigned the
King, of which there is to be two Arch Bishops, and seven Bishops. And how
considerable a number in all the German Dyets the Ecclesiastics are Panvinius
is a Witness beyond exception, who reckons thirty four Bishops that have their
Votes there besides Abbots, Priors, etc. who pass for Religious Persons, and in
the Septemvirate we find no less than three Clergymen, Mentz Arch Chancellor
of Germany, Coln of France, and Triers of Italy. I shall wholly out of this
Collection omit Spain and Italy, as being such known vassals to the Pope, where
the Clergy Rule the Roast. But one word dashes all this [with some] They are
Papists, a doughty argument to condemn any thing though backed by never so
strong reasons: And let us examine how matters stand with others, Andreas
Bureus in his Description of Sueden, acknowledges that the Ecclesiastics were
heretofore the Prime men in the Senate, till the Covetousness of Gustavus the
first despoiled them of their Revenues: Yet since the Reformation, they still
to this day retain their suffrages in all Public Dyets of the Kingdom. And
when the New Crowned King makes choice of his Counselors, the Arch Bishop of
Upsal is still the first, who is allowed a greater proportion of Attendants,
when he comes to the King than any Noble man in the Nation, no fewer than Forty
Horse being permitted him; whereas the retinue of the other Noble men must not
exceed Thirty. And in the great Assembly at Lincopen, Ann. 1600. we find both
Bishops and other Ecclesiastics. And as to Denmark, Pontanus recites Seven
Bishops as the Ecclesiastical Nobility, and these have their Votes in all Grand
Meetings. Jonas ab Elvervelt distributes the States of Holstein into three
Orders, 1. King and Princes. 2. Prelates. 3. The Families of the Nobles. And he
makes the Bishops of Lubeck and Slewick the two Prime Peers in all their Dyets.
In Scotland it is known that anciently the Bishops and Prelates were Essential
Members of the Parliament, and had their Seats as ours here in England on the
Right hand of the King: And in a Parliament held at Edenborough, Ann. 1597. a
Vote passed for restoring the Clergy to their Original Privileges, as the
Third Estate in that Kingdom; the Learned Prince King James Condemning that Act
of Annexing their Temporalities to the Crown as Vile and Pernicious, Basil.
Dor. l. 2. p. 43. Then for Geneva it self, who is so much a stranger to that
Reformation, as to be ignorant what a stroke Calvin and others had upon the
Senate or grand Counsel, which gave occasion to that complaint of some, that
they had expelled One Bishop and admitted many. If remote Countries be to be
regarded, amongst the Abissines the Clergy is Paramount in Affairs of all
natures, and we read in Damianus a Goes of Zaga Zaba an Ethiopian Bishop
Viceroy of Bagana sent Ambassador to the King of Portugal, Dress. Orat. In
Muscovy their supreme Convention, which those Inhabitants call Zabore, consists
of the great Duke, Twenty Ecclesiastics, and as many Nobles, the common People
being wholly excluded; and when they are met together, the Patriarch and
Ecclesiastics are always first Consulted, and first deliver their Opinion. I
shall conclude this Paragraph, only reminding, that neither the Pagans nor
Mahometans are so inhumane or irreligious, or discourteous to their Priests as
to deny them this Liberty: For that Tully acquaints us that it was the
appointment of the Gods, that the Roman Pontifices should not only take care of
their Religion, but further Sumnis Reipub. praeesse voluerunt, Orat. pro. dom.
sua. Nay at this very day the Barbarous Turks never exclude their. Mufti, but
allow him free entrance, and Vote into all their Divans and Counsels; yea the
great Sultan himself so Honors the Mufti, that as often as he comes into his
Presence, he rises from his Seat, and according to their mode, putting his hand
to his breast, bows his head in token of reverence and Honor, which he shows
not to any other Subject, and will hardly vouchsafe the like honors to the
mightiest Monarch upon Earth.

CHAP. V.
Englands more particular Respect and Kindness to the Clergy.

I Might here be very large should I but give the World a brief account of the
Honor which our Saxon Kings had for their Clergy, neither was this a matter
only precarious, and by the Courtesy (as we say) of England, Sed ipsis
confirmatum legibus, Spelm. Council. Ep. ad Regem. The Person who Ministered at
the Altar was esteemed equal in all things in censu pariter Capitis, to the
Lord of the Manor or any Knight, Leg. Aethel. c. ult. de Wirgildis. The Abbot
was esteemed no less than a greater Thane which now we call a Baron of the
Kingdom. The Bishop of no inferior Rank than the Count or Earl, Qui integro
fruebantur comitatu. The Arch Bishop equal to any Duke, who might happen to be
set over, and have the Rule of many Countries; for that says the Learned
Spelman, in these times our Kings gave always the greatest respect and honor
to their Clergy; for that in their keeping were the Keys of Learning and
Knowledge, the Seculars in the mean time addicting themselves most what to the
Wars, so that in those times it came to pass that the Priests mouth was the
Oracle of our Common People no less than of the King and Commonwealth; for that
they had ever the first Place in our Commitia's and Assemblies, no less than in
the Kings Courts of Justice, and Law Tribunals in the Kings Palace with the
Nobles of his Kingdom in the Counties with the Comittees and Justices of the
Counties, in the Sheriffs Courts [turno Vicecomites] together with the
Sheriffs, the Bishops had their Adsessors, yea in the Hundred Courts, they or
their Ministers sat together, with the Lord of the Hundred: so that one sword
was ever helpful to the other in the Administration of Justice, and nothing of
moment was done in these Courts of Judgment, but by their advice and
assistance, Spelm. l. prius citat. The practice of the Kingdom ran parallel
with the Law; for in all Ancient Charters and Laws which heretofore were passed
and made by signing their names cum signo crucis, the Spiritual Lords ever
preceeded the Temporal. In a donation of Ethelbert, A. D. 605. to the Monastery
of St. Peter in Canterbury, the first witness subscribing it, is Austin the
Bishop, and after him several Dukes and Earls, Monast. Angl. and Spelm. Conc.
passim. In a Charter of King Inas, Ann. Dom. 725. To the Monastery of
Glassenbury, after the Bishops, Boorthwald and Fordred, occur Waldhere,
Ethelherd, Ummin and Winchelin, the greatest Peers in the Nation putting their
Names. Not long after in a Grant of King Offus to the Abbey of Worcester, Ann.
Dom. 708. Brotdran, Berthand, Eadbald, and Eadbald, two Princes, and two Dukes,
follows the Bishops. And at the same Kings Consecration at St. Albans, Ann.
793. No less than 10 Dukes, besides other Nobles give place to the Prelates.
And to make an end, in a Charter of King Edward the Confessor to the Monastery
of Winchester; immediately after the King subscribed Plegmund and Frithestan
the Bishops, being followed by Ethelward the Kings Brother, Aethelstan,
Aelfweard the Kings two Sons, Oredluf, Orced, Brorh^^^f and Heerferth Dukes,
many more of this nature might be produced out of the same Authors, and others,
as standing monuments of the Clergies Reputation, and the Reverence our
Religious Ancestors bare to their Functions, particularly the third Charter of
King Edward the Confessor of the Foundation of the Abbey of Westminster, where
more particularly we find Osberne and Peter two of the said Kings Chaplains,
signing the Charter before several of the Earls. And furthermore, here is
Statute Law in the Case that this usage may not be thought to proceed merely
from the Courtesy of England, it is confirmed by the Statute of the 31 Hen. 8.
c. 10. Wherein all degrees and offices are placed in Assemblies and
Conferences, and there the Arch Bishop of Canterbury as primus Par regni the
first Peer of the Kingdom is ranked before all the Nobility, and Seated at the
Kings right hand, next and immediately after the Royal Blood, and the
Vicegerent, and the rest of the Bishops follow him in their due precedence,
according to the Dignities and Aunciencies of their respective Sees. See
farther, the Statute of 8. of Eliz. c. 1. where in that Statute they are called
an high, and one of the greatest Estates of the Kingdom, nor were they ever
excluded from the greatest Employments of Honors and Trust in the Kingdom, and
to evidence, that this is not spoke without Book, we will subjoin a Catalogue
of Churchmen Collected out of Godwin, Malmesbury, Spelman, Dugdale, and others,
etc. that have born all, at least the most honorable Offices of State, and
(how ever bespattered by some) discharged them with much integrity and repute;
England owing more of its happiness to men of this Calling than any other,
though it cannot be denied but some miscarriages might be here and there found,
and yet as few as can be expected in such a Multitude: and if a man were
disposed to find fault, he might without much pains taking two for one in
Critically examining any other Profession. Let us begin then with Englands
Metropolitan, to whom this Primacy justly appertains, and take the rest in
Order, only premising this, that it is true indeed we find fewer of this See
upon the Civil Stage than any other, most Offices being looked upon as below the
Archiepiscopal Dignity, and therefore a Nobleman upbraided Hurbert Arch Bishop
1199. when he was made Chancellor of England, Chief Justice of England, and
high Governor of all the Dominions under King Richard the first, however we
shall begin with his Person and See.

Canterbury.
Hubert under Richard 1. and King John, who entrusted the same Prelate with the
Government of the whole Realm at his departure into Normandy. Gualter, Reynolds
Chancellor, Ann. Dom. 1310. John Stratford Chancellor under Edw. 3. And when
the King Invaded France, no Person thought so fit in his absence to have the
Government of the Nation entrusted to him. Simon Islip of the Privy Counsel to
the Edw. 3. John Stafford to Hen. 5. John Morton to Hen. 6. and Edw. 4. But we
need not stand upon this, when in truth it has been seldom known that any of
them have been at any time omitted: Nor was this proper only to the times of
Propery: Come to the Reformation, we find Arch Bishop Cranmer of the Privy
Counsel to Hen. 8. and Edw. 6. and very active in Civil matters, yet a man so
averse to Rome, so instrumental in planting the Gospel, so Laborious, so Holy,
that a great Apocalyptical man Mr. Brightman, in his Commentaries oa the
Apocalypse [a man no friend to the Hierarchy] takes him to be that Angel
pointed at by God, Rev. 14. that had power over the fire. Under the renowned
Queen Elizabeth, John Whitgift of the Council, and had the Government of the
Principality of Wates given to him.

YORK.
Waler Gray Chancellor under King John, had the Government of the Realm
entrusted to him under Hen. 3. William de Melton Successively Treasurer and
Chancellor of England, 1317. William de Zouche Vicegerent to King Edw. Ann.
Dom. 1346. John Kemp, Ann. 1425. twice Lord Chancellor. And Thomas Young Lord
Precident of the North, An. Dom. 1561.

LONDON.
There was not long since to be seen in St. Paul's the Monument of William
Bishop of London, who obtained from the Conqueror the City Charter, to which
the Lord Major and his Brethren the Aldermen used in a grateful Commemoration
every year to walk on foot: He was Privy Counselor to King William the
Conqueror. Mauritius Chancellor under the same King. Eustachius de
Falconbridge one of King Rich. 1. his Justices, Chancellor of the Exchequer,
Treasurer of England, and twice Ambassador into France. Henry de Wingham
Chancellor under Edw. 3. Ralph Boldoc under Edw. 1. Richard Bintworth under
Edw. 3. Robert Braybrook under Rich. 2. Richard Cox Dean of Westminster (whom I
crave leave to name here as belonging to the Diocese) of the privy Counsel to
Edw. 6. And Bishop Bancroft sent Ambassador to Embden, to treat with the King
of Denmarks Commissioners, Ann. Dom. 1600.

DURHAM.
Geoffrey Rufus Chancellor of England, Ann. Dom. 1140. Richardus de Marisco,
Ann. Dom. 1217. Anthony Beak of the Privy Council, Ann. Dom. 1294. Richard de
Bury Cancellarius, Ann. Dom. 1334. and Treasurer, Ann. Dom. 1336. Thomas
Langley Chancellor, Ann. Dom. 1406. Thomas Ruthal of the Counsel to Henry 8.
and as his Monument at Westminster testifies, Secretary to Hen. 7. Richard
Neyle of the Privy Council, A. D. 1627. And here we cannot omit that known
passage of Newbrigensis, who brings in K. Richard, making himself merry with
the Bishop, boasting what a feat he had done, E Vetusto Episcopo novitium
Comitem ego mirus artifex feci, To make a New Count of an Old Bishop, a
Privilege yet continued to that Ancient See.

WINCHESTER.
Swithan Chancellor of England under K. Egbert, Ann. Dom. 860. William Giffard
Chancellor under the Conqueror, William Rufus, and K. Henry 1. Peter de la
Roch. Lord Chief Justice under K. John. Sendall Chancellor, 1316. William
Edenden Treasucr under Edw. 3. William of Wickam, Founder of New College in
Oxon, Principal Secretary of State, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Master of the
Wards, and Treasurer of the Kings Revenues in France, Ann. Dom. 1360. William
Wainfleet Founder of Magdalen College Oxon, for his great Wisdom and Integrity
long Lord Chancellor of England under Hen. 6. Richard Fox (Founder of C. C. C.
Oxon) one of the Privy Counsel to Hen. 7. (as Prudent a Prince as this Nation
has known) and this Bishop as wise a Privy Counselor as he a Prince)
continually employed either in matters of Counsel at home, or Embassies and
Treaties abroad.

ELY.
William Longchamp Chancellor, Ann. Dom. 1189. after Chief Justice and
Protector of the Realm, when K. Richard the first undertook his Journey to the
Holy Land. Eustacius Chancellor, Ann. Dom. 1196. John Hotbam Chancellor, Ann.
Dom. 1317. Simon Laughan, And. Dom. 1361. first Treasurer, then Chancellor of
England. John Barnet Treasurer, A. D. 1366. John Fordham Treasurer, Ann. Dom.
1385. William Gray Treasurer, Ann. Dom. 1469. John Alcock Chancellor, Ann. Dom.
1486: And Thomas Goodrick Chancellor under Edw. 6.

LINCOLN.
Robert Bleuet Chancellor under the Conqueror, Ann. 1092. Alexander under K.
Henry the I. Lord Chief Justice of England. Galfridus Chancellor, A. D. 1180.
Hugh de Wells Chancellor. Ann. Dom. 1209. Walter de Constantiis Chancellor
under Hen. 6. and Dr. Williams Dean of Westminster, and after Bishop of this
See made Lord Keeper by the Learned K. James.

COVENTRY and LICHFIELD.
Roger de Wiseman Keeper of the Great Seal, Ann. Dom. 1245. William de Langton
Treasurer, Ann. Dom. 1226. Roger Northbrough Clerk of the Wardrope, afterward
Treasurer, Ann. Dom. 1322. Geoffrey Blyth Lord President of Wales, Ann. Dom.
1513. Rowland Lee his Successor in the same Office, Ann. D. 1535. Richard
Sampson in the same, Ann. Dom. 1537. William Smith Founder of Brazen-Nose
College Oxon; in the same under Hen. 8.

SARUM.
Osmond Chancellor of England, always of the Privy Council, and seldom
separated from the Court, under the Conqueror. Roger Chancellor, 1107. and
under K. Stephen, Ann. Dom. 1136. John Waltham Master of the Rools, Keeper of
the Privy Seal, and after Treasurer of England under Richard the II. Nicolas
Bubwith Treasurer, Ann. Dom. 1407. William Ayscoth Clerk of the Counsel, Ann.
Dom. 1438.

BATH and WELLS.
Robert Burnet first Lord Treasurer then Chancellor of England, and always of
the Council under Edw. I. John Drokensford Keeper of the Wardrope, Ann. 1309.
Robert Stillington first Keeper of the Privy Seal, then Chancellor, Ann. Dom.
1465. Oliver King Principal Secretary of State, 1492. John Clark Master of the
Rolls, A. D. 1523.

EXETER.
Leofricus first one of the Privy Counsel, then Chancellor of England, under
the Conqueror, though Sir Henry Spelman reckons him of Bath at that time, and
possibly he might be of both. William Brewster of the Privy Counsel under Henry
the 3. Walter Stapledon Founder of Exon College Oxon first of the Privy
Counsel, then Treasurer under Edw. 2. John Grandesson Privy Counselor to Edw.
3. John Voysey Lord President of Wales under Hen. 8. Gervase Babington Vice
Precident of Wales, A. 1597.

NORWICH.
Hen. 2. by a special Commission makes the Bishops of Norwich, Winchester, and
Ely, Lord Chief Justices of England in my Authors words, Radalphus de Diceto,
Archi Justitiarios Angliae, who there adds, Clergymen were pitched upon by the
Kings for this employment, rather than others, for that they were the likeliest
persons not to oppress the poor, nor to respect the face of the Rich. John
Salmon Chancellor, A. D. 1319. Robert Baldock Chancellor, An. Dom. 1324. John
Wakering Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, A. D. 1416.

HEREFORD.
Thomas Cantelupe Chancellor, A. D. 1275. Thomas Charlton Lord Treasurer,
1329. John Gilbert in the same employment, 1386. Thomas Melling of the Privy
Counsel to Edw. 4. Charles Booth Chancellor of the Marches of Wales, Ann. Dom.
1517.

WORCESTER.
Galfridus Giffard Lord Chancellor of England Ann. Dom. 1267. Walter Reynold
first Treasurer then Chancellor of England under King Edw. 2. John Bar^^s Lord
Treasurer Ann. Dom. 1362. Henry Wakefield Treasurer, An. Dom. 1376. Nicholas
Heath Lord President of Wales and Chancellor of England under Queen Mary.

CHICHESTER.
Ralph Nevil Chancellor of England, Ann. Dom. 1222. But Sir Henry Spelman
reckons it 1226. who says he was appointed to that Employment by Parliament.
John de Langton Chancellor under Edw. 1. and 2. John Stratford Lord Chancellor
Ann. Dom. 1360. Adam Molins Clerk of the Privy Council, Ann. Dom. 1451. And
that very Learned Prelate and industrious Preacher Lancelot Andrews Privy
Councellor of England and Scotland, under a Prince who knew the worth of
Learning, and advanced it accordingly.

ROCHESTER.
Walter de Merton Founder of that College that bears his name in Oxon, Lord
Chancellor of England, Ann. Dom. 1274. John de Shepey Lord Treasurer, Ann. Dom.
1358.

OXFORD.
Hugh Curwyn Lord Chancellor of Ireland.

St. DAVID'S.
Adam de Houghton Lord Chancellor of England, Ann. Dom. 1376. Lindwood the
famous Canonist Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, Ann. Dom. 1440, and a person
much employed in Embassies to the King of Spain, Portugal, etc.

I might here add several Deans and Archdeacons promoted to the same and like
Dignities, and with industrious Mr. Stow, take notice that till the dissolution
of Abbeys and Monasteries, the Prior of Christ Church in London was ever a
Member of the Court of Aldermen; and that the Dean of Westminster is by his
Charter allowed no small interest in the Government of that Neighboring City.
But I shall not nauseate the Reader any longer with the repetition of any more
ancient names, but observe (as others have done before me) that in the
Catalogue of Chancellors Recorded in Spelmans Glossery, amounting to about 170,
near a 100 of them were Clergymen, more than all the other Professions put
together can make up.

These then are the Honors which (if any humane Testimony can make a thing
certain by an uninterrupted Custom (equal to Law) which Wise Antiquity in the
best of times gave them, through all the Saxon, Danes, and Norman times,
without Control and Dispute till within these 40 years or thereabout, since
which England has groaned under the very great sin of Dispiseing the
Ambassadors of Christ, and with some it has been no small step to preferment
to rail at them, to murmr at, and decry their advancements for secular ends
of their own, yea to rank the great Trustees of Souls with the vilest Peasants
in the Nation; as if there were no better way to show their Love to their
Redeemer, and their own Christianity, than by hatred to his Servants who
conveyed it to them; as if men had no other way to manifest their respects to
the Majesty of the great God, but by pouring out contempt and obloquy upon
those who represent his Person. And thus Corah and his accomplices great
complaint and grievance against Moses and Aaron was, That they were too high,
took too much upon them, Numb. 16. They were advanced and honored above the
rest, this was the main Eyesore, but the revengeing hand of God would not then
bear it. Nay have we not here in England dureing our late and unhappy troubles,
heard such Language as this (nay have we not seen the thing reduced into
practice?) All the Congregation is Holy, and one may Preach as well as another:
Thus would these Sons of Confusion have brought upon us a Munster Confusion and
Disorder, by taking away the Distinctions of Callings. The Wise God (we know)
appointed it otherwise under the Old Testament, when every one we know was not
admitted to the Priesthood. We cannot but think, that there were 1000 in Israel
who knew how to kill, slay, and dress a Sheep, Ox, or Goat, as artificially as
the Sons of Levi, yet none ever attempted it in reference to the Altar without
a severe rebuke. And was Moses a more Prudent Lawgiver or Steward of Gods house
than Jesus Christ the Wisdom of the Father? Would it be fuffered in humane
Societies, in any well regulated Corporation that every man who should conceive
himself fitter to discharge an Office, manage a Trade, Husband an Estate,
should presently exclude another legally possessed of it, and invade his
propertys? grant this, and farewell Government, and welcome Babel. Let me say
it once for all, ' it is folly for any to expect the prosperity of the Nation,
whilst the Clergy of it is in Misery, a Low and Despicable Condition, whilst
the sacred Function is deposed, nay with black ingratitude reviled; to whose
learned labors do we owe the Translation of our Bibles, and who, (as before
once was intimated) under God were the principal Instruments of delivering us
from that Egyptian Darkness our Forefathers sat in: Is not this like the Deer
we Read of in Plutarch, who browsed on that Bush in a Calm he was glad to creep
under in a Storm? Certainly they are not worthy the Name of Christians or
Friends of the Gospel (whatever their pretenses may be) that despise and
vilify the Ministry, than which, nothing more bespeaks a vile and reprobate
Heart. We all know that under the Law presumptuously to rise against the Priest
was punishable with no less than Death, Deuteronomy. 17. for these are the Ambassadors
of the King of Heaven, and how sacred such persons were esteemed by the Laws of
all Nations, all Histories do abundantly Witness: 'twas the shame of our
Neighbor Nation of Scotland, the Murder of the late learned Prelate there, and
that small indignities offered to persons of his Rank have been highly
resented; the Ammonites are a lasting testimony in the days of King David, and
prood Corinth was for no other reason burnt to ashes by the enraged Romans,
Florus.

CHAP. VI.
The Ancient Estate of our Bishops and Clergy under the times of the Britains,
Saxons, Danes and Normans.

What encouragement the Clergy found in the times of the Britons will appear
to have been very great if we will but read Arch Bishop Usher de Primordiis
Ecclesiae Britanicae, through the Series and Succession of Kings, who when
Converted to the Christian Faith, were not scanty in Conferring Honors and
Riches upon them: See him in his Sixth Chapter under these Respective Heads,
Antiquitatis Glastoniensis Ecclesiae assertio and nova ab Ina rege instauratio.
Privilegia varia eidem a Saxonibus Regibus. Arthur. donatio and Sepulchri
inventio, Hen. 2. and Edw. 3. Diplomata. Possesiones and libertates Ecclesiis a
Lucio Rege Tributae. Wintoniensis Ecclesiae libertates and Antiquitates.
Fundatio Ecclesiae Sancti Petri Westmonasteriensis. B. Marcae Doveriensis and
Sancti Martini Cantuariensis. Afterward in his 7th Chapter, De pace Britanici
Ecclesiis post caeptam persecutionem Constantio Chloro, Aug. Constant. M. patre
restituta. And afterward in his 8th Chapter of the British Bishops, Qui variis
consiliis interfuerunt, Concilio Arelatensi, Sardicensi and Ariminenst; where
any persons may receive satisfaction of the Clergy Honor in those first
British times. In the times of the Saxons what their immunities were will
appear if we instance in but one single one, as more eminent and glorious than
the rest (viz.) Their Admission to all Public Debates and Assemblies. Such
were (1) their Scire Gemotis, which Spelman and other Learned Antiquaries
resemble to our Country Courts, and Sheriffs turn in which all causes both
Criminal and Civil, concerning Church or State were handled; the persons bound
to be present were the Sheriff, the Bishop and all the Nobles of the County;
till at last upon their humble Petition in Parliament, the Clergy were
dispensed with by the Statute of Marleborough, 52 Edw. 3. unless urgent
necessity required it. Secondly, their Folk Gemotts a kind of Annual Parliament
commonly held in the beginning of May, in which the Princes of the Kingdom,
Bishops, and Magistrates, and the Laity took the Oath of Allegiance, and
confirmed their mutual Union before the Bishops. The Original of this is
intimated to be as high as King Arthur, Vid. Leg. Edw. Confess. 35. Thirdly,
their Wittena Gemotts, or Michel Synoth, the grand Convention of their Wise
men. These who desires to look farther into, may have recourse to Spelmans
laborious Glossary, V. Gemot. Now out of none of these were the Clergy
excluded, but ever reckoned an eminent and principal part of each, their
Counsels Votes and Approbation demanded and given before any Laws were
constituted.

For Proof of this, we shall look back above 1000 years to the Laws of King
Ethelbert, and the Authors we shall produce, and on whose Authority we lean are
Bid, Spelman, and Lambard. And as to King Ethelbert presently after the
arrival of Austin the Monk here in England, we find as Spelman has it in
Spelm. Conc. 126. The King to have called a grand Assemby, A. 605. Tam cleri
quam populi. In the Laws of King Ina, which Florentius Wigorniensis dates, Ann.
Dom. 686. Spelm. 692. Lambert 712. we find these Laws were made and wrote by
the persuasion and advice of his Bishops Hedda and Erkenwald; and though the
Learned Spelman Excerps out of the body of those Laws only those which more
particularly relate to the Church, as being only proper for this design, yet
Lambard mentions many Civil matters there determined. And when the great League
and Union between the Britons, Saxons and Picts was concluded, we find it
Ratified per Commune Concilium and assensium omnium Episcoporum, Procerum,
Comitum and omnium sapientum seniorum and populorum and per preceptum regis
Inae. The very manner of our passing Laws in Parliament now used in England,
Bed. Eccles. Histor. l. 1. In the Laws of King Athelstan about the year 924.
(Spelm. 922) there is no mention of any other Counselors for the enacting,
though certainly the form was the same, but his Arch Bishop Ufhelme and his
other Bishops, and these were at least the prime persons there, though the Body
of the Laws concern secular affairs. Spelman selecting only Ecclesiastical, yet
in the Title he owns others passed. In the Laws of K. Edmund about 946. the
King had a full meeting of Ecclesiastics, and Laics at London, in which were
present Odo and Wulstan the Arch Bishops, none of the rest though without doubt
there present once named. Again 948. to a great Convention of the Estates at
London under Edred, Writs of Summons are issued out to the Arch Bishops and
Bishops, and yet their agitur de negotiis Regni, Ingulph. p. 87. Spel. Conc. p.
428. Come we to the Danes, 1021. we find a Public Assembly called at
Winchester by Canutus, where were present Wulstan and Adelholme the Arch
Bishops with other Bishops Dukes and Earls, etc. Spelm. Conc. p. 534. Now
dureing these two Periods there is no mention of Baronies, but all the Churches
tenure was in Pura Eleemosyna, Frank Almoigne and the Bishops sat only as
eminent Prelates by virtue of their Spiritual Dignities; for there being hardly
any Laws but some way or other concerning Religion, and the good of Souls:
therefore in the enacting of them the Cergy was ever required by our Prudent
Ancestors. Thus much for the Grand Assemblys, styled usually by the Learned
Knight Sir Henry Spelman Pan Anglica and Pan Britanica. We will only mention
the Private Statute of King Edgar which was thus, ex omni comitatu bis
quotannis conventus agitur cui quidem illius Diocaesae Episcopus and Senator
intersunto, quorum alter jura divina alter populum edoceto. Nor does Mr. Seldom
no friend of the Clergy ever deny or question but the Bishop was joined in
Commission with the Aarlderman, nay he expressly affirms the same Titles of
Honor, l. 2. c. 5. Hitherto of the British, Saxon, Danish Governments, pass we
down to the Normans, and here we have King William solemnly with an Oath
ratifying the Laws of St. Edw. the Confessor, and this particularly is added.
Si quis sanctae Ecclesiae pacem infregerit Episcoporum est Justitia, Lambard,
p. 139. And in several Old Precidents of Grants such Clauses as these Occur,
Nolumus quod libertas Ecclesiae per nos vel ministros nostros quoscunque
aliqualiter violetur and jura and ilbertates Ecclesiasticas illaesas volentes
in omnibus observari. Yet more particularly in a Charter to the Church of St.
Paul's in London, Tam liberam volumus Ecclesiam, D. Pauli London, quam sit anima
mea in die Judicii.

And here now at last we come to that great change in the State Ecclesiastic,
the Bishops who had ever enjoyed the privileges of Majores Thani among the
Saxons are translated to Barons, which gave occasion to that groundless error
of some, to date the first sitting in Parliament hence, as if the Conqueror to
curry favor with the Clergy, and the better to settle his new gotten Kingdom,
confered this Honor upon them; But certainly if there were truth in this, the
Clergy are much to blaim, and very ungrateful to their Patron K. William, for
that we find them loosers by his favors, and looked upon their Condition under
him much worse than before, and all the Writers of that Age must be corrected
for representing him, as a perfect Enemy of the Church. To clear up this we
will only give you one Instance, cited from an Old Record, Entitled, Liber
Sancti Albani. Where we read this Passage of Frederick the then Abbot of St.
Albans, that to obstruct the March of the Conqueror, he caused all the Trees
round to be cut, and laid them cross the ways, wherewith the Conqueror being
stopped in his march sent in some passion for the Abbot, who under his security
coming to him, the Conqueror demands the Reason for the cutting down the
Woods, the Abbot resolutely answers him, that I have done, but what became me,
and if all the Spiritual Persons through the Kingdom had used their Endeavors
against thee, as they might and were in duty bound to have done, Thou would
never have been able to have entered the Land thus far. The Duke then replying,
Is the Spiritualty of England of such Power? if I live and enjoy that, which I
have gotten, I will make their Power less. Add to this that stategem of the
Kentishmen in surrounding the King, and forcing him to a Composition, which
they did under the Conduct of Stigand their Archbishop, which thing ever after
netled him, and that he was never heartily reconciled to the Church. and proved
afterward as good as his word to the Abbot, oppressing the Clergy all his
Reign, bringing them under Knights-Service, and Ordering how many Soldiers
each Bishop should maintain for him and his Successors: the Church, as
beforesaid, being ever free from that bondage. Let no Man then say, that the
Conqueror (who was ever looked upon by the Bishops as their Enemy) did them any
Acts of Grace or Havour by erecting each Bishopric into a Barony, which thing
was ever by the Bishops looked upon as a grievance, and a more glorious piece
of slavery. This was in deed a shrewd shaking to the Bishops, yet still they
preserved their Votes in all Assembli^s, and Parliamentary Summons are ever
directed Archiep. Ep. etc: all ancient Charters and Grants subscribed after the
usual Form in those times, Testibus Archiep. Ep. In a Treatise Entitled, The
Form and Manor of keeping Parliaments, whereof it seems there are two very
ancient Copies, the M. S. in Arch Bods, the other in Sr. Rober Cottons Library,
the first of which was perused by Mr. Seldom, and he allows it to be as long
standing, as Edw. 3d. but the Lord Chief Justice Cook adds near 200 years
more, and raises it to the Conqueror's time (which the Title indeed pleads for)
we are here told, that 40 days before Summons are to be issued out to the
Archbishops, Bishops, and other great Clarks, that held by County or Barony,
and that the Clergy in each Shire are to have Two Proctors representing them,
which in some things had more Power than the Bishops, for we are there
informed, that the K. may hold a Parliament for the Commonalty of the Realm,
without Bishops, Earls, or Barons, so they had summons, though they come not,
but on the cottrary, if the Commonalty of the Clergy and Temporalty being
warned, either does not, or will not come, in this Case whatever the King does
with his Bishops, Earls and Barons is of none effect, for that to all Acts of
Necessity the Commonalty of Parliament must consent, i. e. the Proctors of the
Clergy, Knights of the Shire, Citizens and Burgess^s, for their Persons
represent the Commonalty of England, but the Bishops, Earls, and Barons
represent only their own Persons. There is, they say, another M. S. in Bibl.
Cotton, confirming the same, and citing other large Privileges of the Clergy,
I know indeed Mr. Prinne has questioned the Authority of both these books, in
Bar of which I return the Authority of Cook and Seldom, and particularly the
first, who says, in his Institutes, that 26 Spiritual persons ought ex debito
Justitiae, to have a Writ of Summons sent them every Parliament. These things
premised, we will now desire of the Clergies greatest adversary that he would
produce instances of any solemn meetings, Wittena gemots or Parliaments
whereunto the Clergy were not summoned; any Statutes publicly enacted during
all the Christian British, Saxon, Danish, or Norman times, without their
assistance and advice. As for the precedent of their Exclusion under Edw. 1. at
the Parliament held at St. Edmondsbury, which some triumph in, if there be any
truth in the Narrative (as has been, and is still, questioned) we know, and
can prove, 'twas done in a pett and transport of Royal displeasure for their
too obstinate adhering to the Bishop of Rome in the Scottish quarrel, and for
their noncompliance with their Kings demands. Who yet the very next Parliament,
about a year after, makes an Apology for this charging all upon the Exigencies
of his affairs. And why should this single instance so circumstantiated be
urged more against the Clergy than that other is against the Lawyers who were
shut out of a Parliament under Henr. IV. where we yet find the Bishops and
amongst others, Thomas Arundel stoutly resisting and preserving the Clergies
Temporalities, which these Church-robbers gaped after, who, so they might spare
their own Purses were content to spoil their God to relieve their King.
Certainly if envy it self could have found the least color of Law to deny them
this privilege it had never been reserved for this last, and our most unhappy
age. Many times have they been struck at, many great blows have they received,
as at Clarendon, under Henr. II. where their wings were indeed much clipped, yet
their privilege of sitting and voting in Parliament is left entire to to them
for that the words are Episcopi intersint Curiae Domini Regis cum Baronibus
quousque perveniatur ad diminutionem membrorum vel mortem, and though they
never voted of late in Capital Causes, yet that they however made their Proxies
I hope shall be made appear by what follows, together with their forbearing to
vote in Capital Causes, and the reason of it shall be farther discoursed of.

CHAP. VII.
The Estate of the Bishops and Clergy from the Conquest (as to their Voting in
Capital Causes in Parliament) till the times of King Henr. VIII.

WE have before intimated the common usages and rights of the Bishops to sit
and vote in Parliaments in all ancient times, and that as Peers and Barons of
the Realm, we now aver they have a Power to sit and vote in all, as well
Criminal as otherwise, either by themselves or Proxies lawfully constituted,
which is a privilege of the Peerage, and therefore, belongs to the Bishops as
such, it is very well known what Mr. Seldom has wrote in his Book of The
Privileges of the Peerage of England, that the Bishops was debarred of their
privileges by an Act of Parliament 17 Car. I. Ann. 1641. and that he was a
great notorious stickler in it, but it is as notorious that not long after we
find the Commons, nay a small and inconsiderable part of that House, voting the
Temporal Lords useless and dangerous, and that how they were enabled by being
assisted by the help of Cromwell the late Usurper, and the Army, to accomplish
what they had begun, and the bad consequence of all we have seen with our eyes,
and Bishops God be thanked restored to their undoubted Rights and Privileges,
and that for as much as they were equally Barons (nay the Bishops had usually
the first in Summons) they have also equal privileges to make their Proxies in
Parliament as the Temporal Barons had, we confess, as before, for that they
were Spiritual persons they were not by the Council of Clarendon to sit in
Capital Causes, and loss of limb, but then we must know that long before this
they both had and exercised this Power, as may be made appear out of John
Crampton's Chron. c. 24. where amongst the Laws of Athelstane we read, Episcopo
jure pertinet omnem rectitudinem promovere Dei (viz.) and saeculi and debent
Episcopi cum saeculi judicibus interesse judiciis, and the ordering of all the
Measures and Weights is there made of Episcopal cognizance the Standard being
still left in the Bishops hands, and out of Sir Henry Spelman's Glossary, voce
Comes. Comes praesidebat foro comitatus non solus sed junctus Episcopo, ut
alter alteri auxilio esset and consilio, praesertim Episcopus Comiti nam in
hunc illi animadvertere saepe licuit and errantem cohibere, so much confidence
did the Ancients repose in the Clergy that the guidance and overseeing of most
temporal affairs was entrusted to them, nay, they had a check upon the Laity.
And thus lovingly with all sweetness and candor for 4 or 500 years, during all
the Saxons times and till that unhappy division by the Conqueror, who defaced
this beautiful and regular composure did the Church and State-Officers sit
together in the morning determining Ecclesiastical affairs, and in the
afternoon Civil. There were then no jars or clashings of jurisdictions heard
of, no prohihitions issuing out of one Court to obstruct the course of Justice
in another; thereby hampering the poor Client that he knew not which way to
turn himself; and I am persuaded there is no better expedient to prevent
lasting vexatious suits, and to relieve the oppressed, than again to reconcile
these two jurisdictions, that according to the primitive usage as well
Spiritual as Temporal Judges may be appointed in all Courts, that Moses and
Aaron may not interfere and quarrel, but walk hand in hand. Though I know this
design does not relish with many of the Long Robe, yet it is feared that
attempting some such thing purchased the late Archbishop Laud no few enemies
and was one especial cause of hastening his ruin: yet we find Mr. Seldom a
Lawyer too, lib. 2. de Synedriis, proving that for the first 4000 years and
better the Civil and Ecclesiastical Courts continued united, and the first
distinction proceeded from Pope Nicholas, Gratian. Distinct. 96. c. cum ad
verum, and that the Clergy do not meddle personally to vote in loss of life or
limb proceeds from the Canons of the ancient Church which forbad their presence
in cases of blood, but I hope that no sober man will hence argue that they
being Barons of this Realm they must lose their Privileges which belong to the
Spiritual Lords as well as to the Temporal; viz. To make Proxies though in
Capital Causes (when by the ancient Canons of the Church they are forbid to be
present,) which they have done, and still have right to do comes next to be
discoursed of.

And (first) I shall make use of Mr. Selden's authority, though no friend to
the Bishops, (for reasons he best knew of) who expressly says in his Book of
the Privileges of the Barons of England, Printed 1642. that omnes Praelati,
Magnates, etc. has this Privilege. Introduct. Though he says there they had
lost it by the Parliament 17 Car. 1. 1641. I hope now they are restored to it
again, that they had before he gives you sundry instances Cap. 1. these are his
words 2. That the course of Elder time was not that Barons only made Proxies
but other men, as Bishops, and Parliamentary Abbots, and Priors, who gave their
Letters usually to Parsons, Prebendaries, and Canonists. In the Parliament of
Carlisle under Edw. 1. the Bishop of Exeter sent to the Parliament Henry de
Pynkney Parson of Houghton as his Proxy. The Bishop of Bath and Wells sent
William of Cherlton a Canon of his Church, and in like sort other of the
Spiritualty of that time, in the beginning of the 17th year of King Richard the
Second the Bishop of Norwich made Richard Corqueaux being then Deane of the
Arches, Thomas Hederset being Archdeacon of Sudbury and John Thorp Parson of
Epingham his Proxies by the name of Procuratores sive Nuntii, and in the same
time the Bishop of Durham' s Proxies were John Burton Canon of Bewdley, and
Master of the Rolls and John of Wendlingborough Canon of London, and other like
in the same time. By which also that of the preamble of the Statute of
Praemunire is understood, where it is said that the advice of the Lords
Spiritual that was present and of the Procurators of them that were absent, was
demanded. The like under Henry the 4th and 5th, are found in the Rolls, and
under Henr. 5. the Archbishop of York gives the Proxies to the Bishop of
Durham, and to two other Clerks of his Province. Nay farther, that the Bishops
used to give their Proxies in Cases of Attainder, the said Mr. Seldom expressly
says in the place forecited, and also what sort of persons they used to make
their Proxies, he there likewise tells you, adding withal this unhandsom
reflection, That the Lords Spiritual had so much mistaken of late the Laws of
the Kingdom, and the Original of their own Honors by endeavoring to enlarge
the Kingdom of Antichrist, that they had now (he means, A. D. 42) lost both
Privilege and Vote in Parliament. All sharp, Reply to which I shall purposely
forbear. And secondly, proceed to show you express Precedents wherein they have
Voted either Personally, or by Proxies in Capital Causes, and here I will
produce Mr. Seldom himself, the Bishops adversary become their advocate, who
says expressly p. 125. lib. cit. That though in the Case of Appeal of Treason
in a Parliament of the 11 of Richard the Second, commenced by Thomas Duke of
Gloucester and others against Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert de Vere,
etc. they absented themselves, I mean, the whole Spiritualty in that
Parliament, and would make no Proxy in their room for that time, yet afterward
they agreed to do it in Cases of Judgments of Death, Rot Parl. 2. Henr. 4. and
Rot. Parl. 2. Henr. 5. But he there says, that the first use of such Proxies
was 21 Ric. 2. so that we have him confessing the Bishops sitting in cases of
blood by their Proxies, the next authority I shall make use of, is a Parliament
Roll it self, of that year as I find it in Sir Robert Cotton's Collections
entitled as follows. Placita Coronae coram Domino Rege in Parliamento suo
apud Wegmonast. diae Lunae proximae post Festum Exaltationis Sanctae Crucis
Anno regni Regis Ric. 2. Post Conquestum 21. The Roll it self you may see in
the Tower among the Records there kept. It is of an Impeachment of the Earl of
Arundel and War. etc. for Treason, etc. the Articles were exhibited against
him by several Lords, as Edward Earl of Rutland, Thomas Earl of Kent, John Earl
of Huntington, etc. which the said Lords were ready to prove the Crimes
objected, and demanded the Prisoner to be brought to the Bar, which the Lord
Nevil then Constable of the Tower did, and the aforesaid Lords in their own
Persons appeared also. His Articles being read, the Earl of Lancaster Lord
Steward of England by the King's commandment, and assent of the Lords, declares
the whole matter. And thereupon the said Earl's answer to the Articles was
demanded, who pleaded two Pardons, and prays they may be allowed, but they
were not, whereupon Sir Walter Clopton Lord Chief Justice demands of him what
he had farther to say, for that if nothing more to say the Law would adjudge
him guilty. And the said Earl not pleading any thing else, the Lords Appellants
in their proper persons require that Judgment may be given against the said
Earl, as Convict of the Treason aforesaid. Whereupon the Lord Steward of
England, by the assent of the King, Bishops and Lords, adjudged the said Earl
Guilty and Convict of all the Articles aforesaid, and thereby a Traitor to the
King and Realm, and that he should be therefore Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered,
and forfeit all his Lands in fee, etc. though the Punishment, in regard he was
of Noble Blood, was changed, and he was ordered to be Beheaded; which was done
by the Lieutenant of the Tower, and this is a short account of that Trial for
Blood in Parliament. Where it is plain and evident that the Bishops were there
present, for it is said, that the said Earl was adjudged Guilty and Convict by
the assent of the King, Bishops and Lords. Q. E. D. Next we will produce
another Instance and Precedent of the Condemnation of Thomas Arundel Archbishop
of Canterbury, who was accused by the Commons in full Parliament, die and loco
praedictis, where we find the Commons by their Speaker Sir John Bussy
Petitioning the K. in manner following. For that diverse Judgments were
heretofore undone, for that the Clergy were not present, the Commons prayed the
King that the Clergy would appoint some to be their common Proctor with
sufficient authority thereunto. Whereupon the Clergy appoint Thomas de la Percy
by their Instrument their Proctor, who together with the King and the said
Lords adjudged him the said Archbishop guilty of Treason, and himself a
Traitor. The Crimes objected to him was his traitorous obtaining a Commission
from the King, whereby the Kings Royal Power was encroached, his Subjects put
to death without Royal Assent, etc. for all which he was found guilty as
aforesaid. What I observe in brief is this, from this Trial.

(1.) That there had been diverse Errors in Judgment, which Judgments were in
Law void, for that the Bishops were not present, (2.) That hereupon the Commons
Petitioned the King that the Bishops would appoint their Proxy, and which
accordingly they did Thomas de la Percy. (3.) He was Condemned by the said
Court wherein sat Percy accordingly. (4.) That the said Bishops did not Vote
there personally, for that the Archbishop their Primate was Arraigned and it
might not be seemly for them so to do. And here we have the Case adjudged,
Judgments in Parliament Reversed, for that the Bishops were not Present by
themselves or Proxys, the Commons Petitioning the King that they would make
Proxys, a Judgment obtained for that the Bishops had made their Proxys. Q. E.
D. And if any be not satisfied, they may see the Roll of Parliament as before,
among the Records in the Tower to which they are Referred. Furthermore to make
another discovery of the Inconstancy of the said Mr. Seldom, I find him in his
Titles of Honor in the latter end of his Book, Confessing that Thomas Becket
Archbishop of Canterbury was Condemned by the Bishop of Winchester in Case of
High Treason, Vid. Titles of Honor. And if any person would but a little
reflect upon the Reason, why the Bishops have not sometimes Voted in Cases of
Blood but by their Proxies? (viz.) Their respect they had to the Canons of the
Primitive Church, which might give them umbrage for their so doing: And
together with this, what has been said before, of their being frequently
appointed by the King, and acting as Lord Chief Justices of England, any person
of an ordinary Capacity may guess at the Reason of their forbearing to Judge in
Matters of Blood for the Reason aforesaid, and their ready and cheerful
compliance with their Princes Command; when by the Law of this Land they were
enabled so to do, and which is a sufficient Supersedeas to the former Canon of
the Church. Another Precedent we have of the Bishops Personally sitting in
Parliament held at Westminster on Monday next after the Feast of All Saints, in
the 3d, of Hen. 5. wherein Henry Bishop of Winton was Chancellor, wherein was
Tried Richard Earl of Cambridge and others for Treason, for having Levied men
against the King, and procured Edmund Earl of March as Heir to Rich. 2. to take
upon him to be King of England, and had Proclaimed him such in Wales, and set
one Thomas Trompington an Idiot and Scotchman to Personate Rich. 2. where the
said Earl, and others his adherents in that Action, were Tried and found
Guilty; the Lords Spiritual in Parliament being Present, etc. See the Records
in the Tower, Parl. 3. H. 5. p. 2. M. 4. Many other Precedents of a later Date
and Time might be here Ex superabundanti added, but I shall referr them for the
matter of another Chapter, they being all of them taken out of the Journals of
the Lords House beginning in 32 Hen. 8. and ending 29. Eliz. 2. I might have
enlarged in these which I have taken out of the Tower, but I have purposely
forborne to do it; for that I find Mr. Seldom himself in the days of 1642.
granting me the Matter of Fact as clear and evident from the Ancient Records in
the Tower, of the Spiritual Lords Privileges in this Matter. And will now
proceed to another Argument that the Bishops have Right to sit in all Cases as
well Capital as Civil. For that (4.) they are undoubted Peers of the Realm;
which also I find Mr. Seldom himself granting in his Privileges of the
Barronage of England, p. 192. For there he says, Though some have doubted (we
know whom he means) whether the Spiritual Barons are Peers, he says there,
that they are so, is true and plain, and the Testimonies many and various, as
in the Bishop of Winchester' s Case, who departed from the Parliament at
Salisbury about the beginning of Edw. 3. and was questioned for it afterward
in the Kings Bench he pleaded to the Declaration, Quod ipse est unus e Paribus
Regni and Prelatus, and in that short Disputation of the Case, which is left in
the Year Books; he is supposed both by the Court and Council to be a Peer. But
for this if his Authority be not good, the Year Books themselves may be seen.
Bishop of Winchesters Case, Year Book, 3 of Edw. 3. And Pas. 3. Edw. 3. coram
Rege Rot. 9. Rep. So afterward see the Bishop of Londons Case in the Year
Book, 3 Edw. 3. in a Writ of Wards brought against the Bishop of London; he
pleaded to Issue, and the Defendant could not have a day of Grace; for he said
(as the words of the Books are) That a Bishop is a Peer of the Land, and Haec
erat causa, Year Book, 3 Edw. 3. fol. 186. pl. 28. And in a like Case, an
Action of Trespass against the Abbot of Abington who was one of the Lords
Spiritual, day of Grace was denied against him, because he was Peer de la
terre, 13 Edw. 3. Titulo Enquest. So expressly upon a question of having a
Knight returned into a Jury where a Bishop was Defendant; the Rule of the Court
was that it ought to be so, because the Bishop was a Peer of the Realm, Plowden
Comment. pl. 117. So the Judgment given against the Bishop of Norwich in the
time of Rich. 2. he is in the Roll expressly allowed to be a Peer. We find also
Stafford Arch Bishop of Canterbury upon his being excluded the Parliament under
Edw. 3, thus challenging his place, Ego tanquam major par Regni post Regem
vocem habens jurae Ecclesiae meae tantum vendico, and ideo ingressum in
Parlimentum peto. The same may be made out farther by an Assignment of Errors
under Hen. 5. for the revearsal of the Attainder of the Earl of Salisbury, one
Error is Assigned that Judgment was given without the Assent of the Prelates
which were Peers in Parliament, which is clearly allowed in the Roll and
Petition too, that they were Peers. So also in an Act of Parliament under the
same King, Sta^. 4. Hen. 5. c. 6. where the Archbishops and Bishops are called
Peers of the Kingdom. But of the truth of this Mr. Seldom himself says, That
no scruple could ever be made till the unhappy Act of the 17 Car. 1641. And how
that Act was procured we all know, How full of tumults and uproars were those
Times? to how great a distress was Majesty then brought? How many Repulses did
it meet with? Was it not Past to serve the present Interest? and by what
subtle contrivance was it at last carried it is very well known? Have we not
reckoned the Date of our late Embroilments and wild Confusions from this fatal
Apocha? Under what Miseries, Violencies, and Rapins has not our native Country
for 20 years time from hence to be reckoned, with so much pity from all
true-hearted Englishmen long labored and groaned? and the whole
Christian-world about us stood amazed and agasht. All the Wealth which the
Piety of our Forefathers had been so many years in heaping up, all their
Privileges which their prudence had so deliberately conferred, being in a few
days Passion swallowed up. Had those good men, the then Bishops, unadvisedly
acted any thing against their Prince or Kingdom, could no Personal-fine or
punishment expiate their Crime and fault? must the whole Order be raized, and
Episcopacy it self destroyed root and branch? must so many merits of their
worthy Predecessors be buried in the grave of ungrateful Oblivion? It were an
easy matter to produce a large Catalogue of eminent Prelates, who by their
prudent advice have oftentimes prevented Bloodshed, preserved Peace, saved a
sinking Kingdom and a dying Religion, many good works have they done amongst
us, many Colleges and Schools erected and endowed, many material Churches by
their munificence, and living Temples of the Holy Ghost built by their
Ministry; and for which of these must they now be thus dealt withal? thus
disfranchised? That they who heretofore carried the principal stroke in all
Cabinet Counsels and public Diets, are acknowledged in several recorded
Statutes of this Kingdom, an high, and one of the greatest Estates of this
Kingdom, as particularly 8 Eliz. c. 1. that they are Peers of this Realm, 25
Edw. 3. c. 6. before recited, and 4 Henr. 5. c. 6. must now be debarred those
immunities of which our Nation has ever reaped the greatest benefit, they must
be curtailde in, or excluded from, what is their just right, to Vote as Peers
in the higher House of Parliament, certainly it is now high time, if ever, for
men to relent of their merciless cruelty to to learned Industry; the crafty
Jesuit, who is now at our Doors, thinks his day is coming, this will make him
keep a Jubilee, to see England fall again by her own hands. How much ground has
he got by debasing and pouring contempt on our English Clergy, (of all the
World) whom he most dreaded? Let us but enquire of other Nations, our
Neighbors, and they will tell us, That the English Divine is the terror of
the Papal- world, and that they have wrote more, and better, against Rome, than
all the World besides. We ought not to take pleasure in upbrading an ungrateful
Nation: But is this the reward of their unwearied pains, incessant studies,
early rising and late watching, beating their brains, wasting their bodies, and
contracting incurable diseases, neglecting their families, relations, and
accquaintance for the glory of God and good of their Country? Must they only
have discouragements heaped upon them, bread and water, and rags (if some men
had their will) thought to good for them? Must another Profession, of which a
Forreiner, by way of disdain, said, Causid^^i Angli gens indoctissima ultra
Doroberniam nihil sapiunt? Must they get honor, riches and preferments without
the regret and frowns of any, nay more in 60 years last past than Divinity in
600 preceding, and if the matter was not invidious I could easily make appear:
'twas an old saying, Nulli sua pietas debet esse damnosa, in earnest, This is
not for the honor of the Gospel, neither does it become the Reformation. Of
late years some of the Long Robe, no well wishers to the Church, whose names I
forbear, have started a very unhappy and destructive notion, and not over
beneficial to the English Scepter; and there yet want not those who with much
industry keep this notion up, that the three Estates of this Nation consist of
King, Lords and Commons, which how far it may countenance former actings and
endanger future disturbances, I humbly submit to the prudence of those who sit
at the Helm, and are much better able to determine than my self; But the
consequences of that opinion seem directly to aim at the Leveling of
Sovereignty, and making it accountable to the other two in their esteem
Coordinate Estates. Now by restoring the Spiritualty the only true third Estate
to its due Rights and ancient Privileges, for that it is the true third
Estate, the Lord Chief Justice Cook says in the Fourth of his Institutes and
the Act of Parliament of the 8 of Eliz. c. 1. speaks to the same thing, this
may be the most ready and most natural expedient to remove that destructive and
dangerous opinion out of the minds of an unlearned and fickle multitude. So may
the Crown be safe, and the Mitre no longer trampled on. Et quae Deus olim
conjunxit, nemo hoc sequiori saeculo seperet, Faxit hoc Deus qui solus potis
est!

CHAP. VIII.
Precedents of the Bishops Sitting and Voting in Capital Causes from the Reign
of of King Hen. 8. till the 29th of Eliz.

I shall begin with the Attainder of Cromwell Earl of Essex, who was attainted
in Parliament for Treason, etc. the Articles are every extant, and may be seen;
the first reading of his Bill, as I find it in the Journal of the Lords House
was upon the 17th of June, 32. Hen. 8th, at which reading were present Fourteen
Bishops; who they were you may see in the Journal; at the second reading, which
was the 19th of June of the said year, 32. Hen. 8. were present sixteen
Bishops, whose Names, and Sees there you may find; at the third and last
reading, were sixteen likewise, Vid. Journal ut supra, the Bill it self past
the Royal Assent, the 24th of July following, when were 14 Bishops present. The
next shall be the Attainder of Tho. Duke of Norf. and Henry Earl of Surry. 38.
H. 8. This also was an Attainder in Parliament: The first reading of the Bill
against these Noble Lords, was on the 18th of January, Anno Regis supra dicto,
when were present ten Bishops; the second reading, was the day following, when
were present nine Bishops: The third and last reading was on the 20th of the
same Month, when were present thirteen Bishops; the Bill past the Royal
Assent, January 27th, 38. Hen. 8. the Bishops likewise then present. The third
instance of Hen. D. of Suffolk, which indeed was an Attainder at Common Law,
but afterward confirmed in Parliament. A. 1 and 2. Phil. et Mar. at the first
reading were present 12 Bishops: the Bill was read, 5 Jan. Anno supradicto, at
the 2d. reading, which was two days after on the 7th of January were present
eleaven Bishops; and on the next day, the Bill had its last reading in the
Lords House, at which were present eleaven Bishops: the Lords Spiritual, were
likewise present at the passing of the Bill; which was on the 21 of Jan.
following; in each of these, the Journal if consulted will satisfy any. The
4th Precedent shall be in Seymore the Lord Admiral, who was attainted for
Treason, in the 2d. of Edw. 6. for that he purposed to destroy the young King,
and to translate the Crown unto himself; for which, and other Crimes objected,
he suffered Death, on the Tower Hill: at his Attainder were Present nineteeen
Bishops. I might have before added the Case of the Lord Hungerfords-Attainder
in Parliament; who was condemned in Parliament, in the 32. of Hen. the 8th. at
whose Trial and Condemnation, were Present no fewer than seaventeen Bishops,
Vid. Journal of the Lords House, I will only add two more Precedents, and close
with them; they are in the Reign of the Peaceable Queen Elizabeth, in whose
times if ever, the Actings in Parliament were regular, and orderly: the first
is, the Case of the Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland, for their
Rebellion in the North, and endeavor to bring in Popery, at whose Condemnation
were present thirteen Bishops, Vid. Journal, and lastly that of Pagets, in the
29th of the said Queen, at which were ten Bishops, Vid. Journal as before: I
shall only add one thing more, and that is the Protestation of the Bishops. 11.
R. 2 where they give the reason why they refused, to be put in some
Parliaments, their words Quia in hoe Parliamento agitur de nonnullis materiis
in quibus non licet nobis juxta sacrorum Canonum instituta quomodolibet
personaliter interesse; but they there add a Salvo to their right, in the
beginning of their Protestation. Quod ad Archiepiscopum Cantuar. qui pro
tempore fuerit, n^c non caeteros suos suffraganeos Confratres, Co-episcopos,
Abbates et Priores aliosque Praelatos quoscunque Baroniam de Domino Rege
t^nentes in Parliamento Regis ut Pares praed. personaliter interesse pertinet,
ibidemque de regni negotiis and aliis ibi tractari consuetis cum caeteris dicti
regni Paribus and aliis consulere, ordinare, statuere desinire ac caetera
facere, quae Parliamenti tempore ibid. intendet facien', etc. it is true indeed,
that as they never intended, but that the Appeals, Pursuites, Accusations,
Judgments, had and rendered, etc. upon their voluntary absenting themselves;
they should be good and valid in the Law, as their Protestation expressly
grants: yet by the same their Protestation, they reserve their right of being
present, etc. doing every thing else which any other Peer, though Temporal
might do. And that they did Vote in the 21st of this Kings Reign, by their
Proctor in the Condemnation of the Archbishop of Canterbury (Yea and upon the
Commons Petition too, for that many judgments had been reversed, for that they
were not present as is before proved) and Personally also in the Condemnation
of the Earl of Arandel and Wardour, etc. the Duke of Lancaster being then Lord
High Steward, Vid. Plaoit. Coron etc. 21 Ric. 2. in the Records in the Tower.
The Roll marked with the Letters F. I. It is well known that out of respect to
the constitution made in the Council held at Westminster. that no Clergyman
should agitare Judicium Sanguinis. (This Council is mentioned in R. Hovenden in
H. 2. p. 30.) the Clergy have some time forborne to intermeddle in such matters:
and on the other side it is as notorious, that many of that Order have been Lord
Chief Justices of England, and that none have discharged that Office better,
more to the Content of the King and Subject, and the Benefit of the whole
Commonwealth.

FINIS.



