A LETTER TO George Keith, CONCERNING The Salvability of the Heathen.

Together with A Testimony to the same Doctrine, as Long held, and not Newly
taken up, out of several former Books of him that writ it.

By his Respectful Neighbor, J.H.

If therefore the Doctrine of Christ has demonstrated to all Nations the same
God, whom the Ancients, even before Moses, have served, there is no doubt but
that we are made Partakers with them of the same Divine Worship; and having
moreover the same common Religion, it is manifest that we shall likewise enjoy
the same Blessedness, or Benediction. Eusebius de Demonstratione Evangelii. L.
1. C. 5.

London Printed, and Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster, 1700.

A Letter to George Keith, etc.
Mr. George Keith,
UNderstanding that you came to live near me, I was willing to be acquainted
with you, as a Person learned, and whose Converse is profitable; but I am sorry
to find you so engaged, and hot in your Opinion (though Zeal in a good Cause is
commendable) that you cannot let another differ from you without Anger; when,
if he be angry too, whom you differ from, there must be Contention: Which is to
be avoided, by a prudent Man. Prove. 17.14.

Look, you George, You and I do believe a Salvability for some Heathen: You and
I, for all that, do believe, That no Man is, was, or ever can be saved, but
through the Name Mediation, or Redemption of Jesus Christ; neither of us are
Deists therefore, but both Christians. You proceed further, and say, That no
Man ever was, is, or can be saved, but by Faith in Jesus Christ, and the
knowledge of him Crucified, and Risen again. Here I must differ from you; for
though Redemption be Universal, and it is true, That no Man ever could, or can
be saved without the Benefit thereof: Yet must we not make the Redemption of
Christ, or the Benefit of his Death, and our Knowledge of it, to be
Commensurate. God forbid it should be so, for then indeed no Heathen could be
saved.

In your Truth Advanced, p. 40. you very heartily declare, That to conclude all
Gentiles, however diligent they have been, to live up to their Illumination, to
be finally and irrecoverably Lost and Damned, is a rash and uncharitable
Opinion: And in the same page, you say, I do positively affirm, according to
the Scriptures, That Eternal Salvation is to be had only through Faith and
Knowledge of Christ crucified, and raised again. This is to maintain two
things, inconsistent with one another: And here I asked you therefore, how you
could make out the Mystery? And you answered me, That you had three ways to do
it; Two of them you expressed, but because they were to me unsatisfactory, I
can remember neither; and the third, upon which you laid most stress, you
would not deliver, thinking me at present not like to receive it. I very much
desire to know what that reserve was; but what you have in your Book, and in
the same Page, I see. Though God gives this Knowledge and Faith (say you)
ordinarily, by preaching and reading the Scriptures, yet I nothing doubt, but
that God has inwardly Revealed it to diverse without.

I cannot but remember, upon this, what you told me, That when W.P. put this
Question to you, and pressed you with it, as unanswerable, asking you, how you
could hold any Heathen to be saved, seeing you do maintain, that a Faith in
Christ without, is necessary to Salvation? You answered him, That the Light
within is sufficient for the Revelation. When you told me this, I could not but
commend it, as a present ingenious Repartee, ad hominem, or to a Quaker; but
that is no answer to me, or any other Man, that is no Quaker; nor fit for you
to own, as good; for then it renders you still to be one of them, who take
Enthusiasm for your Guide. W.P. would never have declared you an Apostate, over
the Head of you, for this saying, That you nothing doubt, but God does inwardly
Reveal whatsoever is of necessity to be believed, without Preaching or Reading:
Whereas I, for my part, am so far from an assent to you, that I am persuaded to
the contrary, by those express words of the Apostle, How shall they believe in
him, of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher?
Romans 10.14.

We read in the Acts of the Eunuch, that Man of Authority, a Proselyte, reading
in Isaiah, Philip asks him, Understandest thou what thou read? And he
answered, How can I, except some Man should guide me? Acts 8.31. From whence we
may see, that though the Prophets speak of Christ in many places (and in none
more amply than in this) yet the Readers understood them not, nor indeed could
they; the Understanding being reserved till the time of the Apostles, who had
the Spirit (withheld till Christ was Glorified, John 7.39.) to enlighten them
with that Knowledge, which they were to communicate to us.

The Knowledge of Christ, and Faith in him, is indeed a Treasure; and those
Riches of the Gospel, which, as to the times before, were unsearchable; for it
was to them a Treasure in the Field, Hid (in those Ages) till Found by the
Apostles, through the Revelation thereof by the Spirit, for the Publication of
the same to the World. And this is to be noted, for a matter exceeding
remarkable, That though God had declared to Abraham, that in his Seed all
Nations should be blessed; whereby the Gospel is said to be Preached to him,
Gal. 3.8. Yet was the Preaching the same by Peter to the Gentiles such a
strange thing, to them who were of the Circumcision, that they contended with
him for going to the Uncircumcised, as what ought not to be done, until Peter
rehearsed from the beginning, and expounded in order to them, the Visions that
he and Cornelius had, and how the Holy Ghost fell upon them before he Baptized
them; which put them to silence, so that they held their peace, and glorified
God, saying, Then has God also unto the Gentiles granted Repentance unto Life,
Acts 11.18. This was the thing they wondered at; this the Mystery hid from
them, (the Apostle so calls it) though Preached so long ago to their Father
Abraham himself, That the Gentiles should be fellow Heirs, and of the same
Body, and partakers of his Promise in Christ by the Gospel. Ephesians. 3.6.

I deny not therefore but the Old Testament* Scripture speaks of Christ, and
that so fully, as to his Person, his Office, his States of Humiliation and
Exaltation, that Christ, in his appearing to the two Disciples going to Emmaus,
did show them, how Moses, and all the Prophets, speaking concerning him,
foretold that he was to suffer, and so to enter into his Glory, Luke 24.26.
St. Peter likewise preaches the same, That unto him gave all the Prophets
witness; collecting from thence, that through his Name, whosoever believes in
him shall receive Remission of Sins, Acts 10.43. Nevertheless, it is very
manifest, that the Jews understood not these things, prophesied of Him; nor yet
the Prophets that prophesied them; seeing they ministered those things (says the
Apostle) not to themselves, but to us, which are reported by them that preach
the Gospel, (1 Pet. 1.12.) and therefore he has it before, That they
prophesied of the Grace which should come, or was to come, and not then come, (
v. 10.) St. Paul accordingly lets the Romans understand, ( Romans 16.25, 26.) how
the Gospel therefore was mainly a Revelation of the Mystery which was kept
secret since the World began, that now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures
of the Prophets, according to the Commandment of the Everlasting God, made
known to all Nations for the Obedience of Faith: That is as much as to say, God
by his Spirit has opened those Prophecies to these first Preachers, commanding
them to Reveal the same to the World, for Confirmation of what Christ said and
did, suffered, and rose again; they being such as abode with him, as Eye and
Ear-Witnesses of the same. For which cause (says he again, Ephesians. 3.1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6.). I Paul, the Prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles; if you have
heard of the Dispensation of the Grace of God, which is given me to youward;
how that by Revelation, he made known unto me the Mystery, -- which in other
Ages was not made known to the Sons of Men, as it is now revealed to his holy
Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit. The Knowledge of Christ dying, and risen
again, as now revealed by the Gospel, that is, as dying for our Sins, and
rising again for our Justification; with the Application thereof, by Faith, we
see plainly, was a Mystery, and not made known to the Sons of Men, till the
times of the Apostles. It appears therefore, that the Redemption of Christ, and
Benefits of his Death and Resurrection, must be of larger extent* than the
Knowledge of him; for else, no Man in the World, till Faith came, till Christ,
and the Gospel came, could (as is said before) have been saved.

As for the Distinction here, which you used, of an Implicit and Explicit
Faith, or Knowledge of Christ; I count it but a yielding the Cause: For when we
say, The Benefit of Christ's Redemption, and the Knowledge of Him, or Faith in
Him, are not Commensurate; we mean it, of such a Kowledge of him, or Faith, as
is now preached by the Gospel; that is, that Explicit Knowledge as was revealed
by the Spirit to the Apostles, and by them made known, and so required of us,
as necessary to our Salvation. And if this be granted, that such an Explicit
Knowledge of Christ, and Faith in him, is not of the same Extent ( Necessitate
medii) with our Benefit by him, the Point is obtained: If you will not grant
it, the matter is enforced, or proved, by this Text. A bare Implicit Knowledge
of the Messiah to come, without an Explicit Knowledge of his Death and
Resurrection, as now revealed, is a thing that could be of no more avail, to
the Salvation of the Jews, than the Faith of a Gentile, only in God's Mercy,
upon his Repentance (which we see the Ninevites had) without the Knowledge of
Christ at all; and if either the one or the other had Repentance unto Life
wrought upon their Hearts, by the Spirit of God (which is f^ee to operate where
he will, for the Wind blows where it lists, Christ himself says) they were
accepted only through the Satisfaction and Merits of our Redeemer; whereof
indeed they were both a-like Ignorant; this being the Mystery of the Gospel,
yet hid from the Sons of Men.

I must confess, when I asked you, Whether you did, or could really believe,
that every Jew and Heathen that ever was saved (allowing the Salvability of
such) had a Faith in Christ's dying and rising? And you said, You did verily
believe so. I wondered at it, and told you, I liked you the better, as being a
Man of a stronger Faith than I, who can believe no such thing, if I would never
so fain. On the contrary, I do believe, that there never was any Man in the
World, that had the Knowledge of Christ, Dying for his Sins, and Rising again
for his Justification, so as to make Application of it to his own Soul, by
Faith, as is required now of us under the Gospel, until the Prophecies, which
the Jews had, were accomplished by Him; that is, till after his Death and
Resurrection. We are sure the Apostles knew nothing of his Death and
Resurrection (and consequently of his Satisfaction and Merit thereby) though
Christ did more than once tell them of it; for indeed they were not yet under
that Dispensation, as they should believe it. And when the Disciples undestood
nothing thereof, for all the Scriptures, how can you believe that others did,
or could understand their Meaning, before these Scriptures were fulfilled?

You ask (in your Book) Who taught Abraham, Job, our first Parents, but God and
Christ, by the Holy Spirit in their Hearts? I say the like, as to any good man
that ever was among the Heathen, That it was God by his Spirit that wrought
that Good in him, as in us. But I say also, that God did teach them, every one
of them (the one as well as the other) so much, in their day, as was necessary
to their Salvation, by such way and means as he thought best. But such a Faith
and Knowledge of Christ, as is necessary to the Salvation of a Christian (that
is, one to whom the Gospel is preached and received) I do by no means believe
to be necessary to the Salvation of every Man on the Earth, that is, or ever
was, saved; no, nor to any one of those that lived before Christ came.

We read in John, when Christ was going from his Disciples, and from the World,
to his Father, he has these remarkable words: Ye believe in God, believe also
in me, John 14.1. Under that Dispensation the Jews and the Disciples were,
before the Christian Dispensation was opened; they were to have Faith in God,
and to put their whole trust in him; and it was that Faith, by which the Just
Man was to Live. Hab. 2.4. But the Dispensation was coming on, and is now come,
when we must believe also in Christ. It was Life Eternal for the Jews to know
God, the God of Abraham, to be the only true God, and to live in the
Acknowledgment and Service of him: But now we are to know Jesus Christ also,
and believe in Him whom he has sent, John 17.3. and 6.29. In both places, note
the word Sent, which was not of necessity to Salvation therefore, before he was
sent.

When Christ had finished the Work of our Redemption, by his Death on the
Cross, and Risen again, he entered into that Kingdom, which John and He
Preached, was at hand. All Power is given me, (says he) in Heaven and Earth;
Go and Disciple all Nations. The Jews were under a Theocracy, and so God's
People: It pleased him now to have that Kingdom enlarged, and the Gentiles
brought into it, and to commit it to his Son; so that the Church in the
Wilderness is now Catholic, a Church over the World; and the Law by which it
is governed, is the same as was on foot since Adam fell; but under a diverse
Dispensation, Administration or Edition. Upon this account do we read of
Cornelius, a devout Servant of God, though a Roman, Gentile, or Heathen, is
commanded to send for Peter, to Preach to him the Gospel, which is the Scepter
of Christ's Kingdom, and by Baptism, to receive his Allegiance, and declare him
a Subject. From which Instance there is one Objection that by many is urged
against the Salvability of any Heathen. If Cornelius (say they) could have been
saved without an explicit Knowledge of, and Faith in Christ, Dying for his
Sins, and Rising again for his Resurrection, this need not have been done. They
urge besides, the Angel's speech, That Peter should tell him such words whereby
He and his Household should be saved: But this is indeed standing on Words,
more than Things: It was fit, it was meet, that so eminent a worthy Servant of
God, as this, should be chosen out, to be first brought in, for a leading
Example to other Gentiles, at the opening the Gospel Dispensation. It is to be
more thoroughly considered, that since it pleased God, that this Covenant of
Grace, which is the Covenant of Life and Salvation for Mankind; according to
which, every Man and Woman shall Live or Dye, as they perform, or not perform,
the condition thereof, should have a diverse Administration; we cannot but
think it to be advantageous for any Man, to be brought under that
Administration thereof, that is most perfect; and such being this of the
Gospel, Cornelius has his gracious call into it.

Not that Cornelius was out of a state of Grace and Salvation before, for it is
plain that he was a Man that feared God, a Devout Man, his Prayer heard and
accepted of God, which no Man can be but in the beloved, or through Christ's
Satisfaction and Merits; and such an acceptance, is an acceptance unto Life and
Salvation. To say he was accepted, but not justified, is to speak without Book,
and with prejudice: I am satisfied to the contrary; and if you are not, I pray
what think you of the Disciples? I hope you believe that Peter, James, and
John, Nathaniel and the rest, were in a state of Salvation, while under the
Jews Administration, and understood not the Scriptures (as is said before) nor
Christ hmself, when he spoke of his Death and Resurrection; and could have no
Faith in him Dying for their Sins, and Rising again for their Justification
then, as they had afterward, when accomplished. Well, consider it then,
Cornelius is one that fears God, and works Righteousness; and performing the
condition of the Covenant of Life, he is in a state of Salvation, according to
that Administration of it, as the whole World is under: The Disciples likewise
fear God, and work Righteousness, and are in a state of Salvation, according to
the Jewish Administration; they both being in such a state; Cornelius hears
Peter Preaching, and believes in Jesus Christ, lives up to the Gospel, and is
now in a state of Salvation, according to the Covenant under the Christian
Administration: The Disciples likewise Preach themselves, and they believe and
live according as they Preach, and are in the same condition. What
inconsistency is there here, but that the same Persons may be in a state of
Grace, under one Administration of the Covenant, and under the other, when they
are called from one into the other? Abraham is called out of his Country, and
he obeys; God promises to make him a Nation, which shall inherit Canaan: He
believes God, and his Faith is imputed for Righteousness: After this God
appeared, and makes a Covenant with him, and requires Circumcision: Will any
say here? What need is there of this, seeing Abraham was in a justified State
already? No, indeed there was no need of this for that end; but it is God's
Will, that though Abraham is a Man that walked before God, and was Perfect,
that is, Evangelically, and so in a saved State; yet because here is a new
Administration of the Covenant to be set up, it is the Command of God alone, is
both the Rule and Reason for the doing. As for the Good and Benefit he shall
have by it, Abraham is to be assured of that, seeing God who is good, and does
good, thought it good to be done. Abraham believes, and goes out of his
Country, and is thereby justified: Abraham believes, and receives Circumcision,
and is thereby justified: Abraham believes, and Offers up his Son Isaac, and is
thereby justified: He received Circumcision, as a Seal of the Righteousness of
that Faith which he had, when he was Uncircumcised: He is justified by the
Obedience of Faith, in doing all, and his Justification by one, is no
impediment to his being justified also by the other.

The Angel's telling Cornelius, That he shall bear words whereby he shall be
saved, is no more than Paul's saying, That the Gospel is the Power of God, to
the Salvation of all that believe; which is true, whether the Believer was in a
State of Grace already or no; whether he be a Jew or Gentile; whether
Cornelius, or the Disciples themselves of the Lord Jesus.

If this be so, that a Heathen may be saved, you may say, Then is his Condition
easier, and his State better, than that of the Jew or Christian: I Answer, This
is not only False, because the Condition of Salvation (to walk before God, and
be Perfect) being the same to all; So much the lesser means that one has
thereunto, must needs make it to be so much the harder: But it is also Profane
to say so, because the Apostle to the Romans is express, that the Advantage of
the Jew is much every way above the Gentile, Romans 3.1, 2. And to the Hebrews he
is express, That we Christians have a better Covenant than the Jew, Heb. 8.6.
The first and second Covenant he speaks of there, are nothing but the two
Administrations of the Covenant of Grace (the same in Substance, say our
Divines) in regard to the Jews, which preceded, and then to us Christians. If
you will ask wherein the second Administration is better than the first,
consult the common place of our Divines; That I fix upon, as the result of them
all, is, that these new Administrations did still afford more Means and
Inducement to the bringing up their Hearts unto the terms of the Covenant of
Life it self, by which it was only, that any were, or could be Saved. No doubt
but there was more wrought on of the Jewish Nation, having the advantage of the
Oracles of God; and among us that have a fuller Revelation, (in regard to our
Savior) to come up to a sincere walking before God (which are the terms, and
the same I say to all) than among the Heathen who are without them.

There is one thing remains, which I remember you offered, that requires some
more large Considerations, and it is this, That though you were willing to
allow that some Heathen may be saved, you deny it to be by Covenant, but only
uncovenanted Mercy; and you cited the Bishop of Salisbury for it. That
excellent Person, Bishop Burnet, in his Exposition of the Eighteenth Article of
the Church, which pronounces an Anathema to them that hold any Man may be saved
by the Law, or Sect he Professes, unless he be a Christian (which seems to be
the sense of the Article) distinguishes between the word, By and In. To be
saved by a Law or Sect (says he) signifies, that by the Virtue of that Law, or
Sect, such Men as follow it may be saved: Whereas, to be saved in a Law, or
Sect, imports only, that God may extend his Compassion to Men that are engaged
in a false Religion. And this he appears to own, as not condemned by the
Article. The ingenuous Bishop proceeds; And seeing Faith in Christ is in the
Gospel required, as necessary to Salvation, there is no question, he says, to
be made, but that those that have the Gospel preached to them, and believe not
in him, must be Damned: The difficuly is only concerning those who never heard
of the Christian Religion. Here then the Bishop distinguishes again of Men in
the Law, and without the Law, in the words of the Apostle, that is between the
Jew and Gentile, Christian and Heathen; and for the last, though they have not
the Law written, they have it in their Hearts, and shall be judged according to
their Consciences. This is fair; but seeing Pardon of Sin is limited (as he
speaks) to believing in Christ, and Salvation is only through Christ's Name,
according to Scripture; he distinguishes again thus: It is on the account of
the Death (or Sacrifice) of Christ, that Men are Pardoned or Saved, but it
(...) not so plainly said, that no Man can be saved, unless he has an ^^p^icit
Know^^^g^ o^ (...), together with a belief of it. That is in effect the same I
said before, that the Redemption we have by Christ, and the Knowledge of him,
is not to be reckoned Commensurate; yet it is but unwarily said of him (or too
warily, as one that is in the Water, and feels not a bottom for his feet) that
Pardon of Sin is positively limited to believing in Christ, and thereupon to be
forced to mince the matter thus [ It is not so plainly said] in the words
foregoing: Whereas, Pardon of Sin is limited to a believer in Christ only, as
to such as have had a Preacher, as is before understood by himself: But the
explicit Knowledge of Christ, as the Gospel reveals him, is not at all required
of an Heathen Man, nor of any Man, as of necessity to Salvation before Christ
came. Upon this supposition then, that this is not so clearly said in
Scripture, as the other; he comes to another Distinction, which he says, is to
be made, as that which will clear the matter, and all difficulties in it.

A great difference (says he, I will cite all his words) is to be made between
a Foederal certainty of Salvation, secured by the Promises of God, and of this
new Covenant in Christ Jesus; and the extent to which the Goodness and Mercy of
God may go. None are in a Foederal State of Salvation, but Christians: To them
is given the Covenant of Grace, and to them the Promises of God are made and
offered, so that they have a certainty of it, upon their performing those
Conditions that are put in the Promises: All others are out of this Promise, to
whom the Tidings of it were never brought. In this which is said by this worthy
Bishop, there is thus much of Truth to be acknowledged and noted, That no
Heathen or Jew under their Dispensations, had, or could have, such certainty
upon their turning to God (so as to draw near to him in full assurance of
Faith) that they should be accepted and saved, as Christians have, or may have
upon the Revelation of Jesus Christ; and for that reason, if there were no
other, the Dispensation the Christian is under, is better than that of the Jew
or Heathen, to reflect again on your Objection before. But to speak more fully
to this matter otherwise, I think fit to remember the Doctrine commonly
received (I suppose, even by you, and the Bishop, if it be not out of your
Minds.) There is a double Covenant, the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of
Grace. The Covenant of Works was made with Adam, in Innoceney, which he broke,
and none can keep, to be saved by it: There is therefore the Covenant of Grace,
which was made with Adam fallen, in the Promise of the Seed of the Woman, that
is, of a Redeemer, and of Salvation, upon the terms of it. There is a
Government consequently arises to God, from the right of Redemption, and that
must be by this Law, or Covenant, seeing the other is of impossible
performance. There is no Government but by a Law, and that must be such as the
Subject is in a capacity of reward by the keeping, as of punishment by the
breaking it, or else it is not righteous and meet. There is a diverse
Administration therefore of this Covenant, or Law of Grace, according to the
Revelation God has made of his Will to the Sons of Men. What God reveals as
his Will, must be believed and obeyed. Under the Administration of this
Covenant to us Christians, God's whole design of Redeeming and Saving us by his
Son, is fully revealed, and accordingly a Faith in him dying for our Sins, and
rising again for our Justification, is required of us, as necessary to our
Salvation: Under the Jewish Dispensation they believed a Messiah to come, and
some Deliverance by Worldly Pomp and Conquest ( Acts 1.6.) but as for the
Salvation of their Souls, by his dying for them (or making Satisfaction to God
for their Sins, by the Sacrifice of himself on the Cross) they understood
nothing, as appears by the Disciples aforesaid, Then he took the Twelve, and
said unto them, Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things that are written
by the Prophets, concerning the Son of Man, shall be accomplished: They shall
put him to Death, and the third Day he shall rise again. And they understood
not these things, and this saying was hid from them, neither knew they the
things which were spoken. Likewise, it appears as much by their Rulers and
Chiefest among them, For they that dwell at Jerusalem, and their Rulers,
because they knew him not, nor yet the Voice of the Prophets, which are read
every Sabbath day, they have fulfilled them, in condemning him. As for the
Ancients, before Abraham and Moses, what Revelation they had of God's Will, Who
can tell? A Law they had written in their Hearts, which proves a Lawgiver, and
they had Tradition: They believed a God, and that he was gracious to forgive
the Sinner upon his Repentance, as appears by their Sacrifices; and that if
they lived uprightly, it should be well with them. Now if upon this, it pleased
God to choose any one of them, as he did Abraham, when he was an Idolater, in
Ur of the Caldees, and by his Spirit gave him an inward and effectual Call, by
stirring him up to lay hold on God, and his Covenant, in a desire and endeavor
to walk up to his Light within, or Knowledge he has attained, with Sincerity
of Heart and Life, which is performing the Condition of the Covenant of Grace,
according to the Dispensation he is under; although such a Man does not know
upon what account Sin is expiated, God reconciled, and the Sinner saved; yet is
it certain, that this Man's Sins are pardoned, God reconciled to him, and his
Soul in a State of Salvation, as well as the Christians, who has the Explicit
Knowledge of Christ's Death and Resurrection; and that is, upon the same
account as his, even through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant; to wit,
through the Covenant of Grace, preached and purchased for us by his Blood, the
Death, Satisfaction, Mediation, Redemption of Christ Jesus; so that if any
held, or are willing to hold, a Salvability for the Heathen, and yet deny their
Salvaon by Covenant, but by an uncovenanted Miraculous Mercy, they do but trip
in plain Ground; upholding a Doctrine that is Good and Generous, but without
its Foundation: For there is no Way, nor ever was, but one Way (which is this,
by the Covenant of Grace, procured for us by Christ) of Salvation to any Mortal
under Heaven.

As for them whom God has left in Darkness (says the Bishop, intending all the
Heathen) they are certainly out of Covenant, out of those Promises and
Declarations that are made in it; so that they have no foederal Right to be
saved; neither can we affirm, that they shall be saved. This, I must needs say,
I take to be spoken without second Thoughts; and I like nothing so
inconsiderate, though in this excellent Person. There is no Man coming into the
World so left in Darkness, but he has a Light within, which if he lives up to,
he is one of God's People, says the Quaker. There is no Man in the Earth, that
loves God sincerely, I say for certain, can perish. The Quakers Doctrine, in
this point, is to be preferred before the Bishops. I will say more, there is no
Man in the Earth, Heathen or Christian, but he is a Subject of the Covenant,
the Covenant of Grace; and God is certainly his Governor by this Law, or
Covenant, so far, that if he obeys him, answers it, and keeps it, or lives up
to that Revelation of God's Will which he has, he has, by performing the
Condition, the Promise thereof accordingly to be saved; and we may affirm that
he shall. I must yet say further (if it be farther) That there is no Man on the
Earth that is saved, but it must be by the Covenant, the Covenant of Grace, and
the Promise of it. There is one Distinction therefore I must offer, which the
Bishop has not, and is wanting in the place, and I will be solemn upon it.

It pleased God to call Abram out of his Country, to make him a Nation, and to
give him Canaan; and upon this account he is the first Elect we read of in
Scripture. Thou art the Lord, the God, who did choose Abram, and brought him
out of Ur, in the Caldees. Neh. 9.7. That is, in regard to his Posterity after
him, who were Chosen of God to be a Peculiar People to him by a Covenant, which
was a Political Covenant between him and them, as their Ruler. This Covenant
required the mark of Circumcision in their Flesh, by way of Separation of that
Nation from all others. Among all the Multitudes of People, thou have gotten
thee a People; and unto this People thou gave a Law that is approved of all,
2 Esd. 5.27. Ye stand this day, all of you, before the Lord, to enter into
Covenant with the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 27. Thou art a holy People unto the Lord
thy God; the Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special People unto himself,
above all People that are upon the face of the Earth, Deuteronomy. 7.6. So again,
Chap. 14. v. 2. A special People, a peculiar People. He has not dealt so with
other Nations, as he did to them, says the Psalmist. He has shown his Mind
unto Jacob, his Statutes and Judgments to Israel, Ps. 147.19, 20. To whom
pertains the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving the
Law, and the Service of God, Romans 19.4. By all which it appears, That God was
their God, and they his People, by a Covenant that was Peculiar to them as the
Seed of Abraham, with whom it began, and is called by Divines therefore the
Covenant of Peculiarity; which is to be distinguished in this respect from the
Covenant of Grace that does belong to all Mankind, the Posterity of Adam; the
difference indeed being in regard to its diverse Administrations. When the
Scripture therefore does speak of the Gentiles, that they were, in respect to
the Jews, without God in the World, without the Covenant, Aliens to the
Commonwealth of Israel, without Hope, (the hope of Israel) without Christ,
Strangers to the Covenant of Promise: We are to understand all this in regard
to the Church State of the Jews (which no Nation but the Jews were in) as
appears by all the Texts before-cited. They were without God: How is that? As
he was to the Jews a Peculiar Governor; but not without God as Universal
Sovereign of Heaven and Earth. Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not of the
Gentiles? Yea of the Gentiles also, Romans 3.29. Without the Covenant: How is
that? Without the Covenant of Peculiarity; not without the Covenant of Grace,
but under the Government of God by this Law, or Covenant, which is the Law of
the Gospel, by which all Men at the great Day shall be judged: According to my
Gospel, says the Apostle, Romans 2.16. That Law now cannot but be the Law we must
Live by, (as governed by God) which we must be Judged by: That Law must be
first Norma Officii, a Rule of Life; which at last must be Norma Judicii, the
Rule of Judgment.

Well then, there is that Covenant (which some call a Political, some a
Peculiar, some a Subservient Covenant) belonging to the Jews (and now to us
Christians also) the Partition Wall being thrown down, who are therefore as the
Jews were, called by Peter, a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy
Nation, a Peculiar People, (1 Pet. 2.9.) and by Paul are said to be Grafted
into their Olive; that is, into the same external Covenant Relation, ( Romans
11.17.) and this the Heathen are without: But there is also the Covenant of
Life, of Grace, of Salvation, or of the Gospel; and this we are all under, Jew
and Gentile, Christian and Heathen; and though the Gentile came not in to the
Jew to be Circumcised, and the Heathen come not in to us to be Baptized, that
is, to the Profession of this Covenant, they are yet all under the Verge of it,
in regard to Obligation; and if any of them be wrought on by the Spirit, so as
inwardly to enter into, and keep it, they are made Partakers of the Benefit,
the Privilege, the Promise of it, as well as the Christian.

I have had lately sent me some certain Manuscripts to read, the Works of a
Sedulous Divine I know not, an Anti-Arminian, Learned, Pious Man, who has
these words in one of these Manuscripts, which I will transcribe. Dr. Pain (p.
513.) says, It has been an uncharitable Question, Whether any of the Gentiles
should be saved? Now they cannot be saved in an ordinary way, by Virtue of the
Christian Covenant, to which they have no Title or Claim: Yet God may in
extraordinary Mercy let all Mankind have the benefit of it, and save them by
Christ, though they know him not. Ans. It is certain, that all such of fallen
Mankind, as be Penitent, and honor God by holy Love and Obedience, have, by
God's holy Covenant in Christ, true Right to Remission of Sins, and the Kingdom
of Heaven, and shall be saved; they are really and indeed true Saints: But no
one of fallen Mankind can be truly Penitent, and honor God by holy Love and
Obedience, without special Grace: And special Grace God gives to none of fallen
Mankind, save for the sake of Christ, who has merited it for all the Elect, by
Virtue of the Covenant between God and Christ, according to the foreknowledge
and purpose of God. These are the words of another; and I am to give no more
account of them than I please: But this I will add to them, That the Elect,
which are to be gathered from the four quarters of the Earth, are, I believe,
in some more places than where there are Christians.

I return: To them pertain the Covenants, and the giving the Law. The Covenants
of Circumcision, and that Covenant when he took them by the hand, to lead them
out of the Land of Egypt; and the Law and Ordinances given by Moses: These
indeed, its true, did pertain to the Jews only, and not to any other People:
But there was a Promise which belonged to them also, by which, when none of
them were justifiable by their works, for by the deeds of the Law shall no
Flesh living be justified, the penitent believing Jew was saved. The Promise
was the Promise of the Woman's Seed, made to Adam fallen, and the same Promise
made to Abraham* that in his Seed should all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed, which was the Substance of the Gospel preached to him, which is now
preached to the World; that is, the Promise of a Redeemer, who was then to
come, and so was only in Promise, but now already come; that Redemption
obtained, and the Promise fulfilled. Again, As for the giving the Law, there is
a Law which came from Mount Sinai, and it is true, this pertained to the Jew;
but there is a Law also from Zion, and that belongs to Jew and Gentile,
Christian and Heathen. Out of Zion shall go forth a Law, and the Word of the
Lord from Jerusalem, Isa. 2.3. This is the Law of the Gospel, and the same with
the Covenant of Grace, of Life and Salvation: If there be any then that
apprehend the Covenant of Grace to be made with Christ, in behalf of the Elect,
and to belong only to them, I am not of their Opinion. The Covenant of Grace, I
account, is God's Covenant with Mankind, and made with Adam fallen, in behalf
of his Posterity; and this is as good as expressly declared by Christ, Go,
preach the Gospel to all Nations, to every Creature, or to all the World; he
that believes, or whosoever believes, shall be saved; and he that believes not,
shall be damned, Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.15, 16. This is likewise as good as
expressed by St. Paul; This is the Covenant I will make with the House of Israel,
after those days, Heb. 8.10. Who is the House of Israel, now the Partition Wall
between the Jew and Gentile is down, but the whole World? Besides, if Christ be
Party, how is he Mediator? A Mediator is to bring two Parties to Agreement. If
God and Christ be the Parties, and not God and Man, how is he the Mediator
between God and Men? For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and
Men, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. That the Redemption of Christ therefore
is Universal, and the Effect of it, the Covenant, belongs to all, is not to be
denied; nay, because the Covenant belongs to all, or because it must be
granted, that Christ has died for all, so far that he has obtained an
Universal Conditional Remission and Salvation, or a Law, or Act of Grace, that
whosoever believes and Repents, or performs the Condition of the Gospel, shall
be pardoned, and saved by the Gospel; therefore must our Redemption by Christ
be Universal. And if any persist to deny it, whosoever they be, though they see
it not, (for then they would not presume to do so) they, in effect, do divest
God, as Redeemer, of his Government over the World. This must appear, by what
has been said, to an intelligent Man.

It is time for me then to come now to the Testimony I am willing to produce
out of other Books I have formerly written, that this Doctrine may not appear
strange, as newly taken up, or not considered as thoroughly as I could; but by
the Confirmation and Inculcation thereof, with the cumulative Light I bring out
of them, it may find the willinger Admission, and give satisfaction to them
that have free Minds, and are meet to receive it.

Out of a Book, Entitled, The Ax laid to the Root of Separation.
As God has made all things, so is he Universal Governor of his Creatures. The
Government of God over his Creatures, that are Reasonable, must be a Moral
Government, requiring Obedience from them upon Motives of Reward and
Punishment. The Instrument of this Government must be his Law. The Law of God
is either the Law of Nature, or his Revealed and Positive Laws. The Government
of God is likewise double, Natural, or Conventional.

The Natural Government of God over Men and Women, which he has by right of
Creation, is over all the World, as they are particular Persons, giving them
the Law of Nature to Live by, that they may please him and be saved. This Law
of Nature, is either the Law of Innocent, or Lapsed Nature. The Law of Innocent
Nature, is that perfect Rule of Righteousness that was writ in Adam's Heart,
when Created, requiring him to preserve his Innocence and Integrity upon pain
of Death; and it is called the Law of Works. The Law of Lapsed Nature, is the
same Law with Mitigation, requiring the same Duty, but not as the Condition of
Life; accepting of the imperfect Service of Man, according to his present
State, so long as it is performed in Sincerity of Heart toward God; and is
called the Law of Grace.

As Man in Innocence had the Notices of the most Holy God, and his Duty writ in
his Heart, or could gather it from the Light of his Reason, being to live
perfectly in that State: So must the World, after Man's fall, and the loss of
his Innocence, have some the Like Notices implanted there, or arising naturally
from the Exercise of his Faculties, that God is good and merciful, and will not
punish him if he Repent, but consider him according to his frail Condition; and
consequently, that he must now have no Government at all over him for Life and
Salvation, or else that he must be under another Law than that of Innocence, or
under other Conditions, in obeying it; for else must every Man on the Earth
Everlastingly Perish.

Upon what account, or upon what ground, the Righteousness of God could stand
in dealing with Man, when fallen, by another Law than that at first implanted
in him in Innocence, was a Mystery hidden from the Foundation of the World, and
not revealed, but Darkly, till the times of the Gospel. But the Belief that God
was good, and would pardon the Sinner upon his Repentance, though they could
not tell how, or upon what ground it was (the way of Reconciliation through
Christ being beyond the Ken of all Humane Understanding) was General in the
World; as does appear in particular by the Ninevites; as also by the Sacrifices
for appeasing the Deity, which have been in use in all Nations. Not but they
all are under the same Law as Adam was, (the Law that was for our Nature cannot
be altered) but we are not under it upon the same terms. We are under it, so as
we are bound to live according to it; but we are not under it so as to be
Justified or Condemned by it: We are under it as a Rule of Life, but not under
it as the Rule of Judgment.

There is One Religion therefore, Law or Rule, for all Mankind to obtain Life
by, which being the Law of our Lapsed Nature, or Remedying Law, containing
God's Grace administered to all the Earth, in a threefold State, of such as
were, or are, without the Law, (or before it) and under the Law, and under the
Gospel. As this Administration is threefold, so has the Faith, which is the
Condition thereof, been diversifyed. But now is the Righteousness of God
revealed from Faith to Faith. The Righteousness of God, is the Righteousness of
this Law, which has ever been a-foot in the World* And though a Heathen has
not that Faith as is required of the Christian, in the Third Edition of it, or
that which was required of the Jew under the Second; yet has he such a Faith
as belongs to the First, such as the Ancients before Abraham had: And so long
as that Faith he has does work by Love, or by sincere Obedience to God,
according to the Light he has, it will justify him, as well as that which is
now farther required of us under the Gospel. It follows, that this Law (being
that which is given for Life, and so the one only true Measure of Religion to
all the World) must belong to the Government of God, which is Universal, and
that is the Natural Government of God.

The Government of God which is Conventional, is that Government which he has
taken over some certain Persons, as they are gathered or joined together in
Societies, unto which they are called out from the World, for the Glorifying
his Name in that Worship or Service of him, which he has instituted by his
Positive Law, Precepts, Ordinances, (I mean such as he has any ways revealed
to be his Will) whether they be such as belong to the Law of Nature also, or
such as do not) in order to the taking, owning and acknowledging him for their
God in a peculiar manner; that is, in opposition to the Worship of any other
God or Idols, and the serving him the true God in any other way, but what he
has appointed; and their becoming thereby a Peculiar People to him, and so
being under his Favor and Blessing, in regard to all the good things of this
Life, and that which is to come.

I do observe here, the Government of God which is Natural, is over all the
World: This Government which is Conventional, is over some Persons only, called
out of the World, into a peculiar Relation to God. That the One is over all,
but considered as single Persons, taking in every Individual in the World; the
Other over some, and so over Singulars also, but considered as Incorporated,
for the public Service of God. That the One Government is by the Law of
Nature, (I mean, both of Lapsed and Innocent Nature:) The Other is, by his
Positive and Revealed* Laws. That these Laws and Ordinances of God therefore,
which he has revealed, as they are more* and as they are revealed otherwise,
or farther than by the Light of Nature, or Natural Reason only, are a high
Privilege to such as they are vouchsafed to. What advantage then has the Jew
above the Gentile? Much every way, chiefly because unto them was committed the
Oracles of God, Romans 3.1, 2. He has showed his Mind to Jacob, his Statutes and
Judgments unto Israel: He has not dealt so with any other Nation, Ps. 147.19,
20. This giving to a People his Oracles, or Positive Institutions, are
advantageous upon this account, That they are means for obtaining his Blessing,
or else there could be no such advantages in them. This Blessing of God must be
looked on, not only to concern Temporal things, but Spiritual and Eternal: For,
seeing Man consists of a Body, and a Soul, and that Soul is Immortal, he cannot
be blessed but in both; and the great and principal Advantage therefore that we
have by these Ordinances, or Government of God which is Conventional, must and
does lie in being Means for the bringing Men up to the performance of the Terms
of that Law, which God by his Government, that is Natural and Universal, has
made to be the Rule of Judgment to all Men, for Everlasting Life or
Condemnation.

Thus much as Introductory, out of that Book; I come now to another.

Out of a Book, called, Peaceable Disquisitions.
There is a threefold Government (in one, to speak accurately) that God has
had in the World over Man, in reference to his chief end, the Salvation of his
Soul. The first was, by the Law of Nature; the second, by the Law of Moses; and
the third, by the Law of Christ. Before God gave his Law unto Israel, the whole
World was under that Law which is written in the Heart* God must govern Man by
that only, when there was no other. This Law now writ in Man's Heart (we are to
know) is twofold; for Nature coming under a double Consideration, as Entire
and as Fallen, the Law must be double; the Law of Innocent Nature (or Law of
Innocence) and the Law of Lapsed Nature, which is the Law of Grace and Mercy
toward Man, in regard to his fallen Condition. To express it more fully, there
is Lex Naturae, (...), and Lex Connaturalis Gratiae; the Law of Nature, and the
Connatural Law of Grace, as Suarez has it in his Book De Legibus. I am much
pleased with the Terms, though I found not that he did well understand them, or
explain them himself. Only thus much he says, That the Ancients, before Moses,
who were governed by the Law of Nature only, must have this Lex Connaturalis
Gratiae together with it, or comprehended under it, or else no Man then upon
Earth could be saved; which is a Truth so evident, as makes the Proof of that
Law, by that Reason alone, to be good. When he terms this Law then Connatural,
I understand by it, that this Law of Lapsed Nature, this Law of Grace, or
Remedying Law, is written in the Heart of Man, in regard to his fallen Nature,
no less than the Law of pure Nature it self was.

The Law of Nature, as I take it, is the Dictates of right Reason, declaring to
us our Duty to God, to our Selves, to our Neighbors; and the Light of the same
Reason will dictate to us, when we have failed in that Duty, to repent, and
turn to God, with trusting in his Mercy, for pardon if we do so, and not else.
We do find it legible in our Hearts, that God is good and wisely gracious to
pity our Infirmities, and consider our lost Estate, and necessary Frailty, as
that there is a God, and any Worship that is at all due to him. There is Mercy
with thee, that thou should be feared. And these Characters, thus engraven
in the Heart of Man, is the same Law of Grace in the Practical Contents, as is
more largely Paraphrased on by the Prophets in the Old, and the Apostles in the
New Testament. There is no difference at all in the Substance, (as Divines
speak) but in the Administration. It is no otherwise than as a Book thrice
Printed, the second Edition is larger than the first, and the third most
complete and perfect. This I will say, the Covenant was still on foot, the
Condition, sincerity in walking according to their Light; Men were judged by
it, and many saved. Here only is the difference, that the Foundation, on which
all this is laid, the Mediation, Sacrifice and Righteousness of Christ, comes
not to be revealed but in Types, and darker Promises, till the Promulgation of
the Gospel. Now, I say, that though the Heathen be not under (or have not) this
Law of Grace, in the third and last setting out, or in the State under the
Gospel, yet they are under it (or have it) in the State of the Ancients, or as
they had it in the first Promulgation; and upon Supposition, that any of them
do, according to the Light they have, live up in Sincerity to this Law, I dare
not be the Man that shall deny but through the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
(procuring this Law or Covenant for them, as for us, and all the World) they
shall be saved, even as we; and we shall be saved, even as they. To them who by
patient Continuance in well-doing, seek for it, Eternal Life.

Not to leave this yet, I have learned from Cicero, That all Laws must be
derived from the Divine Reason and Will. I have learned from others, That this
Reason of God, in his Government of all things, agreeable to his own Nature,
and the Nature of his Creatures, is the Eternal Law. I have learned from the
Scripture, That there is a Law of Works, and a Law of Grace. I do learn by
consequence, That these Laws (as Frames of God's Government over Man) must be
Reconcilable with the Eternal Law, or the Reason of his Wisdom, and Justice,
and Goodness; the one of them being fit for the State of Man in Innocence, the
other for his Lapsed Condition. How these Laws do now consist, and not consist,
with one another, while the Scriptures say sometimes, that we are freed from
the Law; and sometimes, that it is Established; sometimes, that not a tittle of
it shall pass; and sometimes, that we are not under the Law, but under Grace; I
do not intend here any full decision: I will draw only one chief Stroke toward
it. The Law may be considered as the Rule of Man's Duty, or Measure of Good and
Evil, according to his own Nature and God's; or as the Instrument of God's
Government over Man, or Measure of his Dealing with us, or Judging us according
to our deservings. It cannot be conceived, but so long as the Nature of God and
Man is the same, and Good and Evil (which consists of agreeableness, or
disagreeableness, to them both) is the same, the Law of Nature must remain
unchangeable, as the Measure of our Moral Actions: But as it is the Instrument
of God's Government in the World, it is as certain, that through the Mediation
of Christ (who has satisfied his Father for our breach of it) it is relaxed,
so as we are not dealt withal according to the Tenor of the Law, in the Matters
of this Life, or of that which is to come. I distinguish these two things, A
Rule of Life, and a Rule for Life. A Rule for Life is expressed in these words,
He that does them shall live in them. We are freed from the Law on the latter
account, we are made free to it in regard to the former. That is, we are under
the Law, so as that we are still bound to live according to it; but we are
delivered from it, so as (through Mercy, and the Merits of Christ) we shall not
be judged by it. There is Norma Vitae, and Norma Judicii. The Law is of force
as a Rule of Life or Duty; but we are not under it as a Rule of Judgment. We
shall be Judged, says St. James, by the Law of Liberty; and Paul says,
According to my Gospel. Blessed be God for this good Truth.

Now, that the Government of God over the whole World is by the Law of Grace,
and not of Works (thus much being said only for light in the way) does appear,
as the Sun or Moon in the Heavens. For God has not left himself without
Witness, in that he does good, and gives us Fruitful Seasons. These are Effects
of his Mercy, which he could not show to the World, as he does, if he dealt
with it according to the Law of Works. When Abraham pleads with God for Sodom,
that he would spare it if there were ten Righteous Persons there, it is
manifest, that he must account of God's Government over the Earth, to be a
Government of Grace. That the Righteous be as the Wicked, that be far from
thee, (says he) shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Right? If God should do
but Right to the best of Men, according to the Righteousness of the Law of
Works, there could be no such Pleading as this. Neither is there any Righteous,
no not one, says the Scripture; nor could God have accepted of Abraham himself
for one, had there been nine besides, but upon the account of the Law of Grace.
It is a Righteousness consisting in a Condecency of his Goodness and Mercy, and
not in the Rule of his district Holiness that Abraham intends. When the
Prophets call upon Israel to Repent, and to do Righteousness, that they may
live, it is a perpetual Discovery, that God dealt not with them according to
the Covenant of Works. The Law admits no Repentance, and there is no
Righteousness that a Man can live by, according to the Law. It is such a
Righteousness then they must mean still, which is the same with the just Man's
Faith, whereby it is said he shall Live; and that is the Righteousness of
Faith, or Righteousness of God in the Gospel, which lies in a conformity to the
Law of Grace. We are Righteous, according to this Law, when we perform the
Condition: God is Righteous according to it, when he accepts us thereupon unto
Pardon and Life. We have a most signal Instance in the Ninevites of these two
things I do here stand upon. If God's Government over the Heathen was not by
the Law of Grace, how could the Ninevites, by their Repentance have diverted
his Judgments? And if this Law had not been Connatural with Fallen Man, so as
to be written in their Hearts, how could they trust in God, that upon their
forsaking Sin, and their turning to him, they should find Mercy, and be saved
from Destruction? Both these things (I say) have, in this one Instance, their
full Evidence. And what think we of Cornelius, the Centurion and Roman, how
could his Prayers and Alms be accepted with God, if Cornelius as well as Paul,
a Roman as well as a Jew, were not under the same Government of Grace, when
there is nothing we do but is imperfect, and liable to a Curse, by the Law of
Works? And what shall we conclude then, from both Instances, but that which
Peter, upon Conviction, himself concludes? Of a Truth I perceive, that God is
no Respecter of Persons, but in every Nation he that fears him and works
Righteousness, is accepted of him.

There are three things go to a Law: That it be for the Public Good, That it
be the Will of the Lawgiver, That it be promulgated to the Subject. That the
Law of Grace is good for the World, there can be no question; that it is God's
Will the World should be governed by it, appears by what is spoken; and that
this Law has been promulgated to Mankind, appears both in the general Notice
of it in Men's Hearts, ( I will write my Law in their Hearts, says God, in the
New Covenant, as distinguished from that of Moses and in the express
Declaration of God to our first Parents, that the Seed of the Woman should
break the Serpent's Head; and in his Covenanting with Noah, which must be
understood, without dispute, in regard to all Posterity. Now, when such a Law
has been promulgated to Adam and Noah, as belonging to all the World, being to
come of them, it must be proved, that this Law has been somewhere, or at
sometime, again repealed by God; or else must every Man and Woman in the World
be under this Government of God, according to it, and consequently be in a
capacity of Salvation.

I will, to these Reasonings, add one Syllogism: It is not the Hearers of the
Law, but Doers, shall be justified. This is express in one Verse of the Second
to the Romans. But some Heathen are Doers, though not Hearers of it. This is
affirmed in the next Verse. For when the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do
by nature the things contained in the Law, with the rest following. Ergo, Some
Heathen are justified and saved. If any cavil, and say, That no Man is a Doer
of the Law; he must be answered, That the Apostle here speaks of such a doing
only as is supposed to be among the Jews, that were godly, or Jews inwardly, in
the Verses after. And I renew my Argument: They that are Doers of the Law,
according to the Sense of such Texts, as make the keeping the Commandments of
God necessary to Salvation; such as when Christ says, If thou will enter into
Life, keep the Commandments; and such as when the Apostle says, (as before)
They that by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, shall have
Eternal Life; that is, They who are Doers of it, as all that are Jews inwardly,
and in the Spirit, do keep it, and no otherwise; to wit, not (...), but (...),
not according to the Rigor of the Law, but according to Acceptance, by the
Equity of the Gospel; they, I say, shall be justified and saved. But some
Heathen are Doers of the Law in this sense, which is the sense of the Apostle.
Ergo, Some Heathen are justified and saved. I confirm the M^nor by the words
ensuing, that we may be sure we have the Mind of the Apostle: Therefore if the
Uncircumcision keep the Righoeousness of the Law, shall not his Uncircumcision
be counted for Circumcision? And shall not Uncircumcision, which is by nature,
if it fulfill the Law, judge thee, who by the Letter and Circumcision do
break the Law? It follows, that such as these therefore are Jews inwardly, and
in the Spirit; though they were not Outward Jews, or in the Flesh, or of the
Circumcision, as is apparent in the words already, and the last Verses. They
that are Jews inwardly, and in the Spirit then, (I follow my Argument) though
not outwardly so, and in the Flesh, do fulfill the Law, in the sense of this
place, and are justified. But such are some of the Heathen here, according to
the Apostle* Ergo, Some Heathen are justified and saved.

And what could be desired more full and convincing? If i^ were not for the
first Verse which follows in the next Chapter* which does yet add such
abounding Confirmation to it, as I must profess my self perfectly struck with
the Evidence, as with a Beam of Light, never to be withstood, or any more
doubted: What advantage then has the Jew above the Gentile? These are the
words. It cannot be imagined by me now, that this Question could be offered,
after he had said thus much* if there were such a difference between these two,
as that one of them only was under a possibility of Salvation, and not the
other. It is brought as an Objection to his foregoing Assertion, in this sense,
That if this be true, there appears no difference in the matter, whether a Man
be a Jew or a Gentile; seeing he that has the Law written only in his Heart,
and keeps it (that is, in sincerity) shall have the benefit, and be saved, as
well as he that has it written in the Bible. The Apostle does as good as
answer, This is true; yet is there a difference, Chiefly because that unto the
Jews were committed the Oracles of God. I interpret not these words, but give
this Paraphrase: The Heathen were under the same Law of Grace for Life as the
Jews, but the Jews advantage was, that they had it in the second Promulgation,
with this privilege of Ordinances; and our advantage is the like over them,
that we have it in the third and last Promulgation, by the Gospel. I argue
then, once more: If this was the chief advantage the Jew had over the Gentile,
that the one had the Oracles of God, and the other had not, then was there not
this difference between them, that one was in a Capacity, and the other under
an Impossibility of Salvation; for this were an advantage of a far greater
Nature. But this was the chief advantage. Chiefly because -- Ergo.

The Objections against this Doctrine are two: The one is from the Scriptures,
which in many places in the New Testament, do require Faith in Christ, or
Believing the Gospel, as the Condition of Salvation. He that believes not,
shall be damned. I answer, As the Apostle says of the Law, Now we know, that
whatsoever things the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law: So
say I of the Gospel, Whatsoever things, of this kind, the Gospel says, it
says to those that are under the Gospel. Where the Gospel is preached, and
Revelation is sufficient, so that Men wilfully reject it, such are left without
excuse; the case of such is dangerous indeed, and these Texts applicable to
them: If you believe not that I am he, you shall dye in your Sins. But as for
those who never heard the Gospel, or when the Revelation has been insufficient
for such Conviction, the case (I hope) is otherwise; the case is, I think, as I
have said; and our good God will not require of any more than he has given.
The other Objection is from the Authority of Men, or of the Church more
generally, that condemns this Opinion: But I account the Verdict of Christians,
in this point, is for themselves, and so partial. I suppose it taken again upon
trust, and followed by the most for want of Light; and I believe also, that if
they had but this Light only, that I offer, they would have determined as I do.
It is true, I grant, as the Church thinks, That there is no Religion, by which
a Man can be saved, but one only, that is the true Religion: But this is a
great Truth here to be received, That Christianity in the Root, according to
what is said, is the Universal Religion of Mankind; (whom therefore ye
ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you) so that the (...), they that live
according to Reason, as Socrates, Heraclitus, and the like Men, were
Christians, though they were not so called, according to Justin Martyr in his
Apology. Which Doctrine, nevertheless (to salve most fully the Eighteenth
Article of the Church, at first mentioned) is not to be harbored, but as it is
compatible with this certain Position, That there is no way, for all that,
under Heaven, whereby a Man is, was, or can be saved, but through the Name and
Mediation only of our Savior. For other Foundation can no Man lay, than that
is laid, which is Christ Jesus.

Out of a Book, concerning the Universality of Redemption, and two other Points.
From the Universality of Redemption, there does arise a Government of Grace,
which God has over the whole World; that is, a Government by the Law of Grace,
which Christ has purchased, as the Instrument of that Government, whereby
Salvation is made possible to all Mankind, or whereby Pardon and Life are made
attainable by all Men, on a Possible Condition. If you ask me, what that is,
wherein this Possibility is placed? This I perceive is a hard Question made,
but I will answer easily: It is to be placed in the lowering the Condition to
the capacity of the Persons, having the power and use of their Natural
Faculties, so that whosoever he be that lives up sincerely to the Light that he
has, shall be saved. Such is the Law of Grace (I say) purchased by Christ, by
which we are Governed, and shall be Judged, that whosoever lives up to the
Light and Means he has, in sincerity, shall be saved by it. I will add,
Whosoever does but what he can, in order to his Salvation, is sincere; and
consequently the Condition must be possible: But seeing no Mortal does what he
can, (every Man can do more Good, and less Evil, than he does) I say, If he
does sincerely what he can (which all the Elect from the four quarters of the
Earth, and the Elect only, will surely do) he shall have Life, notwithstanding
all his Imperfections. This being premised, as to the possibility of the
Performance then it self, it is founded in Dono Supernaturali a Viatore
quocunque possibiliter recipiendo, secundum Legem Ordinariam, as the Schools
speak.

It is an Error (one of them called Vulgar) which has reigned too long in the
Christian Church, to think that none can be saved by the Name of Christ, who
have not heard him preached to them; or that the Extent of Christ's Death, and
the Benefit of it, is Commensurate with the Knowledge of him. The Error has
arose through Carelessness of Divines, in not considering the Point, and the
Partiality of the People to their own Religion. The Jew will have none but the
Jews, the Mohammedan none but the Mahometans, the Christian none but the
Christians, to be saved. But I am hugely persuaded otherwise, that there are
Millions that have been, and Thousands are living in the World, that have never
known, and shall never know, how much they are beholding to Jesus Christ, till
they come before him in Judgment, and then they shall know it to their Comfort;
and Christ will stay for his Thanks till that day, when that Comfort, and those
Thanks, shall be Everlasting. To say, that any Man was, is, or can be, saved
without Christ, is an Error indeed; and if any one shall go to preach up the
Salvability of the Heathen, without this Foundation (that is to say, Lay any
other Foundation than what is laid, Christ Jesus) the Eighteenth Article of the
Church does Anathematize that Person (for such Ignorance is truly accursed:)
But that Article must not be thought to Curse or Condemn any that maintain
Salvation alone by Christ, though he hold also that some Heathen may be saved.
Let the Title of the Article give the Interpretation.

Out of another Book of his, wherein some of the Articles of the Church are
occasionally Explained.
Art. 18. Of obtaining Eternal Salvation only by the Name of Christ. They are
to be held accursed, that presume to say, That every Man shall be saved by the
Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame his Life
according to that Law, and the Light of Nature: For Holy Scripture does set out
unto us, only the Name of Jesus Christ whereby Men must be saved.

I observe, the Church has but one Anathema in all her Articles, and that
seems to be denounced here against all those who do or shall hold, that any
Persons can be saved that are not Christians by Profession; as if the Death of
Christ, or the Benefits thereof, and the Knowledge of him, were Commensurate
through the World. But God forbid! I am out of doubt that God has a Government
over all Mankind, which is Moral, in order to Life or Salvation; and that the
Instrument of that Government must be the Law of Grace (the Law of Innoceney
becoming in the State of Lapsed Nature incapable to that end) which being at
first Promulgated to Adam after his Fall, and to Noah, must belong to all his
Posterity; insomuch as every one (whosoever he be) that lives up in sincerity
to this Law, according to the Administration of it he is under, shall be saved.
For my Assent then to this Article, I do desire the word [ By] may be
especially noted. I could not assent to this Article if it were [In] in the Law
or Sect he professes, but being [By] I hold plainly, that if an Heathen, or
any Person that never heard the Gospel, repents of his Sins, and trusts to a
good God, and so lives up to the Law (or Covenant) of Grace, according to the
first Edition of it, (I say, if any such indeed do, Romans 2.26. Acts 10.35.) and
thereby comes to be saved, it is by the Christian Religion, which he implicitly
holds in Substance with us, and not by the Law and Sect he professes, that he
is saved. And this Salvation of his, is in and through the Name and Mediation
of Jesus Christ (no less than ours is) who procured that Law for them, and all
the World, as well as for Abraham, and the Jews under the Old, and for us under
the New Testament.

A Note hereupon.
Note here, that the Writer of this, being a Nonconformist Minister,
Episcopally Ordained; and holding Communion with his Parish Church, as the old
Non-conformists did, thought good to make a Trial for the recovery of the use
of his Ministry, in Preaching an Occasional Sermon, when called, though without
Benefice or Emolument, which requires farther Compliance; did, in order to
obtain a License, unto which an Approbation of the Thirty nine Articles is
required by the Uniformity-Act, propose a Subscribing to them, with a Liberty
of Explication, if that might be granted; his Judgment being, That as all
Impositions are to be taken in the Sense of the Imposers, these Articles must
be taken in the Sense of the Compilers, or at least he must be construed so to
take them, if he did Subscribe them without that liberty first granted, and
declared. Upon this account he made for himself his Explications of all the
Articles he scrupled, and the Bishop of Salisbury has light upon the same
Explication of this Eighteenth Article (which is cited before) as he Only this
difference must be observed, That this Explications is reckoned satisfactory in
point of Conscience by him, upon the supposition of a Liberty of Explication to
be first granted; but the Bishop proposes this Explication as satisfactory to a
Clergyman for his Subscribing, without the grant to him of a Liberty to make
it. There have been great Divines, who looking on the Articles, to be Articles
for Peace, and not Articles of Faith, have thought it enough for their
Subscription to them, that they engage to bear with, and not contradict them:
This worthy Bishop therefore does honestly show, that this is a Sense too loose
for the Clergyman, who is to declare, That what he Subscribes is his Opinion,
and is bound to take every Arti^^e in the Literal and Grammatical Sense of it,
as is enjoined by the King's Declaration before the Articles. Upon this account
the Bishop's distinction, between the words By and In, is proper, as easy, if
the Authentic Sense be not to be stood upon, but a Literal and Grammatical
Construction altogether. I would fain therefore ask the Bishop, whether a
Literal and Grammatical Construction can be made to salve all the other
Articles, as well as this? I will propose two words in two Articles: The one is
that word [ thorowly] in the Eighth Article. The three Creeds ought Thoroughly to
be received and believed. If Thoroughly, then in every part, then the beginning,
the middle, and the end, of the Athanasian Creed, must be believed; then must
the Proem and the Conclusion be believed. Does the Bishop believe so? If he
indeed does not, then is that fair Grammatical Literal come-off to no purpose,
in the Eighteenth Article, when he is gravelled in the same matter in the
Eight. The common Answer (says the Bishop) of the most eminent Men of the
Church, is, That these Expressions are only to be understood to relate to
those, who having the means of Instruction offered them, have rejected them --
Upon such as do thus reject this great Article of the Christian Doctrine,
concerning One God, and Three Persont, and that other concerning the
Incarnation of Christ, are these Anathemaes denounced. This is well, exceeding
well; but is this a Literal Gramatical Construction? Will the word [ thor^^ly]
so Literally and Grammatically be thus expounded? The other word I have to
propose, is the word [ Only] in the Eleventh Article: That we are Justified by
Faith Only, is a wholesome Doctrine. In the Literal Grammatical Construction
this cannot be subscribed, because it is Literally and Grammatically contrary
to St. James, who says, Not by Faith only, but by Works also. In the Authentic
Sense one may believe the Compilers meant, by Only, what Paul says, By Faith
without Works; which, by distinguishing Works, may be reconciled to St. James.
If the Articles then must be subscribed in the Literal Grammatical Sense, what
shall we do with them? Subscribe them we cannot. Why they must, be let alone.
The Truth is, these Articles, if conscienciously Subscribed, must be Subscribed
in the Authentic Sense or Meaning of the Church, and so of the Compilers, and
that construed Literally and Grammatically, which makes them the harder. They
may remain therefore as standing still for the Articles of the Church, but
without the Injunction of her Sons to Subscribe them. For no Man of a free
Judgment, that will Subscribe nothing but what he understands and believes,
will be able to bring his Ego libenter and ex animo, to do it. O quando! Oh
when will the time come, that we may have an Act for Comprehension, which may
provide for the forbearance of such Subscriptions, Declarations, and Oaths,
that the largest Exposition that can be made of them, does but render a Noli me
tangere to Conformist and Nonconformist, and even to himself that makes, or
has made it?

There is a Threefold Interpretation, An Authentic, a Usual, and a Doctrinal
Interpretation, according to Suarez De Legibus. The Authentic Interpretation
of an Imposition, is the Exposition of it according to the Sense and Meaning of
the Imposer; and the Authentic Interpretation of the Articles is to understand
them according to the Meaning of those who compiled them, and consequently of
the Church which enjoined them according to their Meaning. The Usual
Interpretation of these Articles, who can tell? But if any shall cite
Chillingworth, and Archbishop Usher, and say that any Interpretation of an
Article, as it pleases the Taker, so long as he obliges himself not to
contradict it, is that which is Usual; I think he speaks true: But then this
Usual Interpretation is not allowed the Clergyman by the Bishop, as is noted
before, because it is loose and sinful, as he shows upon clear Reason; and in
this, the Bishop will have a good Conscience at the great Day. A Doctrinal
Interpretation is the Explication of any Doctor, or Doctors, of the Church,
concerning an Article, which is but Rational, and not inconsistent with the
Scripture, and the Analogy of Faith, especially if it be ingenuous and candid,
and sit to be received. Now if upon the Call of any Parliament, there should be
occasion for the Convocation to sit, and they should make a Canon on purpose to
authorize, declare and signify, that the Subscription to the Articles which is
enjoined, is be understood, not in the Authentic or Usual, but only in a
Doctrinal Interpretation; then would this Book of the Bishop be of singular
use, and highly to be approved: But if it serve only to justify the imposing
this Subscription, and continue it without a Liberty of Explication, or any
such Canon, (there being these two ways only, I can think on, to make the
Imposition Conscionable) I must declare what I apprehend, That this Book of the
Bishop will be, and must needs be, a Snare unto many. I will add, That if it
were writ with the Intention to uphold and continue the Subscription, (which I
believe not of this worthy Author) or if it does but hinder the taking of it
off, which was designed in the Convention Parliament, as this Bishop knows;
there is no Man will have more cause of regret, and to be more deeply touched
at the Heart about the Book, than he himself, that has so ingenuously and
exquisitely wrote it.

THE END.

